genealogy The Chronicles of England, from Brute unto this present year of
Christ 1580.

Collected by JOHN STOW Citizen of London.

Printed at London by Ralphe Newberie, at the assignement of Henry Bynneman.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.



Authors out of whom these Chronicles are collected.
ABbas Floriacensis. Abraham Hartwel. Adam Merimouth. Aethicus. Alfridus
Beuerlacensis. Alfridus Riuallensis. Alexander Neckham. Amianus Marcellinus.
Antonius Archiepiscopus. Antiquitates Britan. eccle. Antiquitates Glasconiae.
Antiquitates Calen. de Brist. Antiquitates S. Pauli London* Annals de Hide.
Annals Elienses. Annals de Aquitania. Arbor Successorum. Asserius Meneuensis.
Aurea Historia. Arnolds Chronicl^* Andrew Bourde. Anthony Ascham. Anthony
Anthony. Baptista Platina. Bid de gestis Anglorum. Brute Book. Canterbury
Records. Caesar's Commentaries. Capitolinus. Carta Regia. Chronica de
Dorobernia. Chronica Chronicorum. Chronica de Burgo S. Petri. Chronica de
Dunstable. Chronica de Wigmore. Chronica de Bury. Chronica de Dunmow. Chronica
de Eaton. Chronica de Tewkesbury. Chronica Glasconiae. Chronica de Eouesham.
Chronica de Tintern. Chronica de Tinmouth. Chronica de Colchester. Chroniques
de Normandy. Chroniques de Britain. Chronica Colleg. Regis Oxon. Chronica de
Hautenprice. Chronica de Holland. Chronica de Bromholme. Chronica S. Albani.
Conradus Mendenbar. Cornelius Tacitus. Constitutiones de London. D^^ C^^^^^s
Doro^h^^^. Edmond Haddenham. Edmerus Dorobernensis. Engwerant. Encomium Emme.
Epistola Bonifacij. Eusebius. Eutropius. Eulogium. Erasmus Roteradam. Edward
Hall. Edmond Campion. Freculphus. Floriacensis Wigornensis. Flores Historiarum.
Flaccus Albinus. Francis Guicciardine. Galfridus Monemutensis. Galfridus
Vinisalfe. Gasperus Varerius. Geruasius Dorobernensis. Geruasius de Mappamundi.
Geruasius Tilberiensis. Gesta Abbatis Albani. Gildas Sapiens. Giraldus
Cambrensis. Giraldus Corn^biensis. Guilelmus Mahnesburiensis. Guilelmus
Nouoburgensis. Guilelmus Thorn. Gualterus Couentriensis. Guilelmus Rishanger.
Gualterus Hemingford. Guilelmus Gemiticensis. Guilelmus Tailour. Guilelmus
Paston. Guilelmus Shepeshed. Gualterus Baker. Guilelmus Dunthorne. Georgius
Lilius. Guilelmus Packington. Geffrey Chaucer. Guilelmus de Wilum. Gual,
Haddon. Herodian. Henricus Huntingdonensis. Henricus Lecestrensis. Henricus
Blandford. Hector Boethius. Humfrey Lhuid. Henry Bradshaw. Iacobus Bergomas.
Iacobus Lassabeus. Johannes Salisburiensis. Johan. Hanuile. Josephus. Johannes
de Vigney. Johannes Rowland. Johannes Mandeuile. Iustine. Johannes Rouse.
Johannes Mayor. Johannes Bale. Johannes Fordon. Johannes Capgraue. Iocelinus de
Barkeland. Iocelinus Furnensis. Johannes Leylandus. Johannes Leoaffer. Johannes
Taxtor. Johannes Pike. Johannes Beuerlacensis. Johannes Euersden. Johannes
Blackeman. Johannes Truklow. Johannes Lewenclaij. Johannes Prington. Johannes
Gower. Johannes Belandin. John Frosert. John Audley. Johannes Fortesc^. John
Revstall. John S(...). John Ca(...) Inscriptiones Glocest. John Lidgate. John
Harding. Lampridius. Leges Edwardi Regis. Liber constitut. London. Liber
Dunelmensis. Liber Norwicensis. Liber Tutsberiensit. Liber s. Martini magni.
Liber Lanthoni. Liber Roffensis. Liber Trinitatis London. Liber Colne. Liber
Mona. Ely. Liber Bermondsey. Liber pont London. Liber Glocestrensis. Liber
Warwicensis. Liber s. Mariae de Southwark. Liber Kenelworth. Liber Bernewel.
Liber s. Barthol. Smithfielde. Liber Colegij s. Petri. Liber Edendon. Liber
Eastminster. Liber Mayor. and Vic. London. Liber Eweline. Liber Lichfielde.
Lilius Viraldus. Liber Theokesburie. Lodouicus Viues. Marianus Scotus. Martinus
Polonus. Mathaeus Paris. Mathae. Westmonasterie^sis. Matheus Parkerus. Marlin.
Melkin. Nenius. Necham. Nicephorus. Nicholas Treuitus. Nicholas Vpton. Nicholas
Perotus. Nicholas Bromefielde. Old Records. Oracul Sibil. Orosius. Osbernus.
Pausanias. Panegeric. Constancio dictus Pau. Orosius. Pau. Diaconus. Paulus
Aemilius. Petrus de Ikham. Petrus Ramus. Petrus Pictauensis. Perce de
Longtofte. Phillippus Comineus. Policraticon. Ponticus Virunius. Polidorus
Vergilius. Quadrilogium. Radulphus de Diceto. Radulphus Niger. Radulphus
Baldoke. Radulphus Cogshall. Ranulphus Higden. Record. ecclesiae de Assaphe.
Registrum noui Mona. Registrum fratrum minoru^. Registrum monast. de Hide.
Registrum de Wodbridge. Registrum de ponte Rofensi. Registrum de Clerkenwel.
Registrum mon. de Bury. Registrum mon. s. Albani. Record. ecclesiae Christi
Can. Registrum mon. Cartuarien. Registru^ fratru^ carmelitaru^ Registrum
Maiorum London. Registrum mon. de Bataile. Registrum de Garter. Richardus
Cirencestrensis. Richardus Southwel. Richardus Diuiensis. Richardus Canenicus.
Rogerus Houeden. Robertus Gaguin. Robertus Glocestrensis. Robertus de
Auesburie. Reynwels Testament. Robertus de Brune. Robert Fabian. Robert Green.
Richard Turpin. Scala Temporum. Scalamundi. Speculum Historiale. Sebastian
Munster. Sigebertus Gimblacensis. Scala Chronicor. Simon Dunelmensis. Solinus.
Suetonius. Smart Falconer. Strab^. Spartianus. Sozomenus. Sulcardus. Socrates.
Theodoretus. Titus Liui. Thomas Castleforde. Thomas Sprote. Thomas de Wike.
Thomas Walsingham. Thomas Rudburne. Thomas Delamore. Thomas Hocline. Thomas
Moore. Thomas Lanquet. Thomas Cooper. Thomas Churchyard. Vita Berini. Vita
Aldelmi. Vita Erkenwaldi. Vigetius. Vita Albani. Vita Guilelmi Longocampo.
Vopiscus. Vox Clamantis. Wolfangus Lazius. William Norwel. William Caxton.
William Bear. William Lambert. William Patten. Ypodigma Neustriae. Zozimus.
DROIT ^ ET ^ LOYAL
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

To the right Honorable the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, Baron of
Denbigh, Knight of the most noble Orders of the Garter, and of Saint Michaell,
one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, and Master of her
Horse.
THe good acceptatio^ of my Summarie dedicated to your Lordship five years
since (right honorable and my singular good Lord) has so emboldened this
Treatise, grown now to a greater Volume, that it presumes with assured hope
of like acceptance, to present it self to your Honor, and under the protection
thereof, to venture into the world, and view of men: and that the more boldly,
being an Historical Discourse of this our native Country, setting before our
eyes, to our instruction and profit, the incredible inconstancy, and
continual alterations of this transitory world, with the worthy exploites of
our Kings and Governors. What I have performed herein to the common commodity
in searching out the truth: and what variety of worthy matters I have
recovered, with no small cost and care, out of the grave of Oblivion, wherein
they have lain buried, I refer to your honorable censure, and the
indifferent Reader, not doubting but your Lordship, which has gotten grounded
experience by the administration of most weighty affairs, and furnished your
wisdom with diligent reading of sundry Histories, will both vouche safe to
accept this Monument of my affectionate mind with your wonted courtesy, and
shield it under the authority of your name against those, which in this age
requite honest endeavors with dishonest speeches. The Almighty God preserve your
Honor, with continual increase of his benefits, to his glory, and your
advancement.

Your Lordships most humble to command. JOHN STOW.

To the gentle Reader.
AMongst other Books which are in this our learned age published in great
numbers, there are few, either for the honesty of the matter, or commodity
which they bring to the common wealth, or for the pleasantness of the study
and reading, to be preferred before the Chronicles and Hystories. What examples
of men deserving immortality, of exploites worthy great renown, of virtuous
living of the posterity to be embraced, of wise handling of weighty affairs,
diligently to be marked, and aptly to be applied: what encouragement of
nobility to noble feats, what discouragement of unnatural subjects from
wicked treasons, pernicious rebellions, and damnable doctrines: to conclude,
what persuasion to honesty, godliness, and virtue of all sorts, what
dissuasions from the contrary is not plentifully in them to be found? So that
it is as hard a matter for the Readers of Chronicles, in my fancy, to pass
without some colors of wisdom, inuitements to virtue, and loathing of
naughty factes, as it is for a welfauoured man to walk up and down in the
hot parching Sun, and not to be therewith sunburned. They therefore which
with long study, earnest good will, and to their great costs and charges have
brought hidden Histories from duskie darkness to the sight of the world, and
have bin diligent obseruers of common wealths, and noted for the posterity
the fleeting manners of the people, and accidents of the times: deserve (at the
least) thanks for their pains, and to be misreported of none, seeing they
have labored for Note that the backebiter slays three at once, himself by
his own malice, him that crediteth his false tales, and him that he
backebiteth.
all. I write not this to complain of some men's ingratitude toward me
(although justly I might) but to show the commodities which ensue of the
reading of Histories, that seeing they are so great and so many, all men would
(as they ought) employ their diligence in the honest, fruitful, and
delectable perusing of the same, and so to account of the Authors, as of men
careful for their Country: and to confess, if need require, by whom they
have taken profit.

It is now seuentene years since (I seeing the confuse order of our late English
Chronicles, and the ignorant handling of ancient affairs) leaving mine own
peculiar gains, consecrated my self to the search of our famous Antiquities.
What I have done in them before time, the former editions of my Summarie of
Chronicles may well testify, but how far (be it spoken without arrogancy)
I have labored for the truth more tha^ some other, this last edition will
evidently declare: wherein, that I differ from the inordinate and unskillful
collections of other men, it is no marvel, seeing that I do not fully agree
with my self, as some malicious persons have fondely charged me: but let it
be considered, that there is nothing perfect at the first, and that it is
incident to mankind to err and slip sometime, but only the point of
fantastical fools, to persevere and continue in their errors. Wherefore, seeing
that the perusing of ancient Records and best approved Histories of all times
(not without great difficulty obtained) do not only move me, but for their
authority drive me to acknowledge both mine and other men's errors, and in
acknowledging to correct them, I trust to obtain thus much at your hands,
that at the least you will call to remembrance a most gentle and wise law of
the politic Persians, wherein it was enacted, that a man accused to be in
their laws a trespasser, and found guilty of the crime, should not straight
way be condemned, but after a diligent inquiry and search of his whole life
and conversation (no slander imputed unto him as of importance) if the number
of his laudable factes did counteruaile the contrary, he was full quit of
the trespass. The same law do I wish the readers of these my Chronicles to
put in ure, that if the errors be not so plentiful, as Histories truly
alleged, they will bear with them: for as I promised, so have I tried all
matters worthy of immortality, by the certain Touchstone of best allowed
Historiographers: and yet notwithstanding, some faults by misprinting have
escaped the correction, which easily may be seen and amended by the diligent
Reader.

A brief Description of England, Scotland, Wales, and Cornwall.
Britain, or Brutanne which by two names is called England and Scotland, is an
Island in the Ocean Sea, situate right over against France: one part of which
Isle Englishmen do inhabit, another part Scotts, the third part Walshme^,
and the fourth part Cornishmen. All they either in language, conditions, or
laws, do differ among themselves.

England (so called of Englishmen which did win the same) is the greatest
part, and is divided into xl. Counties, xl. Counties or Shires.
which we call Shires: whereof ten (that is to say) Kent, Sussex, Surrey,
Southampton, Barkeshire, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, Devonshire and
Cornwall, do conteyne ye first part of that Island: which part bounding toward
the South, stands between the Thames and the Sea.

From thence to the river of Trent, which passes through the midst of
England be. xvj. shyres, whereof the first six (standing Eastward) are Essex,
Middlesex, Hartfordshire, Suffolk, Northfolke, and Cambridgeshire: the other
ten which stand more in the middle of the Country are these: Bedforde,
Huntingdon, Buckingham, Oxforde, Northampton, Rutland, Leicester, Notingham,
Warwike, and Lincoln. After these there be. vj. which border westwarde upon
Wales as Gloucester, Hereford, Worcester, Shropshire, Stafford, Chester, and
Monmouth. About the middle of the Region lie Darbishire, Yorkshire, Lancashire,
and Cumberlande. On the left hand toward the West is Westmerland. Against the
same is the Bishoppricke of Durham, and Northumberlande, which boundeth upon
the North in the Marches of Scotland.

These shyres be divided into. xxij. Bishoprikes, which by a Greek work, be
called Dioceses. Of which Dioceses, Canterbury has Kent. Rochester has part
of Kent. London has Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hartford. Chichester has
Sussex. Winchester has Hampshire, Surrey, and the Isle of Wight, Salisburie
has Barkeshire, and Wiltshire. Exceter has Devonshire and Cornwall. Bath and
Wells has Sommersetshire. Worcester has Worcestershire, and part of
Warwickshire. Gloucester has Gloucestershire. Hereforde has part of
Shropshyre, and Herefordshyre. Couentrie and Lichfield has Staffordshyre,
Darbishire, part of Warwickshyre, and part of Shropshyre. Lincoln which is the
gretest, lying between the Thames and Humbre, has Lincoln, Leycester,
Huntington, Bedforde, Buckingham, and the residue of Hartfordshire. Ely has
Cantabridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely. Norwich has Suffolk* and Northfolke,
and part of Cantabridgeshyre. Oxforde has Oxfordeshire. Peterborow, has
Northamptonshire, and Rutlande. Bristowe has Dorsetshire. And this is the
province of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which is the Primate of all England,
with Wales. The Archbishop of York, has Yorkshire, Notinghamshire, and a
piece of Lancashire. The Bishop of Durha^ has the Bishoprike so commonly
called, and Northumberlande. Chester has Chesshire, most part of Lancashire,
Richmonde, part of Flintshire, and part of Denbighshire. Carlisle conteyneth
Cumberlande and Westmerlande: and this is the other Province of the
Archbishop of York, which is another primate of England, and was of long
time also primate of al Scotland: but these Dioceses take their names of the
Cities where those Seas be placed, the chief whereof, is London* where in the
beginning was the Archbishops Sea, but afterward transposed to Canterbury, a
City in Kente, placed in a soil amiable and pleasant.

London stands in Middlesex, on the North side of the Thames. That most
excellent and goodly river has first the name of Ise, and begins in
Coteswolde in Glocestershire, about a mile from Titbery, and as much from the
high way called Frosse: and it takes first the name Tamis^, near to
Dorcester bridge, where the river Tame and the forsayde Ise meet, and so with
a marvelous quiet course it passes by London, and then breaks into the
French Ocean by maine tides, which twice in xxiiij. hours space does ebb
and flow more than lx. miles, to the great commodity of travelers, by which
all kinds of Marchandice be easilye conveyed to London, the principal store
and staple for all commodities within this realm. Upon ye same river is placed a
stone London Bridge.
bridge, a work very rare and marvelous, which bridge has (reckning ye draw
bridge) xx. arches made of foursquare stone, of height. lx. foot, and of
breadth. xxx. foot, distant one from another xx. foot, compacte and joined
together with vaults and cellers. Upon both sides be houses builded, that it
seems rather a continual street than a bridge.

The Ocea^ sea does bound England, the first part of Brytaine, East and South,
Wales and Cornwall West. The river of Twede deuideth England and Scotland North.
The length of the Island begins at Portsmouth in ye South part, and ends
at Twede in the North, containing. 320. miles.

This Realm above other is most fruitful on this side Humbre: for beyond
it is fuller of Mountains. And although to the beholders of that Country a
far off, it may seem plain, yet it is full of many hills, and those for
the most part void of trees, the valleys whereof be very delectable,
inhabited for the most part by noble men, who according to auntiente and old
order* desire not to dwell in Cities, but near unto valleys and rivers in
several villages, for avoiding of vehement winds, because that Island
naturally is stormy.

Humbre has his beginning a little on this side York, and by and by runs
Southward, and then holds his course Eastward, and so into the maine Sea,
greatly increased by the Rivers of Dune and Trent.

Trent begins a little from Stafforde, running through Darbishyre, and
Leicestershire, passing by Litchfielde and Notingham on ye right hand, and Dune
on the left hand: so that both those rivers do make an Ileland which is called
Auxolme, and then joining together on this side Kingstone upon Hul, a goodly
merchant Town, they fall into Humbre: by which river they may ariue out of
France, Germany and Denmark.

England is fruitful of beasts, and abounds with cattle: whereby the
inhabitants be rather for the most part grasiers than ploughmen, because they
give themselves more to feeding, than to tillage. So that almost the third
part of the Country is employed to Cattle, Dear red and fallowe, Gotes,
(whereof there be store in the North parts) and Conies, for every where there is
jolly maintenance of those kinds of beasts, because it is full of great
woods: where of there ryseth pastime of hunting, greatly exercised, specially by
the Nobility and Gentlemen. ( Andrew Bourd says, there be more Andrew Board
Parkes in England than in all Europe beside.)

Scotland an other part of Brytain, (whereof in this place I Scotland.
have thought good to treat at large, that no further mention of the situation
thereof might be made hereafter) began sometime at the Hill called Grampius,
now called Grantsbeyn stretching to the furthest coaste Northwarde, but after
the overthrow of the Pictes, it began at the River Twede* and sometimes at the
River of Tyne, the fortune of wars altering the same, as it does al other
things. Therefore the length of Scotland from Twede to the furthest coaste, is
esteemed to be 480. miles: But as Scotland is longer than England, so it is
narrow and ends like a wedge. For the mountain Grampius is evil favored
and craggie, which Tacitus in the Cornelius Tacitus.
life of Julius Agricola does remember, pearcing through the bowels of
Scotland, from the coast of the German sea, that is to say, from the mouth of
ye River of Dee to the Irishe sea, even to the Laake of Lomunde, which lies
between that Country and the same hill.

The river of Twede (which springs out of a little hyl, not far beyond
Roxborough) is mingled with the German Ocean, joining Southward with that
Country which is called the Marches, being the east bounds between England
and Scotland. The said river of Twede separateth ye Marches from
Northumberland, the furthest Country of England, having prospect to the
German Sea, the chief town whereof is Barwicke, now in possession of the
English.

The Western limit of Scotland whilom was Cumberlande, which the River of
Solue deuideth from Annandale. Between, these two Regions the Cheuiot Hills
appear.

Next to the Marches Pictlande bordereth, now termed Loughdean, bounding upon
the East, a very hilly Country, barren almost of any trees. The most famous
towns of the same be Dunbar, Hadington, Leith, Northberwik, and Edenborough,
the Kings seat, where also is the Castle of Maidens, a very strong and
defensible place. The same City the river of Forthea (commonly called the
Frith) does water and pass by: which being carried into the German Ocean,
makes great arms or meres, commonly called the Scottish sea: wherein besides
other is the Island of Saint Columbe, by name called Aemonia. The same river
again deuideth from Loughdean a Country adjoining (abundant of all things)
called ye Fife, in which Country are many towns, as Donfermile, Cupre, but the
notable town of Saint Andrewe, specially famous for the University, and
beautified with the sea of the Archbishop and primate of all Scotland. On
the other side toward the Irishe side Northwarde, is Nidisdalia, so called of
the River that passes thereby, where be the strong towns of Douglasse and
Donfriese.

Upon the South adioyneth Galloway, more aboundaunte of Fodder for Cattle, than
of Wheat, where is the Town of Candida Casa, now called Whitherne, and the
ancient temple of Saint Ninian, adourned also with an Episcopal Sea. In those
parts besides the town of Wighton is a laake of a wonderful nature, because
the one side in Winter does freese, and the other not. By that stands the
Country of Caricta, once renoumed, with the town Caricton, whereof perchance
it took the name. Above Caricta toward the West, is Elgonia (by which name
Ptolome calls the Country) bordering upon the Ocean, wherein is the Laake
Lomunde, which is very broad and large, containing many Islands, situate at
the foot of the mountain Grantesbeyn, eight miles from the Castle of
Donbriton, besides the river Bodotria, now named Leuinus, entering into the
river of Glota or Clude. Here some do contend that the name of Bodotria is not
well applied to Leuinus, because it appears by Cornel. Tacitus, that Bodotria
and Glota have sundry passages into ye sea, and are clearly dirempte one from
the other, as Leuinus and Glota are not: wherefore they judge rather the river
now called the Frith to be that which of old time had to name Bodotria, and
to prove the same, they add many other reasons, which here I omit. But a
good space on this side Grampius rises the river of Taus, the greatest in all
Scotland, taking his name of a Laake from whence it springs, which falls
by Atholia and Calidonia by many places, but chiefly by Perthum now called
Saint John's town, and lastly by Dunde, in time past called Alectum, and there
breaks into the German sea, and at the mouth forces great estuars or arms
of the sea, whereof Tacitus makes mention. Against Taus is Anguise, which by
means of that river is fertile and prosperous, and is divided from Fife.

To y^ same upon the North adioyneth Athels, not the barre^nest Country, as
well for water as for plenty of soil. On the other side Arguile shows it
self, which being full of laakes, yields greater plenty of fodder than
fruit, whose uttermost bounds stretch so far, as Ireland is not distante
past. xvj. miles, about which the promontorie or foreland, called Lands head
stands. That coast whilom the Silures did inhabit, as Polidor gathers by
these words of Pliny in his 4. book, the. 16. Chapter.

Ireland being situate over against Brytain, is distant from the nation of
Silures by the shortest cut. xx. miles. Howbeit, some other, for that it is
manifest by the same Pliny in yt same Chapter, and also by other writers, that
Brytaine was not in his time well known so far North, suppose he mente not
by this, that the Silures should inhabit Arguile, but rather South Wales,
from whence the passage over was better known (and as he might have
understanding) shortest. Where also as well Tacitus, as Antoninus seem to place
that people.

Between Argile and Olgouia Westwarde lies the Country of Sterling, so
called by a town there. Here the forest of Calydonia began on the left side,
which within stretches far and broad. This forest sometimes bred white
Bulls, long maned like Lions, which were so wild as they could not be
tamed, but because the flesh was pleasant and dainty to the mouth, the whole
race of them almost is extinguished. There likewise is the Castle of Calydone,
situate by Taus called Doucheldine. From a little hill of the forest ryseth
Glota, or Cluid, which by a broad chanel falls into the Irishe Ocean: for
stayed in a manner by the banks of the mountain Grampius, it slydeth into the
sea by great tides, so (as witnesses Tacitus) the Romans thought it to be
another Island. Of that river the Dale was called Glotevale, which Country
that River runs by: and in the same is the City of Glasco, a goodlye
University.

Again toward the East is joined the Country as Anguish and Merne upon
the Sea coaste, wherein Fordune by situation is very strong, and for the
relics of S. Palladius the Scottish Apostle famous.

Of the same side of Scotland, is the Country of Mar, garnished with a
City called Aberdone, standing between the two Rivers of Dona and Dea, with a
Schole also adorned. Then follows Morrey, which the two notable Rivers do
compass about, called Nessa and Spea. At the mouth of this last River,
stands the Town of Elgis, about the banckes whereof be huge woods
replenished with all sorts of wild beasts. There is a Laake also called
Spina, stoared with plenty of Swannes: but in the middle part stands the
broad Country of Rossia now called Bean Rozen, stretching to the uttermost
angle even to both the Seas, and the further it goes Eastwarde, the better it
is inhabited. In the same is a bosom of the Sea, now and then so convenient
for Sailers, as commonly it is called the port of Health, (or the Haven of
Safety) and the town Thana. The breadth of the Island is very short, for
falling into ye form of a wedge, it is scant. xxx. mile over, which defended
with three promontories like towers, repelleth the great waves and surges of
the Sea: and environed with two gulfes, which those promontories do enclose,
the entries be quiet and calm, and the water peaceable. The strait of that
land is at this day called Cathanes, coasting upon the Sea Deucalidon.

Thus much of the particulars of Scotland. But y^ same is in every place full
of good Havens and nauigable entryes, Laakes, with Marshes, floods, fountains,
very full of fish, and mountains, upon the tops whereof be pleasant plains,
yielding great store of grass, and plenty of fodder for Cattle, wooddes
likewise full of wild beasts. That part of the land is well sustained with
commodities, and therefore the people hard to be vanquished at any time, by
reason the woods and Marshes be at hand for refuge, and hunger eased with
Ueneson and Fish. About Scotland in the Irishe Seas, are xl. Islands, of
Pliny termed Brytanniae, other call them Meuania, other Hebrides. Many of
these in length at least are thirty miles, but in breadth not above. xij.
Amongst the^ is Iona beautified with the Tombs of the Scottish Kings. The
Ilanders generally speak Irishe, which declares them to take their original
of the Irishe nation. Beyond Scotland toward the North, be the Isles of
Orchades, which (as Ptolome says) be. xxx. in number, some lying in the
Ducalidon Sea, and some in the German Ocean, the principal of which Islands
is Pamonia, because it is a Bishops sea, and is under the government of
Scotland. The Ilanders use the Goths speech, which argues them to proceed
from the Germans. They be tall of stature, but very helthie and lusty of
body and mind, living very long, although their chiefest food is fish, for
the land almost continually beset with cold, in many places is not able to
bear corn, and generally almost without tree or bushe. Beyond the Orchades
stands Thule, in the Frosen sea now called Iselande, to which our
merchants repair for fishing once every year in the Summer. And thus much
have I to say of the site of Scotland: now of the nature and manners of the
people.

The Scotts which inhabit in the Southern part, be well nurtured, and live
in good ciuility, and the most civil, use the English speech. And for that
wood there is geason and scant, their common fuel is of a black stone, which
they dig out of the Earth. The other part Northern, and full of mountains, a
very rude and homely kind of people does inhabit, which are called the
redshankes or wild Scotts. They be clothed with a mantel and shyrte
saffroned, after the Irishe manner, going bare legged to the knee. Their
weapons are bows and darts, with a very broad sword and a dagger, sharp only
at the one side. All speak Irish, feeding on fish, milk, cheese, and flesh,
having a great number of Cattle. The Scotts differ from the English in laws
and customs, because they use the civil law as almost other Countries do.
The English have their own laws and edicts. In certain other conditions they be
not far unlike, but their language is one, their habit and complexion like,
one courage in battle, and in the Nobility one desire and pregnancie in
hunting. The country houses be narrow, covered with straw and reed, wherein
the people and beasts do lodge together. Their towns besides S. John's town are
unwalled, which is to be ascribed to their animositie and hardiness, fixing
all their succor and help always in the valiancie of their body. The Scots are
very wise, as their learning declares. For to whatsoever Art they do apply
themselves, they easily profit in the same. But the idle and ^louthful, and
such chiefly as shun and avoid labor, live in great poverty, and yet will not
stick to boast of their nobility and gentry, as though it were more seemly
for the honest to lack, than comely, (by exercise of some honest Art,) to get
their living. But the Scots generally be devout obseruers of Religion. And
thus much of Scotland.

Wales the third part of Brytaine lies upon the left Wales.
hand, which like a Promontorie or foreland, or an Isle (as it were) on every
side is compassed with the maine Sea, except it be on ye Southeast part with
the river of Sabrine, commonly called Seuern, which divides Wales from
England, although some late writers affirm Hereford to be a bound between
Wales and England, and say that Wales begins at Chepstow, where the river
Wey (augmented with an This arm of the Sea, as I judge, is now called Aust,
where is a passage betvveene the village of Aust and Chepsto^^.
other river called Lugge*) passing by Hereforde, does run into the Sea,
which river ryseth in the middle of Wales out of that hill (but uncertain
whether out of that Spring that Sabrine does,) for even to that place there
goes a great arm of the Sea, which passing through the land westward, on the
right hand leaves Cornwall, and on the left Wales: which Topographie or
description, although it be new, yet I thought good to follow. Therefore
Wales is extended from the town of Chepstow, where it begins almost by a
straight line a little above Shrowsburie, even to Westchester Northward. Into
that part, so many of the Brytaines as remained alive after the slaughter and
loss of their country, at the length being driven to their shifts, did
repair, as ancient writings report, where partly through refuge of the
mountains, and partly of the wooddes and marshes, they remained in safety:
which part they enjoy even to this day. That land afterward the English men
did call Wales: Giraldus Cambrensis.
and the Brytaines the inhabitants of the same, Walshmen: for amongs the
Germans, Walshman, signifies a stranger, an alien, an outborne or strange
man, that is, such a one, as has a contrary language from theirs, for Wall in
their tongue is called a stranger borne, as an Italian or Frenchman, which
differ in speech from the German. Man signifies Homo, which is a Man in
English. Therefore Englishmen, a people of Germany, after they had won
Brytaine, called the Brytaines, which escaped after the destruction of their
Country, after their Country manner, Walshmen, because they had an other tongue
or speech besides theirs: and the la^d which they inhabited Wales, which name
afterward both to the people and country did remain. By this mean the
Brytaines with their kingdom lost their name. But they which affirm that
name to be derived of their King or Queen, without doubt be deceived. The
country soil toward the Sea coast, and in other places in the valleys and
playnes, is most fertile, which yields both to man and beast great plenty
of fruit and grass: but in other places for the most part it is barraine and
less fruitful* because it lacks tillage: for which cause husbandmen do live
hardly, eating Oten cakes, and drinking Milk mixed with water. There be many
towns and strong Castles, and four Bishoprics, if the Four Bishope in
Wales.
Bishopric of Hereford be counted in England, as the late writers declare.
The first Bishopric is Meneue, so called of Meneua, which at this day they
call Saint David's, a City very ancient, situated upon the Sea coast, and
boundeth Westwarde toward Irelande. An other is Landaffe, the third Bangor,
and the fourth Saint Asaph, which be under ye Archbishop of Canterbury. The
Welshme^ have a language from the Englishmen, which (as they say yt fetch their
pedigree from ye Trojans) does partly sound of the Trojan antiquity, and
partly of the Greek. But hewsoeuer it is, the Walshemen do not pronounce
their speech so pleasauntlye and gently as the Englishmen do, because they
speak more in the throat: and contrariwise, the Englishmen rightly following
the Latins, do express their voice somewhat within the lips, which to the
hearers seems pleasant and sweet. And thus much of Wales, the third part
of Brytaine.

Now follows the fourth and last part of Brytaine named Cornwall. This part
begins on that side which stands toward Spain Westward: Toward the
East, it is of breadth four score and ten miles, extending a little beyond S.
Germains, which is a very famous village situate on ye right hand upon the Sea
coaste, where the greatest breadth of that Country is but. xx. miles: for this
parcel of land on the right hand is compassed with the coast of the maine Sea:
and on the left hand with that arm of the sea, which (as before is declared)
parts the land, and runs up to Chepstow, where the Country is in form of a
horn: For at ye first it is narrow, and then grows brother a little beyond
the said town of S. Germain. Eastward it bordreth upon England: West, South,
and North, ye main sea is round about it: it is a very barren soil, yielding
fruit more through travel of ye tillers and husba^dme^, than through the
goodness of the ground: but there is great plenty of Lead and Tin, in the
mining and digging whereof does specially consist the living and sustentation of
the inahbitants. Their tongue is far dissonant from English, but it is much like
to the Walsh tongue, because they have many words common to both tongs: yet this
difference there is between them, when a Walsh man speaks, the Cornish man
rather understands many words spoken by the Walshman, than the whole tale he
tells, whereby it is manifest, that those three people do understand one
another, in like manner as ye Southern Scots do perceive and understand the
Northern. But it is a thing very rare and marvelous, that in one Island there
should be such variety of speeches. Cornwall is in the Diocese of Exceter,
which was once worthy to be counted the fourth part of the Island, for the
contrariety of the language. Afterward the Norma^s, which constituted a
kingdom of al those three parts, reckened Cornwall to be one of the Counties or
shires of the Country. Thus much of the particular description of Brytaine,
that the whole body of the Realm (by the members) may be the better known
to some peradventure that never heard the same before.

The form of the Island is Triquetra, or three cornered, Strab^. lib. 4.
having three corners, or three sides: two whereof, that is to say, the corner
toward the East, and the other toward the Weast (both extending Northwardes)
are the longest.

The third side which is the South side, is far shorter than the other: for
the Island is greater of length than of breadth. And as in the other two parts
is contained the length, even so in ye last, the breadth, in which place the
breadth begins: and so continuing from the Southe part to the North, it is
but narrow. The first and right corner of which Island Eastwarde, is in Kent,
at Dover and Sandwich. From whence to Callais or Boloigne in France, is the
distance of xxx. miles. From this Angle, which is against France, to the third
Angle, which is in the North in Scotland, the maine whereof boundeth upon
Germany, but no land seen, (and there the Island is like unto a wedge even at
the very Angle of the land in Scotland,) the length is seven hundred
miles. Again, the length from this corner at Dover in Kent, to the vttermoste
part of Cornwall, being S. Michaels mount (which is the West part or West
Angle) is supposed to be three hundred miles. From this left Angle being the
West part and the uttermost part of Cornwall, which has a prospect toward
Spain, in which part also stands Irelande, situate between Britain and
Spain to the North Angle in the further part of Scotland, in which part the
Island does end, the length is eight hundred miles, in which part there be very
good havens, and safe harboroughes for ships, and apt passages into Ireland,
being not paste one days sailing: but the shorter passage is from Wales to
Waterforde, a town in Irelande upon the Sea coast, much like to that passage
between Dover and Calays, or somewhat more: but the shortest passage of all,
is out of Scotland. From this last Angle to Hampton, which is a Town upon the
Sea coast, with a haven so called toward the South, and therefore called
Southhampton, between the angles of Kent and Cornwall, they do measure by
straight line the whole length of the Island, and do say, that it contains.
800. miles, as the breadth from Meneua or Saint David's to Yarmouth, which is in
the uttermost part of the Island toward the East, does conteyne. 200. miles,
for the breadth of the Island is in the South part, which part is the front and
beginning of the land, and ends narrow, or as it were in a strayghte. So
the circuit or compass of the Island is. 1800. miles, which is. 200. less
than Caesar does reckon or account. ()

Of the first habitation of this Island, a short note to the Reader.
WHere it is recorded by the sacred and most ancient Gene. 10.
History, that after the universal flood, the Isles of the Gentiles were
divided by the posterity of Iapheth the son of Noah, we doubt not but this
Isle of Brytaine was also then peopled by his progeny, the History of whom,
as it is to be wished and appertine^t to this purpose, so since it is
irrecouerable, not only unto us, but also to other nations, I think it better
to say nothing therein, than to set down here Samothes, Magus, Sarron, Druys,
and Bardus for his successors, which are vpholden and boulstered only by the
credit and authority of a new small pamphlet falsely forged, and thruste into
the world under the title of the ancient Historian Berosus. For that is the
censure of all the best learned, as concerning our common Berosus, which at his
first appering, about one hundred yers since, was partly suspect Lodouicus
Viues. Gasparus Varrerius.
by Lodouicus Viues, afterward convinced to be fabulous by the learned Gas.
Varrerius, in a several treatise, and now universally rejected of all skilful
Antiquariesas, a mere fable unworthy the name of Berosus. Therefore I dare not
ground the beginning of our History upon the credit thereof, unless I
would be prejudicial to the truth whereunto I leuel al my endeavor. I hope
it shall be sufficient in this History for the Brytaines time, to follow the
authority of the received Brytish History, which Geffrey Archdeacon of
Monmouth translated out of the Brytishe tongue about. 400. years since,
beginning with Brute, who after the progeny of Iapheth seems to be first
discouerer, namer, and Ruler of this land. Yet before we enter into the History
of Brute, it shall not be impertinente to note here that where as Pomponius
Mela me^tioneth that one Hercules killed Albion a Giant about the mouth of
Rhosne in France, many learned men have judged the said Albion to have ruled
here, (since the Greek momuments do always call this Isle ALBION,) and after his
death Nicol. Perotus Lilius Giraldus. Solinus.
that Hercules came hither, Lilius Giraldus writes. An ancient altar also
containing the inscription of a vow found in the uttermost North part of
Britain 1500. years since, as Solinus reports, plainly proved that
Ulysses the renoumed Grecian in his ten years travails, after the sacking
of Troy, arrived in this our Country. And thus much is found only in approved
Histories as concerning Britain before the arrival of Brutus. ()

The race of the Kings of Britain since Brute: and in the margent are placed
the years before Christ his birth, when every King began their reigns,
til Cunobelinus, in whose time Christ the Savior of the world was borne, and
then followyng, the years from Christ his birth are placed.
BRute the son of Siluius, the son of Ascanius, 1108 Gaufrid^.
the son of Aeneas, after the death of his father, being banished into
Greece, delivered there the remna^t of the Troia^s from ye long captivity,
wherein they were detained under the Grecia^s, with whom he departed thence for
to seek some habitation: and associating to himself Corineus with his Trojans
whom he found in the way, after a long and weary journey, and many notable
acts achieved in Aquitaine, he arrived in this Island, which was called
Albion, at a place now called Totnes in Devonshire, the year of the world.
2855. the year before Christ's nativity. 1108. wherein he first began to
reign, and named it Brytaine, (as some write) or rather after his own name
Brutaine, as Aethicus Aethicus.
that wonderful Philosopher (a Scithian by race, but an Istrian by Country)
translated by Saint Hierome above a thousand years past, terms both it and
the Isles adjacent Insulas Brutannicas. And for more proof of this restored
name, Brutannicas.
not only the said Philosopher (who traveled through many lands, and in this
land taught the knowledge of mynerall works) may be alleged, but sundry
other, as the Sybils Oracles, who in the name of the Brytaines is written with
y. that is the Greeks little u. which Oracles although they were not the
Sibils own work, as some suspecte, Oracula Sibili.
yet are they very ancient indeed, and that they might seem more ancient,
use the most ancient name of Countries and peoples. And some English writers
above an hundred years since, usually do name it Brutan, and not otherwise, ^
Mandeuil.
through a large history of this land, translated out of French. Brute
builded the City of new Troy, now called London, he stablished therein ye
Trojan laws, and gave ye vttermoste Western part of the Realm to his
companion Corineus, of whose name it was called Corinea, and to this John
Harding. John Hanuile. Nichol. Vpton.
day Cornwall. John Harding says, that Brute bare Gules two Lions rampant
endorced Ore. Also a Banner of a Uertdian of Gold fichule crowned and
entronized, that were Aeneas arms when he entered the land of Latins. John
Hanuil in Archinis, and Nicholas Vpton, says he bare Ore a Lio^^ passant Gules.

When his death approached, he divided the whole Island among his three sons,
which he had by Innogen his wife, Locrine, Camber, and Albanact. Unto Locrine
he gave the middle part between Humber and Seuern, which of him was called
Loegria* To Camber he gave all the region beyond Seuern, which of him took
the name of Cambria, and is now called Wales. To Albanact he gave all the lands
beyond Humber, which of his name was called Albania: after which partition he
deceassed, when he had reigned. 24. years, and was buried at new Troy.

LOcrine, the eldest son of Brute reigned. xx. years: he 1084 Gaufride.
chased the Hunnes* which invaded this realm: and pursued them so sharply,
that many of them with their King were drowned in a river which then parted
England and Scotland. And for so much as the king of Hunnes, named Hu^ber, was
there drowned, the river is til this day named H^mber. This king Loctine had
to wife* Guendoline* daughter How Humber took that name
of Corineus, Duke of Cornwall, by whom he had a son named Madan* He also kept
as Paramour, the beautiful Lady Estrilde, by whom he had a daughter named
Sabrine. And after the death of Corineus, he put from him the said
Guendoline, and wedded Estrilde: but Guendoline repaired to Cornwall, where
she gathered a great power, and fought with King Locrine, and slew him. He
was buried at new Troy. She drowned the Lady Estrilde, with her daughter
Sabrine in a River, that after the young Seuerne.
maidens name is called Seuerne.

GVendoline the daughter of Corineus and wife to Locrine 1064 Gvvendoline a
Queen reigned. Gaufride. Flores Historiar.
(for so much as Madan her son was too young to govern ye land) was by common
assent of all the Brytaines, made ruler of the whole Isle of Brytaine, which
she well and discretely ruled, to the comfort of her subjects. xv. years,
and then left the same to her son Madan.

MAdan, the son of Locrine and Guendoline* was made 1049
ruler of Brytain: he used great tyranny among his Britons: and being at his
disport of hunting, he was devoured The King devoured by Wolves.
by wild Wolves, when he had reigned. xl. years. He left him two sons, named
Mempricius and Manlius. One old pedigree says, he builded the city of Madan*
now of the river Doncaster builded.
Don called Doncaster.

MEmpricius, the son of Madan, being King, by treason slew 1009 A travtor to
his brother, devoured of vvilde beasts.
his brother Manlius after whose death he lived in more tranquillity,
where-through he fell in sloth, and so to lechery, taking ye wives and
daughters of his subjects: and lastly, became so evil, that he forsook his
wife and concubines, and fell to the sin of Sodomie with beasts, whereby he
became odible to God and man. And going on hu^ting, he lost his company, and
was destroyed of wild Wolves, whereof the land was then full, when he had
reigned. xx. years.

EBranke, ye son of Mempricius, was made ruler of Brytaine, 989 Gaufride.
he had. xx^. wives* of whom he received. xx. sons, and. xxx. daughters:
which* were sent by their fathers to Alba Flores Histariaru^.
Siluius, the fourth King of Albanois* in Italy* to be married to the Albanes.
This Ebranke first after Brutus attempted to invade France with an army*
(...)s Iacobus Iacobus Bergomas. Iacobus Lessabeus.
Bergomas says in his sixte of his Chronicles, and Iacobus* Lessabeus in the
description of Henault affyrmeth the same, and that he was driven back by
Brunchildis Lord of Henault with no small loss of his men. Assaracus the
second Germany took the name of Ebranke his sons, who conquered the same.
son of Ebranke, with the rest of his younger brethren 18. at the least, by
the aid of Alba Siluius, conquered all Germany, which was then no great
matter, for then Europe was very smally inhabited, save only about the Sea
coasts, as Dalmatia, Italy, and the coasts of France, as in reading the
histories may easily be seen how the East people at sundry Bergoma^. Hector
Bo^nu^.
times came swarming into Europe. Of these brethren had Germany the name, a
Germanis fratribus, that had subdued it. Ebranke was a founder of many Cities
(says Bergomas) as Alcluid in Albania (now Scotland) which is after
Dunbretain, Edenbrough, Bamburgh, and York builded.
Hector Boethius, Dunbretaine, but other think the same to be clean destroyed.
He made the Castle of Maidens, now called Edenbrough. He made also the Castle
of Bamburgh: in the. xxiij. year of his reign he builded Kayrbranke, now
called since by the Saxons, Euorwike, now corruptely York, wherein he builded
a Temple to Diana, and set there an Archflame, and was there buried when he had
reigned. lx. years.

John Rouse says he builded Caior Manor after it was called Bellositum, at
length Caior Bossa, Rhydichen, and Oxenford, of a certain Forde, which John
Leiland calls Isis, in English Ouse, and says it is namely called Oxforde
for Ouseforde.

BRutus. 2. the eldest son of Ebranke, succeeded in the kingdom, 929
and for that his father had received such a repulse at the hands of
Brunchildis Lord of Henault, he, in revenge thereof invaded Henault with a
great army in the Fennes and Marshlande at the mouth of the River Scaldis (of
old time named Stadus) and encamped him self upon the River Hania, where
between Brutus and Brunchildis, was foughten a strong battle in that place,
which to this day is called, Estam bruges, of the station and camp of Brutus,
as Iacobus Lessabeus writes in his description of Henaulte. This Brute of his
lusty courage was surnamed Greeneshielde, he reigned. xij. years, and was
buried at York.

LEill the son of Brute Greeneshielde, being a lover of 917 John Bradshaw.
peace, builded Carleile and repaired Carleon, which was since by the Romans
reedified, when a legion of Soldiers was sent thither, and by them named The
City of Legions, now called Chester, of the ancient buyldyng with vaultes and
towers, each house like a Castle, which sometime had been of great
pleasaunce. A legion of the Romans (as Vigetius reports) contained 6000.
warriors or more: Vigetius.
which legion was divided into 10. bands, but the first passed all the rest,
both in number of souldioures, and also in estimation: for this band bare the
Eagle, which was the chiefest Standarde of the Romans. This first band
contained 1105. footmen, heavy armed horsemen 132. and was named Cohors
miliaria, that is to say, a company of a thousand and more soldiers. This
band is the head of all the legion: whenever they must fight, these begin
the battle, and are first set in order in the front of the battle. The
second band contains 555. footmen, and 66. horsemen of heavy armor, and
this band is called Cohors quingentaria, that is to say, a company of 500. and
more soldiers. The third band likewise has 555. footmen, and 66. horsemen,
The fourth band has 555. footmen, and 66. horsemen. The fifth band has as
many. These five bands are set in array in the first battle. The sixte
band has 555. footmen, and 66. horsemen. The seventh band has 555.
footmen, 66. horsemen. The eighte band has 555. footmen, 66. horsemen. The
ninth band has 555. footmen, 66. horsemen. The tenth has 555. footmen, 66.
horsemen. These ten bands make a full and perfect legion, containing. 6100.
footmen, and 726. horsemen. King Leill in the end of his* reign fell to
sloth and lust of the body, by mean whereof civil strife was raised, and not
in his days ended. He reigned. xxv. years, and was buried at Carleile alias
Chester.

RVdhudibras, alias Cicuber, the son of Leil, builded Caergant, Canterbury*
Winchester, and Shaftisbury built^.
of the Englishemenne called Canterbury, (that is to say, the Court of the
Kentishemen) Caierguent, now Winchester, and Caersepton now called
Shaftisburie, wherein he builded three Temples, and placed in the same
Flamines. Flores Historiaru^
He reigned xxix. years.

BLadud the son of Rudhudibras, who had long studied at 863 Stamford an
Vninersitie.
Athens, brought with him four Philosophers, to keep School in Brytaine:
for the which he builded Stamforde, and made it an University, wherein he
had great number of Scholars studying in all the seven liberal Sciences:
which University dured to the coming of Saint Augustine. At which time the
Bishop of Rome interdited it for heresies John Harding. I. Rouse. John Ba^e
in ^ys Votaries. Bathe with the hot Bathes built. The King attempteth to fly.
that fell among the Saxons and Brytons together mixed, so says Harding. He
builded Caier Badon or Bathe, and made there a Temple to Apollo, and placed
there a Flamine: he made also the hot Bathes, and practiced his Necromancie:
he decked himself in feathers, and presumed to fly, but by falling on his
Temple, he brake his neck, when he had reigned. xx. years.

LEire son of Bladud succeeded his father. He builded Caier 844 Leycester
built. Flores Historiaru^.
Lair upon the River Sore, now called Leycester, and made there a Temple of
Ianus, placing a Flamine to govern the same. He had three daughters, Gonorel,
Ragan, and Cordeile, which Cordeile for her virtue and wisdom toward her
father, succeeded him in the kingdom. When he had reigned xl. years he
deceassed, and was buried under the channel of the River Sore, within
Leicester. This vault under the ^. Rouse.
earth was builte in honor of Ianus Bifrons. There all the Workmen of that
City, when the solemnity of the day came, begun al things that they had to
do the year following.

COrdila, ye youngest daughter of Leire, succeeding her father, 805
was sore vexed by her two nephues, Morgan of Albanie, and Conedagius of Camber
and Cornwall who at the length took and cast her in prison: where she being in
despair of recovering her estate, slew her self, when she had reigned. v.
years, and was buried at Leicester in Ianus Temple, by her father.

MOrgan, the eldest son of Dame Gonorell, claymed 800
Brytaine, and warred on his nephewe Conedagius, that was King of Camber (that
now is Wales) and of Cornwall: but Conedagius met with Morgan in Wales, and
there slew him: which place is called Glamorgan till How Glamorganshire
took that name.
this day. And then Conedagius was King of al Brytaine. He builded a Temple of
Mars at Perch, that now is Saint Saint John's town builded.
John's Town in Scotland, and placed there a Flamine: He builded another of
Minerua in Wales, which now is named Bangor. The third he made of Mercury in
Cornwall, Bangor built.
where he was borne. He reigned. xxxiij. years, and was buried at new Troy.

RIuallo, son of Conedagius, succeeded his father, in whose 766 Blood
rayned. Flores Historiaru^.
time it rained blood three days: after which tempest ensued a great
multitude of venomous Flies, which slew much people: and then a great
mortality throughout this land, which caused almost desolation of the same.
This Riuallo reigned over this whole Island. xlvj. years, and then deceassed,
and was buried at Caierbranke, that now is York. Rome was builded in Italy by
Remus and Romulus Rome builded.
356. years after Brute arrived in this land.

GVigustus, son of Riuallo succeeded in the Kingdom of 721
Brytaine who reigned quietly, but was a common drunkard, whereof followed all
other vices. When he had reigned. xxxviij. years, he deceassed, and was
buried at York.

SCicilius, brother of Gurgustus, succeeded in the Kingdom: 684
of whom is left but little memory: he reigned. xlix. years, and was
buried at Bathe.

IAgo or Lago, Cousin of Curgustus, reigned. xxv. years: 636
for his evil government he dyed of a Litargie, and was buried at York.

John de Vigney, in his Book named The Moralization Johannes de Vigney. Game
of Chesse devised.
of the Chesse, says, that the same game of the Chesse, was devised by Xerxes
the Philosopher, otherwise named Philometre, to reprove and correct the cruel
mind of a filmous Tyrant called E^^lmerodach King of Babylon (as is supposed)
about the year before Christ's birth. 614.

Kim^acus reigned. liiij. years, and was buried at York. 612


GOrbodug reigned three score and three years, and was 559 Flores Historiaru^.
496 The brother slew the brother, and the mother murdered her own son.
buried at new Troy.

FErrex with his brother Porrex, ruled Brytaine five years: but it was not long
ere they fell at civil discord for the sovereign dominion, in which Ferrex
was slain, and Porrex afterward by his mother, whose name was Idoine, was
killed in his bed. Thus cruelly was the blood and house of Brute destroyed,
when this realm by the space Brutes line extinguished.
of 616. years had been governed by that lynage.

After this the realm was divided with civil wars, for lack of one
sovereign governor, until Dunwallo reduced the same into one Monarchy.

MVlmutius Dunwallo, the son of Cloten, Duke of Cornwall, 442 First King that
vvare a crown of gold, who builded Blackvvell Hall. The second Laws were
Mulmutius laws. Flores Historiaru^.
reduced this Realm into one Monarchy, being before by civil wars and
dissension severed and brought into diverse dominions: he was the first that
ware a crown of gold: he constituted good laws, which long after were called
Mulmutius Laws. These laws holy Gildas wrote out of the British speech into
Latin. He gave priniledges unto Temples, and ploughes, and began to make the
four notable ways in Brytaine. In new Troy he builded a great Temple called
Templum Pacis, which some suppose to be Saint Paul's, some Blackwell Hall, and
without doubt, the old work of Blackwel Hall now remaining, was the Jews
Synagogue. He reigned. xl. years, leaving after him two sons, Belinus and
Brennus. He was buried in the Temple of Peace which he had builded.

BElinus and Brennus, sons of Mulmutius and Cornouenna, 401
divided this whole Isle of Brytaine between them. Unto Beline the elder
brother was appointed England, Wales, and Cornwall. Unto the other the North
part beyond Humber. This Brennus, a young man, desirous of glory Flores
Historiaru^. I. Leiland. ^a^fride.
and dominion, raised war against Beline. But in conclusion, by ye means of
their mother, they were accorded, and Brennus being wholly given to ye study of
wars, left his country to yt gouerna^ce of his brother, and went into France
amongst ye Galls, where for his excellent qualities he was greatly esteemed,
and made of them their sovereign Captain, with who^ he passed into Italy,
sacked Rome, and expelling the Tuscanes, builded Millain, Brescia, Como,
Bergamo, Vincenza, Trent, and Verona, which he called after his own name
Brenona. After Iustine.
this (as writes Trogus Pompeius, abridged by Iustine,) he raised an host of
150000. footmen, and 15000. horsemen, and invaded Macedone again. When
Sosthenes saw how they wasted the Country and villages, he met them with
his host of Macedones well appointed. But by reason they were few, and their
enemies many, they were soon put to the worser. Wherefore while the Macedones
being beaten, kept them within the walls of their Cities, Brennus like a
conqueror, against whom no man durst show his head to make resistaunce,
foraged all the Isles of Macedone. And from thence as though those booties and
spoils seemed too base and simple in his eye, he turned his mind to the
Temples of the Gods immortal, malapertlye scoffing that the gods were
rich, and ought to depart liberally to men. Therefore he took his journey
toward Delphos, setting more by ye gain of the gold that had been offered to
the Gods, than by their displeasure.

The Temple of Apollo at Delphos, is situate in ye mount Parnassus, upon a
cliffe on every side falling steep down. There the confluence of men has
made a populous City. Moreover both the Temple and the town are enclosed
with the steepness of the rock. The middle part of the rock inward is in
fashion like a Theater, by means whereof when men make any shouting, or any
Trumpet is sounded, the same breaks and redoundeth in such wise upon the
stones from one to another, that the Echo is herd double and treble, the noyce
resounding far louder than it went forth. The which causes the ignorant
to stand in more fear, thinking it to be the presence of the Godheade. In the
winding of the rock, almost midway to the top of the Hill, there is a little
plain, and in the same a deep hole into the ground, which serves to give
Oracles: Out of the which a certain cold breath ascending upward, stirs
the minds of the Prophets into a madness, and so compels them to give
aunsweare to such as come for counsel. In the same place therefore, there are
to be seen many and rich gifts of kings and peoples. Wherefore when Brutus
came within the view of the Temple, he was in doubt a great while, whether he
were better to attempt the matter forthwith, or give his soldiers that nights
respite to rest them. Euridanus and Thessalonus, who for conetousnesse of the
pray, had joined themselves with him, willed to cut off al delay, while
their enemies were unprovided, where as by giving them that nights respite,
their enemies should perchance get both courage and succor: but the common
soldiers of the Frenchmen, when after long penury, they found a Country
replenished with wine, and all other kind of victuals, they dispersed
themselves in the fields, making hauock of al things like conguerours, by which
means the Delphians had respit to lay for themselves, and manned the town by
the help of their neighbors, or ever the Frenchmen could be called from the
wine Fat to their standarde. Brennus had threescore and five thousand chosen
footmen of the best in all his host, where as the Delphians were in all but.
4000. fighting men. In disdain of which small handful, Brennus to the entente
to sharpen the minds of his men, showed them all, what a rich and plentiful
pray they should have. The Frenchmen being by this vouching of their Captain,
or rather by their own beholding, stirred up, and also wounded with the wine
they had poured in the day before, without respite of any danger ran he^long to
the encounter. On the contrary part, the Delphians putting more trust in God
than in their own strength, resisted their enemies, and what with stones, and
what with their weapons, threw the Frenchmen (as they scaled,) headlong from
the top of the mountain. While the two parts were thus striving one with
another, suddenly the Priests of all the Temples, and the Prophets, with
their hair about their ears, etc. like men straught and out of their wits,
came running into the forefront of the battle, crying out, that while they
were al making their supplications to God for aid, they met a young man of
beauty and personage, far excelling any mortal creature, and in his company
two Uirgins in armor, wherefore they besought them, seeing the Gods did guard
their standarde, they should not stick to dispatch their enemies. And there
with all they forthwith perceived that God was present on their side. For both
a piece of the mountain being broken off, by a sudden earthquake, overwhelmed
the French host, and the thickest of their enemies (not without great
slaughter,) were opened and put to flight. In the neck whereof there ensued a
tempeste, with hayle, thunder, and lightning, consuming as many as were any
thing sore wounded. The Captain Brennus himself not being able to abide the
smarte of his wounds, Brennus kills himself.
took ^ sword and killed himself. Thus far abridged out of Iustrne.

Beline in the mean time both in civil justice and also Religion, greatly
increased his Realm. He made three Archflamines, whose Seas were at new Troy,
Kayrbranke, and Kayrlegion. Archflames. Four notable vvayes.
He finished the four great ways begone by his Father: he subdued and made
tributarie unto him Denmark. In new Troy he made the Haven, which at this
day retayneth Belines gate builded. John Leland. Tovver of Lo^. do^ first
builded.
the name of him, called Belines Gate: And as John Lelande writes, he builded
the Tower of new Troy. He married his daughter Cambria, unto a Prince of
Almaine called Antenor, of whom these people were called Cymbri, and Sycambri.

Finally, after he had reigned with his brother and alone xxvj. years, he
dyed: and after the Pagan manner, with great pomp was burned, and his ashes in
a vessel of brass set on a high Pynacle over Belines Gate. He builded
Carlheon upon Flores Historiaru^.
the River Vske, which since by a legion of the Romans there placed, was named
Caerlegion, now clean destroyed.

GVrgunstus, son of Beline, succeeded his father. I. Rouse says 375
he builded Caier Werithe, that is Longcastra: He subdued Denmark, compelling
them to continue their tribute, and in his return home, met with a fleet of
Basdenses coming from the parts of Spain, which were seeking for habitations,
Giraldus.
because their Country was so populous, and not able to sustain them, to whom
the king granted the Isle of Ireland Ireland inhabited.
to inhabit, and to hold the same of him as their sovereign Lord: But the
Scotts write, that Spaniards arrived before Hector Boethius.
this time in Irelande. This Gurgunstus builded Porchester and Warwick in the
middle of the Realm, (says I. Rouse.) He reigned. xxix. years, and was buried
at Caerlheon.

GVinthelinus, son of Gurgunstus, was Crowned king of 356
Brytaine. A prince sober and quiet, who had to wife a noble woman named
Mercia, of excellent learning and knowledge. Flores Historiaru^.
She devised certain laws, which long time among the Brytaines were greatly
esteemed, and named Marcian Marcian laws the third.
Laws. This prince reigned. xxvj. years, and was buried at new Troy.

CEcilius the son of Guinthelin and Marcia, reigned. vij. 350
years (as the Scotts write.) In the first year of his reign, a people
called Picts, arrived here in Brytaine, and possessed those parts, which now
be the Marches of both The Picts first inhabited the Marches.
Realms England and Scotland. Cecilius was buried at Caerlheon.

KImarus succeeded Cecilius, who being a wild young man, and living after his
own lust, reigned but three years, and 323
was slain as he was hunting of wild beasts.

ELanius, called also Danius, was king of Brytaine nine 321
years.

MOrindus, the bastard son of Danius, began to reign 311
in Brytaine: he fought with a king who came out of Germany, and slew him
with all his power. Moreover, Gaufride.
out of the Irishe Seas in his time came forth a wonderful monster, which
destroyed much people: Whereof the king hearing, would of his valiant
courage, needs fight with it, by whom he was clean devoured when he had reigned
eight years.

GOrbomannus, eldest son of Morindus, reigned eleauen 303
years: a Prince just and religious: he renewed the Temples of his Gods, and
governed his people in peace and wealth. This Gorbomannus builded Grantham in
Lincolneshire. Our English Chronicle says, he builded both the towns Caxton
Grantham builded. I. Ro^fe.
of Cambridge and Grantham: but seeing that Cambridge in ancient Chronicles is
called Grant (as it is also Grantchester, Cairgrant, and Grantbridge) it was an
easy matter (as Grammarians know) to translate Grantham into Cambridge, and
so ascribe the building of both Towns to him that builded but one of them.

ARchigallo, brother to Gorbomannus, was crowned king 292
of Britain: he was in conditions unlike to his brother: for he deposed the
noblemen, and exalted the unnoble. He extorted from men their goods to enriche
his treasury: for which cause by the estates of the Realm he was deprived of
The King deprived.
his royal dignity, when he had reigned five years.

ELidurus, the third son of Morindus, and brother to 286
Archigallo, was elected King of Brytaine: a virtuous and gentle Prince, who
governed his people justly. As he was hunting in a forest, by chance he met
with his brother Archigallo, whom most lovingly he embraced, and found the
means to reconcile him to his Lords, and then resigned to him his royal
dignity, when he had raygned five years.

ARchigallo, thus restored to his royal estate, ruled the 282
people quietly and justly ten years, and lies buried at York.

ELidurus aforenamed, after the death of his brother Archigallo, 272
for his piety and Justice, by the general consent of the Brytaines was again
chosen King. But he reigned not passing two years, but that his younger
brethren, Vigenius and Peredurus raised war against him, took him prisoner,
and cast him into the Tower of new Troy, where he remained during their
reign.

VIgenius and Peredurus, after the taking of their brother, 270 The town of
Pickering built. Caxton. I. Rouse.
reigned together seven years. Vigenius then dyed, and Peredurus reigned after
alone two years. He builded ye town of Pickering in the North parts of
Yorkshire.

ELidurus, the third time was made king, who continued 261
his latter reign honorably and iustlye: but being sore bruised with age and
troubles, he finished his life, when he had now lastly reigned four years,
and was buried at Carlisle.

Gorbonian reigned in Brytaine ten years. 258 248 2^4


Morgan guided the Realm peaceably fourteen years.

EMerianus his brother, when he had tyrannouslye raygned seven years was
deposed.

IVal was chosen King for his justice, and temperance, which 227
governed peaceably twenty years.

RImo governed this Realm sixteen years, his time was 207 191 171 A good
example.
peaceable.

Geruncius reigned in Brytaine twenty years.

CAtellus reigned peaceably ten years, he hung up all oppressors of the poor,
to give example unto other.

COilus succeeded Catellus, who quietlye reigned twenty 161
years.

Porrex, a virtuous and gentle Prince, reigned five years. 142


CHirimus, through his drunkenness, reigned but one 136 135 133 132 131 136
1^4 120 118
year.

Fulgen his son reigned two years in Brytaine.

Eldred, reigned in Brytaine but one year.

Androgius, likewise reigned but one year.

VRianus the son of Androgius, wholly gave himself to the lusts of the
flesh, and reigned three years.

Eliud reigned five years, who was a great Astronomer.

Dedantius King of Brytaine reigned five years.

Detonus reigned in this land two years.

Gurgineus reigned three years in Brytaine.

Merianus was king of Brytaine two years. 115 113 111 108 106 104 94 91
Prodigious signs. 88 86 82 81 78 76 74 70


Bladunus governed this land of Brytaine two years.

Capenus reigned king of Brytaine three years.

Ouinus ruled this land of Brytaine two years.

Silius reigned in this land of Brytaine two years.

BLedgabredus reigned ten years, and gave himself to the study of Music.

Archemalus was king of Brytaine two years.

ELdolus reigned four years. In his time diverse prodigies were seen, as
Globes of fire, bursting out of the air with great noise. etc.

Rodianus, was king of Brytaine two years.

Redargius reigned king of Brytaine three years.

Samulius reigned king of Brytaine two years.

Penisellus was king of Brytaine three years.

Pyrrhus ruled this land of Brytaine two years.

Caporus, was king of Brytaine two years.

DInellus, the son of Caporus, a just and virtuous prince, governed this Real
me four years.

HElius his son, reigned not fully one year. Of this prince the I Will of Elie
took the name.

LVd the eldest son of Hely, succeeded his father: he amended 66 Lud repaired
and fortified London. Flores Hist.
his laws, and took away al vsages that were naught: moreover he repaired the
City of new T^^y with fair buildings and waltestand builded on the Weast
part thereof, a strong gate; which unto this time retayneth the ^^^ne of him
and is called Ludgate. Finally, he dyed, leaving after him two sons Androgius
and Theomantius: who not being Ludston, or London took the name of king Lud.
of the age ^o governed, their uncle Cassibelan obtained the Crown. London took
the name of Lud, and was called Ludston: He was buried nere to the same
Ludgate, in a Temple which he there ^^ilded.

CAssibelanus, the son of Hely, after the death of his brother 58 John B^le.
Julius Caesar his first voyage into England, Eutropiu^.
Lud, was made governor of Brytaine, which ruled xix. years. In the. viij.
year of his reign, Julius Caesar co^^^ing unto that part where Caleys and
Boloigue now stand, determined to make war into Brytaine, which Eutropiu^.
until that time remained unfrequented and unknown of the Romans. His quarrel
was, because ye in the wars of France, Casars Commentaries.
he perceived the Frenchmen to have much succor and aid from thence: And
because he could not understand nor learn the greatness or state of the Ila^d,
neither what nations they were which inhabited the same, nor what laws,
customs, or kind of gouernemente they used, nor yet what Havens they had,
able to receive any number of ships, he sent Caius Volusenus before with a
Galley, to discover as much as he could, concerning those matters, who
within five days after returned to Caesar, declaring such things as he had
learned by coasting along the shore, for he durst not for fear of the
Brytaines stir out of his Galley. In the mean space there came Ambassadors
from many Cities of the Isle, and delivered him Hostages, with whom he sent
Comius of Arras, charging him to exhort and persuade the rest of the Cities
and Countyes to do the like. And he himself shortly after having prepared.
lxxx. ships, sailed into Brytaine, where Two voyages of Caesar.
at the first being wearied with an hard and sharp battle, and after with
sudden tempest his navy almost destroyed: he returned again into France,
there to winter his men.

The next Spring (which was the year before Christ. 51.) his Nauye being new
rigged and increased, he passed the Seas again with a greater army, but
whiles he went toward his ^^imies on land, his ships lying at Anchor, were
driven on the sands, where they stacke fast: or else through beating one
against another, with force of the tempest, they were destroyed, so that. xl.
were lost, the other with much labor were saved. In the mean space Saeua one
of Caesar's soldiers, Eutropius.
with four others, who before in a small vessel were conveyed to a rock near
the Isle, and by ebbing of the Ocea^ being for saken, a great number of
Brytaines fell on a few Romans, and some of his companions (though but few)
found means to return by boat, but Saeua remained with out fear in ye midst
of his enemies dar^s; first with his spear he re^^sted them, after with his
sword he alone fought against many of them, and when he was both weary and
wounded, and had lost his helmet and shield, with two light harnesses, he
ran to Caesar's tents, and asked pardon of the Emperor for his overboldness,
who not only forgave him, but honored him with the Office of a Centurion. Upon
land Caesar's horssemen at the first encounter were vanquished, and Laberius
Durus the Tribune slain in a place now called Chesto^ wood near unto
Rochester, (as says the Chronicle of Wygmore.) Cro Wigmore.
At the second conflict, not without great danger of his men, he put the
Brytaines to fight, from thence he went unto the river Thamis, on ye further
side whereof Cassibelanus with a great multitude of people was keeping the
banks, who had set all the said banks, and all the shallow places, under the
Casars Comen.
water with sharp stakes, every one of them as big as a ma^s thighe, bound
about with lead, and driven so fast into the bottom of the river, that they
can never be removed, (so says Bid. Asser.
Bid, and Asser,) who affirm that in their times the said stakes were
easilye perceived to remain as aforesaid. But Cassibelanus and his Brytains
not being able to resist the violence and force of the Romans, hid themselves
in woods, and with sudden eruptions oftentimes invaded them: but in the London
submitted to Caesar.
mean time London their strongest City submitted it self, and delivered
hostages to Caesar, who at their request placed Ma^dubratius to be their
governor, whose Father called Imanentius, being chief Lord or ruler of the
Trinobants, Cassibelane had before slain, wherewith Mandubratius fled, and
coming to Caesar, not only submitted himself, but also was a great means (as
many do write) for Caesar to subdue the rest: yet did Cassibelane send
messengers to the four Kings that ruled in the quarters of Kente, that with all
their puissance they should set on the Romans that lay next the^: their names
were Cingetorex, Caruilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, who obeying his request
were discomfited, and Cingetorex taken, wherewithal Cassibelane being dismayed
after many losses, was constrained to give pledges, and to agree that Brytaine
should become tributarie to Romans. Then Caesar Julius C^sar conquering the
world was slain with bodkins. Eutropius. John Lydgate. Pliny. Suetonius.
The Castles of Dover, Cauterbury, Rochester and the tovver of London built.
Salisbury, Chichester, and Excester builded.
like a conqueror, with a great number of prisoners sailed into France and so
to Rome, where after his return out of Brytaine, he consecrated to Venus a
surcotte of Brytayne Pearls, the desire whereof partly moved him to invade this
Country: shortly after he was by the Senate slain in the Counsel house. John
Lydgate, John Rouse and others write, that Julius Caesar builded in this land
the Castles of Dover, of Canturburie, Rochester and the Tower of London, the
Castle and town of Caesar's Bury, taking his name after Caesar, the which is
now called Salisburie. He also edifyed Caesar's Chester, that now is called
Chichester, and the castle of Excester. etc

Caesar in his Commentaries faith, the Brytons coin was Caesar's
Co^menmentaries touching the barbarousnesse of Brytons.
of brass, or else rings of Iron sized at a certain weight, in stead of
money: they thought it a heinous thing to taste a Hare, a Hen, or a Goose:
they clothed themselves in Lether: they dyed themselves with woade, which
setting a bluish color upon them, made them more terrible to behold in
battle: they ware their hair long, and shaued all parts of their bodies,
saving the head and upper lip: they had ten or twelve wives a piece, common
with themselves, specially brothers with brothers, and parents with their
children, but the issue that came of them was accounted his that first married
the mother.

Theomantius, the son of Lud, and nephew to Cassibelan, 37
succeeded in the Realm of Brytaine, and reigned quietlye xxiij. years: he was
buried at London.

OCtauius Augustus desiring to be like Julius Caesar his 34 Dion. Cassius. ^^^.
49.
Father (for so he always termed him) prepared an expedition in Brytaine, but
being come forward into France, understanding that the Panonians lately
subdued, rebelled, he turned his power against them, and altered his mind as
touching our Country.

THe fourth year after, he opened the Temple of Ianus at 25
Rome, fully determining to invade Brytaine, but when he had marched on his
way, as far as Ariminum Ambassadors of Brytaine met him, humbly suing for
peace, and submitting Dio. 53. G^l^^^u^.
themselves unto his obedience and protection. Wherefore he stayed again to
settle some troubles then raised in France.

THe year following, because the couena^ts between him 24
and the Brytains could not be agreed upon, he made provision for a third
expedition into this I Will, but an actual rebellion in Biscay and Sauoy
with-helde him then also. But S^^^bo. lib. 4.
shortly after Ambassadors came from Brytaine to Rome entreating for peace,
swearing filthily in the Temple of Mars, offering gifts in the Capitol to the
Gods of the Romans: and submitted part of the I Will unto Angustus. Now the
Brytaines began first to pay tolles and tribute without grudging, for all
wares which they traded, which were for that time, Iuorie boxes, tongues,
ouches, and other trinckets of amber and glass. And all here were so quiet,
that one band of soldiers and a few horsemen were sufficient to keep the
I Will in the Roman possession.

CVnobelinus the son of Theomantius reigned king in 14
Brytaine. xxxv. years, and was buried at London. In the xiiij. year of his
reign Christ our savior was borne in Bethlehem of Judah.

From this place following, the years from Christ his birth are placed in the
Margent.
WHen Caesar Augustus the second Emperor, by the Anno Christi 1 Ex Eusebi.
Paulus Orosi. Baptista Platin^, Martinus Polon^^.
will of GOD had stablished most sure peace through the World, our
redeemer Jesus Christ, very God and man, was borne in the. xlij. year of the
reign of Augustus, he began to preach the. xv. year of Tiberius, and
suffered his passion the. xviij. year of the same Tiberius, according to the
Prophecies. But here is to be noted, that the first year of our Lord has but
seven days, after some computation, for he was borne the. xxv. day of December,
and the first of Januarie following, began the second year.

GViderius, ye first son of Cunobelinus, was ordained King. 21 Flores
Historiaru^
This man was valiaunte, hardy, wealthy, and trusted much in his strength.
And for that he thought the Romans had their tribute wrongfullye, he of great
courage denied to pay the same.

Wherefore Tiberius the Emperor purposed to come hither in person, but death
prevented him. Guiderius raygned Geffrey Mo^.
23. years. Aruiragus, or rather (as the Brytaynes term Humfrey L^^yd.
him) Monrigus, the youngest son of Cunobelinus, and brother of Guiderius was
ordained King of Brytaine: he slew G. Mon.
Hamon near to a haue^ of the sea, and threw him gobbet meal therein, it is
now called South-hampton. He stre^gthned the Castle C^r^. Dover.
of Dover, and also the Castle of Richbourgh, near unto Sandwich in Kent. He
reigned. xxviij. years, and was buried at Gloucester.

ALbeit the Brytaine History does here place Aruiragus, yet 40
it is probable yt Cunobelinus as yet lived, for about, 40, years after
Christ: Admimus the son of Cunobeline banished Suetonius.
out of Brytaine by his Father, was received into protection by Caius Caligula
the fourth Emperor, who was the^ Dio. lib* 59.
set forward with great preparation against Brytaine, but when he came into
the parts of Holland against Norffolke he stayed, writing vaunting letters to
ye Senate, that al Brytain was yielded unto him, because Admimus had so done.
Afterward The ridiculo ^^ expedition of Caligula into Brytaine.
as though he would immediately fight a field, he cast his men into battayles,
and squadrons upon the sea coaste, disposing all his Engines in most warlike
manner (no man knowing what he meant): this done he himself in a Gallye
launched into the sea, and immediately returning, he caused the Trumpets to
sound to battle, and suddenly commanded them to gather cockles and muscle
shelles, and therewith to fill their helmets, saying they were spoils due to
the Capitol, and in these spoils he greatly triumphed, as though he had
subdued the Ocean. He rewarded his soldiers, and returned to Rome, after he
had built a high watch Tower in token of his victory against the sea, the
ruins whereof are great remaining in Holland, but ouerflowed by the water, and
is to this day called the Brytons house, in remembrance of this ridiculous
expedition against Brytaine, by the persuasion Brytaine house in Holland.
of Bericus banished out of Brytaine.

Claudius the Emperor dispatched Aulus Plantius with 45
an army into Brytaine, where after dinerse conflicts when he had received part
of the Bodunni into his tuition* and had slain Cataracus and Togodumus
sons of Cunobeline, and thereby had made the Brytains more eagre to revenge,
he sent for Claudius himself, who with great preparation and Elephants, Dio.
Suetonius.
came into Brytanne to his army, then encamped nere the Thames, with which he
passed over into Essex, fought with the Brytanies, obtained the victory, took
the chief Cittye of Cunobeline, and all weapons from the Brytaynes, and so
returned to Rome the sirthe month after he set forth from thence, where he
triumphed, surnaming his son Brytanicus: to which triumph he permitted not
only the presidents of provinces, but also certain banished prisoners to
repair to Rome: and amidst the spoils taken from the Brytains, he fixed on
the top of his Palace a crown of gold beset with stemmes and foreparts of
ships, in token he had vanquished the Brytish Ocean. He behaved himself
very courteously toward diverse of his friends, in so much that when
Plantius (a notable man) who in his voyage which he made into Brytaine
achieved diverse notable acts, and should triumph for the same, the Emperor
himself accompanied him, and (the use being such that with his triumph he
should go up into the Capitol) Claudius gave him the pre-eminence* and went on
the left hand.

At this time Vespatian who was after Emperor, was sent by Claudius into
Brytain, where he fought 30 times with the Brytaines, subdued to the Roman
Empire two worthy nations, above 20. towns, and the I Will of Wight.

OStorius was appointed lieuetenaunt in Brytaine for the 50
Romans who at his first entry in the beginning of Winter assayleth the
Brytaines, and purposes to pen them up and include the^ with rivers and
fortificatio^s, wherefore ye Ioeni made an insurrectio^, which when he had
pacified with some slaughter, he marched against ye Gangi, for raging all the
Cuntries as he passed, but was forced by new tumults to turn from them
against ye Brigants, who^ with some slaughter, and promise of pardon, he
pacified. The^ he made provision against ye Silures which inhabited
South Wales, bearing themselves bold upon ye puissa^ce of Caratacus a valiant
Brytain, who being skilful of y^ Country, removed ye war into Shropshire, where
he fortified amongst craggie mountains a place strong by situation, where
nevertheless the Romans prevailed. The wise daughter, and brethren of
Caratacus were taken, and he flying to Cartisma^dua a q. ruling in Yorkshire,
was by her delivered captive to his enemies. ix. years after the wars began,
who sending him to Rome, was there in open assembly brought before Claudius,
with his wife, daughter, brethren, and friends, and such spoils as had bin
taken from him, where he (nothing dismayed in spirit or countenance,) spoke
after this sort to Claudius:

If my moderation of prosperous successes had bin corresponde^t to my state and
nobility, I might have come to this City, rather a friend than a Captain:
neither you have disdayned to admit me into league, being descended of noble
parentage, and sovereign over many nations. This present state of mine, as it
is villainous toward me, so it is honorable to you. I had horse, men, money,
munition, and what wonder is there, if I had lost them unwillingly? For if you
will rule and reign over all, of necessity all must come into slavery: if I
had yielded at the first, neither my fortune nor thy glory had bin renoumed,
and the oblivion of me had ensued immediately after my execution: but if you
save my life, it shall be an everlasting example of your clemency. At these
words Claudius remitted his offense, granted him life, and the Senate adjudged
In Ostorius time certain Cities were given to Cagidunus a Brytish king, and a
Colonie of Romans was placed here.
Ostorius worthy to triumph: but in the mean time the inhabitaunts of
South Wales, to revenge Caratacus captivity intercepted and discomfited
certain bands of ye Romans, amidst which new wars, Ostorius tired we travel,
departed this life.

Claudius sent Didius to supply the place of Ostorius now 52 ^ac^^us. 3. H^sto.
departed, but in the mean time ye Silures fought fortunatly against the
legions which was under the conduct of Manlius Valens. In this time war brake
out between Cartismanda Q* of the Brigants, and Venutius her husband, whom she
refused, and matched her self with Vellocatus his Esquire: whereupon Venutius
favored of the people, assailed her territory, and she succored by ye Romans,
after she had intercepted by treachery Venutius brother and allies, fought with
him. Where after a sharp fight, she by the aid of ye Romans, prevailed, as
also Caesius Nasica did with his legion against the Brytans in an other place:
for Didius used others in these matters, because he was aged, and only kept y^
which others had heretofore conquered.

Claudius being now poysned by Agrippina his wife, Nero 61
her son obtained ye Romain* Empire* and about the. 7. year of his reign
Verennus was appointed lieutenant here, who died within ye first year of his
government, saying y^ he would have subdued provinces, had he suruiued but. ij.
years, but about this time great slaughter was here of the Romans.

SVetonius Paulinus was the^ sent hither, who at his arriual purposing to
subdue Anglesey, whither many Brytains had 62
we drawn themselves, he invessels with flat keeles ferried over his footme^,
bringing over his horsemen by some fourdes, where as on ye shores stood closely
together great numbers of Bryta^s, and among the^ women gadding up and down
frantickly in mourning weeds, their hair hanging about their ears, and
shaking firebra^ds: ye Druydes also casting up their hands toward heaven
thundered out cruel execrations, with which uncomely sightes ye Romans at first
stood dismayed, but after encouraged by y^ Dion. Casstus.
Generals persuasion* they brust in among the^, made great slaughter, got ye
possession of ye I Will, and felled down ye woods* consecrated to supersticious
uses: two Cities belonging to y^ Romans were taken. 80*000. of their people
slain, and the whole Ila^d revolted, and to the Romans reproach, the slaughter
was committed by a woman, being foretold the^ by many strange signs and
tokens. For in y^ court was heard a noise with much slaughter. In the Theater a
great tumulte and much wondering, when there was no man there, that either
spoke or mourned. Besides, in the river of Thames certain houses or buildings
were seen. The Image of the goddess Victoria in the Temple of Camulodunum
turned her back as though she had yielded to her enemies: the women ran as
mad here and there, saying, and singing, Destruction is at hand.

Finally, betwixt the Island and France, the Ocean sea appeared as it flowed
with blood. The occasion of this war was a co^fiscation of the Brytains goods,
which being remitted by Claudius the Emperor, Decianus Catus then Procurator
of the I Will, said that it ought to have been renewed. To this cause was added,
that whereas (against their wills Seneca had lent them forty Sestercies upon
great usury) he now with great force and all kind of violence compelled them
to pay all the whole sum at one payment, and also persuaded them to make
war on the Romans.

Bunduica of Brytaine, a woman of noble birth, not only with much honor
ruled amongst them, but also was the sovereign in their wars, and had in deed
a stomach more ma^ly than womanlike: who having gotten together an army of
120000. men, got her upon her seat made of Marrishe turues, after the manner
of the Romans, and being a tall woman, of comely shape, and severe
countenance, sharp voice, with yealowe hair hanging down to her skyrtes, (
Ponticus Virunius says to her thyghes) she ware a great chain of Ponticus
Virunius
gold, and had on her back a coat of sundry colors, and a playted
Kirtle. When she was thus apparelled, and had in her hands a great spear, she
spoke unto them to this effect.

First she commended liberty, showing them, how poverty with liberty, was
far better than great riches in misery and bondage: on the other side, with
great eloquence she declared the mischiefs and calamities they suffered at
the hands of the Romans, who exactyng Tributes of paymentes, so oppressed
them, that much better it were once to dye, than long to live in such
extreme slavery.

Secondly, she reproved them, for not expelling their enemies, as their
forefathers had done Julius Caesar, Claudius, and Caligula: And again, she
praised them for their present readiness to help her, and recover their
ancient state.

Thirdly, she disabled the Romans, for that they were few, combred with
armoure, and so faint of courage, that they had rather fight a far off, than
encounter with them by hand strokes: she commended the Brytaines, to be more in
number, of greater valor, and far more able to abide hunger, cold, thirste,
rain, wind, heat, etc. she added the vantage of the place, as being at
home, where the Wooddes and Ryuers, Lakes, and all other things were well
known to every one of them.

Lastly, she exhorted them to show themselves as Dogs and Wolves among
fearful Hares and Foxes: wherewithal, she let out of her lap a quick Hare,
thereby to learn the event of her enterprice. The Hare having a prosperous
passage, all the multitude gave a great showte, and Bunduica clapping her
hands, gave thanks to her Gods, that she ruled not the Romans, as did Nero,
(who, though he were a man, yet was in deed but a woman, for that he sang
What the Brytaines vveregiuen to.
and playde on the Harp) but the Brytans, who esteemed it better to be
Warriors than Ploughmen, who, as they had all things in common, so had they
both wives and children, and that having a kingdom amongst such a kind of
people, she prayed their divine aids against a spiteful and wicked kind of
men, if they were to be called men, who used Niceness of the Romaine^.
hot bathes, dainty fare, wine, ointmentes, lay in soft beds, and were
vassalles to such a wanton Minstrel as their Emperor Nero was.

Bunduica having spoken these and such like amongst her people, with all her
host she set forward against the Romans, who at that time were without
head or governor, for that Paulinus was gone with his army into Anglesey, (as
is before rehearsed,) which is an Island nere Brytaine, by means whereof
Bunduica took two of their Cities, and committed the notable slaughter before
remembered.

She exercised all kind of cruelty on such men as she took. As for the
noble women that she gat, she hanged them up, and cut off their paps, and
sewed them to their mouths: besides this, she stretching their bodies out at
length, thruste sharp stakes clean through them: al which things were done
in despighte, when they sacrificed and feasted in their Templas, but specially
in the woodde called Andates.

Paulinus, who had now subdued Anglesey, hearing of the foresaid slaughter,
returned to Brytaine, yet would he not adventure the fortune of battle with
them, fearing their number, but when he wanted victual, and that his enemies
approached, he was compelled to abide the battle Bunduica* who had in her army
230000. men, was her self placed in a Chariot, and ordered her men at length:
but Paulinus could not stretche his company so long, for that they were not of
any such number, but at length he divided his army into three parts, so that
at one time they might fight in sundry places, exhorting them not to be
abashed at the multitude of their enemies, for both they and their
forefathers, had with less number achieved greater matters, and gotten
greater victories. Adding, that now was the time to play the men, to enjoy that
in quiet, which before their ancestors had won, and recover that which they
had lost, or else to live for ever in misery and shame. Again, he showed what
cruelty their eyes had seen, by those barbarous people, to such as they had
overcome, exhorting them in revenge thereof to fight manfully, and there was
no doubt but the Gods (who were always favorable to such as had suffered
cruelty) would help them: and better it were to die fighting valiantly, than
with reproach to be taken, and die in their enemies hands like Dogs.
Finally, (says he) whether we live or dye, Brytaine shall be ours, for, though
the other Romans lose it, yet shall our bones continually keep it. When he
had thus spoken, the sign of the battle was given, and each part prepares
himself: the Brytaines with great and strange noise, the Romans in silence
came to near, that they might throw their darts to them: and perceiving
their enemies to approach, with great violence, rushed in amongst them, and
brake their a^raye: but after being compassed with the multitude of their
enemies, the battle waxed doubtful. The light harnessed men began to smite
each other, and those of heavy armoure together with the horsemen encountered,
and the Roman Archers fought against the Britishe Chariots. They which
fought without breast-plates, were slain with Darts. This encounter was
made in three several places, and was fought with great courage on both
sides. At the last the Romans departed Conquerours, many were slain in the
battle, and many were taken. Great numbers which escaped, prepared to fight
again, but in the mean space Bunduica died of a dissease which she had, and
they mourned, and buried her very honorablye. After, those that remained were
easily overcome and dispersed.

Tacitus says, that Prasutagus King of the Iceni, a Prince Corneli^^ Tacitu^.
of great wealth, appointed, that Caesar and his own two daughters should
inherit his lands, hereby thinking all his life to be more quiet: and being
deceassed, his wife and daughters should be the more safer by means of such
protection, but it fell out far otherwise, for the Centurions gat his
Realm, their servants spoiled his house, beat his wife, and deflowred his
daughters: besides, the chiefest men of his land were displaced of their
inheritaunces, and handled extremely. In revenge whereof, Bunduica raised the
war, and committed the slaughter before remembered, and at last her army once
overthrown by Paulinus, being afraid to fall into her enemies hands, she
poisoned her self.

Policletus then a seruannt of Nero, was sent hither to survey the state of
Brytaine, who discharged Paulinus Suetonius of the government.

PEtronius Turpilianus was sent into Brytaine as a man 64 Petronius
Turpilianus.
easy to be entreated, and being not altogether acquainted with offenses of
the enemies, was the readier to receive the^ to grace: who setting matters in
their former stay, and attempting no further, delivered the Province unto
Trebellius Maximus. Trebellius being both faint-harted and too sluggishe, and
also utterly unacquainted with experimentes of arms, ruled the province* with
a certain mildness of government. Now had the barbarous people also
learned to wincke at enticing vices, and the civil wars of the Romans then
happening, was a cloak to his cowardice: but there presentlye arose discord
between Roscius and Caelius, legates of the. xx. legion, when the soldiers
(accustomed to be employed in expeditions) gave themselves to lasciviousness:
whereupon Trebellius took his flighte, and hid his head, to avoid the fury
of the army, and in most base and beastly manner, governed (as it were) by
entreatie, so as they might seem to have compounded, that the soldiers
should live in all liberty, and the General at his safety. This time for a
year and half there was deadly civil war among the Romans for the Empire,
between Galba, Otho, and Vitelius.

VEctius Volanus, then was sent hither by Vitelius, he did 69 Vectius Volanus.
not use any discipline or correction in Brytaine, so as there continued the
like sloth and cowardice in the souldioures, toward their enimyes, and the
Camp still as full of wantonness, saving that Volanus was a good and mild
man, and thereby made himself beloved where he should have been feared. In
this time Vitelius advanced many Souldioures in the Brytaine legions, and
Herdonius Flaccus brought unto him 80000. chosen men of war out of Tacitus.
Brytaine. The Brytans seeing ye Romans thus encombred with civil war, began
to trouble them, wherefore Volanus would send no succor to Vitelius at his
commandment, when Vespasian warred against him for the Empire, and all the
Brytaines favored Vespasian.

WHen as (with the rest of the world) Vespasian had recovered 70
Brytaine, the^ were there placed great Captains, and notable armies, the
enemies hope abated, and Petilius Cerealis brought great fear upon the
Brytaines. The Petilius Cerealis.
City of the Brigantes (which was accounted one of the greatest of the land)
being by him assailed, he had many encountres, and some not without
slaughter, whereby he either conquered or assailed a great part of their
country.

Julius Frontinus a man as worthy and valiant as was Julius Frontinus
possible, took then the charge upon him, and subdued the nation of the
Silures, being both valiant and warlike notwithstanding the valor of the enemy
and difficulties of the places.

This was the state of Brytaine, and course of the wars, which Agricola found
arriving in the midst of Summer, Julius Agricola.
the Soldiers even then beginning to retire to their strengthes, and the
enimye searching for his most advantage.

The City of the Ordouices few days before his arrival almost wholly
defeated a company lying upon their bordures. This beginning stirred up the
province, serving for an example to them, who coueted the wars, and yet
desired to see what was in their new Governor. Agricola, although the Summer
were now well spent, the bands dispersed all about the province, the
soldiers had determined to rest for that year, the time being late and
incommodious to commence the war, thinking it would be better to manne the
pieces most suspected: yet he determined nevertheless to prevent danger, and
gathering together the Standards of the Legions, with a few of his foreign
aides, for that the Ordouices durst not take the field, marched forth against
them himself in the vauwarde of his army, that others might take like courage
in the same danger, and put almost that whole nation to the sword: then
followyng his good success, he invaded Anglesey, (which Suetonius had before
attempted) causing certain Brytaines that served him, and knew the shallows
and manner of swimming, with horse and harness to pass over into the Isle on a
sudden, wherewith the inhabitauntes were so amazed (who Tacitus:
feared nothing because they saw no navy) that they submitted the I Will unto
him, immediately. Now having some quietness, and perceiving that war would
little prevail against the Brytaines, if they were iniuriouslye handled, he
purposed to cut off al causes of quarrel, and first reforming his own family,
did nothing partially, only respected the virtue of men, loosened tributes,
and behaved himsefe most honorably. And thus much the first year.

When the Summer began, he assembled his armies, trained his souldioures,
forrayed the enemies Countries with sudden invasions to their great fear,
and yet so favorably, as many Countries willingly yielded unto him, and
suffered Castelles to be builte among them. The Winter following he spente in
civil administration, counsayling the people privately, and helping them
publicly, to build houses, Temples, and Court houses. He procured noble men's
children to study liberal Sciences, and then began the Brytaines to conform
themselves to Roman fashions and attire.

The third year he discovered people in the North hitherto unknown, even as
far as Tau, terrifying the people, and placing fortresses most wisely to the
annoyaunce of the enemy,

The fourth Summer he employed getting those Countries which hitherto he had
passed through, even to the Edenborough Frith, and Cluid, the narrow space
between the which waters he fortified.

The fifth year by Sea he discovered and vanquished further nations in the
North, and placed garrisons in the coast toward Irelande, whereunto he also
aspired, and to that end retained an Irish Prince with him, that was driven
out of his Country by civil dissension.

But in the Summer which began the sixth year of his government, he searched
the Havens by a navy for that purpose sent to the Sea, fearing least all
those nations beyond had united themselves and kept the passages by land: but
afterward he marched forward, his navy coasting with his army by land, so as
sometime in the same Camp, he had horsemen, footmen, and Seamen, lodged
together. It was reported by such as were taken prisoners, that the sight of
the navy much astonished the Brytaines as men from whom all refuge was cut
off, the secrets of their Seas being discovered, wherefore determining to try
it with hand blows the inhabitants of Calidonia with great preparation,
although the report thereof were greater (as it often happens in unknown
matters,) of their own accord, assailed some Castelles, and seeing themselves
rather to be assaylantes than defendauntes, put the Romans in some doubt:
whereupon the ^owards pretending policy, advised to retire on this side
Bodotria, rather than to be driven thereto by force, when as in the mean
while, Agricola knowing that the enimye would charge him in several troops
and companyes, and fearing to be ouermatched and couped in with number, or
deceived by the ignorance of the place, divided his army into three battles,
and so marched forward: which order marked by his enimyes, made them alter
their purpose, and in the night killing the watch, brake in upon the ninth
legion, half asleep and half afrighted, which (as they took it) was the
weakest, and so the fight continued within the Camp til it was day light, at
which time the Romans began to gather courage, and the Brytaines were
discomfited, so as, had it not been for the woods and bogges, that victory
had ended the whole strife, after which battle the Romain soldiers grew to
be of hautie courage, crying out to pierce the country of Calidonia, that they
might find out the vttermoste ports and bounds of Brytaine. The Romans on
the other side, ascribing the praise of this victory, not to the prowess of
the Roman souldioure, but to Fortune, and the wiliness of their Captain,
used al means possible, to hearten up and arm their Youth: bestowing their
wives and children in place^ of safegarde, and by sacrifices and holy
assemblyes unite all their Cities together, upon these resolutions they removed.

In the beginning of the next Summer which was y^. viij. year of his charge,
Agricola seding his fleet before him, which often put a land and spoiled the
Countries, thereby causing a great and uncertain fear: himself with a picked
army, whereunto he added of the valiantest Brytains, came to y^ mountain
Grampius, whereon his enemies had encamped, (for the Brytaines nothing quailed
by the success of the former encounter,) and expecting nothing but a revenge,
or bondage, learning at length, that common danger is only to be resisted with
common consent, by leagues and embassages had stirred up the minds of all
the Cities about. Now were there to be seen in arms thirty thousand and
upward, unto which number, the Youth, and all such as were of strong and
lusty years, every man bearing his tokens of praise about him, continually
repaired from al sides. When amongst many other Capitaines, Calgacus a man
both in nobility and valor above the rest, spoke to the assembly in this
manner: As often as I behold the causes of this war, and our necessity, my
mind gives me great hope, that this day and your mutual consent shall be
the beginning of liberty to all Brytaine, for, every one of you having tried
servitude, and having no other land nor sea, which can save us (the Romans
navy being at our elbowes) the very war and weapons which are the honor
of the worthy, must be the only safety of the faint-harted. With these and
many such reasons drawn from the calamity of their future servitude, the
pride and tira^ny of their Gouernoures, the fickle friendship of the strangers,
serving in their enemies Camp, ready to change upon any high occasion, and
the present remedy of all misery, which, as he said in the beginning, was
only valiancie, he so stirred up all men's minds, that they applauded his
Oration after their manner, with songs and diverse kind of noyses. This Oration
being ended, as also Agricola his speech to his Souldioures, the two armies
began to encounte^* Agricola placed his battayles in this order: he made his
main battle of the strangers (his aids) which were in number* viij.
thousand, on each side whereof, for wings he placed his horssemen to the number
of three thousand, and his legions he caused to guard the trenches of his
Camp, that if it were possible, the victory might be gained without the
sheading of Roman blood, or if his maine battle were broken, they might be
gathered again, and the fight restored by his legions. The battle of the
Brytaines (to terrify their enemies, as also to make their brauest show,) stood
on higher ground, so as their vawarde being come upon the plain, the rest
were on the foot of the hill, their Chariots, in the mean time, galloping up
and down the field, making great showtes and cries. Then Agricola perceiving
the number of his enimes to be greater than his own, and fearing to be
charged both on the face and ^lanke of his battle at one time, and that
many thought necessary to have the legions aduannced forward, remained
notwythstanding, firm in his first resolution, causing his battle to be
somewhat drawn in length, himself alighted from his horse, and stood on
foot before his Standerdes. The first fight was with shot of Arrows and
Dar^es, during which time, the Brytaines, both skilfully and couragiouslye
with their huge Swords and small Bucklers, either bare or brake the Romans
shot, and answered them with an infinite number of the like, until Agricola
was persuaded by bands of Holanders, and Brabanders, that the matter might be
brought to swords and hand-strokes, which kind of fight they ^^re
acquainted withal, by long haunting the wars, and the same was very
incommodious for their enjuries, bearing but small shieldes, and unmeasurable
Swords: For the pointlesse Swords of the Brytaynes, were vnfi^te for a throng,
and where they wanted roomth. Wherefore the Holanders struck thick together,
and thrust them over the Bucklers, wounding them in the faces, and having
broken that battle, passed forward toward them which kept the hill, which
seen by the rest of the Roman bands, they partelye moved by envy of the
others glory, and partelye by heat^ of their own courages, cut in pieces
those that they first encountered, leaving notwythstanding, some half dead,
and others not touched, for haste, to obtain a perfect victory. In the mean
while, the troops of the Brytaine horsemenne, did take their flighte, but
the Chariots put themselves peece-meale among the foot bands, which kind
of fight, (at first) seemed somewhat terrible to their enemies, but it long
served not their tournes, being assailed with a thick prease of their
ennimyes, and the ground not commodious for the Chariots, nor their ryders all
of the best. So as at the last, their Chariot horses, coursing up and down
the field without guiders, ouer-ran many of their own company, as they fled
for fear from one place to another. The Brytaines, which all this while kept
the hill, and came not to ye fight, making little reconing of the small number
of the Romans, began by little and little to descend, entending to hem them
in, in the midst of their conquest, which surely they had done, if Agricola,
suspecting the same, had not dispatched four companies of horsemen (which
he kept for all sodaines) to encounter with them, who, the more fiercely they
assailed, so much the more sharply repulsed them, and sent them to flight:
whereupon the devise of the Brytaines turned to their own harm. Moreover, by
Agricola his commandment the wings of horsemen were taken from the front of
his battle, and were made to charge upon the battle of his enemies, standing
over against them. Then might you behold in the open field, a grievous and
lamentable spectacle, some followed the chase, some took prisoners, and after
killed them to take others. Now the enemies as every one thought best,
fled, some in heaps and armed fled from a smaller number: other, though
unarmed, tarryed and were slain: every where lay weapons, ^^rcasses, and
lymmes, out of the ground all bloody: sometime the vanquished approaching near
to Woods, would make head, and entrap the heedlesse followers, so as, if
Agricola had not caused certain lusty bands in the manner of a search, and
also diverse horsemen* leaving their horse where the Wooddes were thick, and
other on horseback, where the Wooddes would suffer, to raunge them all about,
there might have been some detriment received by too much hardiness* But when
the Brytaines saw themselves pursued in order of battle, they took again
their flight, not in companies, as before, nor tarrying one for an other, but
here and there, even as men glad to escape, sought long, and by ways. Night
and weariness of slaughter ended the chase. There were slain of the Brytaines
about ten thousand: of the Roman army, three hundred and forty, among
whom Aulus Atticus, Captain of aband, whom the heat of his youth, and courage
of his horse brought into the hands of his enemies. That night the victors
made merry with the spoil, but the Brytaines wandering up and down, men and
women lamenting together, relieved, and fetched away their hurt men, assembled
together the whole, forsook their houses, and for anger set fire on them,
choosing themselves lurking places, which strait they forsook again*
sometime* conceyuing good hope, which straighte way quayled again: and some
were known to kill their wives and children, as though they had therein
taken compassion upon them* The next day made the victory more manifest, in
which there was nothing but silence, the hills being then forsaken, and also
the houses smoking a far off.

Agricola sendyng abroad his espialles, could find no ennimye to make ^ed,
wherefore Summer being too far spente to proceed any further in the war,
he had his Souldioures into the coasts of the Horest^* and there taking
hostages, caused his navy to coaste about Brytaine, which at last arrived
at the Haven called* Trutulensis, afterward having bestowed his souldioures in
their wintering places* departed Brytaine, and left the province in quiet to
his successor.

Diverse s^uthours affirm, that about this time, the Gospel First Christians
in Brytaine.
of Christ our savior was first preached in this Island. Nicephorus a Greek
Author, in his second book the. 40. Chahiter, Nicephorus.
has as follows. Simon borne in Cana Galilei, who for his fervent affection
to his Master, and the great zeal he took by all means to the Gospel, was
surnamed Zelotes, he having received the holy Ghost from abone* trauayled
through^ Aegip^ and Affr^k^* then through Mauritania and all Lybia, preaching
the Gospel. And the same Doctrine he brought to the Occidentall sea, and the
Isles called Brytani^, etc. And in the third Book the first Chap. he says. The
holy Apostles (like as we have declared already) being dispersed throughout
the whole earth, did divide the provinces amongst them by lot, to preach the
Gospel in* Peter undoubtedly first at Jerusalem, then in Galatia, By^^inia,
with the higher Asia, Capadocia, and all Italy, taught the Gospel: John in
Asi^* who ended his life there: To Andrew fell the Provinces on the co^^^^ of
(...) all Scythia, Byzans, Ma^edonia, and the (...) of Greece: Thomas amongst
the Parthians* Indians, ^^^ the (...) of Tap^^b^^ did publishe the Gospel:
Another chose Aegipt and Lybia: another the vttermoste coasts of the Ocean,
with the Isles of Brytaine, etc. Do^otheus writes thus* Simon Zelotes passing
through Mauritania, and Do^otheus.
Africa preached Christ, at length was crucified, slain and buried in
Brytaine* Also he says, A^^^^^bulus, whom ye Apo^^le to the Romans reme^be^th,
was ma^e^a Bishop in Brytaine* George Mayor writes in a preface, that
immediately after Christ's r^surrection under Claudius the Emperor, the light of
y^ Gospel wa^ ^^^dled in Brytaine by Joseph of A^^^^^hia that bl^^ed the body
of Christ. (...) writing against the Jews of those times* says* The
Brytaines inahbitants of places unknown to the Romans, yet did obey and were
subject to the kingdoms of Christ. William of Malmesbury, Antiquities of
Gla^tenb^r^. Freculphus.
in his Book of the Antiquities of Glastenburie, alleges Freculphus to write
in his second Book and fourth Chapter, as follows: Philip the Apostle,
preaching the word of God in Gaul (now called France) chose out. xij.
amongst his Disciples, whom he sent into Brytaine to preach the word of
life, and upon every one of them, he most devoutly stretched out his right
hand: over these he appointed for chief, his dear friend Joseph of
Aramathie, that buried our Lord. Glastenbury first Church of Christians in
Brytaine.
These (says John Capgraue, who alleges Melkin and Merlin) came into this
land the year of Christ's incarnation, 63. in the time of Aruiragus, who gave
to them the I Will of Aualon, where they builded an Oratorie of wrythen John
Capgraue. Melkin and Merlin.
wandes, and after there were buried: which place being since increased, and
newly builded by diverse Princes, was named Glastenburie. For confirmation
whereof, King Henry Chart^ Regi^.
the second having diligently perused the Privileges and Charters, which he
caused to be presented and read, not only of William the first, of William the
second, and Henry the first his Grandfather: but also the Charters of the
Princes his predecessors, of more ancient time, to weete, of Edgar, Edmond,
Edward, Elfred, Bringwalthius, Kenthwin, Baldred, Ina, Arthur, and that noble
man Cudred, and many other Christian Kings beside, also of Kenewalla, sometime
a Heathen and Pagan King, concerning the house of Glastenburie* found, that in
some of those Charters it is called the Mother of Saints, of some other, the
Grave of the Saints, and that the said place was first builded even by the
very Disciples of Christ themselves, and by them dedicated to our Lord, as
the first place which he chose to himself in this Realm: al which the
foresaid King Henry established by his Charter.

Marius son of Aruiragus, an excellent wise man, was 73 Galfr^d^^.
ordained King of Brytaine. At this season Rodrike King ^f the Pictes, (which
were people of Scythia) accompanied with the Scots invaded Brytaine, and
spoiled the country with sword and fire, against whom Marius with his knights
assembled in all have, and gave the^ sharp battle, wherein Rodrike was slain,
Flores Historiaru^.
with a great number of his soldiers upon Stansemore, in token of which
victory, there was a stone not far from Carleile erected, with this
inscription, In token of Marius victory. To the^ which remained Marius gave
inhabitance in the further part of Scotland. And for so much as ye Brytaines
disdained to Ran. Hig. Henry Bradshaw. Chester repaired.
give to the^ their daughters in marriage, they acquainted the^ with ye
Irishmen, and married their daughters, and grew in process of time to a great
people. He repaired, walled, and fortified ye city of Caerlegion, now called
Chester. He rained. liij. years.

DOmitianus the Emperor sent Salustius Lucullus into Brytaine, 94 Suetonius.
whom he shortly put to death, for that he suffered certain laws to be called
Lucullen, after his name. Some write, that Cneus Trebullius was now Governor
here.

What Lieutenants were in Brytaine for the time of Nerua and Traiane, I find
not recorded: but when Adrian was possessed Julius Seuerus.
in the Empire, Julius Seuerus governed here under him, who^ Adrianus called
out of Brytaine, to war against ye Jews, 120
and came hither himself in person, pacified the tumults, reared a wall, which
should separate the barbarous from his Spartianus.
subjects, and returned to Rome.

COilus ye son of Marius was ordained King, he was brought 124 Galfridus.
Colchester builded.
up eue^ from his youth in Rome among ye Romans, and therefore favoring the^,
paid ye tribute truly: he builded Colchester, and reigned. lv. years, and was
buried at York.

ANtonius Pius succeeded Hadrianus in ye Empire, and governed 139 Capitelinus.
this province by Lollius Vrbicus, who overcame the Brytaines, and raised
another wall of turffes to keep out the inroades, the Northern Brytaines.

ANtonius Philosophus now ruled the Roman Empire, 162
and Calphurnius Agricola was sent hither with authority against the Britains
then repining at the Romans, but with what success it is not specified.

LVcius ye son of Coilus, was ordained King, who in all his 179 Florent.
Vig^r^^.
acts and deeds followed the steps of his forefathers, in such wise as he was
of al men loved and dread. He sent his two Ambassadors Eluanus and Meduuinus*
two learned me^ in yt scriptures, with his loving letters to Elutherius Bishop
of Rome, England received the faith* ^eda. Asser. Flores Historiaru^. Record of
Saint Asaphs Church* John Capgraue. Marianus Scotus.
desiring him to send some devout and learned men, by whose instruction both
he and his people might be taught ye faith and religion of Christ: whereof
Elutherius being very glad, baptized these two messe^gers, making Eluanus a
Bishop, and Meduuinus a teacher, and sent also with the^ into Brytaine two
famous Clarks, Faganus and Deruuianus, by whose diligence Lucius and his people
of Brytaine were baptized and instructed in ye faith of Christ. 28. Temples
were made Cathedral churches, and Bishops placed, where Flamins before had bin:
at London, York* and Carlein, (which is now S. David's in Wales) were placed
Archbishops: London, York and Carlein, Archbishops. The Epistle of Eleutherius
to Lucius King of Brytaine. Lib. constitut. Lon.
and now follows an Epistle of Elutherius, sent to Lucius K. of Brytain, as I
find ye same recorded in a Book of ye Constitutions of London* pertaining to
ye Guild Hall of London*

The year after Christ's birth 202. Pope Elutherius did write to Lucius king of
Brytaine, for ye amendment of ye kings and the nobility of Brytaine as
follows. You required that we should send you the Romain and Imperial laws, ye
you might use the^ in your kingdom of Brytaine, but those laws we may disprove,
and not the laws of God. You have received lately through Gods goodness in your
kingdom, ye faith and law of Christ: you have there in your kingdom both
Testaments, out of the^ by Gods grace, and the advice of your realm take a
law, and thereby patiently govern ye kingdom. You are ye Uicar of God in your
kingdom, according to ye kingly prophet. The earth is ye Lords, and his
fullness is ye whole world, and al yt Psalm. 45.
dwell therein: and again, Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity,
wherefore God (eue^ thy God) has anointed thee with y^ ^ile of gladness above
thy fellows. They are ye kings children, christian nations, and people of your
kingdom that live and consist under your protection, peace, and kingdom
according to the Scripture, as an Hen gathers chickens under her wings, the
people, and nations of the kingdom of Brytaine is youres, such as are divided
you should gather them together to the law of Christ: his holy Church, to
peace and concord: and cherishe, maintain, protect, govern, and defend them
from the injurious, malicious, and their enemies. Woe be to that kingdom, the
King whereof is a child, and the Princes eat early in the morning. I do not
call a King a child for his youth or minority, but for his folly, iniquity,
Psalm. 55.
and madness, according to the Kingly Prophet. The bloodthirsty and
deceitful men shall not out-liue half their days. By eating we shall
understand Gluttony, by Gluttony, Luxury, by Luxury, all filth,
wickedness, and mischief, according to King Solomon: Wisdom will not
Sapience. ^.
enter into a spiteful soul, nor inhabit in a body subject to sin. A King
has his name of governing, and not of his Kingdom, so long you shall be a
King, as you rule well, otherwise, you shall not be so named, and lose that
name, (which God forbid) God grant that you may so rule your Realm of
Brytaine, that you may reign with him everlastingly, whose Uicar you are in
the said Kingdom. To whom with the father, etc.

There remains in the Church of Saint Peter upon Cornhil at London, a Table,
wherein is written, that Lucius founded the same Church to be an Archbishops
sea, and made it the Metropolitan and chief Church of his Kingdom, which so
endured the space of 400. years, unto the coming of Saint Augustine.

Ioseline of Fornes, in his book that he wrote of the Brytish Ioseline of
Furneys.
Bishops, says, that Thean, who was first Archbishop of London, in the time of
Lucius, builded the said Church of S. Peter Archbishops of London. 13.
in a place called Cornhil in London, by the aid and help of Ciran, chief
Butler to King Lucius, and also that Clauus, the second Archbishop there,
builded a Library to the same church adjoining, and converted many of the
Erwydes (learned men in the Pagan Law) to the Christian faith. The third
Archbishop was named Cadar, the fourth Obinus, the fifth Conan, y^ sixth
Paladius, the seventh Stephan, the eighte Iltut, the ninth Dedwin, the tenth
Thedred, the eleventh Hillary, y^ twelfth Guidilinus, the thirtenth Vodinus,
who was slain of the Sarons that came first into this land. Lucius reigned 12.
year, and was buried at Gloucester.

COmodus after his father Antonius Philosophus succeeded 181 Dion.
in the Empire with most cruel tyranny. In his time the Northern Britains
burst in through the wall, forrayed the Country, and slew the Roman General
with his soldiers, wherefore Vlpius Marcellus was appointed here a careful
vigilant Captain: he sore annoyed the Brytains, which were enemies to the
Romain state, and purchasing envy by his virtue, was shortly dismissed*

Then Ceronnis who ruled all under Comodus, appointed Lampidi^^* Dion.
certain men of base estate to govern the Romain enemies here, wherewith the
soldiers being grieved, sent. 1500. chosen men out of their number to Rome,
who accusing him before Comodus to compass the Empire, for his son was
delivered unto them, who immediatelye mangled him and slew his wife with his
two sons.

Comodus the^ sent Holnius Pertinax into Brytain, and surnamed Lampridi^^*
himself Brytanicus, thereunto persuaded by flatterers, when the Brytaines were
so evil affected toward him, that they would have nominated some other
Emperor against Capitolinus.
him, and namely Pertinax: but these tumults were appeased by the Wisdom of
Pertinax, to his great danger, for he was wel-nere slain in tumulte, and left
among the dead, which injury he after seuerallye revenged, and sued for his
discharge, being afterward preferred to the Empire.

Clodius Albinus was then sent hither by Comodus* who Capitolinus.
at the first so greatly esteemed of him, that he honored him with y^ title of
a Caesar* which Clodius refused: but afterward when a false rumor was
dispersed, yt Comodus was slain, he made an Oration to the legions of Brytain,
impeaching yt government of Emperors, and preferring the Senate, whereupon
Commodus being sharpened against him, sent Iunius Seuerus to rule here, and
shortly after Comodus was slain. slain.

PErtinax then was chosen Emperor, and within. iij. months 194
was slain through the per^wations of Didius Iulianus, who enjoyed the Empire
two months, and the practice of Clodius Albinus, which then returned into
Brytain, and (as it seems) recovered his former government.

SEuerus after the death of Pertinax was saluted Emperor: 194
he immediately slew Didius Iulianus, and because he feared Clodius Albinus
with his Brytain legions, he created him Caesar, and partaker of the Empire,
and sent Heraclitus to govern this I Will: but after he had subdued Niger who
also usurped the Empire, he moved war against Albinus, who passing hence into
France with the Brytish army, encountered with Seuerus near Lions, and was
there slain. Henceforthe Seuerus quietly enjoyed the Roman Empire, and made
sharp wars into the Eastern parts of the world, with great glory.

But returning to Rome, he understood of a war raised in 209
Brytaine. Wherefore he hasted hither with his two sons Bassianus and Geta^at
his arrival peace was offered, whithe he refused, and leaving his younger son
Geta to govern the province, (being the hither part of the I Will) he with
Bassianus his eldest son entered into the North, and passed y^ further part
of this Island without any resistaunce: yet by ambushes, difficulty of the
way, and other inconveniences, he lost. 50000. men, and then returned,
enforcing the enemies to conclude a league, and yield some part of their
Country.

At conclusion of which league, when he and his son rid to treat with the
Caledontans or Northern Brytains, Bassianus his son drawing his sword in the
sight of the enemy, was ready to have slain him, and had done it, had not
some of the company made an outcry: yet this fault was remitted.

After this league, the Brytaines of the North resorted to the Emperors
Court, where Iulia, Seuerus wife, objected to a woman of Brytaine, the wife of
Argentorix the Caledonian, that the Brytish women accompanied with men
dishonestlye, ye^ quoth the Brytishe woman, we satisfy the natural lust in
better sort than you Romans, for we accompanye our selves openly with the
best men; and you commit adultery closely with most vile persons. But
after this league there was a general reuolte of the Brytaynes against the
Romans, which yet was pacifyed with great slaughter, and then he builte a
Wall of Turfe, to inhibite S^uerus wall.
the Northern Brytaines, from whence when he returned, at the next lodging, a
black Moore that served him, a notable scoffer, met him with a Crown of
Cypres: he moved with the color of the man and the Cypres (which was then
used at all burials,) as with signs of evil luck, commanded the manne to be
sent away, wherewyth he cried: Thou haste been all in all, and have
banquished all, and now of a couquerour be thou a GOD. Then coming to the
City of York (as it is supposed,) he was by Spartia^^^.
mistaking brought to the Temple of Bellona: black beasts also being ordained*
for sacrifice, followed him home to his Palace: which things these then did
account to be ominons.

Shortly after he departed* out of this life at York, partly through
sickness, and partly through grief conceived of his sons evil demeanoure.
At his last gasp he uttered these words: I found the state troublesome every
where, and leave it quiet even to the Brytaines.

Herodian writes, that in these wars of Seuerus against ye Herodian
North Brytains, he found their Country full of watery Marshes: by those
marshes did the Britains swim and skirmish with their enemies, being covered
with water up unto the Navel, not caring that men saw the privy parts of
their naked bodies. Neither did they know the use of apparel, but accustomed
to compass their bellyes and necks only with Iron, which they esteemed an
ornament and token of riches, as other barbarous people supposed of Gold. They
painted their bodies with diverse pictures and forms of beasts, and therefore
ware no garmente, least the painting should be hidden, being a nation very
valiant, and warlyke, greedy of slaughter, and content only with a small
target, a spear, and a skayne hanging by their naked sides, ignorant of the
use of shyrtes of mayle and helmets, for they reckned ye same comberous unto
them, when they should swim over the lakes etc.

A greetious disease came upon Seuerus, being sore appalled with age, so that
he was constrained to keep his chamber and send Antonius unto the wars: but
Antonie not regarding the business of Brytaine, endeavored by all means he
could, to win the hearts of the soldiers unto him, deprauing his brother,
to the intent they should only aid him to the attayning of the soueraintie.
The long malady of his Father, caused him to persuade Physicians to rid the
old man out of the world, until that Seuerus, being consumed, ended his life,
who was the most famous of all Emperors in war like affairs: For none other
had obtained so many victories and conquests, either civil against his
adversaries, or for rain against the barbarous nations. Thus deceased he,
after he had governed the Empire the space of xviij. years, leaving his sons
for successors in the same: unto whom he left also great abundance of
riches, as none of his previcessours had before him done. When Antony had
gotten the supreme authority, he put to death the Phisitio^s, because they
obeyed not his commandment in hastnyng his Fathers death: and slew all his
own, and brothers bringers up and instructers, for that they went about to
reconcile them, leaving none alive, that was either of dignity, or had
reverenced his Father. The Captains of the army, he enticed, to persuade the
soldiers to proclayme him only Emperor: imagining daily manifold mischiefs
against his brother: but he could not win the soldiers good wills. Wherefore
Antony, having taken truce with the Britans, removed toward his mother and
brother. Their mother labored to bring them to agreement, wherein also, many
prudente Counselors earnestly traveled. Antony thereby was enduced, rather
of force, than good will; to counterfaite love. After which done, the two
brethren governing y^ Empire with equal honor, launched out of Brytaine, and
sailed with the relics of their Father toward Rome. For when they had burned
the body (as was the custom of the Romans) they carried the ashes,
(intermedled with pleasant odours, in a Box of Alabaster) to Rome, that it
might be there enterred amongst the monuments of other Princes. Themselves led
thus their army, as conquerors of Brytain, and passed over ye Ocean unto the
next coaste of France, and so hasted toward Rome. When they were entered into
Rome, all the people crowned with Laurel, received, and the Senate welcomed
them. Foremost road the Emperors themselves, clothed in Emperial purple. And
next unto them followed the Consuls, bearing the vessel with Seuerus relics.
Which vessel, the people, after they had saluted the new Emperor, did
reverently worship. The Emperors and Consuls being thus accompanied with
Princely pomp, ^aryed the saine into the Temple, where the divine monuments of
Marcus* and other Emperors, are seen. After they had finished the solemn
sacrifise, and according to ye ancient usage, celebrated the Funeral
ceremonies, both the brethren departed into the Imperial palace: which they
divided between them, closed up all back doors, and privy posterns, and
met together only at y^ outter gates. They chose besides either of the^ unto
himself a soundry guarde, and never came together unless it were sometime for
a little while to be seen of the people. Nevertheless, first of all, they
accomplished the due Funerals of their Father. For the Romans accustom to
consecrate with immortality, such Emperors; as at their death, lea^^e either
children, or successoures in the Empire behind them. And those which are
endued with that honor, they canonize ^^^ongst the Gods. There is through the
City, a certain* doleful lamentation, mixed with fearful i^. And they use
to enterre the dead corpse very sumptuously. But then, they have an Image, made
as like the dead Emperor, as may be. The same, within the Porche, of the
Emperial Palace, they lay in a great and high bed of Iuorie, covered over with
cloth of gold. The same Image looks very pale, like a diseased patient. About
the bed on either side, a great part of the day, do certain persons sit. That
is to wit on the left side, the Senate, clothed in black garments: and on the
right side, many matrones. None of these are seen to wear any ouches, or
chains of gold, but being clad with thin white vestures, they show the
countenance of mourners. And thus do they continue the space of seven days:
during the which, every day the Emperors Physicians do repair unto the bed,
and, as though they had felt the patie^ts Pulses, declare that he waxes more
sick than before. Finally, when it seems that he is deceased, certain of the
most noble and worthy young men, of the orders of Knights and Senators, do
take up the bed on their shoulders, and carry it through the street, called
Sacra via, unto the old market place, where the Romain magistrates are
accustomed to render up their Offices. There on both sides, are certain stages
made with steps, upon the which, on the one side, is a queare of Boys,
being noble men's sons, and on the other side are many beautiful women,
singing Himnes and Ballades, in praise of the dead Emperor, measured with
diverse lamentable verses. When these are finished, the young men do take up the
bed again, and bear it out of the City, into the field called Campus
Martius, in the broadest part whereof, there is erected a Tower four square,
with sides of equal height builded of great Timber, like unto a Tabernacle.
The same within forth, is filled with dry chippes, and Reeds: And on the
outter side, it is hanged with Arras clothes of gold, and decked with* Images
of Iuorie, and sundry painted pictures. Within it also, is another less Tower,
but like in form, with doors and Portals opened. And over that, the third and
fourth, with many other rooms ascebdubg continually, until they retche unto
the highest, which is less than all the other. A man may compare this
building unto Towers, which are set in havens, with fire on the tops, to
direct ships which sail by night on the Seas, into their perfect ports.
The same are commonly called Phani. Now when they have put the bed in the
second Tabernacle, they gather all kinds of spices and perfumes, with diverse
odoriferous fruits, Herbs, and iuyces, the which they throw on heaps in
the Tabernacle. Neither is there any Nation, City, or Person, which
excels in honor, or dignytie, but at that time, will to the vttermoste of
his power, most honorablye celebrate the last Funeralles of the Emperor.

When they have couched a great heap of Spices together, and stuffed the
building therewyth, all the Romayne Knights do ride about the Tower, with a
just course and order too and fro: Chariots are also drawn about, wherein
many do sit, clothed in purple, representyng the persons of all noble men
being Magistrates and Captains of Rome.

The Ceremonies being thoroughly ended, the successor in the Empire, takes a
brande of fire in his hand, and fireth therewith the Tabernacle. After whom,
all other that are present, do throw fire likewise into the same. And
immediately, all the building being filled with those dry sticks and spices,
begins to burn vehementlye. Then out of the highest and least Tower, as
out of a high steeple, is let forth an Eagle, the which they believe, does
bear the Emperors soul into Heaven. And from thencefoorthe is that Emperor
worshipped as the other Gods.

From this time to the reign of Dioclesian, for the space of. 72. years,
there is nothing recorded in our Histories hythereto published concerning
Brytaine: but where as it is manifest that the soueraintie of Brytain rested in
ye Romain Emperors all that space, I will set them here down successively.

After Seuerus, Bassianus surnamed Antonius Carracalla, 212 Herodian.
murdering his brother Geta, succeeded in the Empire. He was cruel to his
people: he founded the Bath in Rome, which is called Antonians: he was out of
measure given to sensuality, and carnal concupisence in so much, that he
espoused his mother in law Iuba* He was murdered by Martialis when he had
governed by years.

Macrinus one year. 218


Antoninus Elagabalus. iij. year.

Seuerus Alexander, who was slain by his soldiers here 223 Lampridius
victor. 236 238 239 245 250 252 252 254
in Brytaine, in a vyllage called Sicila, but other save in France. xiij.
years.

Julius Maximus. iij. years.

M. Antonius Gordianus j. year.

Antonius Gordianus the son* vj. year.

Julius Philippus the first Christian Emperor. v. year.

Decius* ij. years.

Trebonianus Gallus* and Vibius Hostilianus ij. years.

Julius Aenilianus. 4. months.

Licinius Valerianus vj.

Licinius Gallicinus* xv.

At this time there arose in diverse Countries. 30. Usurpers; which are called
the. 30. tyrants, of the which Lollianus Posthumous, Victorianus Tetritius, as
it is supposed, kep^e Brytaine from Gallicinus.

Flauius Claudius. ij. 269


Aurelianus. 5.

Tacitus* vj. months. 276


Florianius. iij. months.

Aurelius Probus. v. years. In which time Bonefus a Brytaine 277
borne, but brought up in Spain, fearing least he should be executed because
the Germans had burnte certain vessels in the Rhene, whereof he had charge,
usurped the Empire with Proculus at Colen* and would have exempted from the
Vopisens.
Romans, Brytaine, Spain, and part of France: but being baquished by Probus
in a long and sore battle, he stangled himself: some sedition was then
raised in Brytaine, and appeased by Victorinus a Moore, by whose motion Probus
had made him regent of Brytain, which was causer of this trouble. This Probus
permitted the Brytaines and others, that they might have vines and make wine.
After he had reigned fine years, he was slain by the soldiers.

Caius then succeeded him, with his two sons Numerianus, 282 Vopisens.
and Carinus, to which Carinus he assigned Brytaine Gaul, (called France)
Illiricum, Italy, and Spain, but all three within three years space lost
their lives.

VAlerius Dioclesianus was then chosen Emperor, 284
who adjoined Maximianus unto him in like government.

About this time, holy Alban for professing Christ, being Vita Albani.
led from the City of Verolamium, unto Holmehurst, where now the town of
Saint Albans is builded, suffered martyrdom, who is specified to be the first
Martyr of Brytaine: and shortly after to the number of one thousand
Christians, were martyred at Lichfielde, where Amphabole, instructor Liber
Lichfielde.
of Alban, was taken, brought to Verolamium, and there tormented to death.

Carausius was appointed to be admiral of the Brytaine Seas, which were sore
troubled by the Pyracies of the Franckes and Saxons: but when he had oftentimes
apprehended the Pirates, and neither reserved the prizes, or was Reserved.
accountable for it, neither to the Emperors, nor his deputies, it was
suspected that of set purpose he permitted these Rouers to have recourse
through those Seas, to the end he might rifle them, and enrich himself.
Maximianus therefore sent part of his army to suppress him, in which were
many of the Thebane legion, who in this journey were slain, by his
commandment, and made martyrs because they professed Christ.

Carausius understanding of the preparation made against him, passed out of
Gaul into Brytaine, where bringing the Country to his obeysaunce, he usurped
the Roabe of an Emperor: whereupon they which were sent to surprise him,
returned to Maximianus, who then was encombered with new war in Gaul
against the Peasantes.

In the mean time Carausius built ships in Brytayn, intercepted certain
co^panyes of soldiers, assembled a great number of barbarous people with
spoil, with hope of who^ he purposed to trouble the sea coasts of Gallia and
Spain. Holland (also then holden by certain Frankes) revolted to Carausius.

THen purposed Maximianus the second time to make 288
war against Carausius, but by stormye weather, and want of Pilotes, he
was enforced to defer his purpose, leauyng the government of this I Will to
Carausius.

Shortly after, the two Emperors elected two Caesar's, 291
Valerius Maximus and Constantius Chlorus, to which Constantius they committed
the recovery of Brytaine. He immediatelye passing through Gaul hytherwarde,
sodaynely surprised Gesseriacum, now called Bullen, (which Carausius had
manned,) and so stopped the Haven, that it could stand Carausius in no steed.
Then building ships to pass over Paneg. Constantius dictus.
hither, he first assailed luckily the Hollanders, which had revolted to
Carausius: and then staying for convenient wind, he houered a while on the sea
coaste, and in the mean time Carausius was traytorously slain by Alectus his
familiar friend.

ALbertus then usurped the Empire here in Brytayne, 292
against whom Constantine with his former preparation made ready for war,
and launched out in haste, though the wind was contrary: Which when his
soldiers understood, they set out also with side winds out of the Seyne
and other Ports, in such foggie and mystie Seyne.
weather, that they passed by Alectus Navy, then honering for them about the
I Will of Wighte, not seeing one the other.

The Romans as soon as they landed burnte their ships, determining either
to win, or lose their lives, which when Allectus understood, he left the
shore, and prepared himself for battle with his Mercenarie barbarous
soldiers, in which he was slain, by Asclepiodatus Lord great master of
the Emperors house.

In this fight none of the Romans perished, but here all the field was
ouer-spred with dead bodies of the enemies, among whom lay Alectus himself,
without any Imperial ornaments, and scantly known.

Other Roman soldiers also which had lost their company in the myste,
arrived at London, slew in the City great number of barbarous people which
escaped from the battle, and purposed to have sacked London.

Then when Constantius came a land, the Brytains with their wives and children
flocked unto him, and submitted themselves joyfully, being now delivered out
of a long thraldom.

This expedition of Constantius into Brytain, is ascribed by some to
Maximianus, into which error a false inscription of the Panegirike has led
them.

ASclepiodatus* as is before touched, recovered Brytaine, 290 Galfridu^.
he belayde the City of London with a strong siege, wherein was Liuius Gallus
the Roman Captain: and ere it were long, by Knightly force and violence,
entered the City, and slew the forenamed Gallus, near unto a brook there at
that day running, into which brook he threw him, by reason whereof, it was
called in Brytish Nant Gallon, since in the Saxon tongue Gallus or Wallus
brook: and this day, the street where some-time the brook ran, is called
Walbrooke.

COill after Asclepiodatus took on him the Kingdom of 301
Brytaine.

COnstantius began his Empire with Gallerius, the Empire 305
was divided between them: so that Constantius should possess Africa,
Italy, France, and Brytaine: Gallerius should have Illirica, Asia, and the
East parts: which done, they substituted under them two Caesar's. Co^stantius
holding himself content with the dignity of Augustus, refused to sustain the
trouble which he should have endured through the administration of the
affairs of Italy and Affricke: he sought by all means how he might
enriche the people of the Empire. He abolished the superstition of the Gentiles
in his dominions, so that afterward Brytaine felt no persecutions. The year
following he passed out of France hither against the Pictes, at which time
his son Constantine, who then served Galerius, perceiving his destructien to
be compassed, posted to his Father in all haste, howghing and killing the post
horses, which way so ever he passed, that he might not be pursued, and came
to his Father the very hour that he went aboorde to come into Brytaine: but
Constantius as Panegiricus.
soon as he came to York, suddenly sickned, and perceiving his day to draw
near, when he was asked to whom he would leave the Empire, answered, to
Constantine, and shortly after departed.

COnstantine surnamed the great, son of Constantius by 306
Helena, first consecrated, his Father being now dead, and with so great
sorrow and sheading of tears, solemnized his burial, that the soldiers
hoping he would resemble his Father, saluted him Emperor at York against his
will: but when the Roman Senate had confirmed his election with their consent
he willingly accepted it. And the year following setting the affairs of
Brytaine in order, he passed hence with many Brytaines, first against the
Frankes whom he vanquished, then against Maxentius an Usurper, whom he
slew: and afterward against Licinus who named himself Emperor, whom also
he subdued. Many barbarous nations also were by him discomfited. He establyshed
the Gospel in his Empire, and after him all Emperoures were Christians. In the
first beginning of his raygne, he was worthy to have been compared with the
best and chiefest Princes of the Romans that ever were: and at the end
thereof, to be resembled to such as were of the meaner sort. He was much given
to purchase praise and fame by feats of cheualrie: he had good fortune in
battle, and yet not so good, but that his industrye excelled it far.

After he had repressed the civil wars, he vanquished the Goths in diverse
places: and wanne great memory of praise among the Barbarians: He applied
himself wholly to the study of the Liberal arts: he endeauored to gain the
love of the people, through his well deseruings, seeking the same by his great
liberality. The City which he builte, he made it able to compare (in
manner) with Rome it self. Constantinople
And as he made prepation for battle against the Parthians, he died at
Nicomedia.

Eusebius writes that Constantine was baptized first in Eusebius.
the last days of his life in Gracia, in the City of Nicomedia, of the
Bishop there.

Also Sozomenus and Theodoritus write, that he was baptized Sozomenus.
in his latter days a little before his death, when he wist he should dye, in
the xxxj. year of his Empire.

He left behind him three sons, to wit Constantinus Constans, and
Constantius, to succeed him in the Empire. Theodoritus.


Helen ye mother of Constantine the great at Jerusalem found the Cross on the
which Christ suffered his passion, she repaired the City of Jerusalem, and
adorned it with many fair Churches. She builded walls about London and
Colchester.

About this time Octauius whom Constantine had left governor* Octauius. Simon
Dunelmensis.
in this Island, rebelled, against whom Constantine sent Traherne with a legion
of Romans, who (after diverse conflictes) was slain. Gratianus surnamed
Funarius, was at this time governor of the Roman legions here.

COnstantinus began his Empire and reign over Brytain: 337
with him his Father Constantine had appointed by his last will, that his two
brethren Constans and Constantius should participate and have their portion of
the Empire, but not long after, when Constantinus attempted war against his
brother at Aquileia, and demeaned himself unadvisedly therein, he was slain,
and then was the Empire reduced under the government of the two brethren only.

COnstans then ruled Brytain, which he administered with 340
great justice: but after when he failed of his health, he associated unto him
in steed of friends, evil desposed persons to assist him, through whose
evil counsel he declyned into horrible vices, by mean whereof, waxing scant
tolerable of the inhabitants of the provinces, he was slain by Magnentius
who usurped the Empire in France, Spain, and Brytaine also as some write.

COnstantius then had the regiment of Brytaine, who sent 353
hither a Spaniarde called Paul, a notarie by profession, to bring out
certain men of war which had conspired with Amianus.
Magnentius: but he upon false surmises grievously molested the guiltless,
fettering and manacling whom he pleased. Martinus.
Whereupon* Martinus, then lieuetenant in Brytaine, being moved with
compassion, desired him to forbear the harmless: but he was so rigorous,
that he also charged Martinus himself of conspiracy with Magnentius and was
earnest to bring him before the Emperor: whereupon Martinus drawing his sword
s^it at him, and because he could not slaye him, he suddenly slew himself,
and Paul embrued with blood, haled a great company (linked in chains) to the
Emperors presence, which were either banished, executed, or attainted.

Constantius after this appointed Iulianus to govern Amianus Marcellinus.
Gaul (or France) at which time great spoil was made in Brytaine by the
Scotts and Pictes, wherefore Iulianus busied with war against the Almains,
sent Lupcinus hither with an army, in whose absence Iulianus usurped the
Empire: whereof when Constantius heard, he returned from the war (against
the Parthians,) against Iulianus, and dyed in the way.

IVlianus (called the Apostata) began his reign over Brytain 362
and the Empire, a man seen passing well in the Liberal sciences, but an earnest
adversary of Christian religion: he banished Ammian^^. Marcellinus.
Palladius a great and honorable person into Brytain, upon a suspicion: he sent
Alipius who had bin lieuetenaunt of Brytaine to repair Jerusalem, but terrible
flashes of fire issuing out of the Earth, when they laid the foundations,
enforced them to leave their purpose. This Julian, with great preparations made
war upon the Parthians, he spoiled Assiria, and retournyng from thence a
conqueror, he was slain by his enemies, as he preased unadvisedly into the
battles. After him succeeded in the Empire Ieninian, and held it. ix. months.

VAlentinian was then chosen Emperor by the soldiers. 365
The Pictes, Scotts, Attacots, and Saxons, grievously molested the Brytaines.
Nectaridius who had the charge of the Sea Marcellinus.
coasts here, was slain by them, and Bulchobandes a great Captain was
enclosed by them: wherefore after diverse Captains; Theodosius was sent hither,
who discomfiting the ^^nimie, and recovering the spoil, entered triumphantlye
into London, and the next year went into the North, suppressed the enemies,
recovered the province, and repaired Cities and fortresses: he oppressed
Valentinus an Hungarian, who being banished hither, practiced new tumults,
delivering him to Dulcitus Dulcitus.
to be executed, without any inquiry of his confederats, because he would not
renew the tumult: which done, he returned to Rome. Shortly after Valentinian
sent hither Fraomarins (which he before had ordained king of the Buccenobats
in Germany) to be marshall of the Almaines which served in Brytain. And not
long after Valentinian dyed.

GRatian with his brother Valentinian was then created 375
Emporour. He to the intent he might better repair the decayed state of the
Empire, made Theodotius a copartener with him in it.

MAximus a valiant and worthy man was shortly after forced 383
here in Brytain to take the Empire upon him, who passed into France, and
immediately all the German legions and Roman soldiers revolted unto him
from Gratian, so that he being destitute of men of war, fled to Lions,
where he was slain by treason: for Maximus gave out that Gratians wife was
coming to her husband, which Gratian intierly loving his wife, lightlye
credited, and therefore accompanied with a few, went forth to meet her: but
in the Coache where he supposed to have found his wife, was Andragatius a
desperate man, who leaping out of the Coache killed Gratian.

Then Maximus created his son Victor a Caesar, and Zozimu^.
used some cruelty against Gratians Captains. Valentinian being herewith
terrifyed, sent S. Ambrose unto him to treat a peace, which he accepted, and
Theodotius permitted him to use the title of Augustus. Then he settled himself
at Trier in Sige^ertus.
Germany, empouerished the Countries round about him, executed certain
Heretics called Priscillianists, and then entered into Italy, breaking the
peace, and thought to have intercepted Valentinian, but he with his mother
fled to Theodotius, and persuaded him to take revenge of Maximus. In the
mean time Maximus came to Aquileia, all Italy and Africa submitted
themselves unto him, when sodainelye Theodotius coming from Constantinople,
moved war against him, corrupted his soldiers with brybes, and after one or
two skirmishes enforced Maximus to fly to Aquileia, where his own soldiers
delivered him to Theodosius, by whose commandment he was shortly after
beheaded. Andragatius also who kept the Seas, understanding this, drowned
himself, and Victor the son of Maximus was slain in France by Arbogustes.
The Brytaines which served him returned into France, and settled them in the
Country there, which is now called Brytaine, so was Brytaine recovered
Giraldus.
again to the Romans Empire.

Saint Vrsula, with the 11000. Uirgins, which were sent The. 11000. Virgins.
Flores Historiaru^.
into Brytaine to be married to Conon and his Knights, were slain and
martyred of the barbarous people being on the sea. But, as some write, by
Attila King of the Hu^^es.

HOnorius, the son of Theodosius, succeeded in the Empire, 365 Bid. Pelagius
Heresy.
in whose time Pelagius, a Brytaine borne, disparckled the venom of his
faithless Doctrine very far abroad, holding, that a man might live well
without the help of the grace of God: using herein the aid of Iulianus of
Campania, who was intemperately stirred with the loss of his Bishoprike, to
whom Saint Austen, and other Fathers also have answered in most ample manner,
but yet they would not be amended thereby, but being convicted of their
falsehoode, they rather would increase it by defending and maynteyning it, than
amend it by returning to the truth.

This time Marcus was chosen Emperor by the Souldyoures L^zi^^^.
in Brytaine, fearing the invasion of the Vandales, but immediately they slew
him, and elected Gratianus, whom also they murdered within four months.

Then Constantine, a Soldier of base estate, only upon confidence of his
name, was elected here Emperor, who passing hence into France, with all the
youth of Brytaine, got all the men of war there to take part with him.
Honorius sent therefore Sarus to withstand him, who in a foughten field slew
Justinian, Constantines Captain, and so pursued Constantine, that he made him
take Valentia, wherein he sharply beseeged him, until Gerentias with his
Brytaines, and Edebrichus with the francks raised the seege.

Then Constantine fortifyed the Alps, and Rhene with Garrisons, sent Constans
his son (whom of a Monk he had made a Caesar) with a great Army into
Spain, where he took, and afterward slew certain noble personages a^lyed to
Honorius, and returning to his Father, left Gerontius to govern Spain.
Constantius himself then craved pardon of Honorius for usurping the Empire,
saying, that he did it by compulsion, which when Honorius heard, he so well
liked, that he sent an Imperial Roabe unto him.

In these troubles, Brytaine was greatly endangered by Pictes and Scotts, and
sued to Honorius for succoure, but he sending them only Letters, willed them to
look to their own state. Shortly after Constance, that was Monk, was slain
by Gerontius his own Captain, at Vienna in France: and Constantine himself
being beseeged at Arles by Honorius Soldiers, entered into holy orders, and
fled into the Church, thinking thereby to save himself, but was drawn out
from thence, and slain. Gerontius who had traitorously killed his Master, was
besette round about with Nicephorus.
Spaniards in his Lodging, wherefore he first slew Allanus his tried friend,
then Nunichia his wife, and lastly himself, and now Honorius recovered
Brytaine. In his time (says Beade) Beade.
Rome was destroyed of the Goths, the 1164. year after it was builded: after
which time the Romans left to rule in Britain, after almost 470. years, that
Julius Caesar first entered the said I Will. The Romans dwelt within ye french,
which as we have said, Seuerus drew overthwart ye Island at ye South part, which
thing may appear by ye Cities, Temples, Bridges, and paued streets to this
day remaining, notwithstanding they had in possession, and under their dominion
y^ farther parts of Britain, and also the Islands which are about Brytaine. By
means (as is before said) ye Romans had used to tra^sport with them over into
France the flower of all the youth of Brytaine, to serve the^ in their foraigne
wars, their men of war were consumed, and was not now able to defend
themselves against the invasions of their enemies: whereupon many years
together they lived under the oppression of two most cruel Nations, the
Scotts, and Pictes, which were of ye circuit of Britain, but divided from
the land of Britain by two arms of the Sea, running betwixt them, of the
which one from the East Sea, the other from the Weast, runs in far and
wide into the land, though they may one reake to the other. In the middle of
the East creek, there is a City builded called Guidi. Above the Weast creek
toward the right hand stands a City called Alcluith, which in their language
is as Alcluith.
much to say, as the Rock Cluith, for it stands by a Flood of the fame name.
The Britains then being thus afflicted by the said nations, sent their
Ambassadors with Letters unto Rome, with lamentable supplications, requiring of
them aid and succor, promising them their continual fealty, so that they
would rescue the^ against ye oppression of their enemies: whereupon there was
sent unto them a legio^ of armed soldiers from Rome, which coming into the
Island, and encountering with the enemies, overthrew a great number of them, and
drove the rest out of the frontiers of the country, and so setting them at
liberty, and free from the misery with which they were before so grievously
ouercharged, counseled them to make a wall between the two Seas, which might
be of force to keep out their evil neighbors: and yt done, they returned home
with great triumph. But the Britains building y^ wall which they were bid to
make, not of stone as they were willed, but of turffe, as having none among
the^ that had skill therein, made it so slender, y^ it served the^ to little
purpose. This wall they made between ye two said arms or creekes of the Sea,
many miles long, that where the fence of the water lacked, there by the help of
ye trench they might keep their country from y^ breaking in of their enemies,
of which piece of work, there remains even unto this day most assured tokens
yet to be seen. This trench begins about two miles from the monastery of
Abercuring, in a place which in the Pictes language is called Penuahil, and in
English is called Panwell, and running Penuahil.
out Westward, is ended by the City of Alcluith. But the former enemies, when
they had once perceived yt the Roman Legion was returned home again,
forthwith being set on land by boats, invaded the borders, overcame ye
country, and as it were beat down all before the^: whereupon Ambassadors be
sent again to Rome, beseeching the^ they would not suffer their miserable
country to be utterly destroyed. Again, there is sent another legion, which
coming upon a sudden, made a great slaughter of y^ enemies, and chased the^
over into their own country. Then ye Romans told the Britains, yt it was not
their ease to take any more such trauellous iourneys for their defense, and
therefore bade the^ to practice their armoure themselves, and learn to
withstand their enemies.

They builded up a Wall of hard stone from Sea to Sea, right between the two
Cities, which there were made to keep out the Enemy, in the selfsame place
where Seuerus before had cast his Trench with public and private charges: the
Brytaines also putting too their helping hands, they then builded it eight
foot broad, and twelve foot high, right as it were by a line, from East, to
Weast, as it does to this day appear, which being perfected, they give the
people straight warning to look well to themselves, they teach them to handle
their weapen, and instruct them in warlike feats. Also by the Sea side
Southward, where their Ships lay at harbor, least their Enemies should land
there aboutes, they made up Bulwarks along, one somewhat distant from another,
and this done, bid them farewell, Gildas Sapiens.
as minded no more to return. At this time almost all the treasure of Brytaine
was hid under ground, or transported over into France.

As soon as they were gone, the Scotts and Pictes having intelligence that
they had made promise they would come no more, they taking heart of grace,
return again to their business: and first, all that was without the wall,
they took for their own. After that, they give assault unto the wall, where
the Britaynes were with Graples pulled down, and otherwise so assaulted, that
they leaving both the Cities and the wall also, were dispersed and put to
flight, the enemies following, killed and slayed more cruelly, than ever they
did before, whereupon being driven out of their own houses, and possessions,
they fall a robbing and spoiling one the other of them, so far forth, that
all the whole Country was brought to that exigent, that they had none other
sustenance, but that they got by hunting, and killing of wild Beasts.

THeodosius the younger, son of Arcadius, succeeded his 408
Uncle Honorius, and appointed Valentinianus his Cousin, Emperor in the Weast
parts.

At this time, Timotheus here in Brytaine, under a pretense Sigebertus.
of Religion, and great continency, drew many into a dangerous Heresy.

Chrisanthus, the son of Bishop Martian, a Consul of Socrates Lib. 7.
Italy, was made Uiceroy, and Lord Deputy of Britayne: he was afterward made
Bishop of Constantinople.

Now the poor remnant of the Brytaines directed letters to Aetius, whereof
this was the beginning: To Aetius thrice 446
Consul, the mourning of the Brytaines. In the process of which Epistle, they
thus set forth their pitiful estate. The barbarous enemy drives us upon the
Sea: the Sea again upon the enemy: between these twain rises two manner of
deaths, either we are killed or drowned And yet for all their suite, they
could obtain no aid of him, as he which had then both his hands full of
business and battle at home with Bleda and Attila, Kings of the Hunnes.

The Pelagian Heresies being brought in by Agricola, Pelagian Heresy.
the son of Seuerianus, a Pelagian Bishop, about this time did fore corrupt
the faith of the Brytaines, but the Brytaines being neither willing to receive
their lewd Doctrine, as blasphenrous against the grace of God, neither able
to refute their wily and wicked persuasions, they devised this wholesome
counsel, to seek for aid of the Bishops of France, against these their
spiritual enemies. And they calling a common counsel, consulted among
themselves, whom of them all it were best to send to help their neighbors
faith. By the assent of them all there was chosen two worthy Prelates,
Germanus Altisiodorensis, and Lupus, Bishop of the City Germanus and Lupus.
Trecassa, which should pass over into Britain, to confirm them in the
Faith, which with ready obedience, accepting the commandment of the Sinode,
took shipping thitherward, and had prosperous winds, which set them ashore in
place where they themselves desired. Thither a great multitude of people being
assembled, received the Priests of God, and the word of God was preached by
them, not only in their Churches, but also in the open streets, and in the
Country, in such sort, that in all places both the sound and faithful were
confirmed, and they that before swarued out of the right faith, were amended.
The Authoures and head professors of this heretical error, lay lurcking all
this while, and much spited to see the people daily to fall from them. After
long aduisement used, they take upon them to try the matter by open
disputation, which being agreed upon, they come forth richly appointed,
gorgeously apparelled, accompanied with a number of flattering favorers. The
people were present both to see and judge the matter. The parties were far
unlike of condition: on the one side was the faith, on the other man's
presumption: on the one side meekness, on the other pride: on the one side
Pelagius, on the other Christ. First of all Germanus and Lupus gave their
adversaries leave to speak, which vaynely occupied both the time and ears of
the people with naked words, but after the reverend Bishops poured out their
words confirmed with scriptures, out of the Gospels and Apostles. Thus the
vanity of Heretics was convicted, and falsehoode confuted, so that at
Pelagians Heresy confuted.
every objection, they were forced to confess their error, not being able to
answer them: but after their departure, the Heresy began again to revive.
Wherefore Germanus returned into Britain with Seuerus, banished the Heretics
with banishment, and restored the faith.

The end of the Romans government in Brytaine.
Brytaines and Saxons.
THe Brytaines continued in doubtful War with the Scotts and Pictes,
sometime bearing away the victory, and sometime leaving it to the enemy. But
considering the ambitious minds of men, and fearing least some should usurp
the Kingdom at home, while they were deteyned with wars abroad, thought
good to appoynte over them some King: and so with one consent they elected
Vortiger.

VOrtiger reigned in Brytaines, in whose time hunger more 447 Beade.
preuayling against the Brytaines, drove many of them to yield themselves unto
the hands of their enemies. Other there were, which could never be brought
thereunto, but from the hills and brakes where they lurked, many times invaded
their enemies, as trusting so much the more in the help of God, how much the
less hope they had of aid of men, and by such means, first of all both
resisted and overthrew them, which many years together had lived by the spoil
of the Country, whereby for the time they drew homeward with shame enough,
contending not long after to return. The Pictes then, and long time after,
kept them selves quiet at home, save only they would now and then make
invasions into the land, and drive away booties of Cattle. After that they
drew to a quietness, there ensued such plenty of grain, as never was seen
the like before, as far as any man could remember, whereof the people grew to
loose and wanton living, whereof all manner of lewdenesse followed, specially
cruelty, hate of truth, and love of lying, in so much, that if any were
gentler and more given to truth than other, the other would work him all the
hurt Riot and evil life the destruction of the Brytaines.
and spite they could: this did not only the seculars, but also the Clergy,
and the heads thereof, giving themselves over to drunkenness, pride,
contention, envy, and such other, casting from them the yoke of Christ.

In the mean season a bitter plague befell among them for their corrupt
living, consuming in short time such a multitude of people, that the quick
were not sufficient to bury the dead: and yet for all that, the remnant
remained so hardened in sin, that neither their friends death, nor fear of
their own, could cure the morrein of their souls, which daily perished through
their sinful living: whereby a great stroke of Gods vengeance ensued upon the
whole sinful Nation: for being now infested again with their old neighbors
the Scotts and Pictes, they devised with themselves what was best to do, and
where they might seek reskue to withstand and repel the fear of the Northren
nation: and they agreed all with their King Vortiger, to demand aid of ye
Saxons beyond the Seas, which thing doubtless (says Bid) was done by Gods
own appoyntmente, that the people might be thereby plagued, as by the end it
manifestly appeared.

The people of the English or Saxons, being sent for of the Saxons sent for
into Brytaine.
said King into Brytaine, landed here in three long Ships, and by the Kings
commandment, are appointed to abide in the East part of the Land. And the Isle
of Thanet was given to them, they to defend the Country like friends, but
Will. Malmesberie.
in deed, as it proved afterward, minding to destroy the Country as enemies.
Wherefore encountering with ye Northern enemy, the Saxons had the better,
whereof they sending word home into their Country, as also of the
fruitefulnesse of the Land, the Saxons sent over a greater Navy and number of
men better appointed for the Wars, which being now joined with the former band,
drew to a stronger Army than all the power of the Brytaines was able to
overcome. These by the Brytaines were allowed a place to dwell among them, with
that condition that they should war for them against their enemies, for wages
of the Brytaines. These Saxons, English, and Iuits, that came from beyond the
Seas, Beade.
were three of the strongest nations in Germany. That is, the Saxons, English,
and the Vites, or Iuites. Of the Iuites, came the people of Kent, and the I Will
of Wight, and they in the province of Weast Saxons, are called of Iuites, right
over against the I Will of Wight. Of the Saxons (that is of that Region now called
old Saxons) descended the East Saxons, the South Saxons, and the Weast Saxons.
Of the English, descended the East English, the Mercies, and the Northumbers.
The chief Captains of the Saxons are said to have bin two breethren, Hingest,
and Horsus: this Hingest prepared a great banquet, appoynting Will. Malmesberie.
his Daughter ( Rowan as some write) to attend at the table, to the end she
might delight the Kings eye as he sat: which thing was not done in vain, for
as the King was always desirous to behold the beauty of Women, so was he
straight ways taken with the beauty and elegant behavior of this maiden, and
without farther delay, desired to have her to his Wife, and would compel her
Father to consent thereunto, who in his heart was willing enough withal, but
for a subtlety said nay, alleging that so base a marriage was not meet for
the King, and holding himself as agreeued and not willing. All Kent was given
him for a reward, to consent thereunto, in which country, all equity and
justice was decayed, under government of one called Gnorongus, who
notwithstanding was subject unto Vortiger, as all the rest of the Princes of
the Island were.

For the love that Vortiger bare to Rowayne the Saxon, he was deuorced from his
lawful Wife, by whom he had three sons, for which deed, welneere all the
Britans forsook him.

Vodine Archbishop of London, a man of singular devotion Archbishop of London
reproves the King.
and good life, by the advice of Vortimer, went to Vortiger, and said to him,
that he had not done as a Christian Prince, in departing from his lawful wife,
and taking another woman, whose Father was an enemy to the Christian faith,
and also went about to conquer the Crown of Britain: Then said Vortiger,
I was not wise when I brought the Saxons to help me against mine enemies, but I
was more unwise, when I was taken with the mordinate lust of the daughter of
Hengist: I know that mine Empire will be terrible, except I repent me with
speed and turn to God.

Hengist hearing Vortiger make this lamentation, blamed him, for that he
believed the persuasions of a profane man, of feigned life (as he termed him)
and forthwith slew the good Archbishop Vodine, and many other Priests, and
Archbishop of London slain.
Religious persons. All the Churches in Kent were polluted with blood, the
Nuns, with other religious persons, were by force put from their houses and
goods, and constrained to polution of their bodies.

The Britains considering the daily repair of the Saxons into this Realm,
showed to their King the ieoperdy that might thereof ensue, and advertised him
of the danger, but all was in vain: for Vortiger, by reason of his wife, bore
such favor to the Saxons, that he would in no wise hear the counsel of his
subjects, wherefore, they with one mind deprived him of his royal dignitio,
when he had reigned six years, and ordained to be their king Vortimere his
eldest son.

VOrtimere pursued the Saxons, and by his martial knighthoode 454
fought against them four battles, besides diverse skirmishes, until at
length he was poisoned by the means of Rowa^he his stepmother, after he had
reigned vj. years.

The first battle, He^gest and Horse fought with Wirtigerre (or Marianus
Scotus. I loriacen. Wigornieu.
Vortimer as others have) was in a place called Aeglestrop, and notwithstanding
that Horse was slain in this battle, yet Hengest carried away ye victory. The
second battle Hengest and Eske fought with ye Britains, in a place called
Crecanford. Of the Britains many perished by the sword, the rest of the^
abandoned Kent altogether, and with great fear fled unto London.

The third battle Hengest and Eske fought with the Britans near unto a place
called Weppedes fleet, that is to say, ye Fleet of Wepped, where they slew
xij. Dukes or Captains of the Britains, with many other, where as on the part
of y^ Saxons, there was one only man slain, whose name was Wepped.

The fourth battle was fought by Hengest and Eske against the Britains, who
obtaining the victory got an innumerable spoil, in which battle the
Britains fled from the Angles.

VOrtiger obtained again the Kingdom, and shortly after 460
Hengest, which was chased into the I Will of Thanet, entered the land with a
number of Saxons, but when he heard of the great assembly the Britains had
made against him, he treated W. Malme.
for peace, which in fine was concluded. Shortly after Hengest (by a guile
which before he had devised) bid his son in law, and iij. C. of his Nobles unto
a feast or banquet, where when he The Barons of the Britains slain at a
banquet.
had ouerlaid his guests with overmuch Wine, he fell to quarelling, and with
taunting talk, pinched every one of the^, and straight fell to fighting,
wherthrough the Britains were slain every one. The King was taken prisoner,
and forced to give The King taken prisoner.
for his ransom, Kent, Sussex, Suffolk, and Northfolke. This murder of the
Britans, was on yt plain of Salesbury. Then Hengest began his dominion over
Kent, and Vortiger, fled into Wales, and Hengest King of Kent.
builded there a Castle, of which building, and long let of ye same, and of his
Prophet Merlin, Geffrey Monmouth, and others speak many things. Great
companies of ye Saxons daily flocked Beade.
into this Island, and grew so strong, y^ the people of y^ Country which sent
for the^, stood in great fear of their puissance, for those Saxons had taken
league with the Picts, and began to turn their force upon the Britains: and
to be short, the fire once kindled A miserable state of the Britaynes.
in yt lands of the Paganes there, took just revenge of y^ wickedness of the
people, raging first upon the Cities and Country next adjoining, after from
the East sea to the Weast, ouerwhelming all the whole Island without resistance:
both public and private houses were overthrown to ye ground: the Priests were
slain standing at the altar: the Bishops with their flock were murdered,
without respect of their dignity, nor there was any that would bury the
slain: some of the miserable leauings being taken in the hills, were there
killed: other being sterued with hunger, were feign to creep out of their
caves, and buy their victual at their enemies hands with sale of their
liberty for ever, if yet they were not killed out of hand: other fled over the
Seas with an heavy heart: other tarying still in their country in fear of
death, and lack of food, lived full miserably in ye Mountains, woods, and
Cliffes.

Aurelius Ambrose, and Other (breethren of Constantine yt was before slain in
France) landed with a Navy of Ships at Totnes, made war upon Vortigerne, and
buried him in his Castle in Wales, when he had secondly reigned vj. years.

AVrelius-Ambrose was ordained king of Britain, in whose time, the Britains
by little and little began to take strength 466 Beade. Will. Malme*
and courage unto the^, coming out of their caves in which they lucked
before, and with one consent, calling for heavenly help, that they might not
for ever be utterly destroyed, they had then for their Captain a Roman,
called Ambrosius Aurelius, a gentle natured man, which only of all the blood of
the Romans remained then alive (his parents being slain) which bare the name
of King of the Country.

This man being their Captain, they assembled themselves together, and
provoking the victors to the fight, through Gods assistance achieved the
victory, and from that day forward, now the men of the Country, now the
enemy had the victory, until the year that Bathe was beseeged; where they
gave their enemies a great overthrow, which was about the xliiij. year of
their coming into the land: but of this we shall speak more hereafter.

This Ambrosius caused the Churches to be repaired, Brute Book.
which had bin spoiled by the Saxons. He caused the great Stonehenge besides
Salesburie. Gadeasins Tilberiensis.
stones to be set on the plain of Salesburie, which is called Stonehinge,
in remembrance of the Britains that were slain and buried there in the time
of Vortiger, at the banquet and communication of Hengist with the Saxons.

A Saxon named Cella, with his three sons, and a company Kingdom of the
South Saxons. Agar^a Scot. Brute Book.
of Saxons, landed in the South part of Britain.

A Saxon named Porth, landed with his two sons, Byda and Meagla, at an Haven
in South-hamptonshire, after whom the Haven is named Portesmouth.

The third Kingdom of the East Saxons, began in Britain, Kingdom of the East
Angles.
under Duke Vffa. Aurelius Ambrosius being poisoned, dyed when he had reigned
32. years, and was buried at Stonehinge called Chorea Gigantum.

Other Pendragon, so called, for that he caused always a 498 Gafrid. Arbor
Succes.
Dragon to be borne before him in his battles, was crowned King of Britain: he
vanquished Otta and Oza at Windgate by Coquet River. He was enamored upon
Igren, the Dukes Wife of Cornwall, and to obtain his unlawful lust, made
war upon her husband Goilen, and slew him in battle at Duvilioc. On her he
begat Arthure. He reigned eyghteene year, and was buried at Stonhinge.

ARthure the son of Other borne in Cornwall, at the age 516
of fifteen years was crowned King of Britain, as some say at Caerleon,
other at Winchester: one old namelesse pamflet says at Cilicester, by
Dubritius Archbishop of Legions. Nene^iu^.


This City of Cilicester in British is called Caier segent, and was situate
near Reading. It was so called, for that Constantius, the son of Constantine
the great dyed Sea. Cr^.
there: his Sepulture might once have bin seen there besides the City, as the
Letters engranen on it in stone did declare. He took to Wife Guinouer, Cousin
to Cador Duke of Cornwall, and Daughter to the King of Biscay.

Of this King there be many fabulous reports, but certain, Will. Malmesbery
he was a Prince (as Malmesberie says) more worthy to have advancement by true
Histories, than false Fables, being the only proppe and vpholder of this his
Country.

In the beginning of his reign, Lotho and Conradus his Aurea Histor.
allies, envying his prosperity, made War against him, but he valiantlye
vanquished them with their Pictes and Scotts, at his pleasure, and appointed
them a Gouernoure Sea. Cr^* Neni^^.
named Anguisell. He fought twelve fields against the Saxons, and always bare
away the victory, of which, the last was fought at Bath, where by his own
prowess and manhood, he vanquished nine hundred. Afterward he raised the
Malmesberie.
seege which the Saxons had planted about Lincoln, and slew them in great
numbers.

Thus having abated the rage of the Saxons, and reduced his Country to
quietness, he constituted the order of the Round Table.
round Table, into which order, he only received such of his nobility as were
most renowned for virtue and chivalry. This round Table he kept in diverse
places, but especially at Cairleon, Winchester, and Camalet in Somersetshire.

There is yet to be seen in Denbigh shire, in the parish of Leyland.
Llansanan, in the side of a stony hill, a place compass, wherein be four
and twenty seats for men to sit in, some less, and some bigger, cut out of
the maine Rock by man's hand, where children and young men, coming to seek
their Cattle, use to sit, and play: they commonly call it Arthures round
Table.

So having established all things well at home, he with his nobility made an
expedition into Norway, where he achieved Norway subdued.
sundry notable, and marvelous exploytes, and subdued the same, with all the
Regions thereabout, to Russia, Leges S. Edwardi.
placing the limite of his Empire in Lapland.

He caused the people of those Countries to be Baptized, and receyne the
Christian Religion.

He also obtained of the Pope to have Norway confirmed to the Crown of this
Realm, calling it the Chamber of Britain. Norway the Chamber of Britain.


Then sailing into France, he forced Frolo (Gouernoure there for the Romans)
to flighte, and afterward in Combat manfully slew him.

Shortly after, he addressed deadlye War against Gaufridus.
Lucius Hiberus, who claymed a Tribute of Arthure for Britain, and had
assembled great powers to overcome Arthure, but Arthure encountering with him,
after a long and bloudye fight, discomfited his Army, killed him, and sent
his body to the Senate of Rome for the Tribute.

While Arthure was thus valiantly occupied in his wars beyond the Seas, and
had conquered thirty Kingdoms Flores Historiar.
(such as they were in those days) Mordred to whom he had committed the
government of Britain, confederating himself with Cerdicus first King of the
Weast Saxons, traitorously usurped the Kingdom, of which treason, when
Battle at Dover.
relation came to Arthure, he speedily returned into Britain, and at Richborow
near to Sandwich, gave battle to him, and wanne the field. Anguisell of
Scotland, Gawin and Cador were there slain: then pursuing him into Cornwall,
gave him battle there again by the River of Alaune, of some histories called
Cablan, where Mordred was slain. Wall. Conu^^. Mordred slain. Ann. Glasco.
And Arthure being deadly wounded, was conveyed to Glastenburie, where he
dyed, and is buried, after he had most victoriously governed this Realm six
and twenty years.

COnstantine, kinsman to Arthure, and son to Cador

Duke of Cornwall, was ordained King of Britayne, and 542 B^^te Book.
reigned three years.

This man was by the two sons of Mordred greenouslye vexed, for they claymed
the Land by the right of their Father, but after many Battayles, they fled,
the one to London, the other to Winchester, which Cities they obtained, and
took them: but Constantine Mordreds children slain.
followed, and subdued, and took the foresaid Cities, and one of the young men
he found in an Abbey at London, and slew him near the Altar cruelly, and
buried him nigh Vter Pendragon, at Stonehinge. The other Gildas. Arbor
successio.
young manne he found at Winchester, and slew him, flying into the Church
of Saint Amphibalus.

Aurelius Conanus, a Britayne, raised mortal war against Constantine the
King, and after sore fight slew him in the field, when he had reigned three
years, and was buried at Stonehinge.

A Vrelius Conanus, Nephew to Arthure, was Crowned 545
King of Britain.

He cherished such as loved strife and dissension within his Realm ^ and gave
light credence to them which accused other, were it right or wrong.

He emprisoned by strength his Uncle, which was right heir to the Crown. He
reigned three and thirty Flores Historiaru^.
years.

The Kingdom of Northumberland began first in Britain The fifth Kingdom of
the Saxons. 578 Gildas. Gaufrid.
under a Saxon named Ida.

VOrtiporus, the son of Conanus, was ordained King of Britayne, a vicious
King, and cruel tyrant, who put from him his Wife, and kept her daughter for
his Conc^bine. In diverse battles he discomfited the Saxons. He reigned four
years.

MAlgo pulcher Canonus of Northwales, began his 581
reign over the Britaynes, and governed them five years.

This Malgo was in proportion of body, greater than all the Dukes of Brytaine,
but he delighted in the soul sin of Sodomie. He slew his first wife, and
then took to wife his Gildas.
own brothers daughter.

CAreticu^ began to rule the Brytaines. This man loved civil 586
War, and was odible both to God and to his subjects. They moved the Saxons
(being accompanied with Gurmundu^ King of Ireland) to make war upon
Careticus, in such wise, that he was said to take the Town of Cicester, where
they assaulted him so sore, and fired the Corn, by tying fire to the wings of
Sparrowes, that he with his men fled from thence into Wales: by which
means, he left a great part of his dominion, and ended his life, when he had
reigned three years. Sea. Cro.


This Gurmund burned up the land of Britain from Sea to Sea, and the more part
of that I Will called Leogrea he gave to ye Saxons. The Britains gave place, and
fled into the Weast parts of Cornwall, and Wales. Theanus Archbishop of
London, and Thadeocus Archbishop of York, when their Churches were al
destroyed to the ground, they with their Clergy fled into Wales, and many
of them into little Britain. This plague came on the Britains for their
covetousness, cauine, and ^echerie.

Gurmund builded Gurmondchester. Gurmunchester builded. 61^ Paulus Diaconus.


CAdwane Duke of Northwales, was made sovereign of the Britains, who gave
strong battle to Ethelfride King of Northumberland, and forced him to entreat
for peace: After which concord being made, they continued al their life time
loving friends. He reigned xxij. years.

The Kingdom of the East Saxons began under Erchenuin^s, Sixth Kingdom of
Saxons.
about the year of Christ, 614.

The Kingdom of Mercia, or middle England, began under Seventh Kingdom of
Saxons. 635
Penda* 626.

CAdwalin, the son of Cadwane, reigned over ye Britains: he warred strongly
upon the Saxons, and made Penda King of Mercia. tributarie to him* He reigned
xlviij. years, and was buried at London, in a Church of S. Martine near unto
Ludgate, which Church was then new founded and builded by the Britaynes, in
Anno. 677.

CAdwalladar was ordained king of the Brytaines, and 685
ruled only three years: he vanquished and slew Lothier king of Kent, and
Athelwold king of south Saxons: and the^ forsaking his kingly authority, he
went to Rome, there to be christened, who after became a Monk, and was buried
in S. Peter's Church at Rome. He was last king of Brytain. After which time the
Brytaines were called Walshmen, which name was given them by the Englishmen,
or Saxons, who used to call all men Walshmen, that be strangers unto them.

NOw are we come to ye time wherein God (who for ye sins of the people
translateth kingdoms) dispossessed the Brytaines of their ancient habitation,
and rule of this land, who by the victory of Saxons were enforced, either to
miserable servitude, or driven into the Western parts of the I Will, now called
Wales and Cornwall, (where they now inhabit,) or else to their countrymen the
Brytains in France. But the Saxons enjoying the fertile soil of this Realm,
parted it in process of time into seven kingdoms: Kent, Southsex,
East Angles, East Saxons, Mercia, Northumberla^d, and West Saxons, which the
learned call the Heptarchie of the Saxons, of which kingdoms, I purpose (for
avoiding of confusion) to treat severally, setting down the limits of these
Countries, with the succession, acts, and civil battayles of their petty
Kings, until the time that this Heptarchie, or government of seven, was
reduced to a Monarchy, or regiment of one.

Kentish Saxons.
KEnt the first Kingdom, possessed by ye Saxons, contained 456
that country that stretches fro the East Ocean to the river of Thamis,
having on the Southwest side Southrey, on the West London, and upon the
Northeast the said river of Thamis. It has the Archbishopric of Canterbury
Metropolitan and primate of all England, and the Bishoppricke of Rochester*
and had Kings as follows.

HEngest the son of Widgils, the son of Victa, the son of Wecta, the first
son of Wode^ and Fr^a, was the first of the Saxons that made himself king of
Kent, as before ye have heard, ^yght years after his first entering into
this Island in the year from Christ's birth 456. He raygned xxxiiij. years,
and dyed honorably (says Marianus Scotus) but Peter de ^kham and others say,
that by the counsel of E^dad Bishop of Gloucester, Edel Duke of Gloucester,
caused his Marianus, Petre de l^k^. Floria* Wigor. 490 514 536 562
head to be cut of at Cones^orow.

ESke or Vske, succeeding his father He^gest, reigned peaceably. xxiiij. years.

Otta son of Eske reigned. xxij* years.

Ermericus the son of Otta reigned. xxv. years.

EThelbert the son of Ermericus had the gouernemente of that Kingdom, by the
space of. liij. or after Beade. lvj. years. This Ethelbert in the beginning of
his reign W. ^alme.
being but a child, was troubled with wars on every side, so that he could
hardly defend his own coasts. In his first battle against Ceauline king of
the Weste Saxons and Cuthe his son, he was forced to make his flighte into
Kent, having two of his Dukes Oslaue and C^eb^ ano slain in a place called
Vuibbadune* but when he came to more age, and was more cunning in war, in
short space he overcame all the Kingdoms of the Saxons round about him, save
the Northumbers. And to the end he would have acquaintance with foreign
Princes, he made affinity and alliance with the King of France by marrying of
his daughter Berta, a Christian woman, to whom he permitted to use the laws
and rytes of her Country, and to have a Bishop, whose name was Letardus, to
remain with her, for her better instruction in the laws of GOD. By this*
means the barbarous and Heathen Saxons keeping company with y^ French* and
agree to have all one law and like customs: besides this, the chaste and
virtuous life of Letardus the Bishop, and the other French which came with the
Queen, changed the Kings mind unto the knowledge of Christ, whereby it came
to pass, that afterward he did so sone give place to ye preaching of
Augustine. At this time (says Beade) the Brytaines Beade.
being at quiet, little regarding the storms paste in their fathers days, and
having respect only to the present prosperous estate in the which they then
lived, were so set to break all good orders of truth and justice, that scante
any token or remembrance thereof remained, but only in a few, among many
other of their doings, which their own Gildas.
Historigrapher Gildas, does lame^tably set forth in writing, (he says of them
thus) that they never took care to preach the Gospel of Christ unto the
Angles and Saxons, which inhabited the land among them. But yet the goodness
of God provided for the said nation of the Angles, much more worthy
preachers, by whom they might be brought to the faith

POpe Gregory moved of godly instinction in the hundred 596 Marianus.
Floriacen. Beade.
forty and seven year after the arrival of the Angles in Brytaine, sent
Augustine, Melitus, Iustus, and John, with sundry other Monks that lived in
the fear of God, to preach the Gospel, to the nation of the Angles in
Brytaine, which Auste^ came into Brytaine. Ethelbert was the first Christian
King of the Saxons.
landed in the I Will of Thanet, and were first received by Ethelbert king of
Kent, whom they converted to the Christian Faith with diverse of his people in
the. xxxiiij. year of his reign: and king Ethelbert delaying no time, gave
unto Augustine the City of Canterbury, who furthered thus by the King,
received at his hands an old Church, sometime founded there by the faithful
Romans, and dedicated y^ same to our savior Jesus Christ, which since was
called Saint Austins.

Augustine consecrated Melitus and Iustus Bishops, and Saint Augustins at
Canterbury builded.
appointed Melitus to preach unto y^ East Saxons, who with their King Sebert
the nephew of King Ethelberte, at the preaching of Melitus received the word
of life. King Ethelbert founded the Church of Saint Paul in London. Saint
Paul's in London. S. Andrews at Rochester builded.
Iustus was made Bishop of Rochester, where Ethelbert builded for him and his
successors the church of S. Andrew. Augustine ordained Laurence to succeed
him in the Archebishopricke, and shortly after departed this life. Ethelbert
reigned. lvj. years and was buried with Berta his wife at Saint Austens by
Canterbury.

AThelboldus the son of Ethelbert, not only refused the 616
^ayth of Christ, but also took to wife his mother in law. He was oftentimes
grie^ed with woodnesse and distraught, but by Laurence the Archbishop of
Canterbury, he was converted to leave his Idolatry and unlawful sin, and was
turned again to the Faith. He founded the Priory of Fulkestone in Kent, and
reigned xxv. years.

ERcombert the son of Adbold by Emma his wife, he 640
first suppressed the temples of the Idols, and because his people were given
to excess, commanded a solemn fast of. xl. days long, to be observed
throughout all his Kingdom, and reigned xxv. years.

About this time Henorius Archbishop of Canterbury divided his province into
Parishes.

EGbert his son succeeded, whose quiet government for 667
a long season was after defaced by the cruel murder of Ealbert, and
Egelbright his cousins Germa^s, whom either W. Malme.
he slew himself, or procured to be slain: he reigned nine years.

LOtharius succeeded his brother Egbert, who being assaulted oftentimes by
Edrike the son of Egbert, in a cruel 674
fight was shot through with a dart, whereof he dyed under his Surgeons hands,
when he had raygned thirteen years.

EDricke the son of Egbert, within the space of two years 686
lost both life and Kingdom. After his death y^ kingdom being sometime
governed by usurpers, and sometime by forreners, began to decay.

The Kentishmen, by casting of fire, did cruelly burn Moll the brother of
Cedwal King of the West Saxons, and twelve of his Knights with him: wherewith
Cedwal being moved to fury, did miserably harry and spoil all Kent, so that by
the space of six years, there was no King in that Country.

VVIthredus the son of Egbert purchasing peace with 698
money, was then established king, in which state he behaved himself very
honorably, both in peace and war. He founded the Priory of Saint Martin at
Dover, and reigned xxxi^j. years, with who^ king Swebhearde reigned jointly in
one part of his kingdom.

EDbert the son of Withred walked in his fathers ordinances, 731
and had like success, and reigned three and twenty year.

EDelbert his brother succeeded, in whose time the City of 754
(Canterbury as is to be thought) was burned by chance: he reigned. xj. years.

ALricke the third son of Withred ruled Kent after his 765
brethren, and was vanquished in a fought field against the Mertians: he
reigned xxxiiij. years.

EDelbert or Egbert otherwise called Pren, the^ usurped the kingdom, and
leauyed war against the Mertians, by 799
whom he was taken prisoner, and not long after resisted, but the Kentishmen
would not receive him, Cuthred then usurped, and bare a title of a Kentish
king for the space of. viij. years.

BAlbrede then took on him Princely dignity, but Egberte 807
King of West Saxon so discomfited him in battle, that he fled and forsook
his Kingdom, when he had reigned xx. year, whereby this kingdom of Kent was
united to the Kingdom of the West Saxons.

South Saxons.
SOuthsex the second Kingdom, contained the Counties of Southsex and Surrey,
which had on the East side Kent, on the South side the Sea, on the Weste side
Hampshire, and on the North the river of Thamys: it con aineth the diocesses of
Chichester and part of Winchester.

AEle the eight from Woden, with his three sons, Cime^ 478
Plencing, and Cissa, came into Brytaine with. itj. ships, and landed in a
place called Kimenesore, and there slew many of the Brytaines, and forced the
rest to make their flighte into a woodde which is called Andredsleage.
Afterward fighting with the Brytaines in a place near unto Marerodes burn,
slew many of them, and put the rest to flight. Then he and Cissa his son
after long siege, brake into the City of Andreds Cester, and slew the
inhabitants from the greatest to the smallest, and so began the Kingdom of
Southsex: he reigned. xxxvj. years.

CIssa his son succeeded, he builte the City of Chichester, 514
and named it after his own name, he raygned lxxvj. years.

EThelwulfus (whom Bid names Edelwach) was christened 590 Eeade. First
Christened King in Southsex.
in the province of the Mercies, in the presence and at the exhortation of King
Wulfhere, who also at the font was his godfather, and in sign of that
adoption, gave him two provinces, that is to say, the I Will of Wight, and the
province of Manures, in the West part of England.

Wilfride the Bishop came to the province of the South Saxons, unto them did he
minister the word of Faith, by the permission and great rejoicing of the King.
This Bishop Christened the chief Lords and Knights of the Country: and the
rest of the people at the same time, or sone after were Christened by other
Priests. The Queen Ebba was christened in her I Will, which was in the province
of the Vicctans: for she was the daughter of Eanfride, who was Eanheres
brother, which were both Christian men, and all their people. But all the
province of South Saxons had never before that time heard of the name of God,
nor the faith.

This Wilfride preached the Gospel, and not only delivered the people from
the peril of damnation, but also from an horrible moraine of temporal death.
For in three years before, it had not rayned in all those quarters, whereby a
famine destroyed the people by heaps, in so much that diverse times fortye or
fifty in a company, being famished for hunger, would go together to some
rock or Sea bancke, and cast themselves all down, either to be killed with
the fall, or drowned in the Sea: but on the same day they received Baptism and
Faith, there fell a plentiful shoure of rain, wherewith the Earth flourished
again.

This Bishop also taught the people there to get their sustenance by fishing.

Edilwach gave unto Bishop Wilfride the land of fourscoure and seven
tenements, where he might place his company, the name of the place was
Seolesey. In this Selsee Monestarie in Southsex.
place he founded a Monasterye, to be his Episcopal Sea.

CEadwall a valiant young manne of the Weaste Saxons, being banished from his
Country, came with an host of men and slew King Edilwach, wasted that
province, cruelly murdered and spoiled every where. Edilwach reigned. xxv.
years.

And soon after Ceadwall was driven out by two Captains of the Kings, Bertham
and Anthun, which from that time did hold and keep the Dominion of that
province: the chief of which two, was afterward slain of the same Ceadwall,
(being then King of the Weast-Saxons,) and the province subdued: and the latter
was slain by Ina.

East Angles.
EAstangles the third Kingdom contained the Countries of Norffolk and
Suffolk, Cambridge, and the I Will of Ely, which had on the East and North sids
the sea, on the West, Saint Edmondes Dike, with a part of Hertfordshyre, and on
the South side Essex. It contains the diocesses of Norwich and Ely.

VFfa the eight from Woden, first king of East Angles, reigned 492
vij. years.

Titulus reigned. xx. years. 499


REdwaldus the tenth from Woden, as men write: this is he that for the favor
of Edwin, killed Edelfride king of 519 W. Malme.
Northumberland. The same Redwalde was by y^ persuasion of Edwyne baptized, but
after by his wives counsel he fell from the faith again, but his son
Dorwaldus in pure and uncorrupted Christianity was slain by the heathen
Rochbert. Redwaldus reigned xxv. years.

Gerpenwalde reigned xij. years. 554 566 East Angles baptized.


SIgebertus being brought up in France, when he fled the enmity of Redwald,
was there baptized, whereupon after his return coming to the Crown of the
East Angles, and desiring to follow the godly order which he had seen in
France, set up a Schole to bring up children, by the help and aid of Bishop
Felix, whom he took out of Kent for that purpose, appointed them masters and
teachers, after the manner of Kentishmen.

This Felix ^orne in Burgonia, was made Bishop of Dunmock, Falix Bishop of
Donwich.
now called Donwich, an auntiente City, sometime of great fame, governed by a
Mayor and three Baylifes, now soar decayed and wasted by the Sea: he satte
Bishop xvij. years and was buried at Ramsey.

Sigebert renounced the world and became a Monck, and left his Kingdom to his
kinseman Egricke, with whom he (being assaulted of Penda King of the Mercies)
joined himself in battle and was slain.

ANna the son of Guido, succeeded Egrieks, and was likewise slain by the
fury of Penda. Etheldred daughter to Anna, founded the Church of Saint
Peter in the Isle of Ely Minster founded.
Ely. Anno. 674.

Athelhere brother to Anna succeeded, and both he and Penda were slain by
Oswinus King of the Northumbers, and that deservedly, because he had aided
Penda against his own brother, and his kinsman.

Adelwaldus his brother succeeded him with like fortune, and left the Kingdom
to Aldulfus, Elohwoldus and Hisberna, sons of the same Athelhore.

Etheredus succeeded him.

EThelbertus his son, whom Offa King of Mercies deceitfully 790
slew: he was buried at Hereforde.

Uery few men of might did reign after him in East-Angle, by reason of the
violence done by the Mercians, until S. Edmond.

EDmonde reigned xv. years, in whose time Hinguar and 870
Hubba began Danes, entering the Province of the Northumbers, raged over all the
same, and made great spoils. Hinguar having gotten a great pray, left Hubba,
and with Asserius.
his navy sailed into East-Angle, and arrived at a certain City thereof
unawares to the Citizens, set it on fire, and slew Albo Florica censis.
both man, woman and child. This wicked Hinguar took Edmonde King of that
Province, in a Uillage then called Heglisdune, near to a Wood bearing the same
name, where this holy Edmond being constant in the Christian Faith, was first
by the Pagans beaten with battes, then scourged King Bdmund cruelly martyred by
the Danes.
with whips, he still calling on the name of Jesus: his adversaries in a rage
shot him full of Shaftes, and then smote off his head: after which time the
Angles ceased to reign in the East-Angle, but the same was possessed by Danes,
til a fifty years after, that Edward the son of Etheldred did expulse the
Danes, and joined that Province, and also the East Saxons, to his Kingdom of
the Weast-Saxons.

East Saxons.
ESsex the fourth kingdom contained Essex, Midlesex, and Hartfordshire, being
bou^ded on the East, with the German Ocean, on the South with the river
Thamis, on the Weast with Colme, and on the North with Stowre, which at this
day parts Suffolk from Essex: it contains the diocese of London.

ERchenwine, the eighte from Woden, from whom all the Saxons derived their
genealogies, first erected this Country 527
to a Kingdom, which nevertheless he held as Feodarieto the kings of Kent,
who were as yet the very soueraines of the whole country from Thamis to Humber.
And as we have specified, Vortiger yielded season to He^gest for his delivery,
^eade.
when y^ Peers of the Brytains were slain on Salisburie plain, and he taken
prisoner.

SLedda the son of Erchenwine, succeeded his father in the 587
government, and to establishe the state more sure, married Ricula the
daughter of Ermenrich King of Kent, and enjoyed his gouernemente so quietly,
that he ministered small matter to Historiographers.

SEbert the son of Sledda by Ricula, ruled this kingdom 602
after his father. The second year of his reign, by the persuasion of
Ethelbert his uncle, and preaching of Miletus first Bishop of London, he
embraced Christianity, and was baptized by Miletus, and (immediately to show
himself a Christian,) builte a Church to the honor of Saint Peter, on the
West side of London, in a place, which because it was ouergrowen with Thorns
and environed with Waters, the Saxons at that time called it Thorney, and
Westminster built.
now of the Monastery and West situation is called Westminster.

In this place long before was a Temple of Apollo, (as Sulcardus writes,)
which being overthrown with an Earthquake, Eucius builte a Church for the
Christians, ^ulcard^^.


Sebert (when he had reigned thirteen years) dyed, and was entombed in the
Church which he builte, with his wife Acthelgod, whose bodies many years
after, in the the time T. Walsingham.
of Richard the second, were translated from the old Church to the new at
Westminster: and there enterred.

SErred, Sewarde and Sigbert, sons of Sebarte, jointly (as it seems) then
ruled Eastsex* men wickedly given, irreligious, 616
and deadely enemies to the Christian profession: who presumed contemptuouslye
to the Table of the Lords Supper, being not Baptized: and because Miletus
would not permit them to be partakers of the Christian Sacrament, they
expelled him from his Sea at London, but shortly after Serred encountering with
the West Saxons, was slain with both his brethren by king Kinegls.

SIgebert surnamed the little, son of Sewarde succeeded in this kingdom, and
left the same to Sigebert his kinsman.

SIgebert son to Sigebalde, brother to Sebert, then ruled in Eastsex, he by
the persuasion of Oswy King of Northumbers, ^eade*
abandoned all superstition, and became a Christian, and took an holy manne
Ced with him, who did mightily beat down errors, and wan many by preaching
the Christian religion in his Dominions, whereupon Ced was by Finan consecrated
Bishop of the East Saxons, and then proceeded with more authority in his
function, ordering Priests and Deacons in all places of Essex, but especially
at Ithancester, and Tilberie.

This City of Ithancester, stood on the bancke of the river Pante, that
runs by Maldune in the hundred of Dansey, but now that City is drowned in
Pante, so yt nothing remains but the ruins of the City in the said river.
Tilbery stands on the Thamis side. Ralph Cogshal*


In y^ good proceedings of King SIGEBERT, he was slain by a kinsman of his
own, upon none other occasion, but for that he used too much clemency
toward his enemies, as the murderers themselves confessed.

Swidhelin son of Sexbald, succeeded then in this regiment, who was baptized
by Ced in Rendlesham in East-Englande.

Sigher then ruled with Sebba, which Sebba became a Monk, and is buried at
Saint Paul's in London.

Sigehard then reigned.

Erkenwald Bishop of Eastangle founded the Monasteries of Chartesey in Surrey,
and Barking in Essex. Anno. 677.

Seofride next successively, of whom I find nothing recorded.

Offa the son of Sigher then ruled this Province, he enlarged with building,
and enriched with lands the Church Rich* Cices^^.
of Westminster, and then forsaking his wife, lands, kin and Country, he
went to Rome with Kenrede King of Mercia, and there in a Monks coule ended
this life, leaving Selred to rule his Country.

SElred (whom other call Colred) peaceably after Offa reigned 718 Ri.
Grincastri. 748
in Essex thirty years, and at length was slain.

SVthred after Selred was slain, reigned in Eastsex: but Egbert King of the
Weast-Saxons, the very year that he conquered Kent, subdued also this
Suthred, and annexed Essex to his Kingdom: yet London with the Country
confining about it, came not in subjection to the Weast-Saxons, but obeyed the
King of Mercia, as long as that Kingdom continued.

Sigehricke and Sigehard afterward aspired to the Kingdom of East Saxon, but
with no good success.

Mercians.
MErcia the fifth Kingdom and greatest of the other, contained Gloucester,
Hereford, Chester, Stafforde, Wircester, Oxforde, Warwick, Darby, Leicester,
Buckingham, Northampton, Notingham, Lincoln, Bedforde, Huntington, and part
of Hartforde shires. It had on the Weast side, the river Dee fast by Chester,
and Seuerne fast by Shrewsburie unto Bristow: in the East, the East sea: in the
South, Thamis unto London, in the North y^ river Humber, and so Westward, down
to the river Merce, unto the corner of Wyrhall.

This kingdom of Merce in the beginning was departed into three parts, into
West Mercia middle Mercia, and East Mercia: it co^tayneth the diocesses of
Lincoln, Wircester, Hereforde, Couentrie and Lichfielde.

CReda (the eleventh from Woden) first King of the Mercies, 586
reigned ten years.

Wibba his son reigned. xx. years. 596 616 626 W. Malme.


Ceorlus his son reigned. x. years.

PEnda the son of Wibba, a man active in wars, but frantic and most
wicked, took on him the kingdom of the Mercies, when he was fifty years old:
he shook the Cities, and disturbed the borders of the kings, that were his
own Countreymenne borne: he slew Edwin and Oswald, kings of Northumberlande,
(where Oswald was slain is now situate the town of Oswalstre, which of him
took that name,) he also slew Sigebert, Egfride, and Anna, kings of the East
Angles, which all were of holy life and conversation: he banished Kenewallus
king of West Saxons, but in the end himself was slain by Oswyn which
succeeded Oswald his brother, when he had reigned. xxx. years.

PEda the son of Penda succeeded in part of the Kingdom 656 W. Malme.
being preferred by the gift of Oswin, whose daughter he had taken to wife, on
condition he should embrace Christianity and forsake Idolatry. This Peda was
the first fou^der of Medeshamsted, now called Petarborow. Through yt treason
Peterborow founded.
of his wife he dyed suddenly, when he had reigned after his Father. iij.
years.

OSwine took the Kingdom, but he reigned there only 659
three years.

VLferus brother to Peda, earnestlye preferred Christianity 662
which his brother had begone, but he was the first (says W of Malmesbery,
that through the sin of Simony sold the Byshoprick of London unto Wyna. He
reigned. xvij. years.

EThelred brother to Vlferus succeeded in the kingdom of 676 Bishops sea ^
Worcester.
the Mercians: he obtained a Bishops Sea to be in the City of Worcester*
Bosellus was first Bishop there: Egwinus was the second. This Egwinus, by
the help of Kenredus King of Mercies, founded the Monastery of Euesham, in a
Ex Carta.
place then called Eouesham, of the shepherdes field and Euesham.
house, purchased by the said Bishop. The town in the Saxons time was called
Hotheholme. About the same time two Liber Tewks.
noble men named Odo and Dodo founded the Priorie of Tewkesbury. Monastery of
Gloucester. Inscriptiones Gloucestriae.
Tewkesburie. Also Osricke duke of Gloucester founded the Monastery of
Gloucester then since the same is a Bishops Sea.

Etheldred became a Monk at Bardoney, when he had reigned xxx. years.

KInredus son to Wolferus, in the fifth year of his reign 706
went to Rome, and became a Monk.

CElred the son of Ethelred, who as he was marvelous 710
in prowes against Ina of the West Saxons, so was he miserable by untimely
death, for he rained not past. viij. years, and was buried at Lichfielde.

EThelbalde reigned in continual peace many years, and 718 Chronicle of
Holande. To. May. Epistle of Boniface to Ethelbald.
then by the procurement of Beruredus, was slain of his own subjects. Unto
this Ethelbald, Boniface, ye second Bishop of Verche in Holland, after
Archbishop of Men's upon the Rijne, an English ma^born, who was afterward
martyred, sent an Epistle, of the which I will here set down a piece to be
seen, for that it shows partlye the state of that time, and serves for
example in time to come.

TO his most dear Lord, and to be preferred in the love of Christ above all
other kings of England, Edbaldus, Boniface Archbishop, the German legate,
perpetual health of charity and love in Christ. We acknowledge before God that
we did rejoice to hear of your prosperity, your Faith and good works: and we
be sorry when we hear any thing that goes against you, either in success of
war, or in danger of your soul, for we have heard, that you forbid theft
and robbery, that you love peace, defend the widow and the poor, for the
which we give God thanks: but in that you refuse lawful marriage, which if it
were to the preferring of chastity, it were commendable: and since you wallow
in leacherie and adultery with Uirgins consecrate to God, it is both shameful
and damnable, for it does confound your renown, both before God and man,
placing you among Idolators, because you violate the temple of God. Wherefore my
dear son repent, and remember how filthy a thing it is, that thou who by the
gift of GOD raygnest over so many nations, should to the great displeasure
of GOD, make thy self a bond slave to thine own fleshly lust. We have
heard also that the more part of noble men and people of the Mercians, by
thine evil example have left their lawful wives, and have defiled the wives
of other, and also Uirgins, which how far it differs from all good order
and honesty, let the laws of strange nations touch you: for in the ancient
Country of the Saxons (where was no knowledge of God) if either a maid in her
fathers house, or being married to an husband, were become an aduoutresse, she
should be strangled by her own hand closed to her mouth, and the corrupter
should be hanged Aduoutry among the Infidels pushed by death.
upon the pit where the aduoutresse was buried. If she were not so used (her
garments being cut away down to the gyrdle-steede) the chaste matrones did
scourge and whip her, and prick her with knives, and so was sent from Town to
Town, where other fresh and new scourgers or whippers did meet and whippe
her, until they had killed her. Likewise the Womedeans, who are the most
unclean kind of people, had this manner of usage with them, that the
husband being dead, the woman together with the dead body should cast her
self headlong into the fiered stacke or pile of woodde prepared for the
burning of their bodies. If therefore the Gentiles (not knowing GOD) had so
great zeal to chastity, how much the more (my dear son) it is to be
required at thy hands, who art a Christian and a King. Have therefore
compassion of thine own soul, and spare the great number of people, that by
thy Fatherlye* example yet may beware to offend God, for whose souls thou
shall give an account. Consider also, that if the Englshe nation, despising
lawful matrimonye, do increase by aduoutrye, (as the French men, Italians,
and also the very Pagans do cast in our teeth and vpbrayde us withal,) of
such conjunctions and copulations, shall spring up a peakishe dasterdely
people, which shall despise God, and with their wicked qualities undo the
Country, as it came to pass to the Burgundians, the people of Prouance, and
the Spaniardes, whom the Sarazens have many years assaulted for their sins
which in times past they had committed. Besides this, it is told us, that you
take away privileges of Churches, and thereby give evil example to your noble
men to do the like, but I pray you remember how terrible vengeance God took
upon the Kings your predecessors, which committed such offenses as we
rebuke you for.

A wicked spirit came upon Colredus your predecessoure, which was a defiler of
Uirgins, and a breaker of ecclesiastical Privileges, for sitting royally among
his barrons at a dinner, the Devil plucked away his soul without confession
of his sins. The Devil also drew in such a rage. Osredus king of the
Northumbers, which was guilty of the same crimes, that with a vile death he
lost both kingdom and life in his lusty young age. Also Charles king of
France which ouerthrewe Churches, and altered the Church money to his own
use, was consumed with a long torment and fearful death. It follows
therefore my dear beloved son, that with Fatherlye and earnest prayers we
beseech you that you will not despise the Counsel of your Fathers which
diligently do admonish your highness, for nothing is more commodious to a
good king, than willinglye to amend such faults when he is warned of them, as
Salomo^ says, who so loves discipline, loves wisdom: therefore my dear son,
declaring our advice, we beseech you by the living God, by his son Jesus
Christ our Lord, and by his holy spirit, that you will remember how transitory
this present life is, and how short and momentane the pleasure of this
filthy flesh is, and how vile and shameful a thing it is, that man shall
leave evil examples unto his posterity for ever: begin therefore to frame
your life in better ways, and amend the errors of your youth, that you may
obtain praise with men in this life, and eternal glory in the life to come:
we wish your Highness well to fare, and to increase in all goodness.
Ethelbald was slain at Secgeswald, and was buried at Hrependune.

BEraredus the murderer of Ethelbald, did nothing worthy 749
to be remembered, but being straightway slain by Offa, had an end meet for a
Traitor.

OFfa, Nephew to Ethelbald succeeded: he joined battle 749
with Kineulfus King of the Weast Saxons, and got the victory. He sent for
Ethelbert King of the East Angles, promising great things by flattery, but
when he had got him to his Palace, he caused him to be beheaded, and then
unjustly invaded the Kingdom of the East Angles.

He caused the relics of S. Albon to be taken up, and Vita Alboni. S* Albons
builded
put in a Shrine aborned with gold and precious stones, and builded there a
princely Monastery.

He founded the Abbey of Bathe.

He translated the Archbishops Sea to Lichfield.

He made a dike between Wales and the Kingdom of Offa Dike.
the Mercies, which ditch extends by South from the parts about Bristow, over
the Mountains of Wales, and so North toward Flint, and under a hill of coal,
even to the mouth of Dee, or the North Sea. He reigned xxxix. years, and dyed
at Oflay, and was buried in a Chapel which then stood on Offlay.
the bancke of the River Ouse, without the Town of Bedford.

EGbertus or Ecfride his son, reigned one year. Alquine Alquine.
writ to Osbert of the Mercians, that the noble young Ecfride dyed not so
soon for his own faults, but because his Father was a great sheader of
blood. Plae^^^ A^^inus. 789 W^l. Malme.


KEnulfus, Nephew in the fifth degree unto Penda, warre^ on the Kentish Saxons
punished their Country very sore, and carried away bound their King Egberthus,
but not long Winchelcomb founded.
after, when he had builded a Church at Winchelcomb* on the day of dedication
thereof, he delivered him, declaring a worthy Bishops Sea a^ Hereford founded.
example of clemency. He founded the Church of S. Ethelbert in Hereford and
reigned xxiiij. years.

KEnelmus son to Egbertus a child of seven years, was 813
innocently slain by his Sister Quenda, whereby he obtained the name of a
Martyr.

CEolwulfus, brother to Kenulfus, reigned one year, and 820
was expulsed by Bernulfus.

BErnulfus in the third year of his reign, was overcome 821
by Egbertus King of Weast Saxons at Elyndune.

LVc^^us after he had reigned two years, was oppressed 824
by the East Angles.

VVIthlasnus being at the first subdued by Egbirth reigned 826
xiij. years, paying to him and his son a tribute.

BErthulfus reigned xiij. years, in the same estate, till at 839 W. Malme.
the last he was chased beyond the seas, by the sea rouers of Denmark.

BVrdredus paying the Tribute, enjoyed the same twenty 852
years, and then he being deposed, and driven out of his Country, fled to
Rome, and there was buried at the English schole. Then that kingdom was by the
Danes delivered to Geolwolfus and in few years after that, Alfred y^ Nephew of
Egbirth gate it. So the kingdom of the Mercies fell away in the year of
Christ. 875.

Northumbers.
THe sixth Kingdom was of the Northumbers, which contained Lankishire,
Yorkshire, Cumberland, Westmerland, Northumberland. It had on the Weast the
Sea, by South, the River of Humber, and so downward toward the Weast by the
ends of the Shires of Nottingham and of Darby, unto the River of Merce* and
has the diocese of York, Durham, and Carelile.

At the beginning, it was deuides into two Kingdoms, Bernitia and Deira.
Bernitia stretched from Edenborough Frith to Tine and Deira, from Tine to
Humber, but these two were shortly united.

When Hengest had established himself in Kent, he sent W. Malme.
his brother Otha, and his son Ebusam to possess the North parts of
Britain, where many times they put the men of that province to flight, and for
the space of 99. years, they and their successors ascribes to themselves the
names of Dukes, and bare themselves under the Kingdom of Kent, but in the
year of Christ. 547. the year after Hengests death 60. that Dukedom was
changed into a Kingdom.

IDa* the ninth from Beldegius, and the tenth from Wodden, 547
continued fourteen years in the Kingdom of Deires.

Ae^la his successor of the same kinded, but by another 559
line, strongly advanced his Kingdom thirty years.

In his time, children of Northumberland were carried to be sold in the Market
at Rome, where when the Citizens beheld them, and wondered at their comeliness
and beauty of face, amongst other, Gregory the Archdeacon of the Apostolical
seat being one, asked of what Nation they were, unto whom it was answered,
that they were the children of Englishmen, of the province of Deires, and
subject to Alla their King, but were Painims, whereunto Gregory said, they
shall be taught to sing Allelu^a there, during the reign of Alla over the
Deires.

ADda the eldest son of Ida reigned upon the Bernitians seven years:

Elappea five years:

Theodwald one year:

Frethulfe seven years:

Theodrike seven years:

Aethelfride two years, and all in the life of Bernitianus.

AEThelrike, the son of Ida, reigned in both provinces of 582 Will. Malme.
Deirie and Bernicia five years.

EThelfride, brother to Ethelricus, made greater spoil of Marianus.
Floriacensis.
the Britains, than all the other Kings of the Angles, and unpeopled and
subdued more of their Countries, and made the same tributarie and habitable for
Englishmen: wherefore Aadan King of the Scotts being greatly moved with his
happy success, came against him with a mighty Army, but was overcome and put
to flight of a few Saxons, which battle was fought by Ethelfreth, in a place
called Degsastan, in the eleventh year of his reign, and in the first year
of Phocas the Emperor.

This King also long after this time, leuyed a new power, and according as
Augustine the Archbishop of Canterbury had before spoken, marched toward the
City of Legious, which of the Britains is called Cairlegion, and there first
slew 1200. Monckes, assembled to make prayer unto God, 1200. Monks slain.
for the good success of their Souldioures in the battle: and afterward he
ouerthrewe the whole power of the Britaynes host. He was slain by Redwall King
of the East Angles in a battle near unto a River which is called Idle, in
the year of Christ 616. when he had reigned xxvij. years.

EDwyne succeeded and drove out the seven sons of 617 First Christian King
of Northumberland. Marianus. Floriacen. Wi.
King Ethelfride.

In Anno 626. Paulinus being the third Bishop of Rochester, was constituted by
Iustus then Archbishop of Canterbury, to be Bishop over the Northumbers, and
sent by Eadbald to Edwine the King of that nation, with his Wife, being the
daughter of King Ethelbert, and sister of the said King Eadbald.

A certain desperate fellow, named Eomer, was sent unto King Edwine, by
Guicheline King of the Weast Saxons, who came unto him on Easter day, and
having a naked weapen under his garment, assailed the King, but Lilla his
servant thrust himself before ye stroke, yet notwithstanding the King was with
that stroke wounded through the body of his faithful servant.

The same night the Queen his wife was delivered of a daughter, which upon
Whitsondaye next after, was the first that was baptized of Paulinus the
Bishop, and named Eanfleda.

In the year of Christ. 628. Edwine, the most mighty king of the Northumbers,
and his people, received the word of God, at the preaching of Paulinus the
Bishop: this was done in the xj. year of his reign, and in the 230. year
after the arrival of the Angles in Brytaine.

Edwine gave unto Pauline a Bishops Sea in the City Cathedral Church of York
founded.
of York, and began the Cathedral Church of S. Peter there, which Church was
after finished by King Oswald his successor, after this, in increasing of the
Christian Faith and heavenly kingdom, his earthly possessions did wonderfully
increase, for he first of all the Angles brought Brytaine wholly under his
subjection, saving the Kingdom of Kent.

Edwine in the xvij. year of his reign, and xlviij. of his age, was slain in
a battle which he fought at Headfeld, with the most valiant Painime Penda
King of the Mercies, and Ceadwalla King of the Brytaines. Paulinus the Bishop
builded Lincoln Minster founded. Beade.
the great Church at Lincoln. In the reign of King Edwine, such was the
peace and tranquillity through all Brytaine, which way soever King Edwines
dominions lay, that a weak woman might have walked with her new borne babe
over all the I and without any damage. Moreover, for the refreshing of
wayfaring men, he ordained cups of iron Cups of brass by the high vvayes.
or brass, to be fastened by such clear Wels and Fountains as did run by
the ways side, which Cups no man durst touch further than to his own
present use and necessity, for the love and good will they bare to their prince,
who was for ye time of his reign so honored and loved, that the triumphant
banners were borne before him, not in war only, but in peace to, wheresoever he
went abroad.

After the death of Edwine, the Kingdom of Northumberland was again divided.

OSriche the son of Elfrike, who was Edwins uncle, succeeded 633
in the governance of Deira. And Eanfride the son of Ethelfride, ruled ye
Bernicians: but both these forsaking the Christian profession, wherein they
were instructed, yielded themselves to be defiled with the filth of Idolatry:
but this Apostacy was revenged by Cedwall King of ye Brytans, who slew them
both, and with tragical slaughter spoiled Northumberland.

OSwald brother to Eanfride, then governed this Kingdom, 634
who with a small army overcame the Brytans, and slew Cedwall their King at
Deniseburne. He sent for Aidan a Scot to advance ye Christian religion among
his people, assigning to him the Isle of Lindisfarne or holy Island, for his
Sea. He greatly enlarged his Kingdom, reconciled the Deirians and Bernitians,
which did deadly hate one the other. And when he had reigned viij. years, was
slain in a cruel battle at Maserfielde, by Penda King of Mercia, and canonized
a Saint.

OSwine brother to Oswald, succeeded: he buried the head 642
and arms of Oswald, which Penda commanded to be hanged upon poles. His
government was greatly disquieted by invasion of the Mercians, rebellion of his
own son Aelfride, and insurrection of Adilwald son to Oswald. He murdered
Oswy, the son of Osrike, who ruled Deira, being traitorously delivered unto
him at Ingethling, where Liber Lichfield. ^. Rudbern^.
afterward a Monastery was erected. But at length he delivered his Country
from foreign invasion, vanquished the Mercians with Penda in a fought field
near the river Iewet, brought them to his subjection, and caused them to be
instructed in the Christian Faith.

He builded a Church among the Mercians called Lichefielde, Lichfield Church
a Bishops sea founded.
and procured the same to be a Bishops sea, in Anno. 657.

Duina was first Bishop there of Mercia, and also of Lindisferne: for there
were then so few Priests, that one Bishop was compelled to govern two
Provinces. King Oswine ended his life quietly, when he had reigned xxxij. years.

EGfride his lawful son, then inherited Northumberland: 670
he deposed Wilfride of the Bishoprike, and appointed two Bishops over the
Northumbers. Mildred, otherwise called Etheldred, his wife, would by no means
accompany her husband, but continued a Uirgine, and after she had bin married
twelve years, took at the hands of Wilfride the veil and habit of a Nun,
and builte the Monastery of Eely, where she was Abbess.

Egfride her husband fought a battle with Edilfride King of Mercia, but after
they were reconciled by Theodore the Bishop. Then turning his power against
Ireland, he sent Berte thither, who miserably destroyed the seely people. But
the year following, he marched against the Pictes (contrary to the good
counsel of S. Cuthbert, whom he made Bishop) and was slain by them in an
ambush, when he had reigned fiftene years.

ALfride, bastard son of Oswine, succeeded after his brother 685
Egfride. He did repair y^ decayed state of Northumberland, but could not
recover all that Picts, Scotts, and Brytaines took from the Northumbers at
the death of his brother. He reigned nineteen years.

OSred his son, a child of eight years succeeded, who, 704
when he had wickedly reigned eleven years, was murdered by his kinsmen
Kenred and Osricke.

KEnred, when he had slain Osred, ruled Northumberland 715
two years.

OSricke obtained the Kingdom after xj. years, and elected Ceolnulph brother
of Kenred to be his successor.

CEolnulph reigned in this province with great piety and 728
victory viij. years, and then forsook the estate of a King, and took the
habit of a Moncke in the holy Island.

Benedict, who first brought Masons, Paynting, and Glasing into this Realm
to the Saxons, flourished at this Glasing brought among the Saxons. Bid famous.
time. Beda also that famous learned man, lived at this time, who dedicated his
History of the Church of England to the forenamed Ceolnulph.

EGbert, cousin germane to Ceolnulph, reigned in Northumberland 736 Will. Malme.
twenty years peaceably, and then forsaking the World, entered into Religion,
and became a Monk: his brother bearing the same name, was Archbishop of York,
which Sea he greatly advanced, and founded there a most worthy Library,
replenished with all good Library at York.
Authors.

OSwulfe succeeded his Father, who was slain by the 757
people in the first year of his reign.

MOllo then took the regiment, and after eleven years 758
was traytecously murdered by Alerede.

ALered reigned after him eleven years, and was enforced 76^
by the people to leave the Country.

AThelred or Etheldred the son of Mollo, was advanced 780
to the regiment of Northumberland by the people, and the fifth year after was
by them deprived.

AELfwold then was proclaimed King of Northumberland, 785
and when he had reigned eleven years, was slain by his subjects: he lies
buried at Haugustald.

OSrede, the son of Aelerede then succeeded, but the first 796
year he was deprived.

AEThelred or Etheldred who was before deposed, now received 797
the Kingdom, and when he had ruled four years, was also miserably slain.
After his death, this Kingdom decayed, and was pitifully ransacked by civil
sedition, and foraigne invasions, for the space of 30. years, in which space,
there ruled here without title of Kings

Eardulfe,

Alfwold,

Eandred, Lib. A^tonensis.


Ethelred,

Readulfe,

Osbert, which two last, were slain at York, by the Danes, in a place yet to
this day called Elle Craft.

This Osbert ravished a Lady of his Country, wife to Bernebokard, in revenge
whereof, the same Bernebokard fleeing into Denmark, returned again with the
Danes Hinguer and Hubba, and arrived in holy Island, and so came to York, and
there slew King Osbright.

Egbert then obtained Northumberland.

RIcsy then usurped it, and after him Cuthred, from whom Sitricke the Dane
got it, unto whom King Athelstane the Monarche gave his daughter in marriage.

Weast Saxons.
THe seanenth Kingdom was of the Weast Saxons, which contained the Countries
of Barkeshire, South-hampton, Wiltshire, Dorcetshire, Somersetshire,
Devonshire, and Cornwall: and has dioceses Bathe and Wells, Sarisburie, and
Exester: having on the East side Southsex, on the North side Thames, on the
South and the Weast the Sea Ocean.

This Kingdom, although it took beginning long after the first coming of the
Saxons, yet the same endured longest, and ouercomming all the other Kingdoms,
brought them again to one Monarchy.

CErdic, the tenth from Woden, with his son Kenrike, landed in Britain, at a
place called Cerdike shore, and slew Natanleod King of the Britains, and five
thousand men, of whose name the Country as far as Cerdikes foorde, was
called by the name of Natanleod.

CErdike and Kenrite began to reign as Kings, and 519
the same year they fought with the Britains in a place called Cerdikes
foorde, and departed vanquishers.

After that, they fought with the Britaynes in a place called Cerdicks lege.

They took the I Will of Wight, and gave the same to their Nephews Stuff and
Withgare, and slew the Britains in Wethgarbirg. He reigned xvij. years.
Withgare the Nephew of Cerdic was buried at Withgarbrig, or the City of
Withgar.

KEnrike the son of Cerdic fought with the Britains at 5^6
Searesberige, and afterward at Beranbrige, and at both times put them to
flight, and reigned xxv. years.

CEaulin the son of Kenrike took upon him the Kingdom 560
of the West Saxons.

In the beginning of his reign he discomfited Ethelbert King of Kent and slew
his two Dukes Oslaue and Cnebban at Wibbandune. Afterward his brother Cutholfe
vanquished the Britains at Bedford, and wanne from them the towns of
Liganburge, Egelsburge, Bensington, and Eignesham.

Six years after, Ceaulin slew three kings of the Britains, Commeaile,
Condid^n, and Fariemeile, at Deorham, and took three Cities from them,
Gloucester, Cirencester, and Bathancester.

After he fought with the Britains at Fethanleah* in which Tho. Rudborne.
Leyland.
he had the victory, but lost his son Cutha: for now his fortune changed,
and when he had reigned xxxiij. years, he was overcome at Wodnesbeorhe, or
Wannes ditch in Wilshire, and expelled out of his Kingdom by the Britains.

CEalrike the son of Cutholfe ruled the West Saxons fiu^ 591
years.

CEolnulfe son of Cutha before named succeeded, who had 598
continual wars either with the Englishmen* with Britains, with the
Scotts, or with the Pictes, and lastly moved war against the South Saxons,
and there dyed when he had reigned fourteen years.

KInegilsus the son of Ceolrike succeeded. He brought his 611 Marian. Floria.
W^g.
host against the Britains into Beandune, and there ^lew of them two thousand
xlvj.

He also fought with Penda King of Mercians near unto Cirencester, and after
made peace with him. And shortly after VVestsex baptized.
in the year of Christ 635. by the preaching of Berinus, King Kinegilsus and
all his people received the Christian faith, to whom, King Oswald was
Godfather at the Font, of which Kings, the said Berinus had granted to him the
City of Dorchester, and builded there an house of Canons for Vita Berini.
his Bishops Sea. Kinegilsus reigned xxvij. years. Dorchester a Bishops Sea.
6^8


GVichiline the son of Kinegilsus was baptized by Berinus the Bishop in the
City of Dorchester, and deceased the same year.

CVthredus the son of King Guicheline, was baptized 639
at Dorchester, by Berinus the Bishop, who was his Godfather at the Font. He
reigned four years.

KEnnewalcus the son of King Kinegilsus, took on him 64^ Winchester a
Bishops Sea. Malmesbery builded. Vita Aldelm^.
the Kingdom of the West Saxons.

He founded the Cathedral Church in Winchester placing there a Bishops sea.

He gave Meydulfus burgh to Aldelmus the Abbot, there to build a Monastery.
Afterward being infested with wars by Penda King of the Mercians, because
he had forsaken his wife, sister of the said Penda, was by him driven out of
his Kingdom, and fled to Anna King of East Angles, where he was baptized of
Bishop Foelix, and after was restored to his kingdom by the help of the
forenamed Anna. He reigned xxx. years. After whom Queen Sexburgeo his wife
governed a while. She founded a Monastery of Nuns in the I Will of Shepey, and
became her self a Nun, and after Abbess of Eely.

EAs^winus Nephew to Kinegilsus succeeded, he fought a 67^
battle against Wulfere King of Mercia, in a place called Bidanheafod He
reigned two years.

KEnewinus, son to Kinnegilsus, chased the Britains even 676
to the Sea shore, and reigned nine years.

CAdwalla, Nephew to Ceauline succeeded in the Kingdom. 685


He slew Berthune Duke of the South Saxons, and brought Marianus.
that province under grievous bondage.

After that, he and his brother Mull wasted Kent, and subdued the I Will of Wight,
which till that time was given to Idolatry, whereof he purged them, giving the
fourth part thereof to Bishop Wilfride, who appointed Preachers to convert the
people of that I Will to Christianity. Ceadwalla once again spoiling the
Country of Kent, his brother Moll, and xij. of his Knights were slain by
fire cast upon them, after which tune, even before he was baptized, he gave for
tithe or tenth to God all the pray and spoils he had gotten to his Will. Malme.
own use: in whom (says Malmesburie) although we praise his affection, we
allow not the example: for it is written, that who so offers the sacrifice of
poor folks good, does as it were sacrifice the son in the sight of his
Father.

This being done, he went to Rome to be baptized, when he had reigned two
years over the West Saxons.

INe reigned among the West Saxons, a noble man, of great 687 Asser.
power and wisdom, and therewith valiant and hardy, in feats of arms very
expert: he maintained such war against the Kentish Saxons, that he
constrained them to seek and entreat means of peace, giving to him for the
same great gifts 30000. Mancas (pieces of Gold so named.)

This Ine was the son of Kenred, the son of Ceadwolde, brother to Keadwold,
and son to Chenling, son Marian.
of Kenri, son of Cerdic, the first King of the Weast Saxons.

This man builded first the College of Wells. College of Welles, and Abbey
of Glastenbury builded.


He also builded the Abbey of Glastenburie, and paid the Peter Pence first to
Rome.

When he had governed the Weast Saxons by the space of seven and thirty
years, by the earnest labor of his wife Etheldreda, which was Abbess of
Barking in Essex, he gave up his royal dignity, and went to Rome.

EThelard kinsman on the fathers side to Ine, succeeded in 726
the Kingdom, notwithstanding Oswald a young man of the Kings blood did
disturb the beginning of his reign, Will. Malme.
for he stirred up Rebellion among the inhabitants, but not long after he died,
and then Ethelard reigned quietly fourteen years.

ENthrede his kinsman made war on Ethelwald King of Mercia and against the
Britains, and had of them the victory.

In his time there appeared two Blasing Stars, rasting as it were burning
brands toward the North. He Blasing Stars.
reigned sixteen years.

The Englishmen buried not the bodies of their dead Antiqui. Britan. Ecclesi.
Burial in Church-yardes.
in Cities, until the time of Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, who procured
of the Pope, that in Cities there should be poynted Church-yardes.

SIgebert was made King of the Weast Saxons. He was cruel 757 W. Malme. Scal.
Cro^^.
and tirannous toward his subjects, and changed ancient Laws and customs
after his own lust and pleasure, and because a certain noble man some deal
sharply advertised him to change his manners, he put him to cruel death: and
for so much as he continued in his malice, and would not amend, he was
deprived of al kingly authority, A Tirant came to a miserable end and
shameful death.
and lastly, as a person forlorn, wandering in woods, and hiding himself in
caves of wild Beasts, he was slain in Andreds Walde by a Swineheard, whose
Lord and master called Cumbra, he had wrongfully put to death, when he had
not reigned one year.

KEnulphus of the blood of Cerdicus appeased certain 757
murmours and grudges that were amongst the people, for the deposing of his
predecessor Sigebert. He founded the Bishops sea at Welles founded.
Cathedral Church of Wells. As he haunted a woman which he kept at Merton,
he was slain by treason of one Olio, the kinsman of Sigebert late King, when
he had reigned nine and twenty years, and was buried at Winchester.

BRithricus of the blood of Cerdicus, was made King of 786
Weast Saxons.

He married Eadburga the Daughter of Offa King of Mercia, by whose power he
expelled Egbert, that was an under King in the Lordship of the Weast Saxons.

In his time it rayned blond, which falling on men's Blood rayned.
clothes, appeared like Crosses.

In Anno 800. the Danes arrived in the I Will called Portland, The Danes first
arrived in this land.
but by the puissance of Brithricus, and other Kings of the Saxons, they were
overcome at Donmouth, driven back, and compelled to avoid the land. Marianus.
The King poyfoned by his wife.


Brithricus was poisoned by his wife Ethelburga, when he had reigned
seaue^teene years, and was buried at Warham. For this deed, the Nobles
ordained that from thenceforth the Kings wives should not be called Queens,
nor suffered to sit with them in place of estate.

Eadburge with infinite treasure fled into France, where offering a great
portion of her Gold to King Charles of France, he said unto her, choose
Eadburge whom thou will have to thy Husband, me, or my son: and she
answered, if choice be granted me, I choose your son, because he is younger
than you: then (quoth Charles) if thou had chosen After a wicked life
follovved a miserable end to Queen. Eadburge.
me, thou should have had my son, but because thou have chosen my son,
thou shall have neither him nor me, and then gave to her a Monastery, wherein
she professed hirselfe a Nun, and became their Abbess a few years, but
afterward committing adultery with a lay man, and cast out of the Monastery,
she ended her life in poverty and misery, Houeden.
as of many that have seen her we heard, says mine Author Asserius. Asser.


EGbrichus obtained the government of the Weast Saxons. 802
He tamed the Welchmen, vanquished Bertulphus King of the Mercians at
Hellendune, and subdued to his obeisance W. Malme.
the Kentish Saxons, East Saxons, and Northumbers. He caused the brazen Image
of Cadwaline King of the Britains to be Scal. Croni.
thrown down, and this Land no more to be called Britain, but Anglia or
England. He was Crowned at Winchester. Britain first named England.


In the 33. year of his reign the Danes arrived at Lindisferne, Danes arrived
here. Sca. Cro.
and fought with the Englishmen at Carham, where two Bishops, two Earls, and
a great number of the English people were slain. Two years after y^ Danes
arrived in West Wales, where Egbright overcame them at Hengistendon. He reigned
over the most part of England the space of seven and thirty years and seven
months, and was buried at Winchester.

ADelnulfus the son of Egbrichus began his reign over 8^9 Will. Malme.
the more part of England. He took to wife Judith, daughter to the King of
France, and had by her four sons, which were Kings after him.

In his time, there came a great army of the Pagan Danes Alredus Riusall.
with 350. Ships into the mouth of Thamis, and so to London, and spoiled it,
and put to flight Beorthulfe King of Mercia, Danes spoil London.
with all his power which came to bid them battle, and then the Danes went with
their army into Southerie: then Adhelnulfus with his son Adhelbald, and a
great army came against the foresaid Danes, and at a place called Aolea they
fought a cruel battle, wherein the most part of the Danes were slain.

The same year Adhelstane the son of Adhelfus, and Sca. Cro.
Calchere y^ Earl slew a great army of the Paganes at Sandwich in Kent, and
took nine of their Ships.

Adhelnulfus sent his son Alfride to Rome with a great number of noble men
and other, at which time Pope Leo confirmed the said Alfride, and took him to
his son by adoption, and also consecrated him King.

This Adhelnulfus did make the tenth part of his kingdom Tenth given to the
Church by King Adelnulfus.
free from tribute and service to the King, and gave it to them that did serve
Christ in the Church: and the same year he went to Rome, where he repaired
the English English School at Rome repaired.
Schole, which was first founded by Offa King of the Mercies.

In the mean season, his son Adhelbald rebelling, usurped the Kingdom, so
that when Adhelnulfus returned, he was forced to divide the Kingdom, and to
take the worse part. He reigned eighteen years, and was buried at Winchester
says Asser. Asser.


ADhelbald reigned after his Father: against God, and the 857
worthiness of Christianity, yea, and contrary to the custom of all
Paganes, he presumed to his Fathers marriage bed, and with great infamy,
married Judith the French Kings daughter. He reigned after his father Flori,
Wigor.
two years, and was buried at Shirborne.

AThelbrict, brother to Athelbald, took under his dominion 860
Kent, Southery, and Sussex.

In this time, the great Army of the Paganes invaded Danes invade and spoil
Winchester.
and spoiled the City of Winchester, who when they returned with a great pray
toward their Ships, Osrike Earl of Hampton, and his folk, and Adhelnulfus
the Earl, with Barkeshire men, met them, and far from any Town they joined
battle, where the Paganes were slain in every corner, and the Christians kept
the field.

The Normans and Danes made a firm league with the Kentishmen, who promised
them money to keep the league, but notwithstanding the Paganes brake privily
out of their Danes make a league, and break it.
Castles by night, and spoiled all the East parts of Kent.

Athelbrict reigned five years, and was buried at Shirborne.

ETheldred brother to Adhelbrict, received the Kingdom 866
of the Weast Saxons. In the first year of his reign, a great Navy of
Paganes came into England, and remained all the winter in the Kingdom of East
England.

Anno 871* the Paganes came to Reading in Barkeshire, where they cast a great
ditch and wall betwixt the two Rivers, Thames and Kynetan, on the right side of
the said town.

Adhelnulfus Earl of Barkeshire and his army, met with the Paganes in a
place called Englefield, where the Paganes had the worst, and many of them
slain, and the rest put to flight.

Etheldred King of the Weast Saxons, and Aelfrede his brother, came to Reading,
where was foughten a fierce and cruel battle, but at the last the Christians
fled, and the Paganes had the victory.

The Christians within four days fought a battle with the Paganes in
Assendune, but the Paganes divided themselves Battle at Assendune.
into two battles, for then they had two Kings, which when the Christians saw,
they likewise divided their army into two companyes.

It was determined that King Ethelred with his battle, should go against
the two Pagan kings with their battle, and that his brother Aelfrede with his
army, should set on all the Pagan Dukes and their army. Battle at
Assendoune.
All things thus ordered, when the king farried long in his prayer, and the
Pagans being readilye prepared, came to Chipenhane where the battle was
pitched, Aelfred seeing he must either retire or set on his enemies Sca.
Cron.
before his brother did come, he straight ways set upon them, though the place
of battle was unequal, for the Pagans had gotten the higher ground, and the
Christians brought their battle from the valley. There was in that place one
only thorn tree, very short, about which tree the battles met and joined,
where when they had a long time fought, Hubba one of the kings five Earls, and
many thousands more of the Pagans being slain, the other were chased.

A great heap of stones was laid copped up where Hubba was buried, and the
place called Hubbeslow. Hubbeslovv.


This being done, King Etheldred and his brother Aelfrede Sca. Cro.
shortly after gathered their power again to fight with the Pagans at Basing,
where after a long and sore battle, the Pagans had the victory.

After this battle, came another army of Pagans from Pagans vanquished.
beyond seas, and joined with the first.

When King Etheldred had reigned five years, he was slain of the Pagans at
Whitingham, and buried in the Monastery of Winburne, with this Epitaph:

In hoc loco quiescit corpus sancti Etheldredi regis Westsaxonu^ Sca. Cro.
Marians. Scotus.
martyris, qui anno Domini. 872. 23. die Aprilis, per manus Dacorum Pagan^rum
occubuit. His arms a cross Florie.

Anno. 870. Saint Ebb Abbess of Coldingham, six miles Flores Historiaru^*
Chastity before beauty preferred, a rare example.
North from Berwike, cut off her nose and vpperlippe, and persuaded all her
sisters to do the like, that they being odible to the Danes, might the better
keep their Uirginitie, in despite whereof the Danes burned the Abbey, and the
Nuns therein.

AElfrede borne in Barkshire, at a village called Wantinge, 872 Marians.
Scotus. Florentij Croniea cronicarum. Asser. Alfridus* Beuerlacens^^. Speculum
Hist. VVilshire, why so named. Ricardus Cirecestrensi^. Hap of war doubtful.
the fourth son of Athelwolfe, received the government of the whole realm,
and within one month after, with a very small number fought a sharp battle
against the whole army of the Pagans, in a place called Wilion (which lies
on the Southside of the River Wily, of which river the whole shyre takes his
name) and after they had fought a great part of the day, the Pagans fled,
but seeing the fewness of them that pursued, they set themselves in battle
again, and got the field.

The Weast Saxons made league with the Pagans, upon condition they should
depart out of their Country.

The next year they wintred at London, and made league with the Mercies.

The next year they wintered at Lindesey, which was in the Kingdom of
Northumberlande.

The next year, at Ripindune: they constrained Burgoredus king of Mercies, to
flee beyond the Seas, who went to Rome, where he dyed, and was buried in the
Schole of the Saxons. Burgoredus death.


The Pagans subduing ye whole kingdom of the Mercies, which they committed to
Ceonulfus: The next year one part of the Pagans wintered in Northumberlande
near to the river Tyne, subdued the whole Country: the other part went with
Guthram, Oskecellus, and Amandus, three kings of the Pagans, to Grantbridge,
and wintered there.

The year following, the Pagans going from Cambridge in the night, entered the
Castle of Warham, where there was a Monastery of Nuns, situate between two
rivers, Fraw and Trent, in the Country called in the Saxon Thornseta, a most
sure seat, except in the West only, where it joins to the land: with whom
king Aelfrede made a league that they should depart his kingdom, but
contrary to their oath, they rode into Devonshire, to Exancester, and there
wintered. Exceste^.


The next year. 120. of the Pagans ships were drowned at S^anauing: And king
Aelfrede pursuing an army that went by land to Excester, took of them
pledges, and also an oath to depart with all speed.

In the year following the Danes ^ame to Chipingham, a manner of the kings,
situate on the left side of Wiltshire and there wintred, compelling many of
the Weast Saxons to leave their Country and to go beyond the seas: the rest
that remained they subdued* King Aelfrede himself was ofttimes brought into
such misery, yt none of his people knew where he was become. On a time, being
forced to hide hymwith Asser. Spe. Histo. Ri. Ciren.
a Cowhearde in Somersetshire, as he satte by the fire, preparing his bows and
shaftes, the Cowherdes wife baking bread on the coals, threw the kings bows
and shaftes aside, and said, thou fellow why do thou not turn the bread which
thou see burn, thou art glad to eat it ere it be half baked. This woman
thought not that it had bin K. Aelfred, who had made so many battles against
the Danes, and gotten so many victories. For God did not only vouchsafe to
give him victory over his enemies, but also to be wearied of the^ in the sight
of his own people, to the end he should know there is one God of all, to
whom all knees shall bow, and in whose hands the hearts of kings consists.
The brother Hinguar slain in Devonshire.
of Hinguar and of Healfden, who had wintered in Mercia, and had made great
slaughter of the Christians, sailed with* 23. ships into Devonshire, where
doing great mischief, he and the The Ensign of the Danes was a Raven. Alredus
Riual.
most part of his people were slain, the rest escaped by fleeing to their
ships. In this battle among many rich spoils was taken a banner or ensign
called Reafan, which among the Danes was had in great estimation, for that it
was imbrodered by the three sisters of Hinguar, and Hubba, ye daughters of
Lodbroke. King Aelfrede made a Castle in Aethelingei, Ethelyngey, the noble
Island. Egbrights store*
from thence he went to Petram Egebrichti, which is on the Eastside of the
chase called Sal nudum, in Latin Silua magna, y^ great wood: there met with
him all the inhabitants of Ha^pshire, which when they saw the king, rejoiced
as though he had been risen from death to life.

The king with his army went to Ethandune and fought against the Pagans where
he made great slaughter, and pursued the rest to their Castle, who after.
xiiij. days desired peace, gave pledges and took oath to depart his realm:
and Gythram their King received baptism hard by Ethelingsey, in a place
called Alre, whom Aelfrede received to be his Gythram king of Danes
christened. Chichester.
God-sonne.

In the year. 879. the Pagans went from Chipnan to Cirenceaster, and there
remained one year after. The same year a great army of Pagans came from
beyond the Sea, and Fulham.
wintered at Fullanham, hard by the river of Thamis.

The next year, the Pagans went from Circestre to the Marianus Scotus.
East English, dividing that Country among them, and there inhabited. The
Pagans that wintered at Fullanham, went into East France.

In the year. 885. an army of Pagans came into Kent, and besieged the City
of Rhofeceaster, which lies on the East Rochester besieged.
side of the river Medowege and before the gate of the same City they made a
strong Castle, but Aelfrede with a great Midvvay.
Army chased them to their ships.

The next year* Aelfrede restored, and honorably repaired Asserius.
Floriacens. London builded and made inhabitable.
the City of London (after it had been amongst other Cities destroyed with
fire, and the people killed up,) he made it habitable again, and committed it
unto the custody of his son in law Adhered Earl of the Mercies.
Kentishemen, South and West Saxons, (which before were in Captivity Marianus
Scotus.
under the Pagans) willingly came and submitted themselves.

In the year. 890. Gythram the king of the Pagans (whose name in his Baptism
was changed to Athelstane) Hadley.
dyed, he was buried in the kings town called Headleaga among the East English.

In the year. 892. the great army of the Pagans, came from the East kingdom
of France unto Adbon, and from thence with 250. ships* into Kent, arriving
in the mouth of the River Limene, which river runs from the great woodde,
which is called Andreads Weald, from whose mouth four Andreads vveald in
Sussex and Hampshire.
miles into the same woodde they drew their ships, where they destroyed a
Castle, and fortified another more strong, in a place called Apultrens, now
Apulder. This wood was from the East to the Weaste. 120. miles in length and
more, in breedth. 30. miles.

The same year, Hastings came with. 80. ships into the Milton.
mouth of Thamis, and made a strong town, Middleton in the Beaufleet.
South side of ye Thamis, and another on the Northside, called Beaufleete.

The year following, the City of York was taken by the Normans, but Seber
the Bishop, by Gods provision escaped.

The same year also Aelfred fought against the Normans at Fernham, where he
slew them, wounded their King, and Fernham.
chased the remnant through the Thamis into Eastsex, whereby many of them were
drowned.

Aelfrede hearing that a great number of the Pagans were arrived at
Exanceastre, he took with him a great army, and by battle overcame, and
chased them away.

In the mean season Adhered Earl of the Mercies, and Beaufleet taken from the
Paga^s.
the Citizens of London with other came to Beaufleete, and besieged the Castle
of the Pagans, and brake into it, where they took exceeding rich spoils of
gold, silver, horses, and garments, among which was taken the wife of
Hastings and his two sons, which were brought to London, and presented to
the King, who commanded them to be restored again. But Hastings came again
into Beaufleete, and repaired to the Castle, which they had broken down.
From thence he went to Sceabridge, and there builded a Sudbury.
strong Castle: there was joined unto him the army that remained at
Apuldrane, and other that came from the East English, and from the
Northumbers, who altogyther spoiled Apuldo^.
and robbed, till they came to the bancke of Seuerne, and there at Bultingatume,
they made a strong town, but by Adhered Earl of the Mercies and other, they
were besieged, and shortly through famine forced to come out, where many on
both Floren^^ Cronica cronicaruin. Marianus Scotus.
sides were slain, but the Christians had the victory.

In the year, 895. the Pagans wintered in a little I Will called I Will of Mersey.
Ley, a river that then bare ships unto VVare. Asserius.
Mer^ig in the East part of Essex, situate in the sea, and the same year they
sailed by the river of Thamis, after by the river of Ligea, and twenty miles
from London began to build a Fortress. In the Summer following, the Londoners
and other near adjoining, did seek to destroy the fortress of the Danes, but
they being put to flight, king Aelfrede pitched ^ field not far from the
City, least the Pagans should take away the Harvest of the Country, and
viewing the river one day, perceived that the Chanel might be in one place
dammed up, that the Danes should not get out their ships, he forthwith
commanded on both sides the river a damme to be cast, and divided that river
into three streams, so that where ships before had sailed, now a small boat
could scantly row, which when the Pagans perceived, they leaving their wives
and ships, flee a foot to Quatbridge, and there Now called Catvvarebrig, or
Catvva^d bridge.
building a Fortress, lodged there the Winter following, whose ships the
Londoners bring, some to London, the other they brake down and destroyed.

Anno. 897. the Pagans came from Quatbridge, part into East England part into
Northumberland: some got them ships and sailed into France. After al these
verations, by the cruel Danes committed, followed far greater, the space of
three years, by death of cattaile, and mortality of men. XX. Danish ships were
taken being Pirates, and the Pirates slain or hauged on the gallows.

This victorious Prince, the studious prouider for Alfred deceased
wid^wes, orphans and poor people, most perfect in Sa(...) Poetry, most
liberal, endued with Wisdom, Praise of King Alfrede.
fortitude, justice, and temperaunce, the most patient bearer of sickness,
wherewith he was daily vexed, a most discrete searcher of truth in executing
judgment, a most vigilant and devout Prince in the service of God, Alfrede,
the. xxix. year and sixth month of his reign, departed this life, the xxviij.
day of October, and is buried at Winchester, in the new Monastery, of his
foundation. He founded a Monastery of Monks at Ethelingsey, and another for
Nuns at Shaftsburie. He ordained the hundreds, and tenthes, which Will.
Malm^. Floriac^ns. Reg. Hig. Sea. Cro. Regist. Hyde. T. Rudburn^. University
in Oxforde. Marianus Scotus.
men call Centuaries and Cupings: he sent for Gr^^balde, to come into England
that by his advice, he might erect y^ study of good learning, clean decayed.
By the counsel of Neotus he ordained common schools of diverse sciences in
Oxe^forde, and turned the Saxon laws into English, with diverse other books.

He established good laws, by the which he brought so great Regist. Hid^.
a quietness to the Country, that men might have hanged golden bracelets and
Jewels where the ways parted, and no man durst touch them for fear of the
law. He carried ever y^ Psalter in his bosom, y^ when he had any leisure he
might read it over with diligence.

He divided the xxiiij. hours of the day and night into Asserius.
three parts* he spent. viij. h^ures in writing, reading, and praying: eight in
provision of his body: and. viij. in hearing and dispatching Marianus Scotus.
the matters of his subjects. He divided his yearly revenues into two parts,
and the first he divided into three: one part he gave to his servants, the
second part to his workmen which were occupied in building, the third part to
strangers. The second part of y^ whole, he divided into iiij. parts, the first
part whereof he gave in alms to the poor, the second to Monasteries by him
founded, the third to schools which he had erected, and gathered of many both
noble men's and other men's sons of his nation, the fourth part he distributed to
the next Monasteries in all the English Saxon. Alhfwido wife to king Alfrede
founded the monastery of Nuns in Winchester.

EDward surnamed Senior, the son of Aelfred, was anointed 900 Speculum histo.
Ri. C^ren. Adhelvvold^ reuolteth.
king, and shortly after Adhelwoldus, cousin german unto king Edward,
revolted and went to the army of the Pagans, who forthwith chose him to be
their King in Northumberlands.

Ioannes Leoafer* in his third book of the description ^^ John's Leoafer.
Africa, writes that about this time (to say) about the year ^^ our Lord.
905. the Englishmen at the persuasion of the Goths, besieged the great City
Argilla in Barbary, which the Affricanes call Arella, being. 70. miles distant
from the straight of Marrocho Southwarde, hoping thereby to withdraw the
Sarazens out of Europe, where they fought with so great courage and good
success, that they wanne the said town, and so ransacked it with fire and
sword, that scant one escaped there, and the town lay desolate and without
inhabitant^ for the space of thirty year. We account this to have happened in
the foresaid year, because the aucthour after the ^^shion of the Sarazens,
does refer it to the. 314. year of M^homets Hegira, which by conference of
their places does seem to begin in the year of our Lord. 591. which number
being added, do bring forth. 905.

Adhelwoldus King of the Pagans brought a great army from Eastsex, and the
East English which robbed and spoiled through all Mercia, and the Weaste
Country, until they came to Crickalde, and there went over the Thamis and
took great spoils about Bradney.

King Edward gathered an army and went toward the Danes, but while he tarried
his army out of Kent, Adhelwolf King of the Danes came upon him with a great
power, and badde him battle, wherein Cochricus and Adelwolfe, kings of the
Pagans were slain.

In the year. 910. a battle was fought at Wodnesfielde, a mile North from
Wolfrune Hampton in Staffordeshire, where VVodnesfielde in Staffordshire
VVlfrune Hampton.
Cowilfus and Healidene kings of y^ Pagans, with many Earls and Nobles were
slain, but of the common people innumerable.

Aethered Earl of the Mercies dyed, and king Edward took into his Dominion
London and Oxenforde, and all the Country adjoining thereunto.

In the year. 913. by the Kings commandment, at Hertforde, betwixt the
rivers of Memeran, Benefician, and Legian, in the North side a City is builded.

In the year. 914. the Pagans of Northumberlande, and Leycester, in the
County of Oxforde took spoils, and in the kings town called Hokenorton, and
in many other places they slew many people, and returned home again: another
army of y^ Danes, being horssemen, were sent into Hartfordeshire, toward
Legeton, with whom the men of y^ Country encountered, and slaying many of
them, put the rest to ^^ight, taking their horses and armor, with a great
pray. King Edward leaving certain to build a City in y^ South Maldon i^
Essex.
part of the river L^gea, with more part of his army went into Essex, and
encamped at Mealdune, where he tarried til a Town was builded at Witham.

In the year. 915. a great Navy of Danes sailed about the West Country, and
landed in diverse places, taking great prays, and went to their ships again.
The King for strengthening of the Country, made a Castle at y^ mouth of the
water of Auon, and another at Buckingham, and the third fast by, that is, on
either side of the rivers course one, and then went into Northampton and
Bedfordshires, and subdued the Danes there, with their leader called Turketils.

King Edward builded or new repaired the towns of Tocester Tocester. VVigmore.
and Wigmore.

In the year* 918. the Kentish, Southrey, and East Saxons, besieged
Colchester, and wanne it by force, and slew all therein, Cogshal.
a few excepted, that escaped by flight. The same year king Colchester in
Essex.
Edward went to Colchester with an army, repaired y^ walls, and put a great
garrison of soldiers into it.

The next year died the noble Princess Elfleda (wife to He^rie Bradshaw.
Reynul^ Hygden.
Etheldredus Duke of Mercia) and was buried in the Monastery of Saint Peter,
which her Lord and she before had builded in the Town of Gloucester, which
Monastery was after thrown to the ground by the Danes, but Aeldredus
Bishop of York, and of Worcester, made there another, which is now the
chiefest Church in the town.

This noble woman Elfleda, reedified the City of Chester* she repaired the
town of Tomworth, beside Lichfielde, Chester. Tomvvorth. Lichfielde. Stafford.
VVarvvike. Shrevvesburie. VVatersburie. Eldesburie. Leycester repaired. Runcorn
town and castle, and Brimsbery with the bridge builded.
Stafford, Warwick, Shrewesburie, Watrisburie, Eldisburie, Legeceaster with a
town and Castle in the North end of Mercia, upon the River of Merse, that is
called Runcorne she builded a bridge over Seuerne called Brimesberie bridge*
etc.

When she had once assaied the pains that women suffer in trauayling with
child, she ever after refused the embracing of her husband, saying, it was
not seemly for any noble woman to use such fleshly lyking, whereof should
ensue so great sorrow and pain: tamed the Walchmen, and in diverse battayles
chased the Danes, after whose death, Edward held that Province in his own
hand.

King Edward builded a new town against the old town of Notingham on the South
side of the River of Trent, and made Marianus Scotus. Will. Thorn. Henry
Hunting. Alredus Riual. Thilvval built. Manchester repaired.
a bridge over the said river between the two towns: he subdued the kings of
Scotland and Wales: he builded a town in yt North end of Mercia by y^ river of
Merse, and named it Thilwal, and repaired the Town of Manchester: after al
which deeds by him done, he deceased at Faringdon, and was buried at
Winchester, in the new Church, which his father A^lfrede had builded when he
had raygne. xxiiij. years.

A Delstane, after the death of Edward Senior his father, 924 Alfridus
Beuerla. John Leyland. Speculum histo. Rich. Cirenc.
was Crowned at Kingstone by Athelmus Archbishop of Canturburie. His
corenation was celebrated in the market place upon a stage erected on hic, that
the King might be^e seen the better of the multitude. He was a Prince of
worthy memory, valiant and wise in all his acts, and brought W. Mal^^.
this land into one Monarchy: for he expelled utterly the Danes, and quieted
the Walchmen. He caused them to pay him yearly tribute twenty pound of
gold. 300. pound of silver, and 2500. head of Neat, with hounds and hawks
to a certain number.

And after that he had by battle conquered Scotland: he made one
Constantine king of Scotts under him, adding this Princely word, that it was
more honor to him to make a King, than to be a King. He made seven coining
mintes at Canturburie, four for the King, two for the Archbishop, and one
for the Abbot: at Rochester. iij. two for the king, and one Canturb. records.
for the Bishop: besides these, in London eight: in Winchester W. L^^b^^^
Sax. Laws.
six: in Jews two: in Hastings two: in Chichester one: in Hampton two: in
Warham two: in Excester two: in Shaftesburie two: and in every good town one
Coyner.

He founded Saint Germans in Cornewal, which was since T. Rudborn. Girardus
Co^^ubi.
a Bishops sea: he founded Saint Pe^rocus at Bodmin he founded Pilton Priorie,
Midleton and Michelney.

In his time Guy Earl of Warwick, in acombate slew Guy of VVarvvicke slew
Colbrond.
Colbrond the Danish Giant, in Hide Meade, near unto Winchester.

Athelstane reigned fifteen years, and was buried at Io. Lidgat.
Malmesburie.

EDmunde, the brother of Adelstan, took on him the governance 940
of this realm, whose short reign took from him the renoume of most high
praises that should have redounded to this posterity: for he was a man
disposed Marianus.
of nature to nobleness and Justice: he took out of the Danes hands the
Towns of Lincoln, Notingham, Darbie, Leicester, and Stanforde, and brought
all Mercia to his Dominion: he expulsed the two kings Anlafus the son of
Sithricus, Io. Taxtor.
and Reginalde the son of Cuthberte out of Northumberlande, and subdued the
Country to his Dominion. He granted the Privilege unto Saint Edmund in which
the limits of the Town of Edmundes Bury are contained.

On Saint Austins day, in the kings town named Puckelchurch, W. Malme.
the King (whilst he would have saved his Sewar from the hands of a wicked
thief called Leofe) was slain, when he had reigned five years and. vij.
months, and was buried at Glastenburie.

ELdrede succeeded Edmunde his brother: for his sons 946 Sp^. Histo. Rich.
Ciren.
Edwyne and Edgar were thought too young to take on them so great a charge. He
took on him but as protector, but afterward he was crowned at Kingstone.

This Eldred had the earnest favor of the commons, because he was a great
maintayner of honesty, and also most abhorred naughty and unruly persons: for
his expertnesse in feats of arms, he was much commended, whereby he quieted
and kept in due obeysaunce the Northumbers and Scotts, and exiled the Danes.

He placed the Bishop of Cornewal at Saint Germans, where it continued till
the time of Edward, next before the conquest, in whose time it was translated
to Excester.

In the year. 951. he committed to prison Wolstan Archbyshoppe Ma^^^nus.
Canturb. records.
of York in Luthaberie, because he often had been accused to have commanded
many Citizens of Thetforde to be slain, in revenge of the Abbot Adelme
unjustly by them slain: he was a year after released, and restoared to his
sea.

King Eldred builded Mich at Abindone, gave great lands, Asses.
and confirmed them Charters, with seals of gold.

He reigned. ix. years, and was buried in the Cathedral Church at Winchester,
in the old Monastery.

EDwyn succeeded his uncle Eldred in the kingdom: He 955
was crowned at Kingstone, of whom is left no honest memory, for one heinous
act by him committed in the beginning of his reign.

In the self day of his coronation, he suddenly wythdrewe A vicious king. W.
Malme. Speculum Hist. ^i. Cirecest.
himself from his Lords, and in the sight of certain persons ravished his
own kinswoman, the wife of a noble man of his realm, and afterward slew her
husband, that he might have the unlawful use of her beauty. For which act,
and for bannishing Dunstane, he became odible to his subjects: and of the
Northumbers, and people of middle England, that rose against him, was
deprived, when he had reigned The king deprived.
four years. He dyed and was buried in the new Abbey of Winchester.

EDgar the peaceable, brother to Edwyne, was crowned at 959 King Crowned at
Bathe.
Bathe. He was so excellent in justice, and sharp in correction of vices, as
well in his magistrates, as other subjects, that never before his days was used
less fellonie by robbers, or extortion, or briberie, by false officers. He
chastised ye Alfridus Beuerla.
great negligence, covetousness and vicious living of the clergy, and
brought them to a better order. Of stature he was but little: yet of mind
valiant and hardy, and very Marinus. Alredus Riual.
expert in martial policy. He prepared a great navy of. 3600. ships, which he
deposed in three parts of his realm, and had soldiers always pressed and ready
against the incursions of foreign and strange enemies. King Edgar having
restored and new founded. xlvij. Monasteries, which before his time had bin
destroyed, and intending to continue that his intent till the number of. 50.
were accomplished, he confirmed the Monastery of Worcester, which Oswalde
then Bishop of Worcester, Worcester nu^ster restored. Ex charta regia.
by the kings consent and leave had enlarged and augmented, and made it the
Cathedral Church of that shire. The Princes of Wales, paid to him yearly in
name of Tribute. Wolves destroyed.
300. Wolves, by means whereof within three years, in England and Wales might
scarcely be found one Wolef.

The Danes and all other people in England, used the vice Against qua^^ing
of great drincking. The king therefore put down many alehouses, and would
suffer but one in a village or Town, except it were a great borough: he
ordained certain Cups Laws against dronkardes.
with pinnes or nails, and made a law, that who soever drank paste that
mark at one draughte, should forfayte a certain pain.

Alwynus Alderman, earl of East-angle, kinsman to king Edgar, founded the
Abbey of Ramsey: King Edgar confirming Ramsey fon^ded. Ex charta regia.
the same on Christmasse day. 974. in the presence of all the Nobility. The
same year was an Earthquake through al England.

Edgar being at Chester, entered the river of Dee, he took Eight kings rovved
K. Edgar. Horiacensis. John Pike. Eulogium. W. Malme. Alfridus Beuerla.
Speculum histo.
the rule of the Helm, and caused eight kings to row him unto Saint John's
Church, and from thence unto his Palaice, in token that he was Lord and King of
so many Provinces. The names of the eight Kings were, Rinoch king of Scotts;
Malcoline of Cumberland, Macone king of Man and of many Islands: Dufnal King of
Demecia, or South Wales: Siferth and Huwall, kings of Wales: James king of
Galaway: and ^i. Cir^^^st. Rog H^^ed. Flores Historiaru^. R^y^^lf Hygden.
He^rie Bradshaw. Edmerus. (...) Osbernus. Autonius Archi. Marianus Scotus.
Iukil of Westmerlande. King Edgar reigned sixeteene year, and was buried at
Glastenburie

By his first wife Egelslede (as some do write) or by a religious votarie, as
some other do write, he had issue Edward surnamed the martyr, who succeeded
after his Father. Of his wife Elfrith daughter to Ordgarus, Duke of Devonshire,
he received another son named Ethelrede, and a daughter named Wolfrith.

EDward the son of Edgar was crowned at Kingstone by y^ 975 The king crowned
at Kingstone. John Pike. W^l. Malme. Alfridus Peuerl. Speculum histo. Ri.
Ciren. Flores Historiaru^. The king murdered by his step mother.
hands of Dunstan Archbishop of Canturburie, and Oswalde Archbishop of
York. This man might well be compared to his Father for his modest^e and
gentleness, so that he was worthyly favored of all men, except only of his
stepmother, and other of her aliaunce, which ever bare a grudge against him,
for so much as she desired to have y^ governance of the realm for her own
son Ethelred.

This Edward while he was hu^ting in a forest (by chance) lost his company,
and rode alone to refresh himself at the Castle of Corffe, where by Counsel
of his stepmother Elfrede, he was traytorouslye murdered* as he satte on his
horse, when he had reigned three years. He was buried at Warham, and after at
Shaftesburie.

Elphred did after take great penance, and builded two VVarvvel and Almesbury
built.
monasteries of Nuns, Almesburie and Warwel: in which Warwel the after lived a
solitary life till she dyed.

ETheldrede commonly called Unready, the son of King 978 W. Malme. Speculum
Hist. Ric^ Ciren.
Edgar, by his second wife Elphrede, was crowned at Kingstone. But because he
came to the Kingdom by wicked means, and by killing his brother, he could
never get the good will of the people, who had conceived an ill opinion of him:
of this arose civil wars within the Realm, and often dissension and
discordes, as well of the Nobles as of the common sort.

Anno. 982. a great part of the City of London was brent, Thomas Rudburn.
which City at this time had most building from Ludgate toward Westminster:
and little or none where the heart of the City is now: except in diverse
places was housing that stood without order: so that many Cities, as
Canturburie, York, and other in England, passed London in building: but after
the Conquest it increased, and now passes all other.

A disease not known in England in time past, to wit, Asser. Flux of men,
etc morraine of Cattaile. Bishops Sea at Excester.
Fevers of men, with the Flix, and Morren of cattayle killed many.

Anno. 994. King Ethelred erected a Bishops sea at Excester.

The same year Anlafe King of the Norwayes* and Sweyne King of Danes, on the
day of the Nativity of our Lord, in xviij. Galleys came up to London, which
they attempted to break into, and to set on fire, but they were repulsed, not
without their great detriment and loss by the Citizens, whereupon they being
driven with fury, leaving London, set upon Eastsex and Kent, by the sea
coasts, brent Towns, and wasted the fields, without respect of sex or age
killed al* and wasted with fire and sword al what they may not carry away. At
length being pacified with a Tribute of. 16000. pounds, departed to their
ships, and Wintered at Southampton.

Anno. 995. a Comet apeared. The Bishopric of Lind^fer Bishops sea a^ Durham,
or Hol^e Island was removed to Durham.

In the year. 1002. King Etheldred caused all the Danes in The Danes
(...)thered. Burton upon Trent.
England to be slain, upon the day of Saint Brice. The same year Vl^ricus
Spote founded a Monastery at Burton upon Trent. In Anno. 100^. Swayn King of
Denmark with agret army invaded Engle^d with fire and sword. 1004* they fought
a great battle at The^forde against Vlfekettel Carle of East-Angle. Asser.


The year. 1009. they fought another battle against Vlfekettel at Rengemore.
The year, 1011. they destroyed Canturburie, and for that y^ Archbishop
Elfegus would not yield to them he was first imprisoned there, and after
carried to Grenewiche, and there stoned to death. Christ's Church is spoiled
and brent: the Monks with all other men are ^^^^hed, Tira^ny of the Danes in
England.
nine of every ten being put to death, the tenth suffered to live in misery:
the number of them that were left alive was four Monks, and of lay people
eight hundred, so that y^ number slain was 36. Monks, and. 8000. of the lay
people.

In Anno. 1012. they took tribute of. 48000. pounds, and Record eccle. Ca^.
Marianus* Tloriacensis.
at the last after diverse overthrows given to the me^ of this Island, they
possessed the same, and put king Etheldred to flight, constrayning him to
live in exile among the Norma^s.

This Etheldred had two wives, Ethelgina an English Ethelgina and Emma vviues
to Etheldred. Alured and Edward, the sons of Etheldred.
woman, and Emma a Norman: of the first he had two children, of which saving of
Edmonde who succeeded him in the kingdom, it were nothing to our purpose to
speak. Of the second that was Emma, sister to Richard Duke of Normandy, there
were borne two sons, to wit, Edward and Alured. And that I do here
(contrary to that is commonly used*) set Edward before Alured as elder
brother, I am moved thereunto by no small authority, which I have taken out of
the historiographers W. Gemeticensis. Encomium Emma
of that age, out of Gemeticensis* a most dilige^^ writer of Genealogies, and
one other author, who in his Commentary written in praise of Emma the Queen,
affirms that Edward was the elder brother, whom I do the better believe,
because it is not like, that he seeing the things with his eyes, should
mistake the matter, especially writing to the Queen, who was mother to them
both.

Swanus in the mean time subdued al England, and the people for fear yielded
unto him on every side, over whom most cruelly he tryumphed. But not long
after he departed this life at Geynesburge and left Canutus his son,
successor in the Kingdom.

Etheldrede hearing that Swanus was dead, leaving in Normandy with Duke*
Richard his sisters son, Emma his wife, and the children that he had by
her, returned with all speed into England with Edmunde his son by his first
wife, being then at ma^s state, and by the trustiness of his own men, and the
aid of the Normans, moved war against his enemy.

Canutus finding himself unable to match with him, went into Denmark,
minding to return hither immediately again.

Etheldred being contrary to his expectation thus restored to his kingdom,
showed great cruelty upon the Danes that remained in England, sparing neither
man nor woman, young nor old. Therefore Canutus being very desirous to revenge
the same, prepared a new army, and came into England against Etheldred with all
speed he could, raging wide and side with fire and sword. Etheldred in the
mean season, whether by sickness or for sorrow, dyed, when he had reigned ^o.
Taxtor. Will. Malme. Alfredus Beuers lacensis.
eight and thirty years, and was buried in the North I Will of Paul's Church in
London above the high Altar.

EDmond the son of Etheldred by his first wife, succeeded 1016 Edmond
Ironside. W. Malme.
in the Kingdom, who (whether it were for the great strength of his body, or
for that he always used to go in armor) was surnamed Ironside.

He had six battles against Canutus King of the Danes Leyland.
at Penham hard by Gillingham in Dorcetshire.

He put the Danes to flight after that at Shirestone.

He held even hand with them in the field, notwithstanding that the Englishmen
at the first began to flee, by the policy of Edricus Duke of Lincoln, and
of Merce, who cried Edrike a Traitor.
run away wretches, Edmond your King is slain.

After this, King Edmond came to London, to deliver the Citizens, whom part of
the enemies had beseeged as soon as he was gone from thence.

He had made a ditch also round about the City, where Ditch about London.
the River of Thamis does not run. The Danes fleeing, the King followed them,
and passing over Brentford, he vanquished them with a notable victory.

The rest of ye Danes which remained with Cnute (whiles London beseeged both by
land and by water.
Edmond rested him, and set his matters in order) did again beseege London,
both by water and by land, but the Citizens stoutely withstoode, and repulsed
them, wherefore they showed their anger upon the Country of the Mercies,
spoiling Towns and Uillages with robbery, burnings, and murder, and carried
their pray to the Ships which they had gathered together in the River of
Medway, which runs by Rochester, from whence they were driven by the King,
who taking the foorde of Brentford before them, put them to flight, and slew a
great number of them.

The sixth and last battle was at Essendone in Essex, near to Rochford, in
which battle Edmond had got the victory, Cogshal. Sca. Cro.
but Edrike again playing the Traitor, great slaughter of the Englishmen was
made, there the honor of England was overthrown, and Edmonde went almost
alone on foot to Gloucester, where he gathered a new force to set upon his
enemies, but Cnute pursued him as he fled, and having prepared their armies,
both the Kings themselves attempted to fight hand to hand for the right of the
Combat for the Kingdom.
kingdom in the I Will of Olania in Seuerne, in the which Combat, they both
being weeryed, fell to a covenant to divide the same, so that the one half of
the Kingdom should be England divided.
under Canutus, and the other half under Edmond, which Edmond not long after
dyed at Oxford, whereas it is said he was slain by the treason of Edrike of
Straton, and was buried at Glastenbury, leaving Edmonde and Edward his
children very young.

This Edrike was not long unrewarded according to his deserts, for himself
making vaunt thereof unto Canutus, then being at Baynardes Castle in London,
said in this wise, Thus have I done Canutus for the love of thee, Edrikus a
Traitor.
to whom he answered, saying: and thou shall dye as well thou art worthy,
because thou art guilty of Treason against God and me, in that thou have slain
thine own Lord and King, which was joined to me in league as a Brother, his
blood be upon thine own head: and straight ways, least there should be any
tumulte, the Traitor was in the same Speculum histo. Ri. Cirecest.
Chamber tormented to death with firebrands and linkes, and then his feet
being bound together, he was drawn through the Streets of the City, and
cast into a ditch, called Hounds ditch, for that the Citizens there cast their
dead Hunsditch. Treason revvarded.
Dogs, and such other filth, accompting him worthy of no better burial.
These Princes reigned together two years.

CAnutus the Dane, taking an occasion, because in the covenant 1018
that was concluded concerning ye dividing of the Realm, no assurance was made
for the Children of Edmond, The Danes possessed all England.
he challenged all England to himself alone by law as they call it, of growing
to, which was a most easy thing for him to do, because there was no man that
durst erect himself as patron to defend the childrens right and title, and by
this subtle and crafty interpretation of the covenant: the Dane got the
Monarchy of England and slew the brother of Edmond, and conveyed the children
far away out of England, least they should at any time be brought again and
receive their right. Some say, they were sent to a certain The Kings children
conveyed into Svvethen.
man that was a Prince in Swethland, there to be dispatched out of the way:
and that the Prince understanding they were Kings children, spared them,
contrary to the credit and trust that was committed unto him: which appears
to be true, in that the same foraigne Lord kept and brought up the children
honorably, the youngest of which whose name was Edward, did afterward
marry Agatha, the Agatha the Emperors daughter the wife of Edward.
daughter of Henry the fourth, Emperor of Rome, of whom he had many children,
of which we shall speak hereafter. And the other, which was ye elder
brother, whose name was Edmond, dyed without children. In the mean season
Canutus, because he had no heir that lawfully might succeed him in his
kingdom (for Harold and Swain were begotten of Harolde and Svvayne concubines
children.
a Concubin) partly that he might establish in time to come the kingdom that
he had gotten unto his own kindred yt came by lawful succession: and partly
that he might purchase to himself the friendship of the Englishmen, and of the
Normans, procured to have given him in marriage Emma, the widow of King
Etheldred, who at that time was with Edward and Alured her sons in exile with
Duke Richard in Normandy, which marriage seems to be made even by Gods
providence, who had determined to restore the common wealth in England,
whereby, as by the law and title of recovery, and return out of exile, the
monarchy of all England, which the Danes had taken from the Englishmen, and
had possessed six and twenty years and more, did return again to the
Englishmen that were the right heirs. For Emma concluded marriage with the
Dane, upon condition Marriage made upon condition.
that the Kingdom of England should remain unto none other but to the
Children that were begotten of her, if any of them did remain alive: by reason
of this marriage, shortly after she did bear Canutus a son of his own name,
commonly called Hardycanutus.

This second name was given him because of his great How two names were
given to Kings.
courage, like as his brother Harold was named Harefoote, that is to say,
lightfoote, because of his notable swiftness of foot.

By this affinity and aliance, the Danes became of the more strength and power.

He kept Englishmen in his service so long as he lived.

He subdued the Scotts whereby he was King of England, Canutus King of four
Kingdoms.
Scotland, Denmark, and Norway.

After that, he went to Denmark, and so to Rome, and returned again into
England, where he kept good justice all his life, and did many charitable
deeds.

He made a fair Church at Ashendume in Essex.

He founded anew the Monastery of Saint Edmondesbury, Saint Edmundsbury
builded. Ex charta regia. Marianus.
restoring the donation which Edmond King of the West Saxons had given to Saint
Edmund the King and Martyr, who lies there buried.

He appointed to be King of Norway Swanus his son Marianus.
(as was said) by Alfgine daughter to Althelme Duke of Northampton, and his
Lady Vulfrune: but other said, he was a Priests son etc.

He also appointed his son Hardycanutus by Emma, to be King of Denmark, and
deceassed at Shaftesburie when he had reigned twenty years, and was buried in
S. Swithens at Winchester.

HArold for his swiftness called Harefoote whom Canutus 10^8
had by a Concubine Alice of Hampton, a Shomakers daughter (affirming himself
to be son of Canutus and Peter de Ich^^^. Marianus. Floriacen.
Alfgina the Earl of North-hamptons daughter) slept not upon the occasion and
opportunity offered, but using the force of the Danes that dwelt in England,
invaded the Realm, while his brother Hardycanute governed in Denmark.

He took from his mother in law Emma, the most part of the riches and
treasure that Canute his father had left her, and then with consent of the
great Lords began to reign, but not so mightily as his Father Canutus did, for
a more just heir Hardycanutus was looked for, whereupon the Kingdom was
divided, the North part to Harold, and the South to Hardycanute.

Edward and Alfred sons to King Ethelred, with many Knights, came out of
Normandy, to see their mother at Winchester, which sore troubled the minds of
many great men, who bare more favor to King Harold. Especially Godwine Earl
of Kent, feigning to receive Alfred as a friend, came to meet him, but in the
end put him in prison, part of his company he put in fetters, and after put
out their eyes. Of some he caused their skin to be plucked over their ears,
chopping off their hands and feet. Some he commanded to be sold, and diverse
were murdered at Gilforde.

Queen Emma hearing of this dealing, she sent her son Edward back again
into Normandy.

After this, Alfride was conveyed to the I Will of Eely, where his eyes being
first plucked out, he was delivered to the Monckes to be kept prisoner there,
where shortly after he departed this life, and was buried in the South I Will of
the West part of the Church.

Because Hardycanutus delayed to come over being sent for, he was utterly
rejected, and Harold, who before was King of the Mercies and Northumbers, was
chosen King of all England, who shortly after expelled his mother in law Emma
out of the Realm. He reigned three years, dyed at Oxford, and was buried at
Westminster, and after at Saint Clements without Templebarre at London.

HArdycanutus the lawful begotten son of Canutus and 1041
Emma as soon as he had gotten his fathers Kingdom, fetched home his mother
out of exile: and in revenge of displeasure that was done to her, and of the
murder of his brother Alured, he commanded the carkas of Harold to be dug
out of the earth, and to be thrown into the River of Thamis, where by a Fisher
it was taken up, and brought to the Danes, who buried it in a Church yard,
which they had This is supposed to be S. Clements Church without Temple bar.
at London. Which done, the King appointed eight marks to be paid to every
Sayler in his name, and twelve marks to every Pilote or Master, which tribute
was to be paid of al England, so grievous, that scarce any was able to bear
it. Shortly after, he sent for Edward the son of Etheldred, his brother of
the mothers side, to come into England, and embraced him with all love and
favor. Being at a marriage feast pleasantly drincking with the Bride and other
persons, in the midst of his cups he fell suddaynely down to the ground and
so remaining dumb, departed this life the third year of his reign, and was
buried by his father at Winchester.

EDward borne at Islip besides Oxford, the son of Etheldred, 104^. Alfridus
Beuerla. Io. Rouse.
whom Hardycanutus had sent for into England, was Crowned at Winchester. This
Edward for his excellent holiness, is until this day called Saint Edward who
so soon as he had gotten his fathers kingdom, of his own free will released
the tribute of 40000. pound, called Dane gelt, which Dane gelt.
the English people, even from the very beginning of the reign of the Danes,
was compelled to pay to their Kings every The first com^^ing up of the common
Law.
year. He was also the chief author and cause, that the law which we call the
common Law, was first brought up, being gathered together out of the laws and
ordinances of four nations, which were received when the Island was subject to
diverse regiments and gouernances, to wit, of the Mercies, of the West Saxons,
of the Danes, and of the Northumbers. Mercies, west Saxons, Danes, and
Northumbers.
He was hard to his mother, because she was hard to him in his minority, and
also suspected with Alwine Bishop of Winchester, whom he put in prison, by
counsel of Roberte Archbishop of Canturbury: but after his mother had purged
hirselfe, Alwine was delivered, and Robert the Archbishop conveyed himself out
of England. He took to wife Edgitha, Sea. Cron.
the daughter of Earl Godwine, who because she brought Edgitha was barreyne.
him forth no children, neither was there any hope that she should bear any,
when he did see that many did gaye after y^ kingdom, he began to be careful
for one that should justly succeed him, and therefore following the reason of
y^ common law, he sent for home into England his Nephew Edward, the son of
king Edmond his brother, who by reason of his long absence out of the Country,
was commonly called ye outlaw. This is that Edward, the son of King Edmond
surnamed Ironside, which remained alive, whom Canutus when he had gotten
England, had sent into Swethen with his brother. He knowing the advice of his.
Uncle, came again into England, and brought with him Agatha his wife, and
Edgar, Margaret and Christian his children, borne in Panonia, in hope of the
kingdom, where he lived but a while. Thus S. Edward being disappoynted, both
of his Nephew and his heir, for that Edward the outlaw was both by neerenesse
of blood, and by lawful succession right heir unto the Kingdom, without
delay pronounced Edgar the outlawes son, and his great Nephew, to be heir
of the Kingdom, and gave him to surname Adeling, which name in those days was
peculiar only to Kings Children, which were borne in hope and possibility of
the Kingdom: for this word Adeling, in the English tongue, is as much to say,
as Prince, or Lord, the contrary of which word is* Underling, that is The
signification of the word Adeling.
to say, a seruan^^or or bondsman: or according to the Walche speech, Adeling
signifies heir: but because this Edgar was but young of years, and within
age, by his testamente he made Harold the son of Godwine (a stout man both
in war and peace) Regent, until the young Edgar should be of age to receive
the Kingdom, and that then he should be made King: which thing Harold with a
solemn oath promised to see so performed and done. Notwithstanding, he like a
Traitor (by force of arms) immediately after y^ death of Edward, refused the
name of Regent, and pronounced himself Alfridus Beuerl. Speculum histo. R^.
Cirecest. Flores histo.
King, which thing shortly after brought destruction both to himself, and to
all England.

Anno 1051. Eustace Earl of Bullogne, which had to wife Floriacen.
Goda, sister to King Edward, arrived at Dover, where one of his men quarelling
about his lodging, slew one of the Townsmen, in revenge whereof, not only
the quareller, but other of his company, and many of the Town were slain,
which doing so much offended Godwine Earl of Kent, that he assembled a great
power, wherewith he marched toward Gloucester, where the king then lay, unto
whom he sent messengers to denounce war, except he would deliver Eustace and
his fellow Normans and Bolognians, which held a Castle in the dominions of
Kent.

After this, Godwins army entered into Gloucester, but it was there agreed,
that at a day appointed, the King and Earl Godwine should meet at London: and
thus departing for the time, the King increasing his army, led the same to
London, and Godwine with his power came to Southwarke on the other side of the
River Thamis: but there because his army by little and little stipped from
him, he fled, and the King forthwith pronounced him, with his five sons, to
be banished, who straightwayes with his wife, and two of his sons came to
Thorney, where his Ship being laden with Gold, Silver, and precious things,
he sailed toward Flanders: his other sons took Ship at Bristow, and
sailed into Ireland.

In the next year, Harold and Leofwine, sons to Earl Godwine, returning out
of Ireland, entered Seuerne, arrived with many Ships in Somerset and
Dorsetshires, spoiled many Towns in the Country, slew many people, and
returned with pray, then they sail about Portesmouth. etc.

Earl Godwine landed in Kent, gathered a power, sailed to the I Will of Wight,
wasting along the Sea coasts, till his sons Harold and Leofwine came with a
Navy, which being come together, they take their course up the River of Thamis,
came to Southwarke, and there stayed for the Tide, and then weyed up Anchor,
and finding none that offered to resist them on the Bridge, they sailed up by
the South side of the River, and his army by land, placing it self upon the
banckes side, made show of a thick and terrible battle.

After this, the Navy turned toward the North shore, as though it would have
compassed in the Kings Navy: but they that were with the King, and with
Godwine, abhorred to fight against their own kindred and Countrymen,
wherefore a peace was made, Godwine with his sons were restored to all former
honor, and the Normans were banished the land.

As William of Malmesbury writes, a certain young woman W. Malme. Kings evil
healed by the King.
being terribly diseased, by reason of humors gathered about her neck into
great swelling kernels, came to King Edward, who with his right hand dipped in
water, handled her neck, and forthwith ye hardness did break, the worms
with the matter ran out, and all the noisome dwelling assuaged, so that she
was perfectly hole, and fair skinned ere the week were ended: and they that
knew his life, said, he had often cured this plague in Normandy.

This Edward reigned three and twenty years, six months, T. Rudborn.
and odd days.

He was buried on the day of the Epiphanie, in the Abbey of Saint Peeter in
Westminster which he had newly builded.

In the same day Harold the eldest son of Godwine Earl of Kent, and brother
to Edgitha the Queen, having obtained faith of the nobility, took the Crown.

Leofrike Earl of Mercia, and of Hereford, founded the Monastery of Couentrie
in Anno 1044. He also granted great privileges to that Town.

HArold, that he might in some behalf seem to make the 1066 The year of our
Lord begins here at Christmas.
young Edgar amends for the wrong he had done him, gave him the Earldom of
Oxford, and so from a King, he made him an Earl. But in the mean season
England began to be tossed and turmoyled with wars within and without: for
the disheriting of the right heir is always wont to be the beginning of
civil wars.

The 24. day of April, a Comete appeared, not only to the people of this land,
but also in other parts of the world seven days. Toftus envying (as men said)
the prosperity ^og. Houed. Simon D^nel. Gualter Couen.
of his brother, stirred up troubles in the Realm, for he joining himself to
Harold the King of Norway, assaulted England in warlike sort, both by sea and
land. Whose attempt whiles Harold of England prepared to withstand, William
Duke of Normandy, who notwithstanding he was a Bastard, William Conqueror
cousyn to King Edward by the mother side.
was of kin to Saint Edward in the third and fourth degree of
consanguinitie, seeing a convenient time and occasion offered to take the
Kingdom in, gathered a Navy of 896. Ships, and came into England with a
very well appointed army, alleging, that by all right and title it was due to
him, by the gift of King Edward his kinsman, and also by the covenant that was
made, and by oath established betwixt Harold and him. He landed at Pemsey, nine
miles Gualter Couen.
from Hastings, the 28. of September. Harold notwithstanding he was bare of
men, by reason of the battle that he had fought against Toftus, and the men of
Norway, yet hearing of Williams coming, went straightwayes against him. Both
armies being brought into array, the battle was fought, wherein great slaughter
of Englishmen was made, and England conquered by vvoden bovves and arovves.
the Normans got the victory, especially by means of their wodden bows and
arrows (which the Englishmen had not then in use) for Duke William commanded
his men, that Io. Rouse.
some of them should shoot directly forward, and some upward, by reason
whereof, the arrow shot upward, destroyed the English as they stouped, and the
arrow shot directly before hand wounded them that stood upright: and King
Harold himself (valiantly fighting) was shot through the Harold slain.
brains, whereof he dyed, when he had reigned nine months, and was buried in
the Priorie of Waltham which he Sigebertus Gemla^en. W. Gemi^^censis. Gualterus
Couen. Hen. Hunting. Register of Wodbridge. Chronicle of Normandy. The
description of the Saxons. Matthew Paris. W. Malme. Flores Historiaru^.
had founded. This battle was fought at Hastings in Sussex, upon the
fourteenth day of October being Saturday, in the year of our Lord 1066. There
was slain of Englishmen 67974. and of Normans 6013.

This was (says Matthew Paris) the doleful destruction of this sweet and
pleasant land, the Kings whereof (meaning the Saxons) at their first coming,
with barbarous countenance and gesture, in warlike sort, provoked all men to
malice and hatred toward them, who overcame al men by war and subtlety: but
after they had received the Christian faith, and by little and little applied
their diligence unto Religion, they neglected the exercise of armor, for the
Kings did change their habit, and some at Rome, and some in their own
Country, sought to change their temporal Kingdoms for everlasting Kingdoms:
and many which all their life time embraced worldly things, did yet distribute
their treasures unto all the works of mercy: but afterward when charity
waxed cold, all their study and travail of Religion slaked, and then came
the destruction of the inhabitants: first at the coming of the Danes, and now
in the expulsing of the Englishmen by the Normans: for the noble men giving
themselves to gluttony and lechery, did not go to the Church in the morning
as Christian men use to do, but lying in their Chambers dalying with Women,
did hear the Priest hastily rattle up divine service. The Clerks also that
had taken orders, if one had learned but his Grammar, every one wondered at him.

All men generally gave themselves to drinking and gulling, and spent both day
and night in such exercises till they vomited.

The Saxons ware their garments to the midde knee, their hear rounded, and
their beardes shaven (all save the ouerlip) their arms adorned with golden
bracelets, and W. Malme.
their skin painted and printed. etc.

Thus ends the Reign of the Saxons, who were first sent for by Vortiger,
about the year of our Lord. 450. and had now continued sometimes in wars
with the Britains, then with the Danes, and now with the Normans, the space of
six hundred years.
Verses.
A thousand six and sixty year
it was, as we do read,
When that a Comete did appear,
and Englishmen lay dead:
Of Normandy Duke William then
to Englandvvard did sail,
And conquerde Harold with his men,
and brought this Land to bale.
King William Conqueror.


WIlliam Duke of Normandy, Anno. reg. 1.
surnamed Conqueror, Bastard son of Robert the sixte, Duke of that Duchy,
and Coosin germane unto King Edward on the mothers side, began his dominion
over the Realm of England, the fourteenth day of October, being Saturday, in
the year of our Lord 1066. After the battle at Hastings, Duke William came
to London, where with great joy he was received, both of the Clergy and
people, and was proclaimed King.

When the City of London was thus yielded unto him, he took his journey
toward the Castle of Dover, to subdue that, and the rest of Kent also: which
when the Archbishop Stigand, and Egelsin the Abbot of Saint Augustines (being
as it were the chiefest Lords and governors of all Kent) did perceive and
consider, that the whole Realm was in an evil state, and that whereas in this
Realm of England, before the coming of the foresaid Duke William there were
no bondmen, now all, as well noble men, as the common people, were without
respect made subject unto the perpetual bondage of the Normans, taking an
occasion by the peril and danger that their neighbors were in, to provide for
the safeguard of themselves and their Country, they caused to assemble at
Canterbury all the people of the County of Kent, and declared to them the
perils and dangers imminent, the misery that their neighbors were come into,
the pride and insolency of the Normans, and the hardness and grief of
bondage and servile estate: whereupon all the people rather choosing to end
their unfortunate life, than to submit themselves to an unaccustomed yoke of
servitude and bondage, with a common consent determined to meet Duke William,
and to fight with him for the laws of their Country. And y^ foresaid Stigand
the Archbishop, and the Abbot Egelsin, choosing rather to die in battle, than
to see their nation in so evil an estate, being encouraged by the examples of
the holy Machabees, became Captain of the army. And at a day appointed, all
the people met at Swanescombe two miles west from Graues-end and being hidden
in the woods, lay privily in wait for the coming of the foresaid Duke
William. And because it can not hurt to be very wary in such cases, they agreed
before hand, that when the Duke was come, and the passages on every side
stopped, to the end he should no way be able to escape, every one of them, as
well Horsemen as footmen, should bear boughs in their hands. The next day
after, when the Duke was come into the fields and territories near unto
Swanescombe, and saw all the Country set and placed round about him, as it had
bin a stirring and moving wood, and that with a mean pace they approached and
drew near unto him, with great discomfiture of mind he wondered at that
sight. And as soon as the Captains of the Kentishmen saw that Duke William
was enclosed in the midst of their army, they caused the trumpets to be
sounded, their banners to be displayed, and threw down their boughs, and with
their bows bent, their swords drawn, and their spears and other kind of
weapons stretched forth, they showed themselves ready to fight. Duke William
and they that were with him, stood (as no marvel it was) sore astonished, and
amazed, and he which thought that he had already all England fast in his fist,
did now despair of his own life. Therefore on the behalf of the Kentishmen
were sent unto Duke William the Archbishop Stigand, and Egelsin Abbot of Saint
Augustines, who told him their message in this sort:

My Lord Duke, behold the people of Kent comes forth to meet you, and to
receive you as their liege Lord, requiring at your hands the things which
pertayne to peace, and that under this condition, that all the people of Kent
may enjoy for ever their ancient liberties, and may for evermore use the laws
and customs of the Country, otherwise they are ready presently to bid
battle to you, and them that be with you, and are minded rather to die here
altogether, than to depart from the laws and customs of their Country, and
to submit themselves to bondage, whereof as yet they never had experience. The
Duke seeing himself to be driven in such a straight and narrow pinch, consulted
a while with them that came with him, prudently considering, that if he should
take any repulse or displeasure at the hands of this people, which be the key
of England, all that ever he had done before, should be undone again, and of
no effect, and all his hope and safety should stand in danger and ieopardy:
not so willingly as wisely he granted the people of Kent their request. So when
the covenant was established, and pledges given on both sides, the Kentishmen
being joyful, conducted the Normans (who also were glad) unto Rochester, and
yielded up to the Duke, the Earldom of Kent, and the noble Castle of Dover.
Thus the antiente liberties of England, and the laws and customs of the
Country, which before the coming of Duke William out of Normandy, were
equally kept throughout all England, do (through this industry and earnest
travel of the Archbishop The ancient liberties and laws of England, remain
in Kent only. Thomas Sprot. Will. Thorn.
Stigand and Egelsin Abbot of Saint Augustines) remain inuiolably observed
until this day, only in the County of Kent. Thus far Thomas Sprot, after
him William Thorn.

After this, Duke William wasted Sussex, Hampshire, Southery, Marianus.
Floriacen. Wigor.
Middlesex, and Hertfortshire, not ceassing to burn Towns, and sley the
people, till he came to Barkehamsteed, where the Archbishop Alredus, Wolstan
Bishop of Worcester, Wilferus Bishop of Hereford, Clito Edgar, the Earls
Edwine and Morcare, and every one of the noble men about London came to him,
and giving pledges, submitted themselves, and swear fealty to him, with whom
also he made a league, and nevertheless permitted his army still to burn
Towns, and to take spoils. Chro. S. Albani.


There was at that time an Abbot of Saint Albons called Frederike Abbot of S.
Albons his policy against Duke William.
Fretherike, who hearing of the coming of Duke William into Hartfordshire,
caused the woods betwixt London and Saint Albons to be felled, that no man
could either ride or go that way for them: and thus the Abbot kept his
Monastery, that Duke William might not come there, but was feign to coast over
to the Castle of Barkehamsteede, who there, under surety, sent for Frederike
Abbot of Saint Albons, and demanded of him why such felling of woods was made
about him, more than in other places: Frederike answered and said, if the
Spiritual men through this land had done their endeavor, it should not have
bin in thy power to have entered the land so far: for the Spirituality is of
great power. Duke William answered, and I may live and rejoice, I shall loose
their power, and make it less, and specially I will begin with thee.

The Abbot thought he had said too far, and (as soon as he might) departed
home, called a Chapter of his breethre^, told them of Duke William, took his
leave of them, and went to Eely, and never returned.

Then Duke William took much of the liuelode of Saint Albons. At Christmasse he
would be crowned at Gloucester, at Whitsontide at Westminster, at Easter at
Winchester: these feasts he kept with great royalty, but he made his commons
bare, and himself rich. He was proud of port, and had a great belly, balde
head, and a big man in all the parts of his body, he was a good Archer, and
right few might bend his bow. He brought the Jews from Rhone to inhabit
here.

When Christmasse approached he marched with all his army Duke William crowned.
to London, that there he might be crowned King, which was there done on
Christmasse day by Aldred Archbishop of York, and not by Stigande of
Canturburie because he came not lawfully by that dignity: then he received
homage, oath of fidelity, and pledges of the nobles, and commanded that in
every town and village a bell should be roong every night at eight of the
clock, and y^ all people should then put forth Fire and light forbidden to the
Englishmen.
their fire and candle, and go to bed, which order was observed through this
realm during his reign, and the reign of William his son.

The Historiographers of that time accounted the year to begin at Christmas,
after which account then began the year 1067. but after the account of England
now observed, the year begins not til the. 25. of March following.

And now because those houses may not be unremembered unto who^ King William
disposed y^ lands and possessions of this realm for their good service, I have
thought good to publishe the names of them as heretofore I have done, out of
the Chronicles of Normandy, gathered by William Tayleur of Rhone.

To wit, Odo Bishop of Baion* Robert Earl of Mortaigne: These two were
brethren to Duke William by his mother: Bandonni de Buillon: Roger Earl of
Beamont, that was surnamed with the Beard, of him came the lineage of Mellent.

Guillam Ma^^^* The Cronicles of Normandy vvri^te^ in french by Guillem
Tailleur.
Guilliam fitz Osberne. Le sire de Mo^tfort sus Rille* Guillam de vielz Po^t.
Neel de saint Saueur le vicont. Le sire de F^^giers. Henry sire de Ferrers. Le
sire Dambemare. Guillia^ sire de Romare. Le sire di Lichare. Le sire de Tonque.
Le sire de la Mare. Le sire de Nehabon. Le sire de Piron. Le sire de Beauson.
Le sire Damnon. Le sire de Soteuile. Le sire de margneuille. Le sire de
Tankeruille. Eustace Dambleuille. Le sire de Magneuille. Le sire de
Gremesuille. Guillam Crespin. Le sir de saint Martin. Guillem de Moulins. Le
sire de Pins. Gieffray sir de Maye^ne. Affroy de Behunt. Affroy and Mau^gr. de
Cartaict. Guillam de Garennes. Hue de Cournay sire le de Bray. Le conte Hue de
Do^rnay. E^g^^^o^nt de Laigle. Le vicont de Touars. Richart Donnemchni. Le sire
de Biars. Le sire de Salligny. Le Boutellier daubegny. Le sire de Mar. Le
sire de Victry. Le sire de Lacy. Le sire du vall Darie. Le sire de Tracy. Hue
sire de Montfort. Le sire de Piqgny. Hamon de Brayen. Le sire de Spinay. Le
sire de Port. Le sire de Torchy. Le sire de Iort. Le sire de Rivers. Guillem
M^yon. Raoul Tesson de Chignelois. Rogier Marmion. Raoul de Gael. Au^ Neel de
Biars. Parnel du Monstier. Bertram le Tort. Hubert Robert. Le sire de Seukee.
Le sire de Dormal. Le sire de Brenal. Le sire de saint Iehan. Le sire de Bois.
Le sire de Homme. Le sire de Saussay. Le sire de Cailly. Le sire de Semilly. Le
sire de Tilly. Le sire de Romely. Martel de Basqueuill. Le sire de Praux. Le
sire de Gonys. Le sire de Saincteaulx. De Mullox. These Archers of the vale of
Rueill, and of Bretueill, and of many other places. Le sire de seinct Saen. Le
sire de la Rimer. Le sire de Salnarinlle. Le sire de Tony. Eude de Beaugien. Le
sire de Ollie. Le sire de Sacy. Le sire de Vassye. Le Bisquams de Chaymes. Le
sire de Sap. Le sire Duglosse. Le sire de Nim^. Le sire de Blamuille. Le sire
de Brencon. Le vida^ de Partenay. Raoult do Mormont. Pierre de Bailleul. Sir de
Foscamp. Le sir de Beaufault. Le sir de Tillieres. Le sir de Pacy. Le
seneschall de Torchy. Le sir de Lacy. Le sir de Gacy. Le sir de Doully. Le sir
de Sancy. Le sir de Bacy. Le sir de Tourneur. Le sir de Praores. Guillem de
Colombiers. Hue sir de Bollebec. Richart sir Dorbec. Le sir de Donnebos. Le sir
de Trois gros. Le sir de mont Fiquet. Hue le Vigot, alias Bigot de Mal^^ot. Le
sir de la Hay. Le sir de Bracy. Le sir de Moubray. Le sir de Say. Le sir de
Laser^. Bonteuillam Tronsebours. Guillem Patris de la land. Hue de Mortemer. Le
sir Donuiller. Le sir Donnebant. L^ sir de saint Cler. Robert le fitz Herneys
duke Dorlians. Le sir de Harecourt. Le sir Creuecure. Le sir de Dancourt. Le
sir de Brunetot. Le sir de Cambray. Le sir Dauncy. Le sir Fonteney. Le count
Deureux. Le sir de Roberchil. Alan sergent Count de Britaigne. Le sir de ^aint
Wallery. Le count Deden. Gualtar Guisart, count de Longeuile. Le sir de
Scouteuile. Le count Thomas Da^binale. Guillem de Hoimes e^ Darques. Le sir de
Barreuile. Le sir de Breante. Le sir de Freamuile. Le sir de Panilly. Le sir de
Cler^. Tostamdubec. Le sir de Mangny. Roger du Mont Gomery, Comes. Almary de
Touaers. Beside a very great number of Knighte and esquires that were under
them. Thus far out of the Cronicle of Normandy, the other following are taken
out of a Table sometime in Battle Abbey. Awmerle. Audeley. Angilliam.
Argentoun. Arundell. Auenant. Abel. Awgers. Angenoun. Archer. Asperuile.
Amonerduil^. Arey. Akeny. Albeny. Asperemound. Bertram. Buttecourt. Brahus.
Byseg. Bardelf. Basset. Bygot. Bohun. Baylife. Bondeuile. Barbason. Beer.
Bures. Carta W. Reg^* de S. Martin ^^ g^^^d^.
Bonylayne. Barbayon. Berners. Braybuf. Brand. Bonuile. Burgh. Busshy.
Blundell. Breton. Bela^yse. Bowser. Bayons. Bulmere. Broune. Beke. Bowlers.
Banastre. Belomy. Belknape. Beauchamp. Bandy. Broyleby. Burnel. Belot. Beufort.
Baudewine. Burdon. Berteuylay. Bar. Busseuile. Blunt. Beawper. Bret. Barret.
Bainard. Barnevale. Barry. Bodyt. Berteuile. Bertine. Belew. Bushel. Beleners.
Buffard. Boteler. Boteuile. Brasard. Belhelme. Branch. Bolesur. Blundel.
Burdet. Bagot. Beawpount. Bools. Belefroun. Barchampe. Camos. Canuille.
Chawent. Chauncy. Couderay. Coluyle. Chamberlain. Chambernoune. Cribet.
Corbine. Corbet. Coniers. Chaundos. Coucy. Chaworth^. Claremaus. Clarell.
Camuine. Chaunduyt. Claruays. Chantilowe. Colet. Cressy. Courtenay. Constable.
Chaucer. Cholmelay. Corneuile. Champeney. Carew. Chawnos. Claruaile. Champaine.
Carbonell. Charles. Chereberge. Chawnes. Chawmont. Cheyne. Cursen. Conell.
Chayters. Cheynes. Cateray. Cherecourt. Chaunuile. Clereney. Curly. Clyfford.
Denauile. Dercy. Dine. Dispencer. Daniel. Denyse. Druell. Deuaus. Dauers.
Doningsels. Da^el. Delabere. De la Pole. De la Lind. De la Hill. De la Wate. De
la Watch. Dakeny. Dauntre. Desnye. Dabernoune. Damry. Daueros. De la Vere. De
Lee. De la Ward. De la Planch. Danway. De Hewse. Disard. Durant. Drury.
Estrange. Escutauile. Escriols. Engayne. Euers. Esturney. Foluile. Fitz Water.
Fitz marmaduk Filberd. Fitz Roger. Fitz Robert. Fanecourt. Fitz Phillip. Fitz
William. Fitz Pain. Fitz Alyne. Fitz Raufe. Fitz Brown. Foke. Freuile.
Faconbrige. Frissel. F^lioll. Fitz Thomas. Fitz Morice. Fitz Hughe. Fitz
Warren. Faunuille. Formay. Formiband. Frison. Finer. Fitz vrcy. Furniuall. Fitz
Herbert. Fitchet. Fitz John. Gargraue. Graunson. Gracy. Glaunuile. Gouer.
Gascoyne. Gray. Golofer. Grauns. Gurly. Gurdon. Gamages. Gaunt. Hansard.
Hastings. Haulay. Husie. Herne. Hamelyn. Harewell. Hardel. Heck^t. Hamound.
Harecord. Iarden. Iay. Ianuile. Iasparuile. Karre. Karron. Kyriell. Le Strange.
Leuony. Latomere. Loueday. Logenton. Leuel. Le Scrope. Lemare. Litteril^. Lucy.
Lislay. Longspes. Longschampe. Lastels. LindSey. Loterell. Lindsey. Longuaile.
Le Vawse. Loy. Laue. Le dispenser. Marmilou. Moribray. Moruile. Manley.
Malebranche. Malemaine. Muschampe. Musgraue. M^nilebillers. Mortmaine. Muse.
Marteine. Mountbocher. Maleuile. Mountney. Maleherbe. Musgros. Musard.
Mautrauers. Merke. Murres. Montague. Mantalent. Mandute. Manle. Mal^ry. Merny.
Muffet. Menpincoy. Mainard. Morell. Morley. Mounrmartin. Myners. Mauley.
Mainwaring* Mantell. Mayel. Morton. Neuile. Newmarche. Norton. Norbet. Norece.
Newborough. Neele. Normanuile. Otenell. Olibef. Olifaunt. Oysell. Oliford.
Oryoll. Pigot. Pery. Perecount. Pershale. Power. Paynel. Peche. Peuerell.
Perot. Picard* Pudsey. Pimeray. Pounsey. Punchardon. Pynchard. Placy. Patifine.
Pampilion. Poterell. Pekeney. Peruinke. Penicord. Quincy. Quintine. Rose.
Ridle. Rynel. Rous. Russell. Ro^d. Richmond. Rocheford. Reymond. Seuche. Seint
Quintine. Seint Omer. Seint Amond. Seint Ledger. Someruile. Sanford. Somerey.
Seint George. Seint Les. Sauine. Seint Clo. Seint Albine. Seint Barbe.
Sandeuile. Seint More. Seint Scudemor Towrs. Toget. Talybois. Tuchet. Truslot.
Trusbut. Traynel. Taket. Talbo^. Tanny. Tibtote. Trusell. Turbeuile. Turuile.
Totet. Tauers. Torel. Tirell. Totels. Tauerner. Valence. Vancord. Vau^sour.
Vender. Verder. Verdon. Aubrie de Vere. Vernoune. Venables. Ven^ure. Verlaud.
Verlay. Vernoys. Verny. Vilan. Vmframuile. Vnket Vrnall. Wake. Walenger. Ward.
Wardebus. Waren. Wate. Wateline. Wateuile. Woly. Wyuell.
THis year through the great suite and labor of William the Norman, then.
Bishop of London, King William granted the Charter and liberties to the same
William, Bishop, Wherefore the Mayor and Citizens of London repair to
Poules.
and Godfrey, Portgreue, and all the Burgies of the City of London, in as
large form as they enjoyed the same, in the time of Saint Edward before the
Conquest: in reward whereof, the Citizens have fixed on his grave, being in
the midst of the great West I Will of Saint Paul's Church in London, this
Epitaph following.

GVilielme viro sapie^tia and vitae sanctitate clar^, qui primum Epitaph of
William Bishop of London.
diuo Edwardo Regi and Confessori familiaris, nuper in Episcopum Londinensem
erectus, nec multo post apud inuictissimu^ Principem Guilelmum Angliae regem
eius nominis primum, ob prudentiam fidemque singularem in consilium adhibitus:
amplissima huic vrbi celeberimae priuilegia abeodem impetrauit. Senatus
populusque Londinensis been merenti posuit. Sedit Episcopus annos. 20. Decessit
anno a Christo nato. 1070.

HAEc tibi, clare pater posuerunt marmora ciues,
Praemia, non meritis, aequiparanda tuis:
Namque sibi populus, te Londoniensis amicum,
Sensit, and huic vrbi non leave praesidium.
Reddita libertas duce te, dotaque multis
Te duce, res fuerat publica muneribus.
Diuitias, genus, and formam breuis opprimat hora,
Haec tua sed pietas, and benefacta manent.
Obijt anno. 1070 Sedit Episcopus annos. 20.

The same in English.
TO William a man famous in wisdom and holiness of life, who first with
Saint Edward the king and Confessor being familiar, of late preferred to be
Bishop of London, and not long after for his prudencie and sincere fidelity,
admitted to be of counsel with the most victorious Prince William king of
England of that name the first, who obtained of the same great and large
privileges to this famous City. The Senate and Citizens of London to him
having well deserved, have made this. He continued Bishop. xx. years and died
in the year after Christ his nativity. 1070.

THese Marble monuments to thee thy Citizens assign,
Rewards (O Father) far unfit to those deserts of thine.
Thee unto them a faithful friend, thy London people found,
And to this town, of no small weight, a stay both sure and sound:
Their liberties restorde to them, by means of thee have been,
Their public weal by means of thee, large gifts have felt and seen.
Thy riches, stock, and beauty brave, one hour has them suppressed,
Yet these thy virtues and good deeds, with us for ever rest.
KIng William, (leaving his brother Odo Bishop of Bayon, Marianus. Ypodigm^
Neustri^.
and William Fitz Osberne whom he had made Earl of Hereforde, to be Wardens of
England) returned into Normandy, which at that time was bent to shrink from
him. He took with him Edgare Etheling, Stigandus Archbishop of W. de W^lum.
Canturburie, Frederike Abbot of Saint Albons, Egelnothus Abbot of
Glastenburie, Edwyne Duke of Mercia, Morcarus duke of Northumberlande, Walden
Earl of Northampton and of Huntington, Roger late Earl of Hertford, Renulphe
Earl of Cambridge, Gospatrike Earl of Cumberlande, Gualter the son of Siward,
and many other nobles of England thinking they would be truer to him in a
foreign Country than in their own: by their diligence he subdued the
rebelling Normans. When Winter was at hand, King William returned, and set an
importable tribute on the Englishmen.

After this going into Devonshire he besieged Excester, Excester besieged.
which the Citizens and other English men held against him.

The Countess Githa mother of King Harolde, and sister to Swanus king of
Denmark with many other fleeing out of the City escaped, and got them over
into Flaunders, and the Citizens yielded to the King. Anno reg. 2. 1068
Ypodigma.


Mathild wife to King William came forth of Normandy, and on Whitsonday, was
consecrated Queen by Aldred Archebyshop of York. After this Marleswin,
Gospatricke, and other noble men of Northumberlande, to avoid king Williams
roughe and boisterous dealings, taking with them Edgar, Etheling, and his
mother Agatha, with his two sisters Margaret and Christian, went by sea into
Scotland, where they were received and well entertained of Malcoline king of
Scotts, who took Margaret the sister of Edgar to wife. John Rouse.


King William with his army went to Notingham and Castle at Notingham, York
and Lincoln. builded.
there builded a Castle: he went to York, and made there two Castles, and put
in them garrisons: he commanded also Castles to be made at Lincoln and other
places.

This year Henry the kings son was borne in England, T. Rudborne. Earl of
Northumberlande slain.
for his eldest sons Robert and William Rufus were borne in Normandy, before
he Conquered England.

King William gave to Robert Commin the Earldom Liber Dunelme. Anno. reg. 3.
of Northumberland, who entered by force into Duresme, but for his outrages
there done, he and 900. of his men were slain by the men of that Country, in
the Bishops palace, that Sea. Cro.
had himself received him honorably, and king William came Afterward upon
them and slew them every one.

Agelricus bishop of Durham, being accused of treason, was 1069
imprisoned at Westminster. And his brother Egelwine being made Bishop there,
was soon banished.

The Englishmen that were fled out of England, having Edgar to be their
Captain, returned out of Scotland, and suddenly set upon the garrisons that
King William had set at York, put them to flighte, slew them, possessed the
City, and pronounced Edgar to be King: but not long after King William came
with a great army and recovered thr City, constrayning Edgar to return into
Scollande. Edgar seeing he could not make his party good with king William,
adjoined unto him Canutus king of the Danes, promising him half of the
kingdom. Thus they entered England and came to York.

The Normaines that were left to defend the City, set York brent.
their suburbs on fire, that their enemies should have no commodity of it,
but the wind drove the fire on high, and set all the City on fire, so that
the garrisons were forced to flee into their enemies hands. In the ^kirmish were
slain 3000* Normans, whereupon all the North part of England fell from
William to Edgar.

When William had word, of the slaughter of his men, he with great travel came
to York, where he fought with his enemies, and put them to flighte. Canutus
with a few Danes got to their ships, but Edgar and the Englishmen which
escaped, returned into Scotland. King William spoiled all the Country beyond
Humber.

Such a dearth was in England that men did eat horses, Anno reg. 4. Man's
flesh good meat. Ioh Taxtor. 1070 Monasteries rifled.
cattes, dogs, and man's flesh.

King William bereaved all the Monasteries and Abbayes in England of their
gold and silver, sparing neither chalice nor shrine, appropriating the said
Monasteries and Abbayes to himself: he also brought under Knights service,
all those Bishoprics and Abbayes that held Baronies, which had bin free from
all secular bondage, appointing them how many soldiers they should find him
and his successors in time of war.

In a counsel at Winchester Stigand was deposed as an Ypodigma. Stigand deposed
Apostata Archbishop, who for money got his Bishopric: and Lanfranke was
chosen Archbishop of Canturburie. Anno. reg. 5. 1071


Edwine Earl of Mercia, Marcherus Earl of Northu^berlande, and Swardus an
Earl, with Egelwine Bishop of Durham, and many other of the clergy and
laity, keeping the Noble men fled
wooddes, for that they were not able to abide the Kings displeasure, at the
last came into the I Will of Elie, Herewarde being their Captain, who sore
afflicted that Country, but king William besieging the I Will, they all saving
Herewarde submitted them to his pleasure, who committed some to perpetual
prison, some he put to death, and some he ransomed, but Hereward by strong
hand brought his men out of the I Will and escaped.

The Castle of Ledes in Kent, was builded by Creueken, Anno. reg. 6. Ex libro
Nor^. Castle of Leder and of Oxforde builded. John Rouse. 1072 Matthew Paris.
York subject to Canturburie. Anno reg. 7. 1073 Anno reg. 8.
and the Castle of Oxforde by Robert de Olly, two noble men that came into
England with William Conqueror.

In a Counsel holden at Windsore, the primacie of y^ church of Canturburie over
the Church of York being examined, it was found by good authority of old
writings, that the Church of York ought to be subject to the Church of
Canturburie and faithfully to obey the same.

King William with a great power invaded Scotland, and forced Malcoline to do
him homage and fealty.

King William with a great power of Englishmen, went into Normand^e which
rebelled, and subdued it, spoiling the Cities, towns, vineyardes, corn, etc.

Gregory the seventh Pope, excommunicated all committers 1074 Married priests
removed. Ypodigma. Matthew Paris.
of Simony, and removed married Priests from executing of divine service,
whereof rose great troubles in England.

Ranulph Earl of ye East-English, by y^ counsel of the Earls Woltheopus and
Roger, traveled to expel K. William out of his kingdom. The co^spiracie was
concluded at a marriage in y^ Conspiracy.
City of Norwich, and forthwith they sent to the King of Denmark, desiring
his aid, and having confederated with the Walchmen, every one where they
came, robbed the Kings towns.

King William came suddenly out of Normandy, and took the Earls, committing
them to prison: but the Walchmen he caused to have their eyes put out, and some
to be hanged.

Kanut the son of Swayne, and Hacon the Earl, came Anno reg. 9.
out of Denmark, with 200 sail but when they heard y^ their fautors were
overcome, they turned into Flaunders.

King William caused a castle to be builded at Dirham, and 1075 Ypodigma.
commanded Waltheothus, Earl of Northampton and of Huntindon, son to Siward
duke of Northumberland, to be beheaded at Winchester, who was buried at
Crowland.

The king sailed into Brytaine, and besieged the Castle of Dolens, but
prevailed not.

Walter Bishop of Durham, bought of king William the Bishop murdered. Anno.
reg. 10
Earldom of Northumberlande, wherein he used such cruelty, that at the length
the inhabitants slew him and an hundred of his men, by the river of Tine,
where the Bishop held his courts.

The Earth was hard frozen, from the Calendes of November, 1076 T.
Castleforde. John Leyland. Anno. reg. 11
till the midst of April.

King William gave the castle with the town of Pontfrait, with land lying there
about, to Hilbert Lacy a Norman. The castle town and lands about Pontfraite,
longed before y^ Conquest to one Richard Ashnalde, who had issue Ailricke, who
had Swane, who had Adam, of whom came two daughters, one of them married to
Gaulfride Neuile, the other to Thomas Burgh, but neither of them had any part
of the Town or lands about Pontfrait. Robert son to Hildebert Lacy, founded
the Priory of Pontfraite.

Robert the first son of King William, because he could not possess
Normandy, which his father had given him before his coming into England, (in
the presence of Phillip king of France) he went into France, and through aid
of King Phillip he fetched prays in Normandy, brent towns, slew men, and
brought his father into no small perplexity.

Upon Palm sunday about noone, appeared a Blasing 1077 Anno. reg. 12 1078
Ypodigma.
star near unto the sun.

Malcoline King of Scots, wasted Northumberland, slew many, and took a great
pray with him into Scotland.

The Cathedral Church of Hereford was brent by Grifin and Algare son to Leof
icke Earl of Merce.

While King William gave battle unto his eldest son Robert, before the
Castle of Kerbothead, which King Philip King William vvounded.
had lent him, he was wounded by him in his arm and cast besides his horse,
but as soon as Robert knew him by his voice, he straight alighted, and
required his Father to mount on his horse, and suffered him to depart: many of
king Anno. reg. 13
Williams men were slain, and his son William with many other sore wounded.

Trustin Abbot of Glastenbury, committed a filthy act in his 1379 Murder.
Matthew Paris.
Church, for he caused three Monks to be slain which were laid under the
Altar, and xviij. men to be wounded, that their blood ran from the Alter down
y^ steps to y^ pauement.

This year was a great wind on Christmas day. And Anno. reg. 14 1080 Anno.
reg. 15 1081 Anno. reg. 16 Tutsbury. Liber Tutsbury. 1982 Bermondsey. Anno.
reg. 17 1083
a great Earthquake and roarings out of the earth, the vj. of April.

Henry Earl Ferrers founded a Priory within his Castle of Tutsbury, the late
new Church was builded in Anno. 1407. when the Normans were put out.

Alwin Child a Citizen of London founder of the Monastery of S. Savior at
Bermondfeey in Surrey, gave unto the Monks there, diverse rents in the City
of London.

Matild the Queen, daughter to Baldwin Earl of Flaunders, and wife to King
William, died, and was buried at Cane in the Monastery of Nuns, which she had
builded.

Richard son to King William, died in the new Forest, and was buried at
Winchester.

King William caused inquiry to be made, how many Acres of land numbered. ^^.
Rouse. Anno. reg. 18. 1084 A great tax
acres of land were sufficient for one ploughe by the year, how many beasts
to the tilling of one hide, how many Cities, Castles, Farms, Oranges, Towns,
Rivers, Marshes, and Woods, what rent they were by year, and how many
Knights or Soldiers were in every shire, all which was put in writing, and
remains at Westminster.

King William took homage, and oath of allegiaunce of all England, of what
tenor or fee soever they were, and took Anno. reg. 19
of every hide of land sire shillings, and then failed into Normandy.

When the Normans had accomplished their pleasure upon 1085
the Englishmen, so that there was no noble man of that nation left to bear
any rule over the^, it became a reproach to be Nev^^ ^^rrest.
called an Englishman. Wicked customs sprang up, and the more the people spoke
of equity, the more wrong was done: the Justiciers were the authors of al
unrighteousness. Who so did take a Dear or a Goat, had his eyes put out. It
was brought to pass, that for the space of more than. xxx. Matthew Paris.
Bishop at Lincoln.
miles, good profitable corn ground was turned into a chase for wild beasts.

Remingus Bishop of Dorchester, removed his Sea to Lincoln, Anno reg. 20.
where he bu^lded a new Church to be his seat.

King William kept his feast of Christmas at Gloucester* Flori. Wigmore.
where to three of his Chaplains he gave three Bishoprikes, to Mawrice, the
Bishopric of London: to William, that of Thetford: and to Robert, that of
Chester.

There was a great water floude, so that hills were made 1086 Water floude.
soft and consumed, and with their fall over whelmed many villages. King
William founded the Abbeys of Battle, where he overcame Harolde of Selbe in
Yorkshire, and of Cane in Normandy, Battle Abbey.
in the which he was buried. He founded the Priory of Saint Nicholas at
Excester. He gave great Privileges to Saint Martins le Graunde. Liber S. Mar.
Anno reg. 21
Saint Martins le grand in London, (which Church was founded before the
Conquest by Ingelricus and Ewardus his brother cousins to king Edward the
Confessor) he also gave to ye Chlledge, as appears by his Charter, in these
words: I do give Creeplesgate of London, but a Posterne and all the ground
adjoining was a Door or Marishe.
and grant to the same Church all the land and more without the Posterne which
is called Criplesgate on either part of the posterne, that is to say, from the
North corner of the wall, as the river of the Wells there running, depart the
same more from the wall, to ye running water which enters the City, etc.

This year was a great death of Cattle, and sore distemperancie 1087
of air, many dyed first of fevers, and after of famine.

In the mean time, a devouring fire spread over all the principal Famine and
Pestilence.
Cities of England. The Church of Saint Paul in London was brent with the
more part of the City, which fire began London and Poules Church brent. (...)
Erkenwaldi.
at the entry of the West gate and consumed so ye East gate. Mawrice then
Bishop of London began the foundation of the new Church of Paul's. Richard his
successor did wonderfully increase the walls of the said Church, and of his
own cost Floria Wig.
purchased y^ large streets about it where were wont to dwell many lay men,
and compassed it with a strong wall.

In a province of Wales, called Rose, was found the sepulcher of Gawen upon the
sea shore, who was sisters son to Will. Malme. Men's bones of large six.
Arthur king of the Britains, being xiij. foot of length. King William being
at Roane in Normandy, Philip king of France said that he kept his Chamber as
women do in childbed, and nourished his fat belly, but when he is churched I
will offer a thousand candles with him. King William hearing of these scorns,
went with a great army into France, spoiling al things as he passed. Last of
al he burned the City of Meanx with our Lady Church and two Anchers that were
enclosed there, who persuaded themselves, they ought not to forsake their house
in such extremity: whereat the King rejoicing, cheared his men to feed the
fire, and came himself so near, y^ with the heat of his harneys he got a
disease to the increase of his sickness. Also the kings horse leaping over a
ditch, did burst the inner parts of the K. with the pain whereof he was sore
afflilcted, and returned to Roane, where shortly after he ended his life. The.
ix. day of Septem, in the year of King William dyed.
our Lord. 1087. when he had rained xx. years and xj. months lacking fine
days, his body being brought with great sole^nitie in Cane in Normandy there to
be buried in a Church which he had founded, a certain knight boldly forbod
the burial of W. Malme.
him in that place, affirming that by title of inheritance the ground was his,
and that king William ought not to be buried Burial forbidden to William
Conqueror.
in the ground, which by violence he had obtained: wherefore by consent of Henry
his son, this reproach was appeased with the payment of an hundred pound of
silver. He had issue by Matild his wife, daughter to Baldwin Earl of Flaunders:
Robert Curthose, unto whom he gave Normandy. Richard that Issue of VVillia^
Conqueror.
dyed young: William Rufus, unto whom he gave England: and Henry to who^ he gave
his wives inheritance and treasure: he had daughters Cicily, Abbess of Cane:
Constance married to Alane Earl of Brytain: Adale wife to Stephen Earl of
Bloyse: Margaret promised to Harold king of England, and Alianor betrothed to
Alfonse King of Galicia. King William commanded all prisoners to be released,
and his tresure to be distributed unto churches.

King William Rufus.


WIlliam le Rovvse or Rufus, the third son of William Conqueror; began
his reign the Anno reg. 1.
ninthe day of September, in the year of our Lord 1087. and was crowned at
Westminster by Lanfranke Archbishop of Canturburie, y^ first day of October. He
was variable, inconstant, covetous, and cruel, he burdened his people with
unreasonable taxes, pylled the rich and oppressed the poor, and what he thus
got, he prodigally spent in great banqueting and sumptuous apparel, for he
would neither eat, drink, or wear any thing, but W. Malme. Robert of
Glocest. S. Albons Cronicl.
that it cost vnmeasurably dear. As for example it was in those days written
(and for us now to be noted) that in a morning his Chamberlayne bringing him a
new pair of hosen, he demanding what they cost, and the Chamberlain The
best pair of hose three shillings.
answering three shillings, the king being wroth, said, away beggar that thou
art, are those meet hose for a King to wear, bring me a pair of a Mark, or
thou shalt sore repent it, then his Chamberlain fette another pair that were
much worse than the first, and said ^h^y cost a Mark, wherewith King William
was well pleased. Thus far have I noted the saying of King William, because
it imports the simplicity of apparel in those days used, so far
different from the excess of this present time.

Odo Bishop of Bayon, and Earl of Kent, with his brother 1088 The Nobles
^ebes^.
Robert Earl of Mortaigne and Hereford, and almost all the Nobles of England,
raised war against King William, and would have had Robert his eldest brother
to be King: but King William* by f^irs words pacifying some of the principal
conspirators, beseeged the residue in the Castle of Rochester, W. Malme.
and with much labor lastly overcame them.

An Earthquake ouerturned many houses and churches An Earthquake.
in England.

Lanfranke Archbishop of Canturbury deceassed. He renewed Anno reg. 2. 1089
the great Church of Canturbury, restoring xxv. manors to the same. He repaired
the walls of that City, builded two Hospitals, the one of Saint John the
other at Harbaldowne. Hospital of Saint John and Harbaldovvne.
He restored the Church of Rochester from four secular Clerks, to fifty
Monks. He always attended his book, and traveled to correct the corruption
of Writers.

When Lanfranke was dead, King Wilham kept in his own hands the Churches and
Monasteries of England after Matthew Paris. G. Lilly.
their pastors were dead, making great spoil, and lotting them out to ferme.

King William making war against his brother Robert Anno reg. 3. 1090 King
William made war on his brother.
Duke of Normandy, took the Castles of Wallarroke and of Albemarle, making
great spoil in his brothers Country: but at length agreemente was made
between them, that Robert should give up into the Kings hands, the Castles
that he had gotten of him: and the King should help him to get all that his
father had, England only excepted: and also, if one of them dyed without issue,
the other should succeed in the inheritance: to which covenant were sworn
twelve Princes of the Kings side, and twelve Barons on the Dukes side.

Malcoline King of Scotts did homage and fealty to King of Scots did homage.
Matthew Paris. Great tempest.
King William. of England.

A great tempest sell on Saint Lukes day in ^imdry places of England, specially
in Winchcombe, where a great part of the Steeple was ^uerthrowne with
thundering and lightning, and in London the wind ouerturned 606. houses, and
606. houses ouerturned.
the rou^e of Bow Church in Cheap, wherewith some persons were slain: four
of the ^afters of 20. foot in length were with such violence pitched into the
stree^e that scantly Will. Malme. Gualter Couen.
four foot of them remained above ground, which were feign to be ^^t even
with the same ground, bycau^e they could not be plucked out.

About this time, one Justinius son to Gurguntus* Earl Anno reg. 4.
of Glamorgan, and Morgannoke, refusing to obey Rhesus* son to Theodore
Prince of South Wales, sent Aeneas, The vvinning of Glamorgan and Morganoke
out of the VVelchmens hands.
son to Gedi^orus, sometime Lord of Deme^ia, into England, to take muster of
Souldioures, and there received a great Army, under the conduct of one Robert
Fitzhamon, and joining with other tables out of Went and Brecini^, met with
Rhesus in Black h^ll, and there ^^ewe him, and s^ paying the Englishmen their
wages, discharged them. But they taking regard unto the goodness of the soil,
and the great variance which was then amongst the Welchmen, as in foretime the
Saxons had done, they turned their force of arms against those which had
entertained them, and soon displaced them wholly of all the Champion, and the
best of the Country, which Robert Fitzhamon divided amongst twelve Knights
which he brought with him, reserving the better part to himself, who
building there certain Castles, and joining their power together, defended
their Farms and Lordships* which they had taken and possessed, whose heirs
peaceably* enjoy the same unto this day: but Justinius scarsely reserved to
himself and his, the hilly Country. The names of the twelve Knights were
these.

1 William Lowdon. 2 Richard Granuille. 3 Paganus Turberuille. 4 Robert
Saintqui^ti^^. 5 Richard Siward. 6 Gilbert Vmfreuill. 7 Roger Berkerowle. 8
Reynald Sully. 9 Peeter Soore. 10 John Fleming. 11 Oliver Saint John. 12
William Easterling, now for shortness called S^radling.
Thus was the Lordship of Glamorgan and Morgannoke won out of the Welchmens
hands, which Lordship contained in length from R^mid bridge on the East side,
to Pallekinan in the West side 27. miles. The breadth from the Haven of
Aberthaw on the South side* to the confine of Breknokeshire, about Morleys
Castle, is 22. mi^^^*

In this Province are neath upon a River of the same name Pontfaine, that is to
say, Stone bridge, sometimes called Cowbridge, Lantwid, Wenny* Dinwid* Towns,
and Castles, besides Caer Phili, a most ancient Castle and fortress, which by
report was erected by the Romans, and Caerdid, the Humfrey L^^yd.
principal Town of the Shire, standing upon the River Tafe, Englishmen term
it Cardid or Gardife.

Also, within the body of the said Lordship, were eightene Castles, and ^6.
Knights fees and a half, that held of the same Lordship by Knights service,
besides a great number of free holders. Also, the said Lordship being a
Lordship Marcher, or a Lordship Royal, and holden of no other Lordship, the
Lords thereof, ever since the winning of the same, owing their obedience only
to the Crown, have used therein Iura regalia, with the trial of all actions,
as well real as personal, and pleas of Crown, with authority to pardon all
offenses, Treason only excepted.

King William* W(...) Northumberland, where he repaired 1091 New Castle.
Sarisburie. Anno reg. 5
such Castles as the Scotts had impaired, and builded the new Castle on
Tine. Osmond Bishop of Sarisburie founded the Cathedral Church of old
Sarisburie, and on the morrow after the dedication thereof, the Steeple was
fiered by lightning.

In England fell wonderful abundance of rain, and after 1092 Great Frost.
Matthew Paris. Will. Malme.
ensued so great frost, that horses and carts passed commonly over great
Rivers, which when it thawed, the Yse brake down many great bridges.

Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, sent into Normandy for Abbey of Chester.
Anselme, by his counsel to build an Abbey at Chester of Saint Werbridge.

King William lying sick at Gloucester, for fear of death, Matthew Paris.
promised to correct the wicked Laws.

He gave the Archbishoprike of Canturbury to Anselme, Anselme Archbishop.
and to his Chancellor Robert Bloet, the Bishoprike of Lincoln* but when the
King had recovered his health, he was sorry that he had not sold the Bishoprike
of Lincoln.

Malcolme King of Scotts coming into England, was King of Scotts flayne.
met withal, and sodeinly ^^ayne, with his son and heir also, by Robert
Mowbray Earl of Northumberland.

John Bishop of Wells, by noynting the Kings hands, Bishopric at Bathe.
Jews in Suffex. Anno reg. 6. 1093 Carelile repaired, and the Castle builded.
Famine. ^^* Beuerla. Thomas Rudburn.
transposed his Bishops seat to Bathe.

William Waren first Earl of Surrey, and Gundred his wife, founded the Abbey
of Jews in Sussex.

King William builded again the City of Carelile which was destroyed by the
Danes 200. years before. He also builded a Castle there, and out of the South
parts of England sent men to inhabit.

This year was a great famine, and after, so great a mortality, that the
quick were scant able to bury the dead.

King William made great wars in Normandy against his brother Robert, through
the which both England and Normandy were fore oppressed with exactions.
Exactions. VV^l^chmen vvon Angle^ey.


The Welchmen spoiled the City of Gloucester with a part of Shrewsburie and
woonne the Is^e of Anglesey.

The Bishopric of Thetford was translated to Norwich, Bishopric at*
Norwich. Anno reg. 7. 1094 Northumberland spoiled.
by Herbert Losing, Bishop there.

King William sent his brother Henry into Northumberland with a great power,
because Robert Mowbrey Earl of that Country refused to come to the Kings
Court: the Country was spoiled, the Earl was taken, and many were disherited.
Some had their eyes put out etc.

King William with a great power entered Wales, but not King William invaded
wales.
being able to follow the Welchmen among the hills, he builded two Castles in
the borders and returned.

Great preparation was made by the Christians to go Anno reg. 8. 1095 (...) to
Jerusalem.
against the Infidels at Jerusalem, Peter the Hermit being their first
leader, and after Godfrey of Lorraine, called Godfrey of Bolleine.

Robert Duke of Normandy took his journey toward Anno reg. 9. 1096 Normandy
pavvned. An. reg. 10. 1097 Nice and Antioch vvoon.
Jerusalem and laid Normandy to gage to his brother King William for 6666.
pounds of silver.

The Dukes, Godfrey Beamonde and Robert, beseeged the City of Niece, with
6000. horsemen, and 10000. footmen, and took the same, with the wife of
Soliman, and his sons. They also took the City of Antioch.

King William with an army of horsemen and footmen went the second time
into Wales, meaning to kill all the male kind there, but he could uneath kill
or take any one of them.

All the lands in Kent* that sometime belonged to Earl Hector Boethius. Godvvin
sands.
Godwine, by breaking in of the Sea, were covered with Sands, and therefore is
yet called Godwine Sands.

King William was in Normandy* and gave himself to Exactions. An. reg. 11.
1098 An. reg. 12. 1099 Jerusalem vvonne.
wars there, so that with exactions and tributes he did not only shave, but
flea the people of England.

Hugh, Earl of Shrewsburie was slain in Anglesey by the Irishmen.

The Christians took the City of Jerusalem, and placed there a King and a
Patriarche.

After King Wilham was come out of Normandy, he kept his Court at Westminster
in the new Hall, which he had then caused to be builded, the length whereof is
270. foot, Westminster Hall. P. Patauiensis.
and the breadth 74. foot, and hearing men say it was too big, he answered,
this Hall is not big enough by the one half, and that it was but a Chamber
in comparison Io. Euersden.
of that he was about to make. A diligent searcher might Matthew Paris. Io.
Rouse.
yet find out the foundation of the Hall which he had purposed to build,
stretching from the Thames side unto the common street.

King William being a hunting in the new Forest, word was brought him that his
people were beseeged in Main: he forthwith took shipping, though he were
vehemently persuaded to the contrary, for that there was at that time a great
tempest, to whom he answered, he never heard that any King was drowned. At
this time he got more honor Word of William Rufus. Matthew Paris.
than ever he did in all his life, for he chased his enemies, and returned with
victory.

In this Summer, blood sprang out of the earth at Finchamstede Anno reg. 13
in Barkeshire.

King William on the morrow after Lammas day hunting 1100 There stande^^ a
Chapel. King William slain. Will. Malme. Matthew Paris. Radulphus Niger.
in the new Forest of Hampshire, in a place called Chorengham, Sir Walter
Tirell shooting at a Dear, unawares hitte the King in the breast, that he fell
down stark dead, and never spoke word: his men (specially that Knighte) gate
them away, but some came back again, and laid his body upon a Colyars Cart,
which one silly lean beast did draw unto the City of Winchester, where he
was Radul. Cogshal.
buried on the morrow after his death, at whose buryall men could not weep for
joy.

This King was taken out of the world in the midst of his unrighteousness,
who being wicked to his own people and to strangers, was most wicked to
himself.

The Countries about him he provoked with wars: and England was so miserably
oppressed under him, that it Io. Rouse.
could not recover, for he and his train spoiled and subverted all things. He
reigned twelve years and eleven months lacking eight days.

He gave unto the Monks, called De Charitate, in Southwarke, Register of
Berna^dsey.
the great new Church of Saint Savior of Barmonds eye, and also Barmonds eye
it self.

He also founded of an old Monastery of Monks, a Ex C^^^
goodly Hospital in the City of York, called Saint Leonards, for the
sustentation and finding of the poor, as well men as women. He gave the
Church of Saint Peeter in the City of Bathe to be a Bishops Sea, and the
mother Church of Somersetshire.

King Henry Beawclerke


HEnry brother to William Anno reg. 1. Io. Rouse.
Rufus, and y^ first of that name, for his learning called Beawclearke, brought
up in the study of the liberal arts at Cambridge, chieflye through the
travel of Henrye Nowborough Earl of Warwike who appeased all debates of that
time to the The. R^dborne. W. Malme.
contrary) obtained the dominion over this Realm of England, and began his
reign the first day of August, in the year o^ ^ure Lord 1100. and was
crowned at Westminster on the fifth day of August, by Mawrice Bishop of London,
because at that time Ge^^^. Dor^.
Anselme Archbishop of Canturburie, was by persecution of William Rufus exiled.

This Henry borne at Selbe in England, was a noble Prince, strong and mighty
of body, high of stature, and amiable of countenance. He was excellent in wit,
eloquent, and fortunate in battle, and for these three, he had three notable
vices, covetousness, cruelty, and lechery.

He married Mawde the daughter of Malcoline King of Scotts, of whom he begat
William, and a daughter named Mawde.

At the beginning of his reign, he restored the state of the Clergy, aswaged
the grievous payments, reduced again Saint Edwards laws, and amended them.

He put out of his Court all nice and wanton persons.

He reformed the old untrue measures, and made a Measures reformed. W. Malme.
Vlno, now called a yard. W. Malme.
measure by the length of his own arm, which was then called Vlno, an Elle,
and now the same is called a yard, or metewand etc.

He restored to his Subjects the use of lights in the night, Use of light in
the night permitted.
which lights, and also fire, had him forbidden by his father to be used,
after the ringing of a Bell, at eight of the clock at night.

Edgar King of Scotts did homage to this Henry.

This year Jordan Briset Baron, the son of Raufe, the Saint John's by
Smithfielde
son of Brian Briset founded the house of Saint John of Jerusalem, near
unto London, by Smithfield.

The same Jordan gave fourteen Acres of ground lying Clarken well. Register
of Clerken well. Ex Carta.
in the field next adjoining unto Clarken well, to build thereupon a house of
Nuns, wherein, he, with Murioll his wife were both buried in the Chapter
house.

Robert Shorthose Duke of Normandy, the Kings eldest 1101 Anno reg. 2.
brother, which was now returned from Jerusalem, made war upon his brother
Henry for the Crown of England, who assembled a strong army, and landed at
Portesmouth, but by mediation a peace was made, on condition, that Tribute to
Robert Shorthose. Winchester and Gloucester brent. Liber Glocestr. Tevvkesbery
builded. Cronica de Theoksbery.
Henry should pay three thousand marks yearly to Duke Robert, and if the one
dyed without issue, the longer liver should inherit. Winchester was brent the
xvij. of May, and Gloucester was brent the twentieth of May:

Robert Fitzham, who came with the Conqueror out of Normandy, with Sibell his
wife, founded a new the Church of Theukesbery and was there buried.

Robert de Belasine Earl of Shrewsburie, eldest son to 1102 Robert de
Belasme rebelled. W^l. Malme. Floriacens^s.
Roger Mountgomery strengthened the Town and Castle of Shrewsbury, so did he
the Castles of Bridgenorth, Tichile, and Arundell with vi^^uals, and armed men
against King Henry: but the King being warned thereof, he gathers his power,
and beseegeth Bridgenorth, which Town was yielded unto him. And this being
known to them of Arundell, they forthwith submitted themselves, with
condition, that their Lord Robert de Belasme might be permitted freely to
pass into Normandy. Also they of Shrewsbury sent the keys of their Castle,
and pledges of their obeisance, and then Robert, with his brother Ernulfus, and
Roger of Poytiers abiured this land for ever.

The Cathedral Church of Norwich was founded by Minster of Norvviche. Anno
reg. 3. Register of Saint Barthelmew. Hospital of S. Barthelmevv. 1103 Anno
reg. 4.
Herbert Bishop of Norwich.

The Priorie and Hospital of Saint Barthelmewe in Smithfield was founded by a
pleasant I ester or Minstrell of the Kings, named Reior, who became first Prior
there.

Before this time Smithfield was a laystow of all drdure and filth: and the
place where fellons and other transgressors were put to execution.

Roberte Duke of Normandy coming into England, through the subtelty of King
Henry his younger brother, released The younger brother begyleth the elder.
to him the tribute of three thousand Marks of Silver.

Hugh Lacy founded the Monastery of Saint John at Ex libre Lanthony Matthew
Paris. Lanthony founded. Chro. Donmow.
Lanthony, the Chanons of which place were since translated by Miles high
Connestable, and Earl of Here ford to a place near unto Gloucester, then
called Hide, since called Lanthony.

Iuga Baynard Lady of little Donmow, caused Maurice Bishop of London to
dedicate the Church of Donmow which the Priorie of Donmovv in Essex founded by
the VViddovv of Baynard that builded Baynards Castle in London.
had founded, and the same day she gave to it half a hide of land.

This Lady Iuga was late wife to Baynard, that first builded Baynards Castle
in London.

Great malice was kindled between the two brethren 1104 Anno reg. 5.
Robert and Henry whereupon deadly war ensued.

There appeared about the Sun four circles, and a blasing Star.

King Henry remained in Normandy, making strong 1105 Anno reg. 6. Saint John's
in Colchester.
wars upon his brother Robert and Rorsia his wife.

Eudo Dapifere, or sewer to King Henry founded the Monastery of Saint John in
Colchester of black Channons, and those were the first in England.

Simon Earl of North-hampton; and Mawde his wife, Saint Andrew in
North-hampton. Ex Carta. ^o. Rouse. 1106 Anno reg. 7. Elder brother seeks
favor of the younger.
founded the Monastery of Saint Andrew in North-hampton.

Robert Duke of Normandy came to his brother at Northhampton and friendly
desired him to bear brotherly love foward him, but King Henry feeling his
conscience accusing him, for obteyning the Kingdom by defrauding of his elder
brother, and fearing men more than God, first he reconciled the Nobles of the
Realm with fair promises, thinking afterward to make amend for his great
wrongs, by founding of an Abbey.

The Duke returning into Normandy the King followed with a great power, where
between them were many sore battayles fought, but at the last the valiant man
Roberte was taken.

This year appeared a blasing Star; from three of the A Blasing Star.
Matthew Paris.
clock till nine. And on the Maundy Thursday was seen two full Moons, one in
the East, and another in the West.

The first Chanons entered into the Church of our Lady T Rudborne. Saint Mary
Ouery. Liber Roffensis* ^o. Reuerla. 1107 Anno reg. 8.
in Southwarke, called Saint Mary Ouery, founded by William Pountlarge Knight,
and Wiliam Daneys, Normans. Aigedus was first Prior there.

When King Henry had set in order Normady according to his pleasure, he
returning into England, brought with him his brother Robert; and W^rlham of
Morton, and put them in perpetual prison, from whence shortly after, Duke
Robert deceiving The younger brother puttet^ out the eyes of his elder.
his kepers; sought to escape; but he was taken as he fled, and by his brothers
commandment had his eyes put out, and kept streighter till his dying day.

This year, the Priorie of the holy Trinity, within 1108 Priorie of the
Trinity in London. Liber trini.
Aldgate of London, was founded by Matild the Queen, in the Parishes of Mary
Magdalen, Saint Michael, Saint Katherine; and the holy Trinity, all which are
now but one Parish of Christ Church, in old time called holy Roode parish. W.
Dunthorne.
She gave to the same Priorie the port of Aldgate, with the stock thereunto
belonging, which was of her demaynes, and is now called Aldgate Ward.

King Henry with sundry expeditions brought under him the Welchmen, and to pull
down their stoutness, he Anno reg. 9. W^it. Malme. Gerua. Doro, Flemings
sent into Wales.
sent all the Flemings that inhabited England thither, which of late were come
hither, when great part of Flanders was drowned, and also in time of his
father, by aliance of his mother, in so much, that through their great
multitude they seemed grievous to the Realm, wherefore he sent them ali with
their substance and kindred into Rose, a Co^untrey of Wales, a^ into a^ stuck,
that he might cleanse the Realm of them, and also suppress the wildness of
the enemy, and not long after he made expedition thither, compelling the
Welchmen to give him for pledges the sons of the Nobility, with some money,
and much Cattle, and returned.

Henry Emperor of: Rome sent messengers into England, requiring to have Mawde
the Kings daughter given 1109 An^. reg. 10.
him in marriage, which was granted by the King, who then took three. Shillings
of every hide of land through England.

The King translated the Abbey of Eoly into a Bishopric, A Tax. John Taxtor,
Eely^ a Bishopric. Matthew Paris. ^ibermo^n. Elie.
and made Haruey Crust Bishop of Bancor, Bishop there.

A Comete appeared after a strange fashion, for it was risen out of the East,
and astended upwards.

A great Earthquake was at Shrewesburie, and the water 1110 Anno reg. 11 A
Comete. Trent dried up. Floria censis.
of Trent at Nottingham was dried up from one of the clock, till three.

King Henry married Robert his bastard son to Mawde, Floriacen.
daughter and heir to Robert Fatzham, and made him the first Earl of
Gloucester, who after builded the Castles of Bristow Castles at Bristovv and
Cardife. Saint James at Bristovv, Kensham. 1111 Anno reg. 12 Matthew Paris.
and Cardeffe, with the Priorie of S. James in Bristowe, where his body was
buried. And his son Earl William began the Abbey of Kensham.

King Henry went into Normandy to make war against the Earl of Angiew, which
kept Maine against the Kings will, and spoiled the whole Country.

William Baynard, under whom Lady Iuga held the Cro. Dun.
title of Dunmow, by misfortune lost his Barony, and King Henry gave it wholly
to Robert the son of Richard the Robert Fit^^ Richard.
son of Gilbert Earl of Clare, and to his heirs, together with the honor of
Baynards Castle in London, and the appurtenances. This Robert was Cupbearer or
Butler to the King.

About this time, Gefferey Clinton, Treasourer and 1112 Anno reg. 13
Kenelvvorth Priory and Castle founded. Lib. Ken.
Chamberlayne to King Henry the first, founded the Priorie at Kenelworth of
regular Chanons. Geffery Clinton the younger, confirmed to the Chanons all which
Geffery his father gave them, except those lands which his father reserved, to
make his Castle and Park on in Kenelworth.

This year was a great mortality of men, and moreine Matthew Paris.
of Beasts.

The City of Worcester, the chief Church, the Castle, 1113 Anno reg. 14.
Floriacen. Cro. Hautenprice.
and all other buildings, one of the Monks, with two servants, and fifteen
Citizens, were all brent the twentieth day of July.

The King subdued the Walchmen.

The King caused all his Nobles to swear to William his son.

The tenth of October, the River of Medway, by no small 1114 Anno reg. 15
Thames and Medvvay dried up.
number of miles, did so fail of water, that in the midst of the Channel the
smallest Uessels and Boats could not pass. The self same day the Thamis did
suffer the like lack of water, for between the Tower of London and the bridge,
and under the Bridge, not only with Horse, but also a great Thomas de Wike.
Walter Couen. John Taxtor. William Sheepehead. Liber Roffensis. Chichester
brent. A blasing star. 1115 Anno reg. 16 Liber trinitatis.
number of men and children did wade over on foot, which defecte of water did
endure the space of two days.

Chichester with the principal Monastery was brent.

There was many storms, and a blasing Star.

This year through an hard Winter, almost all the bridges in England were
borne down with Yse.

Edgar sometime King of England granted unto thirteen Knights a portion of
ground without the walls of the City of London, left void in the East part
of the same City, Knighten Gild, now Portsoken ward.
together with a gilde, which he named Knighten Gild, that now is called
Portsoken ward, and now the Church of the holy Trinity being founded within
Aldgate of London by Mathild then Queen, as is before showed. The successors of
those Knights, to weete, Radulphus fitz Algede, Winiard le Douershe, etc. gave
the foresaid Lands called Knighten Gild, to the same Church: but Othowerus,
Accolinillus, Otto, and Gefferey Earl of Estsex, Constables of the Tower of
London by succession, with-helde by force a portion of the same land, that is
to say East Smithfield, near to the Tower, to make a Uineyard, and would not
depart from it by any means, till the second year of King Stephen, when the
same was adjudged and restored to the Church of the holy Trinity.

King Henry having great wars with Jews King 1116 Anno. reg. 17 Cro. Peter.
of France, the Realm of England was sore oppressed with exactions.

The Town of Peterborow with the stately Church there, was burned down to
the ground.

In March was exceeding lightning, and in December 1117 Anno. reg. 18. Tempest
and Earthquake.
thunder and hayle: and the Moon at both times seemed to be turned into blood.

This year in Lumbardy was an Earthquake, continued forty days, which
ouerthrewe many houses, and that Floriacen.
which was marvelous to be seen, a Town was moved from his seat, and set a
good way off.

Mathild the Queen, wife to King Henry of England, 1118 Anno reg. 19. Matthew
Paris.
deceassed at Westminster, and was there buried in the Reuostrie.

She founded the Priorie of Christ's Church within the East gate of London,
called Aldgate, and an Hospital of Mathilds Hospital.
Saint Giles in the field, without the Weast part of the same City.

The order of the Templers began. Knights of the Temple.


Many sore battayles were fought in France and Normandy between the King of
England and of France. 1119 Anno reg. 20 1120 Anno reg. 21. The Kings children
drowned. W. Malme. Matthew Paris.


King Henry having tamed the Frenchmen, and pacifyed Normandy, returned into
Engalnde, in which voyage, William Duke of Normandy, and Richard his sons,
and Marye his daughter, Richard Earl of Chester, and his wife, with many noble
men, and to the number of one hundred and sixty persons were miserably
drowned, the Sea being calm.

King Henry married Adelizia, the Duke of Louans 1121 Anno reg. 22.
daughter, at London: from thence the King with a great army went toward
Wales, but the Welchmen met him humbly, and agreed with him at his pleasure.

The City of Gloucester with the principal Monastery, was brent again, as
before, and Lincoln was burned. 1122 Anno reg. 23 Gloucester brent Lib.
Glocest. Matthew Paris. 1123 Anno reg. 24. VVarvvike with the College.


King Henry sailed into Normandy, where he remained long, traveling to quiet
that Country.

Henry Earl of Warwike, and Margaret his wife, founded the College of Saint
Mary in y^ town of Warwike. And Roger de Belemound his son Earl of Warwike,
and Aeline his wife, translated the same College into the Castle of Warwike,
in Anno 1123.

At that time were nine parishes in Warwike, Saint Sepulcre, Saint Hellens, of
these twain were made one Priorie of Saint Sepulcher: Alhalowes, Saint
Michaell, Saint John, Saint Peter, Saint Lawre^ce, Saint James, these five last
Liber Warwic^^* Io. Rouse.
were joined to Saint Maryes, in Anno 1367. Saint Nicholas.

Waleran Earl of Mellent is taken in Normandy by King 1124 Anno reg. 25 1125
Anno reg. 26 Matthew Paris. Taxtor. Coyners punished.
Henry, and he with many other are imprisoned at Roane.

John Thremensis Cardinal came into England, who inueying sore against
Priests Concubines, was himself detected of whoredom.

The King caused all the Coyners of England to have their privy members cut
off, and also their right hand, because they had corrupted the Coin.

Henry the fourth Emperor being dead (as it was said) 1126 Anno reg. 27. The
Empress returned into England. Giraldus Cambr.
and Mawde the Empress returning into England, dwelte with the Queen in her
Chamber, because she was suspect of her husbands death, but some affirmed him
to be long after in England, living as an Hermit, and in the end to be buried
at Chester.

King Henry held his Court with great magnificence Floriacen.
in his Castle of Winsore, and there assembled all the nobility of his
Realm, where when the Archbishop of York would have Crowned the King equally
with the Archshop of Canturbury, by the judgment of all men he Archbishop of
York with his Cross cast out of the Kings Chapel.
was repulsed, the bearer of his Cross, together with the Cross, was thrown
out of the Kings Chapel: for it was affirmed that no Metropolitan out of his
own Province might have any Cross borne before him. The feast being ended,
the King with all the States of the Realm together came to London, and there
at the Kings commandment, William the Archbishop, and the Legate of the Romish
Church, and all other Bishops of the English Nation, with the Nobility, took
an oath. to defend against all men the Kingdom to his daughter, if she
suruiued her father, except that before his deceasse he begat some son to
succeed him.

The King also granted to the Church of Canturburie, and to William and his
successors, the custody and Constableship of the Castle of Rochester for ever.

The Archbishop of Canturbury assembled a counsel of Bishops, 1127 Anno reg.
28.
Abbots and other Prelates at Westminster, where they determined many causes
concerning Ecclesiastical business: and the King with his counsel confirmed
them.

King Henry went with a warlike army into France, because 1128 Anno reg. 29
Lodowike the French King defended the Earl of Flaunders the Kings Nephew and
enemy.

At this time men had such a pride in their hair, that they Men wear hair
like women. W. Malme. 1129 Anno reg. 30 Matthew Paris.
contended with women in length of hair.

King Henry held a Counsel at London, wherein it was granted him to have the
correction of the Clergy, which came to an evil purpose, for the King took
infinite sums of money of Priests, and suffered them to do what they would.

Robert Deolley Knight, great Conestable of England, was the first founder of
Osney.

King Henry gave his daughter the Empress to Geffrey 1130 Anno reg. 31 1131
Anno reg. 32 Rochester brent Richard Diuiensis 1132 Anno reg. 33 Carleil a
Byshopricke. Geruasius. Gualter Couen. London brent. Geruasius Doro. Thomas
Wikes.
Plantagenet Earl of Angiou.

In the Month of May, the King being present, the City of Rochester was sore
defaced with fire.

The King made a Bishopric at Carleil.

Mawde the Empress did bear to Geffrey Plantagenet Earl of Angiou a son,
and named him Henry, which when the King knew, he called his nobles together,
and ordained, that his daughter, and the heirs of her body, should succeed
him in his Kingdom.

In Whitsonweeke, a great fire beginning at Gilbert Beckets house in Weast
Cheap, consumed a great part of London, from thence to Algate with the
Priorie of Channons of the holy Trinity, and many houses of Office thereto
belonging.

An Earthquake in England. Earthquake.


Henry Bloys Bishop of Winchester, builded the Hospital Liber canonitrinitatis.
of Saint Cross near unto Winchester. The same had been a Hospital in the
Saxons time, but after spoiled by the Danes.

There was great darkness in England, and the Sun 1133 Anno reg. 34.
Worcester brent.
became like the Moon in the third quarter.

Worcester, as it had often before chanced, was sore defaced with fire.

Mawde the Empress brought forth a son named Geffrey, for which cause King
Henry went over into Normandy.

Robert Shorthose King Henry's brother died in the Castle 1134 Anno reg. 35
Robert Short^ose died. 1135 Anno reg. 36 Death of King Henry. Matthew Paris.
of Cardife, and was buried at Gloucester.

King Henry remaining in Normandy, upon a day did eat Lampraies, whereof he
took a surfeite, and deceased the first day of December, Anno. 1135. when he
had reigned 35. years 4. months: his bowels, brains and eyes, were buried at
Roan, the rest of his body was pondered with salt, and wrapped in Bulls
hydes, because of the stincke, which poisoned them that stood about him. The
Physician which being hired with a great reward to cleave his head to take out
ye brain, with the stinck thereof died, so that he enjoyed not the reward that
was couenaunted. Thus among a great many that king Henry slew, this Physician
was the last.

King Henry was buried at Reding, which he had founde^. He also founded the
Priorie of Dunstable, he converted a rich College of Prebends in the Town of
Cirencester, into an Abbay of Chanons regular: he also builded ^. Leyland.
there an Hospital of Saint John: and new builded the Castle of Windsor with
a College there.

()

King Stephen.


STephen Earl of Morton, Anno reg. 1 W. Malme. Floriacencis. Gernasius Do.
Ypodigma.
and of Boloigne, son to the Earl of Bloys, and Adela, William Conquerours
daughter, and nephew to king Henry the first, claymed the kingdom the
second day of December Anno. 1135.

He coming into England, was repulsed by them of Dover, shut out by them of
Canturburie, but received of ye Londoners, and Peers of the land, admitted
king, and crowned at Westminster on Saint Stephens day by William Archbishop
of Canturburie.

This was a noble man and hardy, of passing comely favor and personage, he
excelled in martial policy, gentleness and liberality toward all men,
especially in the beginning: and although he had continual war, yet did he
never burden his commons with exactions: But unjustly and contrary to his oath
made to Mawde the Empress, daughter Fire at London
to King Henry, he took on him the crown of England.

Fire which began in the house of one Ailward near London Liber trinitatis
London. Thomas Wikes. 1136 Excester besieged. Ger. Dorobor.
stone, consumed Eastward to Algate, and Westwarde to Saint Erkenwalds shrine
in Poules Church.

King Steven assembling a great army of Englishmen and Flemmings entered into
Devonshire, and besieged the Castle of Excester a long time, which Baldwine
de Rivers held against him, but at length when they within the Castle wanted
necessary things to live by, they compounded. Baldwine with his wife and
children are disherited and expulsed the land.

A battle was fought at Goher, betwixt Normans and Walshmen, where a hundred
and. xvj. persons on both sides Battle against the vvalchmen.
were slain, whose bodies lay in the fields, and were horribly torn and
devoured of Wolves.

After this was made great eruptions by the Walchmen, who destroyed Churches,
Towns, Castles, corn, cattayle, slew men, women and children, rich and
poor, or sold the^ in foreign countries.

In October a sore battle was fought at Cardigan, in the which such slaughter
of men was made, that the men except which were led away captive, there were
of women taken and led away, that there remained to the tenth a thousand,
their husbands with their small children partelye drowned, partly brent, partly
slain, so that the bridge being broken over the river of Tinde, there was a
bridge made of men's bodies Anno reg. 2.
and horses drowned.

In March King Steven passed the Sea to subdue Norma^die, 1137 Ypodigma.
Rochester. Richard Diuiensis
where he took many Cities and strong Castles.

The third of June, Saint Andrewe in Rochester was brent, with all the City,
and the Bishops and Monks houses.

The fourth of June Saint Peter's the Archbishops sea in Saint Peter's in York.
York, Saint Mary's without the walls, and an Hospital which the Archbishop
Thrusto^ had builded, with 39. other Churches, also the Trinity Church in the
suburbs of the same City, within a small time after were brent.

Also Saint Peter's Church at Bathe, and all the City, the The City of Bath
brent. Liber Roff. Geruasius Dor^. Floriacensis. Anno. reg. 3.
27. of June was brent. And the same month the city of Leogere was consumed
with fire.

England began to fall into great troubles, which caused King Steven to return
out of Normandy before he had finished his business there.

King Stephen besieged Bedford and won it, then he went 1138 Bedford
besieged. Floriacencis* Geruasius.
with a strong power into Northumberlande, where he stayed not long, but went
to Gloucester, where the Citizens received him with great rejoicing: Miles the
Kings Conestable brought him into the Kings Palace there, where all the
Citizens were to him sworn. From thence he went to Hereford, because that he
heard the Castle was holde^ against him, and on Whitsonday he sat crowned in
the Church of Hereford. When they that kept the Castle saw the Kings power
to increase, they yielded themselves. The King took also the Castle of
Webheleyge, which Geffrey Talbot had held against him. The same day that
the King departed Hereford brent.
out of Hereforde all beyond the River of Wye was burnt by the said Geffrey.
The King returned to Oxforde, where he took Roger the Bishop of Sarum, with
the Bishop of Lincoln and his son Roger: the Bishop of Eely escaping, went
to the Castle of Vies and kept it against the King, but at length it was
delivered.

The same time Robert Earl of Gloucester renounced his allegeaunce to King
Stephen, fortified Bristow and other Castells. Also Miles the Kings Conestable
revolted. Wherefore Bristovv besieged.
the King besieged the Castle of Bristow, but at length being wearyed, he
turned to other of the Earls Castles, and seeing his enimyes still
increasing: he called out of Flaunders Anno reg. 4. Ypodigma.
men of war with Wylliam de Ypers their leader, whose counsel he chiefly
followed.

The same year Roger Bishop of Salisbury, a great builder Geruasius Do^o.
of Castelles and Houses, departed this life. There was found in his Coffers
forty thousand Marks of silver, besides much gold, and diverse Jewels that
came to the kings hand, so that he had gathered treasure, but wist not for
whom.

The Nobles sent for Mawd the Empress, promising her Matthew Paris. Geruasius.
Battle of the standarde. Cro. Hautenprice.
the possession of the realm according to their oath made to her: In the mean
time, David king of Scots, promising to recover the crown of England for the
Empress Mawde his Niece, in most cruel wise invaded Northumberland, where by
Thrustone Archbishop of York, the Scotts had an overthrow at Conton more than
four miles Northweast from Alnert^^ and were slain above x. thousand.

In the month of July Robert Earl of Gloucester returned 1139 The Empress
returned into England. Geruasius.
into England, with his sister the Empress, and a great army, which arrived at
Portesmouth. The Empress was received into Arundel castle, by Adelize late
wife to king Henry, as then wife or Concubine to William Earl of Arundel.

Earl Robert went to Wallingforde, and thence to Gloucester, and raised those
Countries.

The king held his siege before Marleborough, but advertised Marleborough
besieged.
of the Empress arrival, he hasted toward Arundel* where being by fair
speech pacified, he commanded his brother Bishop of Winchester to bring the
Empress unto Bristowe, and he himself followed Earl Robert with his army. The
Empress stayed at Bristow till October, and then went to Gloucester, her
coming thither being known, Miles the high Conestable and many other nobles
took part with her against king Stephen.

The king besieged Wallingforde Castle, but profited not, VValingford castle
besieged. Floriacensis.
and therefore raising a Tower of woodde before it, stuffed it with men of
war, and went to win the Castle of Malmesburie.

The army of Earl Robert wanne the City of Worcester* brent the most part
of it, and laden with the spoil, departed thence*

The Shirife of that City in revenge hereof, destroyed the town of Sudley,
and with the spoil thereof returned to Worcester.

After this the King with a great army came from Oxford to Worcester, where he
gave the honor of high Conestableship, Anno. reg. 5.
(being taken from Miles of Gloucester) unto William the son of Walter
Beauchampe, Shirife of Worcester, and then returned to Oxforde and so to
Salisburie.

The King went to Reading, and after with his army toward 1140 Notingham
spoiled. Geruasius Doro.
Ely, but the Bishop fled to Gloucester, to Earl Robert, and the King
wanne the Castle of Ely.

Robert Earl of Gloucester with a great power invaded the town of Notingham and
spoiled it: the towns men were taken, slain or brent in the Churches,
whereunto they fled. One of them more rich than the others was taken, and led
Anno. reg. 6. Notingha^ brent*
to his own house by his takers, to show them where his treasure lay, he
bringing them into a low seller, whilst they were busy to break open locks
and Coffers, he conveyed him self away, and shutting the doors after him, set
sire on ye house: and soothe thieves to the number of thirty were brent, and
by reason of this fire all the town was set a fire and brent.

King Stephen besieged Lincoln, against Ranulph Earl of Chester, but Roberte
Earl of Gloucester, came with a great 1141 Lincoln besieged. King Stephen
taken.
power and rescued the same, chased the Kings army, and took him prisoner on
Candlemas day, first he was had to Gloucester, and after to Bristowe, and there
committed to prison.

The Empress rejoicing at this her good hap, departed from Gloucester and
came to Ciceste,r with Bishops, Barons and other in great number, from thence
she went to Winchester, where met her Lords spiritual and temporal in
great number, the City with the tower and Crown of the Realm was delivered
into her hands.

The Bishop of Winchester that was king Stephens brother, The Empress
obtayneth the Crown.
accursed all that stood against the Empress, and blessed those that took her
part. From thence she departed to Wilton, where the Archbishop of Canturburie
came and saluted her. When Easter was paste, she went to Reding* where she was
received with all the honor that might be: thence she went to Oxforde, where
the Castle was delivered unto her by Robert de Olly: then went she to Saint
Albons and was received with all honor.

Here the Citizens of London came and yielded their City to her, whereupon she
went to London, and so to Westminster, where she being received with
procession, remained certain days taking order for the state of the Realm.

King Steuens wife, and many Peers of the realm, made Ypodigma. Geruasius Do.
Floriacensis.
suite to the Empress to have the King restored to liberty, and not to the
kingdom, promising to persuade with him to become a Monk: but she would not
hear. The Bishop of Winchester requested her, to give unto Eustace his nephew,
King Steuens son, his fathers Earldom, but it would not be. The Citizens
of London required her to restore King Edwardes laws, but she being puffed up
with pride, would not grant their request, whereupon they conspired to take
her prisoner, but she advertised hereof, fled with shame, The Empress fled.
leaving behind her all her furniture of household and apparel.

Henry Bishop of Winchester, casting which way to deliver his brother,
persuaded the Londoners to aid him. The Empress got her to Oxforde, and from
thence to Gloucester, and Ypodigma. Floriacences. Geruasius.
the^ with her assured friend Miles, again to Oxforde: and because she trusted
most in him, she to do him honor, gave him the Earldom of Heneforde, and now
having got a great army, about Lammes went again to Winchester, and lodged in
the Castle there. The Bishop abashed of her sodayn coming departed out at one
gate as she came in at another, he getting a great army with the help of the
Londoners, besieged the City, and the second of August committed the City to
the Winchester brent. Geruasius. Floriacensis.
fire, with the which the Nunry and houses of office with more than twenty
Churches, some write xl. and a great part of the City, with the Monastery of
Saint Grimbald, and the houses thereto belonging, were brought to ashes. About
the exaltation of the cross, the Empress being wearied of long siege, got her
to horssebacke with her brother Reginalde Earl of Cornewal, and many other.

Earl Robert followed with a great number of Lords and knights, but the
Bishops men setting on them, slew and took a great number.

The Empress fled to the Castle of Lutegershal heavy and The Empress fled.
almost dead for fear: from thence she was brought to the Castle of Vies,
and from thence to Gloucester, bound in a horselitter like a dead carcass.

Earl Robert being pursued was taken at Stobbridge we Earl of Gloucester taken.
Earl Waren, and many other, and presented to the Queen, as then new entered
into Winchester.

Earl Robert was delivered to William de Ypers, who put him in prison in the
Castle of Rochester.

Miles Earl of Hereford hardly escaped, and came to Gloucester Earl of
Hereforde fled.
almost naked. The Bishops men brent the Monastery of Nuns at Warwel, etc. the
books and ornaments of the Nuns were taken and borne away, and men slain even
before the Altar. These things thus done, the Bishops wroth was somewhat
appeased, but his covetousness increased, so that being prompted thereto by the
Prior of the new Monastery in Winchester lately brent, he took of the cross
that was burnt. 500. pound of silver and. 30. mark in gold, three crowns, with
as many ^eats of fine Arabicke gold: fret with precious stones, all this he
laid up in his own treasury.

King Stephen, and Earl Robert being straightly kept, at length through
mediation of friends a peace was concluded, that they should be delivered, the
king to his kingdom, and the Earl to his liberty.

William Mandeuile fortifyed the Tower of London, and John Beu^^*
Robert Bishop of London was taken at Fulham by Geffrey Mandeuel.

The King and Earl being set at liberty, did not only renew, but multiply
their malice: the King repaired his power 1241
and expenses, the Earl went over the Sea to Geffrey Earl of Aniowe, whom he
found occupied in wars against certain of his subjects of Aniowe, so that he
could not come into England with him, whereupon he taking Henry, eldest son to
Geffrey Earl of Aniowe, and Mawde the Empress, with certain chosen men of
arms, returned into England.

King Stephen hearing that Earl Robert was gone out The Empress besieged.
of the realm and the Empress to lie at Oxforde, with a great power, came and
besieged her a two months space. Earl Robert with Henry son to the Empress
and other his accomplices, Warham Castle besieged.
landed at Warham, where he besieged the castle, which was defended by Hubert
de Lucy, who at length yielded the The Empress flies. Geruasiue.
same. In the mean time the Empress seeing that she was void of all help,
with a womannish subtilitie deceived the kings scout watch, clothing her self
and her company, five in number all in white, upon a night went over the
Thamis a foot, which was then hard frozen, and white with snow: that night she
went to Walingforde, and the Castle of Oxford was yielded to the king. After
the winning of Warham castle, Robert went to visit his sister the Empress, who
was not a little joyful to see him and her young son Henry, which Henry
remained at Bristowe for the space of four years, and there Anno reg. 8.
was brought up in learning.

King Stephen after the robbing of many churches, brenning 1143
and robbing of towns and villages by the hands of ye Flemming soldiers, he
and his brother Henry Bishop of Winchester, builded a castle of the Nunry at
Wilton, to repress the incursions of them of Salisburie. Earl Robert the
first of July fell suddenly upon them in Wilton, and set the town on Wilton
brent. King Stephen fled. Anno reg. 9. Boxley.
fire. The king with the Bishop fled with shame, the Earls me^ took the kings
people, and sacked his plate and other things.

Miles Earl of Herforde dyed, and his eldest son Roger succeeded him.
William of Ypre, founded Boxley Abbay in Kent.

King Stephen took Geffrey Mandeuile Earl of Essex, at 1144 Geruasiue D^r^.
S. Albons which Geffrey could not be set at liberty til he had delivered the
Tower of London, with the Castles of Walden and Plecy. When the Earl was thus
spoiled of his holds, he took the Church of Ramsey, and fortified it: as he
besieged the Castle of Burwel, he was smitten in the head with a Darte, whereof
he died. Robert Marmon was also slain at Couentrit, and Ernulfus Earl
Mandeuiles son, that held Ramsey church as a fortress, after his fathers
death was taken and bannished. Anno reg. 10 1145 Wallingford besieged. Anno
reg. 11


King Stephen besieged Wallingford, but could not prevail. The Earl of
Chester was reconciled to the King, and was at this siege with him, but shortly
after when he came to the Court, the king lying at Northampton, he was taken
and kept prisoner till he had rendered the Castle of Lincoln and other
fortresses, whereupon he was the kings enemy ever after.

Geffrey Earl of Aniowe sent four noble men with furniture 1146
of warriors to Earl Robert, requesting him to send over his son Henry, and
if need required, he would send him back again with all speed. The Earl
agreeing to his request, brought the young Henry to Warham, where he took
shipping toward his father, of whom he was joyfully received, there he abode
two years and four months, in the mean time Earl Robert deceased, and was
buried at Bristowe. Anno reg. 12 1147


King Stephen entered Lincoln and there ware his crown, after whose departure
from thence, the Earl of Chester came to recover y^ town, but could not bring
his purpose to pass, Anno reg. 13 The Empress went into Normandy.
the Citizens showed such defense. The Empress being weried with the discord
of the English nation, went over into Normandy, chosing rather to sit under
the defense of her husband in peace, than to suffer so many displeasures in
England.

The Queen lay at Saint Austines in Canturburie, because 1148 Anno reg. 14 S.
Katherins. W. Dunthome. Liber trinitati^ London.
she was desirous to see the Abbay of Fe^ursham finished, which she and her
husband had begone to build: she also builded the Hospital of S. Katherine by
the tower of London, for poor brethren and sisters.

In the month of May, Henry the Empress son, 1149
with a great company of chosen men of arms and other came into England,
and taking with him Ranulph Earl of Chester, Roger Earl of Hereford and
diverse other, he went to David king of Scotts, of whom he was joy, fully
received, and made knight. When king Stephen heard that David King of Scotts,
with his strength, and Hen son to the Empress with his Western Lords, were
together at Carlisle, he came to York with a great army, for fear they should
attempt any thing against that City, and so lay there the month of August: at
length the one party as well as the other departed: but Eustacius the Kings
son being made knighte, exercised many cruelties in the lands of the
Earls, that took part with Henry the Empress son.

Henry the Empress son sailed into Normandy. Al England Anno reg. 15 1150
Anno reg. 16 Ex charta regia. 1151 Ypodigma. Geruasiu^.
was full of trouble and noise of war, set forth to fire and rapyne, through
discord betwixt king Stephen, and certain Earls that took part with Henry
the son of the Empress.

Robert Earl of Ferrers, founded the Abbay of Meriual.

Geffrey Plantagenet Earl of Aniow, and Duke of Normandy, deceased, and left
his son Henry his heir.

King Stephen besieged the Castle of Worcester, which he Worcester besieged.
Anno reg. 17
could not win the last year, and when he saw now also that he could not
obtain his purpose, he builded two Castles before the same, stuffing them with
garrisons, and went from thence, but by Counsel of Roberte Earl of Leicester,
the kings Castles were overthrown, and the Castle besieged delivered from
danger.

A diuorcement was made between Jews king of France 1152 Matthew Paris.
Geruasius Doro.
and Elianor his Queen, because they were a kin in the fourth degree:
moreover, she was defamed of adultery with an infidel, etc.

Henry Duke of Normandy married Elianor, (who^ Jews king of France had
deuorced from him) and had by her a son named William.

King Stephen called a Parliamente at London, declaryng to Theobalde
Archebyshoppe of Canturburie, and the other Bishops, how he would utterly
disherite Henry duke of Normandy, and confirm his own son Eustace to be
his successor by crowning him king: but the Pope had sent a commandment to
the Archbishop, prohibiting him to crown king Stephens son, because his
father had usurped the kingdom, contrary to his oath. Which thing (as was
thought) was brought to pass by the subtle policy of Thomas Becket a
Chaplain borne in London.

King Stephen and his son, being not a little offended therewith, caused the
Bishops with their Primate to be closed up in an house, threatening with terrors
to extort of them that which with prayers or price they could not obtain. The
Archbishop stiffely standing in his purpose, some of the Bishops through fear
went from him, at length the Archbishop by a marvelous hap escaping, got over
the Thamis, and so to Dover: and thence transporting over the seas, escaped the
threats of the King and his son, and deprived his son of his coueted honor.

Queen Mawde deceased, and was buried at Feuersham. Anno reg. 18 Norwich
increased. Chronicle of Brom* holma.


The people of Norwich obtained of the king to have Coroners and baylifes, for
before yt time, they had no other Officer, but a sergeant for the king that
kept Courts, and after this, that is to say in the 37. year of Hemie the
third, they had license to enclose that town, with ditches got of sundry
hundreds* etc.

Henry Duke of Normandy furnished with an army came 1153
into England and at his first coming wan the Castle and town of
Malmesburie, from thenceforth Roberte the noble Earl of Leicester, began to
take the Dukes part, and to furnish him with things necessary, a thirty
Castles or more (through his counsel with them that kept them,) submitted
themselves to the Duke: at length it was decreed y^ the King should talk with
the Duke touching peace to be had: and so they met in a place where y^ Thamis
was most narrow, the one standing on the one side, and the other on the other.
After long talk they returned, the Duke to his men, and the king to his, and
so laying down weapon, every man departed in peace.

Eustace the kings son was angry with his father, for agreeing to this peace,
and therefore in a rage departed from Policraticon. John Sarisburien. John
Taxtor. Matthew Paris.
the Court toward Cambridge, to destroy that Country. Coming to S. Edmunds
Bury, he was there honorablye received and feasted, but when he could not
have such money as he demanded, to bestow among his men of war, he went away
in a rage, spoiling the corn in the fields belonging to ye Abbay, and carried
it into his castles thereby: but as he sat him down to dinner, he fell mad
upon receiving the first morsel, and miserably died, and was buried at
Feuersham.

The Duke besieged Stamfort Castle, and wanne it, and Stamforde Notingham, and
Ipsvvich besieged.
then he went to Notingham and wan that. The King in the mean time besieged
Ipswich and wan it. At length, thorough the great labor of the Archbishop of
Canturburie and the other Bishops, the king commanded the nobles to meet Ex
charta regia. Anno reg. 19 King Stephen adopted Henry. Ypodigma. 1154
at Winchester, where the duke being received with great joy, the King in sight
of all men adopted him his son, and confirmed to him the principality of all
England.

The duke received him in place of a father, granting to him all the days of
his life to enjoy the name and seat of the kings pre-eminence.

Duke Henry in the Octaues of the Ephiphanye, came together with the king to
Oxforde, where the Earls and Barons by the kings commandment swear fealty
to Duke Henry, saving the kings honor so long as he lived. This assurance
being made, they departed asunder, but shortly after they met again at
Dunstable, there to entreat of the state and peace of the kingdom.

Shortly after Duke Henry with king Stephen and certain Lords of England
came to Canturburie, and from thence to Dover, where they had communication
with Theodrike Earl of Flaunders, and the Countess the Dukes aunte. When the
King and the Duke had dismissed the Earl of Flaunders, and were turning
toward Canturburie, the slaughter of the Duke was prepared by a conspiracy of
the Flemmings, which envied both y^ duke and peace: but behold suddenly y^
kings yo^ger son William privy with the conspirators, on Barha^ down fell of
his horse, and breaking his leg, he gathered all y^ company about him in
sorrow. The duke in the mean time understanding the appointed treason, got him
to Canturburie, and so escaped his enemies hands: from thence by Rochester and
London, he came to the sea, and passed over into Normandy.

William Archbishop of York going to York in the feast of Pentercost, was
poisoned at Mass, and dyed within few days after.

In October the king met the Earl of Flaunders again at Dover, and talked with
him. After the Earl was dismissed, the king was taken with a sudden pain of
the Iliake passion, K. Stephen died Ger^a. Doro. Ralph Cogshal.
and with an old disease or running of the Emerodes, and there in y^ house of
the Monks dyed the xxv. of October, when he had reigned xviij. years. x.
months and odd days. He founded the Abbays of Cogshal in Essex, of Furnes in
Lancashire, of Hurguilers, and Feuersham in Kent, where his body was buried. He
founded an house for Nuns at Carewe.

King Henry the second.


Henry the second, son of Geffrey Plantagenet and Mawde the Empress, began
his reign over this realm Anno reg. 1.
of England, the xxv. day of October, in the year of our Lord 1154. he was
Crowned at Westminster the. xvij. day of December, by Theobalde Archbishop of
Canturburie: he was somewhat red of face, short of body, and therewith fat: of
speech reasonable, well learned, noble in chiualry, and fortunate in battle:
wise in counsel, one that loved peace, lyberall to strangers, but hard to his
familiars: unsteadfast of promise, given to pleasure, and a wedlock breaker: by
his manhood and policy the crown of England was much augmented, with the
annexing of Scotland, Ireland, the Isles of Orcades, Boytaine, Peyters, Guyen,
and other provinces of France.

Thomas Becket Archdeacon of Canturbury, was made the Kings Chancellor.

He held his Christmas at Bermonsey, where having conference Geruasius Doro.
with his Nobles for the state of the Kingdom, he 1155
promised to banish all Strangers. Whereupon William of Ipres, and all the
Flemings* that had flocked into England, fearing the indignation of the new
King, departed the land. And the Castles that had bin builded to pill the rich
and spoil the poor, were by the Kings commandemente, and counsel of his
Chancellor thrown down.

In March, Queen Elianor did bear a son at London called Henry after his
father.

King Henry was son to Mawde the Empress, whose Line of the Saxons restored.
Gerua. Doro. Radulphus de dec^te.
mother was Mawde Queen of England, wife to King Henry the first, and daughter
to Margaret Queen of Scotts, who was daughter of Edward, which he begat of
Agatha, the sister of Henry the Emperor. Edward was the son of King Edmond
named Ironside: whose father was King Etheldred: whose father was the peaceable
King named Edgar, the son of Edmond, the son of Edward the seigniour, the
son of Alured etc.

A counsel was holden at Wallingford, where the Nobles Anno reg. 2. Ger.
Dorobor.
were sworn to the King and his issue.

King Henry went over into Normandy, where with long 1156 Anno reg. 3.
seege he took diverse Castles, of Mirable, Chinon, and other, and obtained the
homage and pledges of all Aquitaine and Gascoyne.

William the Kings eldest son died, and was buried at Reding.

King Henry returned into England* and then with an army 1157 King Henry went
against the VVelchmen. Reedifyed Castles. Henry of Essex.
went against the Welchmen, where he felled their wods, fortified the Castle
of Rutland, and recovered many strong holds. He reedifyed the Castle of
Basingwirke etc. but he lost many of his men, for Henry of Essex that bare the
Kings Standerd, as he was assailed amongst his enemies, let fall the Standerd
to the ground, which encouraged the Welchmen, and put the Englishmen in fear,
supposing that the King Iocelyn of ^racland.
had bin slain.

The King notwithstanding got of a certain King of Anno reg. 4.
Wales and other Barons homage and hostages, and so rereturned.

Queen Elianor brought forth a son named Richard, at Oxford in the Kings
Palace there.

William Earl of Gloucester was taken by the Welchmen Giraldus Cambre.
in the Castle of Cardife.

On Christmas day King Henry ware his Crown at 1158
Winchester, where after celebration of divine service, he set his Crown upon
the Altar, and never ware it after.

King Henry went into France, and at Paris was joyfully received of King Jews,
who required to have his daughter Margaret to be married to his son Henry,
which suite he obtained, and King Henry obtained that as Seneshall to the
French King he might enter into Britain, and call before him such as made
war one against another, to appease them, whereby he brought the City of
Naunts to his dominion. An Earthquake happened in many places Earthquake.
through England: and the River of Thamis was dried up, that at London men
might walk over the same dryshod.

Queen Elianor brought forth a son named Geffrey. Anno reg. 5. Ypodigma.


A new Coin was made in England.

King Henry took es^uage of the Englishmen, the sum 1159 Geruasius.
whereof grew to 12400. pounds of silver. Of other Countries subject to him he
gathered also an infinite exaction, and then passed toward Toulouse with an
huge army, and beseeged that City from Midsomer til Hallontide. There were
with him Malcoline King of Scotts, and a certain King of Wales, and all the
Earls and Barons of England, Normandy, Aquitaine, Angeow, and Gascoyne: but
Jews the French King so defended that City, that the Kings purpose was
frustrate, and the seege raised.

King Henry returned from Toulouse, and Henry y^ King Anno reg. 6. 1160
of Englands son, not seven years old, married Margaret the French Kings
daughter, that was not yet three years Gerua. Dor^. Anno reg. 7. 1161 Anno
reg. 8. Thomas Wikes. ^^. Beu^^la.
old.

Matthew Earl of Bolonia married Mary Abbess of Rumsey, daughter to King
Stephen.

Theobald Archbishop of Canturbury deceassed, and the Church of Canturbury was
void one year, one month, and fourteen days.

King Henry caused all his subjects to swear fidelity to 1162 Matthew Paris.
his son Henry concerning his inheritance. Thomas the Kings Chancellor took
his oath, first, saving his fidelity to King Henry the father so long as he
lived. This Thomas was elected Archbishop of Canturbury, and when he was
consecrated, he forthwith refused to deal any more with matters of the Court,
renouncing the Chauncellorship etc.

There came into England xxx. Germaynes, as well men as women, who called
themselves Publicanes: their head and Wilbel Nouobur. Ralphe Cogshall*
ruler named Gerardus was somewhat learned, the residue very rude. They denied
Matrimony, and the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, with other
Articles. They being apprehended, the King caused a Counsel to be called at
Oxford, where the said Gerard answered for all his fellows, who being pressed
with Scriptures, answered concerning their faith, as they had bin taught, and
would not dispute thereof. After they could by no means be brought from
their errors, the Bishops gave sentence against them, and the King commanded
that they should be marked with an whote Iron in the forehead, and whipped, and
that no man should succor them with houserome or otherwise: they took their
punishment gladly, their Captain Publicans vvhipped.
going before them, singing, Blessed are ye when men do hate you: they were
marked in the forehead, and their Captain both in the forehead and the chinne.
Thus being Anno reg. 9.
whipped and thrust out in the winter, they dyed with cold, no man releeuing
them.

Robert de Mountfort accused his near kinsman Henry 1163 Ioc^lin of Bracland.
of Essex of high treason before the Nobility, affirming that he in an
expedition into Wales, in a narrow and hard passage at Colleshele, most
fraudulently threw away the Kings Standard, and with a loud voice pronounced
him to be dead, and turned back those that came to y^ Kings succor. (Indeed
the foresaid Henry of Essex was persuaded that King Henry was slain, which
undoubtedly had come to pass, if Roger Earl of Clare had not with quick
speed come to with his retinue, and raised again the Kings Standarde, to the
encouraging of the whole army.) Henry withstoode the foresaid Robert, and
denied all his accusations, whereby in process of time the matter came to be
tried by Combat. They met at Reding to fight, in an I^e Combat at Reading.
near to the Abbey. Thither also came much people to see what end the matter
would come to. And it chanced that when Robert had manfully powered out many
and heavy strokes, Henry turning reason into rage, took upon him the part of
a challenger and not a defender, who whilst he manfully stroke, was more
stoutely stricken again, and endeavoring to conquer, was conquered himself: he
being overcome, fell down for dead, and when he was thought to Henry of Essex
overcome.
have bin slain, at the instance of such of the nobility as were of kin to
him, it was granted unto the Monks there Flores Historiaru^.
that his body should be buried, but afterward he revived, and having recovered
his health, became a Monk in that place.

London Bridge was new made of timber, by Peter of Colechurch Anno* reg. 10
London bridge made of Timber 1164 Geruasius Do.
a Priest Chapleyne.

Malcoline the Scottish King, and Resus Prince of Southwales and other, did
homage to King Henry and his son Henry at Westminster.

A Counsel was holden at Claringdon, in presence of the King and the
Archbishops, Bishops, Lords, Barons, etc. wherein was recognized, and by their
oaths confirmed many ordinances, too long here to recite, Thomas Archbishop of
Canturburie being sworn to the same, shortly after sore repented, and ^^ed the
Realm, and went to the Court of Rome.

The six and twentieth day of January was a great Earthquake Anno reg. 11 1165
An Earthquake. Matthew Pari^. Gerua. Doro. Anno reg. 12.
in Eely, Norffolke, and Suffolk, so that it ouerthrewe them that stood upon
their feet, and made the Belles to ring in the Steeples.

The King seized into his hands all the Archbishops goods and rents, and
banished all his kindred.

The King led an innumerable army against the Welchmen* Radul. Cogshal.
of Flemings, Scotts, Pictes, Aniowans, and other, but with so great a
multitude he could not overcome them.

The Welchmen took the Castle of Cardigan.

In a certain asseege at Bridgenorth, against Hugh de Mortimere, when the
King was shot at by one of the enemies, a valiant man Hubert de Saint Clear
Constable of Colchester, did thrust himself betwixt the King and the danger
of the stroke, and so received death for him, whose only daughter the King
taking into his custody, he gave her in marriage to William de Languale, with
her fathers inheritance, who begat on her a son, bearing the name and
surname of his Grandfather.

Queen Elianor brought forth a son named John.

The King passed over into Normandy, and there holding 1166
a counsel, appointed a collection to be made through all his Countries, two
pence of the pound of mouable goods A Tax.
for the first year, and one penny the pound for four years after.

Robert, son to William Earl of Gloucester deceassed. Anno reg. 13 1167


The war was renewed betwixt the King of England, and the French King, for
the City of Tholose: and Mathewe Earl of Bulloigne, brother to Philip Earl
of Flanders manned six hundred Ships to have come into England, but by such
preparation as Richard Lucy governor of England made, he was stopped well
enough.

Mawde King Henry's daughter was married to Henry Anno reg. 14 1168 John Taxtor.
Gerua* Doro. Ypodigma.
Duke of Saxon.

Conan Earl of little Britain dyed, and left for his heir a daughter named
Constance, which he had by the King of Scotts sister, which Constance King
Henry married to his son Geffrey.

Robert de Boscue Earl of Leycester dyed. He founde^ Anno reg. 15 1169 Sca.
Cron. Gerendon. Leycester and Eaton. Sca. Cro.
the Monasteries of Gerendon of Monks: of Leycester called Saint Mary de Prate
of Channons regular: and Eaton of Nuns, was founded by Amicia his wife,
daughter of Ralph Montforde.

King Henry caused the Castle of Warwike to be builded.

Deruntius the son of Morcardus, called Mack Murgh Giraldus Cambr.
King of Leynster, being expelled out of his kingdom, came into Guyen to King
Henry, hnmbly requiring (...) ^^r his restitution, who understanding fully the
cause ^^ereof, gave free license to all Englishmen that would, to ^^^^e the
said Deruntius: whereupon he returning into England, couenanted with Richard
Earl of Chepstow, to g^^e him his daughter in marriage, and with her the
succession of his Kingdom, so that he would help him in the recovery of it:
and shortly after he promised to Robert Fit^ Stephen, and Mawrice Fitz Gerald
large revenues in Ireland for the like help.

King Henry held his Court at Naunts, where the Bishops Anno reg. 15. 1170
and Barons of Britayne being present, swear their fidelity to the King, and
to his son Geffrey: and then the King sailed into England, but many of his
company were Giral. Cambr.
drowned by the way.

Robert Fitz Stephen first of all Englishmen after the Conquest Englismnen
transported into Ireland.
entered Ireland the first day of May, with 390. men, and there took Wexford in
the behalf of Deruntius.

King Henry caused his son Henry borne at London Henry the kings son
Crowned.
to be Crowned by the hands of Roger Archbishop of York, as he thought to the
great quietness of himself and his Realm, but it proved far otherwise.

Thomas Archbishop of Canturbury, by the mediation of Pope Alexander, and Jews
the King of France, was restored to his Sea of Caunturbury.

In September, Richard Earl of Chepstow, surnamed Gualteru^ Couen.
Strongbow, sailed into Ireland with a thousand two hundred men of war, and
by force took Waterford and Dub^^^, and married Eve Deruntius daughter.

Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canturbury, the xxviij. of Anno reg. 17 1171
December was slain by William Tracy Baron of Brains, Reignolde Fitz Vrse,
Hugh Moruilt, and Richard Briton Knights.

There was seen at S. Osythes in Estsex a Dragon of a Chro. Colchester.
marvelous bigness, which by moving burned houses. Ex Record.


King Henry returned from beyond the Seas, and landed at Portesmouth in the
month of August.

Nicholas Break espeare an Englishman, borne at Langley in the County of
Hartford, son to Robert a younger brother Pope Adrian an Englishman.
of the house of Breakespeares, (which Roberte after the death of his wife
professed himself a Monk of Saint Albons, leaving his son to provide for
his own preferment) this young man passed into France, was shorn a Monk, and
after chosen Abbot: went to Rome, was consecrated Bishop of Alba, made
Cardinal, sent Legate to the Norwayes, where he reduced that nation from
Paganism to Christianity, and after returned to Rome. When Anastasius was
dead, he was chosen Pope, by y^ name of Adrian the 4. During his Popedom, he
granted the regimente of Ireland King Henry Lord of Ireland. Gesta Abbat.
Sanc^^ Albani. Regi^tru^ m^n. Sancti Albani. John Bale. Cimphriu^. Anno reg.
18. Giraldu^ Cambr. Radul. Cogshal. Geruasius D^^^.
to the King of England, whereupon King Henry having caused Richard Earl of
Chepstow to give into his hands all the land which he had conquered in that
Realm, took Ship at Penbroke, and sailed thither, where the King of Conach,
Deruntius King of Cork, Morice King of Methe, the King of Vriell, Duvenald
King of Ossery, Duvenald King of Limerike, Machachelin, Ophelon, Machaleny,
Othne^hely, Gillemehelmach, Ocadeci, Ocaruell, with other Princes, and the
Bishops, submitting themselves and theirs to the King of England and his
successors, builded for him a great Palace at Dublin, where he held his
Christmas.

The Church of Norwich, with the houses thereto belonging was brent, and the
Monks were dispercled.

The King returned into England on Monday in the Easter 1172
week, and about the Ascension tide sailed into Normandy.

At Andouer a Priest praying before the Altar, was stricken with thunder, and
slain. Likewise one Lark and his brother was brent to death with the
lightning. Cro. Col^estre.


King Henry the son, with his wife, the French Kings daughter, were both
together Crowned at Winchester the seven and twentieth of August, by the hands
of Rotrod Archbishop of Roane.

King Henry the elder was assoyled of the death of Thomas Geruasius. Anno reg.
19.
the Archbishop, upon his oath made, that he was not privy to it.

King Henry married the eldest daughter of Hubert 117^ Ypodigma.
Earl of Morton, unto his son John, surnamed without land. He also made Mary
the sister of Thomas Becket Abbess of Berking.

Henry the younger rebelling in Normandy against King Henry the younger rebelled.
Henry his father, many Earls and Barons fled over to him, whereby diverse
strong battayles were fought, as well in England as in Normandy, Poytow, Guyen,
and Britain. There took part against the father, Jews King of France,
William King of Scotts, Henry, Geffrey and John his sons, Robert Earl of
Leycester, Hugh of Chester, and others.

Robert Earl of Leycester with three thousand Flemings coming into England,
arrived at Walton, and after were received by Earl Hugh into Framilingham
Castle. They brent the Castle of Hagoneth, the City of Norwich etc. but by
John Taxtor. Anno reg. 20
Richard de Lucy the Kings Justice, both he, his wife, and as many Normans and
Frenchmen as were with him were taken, but the Flemings were all slain, or
drowned. This battle was fought without the Town of S. Edmondsburie, near
to a place called S. Martins of Farneham.

William King of Scotts with many Flemings entering into England, wan the
Castles of Appleby, Brough, and Prideho^*

King Henry the elder, returning into England, in short time subdued his
Rebels. The City of Leycester by his 1174 Leycester brent.
commandment was brent, the walls and Castle raced, and the inhabitants
sparcled into other Cities. Robert de Scoteuile, Radulph de Mandeuile, Barnard
Bayllole, of whom Baynards Castle took the name, and William de Vescy came
to Newcastell, and after took King William King of Scotts taken prisoner.
Ger. Dorobor. Baynardes Castle. Sca. Cron.
prisoner, and sent him to London, from whence King Henry took him and the
Earl of Leycester with him into Normandy, and there imprisoned them at Roane,
where King William compounded for his ransom, and after was delivered at York
for 4000. pound. The Nobles of Scotland came no nearer than Pembles in
Scotland to meet with their King, wherefore he took with him many of the
younger sons of noble men in England that bare him good will, and gave them
lands in Scotland, which he took from such as were Rebels to him there. The
names of those Gentlemen that he took with him, were Baylliol, Brewle, Soully,
Mowbrey; Saintclere, Hay, Giffard, Ramesey, Lanudell, Bisey, Berkeley,
Wellegen, Boys, Montgomery, Valx, Celenille, Friser, Grame, Gurlay, and diverse
other.

The v. day of September, Christ's Church in Canturburye Geruasius Doro. Will.
Thorn. Canturbury brent.
was burned, with certain houses of Office in the court.

King Henry the son, with his breethren, and other, were reconciled to King
Henry the father.

The Archbishop of Canturbury held a Counsel in S. Peeters Anno reg. 21 1175
at Westminster on Sunday before the Ascension day, at which Counsel were
present all the suffragan Bishops of his Province, Worcester except, that was
sick, and so excused himself, and y^ Bishop of Norwich which was deceased.

A brother of the Earl Ferrers was in the night privily Roger Houed.
slain at London, which when the King understood, he swear that he would be
avenged on the Citizens: for it was then a common practice in the City, that
an hundred or more in Night vvalkers in London, did murder all they met.
a company of young and old, would make nightly invasions upon the houses of the
wealthy, to the intent to rob them, and if they found any man stirring in the
City within the night, they would presently murder him, in so much, that when
night was come, no man durst adventure to walk in the Streets. When this had
continued long, it fortuned that as a crew of young and wealthy Citizens
assembling together in the night, assaulted a stone house of a certain rich
man, and breaking through the wall, the good man of that house having prepared
himself with other in a corner, when he perceived one of the Thieves named
Andrew Bucquinte to lead the way, with a burning brand in the one hand and a
pot of coals in the other, which he assayed to kindle with the brand, he
flew upon him, and smote off his right hand, and then with a loud voice cried
Thieves, at the hearing whereof the Thieves took their flight, all saving he
that had lost his hand, whom the good man in the next morning delivered to
Richard de Lucy the Kings Justice. This These upon warrant of his life,
appeached his confederates, of whom many were taken, and many were fled, but
among the rest that were apprehended, a certain Citizen of great countenance,
credit, and wealth, surnamed John the old when he could not acquit himself
by the waterdome, offered the King for his life five hundred Marks, but the
King commanded that he should be hanged, which was done, Gualter Couen.
and the City became more quiet.

The Kings of England both father and son did eat Anno reg. 22 1176
and drink at one Table, lay in one Chamber, and went together to visit the
Tomb of Thomas late Archbishop of Canturburie, accomplishing indeed the peace
which they had promised.

The King caused to be razed and overthrown the Castles of Huntington, Walton,
Groby, Tutsburie, Hay, and Trest Castles razed.
with many other, in revenge of the harm the Lords of them had done to him.

This year 1176* after the foundation of Saint Mary Redulphus de diceto.
Oueryes Church in Southwarke, the stone bridge over the The stone bridge at
London begone to be builded. Ex recordis Sa^ctae Mariae de Southwarke. John
Leyland.
Thamis at London was begone to be founded. A Cardinal, and the Archbishop
of Canturburie gave a thousand Marks toward the same foundation.

In March the King called a Convocation of the Clergy at London, when the
Popes Legate was set, and the Archbishop of Canturbury on his right hand, as
primate of England, the Archbishop of York disdeyning to sit on the left
hand, came and swapt him down to have thrust his tail betwixt the Legate
and the Archbishop of Canturburie, which Archbishop of Canturburie being
loathe to remove, the other set his buttocke in his lap, but he had uneath
touched him with his bumme, when the Bishops and other of the Clergy and
Laytie stepte to him, pulled him, threw him to the ground, and began to lay
on him with fistes and battes, so that the Archbishop of Canturburie (yielding
good for evil) was feign to defend the other Archbishop, who with his rent
Coape got up, and away straight to the King with a great complaynte: but
when the truth of the matter was once known, he was well laughed at for his
remedy.

Richard Strangbow Earl of Chepstow, deceassed, and was John Beuer.
buried at Dublin in Ireland.

William Earl of Arundell also deceassed, and was buried at Wimondham.

William Earl of Gloucester, because he had no son to Anno reg. 23 Ypodigma.
inherit his lands, and being loath to distribute them amongst his daughters,
he made John the Kings son his successor.

A shower of blood reigned in the Isle of Wighte two Cron. Tinmouth.
hours space.

The Church of secular Channons at Waltam, was by 1177 Ypodigma. Geruasius.
the Kings commandment new builded, and regular Channons placed there.

After the death of Rosamund the Fair, daughter of Walter Rosamund.
Lord Clifford, Concubine to Henry the second at Woodstoke, he took privily
King Jews daughter of France, (that was married to his son Richard Earl of
Poytow) for his Leman, and had practiced for a divorce betwixt him and his
Queen Eleanor, whereupon followed great discord betwixt the Kings of England
and France, but meeting together, they agreed upon peace for a time.

Richard Lucy the Kings Justiciar laid the foundation of the couentuall Church
in the honor of Saint Thomas, in 1178
a place which is called Westwood, otherwise Lesnes, in the territory Lesnes.
Geruasius. Walter Couen. Gerua. Tilberien.
of Rochester, in the new Parish of Southfleete.

This Richard Lucy builded the Castle of Anger in Estsex, in the diocese of
the Bishop of London.

The City of York was brent.

On Christmas day at Oxenhall, in the territory of Derlington, Anno reg. 25.
1179 Cron. vinmouth.
in the Bishopric of Duresme, the earth lifted up it self in the manner of
an high Tower, and so remained from the spring of the day immovable, until the
evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise, that it feared the
inhabitants thereabout, and the earth swallowed it up, and made there a deep
pit, which is seen until this day. For a testimony thereof, Leyland says,
he saw the pittes there John Leyland.
commonly called Helkettles.

The tenth day of April the Church of Saint Andrewe in Rochester was consumed
with fire.

Richard Lucy departed this life in the Abbey of Lesnes, having changed his
habit.

The Usurers in England were grievously punished for Anno reg. 26 1180 Vsuters
punished. Gerua. Dor^.
corrupting the Coin, the which besides other vexations were fettered two and
two together, and carried in Carts to the Kings Court.

A new Coin was ordained in England.

Geffrey the Kings Bastard son, resigned the Byshopricke Anno reg. 27 1181
of Lincoln, and was made the Kings Chancellor.

This year Giraldus Cambrensis wrote his book of the Itinerarium Cambri^
Giraldi.
description of Wales, wherein he notes to have happened in his time in the
Province of Kemmeis, a young man (borne in those parts) to be persecuted with
Toades, as all within that Country had come crawling together to vex him, A
man devoured by Toades.
and when innumerable numbers of them were killed by those that kept him, and
other of his friends and kinsmen, Geruasius de mappa mundi.
yet came they still as if they had sprung like Hydraes head numberless: at
length when his friends were weeried with watching, they caused him in a Coffin
to be hoysed up into an high tree that was shred of all the boughs, and made
smooth: but there was he not preserved from his venomous enemies, which
assaulted him creeping up into the tree, till they had eaten him to the bones
that he dyed, his name was Seisillus Elker her (that is) long leg.

Barnewell with the Priorie, near unto Cambridge, was fired Anno reg. 28 1182
and brent.

Robert Harding a Burgess of Bristow, to whom King Henry gave the Barony of
Barkeley, builded the Monastery Saint Austins in Bristovv. Anno reg. 29 1183
of Saint Augustines in Bristow.

King Henry the elder went into France, and there made his testament.

They of Aquitayne hated their Duke Richard for his cruelty, and were minded
to drive him out of the Earldom of Poytow and Dukedom of Aquitayne, and to
transpose those estates to his brother King Henry the younger, but when all men
looked for victory to the young King, he King Henry the younger deceassed.
Giraldus Cambr-(...). 1184 Gualterus Couen.
fell miserably sick, and dyed in the Castle of Limouicen, about the
beginning of June, and was buried at Roane.

King Henry returned into England, and sent many men of war into Wales, for
the Welchmen emboldned by the Kings absence, had broken forth and slain many
Englishmen.

The Abbey of Glastenbury was brent, with the Church of Glastenbury brent.
Saint Julian.

Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem came to King Henry, Anno reg. 31.
desiring him of aid against the Turks, but the King because 1185 Herac^^us
the Patriarch. Gerua. Doro.
of the cruelty of his sons, was counseled not to leave his Dominions in
hazard, and to go so far off: wherefore he promised the Patriarch* 50000.
Marks of Silver.

This Patriarch dedicated the new Temple then builded New Temple.
in the West part of London.

King Henry sent his son John into Ireland, that he John the kings son
Lord of Ireland. Ypodigma.
might be made Lord thereof. The Pope sent him a Crown of Peacocks feathers
brayded with Gold.

This year dyed Hugh Mortimere founder of Wigmor^ Abbey.

Mawde the Empress, Mother to King Henry the second The Empress deceased.
deceassed: she founded the Abbey of Bordesley.

Geffrey Earl of Britayne the Kings son of England dyed Anno reg. 32 1180
Geffrey Earl of Britayne dies. Giral. Cambr. Matthew Paris. Roger Houeden.
John Taxtor.
at Paris, about the beginning of August, and was there buried. He left issue
two daughters which he had by Constance (daughter to Conan Earl of Britain)
who also at the time of his death was great with child, and after brought
forth a son named Arthur.

A great Earthquake threw down many buildings, amongst the which the
Cathedral Church of Lincoln was rent in pieces the five and twentieth of
April.

The Cathedral Church of Chichester and all the whole Chichester brent.
City was brent the twentieth of October.

Near unto Orford in Suffolk, certain Fishers of the Anno reg. 33 1187 A
Fish like a man. Ralphe Cogshall. Monument in Colchester.
Sea took in their nets a Fish having the shape of a man in all points,
which Fish was kept by Barthelinew de Glaunuile, Custos of the Castle of
Orford, in the same Castle, by the space of six months and more for a
wonder: he spoke not a word. All manner of meats he gladly did eat, but most
greedily raw fish, after he had crushed out all the moisture. Oftentimes he
was brought to the Church, where he showed no tokens of adoration. At length
when he was not well looked to, he stale away to the Sea, and never after
appeared.

The Kings of England and of France met betwixt Gisors Anno reg. 34 1188
and Try, where they took on them the Cross, and diverse other with them. The
King of England landing at Winchelsea, hasted toward North-hampton, where at
Gedington, Richard Sothwel* Rog Houed. ^n^iq^ ^^^erl. Gual. Coue^^.
about eight or ten miles from North-hampton he held a Parliamente about
the voyage into the holy land, where many Articles concerning that voyage were
concluded, and the whole Realm troubled with paying of tithes toward that
voyage. The Christians were appointed to pay above lxx. thousand pound, and the
Jews lx. thousand, without any delay: but by means of a discord that fell
betwixt the two Kings, that voyage was stayed.

The Town of Beuerley, with the Church of Saint John Beuerley brent. Anno reg.
35 Geruasius. 1189
there was brent the twentieth of September.

The Kings of England and of France, with Richard Earl of Poytow, the Legate
and the Archbishops, of Canturbury, Roane, Rhenes, and Burges, met at Naunts
the ninth day of June. There Philip the French King required, that his sister
which had bin kept in England a two and twenty years, ^odouicus vi^es* Death
of King Henry the second.
might be restored unto Earl Richard as his wife, and Earl Richard desired
the same, but King Henry denied this request, and so they departed a sunder,
and got them to armor. The French King and Earl Richard pursued the King of
England so hard, that he was forced to yield to Richardus Cambr.
all the requests, as well of the French King, as of his son Richard. This
was done at Gisors, and so departing came to Azai, where he fell sick, and
departed this life the sixth day Ypodigma.
of July, in the year of our Lord 1189. when he had reigned xxxiiij. years,
ix. months, and xij. days, and was buried at Fonteuerard in the Monastery
of Nuns by him founded. He founded the Priories of Dover, and of Stoneley,
and Basingwarke, and the Castle of Rudlan. He also began the stone Bridge over
the Thamis at London. He left issue Richard and John.

King Richard Cuer de Lion.


RIchard the first borne at Oxford, for his valiantness surnamed Anno reg. 1.
Cordelion, or with the Lions heart, the second son of Henry the second,
began his reign the sixth day of July, in the year of our Lord 1189.

He was big of stature, with a merry countenance. To his Souldyoures
favorable: bountiful to his friends: to Strangers a grievous enemy: hard to
be pleased: desirous of war: abhorring idleness: inclined to pride, lechery,
and avarice.

He coming from beyond the Seas, landed at Southhampton Geruasius Do. Matthew
Paris.
the twelfth day of August, and was Crowned at Westminster on the third day of
September, by the hands of the Archbishop Baldwine.

He commanded that no Jews nor women should be at his Coronation, for fear
of enchantmentes which were wont to be practiced: for breaking of which
commmandement, many Jews were slain the same day.

Elianor the old Queen, who at the commandment of her husband had been
long kept close prisoner, was now set at liberty.

The Archbishop of Canturburie being sore offended with Earl John the kings
brother, for taking to wife Isabel countess of Gloucester, his coosin in the
third degree* wrote a threatening letter to the same John, commanding him not
to touch the virgin, and to appear at a peremptory day before him to answer
the matter.

King Richard gave the Castles of Berwike and Rokesburgh to the Scottish king,
for the sum of x. M. pound: he also sold to Hugo de Puteaco Bishop of
Durham, his own province for a great piece of money, and created him Earl of the
same, and then said in game, I am a wondrous craftesman, I have made a new
Earl of an old Bishop. He sold the Priorie of Couentrie, to Hugh Bishop
of Chester, for iij. C. marks, which Hugh with a power of armed men invaded
the Priory, chased the Prior away, beat the Monks, lamed some, cast some into
prison, and spoiling the other, drove the^ away, brake the Hutches of the
Church, burnt their Charters and privileges.

The King also feigned to have lost his signet, and made a new, and then caused
to be proclaimed, that who so ever would safely enjoy those things which
before time they had enrolled, should come to the new seal, whereby it came
to pass, that many which could not find him in England, went over sea to fine
with him at his pleasure. He gave his brother John the provinces of Notingham,
Devonshire, and Cornewal.

In this time were many robbers and out-lawes, among John Mayor. Outlavves in
England.
the which, Robert Hoode and little John renowned thieves, continued in woods,
despoyling and robbing the goods of the rich. They killed none but such as
would invade them, or by resistance for their own defense.

The said Robert entertained an hundred tall men, and good Archers, with such
spoils and theftes as he got, upon whom four hundred (were they never so
strong,) durst not give the onset. He suffered no woman to be oppressed,
violated, or otherwise inolested: poor men's goods he spared, aboundantlye
relieuing them with that, which by theft he got from Abbayes and the houses
of rich Carles: whom Mayor blames for his rapine and theft: but of all
thieves he affirms him to be the Prince, and the most gentle thief.

Till this first year of King Richard the first, the Citizens Magistrates of
the City of London, since before the Conquest. Robert Fabian.
of London had been governed by Portgraues, as Fabian sometime an Alderman of
London, in his Chronicle affirms: whose names with the laws and customs of
the City then used, (he says) were recorded in an old book written in the
Saxon tongue, called Domes day, sometime remaining in the Guilde Hal of
London, but now embezeled.

To this accords the Charter of the same City, granted by William the
Conqueror, and diverse other Records, wherein I find, that the chief
Magistrate of the City of Portgraue.
London, in the time of king Edward last before the Conquest, called the
Confessor, was called Portgraue* whose name was Wolfgare.

In the time of William Conqueror, and William Rufus, Liber trinitatis. W.
Dunthorne. Provost.
Godfrey Mandeuile or Magnauile was Portgraue, and Richard de Pare Provost.

In the time of King Henry the first, Hugh Bouch Portgraue, and Leofstanus
Goldsmith Provost.

After them Awburie de Vere Portgraue, and Robert de Barquerel Provost

In the time of King Stephen, Gilbert Becket Portgraue, and Andrew Buchennet
Provost.

In the time of King Henry the second, Peter Fitz Walter Portgraue.

After him John Fitz Nigelly Portgraue.

After him Ernulfus Buchel Portgraue.

After him William Fitz Isabel Portgraue.

These Portgraues are also in diverse Records called Vicecomites or Sherifes,
for that they then farmed the Sherifwike of the King, as the Shirifes of London
do at this day: John Beuar.
and some authors, as Iohannis Beuar and other, do call them Domes men, or
Judges of the Kings Court.

This year the Citizens of London obtained to be governed Baylifes.
by two Baylifes, which in diverse auntiente records are also called Sherifes,
for that they (like as the Portgraues) farmed the Sherifewike.

They also obtained to have a Mayor to be their principal governor, and
lieuetenaunte of the City, as of the Kings Chamber.

The names of the first Baylifes or Shirifes, who entered at the feast of Saint
Michael the Archangell, were as follows.

Sherifes.
Henry Cornehil. Richard Reinery.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne. Fitz Leofstan
Goldsmith, The first mayor.
first Mayor of London, and continued Mayor during his life, that was four
and twenty years, as appears by a very ancient Record sometime pertaining
to the Nunrye of Clerkenwel, containing as a perfect register, all such
Register of Clerkenvvel.
grauntes of lands as was made to them by any, which has diverse deeds,
where unto Henry Fitz Alwyne first Mayor of London is a witness, dated the 1.
2. 3. 4. etc. of Richard the first.

And for a more proof, I find recorded in the Guilde Hal, Consuetud de Lo^.
in a book called the Customs of London, a constitution or order how
Citizens shall proceed in buildings between Citizen and Citizen, which
constitution begins thus:

In the year of our Lord. 1189. the first year of the reign of king Richard,
Henry Fitz Alwyne being Mayor, who was the first Mayor of London, it was
provided and ordained etc. Other proofs might be showed out of diverse
auntiente Records, but these are sufficient.

King Richard betook the guiding of this land to William 1190 Governor of
England William Bishop of Ely. King Robert took his voyage over to Jerusalem.
Geruasius. Ypodigma.
Longshampe Bishop of Ely, Chancellor of England, and y^ four and twentieth
day of February, he took his scrip and staff at Canturburie, and the sixth
of March took the Sea at Dover, and transported over.

The second of July the two Kings of England and of France met at Towers, and
from thence set forward on their journey toward Jerusalem.

The town of Mawling in Kent with the Nunry was consumed with fire.

The Jews in the towns of Norwich, Saint Edmunds Bury, Lincoln, Stamforde
fair, and Linne, were robbed and spoiled. Jews slew themselves.
And at York to the number of 500. besides women and children, entered a tower
of the castle, which the people assailing, the Jews proffered money to be in
safety of their lives, but the Christians would not take it: whereupon their
men of law said to them, it is better for us to die for our law, than to fall
into the hands of our enemies: and they all agreeing to that Counsel, cut the
throtes of their wives and children, and cast them over the walls on the
Christians heads: the residue they locked up in the kings lodging, and burnt
both the house and themselves.

Geffrey Archebishoppe of York, retourning from Rome, Archbishop of of York
drawn from the Alter to prison. Ralphe Cogshall.
and now consecrated, arrived at Dover with his train, who^ Matthew de Clare,
by the commandment of the Kings chaunceller, entering with violence into the
Church of Saint Martins le Grande in London, drew from the Alter, and so carried
him to prison.

William Bishop of Ely, builded the utter wall about Anno reg. 2. W.
Di^^thorne. A ditch made about the tower of London. Richard Sothwel.
the Tower of London, and caused a deep ditche to be made about the same,
thinking he could have caused the river of Thamis to go round about it, but
he bestowed great cost in vain^.

Sherifes.
John Herlion. Roger Duke.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alyne.
King Richard subdued the I Will of Cipers, and then joining Matthew Paris. Rog
Houed. Galf^id^^ Vinis^l.
his power with Phillip the French Kings in Asia conquered Acon, where there
grew between the two Kings a grievous displeasure: for which cause Phillip
shortly departed thence, and coming into France, invaded the Country of
Normandy.

John brother to King Richard, took on him the kingdom Arbor Successi^nis.
of England in his brothers absence.

Robert Earl of Leicester dyed in his journey to Jerusalem.

King Richard restored to the Christians the City of Ioppa, and in many
battayles put the Turks to great sorrow.

The bones of the most famous King of Brytaine, Arthur, 1191
were found at Glastenburie, in a goodly old se^ulchre, about the which stood
two pillars, in which were letters written, which, by reason of the great
barbarousnesse of the language, and the foulness, no body could read: upon
the sepulture was a cross of lead, whereon was written, here lies the Anno
reg. 3.
noble king of Brytains Arthur.

Sherifes.
William Hauerell. John Bucknote.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
William Bishop of Ely, did commonly ride with. 500. John the kings brother
rebelled
horses, and grieved Abbayes by mean of his lodging with them: he withstoode
John the Kings brother, who said, he wist not if his brother Richard were
alive or not. To whom the Bishop answered, if King Richard be yet living, it
were untruth to take from him the Crown. If he be dead, Arthure the elder
brothers son, must enjoy the same.

King Richard exchaunged Cipres, with Guy of Lesingham, 1192 Ex anniles ^lie^*
Vita G^^ng^ c^^^.
for the Kingdom of Jerusalem: wherefore the King of England a long time
after was called King of Jerusalem.

The Bishop of Ely legate to the Pope, Chancellor Roge^ Houed. The Bishop
put to his shifts* Geruasius Doro.
of England, and governor of the Realm, was forced to take the Tower of
London for his refuge, wherein Earl John besieged, him, at length the
Bishop getting license to depart went to Dover, but he was there forced to
swear that he would not depart the Realm: yet being in a marvelous
disquietnesse of mind, he put off his man's apparel, and put on woman's,
meaning so to escape: whylest he goes up and down on the shore, bearing a
web of clothe on his arm as he would sell it, still waiting for a ship,
a sort of women pulled off his kerchiefe, and threw him to the ground, and
after beat him, and drew him along the sands, whereupon great cry being
made, the Burgesies ran, and with much a do, got him from among them, and
kept him strayghtlye till he had obtained license to depart the Realm.
Anno reg. 4


Then the Archebishoppe of Rhoane, with the consent of Earl John, took upon
him the rule of the land as Uice^ Chancellor.

Sherifes.
Nicholas Duke. Peter Newlay.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King Richard having knowledge that Phillip of 1193
France invaded Normandy, and that John his brother had made himself King
of England, made peace with the Saladine for three years, and with a small
company retourning homewarde, was taken prisoner by Leopolde Duke of Austria,
who brought him to Henry Anno reg. 5. King Richard taken prison.
the Emperor, and there kept him in prison a year and five months. He was
enuyed for his valiauncie, in that he had showed more proof of his prowes,
than all the other had.

Wolfangus Lazius, in his book de Romano Imperio, affirms that Leopolde of
Austria, when he had taken king Richard, for some injury done to the house
of Austria, he King Richard of England builded the walls of Vienna
compelled him to build the walls about Vienna, the chiefest City of
Austria, the which Walls within our memory defended all Germany from the
invasion of the Turk.

The rumor being spredde that King Richard was taken Earl John rebelled
against King Richard.
as ye have heard, forth with the French King and Earl John made a great
conspiracy together, meaning to take the Kingdom of England, herevppon a
great number of Flemmings were assembled at Witsa^^e, and an innumerable
multitude of Flemmings ready to come over, but their messengers being taken,
their treason was bewrayed.

Elianor the old Queen caused the Sea coasts to be watched over against
Flaunders, but notwithstanding Earl John came secreetely into England, to
raise the Walchmen and Scotts, but the King of Scotts would not aid him.
The Walchmen in the parts about Kingstone and Windsore took prays abroad.

The French King entered Normandy, found small resistaunce, wanne diverse
Towns, Gisors was delivered to him, then he hasted toward Roane, and besieged
it, but through the great industry of Robert Earl of Leicester, he profited
little there, and so returned into France* Earl John perceiving his treason
was discovered, fortifyed his Castles and passed over into France, and joined
with the French King.

Sherifes.
Roger Duke. Richard Fitz Alwyne.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King Richard sent for his mother and the Archbishop of Rhoane to come unto
him into Almayne, being now in great hope to be delivered, and in the mean
time the Archbishop of (...) was made regent of England.

The Kings friends entreating for his deliverance, his The Kings ransom.
Geruasius Doro. Radul. Cogshal.
ransom was set at 100000. pound, to wit to the Emperor 100000. marks, to
the Empress 30000. marks: and to y^ Duke of Austrich 20000. marks: whereupon
commandment was directed from the kings Justices, that al Bishops, Prelates,
Earls, Barons, Abbots, and Priors, should bring in the fourth part of their
revenues toward the kings ransom, and besides this, the clergy brought in
their golden and silver chalices, and fleeced their shrines, all which was
coined into money.

The order of the Cestercencies, did give their wool for one Matthew Paris.
Roger Houeden.
year etc. all the money gathered for the Kings ransom, to remain in the
custody of Hubert Archbishop of Canturburie, Richard Bishop of London,
William Earl of Arundel, Hameline Earl of Warren, and the Mayor of London.

The King was restored to liberty, the most part of his ransom being paid,
and pledges left for the residue. In the mean time letters were intercepted of
Earl John which he had sent into England touching treason, one Adam of Saint
Edmund Cleark, being sent by Earl John, to provide that his Castle might be
fortified against King Richard, came to London, and dyned with Hubert
Archbishop of Canturburie, where he bragged of Earl John's prosperity, and
familiarity Recard^^ ca^^^^.
with the French king, for y^ which being suspected, he was after dinner
apprehended by the Mayor of London, who took from him his letters, and
delivered them to the Archbishop of Canturburie, who on the next morrow
called a Counsel of the Earls and Barons, and showed them the letters,
whereupon they al c^nsented that Earl John should be dispossessed of all his
land in England and that his Castles should be besieged. The same day the same
Archbishop and Bishops excommunicated Earl John and all his favorers,
which troubled the peace of the kingdom. And forth with the Archbishop 1194
besieged the Castle of Marleborough, which belonged to Earl John, and took
it. After this he besieged Notingham Castle.

The King taking ship at Antwerpe* landed a^ Sandwich, on God^^^* v^^^^alfe
Gerua. Doro. K. Richard the second time Crowned. Anno reg. 6.
the. 12. of March, shortly after he besieged the Castle of Notingham, and wan
it, and after that the Castle of Tikehil* and then rode to Winchester, where he
was again solemnly crowned on the xvij. of April. After this he called into his
hands, all such thing as he had either given or sold by patentes or otherwise,
by which means he got a great sum of money, and sailed into Normandy the
xij. of May, where having a great army, he took Taileburge and the county of
Angolesme. Shortly after a peace was taken between the two kings of England
and France, the xiij. of June, and also by means of Elianor the old Queen,
Earl John was reconciled to his brother. King Richard gave to him the
Erledomes of Morton, Cornewal, Dorset, Somerset, Notingham* Darby, and
Lancastre: y^ Castles of Marleborough, and Luthegarshal, with the forests and
Gual. Couen.
appurtinaunces: the honor of Wallingford, Tikehil and Eye: the Earldom of
Gloucester with the Earls daughter Isabel* though she were a kin to him: but
he kept certain Castelles belonging to the said Earld^mes in his own hands:
he removed from him his Concubines, and took to him his own wife, which he had
not known of a long time before.

Sherifes.
William Fitz Isable. William Fitz Arnolde.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King Richard sent messengers to the Pope, complaining upon the Duke of
Austrich, for misusing of him and his, as they came by distress of weather
through his Country: whereupon the Pope excommunicated the Duke, and enjoyed
him to release the ^^uenaunts that he constrained the King to make, and to
send home the pledges: but the Duke refused this order contempning the Popes
authority, who shortly after dyed, and was kept unburied til his son had
released the English pledges that lay in hostage for the money behind of K.
Richards ca^nsome, and further swear to stand to the judgment of the Church
for that offense of his father.

Hugh Bishop of Lincoln gave to the king a thousand Anno reg. 7.
marks for his mantell of Sables, which his predecessors were wont yearly to
have given them by the King.

Sherifes.
Robert Beasaunt. Ioke de Iosue.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
William Fitz Osbert a Citizen of London, poor in degree, VV. with the
^earde. Roger Houed. Will. ^aruus. John Taxtor. Gerua. Doro. Canturb. records.
Gual. Covent.
evil favored of shape, but yet very eloquent, moved the common people to
seek liberty and freedom, and not to be subject to the rich and mighty, by
which means he drew to him many great companies, and with all his power
defended the poor men's cause against the rich. 52000. Londonors he allured to
him to be at his devotion and commandment. The king being warned of this
tumult, commanded him to cease from those attemptes, but the people still
followed him, as they before had done: he made to them orations, taking for his
theme this sentence* Haurietis aquas in gau^io de fontibus saluatoris, which
is to say Ye shall draw in joy, waters forth of the wels of your savior. And to
this he added: I am (said he) ye savior of poor men, ye be poor, and have
assayed long ye hard hands of rich me^: Now draw ye wholesome water forth of my
Wels, and that we joy, for the time of your visitatio^ is come. This William
was commanded to appear before the kings counsel to aunsweare for himself
in such causes as should be laid against him, where he appeared, but with
1196
such a multitude of people, that the Lords were afraid, and remitted him
with pleasant words for the time, appointing some priuliy when he was alone
to apprehende him. He sooke the steeple of Bow Church in Chope, and fortified
it with munition and victuals: The Archbishop of Canturburie then being at
London with other Justices sent to him, and willed him to come forth of the
Church and he should have his life saved: but he refused to come forth,
wherefore y^ Archbishop talking with the Citizens of London, called together a
great number of armed area least any stur should be made. The Saterdaye
therefore being the Passion sunday even, the steeple and Church of Bow were
assaulted, and William with his accomplices taken, but not without bloodshed, for
he was forced by fire and smoke to for sake the Church: he was brought to the
Archbishop in the Tower, where he was by ye Judges condemned, and by the heels
drawn from thence to a place called the Elmes, and there hanged with nine of his
fellows.

This counterfaite friend to the poor, who named himself A false accuser of
his elder brother in the end was hanged.
to be the savior, persuading them against the rich, was a man of an evil
life, a murderer, who slew one manne with his own hands: a fornicatour, who
poluted Bow church with his Concubine: and amongst other his detestable facts,
one that had falsely accused his elder brother of treason which elder
brother had in his youth Anno reg. 8.
brought him up in learning, and done many things for his preferment. Yet
after the death of this wicked malefactor, the simple people honored him as a
martyr, in so much that they stale away the gibbet whereon he was hanged, and
pared away the Earth, that was be-bled with his blood, and kept the same as
holy relics to heal sick men.

King Richard granted license unto Phillip Bishop of Durham, to coin money
in his City of Durham, which liberty Roger Houeden.
none of his predicessours had enjoyed of long time before.

Sherifes.
Gerard de Anteloch. Robert Durant.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
The Walchmen brake forth and did much hurt by spoiling 1197
of the Marches. The Archbishop of Canturburie calling together an army hasted
thither, besieged the Castle of Polie, and took it, and chased the enemies,
established peace, and returned.

Rise the Walch king departed this life.

King Richard and the Earl of Flaunders confedered together. Anno reg. 9.
The French King entering unawarely into Flaunders, was intercepted and taken by
the Earl of Flaunders, but giving pledges upon covenant to make peace, he was
suffered to depart. The viij. day of September they met at List, where by
mediation of the Archbishop of Canturburie, they took a truce. The Archbishop
of Roane returned from Rome, where he had complained on King Richard, for
taking from him a plot of ground, whereon he builded a strong Castle, but at
the request of the Archbishop of Canturburie, the King gave him in recompense
the town of Deep.

Sherifes.
Roger Blunt. Nicholas Ducket.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
The Walchmen on the Marches took booties, and did much 1198 Geruasius.
hurt, but Hubert the Archbishop of Canturburie being Lord thief Justice,
Lieuetenaunt, or Warden of England, found means to resist them, so that they
being fought with, were overthrown, and five thousand of them slain. The
Archbishop having got this victory returns to London, where calling
together a great number of the Nobles of the land, he resigned his office of
being head ruler, in whose place the Anno reg. 10
Lord Geffrey Fitz Peter succeeded in August.

King Richard took of every Carucata, plough land, or hid of land through
England five shillings. The French king was intercepted by the army of King
Richard, so that with much ado, he escaped into Cipres, his army was
dispersed, and almost an hundred Knights taken, beside other common soldiers,
without number. The Charters which the king had Matthew Paris.
before made with his new seal were changed.

Sherifes.
Constantine Fitz Arnolde. Robert de Beaw.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
Hubert Archbishop of Canturbnrie, through the procurement of the Monks of
Canturburie and by the commandment of the Pope, brake down even with the
ground the Chapel College at Lambeth.
or College at Lambeth which his predecessors had founded, and he had finished
in the honor of Thomas Archbishop of Canturburie.

King Richard turned his army against the Barons of 119^ K. Richaad vvo^ded
to death. Paulus Aemeleus Gualterus Couen. Ralph Cogshal.
Poictow that rebelled against him, he set their Cities and towns on fire,
spoiled their Country, and flew many of his adversaries cruelly, at the last
came to the Dukedom of Aquitaine and besieged the Castle of Chalne, and
brought it to that, that they within offered to yield upon conditions, but he
would not so receive them, but would have them by force: whervpvn a certain
young man named Bertram de Gordon, standing on ye Castle wall, leuelled a
quarrel out of a cross bow and smote him with a venomed Darte, which stripe
the king little regarded, but inuading the castle wan it, and put the soldiers
in prison. Of this wound aforesaid, he dyed the sixth day of April, in the
year of our Lord. 1199. When he had reigned ix. years and ix. months, and was
buried at Fonteuerard at his fathers feet, whom he confessed he had betrayed,
his heart was buried at Roane, and his bowels at the foresaid Chalne.

King John.


JOHN brother to Richard aforenamed, began his reign over the Realm Anno
reg. 1
of England the vj. day of April, in the year of our Lord 1199. Of person he
was indifferent, but of melancholy and angry complexion. He being now in
Normandy, sailed over into England, and was crowned at Westminster on y^
Ascension day. And at Midsomer Ralphe Cogshall.
he returned again into Normandy with a great army, which all the Summer season
contending against y^ French, proved the worthynesse of ye enemies to be
sufficient enough: Consuetud de Lo^.
for Phillip king of France, in the quarrel of Arthur the son of Geffrey,
John's eldest Brother, duke of Brytaine, made war upon King John in Normandy,
and took from him diverse Castles and towns.

King John granted the Shirifewike of London and Midlesex Sheriff vvike of
London let to ferme.
to the Citizens thereof for. 300 pound yearly to be paid, for that of ancient
time it had been so accustomed to be fermed, as king Henry the first before he
had granted to the same Citizens, for. 300. pound yearly. Also he gave them
full authority to chose and deprive their Sherifes at their pleasure.

Sherifes.
Arnolde Fitz Arnolde. Richard Fitz Barthelmew.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King John made a law, that no tun of Wine of Poiters, 1200 Price of vvines.
Gual. Couen.
should be sold dearer than twenty shillings: of Anioye four and twenty
shillings: and of French wine five and twenty shillings, unless the same
French wine were so good, that some would give for it, six and twenty
shillings eyghte pence, but not above. A sexter of wine of Poiters, no dearer
than twelve pence, nor white wine above six pence.

King John having made peace beyond the sea he required Annoreg. 2 Task.
aid of his Realm of xxx. M. marks, wherefore an edict was made, that every
plow land should pay three shillings, which troubled the land very sore,
considering the escuage that went before for every Knights fee two marks,
which before never paid above twenty shilling.

The king being deuorced from his wife Isabel, the Earl King John deuorsed.
Matthew Paris. Ypodigma. Radul. Cogshal.
of Glocesters daughter, he passed over the sea, paid thirty M. marks to the
French King, vanquished his enemies, and returned into England with Isabel his
wife, daughter to the Earl of Angolesme, and crowned her Queen at
Westminster, on the eight of October.

Sherifes.
Roger Dorset, James Bartelmew.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King John went to Lincoln, where he met with William King of Scotts did
homage.
King of Scotts, Rotland Lord of Galloway, and many other noble men, who did
to him homage on the one and twe^tith day of November.

A noble man of Aquitaine named Hugh Brune, rebelling 1201 Hugh Brune rebelled.
against King John, invaded diverse parts of the province, because the King had
married the daughter of the Earl of Angolesme, whom the said Brune had affied,
and had in his custody, wherefore the passed over, and restrained the rebels
from their attemptes.

The 25. of June there arose a cruel Tempest of thunder, Ypodigma. Annoreg. 3.
Tempests.
lightning and hayle, with a vehemente rain, that destroyed corn, cattle,
men, and houses, by brenning them etc.

The 10. of July, another Tempest much like to the former happened, so that the
Meadows could not be mowed, and the hay that was down was carried away by the
outrageous course of waters that ouerflowed the ground, great numbers of
fishes through the corruption of the waters dyed, many bridges borne down,
corn and hay carried away, and many men drowned: so that al men thought a new
deluge had been come.

Sherifes.
Walter Fitz Alis. Simon de Adermanbury.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King John sharplye warred upon the Earl of March, 1202 Radulphu^ Cog.
Hugh Brune, and the Earl of Eve his brother, who being not able to resist,
they complained to Phillip king of France, as to their sovereign and chief
Lord, who sent ofttimes to King John, moving him to cease from vexing them,
but that would not serve, wherefore he was sommoned by the * Annoreg. 4.
Nobles of France as Duke or Earl of Aquitaine and Anioy, to come unto the
Court of the French King, and to stand to the judgment of his Peers, all
which King John denied, K John so^moned to the French Kings Court.
whereupon the same Court adjudged him to be deprived of all his lands, which
he or his predecessors held of the king of France etc.

King Phillip forth with assembled an army, and invaded the Castle of Buteuant
in Normandy, which King Richard had builded, he rased it to the ground. He
took the land of Hugh Gorney, and all the Castles there about. He took the
Castle of Albomarle, with the County of Eve, and all the land to Arches, none
resisting him. Also Arthure Earl of Britayne being made Knight by the French
King, whose Arthure Earl of Britayne taken.
younger daughter he had fianced, he being but sixteen years old, went to
Hugh Brune, and Geffrey of Lucingnam, and with 250. Knights, beseeged the
Castle of Mirable, in which Queen Eleanor his Aunte was enclosed: but King
John came with a power, and delivered his mother from danger. He took there
his Nephew Arthure, William de Brawsa, Geffrey de Lucingham, Hugh Brune, Andrew
Caueny, Saluaricus de Mauleon, and diverse others.

Great thunder and lightning, with hayle as big as Hens eggs etc.

Sherifes.
Normand Brundell. John de Ely.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
The waters increased, and did much hurt in England. 1023 Matthew Paris.
Annoreg. 5. Earl of Britain murdered Radul. Cogshal.
Arthure Earl of Britain, from Falaise was brought to Roane, and put in the
Tower under the custody of Robert de Veypont, where shortly after he was
dispatched of his life, some say by the hands of his Uncle John.

The King of France invaded the Castles of Normandy, took Lisle, Dandely, with
the Castle, and the Vale de Ruell, in the which were Robert Fitz Water, Sayer
de Quincy, and many other. He took the strong Castle upon Seyne, builded by
King Richard, which had bin valiantly kept by the Connestable of Chester.

Sherifes.
Walter Brown. William Chamberlayne.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King John doubting treason in his own men, in December returned into
England, where he gathered great aids of money.

Elianor, daughter to the Earl of Poyters, that had bin 1204 Ralph Cogshal.
Anno reg. 6.
wife to Jews King of France, and after to King Henry the second of England
departed this life, and was buried in Westminster.

King John sent Embassadoures to treat a peace with the King of France, but
he, because the world went with him, would not agree in any wise, except
Arthure might be delivered to him alive, or if he were dead, he would have
his Sister in marriage with all the lands on that side the Seas.

Shortly after he took Falaise, Caen, and so forth all the Country to
Barflot, Charburgh, and Dunfront, Roane, Vernoll, and Arches: and so proud
Normandy, Angiow, Briteyne, Main, Poitow, and Thoraigne, were within a short
time delivered to King Phillip.

King John married Jane his Bastard Daughter to Lewlin Prince of Wales, and
gave with her the Castle and Lordshippe of Elingsmore, in the Marches of
South Wales.

Robert Fitz Parnell Earl of Leycester, dyed without issue, Liber Bernewell.
and then Simon de Mountford, and Sayer de Quincy divided the Earldom betwixt
them, because that Sayer de Quincy, and the Father of Simon Mountford had
married the sisters of the said Robert.

Sherifes.
Thomas Hauerell. Hamond Bronde.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
The fourtenth day of January began a Frost, which continued till the two
and twentieth day of March, so Great Frost. 1205
that the ground could not be tilled, whereof it came to pass that in
Summer following, a quarter of Wheat was sold for a Mark of Silver in many
places of England, Dearth of corn
which for the more part in the days of King Henry the second, was sold
for twelve pence: a Quarter of Beans or Pease for half a Mark: a Quarter of
Otes for forty pence, that were wont to be sold for four pence. Also, the nno
A reg. 7.
money was so sore clipped, that there was no remedy, but to have it renewed.

King John gathered great armies of men to have gone over the Seas, but
being sailed onwarde of his voyage, he returned again, and took escuage,
two marks and a half of every Knights fee through England, pretending a
quarrel against his Barons, because they John Taxtor.
would not follow him into the parts beyond the Seas.

Sherifes.
John Walgraue. Richard Winchester.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
The Earl of Salisburie, the Kings brother, Geffrey the Kings son begot on a
Concubine, and many other 1206 Ralph Cogshall. Anno reg. 8.
Knights, were gone over before, but all in vain: the charges was inestimable
that had bin laid out about the preparation made for this journey.

Great Thunders and Lightnings, brusting out of the Great Thunders Lightnings
and hayle.
Clouds were seen, so that men thought the day of Dome had bin come, many men
and women were destroyed, beside Cattle, and houses that were overthrown, and
burned. The Corn in the fields was beaten down with haylestones as big as
Goose eggs.

About Maydestone in Kente, a certain Monster was A strange Monster.
found, stricken with the Lightning, which Monster had an head like an Ass,
a belly like a man, and all other parts far discordante from any one living
thing. This dead body no man might uneath come near unto for stenche.

Sherifes.
John Holyland. Edmond Fitz Garrard.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
King John took the thirtenth part of all mouable goods, both of lay and
religious through England, at which all men murmured.

The seven and twentieth day of January a great wind 1207
overthrew many houses and trees, and a great Snow destroyed many beasts.

The Monks of Canturbury, by the advice of the Pope, elected Stephen Langton
to be their Archbishop, and then Anno reg. 9. Matthew Paris.
Pope Innocent intending to obtain the favor of King John toward this
election, because he knew that he did make diligent search for precious
stones, sent him an eloquent Epistle, with diverse precious jewels, which were
of King John well accepted: and Stephen Langton was consecrate at Rome. Then
the Pope sent Letters to King John, humbly exhorting him to receive the said
Stephen Archbishop of Canturburie, being thereunto canonically elected, the
rather because he was an Englishman borne, and a Doctor of Divinity etc. but
King John being greatly offended with the promoting of the said Stephen, sent
men in armor to expel the Monks of Canturburie, to the number of lxiiij. out
of the Realm, and condemned them of Treason, the Monks went into Flanders,
and their goods, and lands of their Church was confiscate. Also King John
sent threatening letters to the Pope, whereunto the Pope made a large answer.

Queen Isabell was delivered of her first son at Winchester, and named him
Henry.

Sherifes.
Roger Wincher. Edmond Hardell.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne.
The xxiij. of March, William Bishop of London, Eustachius Bishop of Ely, and
Malgor Bishop of Winchester by the 1208 England interdicted. Nicholas Trivet.
Matthew Paris. Ralphe Cogshall.
Popes commandment executed the interdiction upon the whole Realm, and they
ceased through all England from ministering of Ecclesiastical Sacraments,
saving to them that were in peril of death, and Baptism to Children. All the
bodies of them that dyed, were buried like Dogs in ditches and corners. Many
Bishops, especially they that pronounced the interdiction, fled the Realm.
The King Anno reg. 10
set all the Bishoprics and Abbeys in the Realm into the custody of lay men,
and commanded all Ecclesiastical revenues to be confiscated. Also doubting
least the Pope should excommunicate him by name, or discharge the Nobles of
England of their allegiance toward him, he laid hold upon them, specially
such as he had in suspicion, and took pledges of them.

This year was granted to the Citizens of London by Mayor of London yearly
chosen.
the Kings letters patents, that they should yearly choose to them a Mayor.

Sherifes.
Peter Duke. Thomas Neale, the 28. of Septem.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne the 28. of October.
Richard the Kings second son by Isabell his wife was 1209 Will. Packington.
borne.

By the procurement of Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canturburie, license was
granted to the conuentual Churches in England to celebrate divine service
once every week, but the white Monks had not this privilege, because they
had disobeyed the interdiction.

The Eschequer was removed from Westminster to Northhampton Eschequer at
Northhampton.
by the Kings commandment. He also gathered a great army, and went toward
Scotland as far as the Castle of Norham, where the King of Scotts came to
him, and treated a peace, for the which he gave 11000. Marks of Silver, and
delivered his two daughters for a pledge.

By the Kings commandment, through out all the Forestes of England, all the
ditches were made plain ground, Cro. D^^. Hedges breute. Homage of
freeholders. VVelchmen did homage.
and the hedges brent. After this, he took homage of all freeholders, and
swear all men to his allegiance from twelve years old upward. The Welchmen
came to Woodstocke and did homage.

A Clarke of Oxford by chance killed a woman, and then Anno reg. 11 Oxford
forsaken.
ran away, wherefore his three chamber fellows which knew nothing of the
matter, were hanged at the Towns end* which caused three thousand Masters and
Scholars to forsake the University of Oxford, so that there tarried not one.

A prodigeous sight was seen one morning in the beginning Radulphus Cog.
of Lent, the Clouds seemed to fight with the Sun from the Sun rising
till one of the clock of that day.

The Arches and stone bridge over the Thamis at London London bridge builded of
stone Fx libro pontis ^ondinensis. S. Mary Ouery
was this year finished by the worthy Merchants of London, Serle Mercer,
William Alman, and Bennet Botewright. Master Foul a learned man, last Prior
of Saint Mary Oueryes Church in his life time, reported, that at the first,
being no Bridge at London, but a Ferie, the Feryer and his wife deceasing,
left the same Ferie to their Daughter, a maiden named Mary, who with the goods
left by her Parents, 1. Leyland.
and the profits which came by the said Ferie, builded a house of Sisters,
which is the uppermost end of Saint Maryes Church above the Quier, where she
lies buried, unto the which house she gave the oversight and profit of the
same Ferie: but afterward the same house of Sisters was converted unto a
College of Priests, who builded the Bridge of Timber, and from time to time
kept the same in reparations: but considering the great charges in repayring,
lastly by the great aid of the Citizens of London, and others, they builded ye
same of stone. King John gave certain vacant places in London to build on, for
building and reparation of London Bridge. A Mason being Master of the Bridge
house, builded from the foundation the Chapel on London Bridge, of his own
proper expenses. Peter le Iosue, William Blund, the 28. of September. Sherifes.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne, the 28. of October.

The King commanded all the Jews both men and women Jews ransomed.
to be imprisoned, and grievously punished, because he would have all their
money, some of them gave all they had, and promised more, to the end they
might escape so 1210
many kinds of torments: amongst whom, there was one which being tormented
many ways, would not ransom himself, till the King had caused every day one
of his great teeth to be pulled out by the space of seven days, and then he
gave the King ten thousand Marks of Silver, to the end they should pull out
no more.

In the month of June, the King leads an Army into Anno reg. 12
Ireland, expulseth Hugh Lacy, and brought all Ireland under his subjection. He
caused the Laws of England to be executed there, and money to be coined
according to the weight of English money, and made there both halfepence, A
mint in Ireland.
and farthings: he returns with great triumph in the month of September, and
then raised a great Tax Tax. Nic. Trivet.
upon all the religious in England, whom he caused to pay such a ransom,
and to spoil their Churches, that the sum came to an hundred thousand
pound, besides forty thousand pounds of the white Monks.

Another fight betwixt the Sun and the Clouds was seen.

Matild a noble woman, wife to William de Brawse, and John Beuer-Ral. Cog shall.
his son and heir William, perished miserably with famine at Windsore.
William her husband changing his apparel passed over the Sea at Shoram, and
shortly after dyed at Paris.

Adam Whetly, Stephen le Grace, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Henry Fitz Alwyne the 28. of October.

The Bishop of Londons Castle called Stortford, is overthrown, Stortford
Castle 1211 Army into Wales. Matthew Paris.
and the Kings house builded at Writle.

The King went into Wales against Lewlin his son in law, that had married his
bastard daughter, with a great force, even to Snowdon, and subdued all the
Princes and nobles without any gainesaying. He took xxviij. Pledges for their
subjection, and returned. When he came at Northhampton, there met him
messengers from the Pope, Pandolph, Legates from Rome. Anno reg. 13.
and Durand, which came to make an unity betwixt the King and the Bishop of
Canturbury, with the Monckes which were banished, but the King granting their
return, dented to make the^ any ame^ds for their loss which they had
sustained, or to restore their goods which he had co^fiscated, so that ye
Ambassadors returned without any end concluded:

After this, the King took of every Knight which was A great Tax.
not with him in Wales, two Marks of silver of every shield.

Pope Innocent absolved all, both Princes and other, which pertayned to the
Crown of England, from their fide litie and subjection to King John, and
commanded them to eschew his company.

A heard of Hearts coming forth of the Forest, lept all Gual. Covent.
into the Sea at the mouth of Seuerne.

Sherifes.
John Fitz Peter. John Garland, the 28. of Sep.
Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyn the 28. of October.
William King of Scotland being aged, was not able to ^^ber Bernewell.
quiet the inner parts of his Realm, troubled with sedition, wherefore he
fled to the King of England, and committed himself, his Kingdom and only
son unto his provision, who making the young man Knighte, went into those
parts with an army, and sending forth his men into the inner parts of that
Kingdom, he took Cuthred Mac William Captain of the sedition, and hung him
on a pair of Gallows, for he was of the old ancient race of the Scottish
Kings, who assisted with the aid of the Irish and Scotts, did exercise long
enmity against the modern Kings of Scotland, as his Father Donald had done
before him, sometime secretly, sometime openly: for the moderane Kings of
Scotland confess themselves to be rather Frenchmen, as in stock or lignage,
so also in manners, language, and apparel, and having brought the Scotts unto
extreme servitude, they admit only Frenchmen into familiarity and service.

The Welchmen took diverse Castles of the King of Englands, VVelchmen in^aded
England. 1212
cut off the heads of all the Souldioures, burned many Towns, and with a great
pray returned.

The King gathered a great army, minding utterly is destroy all the coasts of
Wales, but when he came to Notingham, he caused the xxviij. pledges of the
Welchmen to be Pledges hanged.
hanged, and for fear least his nobles should rebel, he returned to London.

An Hermit in Yorkshire, named Peter, prophesied openly Peerce of Pomfre^
of King John, and said that upon the Ascension day next coming, he should be
no King, but the Crown should be transposed to another: this Peter was
apprehended, and put in prison.

The tenth of July at night, a marvelous and terrible Anno reg. 14. London
bridge perished with fire. Ex recordis Sa^ct^ Mariae de Southwarke.
chance happened, for the City of London upon the South side of the River of
Thamis, with the Church of our Lady of the Chanons in Southwarke being on fire,
and an exceeding great multitude of people passing the Bridge, either to
extinguish and quench, or else to gaze, behold suddaynely the North part, by
blowing of the South wind was also set on fire, and the people which were
even now passing the Bridge, perceiving the same, would have returned, but
Arbor successic. Gualterus Couen. Will* Packington.
were stopped by fire, and it came to pass, that as they stayed, or protracted
time, the other end of the Bridge also, namely the South end was fired, so
that the people thronging themselves betwixt the two fires, did nothing else
exspect or look for than death: then came there to aid them many Ships and
Uessels, into the which, the multitude so indiscreetly pressed, that the Ships
being drowned, they all perished, it was said, through the fire and the
Shipwreck, that there were destroyed about three thousand persons. William
Packington writes, that there were found in part or half burnt three
thousand boydes, besides those that were quite burnt that could not be
found.

Randolph Eiland. Constantine Iosue, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.
Henry Fitz Alwyne the 28. of October.

King John being now in extremity, and minding to impute the fault to them
that would not appease his furor aforetime, reprehended sometimes one, and
sometimes another Liber Roffensis. Gualter Couen.
of his Nobility as Traitors, calling them jealous, whose beds (as he
bragged) he had defiled, and des^our^^ their daughters.

The Chronicle of Dunmow says, this discord arose betwixt Chr. of Dun.
the King and his Barons, because of Mawde called the Fair, daughter to Robert
Fitz Water, whom the Mavvde the fair, daughter to Robert Fitz Walter.
King ^o^^^d, but her father would not consent, and there upon ensued war
throughout England. The King spoiled especially the Castle of Baynard ^^^
London, and other Baynards Castle thrown down.
holds and houses of the Barons. Robert Fitz Walter, Roger Fitz Robert, and
Richard Mount Fichet passed over into France, some also went into Wales, and
some into Scotland, Robert Fitz Walter fled into France.
and did great damage to the King. Whitest Mawde the Fair remained at Dunmow,
there came a messenger unto her from King John about his suite in Love; but
because she would not agree, the messenger poisoned a boiled or po^ched egg
against she was hungry, whereof she Mavvde the Fair poisoned.
dyed, and was buried in the Quier at Dunmow.

About this time, the King of France wasted the King of Englandes lands
beyond the Seas, and the King of England 1213
likewise wasted his: but at the length a truce was taken, and an a^ne of the
Sea being betwixt either host, there was a Knight in the English host that
cried to them of the other side, willing some one of their Knights to just a
course or twain: whereupon without stay, Robert Fitz Walter made himself
ready, terried over, and got on his Horse without any manne to help him,
Robert Fitz Walter his ^al^an^ie.
and being ready against the face of his enemy, at the first course he
stroke the other so hard with his great Spear, that Horse and Man fell to
the ground, and when his Spear was broken, he went back again to the King
of France: by Gods tooth (quoth King John) he were a King indeed that had
such a Knighte. Robertes friends hearing that, kneeled down, and said, O
King, he is your Knighte, it is Robert Fitz Walter: and the Robert Fitz
Walter restored to the kings favor*
next day he was sent for, and was restored to the Kings favor, and by his
means peace was concluded, and he received his livings, and had leave to
repair his Castles ^^. Three the most for(...) and valiaunte Knights of
England in those days were Roberte Fitz Walter, Roberte Fitz Roger, and
Richard Mount Fichet.

Pandolph the ^^ga^^ ^ame to Dover, and admonished Matthew Par^s. Nic. Trivet.
the King to restore Stephen Langton to his Sea of Caunturburie, and the Monks
unto their Abbey: the King calling to mind the manyfolde dangers he was in*
made promis by oath to be obediente to the Court of Rome. This was done the
Monday before the Ascension day^ Pandolph ^al. Cogshall. King John resigned the
Crown.
with the Nobles of the Realm came together at the house of the Templers by
Dover, upon the Ascension even, where the King, according as sentence was given
at Rome, did resign his Crown, with the Realms of England and Irelande into
the Popes hands, whose Uicegerent was Pandolph aforesaid; and confirmed his
gift with a Charter, dated the xv. of May, in the viiij. year Peter of
Pomfret. Anno reg. 15
of his reign. When the Ascension day was past, he commanded the foresaid
Peter the Hermit to be fette out of the Castle of Corfe, to be bound to a
Horse tail, drawn through the Streets to Warham, and there both he and his
son to be hanged.

The seauententh of August, Stephen Langton Archbishop Stephen Langton returned.
of Caunturburie, and all the other that were banished, arrived at Dover, and
went to Winchester to the King, who meeting them in the way, fell flat upon
the earth before their feet, and with tears beseeched them to take pity on
him, and of the Realm of England. The Archbishops and Bishops likewise, with
tears took him up from the ground, and brought him unto the do^e^ of the
Cathedral Church, with the Psalm of Mise^ere absolved The King ab^solued.
him: then the King took an oath to call in all wicked laws, and to put in
place the Laws of King Edwards Divine Service being ended, the King, the
Archbishop, Bishops, and Nobles dyned albat one Table.

Richard Prior of Bermondsey, builded an house (against Lib. Bermondsey. Saint
Thomas Hospital.
the wall of the sa^^ house of Bermondsey) called the Almorie or Hospital of
conuerts and children, in the honor of Saint Thomas.

Gilo de Brawse, the son of William de Brawse, received all his Fathers
inheritance into his custody, together with his Nephew, till the child came
to lawful age.

Henry Fitz Alwyne Fitz Leofstam, Mayor of London deceassed, who had continued
Mayor of London four and twenty Henry fitz Alvvin Mayor of London xxiiij.
years. Will. Packington.
years, since the first of King Richard the first, he was buried in the
Priorie of the holy Trinity, near unto Aldgate.

Martin Fitz Alis, Peter Bate, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Lib.
Bermond. A ditch about London. Chr. of Dunstable.
Roger Fitz Alwyne, the 28. of October.

The fiftenth of October, was begone by the Londoners, the Ditche without the
Walls of London, of two hundredth foot broad, causing no small hinderance
thereby to the Channons of Christ's Church near unto Aldgate, for that it
passed through their ground.

Geffrey Fitz Peter dies, chief Justice of England, and Bishop chief
Justice. 1214
the Bishop of Winchester in that office is placed, the Nobles of England
murmuring, that a Stranger borne should be made Ruler over them.

Pope Innocent sent his Letters to Nicholas Bishop of Interdiction releassed.
Nic. Trivet.
Tusc^land his Legate, to release the interdiction, which had continued six
years, three months, and fourteen days.

The second day of July, King John sailed toward Brit^ne, intending to
beseege Naunts, in the which wars, he had the aid of Oath the Emperor, and
of the Dukes of Lo^^ine, Brabant, and Holland, of Reignold Earl of Roloigne,
and Ferrandis* Earl of Flanders, so that there was a great field fought, in
which the French King escaped narrowly, but being rescued, he took the
foresaid Earls, put Hugh de Bones to flighte, and drove the Emperor out of
the Fields, and then a truce was taken betwixt King John and the French King,
for five years.

The King returned from Poytow, and the Barons of the Anno reg. 16
Realm came to him at Saint Edmondsburie, requiring to have the Charter of
Henry the first confirmed, the which if Old Lavvc^ required.
he refused to do, they swear by the high Alter they would make war against
him.

Fishes of unwonted shape were taken in England, for they were armed with
helmets and shieldes, in outward shape they resembled, and were like unto
armed Knights, saving that they were far greater in proportion.

Salamon Basing, Hugh Basing the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Saint
Edmonds bu^y brent. John Taxtor. The Barons in armor.
Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.

Almost the whole Town of Saint Edmondsburie was consumed with fire.

The King being lodged in the new Temple at London, there came to him the
foresaid noble men in warlike order, demanding of him to confirm the
liberties of King Edwards law and other: the King requiring respite till
Easter, was feign to put in sureties the Archbishop of Caunturbury, the Bishop
of Ely, and other, to satisfye all men in that behalf, and then the noble men
returned. The King in the Church of S. Paul at London, at the hands of
William Bishop 1215 King John crossed to Jerusalem.
of London, took on him the sign of the Cross of the holy Land, by mean
thereof to be in the better safegarde: the Earls of Chester and Darby did the
like. In the Easter week the noblemen in armor met at Stamford, and after at
Barkley; whether came to them from the King, the Archbishop Anno reg. 17
of Canturbury, William Marshall, with other, to demand of them what they
would have confirmed, and the Nobles delivered to them a scedule, containing
the old laws and customs* which except the King would grant, they would
take the Castles of his lands, and so compel him.

The xvij. day of May being Sunday, the Barons came to London, and entered
through Aldgate, in the service time, where they took such as they knew
favored the King, and spoiled their goods. They brake into the houses of the
Jews spoiled in London. Gualter C^uen.
Jews, and searched their coffers, to stuff their own purses that had bin
long empty. After this, Robert Fitz Walter, and Geffrey de Mandeuill Earl of
Essex, and of Gloucester, Wales of London repaired. Ralph Cogshal.
chief leaders of the Army, applied all diligence to repair the walls of
the City, with the stones of the Jews broken houses. The Tower of London yet
held out, though there were few within to defend it. When it was noysed that
the Barons had London, all (except the Earls of Warren, Arundell, Chester,
Penbroke, Ferrers, and Salisburie, and the Barons, William Brewer, with other)
went to those Barons that were against the King, who called themselves the
Army of God, whereby such a fear came on the King, that he durst not peep
out of Windsore Castle: at length he appointed to meet with the Barons in a
Meddowe betwixt Stanes and Windsore, Matthew Pari^. The King meets the Barons.
which appoyntemente he observed, and there granted the liberties, without
any difficulty, the Charter whereof is dated, Given by our hand in
Runningmede, betwixt Stanes and Windsore, the xvj. of June, the xvij. of our
reign, unto which, all the whole Realm was sworn.

Whiles the Barons returned home, the King being left almost alone, he sent
Pandolph the Legate with other to Rome, to the end that by the Apostolic
authority, he might make frustrate the purpose of the Barons. Also he sent
Walter Bishop of Winchester, and John Bishop of Norwich, with other, unto the
Realms next adjoining, to procure him Souldioures, promising them lands, The
Pope excommunicateth the Barons.
and large possessions. By means of Pandolph, the Pope disanulled the
foresaid Charter and liberties granted, and also excommunicated the Barons.
By the other messengers were procured a great number of men of war, Rochester
beseeged.
which landing at Dover, the King forthwith beseeged Rochester, coneting to
brenne the Bridge, that no aid should come to the beseeged: but Robert Fitz
Walter defended the Bridge, and quenched the fire, nevertheless after long
assault the Castle was yielded.

As a great number of Strangers were on the Seas, minding to have landed at
Dover, to have aided Strangers drovv^ed. Matthew Paris.
the King against his Barons, through a suddayne Tempest they were all
drowned, so that about the coast of the Sea, was cast up such a multitude of
men, women, and children, that the Air was sore infected with their putrified
bodies. It was said that of forty thousand, there escaped not one alive. The
King had promised to this people, the Countries of Norffolke, and Suffolk.

John Trauers, Andrew Newland, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mator. Ralph
Cogshall.
William Hardell, the 28. of October.

King John divided his Army, the one half whereof he put under the leading
of Sauarike de Maulion a Poictouin, Fulco a Norman, the Earl of Salisburie his
bastard brother, Gerard de Sotingham a Fleming, and Walter Buca Brabander. He
himself went against the Northernmen. Sauarike beseeged the Castle of Plashy,
that belonged to Geffrey Maundeuill, the other gave themselves to waste the
Country about.

On Christmas day they spoiled the Abbey of Tiltey, Radul. Cogshal. Liber
Bernwel.
and carried away much treasure that there was laid up in trust by diverse of
that Country. On New-yeares day they did the like at Cogshall Abbey.

From thence, they went to Saint Edmondsburie, and so to the I Will of Ely,
which I Will they beseeged, because diverse I Will of Eely beseeged.
Knights and Ladies were fled thither with their substance: and those
robbers entering the Isle, spared neither sex nor state, but by torments
compelled them to tell where their treasure lay.

About the Epiphany, Sayre de Quincy Earl of Winchester, and other, returned
from beyond the Seas, bringing with them one and forty Ships laden with
Souldioures: and about the feast of the Purification of our Lady they beseeged
Colchester Castle, but hearing Colchester beseeged.
that the Barons that were at London made have to come and succor that
Castle, they went back to Saint Edmondsburie.

The King with his army was long time on the Scottish Seas, and oft-times
invaded the Lands of his Barons in those coasts, burning their Castles, and
spoiling their goods, in which expedition he went so far, that it was not
well known what was become of him, in so much, that he was noysed to be dead,
and secretly buried at Reding.

Geffrey Mandeuill dyed at London of a wound received in Justing: he was buried
in the Priorie of the Trinity at London.

The Pope excommunicated the Barons by their peculiar The Barons excommunicate.
names, but the Canons of S. Paul in London, and many other Ecclesiastical
persons, with the Barons that remained at London, appealed against this
sentence, taking exceptions against it, as pronounced by false suggestion.

The Barons sent Sayre de Quincy and other, to Philip The Barons sent for
Lodovvike.
King of France, earnestly requesting him to send his son Jews into this
Realm, promising to make him King thereof, which the French King refused to
do, till the Barons had sent him 24. pledges of the best men's sons in the
Kingdom, and then he sent them aid. Gwalo the Legate 1216
was sent from the Pope into France, to forbid Jews to go into England, but
his persuasions nothing prevailed, wherefore he excommunicated them. Also the
Abbot of Abbingdon renewed the excommunication against the Barons, the Citizens
of London, and the French, which came to their aid. About Mid-lent the King
beseeged the Castle of Colchester, and after a few days it was delivered to
him by the Colchester taken.
Frenchmen that kept it, with condition that they might depart free, with all
that belonged to them, and that the Englishmen should be suffered to depart
upon reasonable ransom, notwithstanding ye Englishmen he put in straight
prison. After the King had taken Hidingham Castle, belonging to Robert de Vere
Earl of Oxford, he made have to beseege London, but ye Londoners set open
their gates, and were ready to meet with the King ten miles of the City:
the king understanding their boldness and multitude, he withdrewe himself,
but Sauari^ de Malione, being suddenly set upon by the Londoners, loosing many
of his men, was sore beaten and wounded almost to death.

The Northren Lords recovering their strength, besieged York bes^eged
York, at length receiving above a thousand marks granted truce to the
Citizens, till the Octaues of Pentecost.

The Londoners also took a lxv. ships of Pirates besides innumerable other that
were drowned, that had besieged the Anno reg. 18
river of Thamis.

In the mean time the king having knowledge y^ Jews meant to come into
England, he sent over to the French King, y^ Bishop of Winchester, William
Marshal the elder, and other, to try if they could persuade the French king to
stay his son from that journey, but they returned without audience. The King
therefore marching along the sea coast fortified his castles, and getting
pledges of the five Ports, gathered a great multitude of ships of Yarmouth,
Linne, Dunwich, and other havens, fraught them with men of war, and
determined to encounter the Frenchmen by sea, when they came to arrive in
England, but by Tempest that arose from the North, those ships were bruised,
drowned, or driven into the South parts Jews arrived in England.
of the sea, Jews having all his power ready at Cala^s, Graueling, and
Whitsande, the Northeast wind coming about, he set forward toward England,
and with some difficulty, because it was a side wind, he la^ded at Stona, in
the I Will of Thanet, the xix. day of May. King John being then at Dover, because
his soldiers were strangers, durst not go against Jews, but fled toward
Gilforde. Jews went straight to Ca^turburie, where he received both Castle
and City into his subjection, and after all the other Castles in Kent, Dover
only King John flect^^.
excepted, then came he to London, where he was honorablye received of the
Nobles and Citizens, who altogether swear fealty to him, and did him homage at
Westminster, after this taking the Castles of Rygate, Guldforde and Ferneham,
he hasted forward to take the King, who as he heard was at Winchester, and had
raised up the standarde of the Dragon, as he had meant to give battle to Jews,
if he came to offer it. But when king John heard that Jews approached, he laid
down his Dragon, set fire on four parts of the City and fled. The Dover
Castle besieged. W^l. Packington.
Citizens quickly quenched the fire and went forth to meet Jews, receiving
him joyfully into their City, and swear fealty to him. Here came to him in
manner all the Earls and Barons of the realm: then taking the Castle of Odiham,
and ye tower of London, he returned into Kent, and the xxij. of July he
besieged the Castle of Dover, and continued the same till the xiiij. of
October: then Hubert de Brugh and Gerard de Scoting being not able longer to
abide the assaults, obtained truce, that they might send to king John for
succor. Whilst this siege remained, king John went about the land, consuming
with fire and sword the possessions of the Barons.

Alexander king of Scots and the Barons of the North came to Canturburie unto
Jews. The king marched through Norffolke and Suffolk til he came to Lin, and
appointing Sauerice Radulphur Niger. Ralphe Cogshall.
de Maulion to be Captain there, began to fortify the town: but here (as it is
said) filling his belly too much, as he was thereto greatly given, he got a
surfeyt, and therwithal fell into a laske, after his laske left him he was let
blood at a town in Lindsey called Lafforde, belonging to the Bishop of Tho.
R^dborne.
Lincoln. Here also when the messengers of them that were besieged in Dover
were come and had declared their case, the disease with grief conceived
thereat increased: moreover, The kings treasure drowned.
great sorrow oppressed him, for that in his journey he had lost the
ornaments of his chapels, with other treasure and cariages at the passage of
Welstreame, where many of his household servants were drowned in the water
and quick sands, by reason they had unadvisedly entered Liber Bernewell. K.
John dyed.
before the tide was gone forth. His disease increasing, within few days he
dyed in Newerke Castle, which belonged to the said Bishop of Lincoln, on
the xix. of October, Anno. 1216. His servants spoiled all that he had there
with him, and fled away, leaving not so much as would cover his dead carcass:
but the Captain of that Castle causing his Matthew Paris. Flores Historiaru^.
body to be bowelled (by the Abbot of Croxton, who had bin y^ kings Physician,
both for the soul and body) provided for it so honorably as he might. He was
buried in the Cathedral Church of Worcester. The English Chronicle printed by
W. Caxton. Eulogi^^.
William Caxton, and other, report that king John was poisoned by a white Monk
of Swinsteede Abbay in Lincolneshire, for saying if he might live half a year,
he would make a half penny loaf worth twenty shillings. To conclude, howsoever
he died, certain it is that he reigned with trouble enough (as by ye
preemisses may appear) xvij. years. vj. months and odd days. He had issue two
sons Henry and Richard, Issue of K. John.
and three daughters, Isabel ye Empress, Elianor Queen of Scots, and Jane: he
founded the Abbey of Boweley, in the new forest in Southamptonshire: he builded
the Monastery of Farendon, and the Monastery Farendon, Hales Godstovv, and
Snaresbrough. Ex charta regia. 10. Rouse.
of Hales Owen in Shropshire, he reedifyed Godstowe, and Wroxhall, and
increased the Chapel of Knarisborough. ()

King Henry the third


Henry born at Winchester, the eldest son of John, of the age of ix. years,
began Anno reg. 1.
his reign the xix. of October, in the year. 1216. he was crowned at
Gloucester on the xxviij. day of October, by Peter Bishop of Winchester, and
Iocelyne Bishop of Bathe, in the presence of Walo the Legate, Siluester
Bishop of Worcester, Ranulph Earl of Chester, William Marshall Earl of
Penbroke, William Earl Ferrers, John Marshal, Matthew Paris.
and many other, being crowned remained in the custody of William Marshal
Earl of Penbroke, by whose means all the nobles served King Henry much more
faithfully than they had his father.

Bennet Seinturer, William Bluntiuers the. 28. Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


James Alderman, the. 28. of October, for part of the year, and Solomon Basing
for the residue.

Jews took the Castles of Berkhamsteede and Heneforde, and 1217
after returned into France to fetch more succor, and at his return besieged
Dover in vain: for the Barons of England, that had taken part with him, going
to Lincoln with a great Liber Barnwel.
army, were there taken on the xx. day of June, which misfortune Liber Col. S.
Peter. Scala Crom.
when Jews understood, he raised his siege from Dover, and came to London,
and shut up all the gates save one, but the Londoners at the coming of king
Henry's host yielded the City to him, wherefore he confirmed all the
liberties that the Londoners had or were meet to have: at length the barons
of France with one Eustace le Moyne a great man of France, having prepared a
navy of. lx. ships, set forward to come into England to y^ aid of Jews: but
Hubert de Brugh Conestable of Dover Castle with a multitude of armed men and
the ships of y^ five Ports, met them on the Sea, where they slew Eustace their
leader: there escaped but fifteen ships and all the other were taken and drowned.
When Jews heard this, he wist not what to do, whereupon compelled by
necessity, he sued for peace: at length, the Legate, Bishops and nobles of
England, meeting in an I Will near unto Kingstone, they had a treaty of peace
together, where the said Jews in presence of them all was released of the
excommunication, and he renounced she Realm of England, and so peace was
restored the thirteenth day of September. Jews returned Jews returned.
into France. From the benefit of the absolution and peace were exempted
Bishops, Abbots, Pryors, and of al ye clergy which had borne any favor or
good will to Jews and the Barons were al deprived from the benefices by the
Legate. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln gave a thousand mark to the Pope, and an
hundred mark to the Legate, whose example Anno reg. 2.
many other did follow.

Thomas Bokerel, Ralphe Elland, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Searle Mercer, the. 28. of October.

Simon de Montfort died at y^ siege of Toulouse, being hurt Lib. Barnewel.
Gualters Coro. 1218
with the stroke of a stone.

Randulph Earl of Chester, Sa^r de Quincie Earl of Winchester, William de
Albeneto Earl of Arundel, William Earl Ferrers, with the Barons, Robert Fitz
Walter* John Conestable of Chester* and William Harcourt, with a great train
took their journey toward Jerusalem: Walo the Legate departed toward Rome, and
Pandolph elected Bishop of Norwich succeeded Legate. Anno reg. 3 Sherifes.
Mayor. 1216 Crom. ^^iter. Nicholas Trivet. Earl Marshall dyed. Anno reg. 4.


John Viell: John le Spicer* the 28. of September. Searle Merce^, the* 28 of
October.

William Marshal the elder Earl of Penbroke, governor of the kings person and
of the realm died, and was burye^ at London in the New Temple, the xv. of
Apryll, after whose death the king was governed by Peter Bishop of Winchester.

Richard Wimbledon: John Viell the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. King Henry
c^ovvned.
Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.

King Henry was crowned at Westminster by Stephen Langton Archbishop of
Canturbury* on the. xvij. day of May* Hubert de Burgo was made the kings
chief Justice.

The new work of our Ladies Chapel at Westminster Nevve work of
Westminster Strangers banished.
was begun by king Henry.

Proclamation was made, that all strangers should ^^oyde the realm, except
such as came with Marchaundise, and to make sale of them under the kings
safeconduct.

Ranulphe the third Earl of Chester, Lincoln, and Richmond, Castles of Chart
ley and Bestrne builded. Abbey of Delacrosse. Annoreg. 5. Sherifes. Mayor. 1231
Nicho. Tre^* Antiq. Calend. in Bristollia
and Lord of Little Brytaine came out of the holy land into England, and
builded the Castles of Carteley, Bestone, and the Abbey of Delacrosse.

Richard Renger: John Viell, the 28. of September. Searle Mercer, the 28. of
October.

The Friar Preachers, thirteen in number, were sent into England and having
to their Prior* Gilbert de Fraxineto in company of Beter de Roche Bishop of
Winchester, came to Canturbury, and there presenting themselves before the
Archbishop Stephen, he commanded the said Prior t^ preach before him, and
lyked him so well, that he ever a^^^ loved their order. On Saint Laurence day
they came to London, and so to Oxford on the day of the Assumption, in whose
ho^ or they builded an Oratorie, and also those Schools which since were
called Saint Oxwards schools, in whose parish they took a place, and there
for a time remained, and after that removed to the place without the walls,
which the king assygned them.

King Henry subdued the Welchmen which rebelled.

The Noblemen granted to the king two Marks of (...) of every hide of land.

Isabell the kings mother, without making her son or Nicho. Trivet.
his Counsel privy to her purpose, went over into France, and there married
with the Earl of March Hugh Bronne.

King Henry gave his sister Jane to Alexander k. of Scots, who married her at
York and Hubert de Brugh married the king of Scots sister. William de Albeneto
Earl of Arundel ^yed coming from the holy Land, who was conveyed into England
and buried at Wimondham, a Priory of his foundation. Anno reg. 6 Sherifes.
Mayor. 1222 Provincial Counsel. Radulphus Cog. Gual. Couen. Lib. Bermond.


Richard Renger: Thomas Lambert, the 28. of September. Searle Mercer, the 28. of
October.

A Provincial Counsel was holden at Oxforde, by Stephen Langton Archbishop of
Canturbury, and his Suff^agan Bishops and others in the conuentuall Church of
Osney xv. days after Easter, where were degraded a Priest and a Deacon, the
Priest for homicide, the Deacon for sacrilege and theft committed. An other
Deacon offending more deeply, denied the profession of Christian Religion, and
for the love he ^are fo a Jewish woman, caused himself to be circumcised,
following the Jewish rytes and customs: he was degraded, An Apotestate brent. A
counterfaite Christ.
and being left as a lay person and Apostata, was condemned and committed to
the fire* by the servant of Falcatius, wherein he miserably ended his life.
There was also a young man and two women brought before them, the young man
would not come in any Church, nor be partaker of the Sacraments, but had
suffered himself to be crucified, in whom y^ scars of al ye wounds were to be
seen, in his hands, head, side, Radulphus Cog.
and f^et, and he reioiced to be called Jesus of these women and other. One of
the women being old, was accused for be^^^*ching Radulphus Cog. Wall.
Couentren. Nicholas Triues.
the young man unto such madness, and also (altering her own name*) procured
hirself to be called Mary the mother of Christ. They being co^uict of these
crimes and other, were adjudged to be closed up between two walls of stone,
where they ended their lives in misery. The other woman Counterfaite Marie and
Christ.
being sister to the young man, was let go, because she reue^led the wicked fact.

On Saint James day, the Citizens of London kept game^ of defense and
wrestling, near unto the Hospital of Matild, Wrestling. Matthew Paris.
where they got the maisterie of the men of the Suburbs. The Baylife of
Westminster devising to be revenged, proclaimed a game to be at Westminster
upon Lammas day, whereunto the Citizens of London repaired, and when they had
played a while, the Baylie with the men of the suburbs harnised themselves and
fell to fighting, that the Citizens being foully wounded, were forced to run
into the City, where they rang the common Bell, and assembled the Citizens in
great number, and when the matter was declared, every man wished to revenge the
fact. The Mayor of the City being a wise man and a quiet, willed them first
to move the Abbot of Westminster of the matter, and if he would promise to see
amends made, it were sufficient: but a certain A tu^ult in London.
Citizen named Constantine Fitz Arnul^e* willed that all houses of the Abbot
and Baylie should be pulled down, which word being once spoken, the common
people issued out of the City without any order, and fought a civil battle:
for Constantine the first pulled down many houses, and of^times with a loud
voice cried in praise of the said Constantine, the joy of the mountain, the
joy of the mountain, God help and the Lord Lodowike.

A few days after this tumult, the Abbot of Westminster Cro. D^n. Abbot of
Westminster pat to his shifts.
came to London to Phillip Dawbney, one of the kings counsel, to complain of
the injuries done to him, which the Londoners perceiving, beset the house
about, and took by violence twelve of the Abbots horses away, cruelly
beating of his men, etc. But whiles the foresaid Daubney, labored to pacify
the uproar, the Abbot got out at a back door of the house, and so by a boat
on the Thamis hardlye escaped, the Citizens throwing stones after him in great
abounda^ce. These things being thus done, Hubert de Burgo, Justiciar Chief
Justice en tred the City of London with an army.
of England, with a great army of men came to the Tower of London, and sent
for the Mayor and Alderme^, of whom he enquired for the principal aucthours of
this faction. Then Constantine, who was constaunt in the sedition, was more
constante in the aunsweare, affirming, that he had done it* and that he had
done much less than he ought to have done. The Justiciar took him and two
other with him, and in y^ morning early sent them to Falcatius by water, with
a great number of armed men, who brought Constantine to the gallows,
Co^sta^tine with other hanged.
and when he saw the rope about his neck, he offered for his life 15000.
marks, but that would not save him: so he was hanged with Constantine his
nephew, and Galfride, that proclaimed his proclamation on the sixteenth of
August.

Then the Justiciar entering the City with a great army, Matthew Paris. Feet and
hands. of many cut of.
caused to be apprehended as many as he could learn to be culpable, whose
feet and hands he caused to be cut off, which cruelty caused many to flee the
City.

The King took of the Citizens 60. pledges, which he sent to diverse Castelles:
he desposed the Mayor, appointing a Gardien or keeper over the City, and
caused a great gybet* to be made, and after heavy threatenings, the Citizens
were reconciled, paying to the king many thousand Anno reg. 7 Tempests and
dearth.
marks.

On holy Rode day was great Thunder and lightning throughout all England, and
such great floods of water followed, with great winds and tempest, which
continued till Candlemasse, that the year following wheat was sold for xij.
shillings the quarter.

Richard Renger: Thomas Lambert, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.

On Saint Andrews day a great Thunder ouerthrewe Great tempests.
Churches, Castles, and houses, so that scantly any body escaped free from
harm by this Tempeste. A Knight and his wife and eyghte men of his
household, with the fall of his house were slain in Pilardestune a villedge of
Warwickeshire.

In a Counsel holden at London the Archbishop of Canturburie 1223
and other the nobility and Barons of the Realm, required the king to
confirm the liberties for the which the war was moved against his Father,
and that himself at the departing of Jews out of England: swear to observe
where upon forthwith the King sent his letters to all the Sherifes of the
realm, commanding them to inquire by the oaths of twelve lawful men in every
County, what liberties were in England in the time of King Henry his
grandfather, and to send the inqusition so made to London fifteen days after
Easter.

John de Brennes king of Jerusalem, and chief master of K. of Jerusalem.
the Hospital there, came into England, and required aid to win Jerusalem,
but he returned with small comfort.

Leolyn Prince of Wales, founded the Castle of Mountgomerie, Tho. Wikes.
and therewith certain Englishmen in despighte of the King, attempted to
constrain William Marshall Earl of Penbroke, and other, to yield to them:
but the whole Country Anno reg. 8. Sherifes. Mayor. 1224 Matthew Paris.
rose in armor, and overcame them.

John Trauers: Andrew Bokerel, the. 28. of September.

Richard Renger, the. 28. of October.

The Earl of Chester and other, rose against the king, and his Justiciars, for
the custodyes of the Castelles and lands, which the King demanded of them.

Wherefore the Archbishop of Canturburie and the Bishops excommunicated all the
perturbers of the king and the Realm.

The Earl of Chester and his accomplices, perceiving that the King had a greater
number of men of arms then they, and also fearing the excommunication, came to
the king at Northampton, yielding their castles and honors which appertayned to
the Crown. Then the king laid siege about the Ral. Cogshall. Bedford castle
besieged.
Castle of Bedforde, that Falcatius had long kept by strength, which siege he
continued by the space of eight weeks, and took the Castle on the fifteenth of
August, on which day he caused to be hanged to the number of 8^. men of arms
and other soldiers, Falcatius de Brent, who was fled into Wales, hearing
that the Castle was taken, and his men slain: under the conduct of the Bishop
of Couentrie, came to Bedforde and fell at the kings feet, requiring mercy. The
King delivered him to Eustace Bishop of London, and the Castle was made an
heap of stones. There was granted to the King throughout England two
shillings for every carucat of land. Caruage granted Gray Friars. Registrum
fratrumminoram.


The Friars Minours first arrived at Dover nine in number, five of them
remained at Canturburie, and did there build the first Coue^t of Fries Minours
that ever was in England: the other four came to London, and lodged at the
preaching Friars the space of fifteen days, and then hired an house in
Cornhil, of John Trauers one of yt Sherifes, they builded there little Celles
wherein they inhabited. The devotion of the Citizens toward them, and also
the multitude of Friars so increased, that they were by the Citizens removed to
a place in Saint Nicholas Shambles, which John Iwyn Citizen and Mercer of
London appropriated unto the comunaltie of the City, to the use of the said
Friars, and became himself a lay brother. Anno reg. 9.


William Ioynar builded their quire, Henry Wales sometime Mayor of London, the
body of the Church: Walter Potter Alderman, the Chapterhouse: Gregory Roksle
the Dortar: Barthelmew of the Castle made the Refertorie.

This year the King granted to the comunaltie of the the City of London, to
have a common seal.

John Trauers: Andrew Bokerel, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1225
Fifteen, Great charter confirmed.


Richard Renger, the. 28. of October.

The xv. part of al men's goods mouable within y^ realm, as well of the Clergy
as of the Laity, was granted to the King to aid him in his right beyond the
Seas, and the king granted to the Barons and people, the liberties which they
long time had sued for: he caused charters to be made, and sent into every
Country twain, one of the common Liberties, and the other of the Forest.

Richard the kings brother, and his uncle William Earl Gascoin subdued. Anno
reg. 10.
of Salisburie and many other, were sent into Gascoigne, who subdued the same,
and recovered Poyters.

Roger Duke: Martin Fitz William, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1226
Free warren free toll. Anno reg. 11


Richard Renger, the. 28. of October.

The King granted to the Citizens of London free warren, that is to say, free
liberty to hunt a certain circuit about the City. And also that the Citizens
of London should pass toll free throughout all England, and that al weres in
Thamis should be plucked up and distroyed for ever.

Roger Duke: Martin Fitz William, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1227


Richard Renger, the 28. of October.

The King blaming the Citizens of London, because they had given to Jews the
French King (now deceased) at his departure out of England. 500. marks, he
compelled them to pay the like sum to him, beside the, xv. part of their
moueables: and of the Burgeses of Northampton he took 1200. marks.

In a Counsel at Oxforde, the King proclaimed, that Charters canceled.
for as much as he was now of lawful age, he would rule himself at his
pleasure, and forthwith made all ye charter of ye Liberties and Forests to be
frustrate, alleging, that they were granted whiles he was under ward of
other, and had not power of his own body: so it followed, yt who so would
enjoy the liberties before granted, must renew their charters of the kings
new seal, with such a price as the Justiciar awarded them.

Richard the Kings brother returned into England, and was made Earl of
Cornewal at Westminster, Hubert de Burgo was made Earl of Kent.

Shortly after the Barons declared unto the king, that except he would restore
the Charter of liberties of the Forest, which lately he had canceled at Oxford,
they would compel him by the sword. Anno reg. 12 Sherifes. Mayor. 1228 Anno
reg. 13


Stephen Bokerel. Henry Cocham the. 28. of September.

Roger Duke the. 28. of October:

The King corrected the measures and weyghtes, and made them bigger. In the
Summer was often great thunder and lightning, which brent many houses, and
slew both men and beasts.

Stephen Bokerell. Henry Cocham the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1229
Anno reg. 14


Roger Duke the. 28. of October.

Robert Lingham Bishop of Salisburie, by the Kings help, prosecuted the
building of the new Church at Salisbuburie, which his predecessor Richard
did translate.

William Winchester. Robert Fitz John the. 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. 1230
Matthew Paris. Darkness in Paul's Church.


Roger Duke the. 28. of October.

Upon the day of Saint Paul's Conuersition, when Roger Niger Bishop of London
was at Mass in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, a great multitude of
people being there, suddenly the weather waxed dark, that one could scantly
see another in the Church, and suddenly an horrible Thunder clappe lighted on
the Church, that the same was shaken as though it should have fallen, and out
of a dark cloud came such lightning, that all the Church seemed to be on
fire, and such a stincke that all men thought they should have died.
Thousands of men and womenne ran out of the Church, and being astonished, fell
upon the ground void of al understanding, none of all the multitude tarried in
the Church, save the Bishop and one Deacon, which stood still at the high
Alter awayting the will of God. Anno reg. 15


King Henry with a great army sailed into Brytaine, where after spoylyng the
Country, a peace was concluded. Anno reg. 15 John Beuer. Sherifes. Mayor. 1231


Gilbert of Clare Earl of Gloucester, dyed in Brytaine.

Richard Walter: John of Woborne, the. 28. of September.

Roger Duke, the. 28. of October.

Richard the Kings brother married Isabel Countess of Gloucester, late wife to
Gilbert Earl of Gloucester lately deceased, and sister to William Marshal Earl
of Penbroke: and the marriage being scantly finished, the said William died,
and was buried in the new Temple at London by his father. His brother Richard
succeeded him in the Earldom.

Leolin Prince of Wales, spoiled the lands of the Barons Nicho. Trivet. Anno
reg. 16
that were on the borders of Wales wherefore the king gathered a great power at
Oxford, and went against the Walshmen, and builded the Castle of Matilde,
which before had been destroyed.

The Jews builded a Sinagoge at London very curiously, Jews sin^goge John
Shepeshed.
but the Christians obtained of the king yt it should be dedicated to our
blessed Lady.

Michael of Saint Helen: Walter de Buffel, the. 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.
12^2


Andrew Bokerel Peperer, the 28. of October.

Ranulph Earl of Chester and Lincoln dyed at Walingford, and was buried at
Chester. Through many complaints made against Hubert de Burgo, chief Justice
of England, the said Hubert fled to the Chapel of Brendwood in Essex, where
he was taken, and the king sent him to the tower of London. The morrow after
Saint Martins day began Thunders very horrible, which lasted xv. days. Great
harm was done in London, by fire which began first in the house of David
Ionet Lumbard. Historia A^rea. Anno reg. 17


Ela Countess of Salisburie widow, founded the Monastery of Chanons at Lacok
in Wilshire, for William Longspeye her late husband and William their son
and heir.

Henry of Edmonton. Gerard Bat. the. 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Andrew Bokerel Peperer, the 28. of October.

The King removed all his officers and counselors, as 1233 Pictauians placed
about the King Matthew Paris. The likeness of five Suns.
well Bishops as Earls and Barons, and sent for Pictauians, whom he retained
into his service, and committed to them the keeping of the Castles and his
treasures.

The vij. of April there appeared as it were four suns beside the natural
sun, of a red color, and a great Circle of Cristal color, from the sides
whereof went out half cyrcles, in the deuisions whereof, the four Suns went
forth. There followed that year great war and cruel bloudesheds, and
generally great disturbance throughout England, Wales, and Ireland.

In the month of June in the South part of England by Dragons.
the Sea cost were seen two great Dragons in the air, flying and fighting
together an whole day, the one chasing the other to the deep Sea, and then
were no more seen.

The King being at Oxforde, Robert Bacon openly preached Robert an I Roger
Bacon.
against Peter Bishop of Winchester, for that he euilly counseled the king
to spoil the Realm with Pictauians. Also Roger Bacon his brother both
earnestlye and pithelye persuaded the king to leave the counsel of the said
Peter. Also the Barons sent messengers to the king, requesting y^ The Barons
threat the King.
he would put from him Peter Bishop of Winchester and the Pictauians, or else
they would depose him from his kingdom, and create a new.

The King builded a fair Church and many houses adjoining House of conuerts.
thereunto in the City of London, not far from the Old Temple: In the
which house all the Jews and Infidels that did convert to the faith of
Christ might have under an honest rule of life sufficient living, whereby it
came to pass that in short time there was gathered a great number of
Conuertes, which were baptized and instructed in the laws of Christ, and did
live laudably under a learned man appointed to govern them. He also builded
Hospital at Oxford. Histo. Aurea. Anno reg. 18 Io. Rouse.
the Hospital of Saint John without the East gate of Oxforde for sick folk
and strangers to be relieved in.

Simon Fitz Marie. Roger Blunt. the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Andrew Bokerell Peperer: the. 28. of October.

Richard Marshal and Leolyne Prince of Northwales, with a great force invaded
the Kings lands, and destroyed the 1234 Salisburie brent
same with fire and sword, from the coasts of Wales to Salisburie, which town
also they set a fire. By the persuasion of Edmunde Archbishop of Canturburie,
the king commanded Peter Bishop of Winchester to go to his Bishopric, and
also expulsed all the Pictauians into their own Country, and The Pictaulans
expelled.
making peace with Richard Marshall and Lewyn Prince of Walls, he called
again his natural subjects and submitted himself to their counsel.

Richard Marshal in Ireland raising a war there, by Geffrey Nicholas Trivet.
de Marisco, was slain and buried at Kilkeny, Gilbert his brother succeeded
him in the Earldom.

This year was a great dearth and pestilence so that many Matthew Paris.
Covetous Archbishop.
poor folk dyed for want of victuals, and the rich men were stricken with
covetousness y^ they would not reticue them, amongst whom is to be noted,
Walter Gray Archbishop of York, whose corn being five years old, doubtyng
the same to be destroyed by vermin, commanded to deliver it to the husband
men that dwelte in his manors, upon condition to pay as much new corn
after harvest, and would give none to the poor for gods sake. And it fortuned
that when men came to a great stacke of corn neygh the town of Ripon
belonging to the said Archbishop, there Corn full of vermin.
appeared in the sheues all over the heads of Worms, Serpents and Toades,
and a voice was heard out of the Corn mow saying, lay no hands on the
Corn for the Archebyshoppe and all that he has is the Diuelles, to be
short, the Baylifes were forced to build an high Wall round about the
corn, and then to set it on fire, least the venomous Worms should have
gonne out and poisoned the Corn in other Anno reg. 19
places.

Ralph Ashwe. John Norman the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1235


Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.

The Jews at Norwich stale a boy, and circumsised him, minding to have
crucified him at Easter, for the which fact they were convicted both bodies
and goods at the Kings pleasure.

Frederike the Emperor married Isabell the kings sister.

Walter Brune a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, Saint Mary Spittell.
Anno reg. 20
founded the Hospital of our Lady without Bishops gate of London, a house of
such great relief to the needy, that there was found standing at the
suppression 180. beds for the poor.

Gerard Bat. Robert Hardell the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1236 Matthew
Paris. Histo. Aurea. Will. Packington.


Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.

King Henry took to wife Elianor, daughter to Raymond Earl of Province, she
was married at Canturburie, and crowned at Westminster the twentieth day of
January. To this Coronation resorted so great a number of all estates, that the
City of London was scarce able to receive them. The City was adorned with
Silks, and in the night with Lamps, Cressets, and other lights, without
number, besides many Pagentes, and strange devises which were showed. The
Citizens rode to meet the King and Queen, being clothed in long garments,
embrodered about with gold and silk of diverse couloures: their Horses finely
trapped in array, to the number of 360. every man bearing golden or silver
cups in their hands, and the Kings Trumpetters before them sounding. The
Archbishop of Canturburie did execute the office of Coronation. The Citizens of
London The Citizens of London Butlers.
did minister Wine as Butlers. The Citizens of Winchester took charge of the
Kitchen, and other Citizens attended their charges.

Ioane the Kings sister, wife to Lewlin Prince of Wales died at Hauering in
Essex, and was buried at Tarent in Dorset.

About this time fell such abundance of rain the space High Water.
of two months, that the Thamis ouerflowed the banckes, so that in the great
Palace of Westminster men did row with wherries in the midst of the Hall, and
they rode on Horseback to their Chambers.

A Parliament at Marton, wherein was made the Statutes Anno reg. 21 Statutes of
Marton. Sherifes. Mayor. 1237
of Marton.

Henry Cocham: Jordan of Couentry, the 28. of Septem.

Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.

By the Kings procurement, Octobon a Cardinal came into England as Legate from
ye Pope the second day of July.

This year passed a stormy and troublesome weather, and very unhealthful, so
that no man could remember that ever so many folks were sick of the ague.

John Scot last Earl of Gloucester deceassed, and the Country Anno reg. 22
Nic. Trivet. John Beuer. Sherifes. Mayor.
returned to the King for lack of heirs.

John Tolason: Geruas the Cordewenor, the 28. of Sept.

Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.

Simon de Mountfort, son to Simon Earl of Mountford, for doubt that Queen
Blanch, mother to the French King was offended with him, fled into England,
and was made Earl of Leycester, and Steward of England, by King Henry, and had
the Kings sister Elianor, widow of William Nicholas Trivet. Io. Beuerla.
Marshall given him to wife.

Octobone being lodged in the Abbey of Osney, the Scholars 1238 Matthew Paris.
Ypodigma. Legate put to his shifts.
of Oxford slew his master Cook, who was also the Legates brother, and the
Legate for fear gate him into the Steeple of the Church, where he held him
till the kings officers coming from Abingdon, conuayed him to Wallingford,
where he accursed the misdoers.

Odo de Kilkenny, as Standerdbearer of the Scholars, was taken with twelve
other, and cast in prison, and long after went from Saint Paul's Church in
London to the Legates Scholars did penance at London. John Beuer.
house (which was Durham place) vngirded, without gown, bareheaded and
barefooted, whereby they asked him forgiveness, and then the Legate restored
them to their University.

A Scholar of Oxford fayning himself mad, enterprised to have slain the
King in his Chamber at Wodstocke: King in darge^. Anno reg. 23
but he was taken, and after long emprisonment, plucked in pieces with Horses
at Couentrie.

John Coders: John de Wilehale, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Nicho.
Trivet. 1229


Richard Renger, the 28. of October.

Simon de Mountfort, whom the King had made Earl of Leycester (after he had
agreed with his elder brother Earl Almericus for the same Earldom) being
also Steward of Gascoine, induced the King of England to recognize, that he
would hold of the King of France the land of the Baseles, the chief Town
whereof is Bayon, and was in times past a Kingdom of it self, and so by
acknowledging to be of the fee of the King of France, excluded the King of
Castile, who challenged the said fee to belong to the King of Spain.

The Tower of London was fortified, which the Citizens Matthew Paris. Tovver of
London.
fearing least it were done to their* detriment, complained to the King, who
answered that he had not done it to their hurt, but (says he) I will from
henceforth do as my brother Ypodigma. Anno reg. 24
does, in building and fortifying of Castles, who bears the name to be wiser
than I am.

Queen Elianor bare a son named Edward at Westminster, the 22. day of June.

Roger Bongye: Ralph Ashwye, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1240


William Ioyner, the 28. of October.

Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings brother, took his journey toward
Jerusalem, with many other noble men of England. Upon Saint Georges night, the
stone gate and bulwark Matthew Paris.
which the King had caused to be builded by the Tower Bulvvarke by the Tovver.
of London, was shaken with an Earthquake, and fell down, but the King
commanded the same to be builded again, stronger than before. Lewlin Prince of
Wales deceased, and then betwixt his bastard son Griffin, and his legitimate
son David, nephew to ye K. of England by his sister, great and grievous
destruction rose for the principality, but at length Griffin being taken of
his brother, was committed to prison.

Many strange and great Fishes came ashore, whereof xj. were Sea Bulls, and
one of huge bigness passed up the Monstrous Fishes.
River of Thamis, through the Bridge at London unhurt, till he came as far as
the Kings house at Mortlake, where he was killed.

Aldermen chosen in London, which had the rule of the Wards of the City, but
were every year changed. Anno reg. 25 Aldermen in London. Sherifes. Mayor. 1241


John Gifers. Michaell Tony the 28. of September.

Gerard Bat the 28. of October.

The Jews were constrained to pay twenty thousand Marks at two terms in
the year, or else to be kept in perpetual prison.

Gilbert Marshall Earl of Penbroke, dyed without the Town of Hereford, being
bruised in Turneament, and was John Beuer.
buried at London in the new Temple. Walter his brother hardly obtained the
Earldom, because he procured that Turneament, contrary to the Kings will and
pleasure. This Walter dying without issue, his heritage was divided Nic. Trivet.
betwixt the sons of his five sisters.

The walls and Bulwarks that were newly builded about the Tower of London (in
the building whereof, the Bulvvarkes by the Tovver. Matthew Paris.
King had bestowed more than twelve thousand Marks) were again unrecoverably
thrown down as it were with an Earthquake, for which chance the Citizens of
London nothing sorry, were much amazed, for they were threatened, that the said
walls and bulwarks were builded in despite of them, to the end that if any
of them would presume to contend for the Liberties of the City, they might
there be imprisoned, and to the end that many might be Anno reg. 26
laid in diverse prisons, many lodgings were made there, that no one should
speak with another.

John Viell. Thomas Duresme the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1242 Nic.
Trivet. Ypodigma.


Roger Bongey the 28. of October.

King Henry with a great army sailed into Normandy, purposing to recover
Poyters, Guine, and other Countries, but after many bickerings, to the loss of
Englishmen, he treated a peace.

Elianor, daughter to Geffrey Earl of Briteyne, and sister to Arthure, ended
her life prisoner in the Castle of Bristow.

John Fitz John: Ralph Ashwye, the 28. of September. Anno reg. 27 Sherifes.
Mayor.


Roger Bongey, the 28. of October.

Hugo de Albeneto Earl of Arundell dyed, and his inheritance was divided among
four sisters Also Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent dyed at his Manor of Banstede,
and was buried in the Church of the Friars Preachers at London, unto the which
Church he gave his noble Palace at Matthew Paris.
Westminster, which afterward the Archbishop of York bought of them, and
made it his Inn, since commonly called York place, now White Hall.

The Thamis ouerflowed the banks about Lambeth, and 1243 Great floods.
drowned houses and fields, the space of six miles, and in the great Hall at
Westminster men took their Horsebackes, because the waters ran over all.
Anno reg. 28


Richard Earl of Cornwall married the third daughter of the Earl of Prouence.

Hugh Blunt: Adam Basing, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1244 Miserable
death of Griffin. Matthew Paris.


Ralph Ashnye Peperer, the 28. of October.

Griffyne the eldest son of Leolin Prince of Northwales, which was kept
prisoner in the Tower of London, devised subtly how to escape: wherefore one
night having deceived the Watch, made of the hangings, sheets, towels etc a
long line, and put himself down from the top of the Tower: but as he was
sliding a good pace, with the weight of his body, being a very big man and a
fat, the rope brake, and he fell on his neck, whose miserable carcass in the
morning being found by the Tower wall, was a pitiful sight to the beholders,
for his head and neck were driven into his breast between the shoulders, the
King hearing thereof, punished the watchmen, and caused Griffins son y^ was
imprisoned with his Father to be more straightly kept.

The King took of the Citizens of London 1500. Marks, for that they had
received into their City again Walter Bokerell, who had bin banished twenty
years, notwithstanding the Citizens had proved that before that time the said
Walter and his brother Andrew by their suite to the King, had gotten him to be
reconciled and restored to the Kings favor. Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln,
with other Robert Grosted. Anno reg. 29.
Prelates, complained to the King of the waste made of the Church goods, by
aliant Bishops and Clearkes of this land, where upon they were shortly voyded.

Ralph Foster: Nicholas Bat, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1245 Anno
reg. 30
Michaell Tonny, the 28. of October.

Queen Elianor brought forth a son named Edmond.

The King enlarged the Church of Saint Peter's in Westminster, pulling down the
old walls and steeple, and caused them to be made more comely.

Robert Ros being made a Templar, died, and was buried at London in the new
Temple.

Robert of Cornehill: Adam of Bentley, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. 1246
John Gisers Peperer, the 28 of October.

In the Dioces of Lincoln, there was a woman of noble birth, welfauoured and
beautiful, which was married to a rich man, and did bear him children, she
also got another Monstrous. Anno reg. 31
Gentlewoman with child, and begat three sons of her one after another, or
ever it was known: the women's names were Hauisia, and Lucia.

Harold King of Man was made Knight at London.

Simon Fitz Meger: Laurence Frowike, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. 1247
Queen Hyue. Customs of London.
John Gisers Peperer, the 28. of October.

King Henry let to ferme the Queenehiue in London to John Gisers, then Mayor,
and his successors and comminaltie of London for ever, for the sum of fifty
pound the year, to be paid at two payments, at Clarkenwell. Dated at
Windesore the xxxj. of his reign.

The Church of Saint Mildred in Canturburie, and a great Ger. Dorobor.
part of that City was brent.

A great Earthquake was in many places, especially at Earthquake.
London about the banckes of the Thamis.

The Coin was so sore clipped, that it was thought good Coin base.
to change the same, and make it baser.

A great plague was in England, so that in September, Pestilence. Matthew Pari^.
there was every day nine or ten buried in the Churchyard of Saint Peter at
Saint Albons.

Elianor, Sister to Arthure Duke of Briteyne, was buried Anno reg. 32 W^l
Wasion. Sherifes. Mayor. 1248
at Ambresburie, among the Nuns.

John Viell: Nicholas Bat, the 28. of September.

Peter Fitz Alwyne, the 28. of October.

By reason of the embasing of the Coin, a great penury followed.

Robert Bacon preaching Friar, deceassed at Oxforde.

The King required a great aid of money which was denied him, whereby (through
counsel) he was forced to The King sells his Iev. vels.
sell his plate and Jewels to the Citizens of London.

The Town of Newcastell upon Tine, was burned, bridge Earthquake.
and all.

By a strange Earthquake, the tops of houses were Anno reg. 33
thrown down, walls did cleave, the heads of chimneys and Towers were
shaken, but the bodies and foundations did not move.

Nicholas Fitz Iosey: Ge^^rey Winchester, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor. 1249
Matthew Paris. A Mart at Westminster.


Michael Tonney, the 28. of October.

The King devising how to exact money from the Citizens of London, made a mart
at Westminster to last fifteen days, and commanded that all trade of
Merchandise should cease in the City those fifteen days, which the Citizens
were feign to redeem with two thousand pounds. Besides this, the King took
victuals and wine, wherein could be found and paid nothing for it.

Two Merchants of Brabant complained to the King at Matthew Paris. Strangers
robbed, and Pirates hanged.
Winchester, that they had bin robbed by men of that Country, who had taken
from them to the value of two hundred marks, which thieves they had seen in
the Court, wherevpo^ such as were suspected, were taken to be tried by ye
Country, but ye Country purged the^ by oath, because they were for the most
part all infected and given to theeuerie* but the Merchants continuing their
suite to the King, said, that if they could not have justice, they would stay
so much of English Merchants goods in Brabant. Then the King caused twelve
men of Winchester to be chosen, who also did quit them that were accused,
which thing when the King did see, he caused those twelve to be imprisoned,
and swear, that in short space they should be hanged as Thieves accessarie and
perjured, and caused other twelve to be empaneled, which last quest found and
confessed all, and appeached many, especially of Hamshire, which were hanged.

Great dissension arose in Cambridge betwixt the Scholars Discord at Cambridge.
and Townsmen, so that houses were broken down and spoiled, and many men
wounded and slain.

In the Month of June fell great Raynes, especially about Anno reg. 34
Abingdon, which carried away many trees, houses, beasts, milles, bridges, and
one Chapel, not far from Abingdon.

Richard Hardell: John Thollason, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1250
Matthew Paris.


Roger Fitz Roger, the 28. of October.

The Friars Augustines began to inhabit at Wales at Wodhouse.

Boniface Archbishop of Canturburie in his visitation Matthew Paris.
came to the Priorie of Saint Barthelmew in Smithfielde, where being received
with Procession in most solemn wise, he said he passed not upon the honor, but
came to visit them, unto whom the Chanons answered, that they having a learned
Bishop, ought not in contempt of him to Archbishop of Canturbury visits Saint
Barthelmevves in Smithfield, beats the Supprior and Channons. etc.
be visited by any other, which answer so much misliked the Archbishop, that
he forthwith fell on the Subprior, and smote him on the face with his fiste,
saying, indeed, indeed, does it become you English Traitors so to answer me?
Thus raging with oaths not to be recited, he rent in pieces the rich Coape of
the Subprior, trod it under feet, and thrust him against a Pillar of the
chancell, that he had almost killed him, but ye Chanons seeing, that their
Subprior was almost dead, they ran and plucked off the Archbishop with such a
violence, that they overthrew him backwards, whereby they might see that he was
armed and prepared to fight. The Archbishops men seeing their master down
(being all Strangers, and their masters countrymen borne in Prouance) fell
upon the Chanons, beat them, tare them, and trod them under their feet: at
length the Chanons getting away as well as they could, ran bloody and mirie,
rent and torn, to the Bishop of London, to complain, who bade them go to the
King at Westminster, and tell him thereof: whereupon four of them went
thither, the rest were not able they were so sore hurt: but when they came at
Westminster, the King would neither hear nor see them, so they returned
without redress. In the mean season the whole City was in an uproar, and
ready to have rong the common bell, and to have hewed the Archbishop into
small pieces, but he was secretly got away to Lambeth.

The Friars of the order of Preachers through Christendom, and from
Jerusalem, were by a common convocation assembled together at their house in
Holborne by London, to entreat of their estate, to the number of four
hundredth.

The King taking inestimable sums of money of all the rich me^ in his Realm,
took of one Aaron a Jew borne in York 14000. marks for himself, and 10000.
marks for English Jews. A mark of gold or of silver, was eight ounces.
the Queen, and before he had taken of the same Jew so much as amounted
altogether to 30000. marks of Silver, and two hundred marks of gold to the
Queen.

In October the Sea flowing twice without ebb, made Tempests.
so horrible a noise, that it was heard a great way into the land. Besides
this, in a dark night, the sea seemed to be on a light fire, and the waves to
fight one with another, so that the Mariners were not able to save their
Ships: and to omit to speak of other, in one Haven called Hureburne,
besides small vessels, three noble and famous Ships were swalowed up of the
waves. And at Winchelsea, besides cotages VVinchelsea drowned.
for salt, and fishermens houses, bridges and milles, above 300. houses in
that Town, with certain Churches, through the violent rising of the Sea, were
drowned.

A great Earthquake at Saint Albons on Saint Lucies day. Anno reg. 35 Sherifes.
Mayor. 1251 Mayor of London sworn. Anno reg. 36


Humfrey Beas: William Fitz Richard, the 28. of Septem.

John Norman, the 28. of October.

King Henry granted, that where before time ye Citizens of London did present
their Mayor before the King wheresoever he were, and so to be admitted, now he
should come only before the Barons of ye Eschequer, and they should admit him.

Lawrence Frowike: Nicholas Bat, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Adam Basing, the 28. of October.

A great drought from Easter to Michaelmas, for from the first of March, til
the Assumption of our Lady, there fell Nicho. Trivet.
not so much as one drop of rain. The Shepeheards of France and England took
their journey toward the holy land, 1252 Shepherds assembled. W. Packington.
Anno reg. 37 Sherifes. Mayor. 1253 John Taxtor.
to ye number of 30000. but their number vanished in short time.

King Henry made Alexander King of Scotts Knight at York, and gave him his
daughter Margaret to wife.

William Durham: Thomas Wymborne, the 28. of Sept. John Toloson Draper, the 28.
of October.

The King took 40. s. of every Knights fee, to make his eldest son knight. He
purchased the tenthes of all spiritual livings at the Popes hands for five
years, as it had bin in aid of the holy land, but in deed it was to make his
son Edmond King of Naples and Sicill. The Liberties of London were seized by
the means of Richard Earl of Cornewal, who charged the Mayor that he looked
not to the Bakers for Liberties of London seized.
their sises of bread, so that the City was forced to please the Earl with
600. marks, and were restored. The King emprisoned the Sherifes of London in
the Tower a month and more, and after deposed them of their office, because of
the escape of John Offrom that was under their ward in Newgate, for the death
of a Priour that was the Kings ally. Ypodigma.


A great Flood happened in Holland, Lindsey, and Holdernes, Great flood. Anno
reg. 38
Countries of England, the tenth of October; which came unto Alnigham, where
through, a great portion of land, with houses and people were drowned. Robert
Grosted Bishop Robert Grostede.
of Lincoln, in Greek, Latin, and other languages, did by an Epistle reprove
Pope Innocent, affirming, that the Nicholas Trivet. W. Sheepeshed*
Preaching Friars, and minorite Friars were infected with heresies. This Robert
Grostede borne in Suffolk, this year deceased: he gave al his books to ye
friars Minors at Oxford*

John Northampton: Richard Pickard, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. 1254
Edward prince of Wales.
Richard Hardell Draper, the 28* of October.

Edward yt Kings eldest son wedded the Kings daughter of Spain Elianor: his
father gave him the Earldom of Chester, and the governance of Guyen and
Ireland.

The Bishop of Hereford in the Court of Rome, feigning himself Procuratour for
the Clergy of England, bound the small houses of Religion in 100. or 200.
marks the piece, Rodul. de Diceto.
the greater houses in 300. or 500. marks the piece. Saint Edmondsburie was
bound in 700 marks, to be paid to certain Taxtor; Anno reg. 39
Merchant strangers, and all this money was collected to expulse Manfred out of
Naples.

Ralph Ashwye: Robert of Limon, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1255
Matthew Paris. Anno reg. 40 Jews hanged. Nicholas Trivet.
Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.

Cxlij. Jews were brought to Westminster, which were accused of ye crucifying
of a child named Hugh at Lincoln, xviij. of the^ were drawn through the
streets at Lincoln, and after hanged, ye other remained long prisoners. The
Earls and Barons of England, with assent of the Prelates, caused proclamation
to be made through all England, that the Charters of liberties and forests
should be kept: and at their instance, Boniface Archbishop of Canturbury
accursed all those that should break the^. Lewlin Prince of Wales, gathering a
mighty ^a^d of me^, invaded Cheshire, which ye King had lately given to his son
Edward, and destroyed all things with fire and sword, till he came to the gates
of the City of Chester, to repress whose violence, a valiant and famous
Knight called Stephen Bancan was sent of the K. with an army, who entering ye
lands of a noble man of Wales called Rise, surnamed Vaghan, ye is, little,
being circu^vented and beset of his enemies in marish grounds, was slain, the
remna^t of his army likewise either slain, or taken alive, and put in bands,
few excepted yt escaped by flight.

Stephen Do: Henry Walmond, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1256 Anno
reg. 41
Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.

The Mayor and diverse Alderme^ of London, and the Sherifes, were deprived of
their offices, and the governance of the City committed to other.

The new work of S. Paul's Church in London, was begone.

Michael Bokerell: John the Minor, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1257
Tpodigma.
Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.

Hugh Bigot chief Justice of England, and Roger Thurkelby kept their Courts
in the Guild Hall of London, and punished the Bakers upon the Tomberell, and
did many other things against the laws of the City. Richard Earl of
Cornwall went over into Almayne, and was there Crowned King of Almayne at
Aquisgrayne. King of Almayne.


The sixth day of July fell such abundance of rain, that many houses, bridges,
and trees were borne down. The Bridges borne down. Taxtor. Wales of London
repaired. Anno reg. 42 Sherifes. Mayor. 1258
King caused the walls of the City of London, which were sore decayed, and
destitute of Bulwarks, to be repaired in more seemly wise than before they had
bin.

Richard Owell: William Ashwye, the 28. of September. Richard Hardell Draper,
the 28. of October.

For so much as the King had oftentimes promised the restitution of certain
ancient laws which he never performed, the Lords murmuring against him, held a
Parliament at Oxford, which was after called the mad Parliament, because many
things were there enacted, which turned Mad Parliament. Tpodigma. Twelve
Peers.
to the death of many nobles. In confirmation of these acts were chosen twelve
Peers, which had authority to correct ye breakers of them, the King his
breethren, the noble men and Barons, taking their oath to see the same observed.
Shortly after, they banished William of Valence, Galfrede, Strangers banished.
Gwydon, and Aylmer the elect of Winchester, all four breethren to the King on
the mothers side, and other strangers.

Great dearth followed the wet year passed. A Quarter Dearth of Corn.
of Wheat was sold for fifteen Shillings, and twenty Shillings, but the
worst was, there could be none found for money, where-through many poor people
were constrained to eat Horse flesh, and barks of trees, but many starued
Cro. ^ouesham.
for want of food twenty thousand in London as it was said.

A Jew at Tewkesburie fell into a privy upon the Saturday, A Jew drowned.
and would not for reverence of his Sabbath be plucked out, wherefore Richard
of Clare Earl of Gloucester, kept him there till Monday, at which time he was
found Anno reg. 43 Ex record. Tho. W^ke^.
dead. Richard Clare Earl of Gloucester dyed, and also his brother William by
poison as was thought.

Robert Cernehull: John Adrien, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1259 A
^u^ke more.
Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.

The King commanded a general assembly at Powles Cross in London, where he in
proper person commanded the Mayor, that the next day following, he should
cause to be sworn before the Aldermen, every stripling of twelve Oath to the
King.
years of age or vpwardes, to be true to the King and his heirs Kings of
England, and that the Gates of the City should be kept with harnessed men.

Two Romans striving for prebends in Powles Church Anno reg. 44
at London, the one killed the other there.

John Adrian: Robert Cornehill, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1260
John Gysors Peperer* the 28. of October.

John Duke of Briteine married Beatrice, King Henry the thirds daughter, and
was made Knighte, and with him Baldwine Earl of the Isle of Wight.

This year was Sir Hugh Dispencer made chief Justice Hugh Bigot chief
Justice. Will Packington.
of England, and Nicholas of Ely Chancellor to ye King, and the Abbot of
Peterborow Treasourer of the Eschequer, by ordinance of the Barons.

The King repenting that he had at Oxford granted such large Laws and
Liberties to the Nobles and people of the Realm, by counsel of Edward his
son, and Richard his brother, he sent to the Court of Rome to be absolved
of his oath. The Barons and Nobles of the Realm, held a Parliament.
Parliament at London in the new Temple, and the King held himself in the
Tower of London.

Reignold de Moun, Earl of Somerset and Lord of Dunstere Anno reg. 45 Nevvham.
founded the Abbey of Newham in Devonshire.

Adam Browning: Henry Couentry, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. 1261 King
Henry absolved.


William Fitz Richard, the 28. of October.

King Henry published at Powles Cross the Popes abslution for him and all his
that were sworn to maynteyne the articles made in the Parliament at Oxford,
and then he with the Queen sailed into France, to make a final concord
between him, and the King of France for Normandy, where the composition was,
that Normandy should remain to the French King, paying to the King of England
and his 3000. pound sterling. Anno. reg. 46 Sherifes. Mayor. 1262 The Barons in
armoure.
heirs yearly thirty thousand pounds Turnoys, which is 3000. pound sterling.

John Northampton: Richard Pickard, the 28. of Septem.

William Fitz Richard, the 28. of October.

The Barons of England ( Simon de Mountfort being their chief) armed
themselves against the King, and all this year houered about London, and other
places, without any notable act of Rebellion, saving that they robbed aliants,
and such other persons as they knew to be against their purpose, especially
they slew the Jews in all places. There was slain Jews at London to the
number of 700. the rest Jews spoiled for Usury.
were spoiled, and their sinagogue defaced, because one Jew would have forced
a Christian man to have paid more tha^ two pence for the Usurie of twenty
Shillings a week.

Richard of Clare Earl of Gloucester, son of Gilbert of Clare, Will. Packington.
Anno reg. 47
being with King Henry in France, deceassed, and was buried at Tewkesburie, and
Gilbert his son succeeded him.

John Tailor: Richard Walbroke, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1263
Macy a French man Connestable of Gloucester. Robert of Glocest.


Thomas Fitz Thomas, Fitz Richard, the 28. of October.

Sir Macy de Bescile, a Frenchman, was by the King made Sheriff and Connestable
of Gloucester, wherewith the Barons being offended, they chose to be Sheriff and
placed there a Knight of that Country called Sir William Tracy, which Sir
William keeping Court upon a day in the Town of Gloucester, Macy the Frenchman,
with a number of armed men came sodeinely upon him, drew him to the ground, and
so to the Castle, and cast him in prison, whereof when the Barons understood,
they sent Roger Clifford, and Sir John Gifford with a great power to Gloucester,
who beseeging the Castle, Clocester Castle taken by the Barons.
brent the bridge, and entered at the last, where they took the said Macy, with
all his company, and for that a Carpenter from the Castle with a quarrel, had
slain an Esquier of the Barons party, Sir John Gifford made the same
Carpenter to leap from the top of the Castle, where-through he was crushed to
death, Sir Roger Clifford took the keeping of that Castle upon him, and sent
Macy into the March, Sir John Gifford took all Macies goods at Sherestone,
and elsewhere.

Peter de Egblonuch a Frenchman, Bishop of Hereford, Bishop of Hereford a
French man.
was drawn out of his Cathedral Church by Thomas Turberuill, and other, and
sent to the Castle of Erdesley, where he and Sir Macy were both committed to
safe ward: his treasure was spoiled, and his Chanons sent to prison: and thus
were Frenchmen served through the Land where they might be found, by them
that were on the Barons part.

Simon de Mountfort with the Barons, pitched their Tents in Istleworth Park.
The Manor of Istleworth belonging Tho. Wikes.
to Richard King of Almayne, was burnt by y^ Londoners. They also burned
another house of his near to Westminster.

In this mean while, the King and Queen remained The Queen chased. Nicho.
Trivet.
in the Tower of London, and when y^ Queen would have gone by water unto
Windesore, the Londoners getting them to the Bridge in great numbers, under the
which she must pass, cried out on her, using many vile and reprochful words,
threw dirt and stones at her, that she was constreyned to return again to the
Tower. The Citizens fortified the City with iron Chains, drawn overthwart
their Streets of London chayned. Annals of Hyde.
streets, munited the City, and did marvelous things.

There was a peace concluded betwixt the King, and the Barons, with these
conditions, that Henry, son to the King of Almayne, that took the Barons
part, and was in prison, should be delivered, that all the Kings Castles
through England should be put into the Barons hands, that the provisions of
Oxford should be kept, and that all Strangers within a certain time should
depart the land, those except, whose abode the faithful persons of the Realm
with one assent should accept: lastly, that the Englishmen borne, and such as
were faithful men to the Kingdom, should order and rule the business of the
land under the King. But this notwithstanding, certain Knights of the Kings
part fortified the Castle of Windesore with vittayles and armor. Edward the
Kings son came to Bristow, where discord rose betwixt his Knights and the
Townsmen, so that the Townsmen were minded to have beseeged the Castle:
which when Edward understood, he sent for Walter Bishop of Winchester that
took the Barons part, that in his company he might go to the Court of his
father, promising to persuade his father to peace. Heerevpo^ going forth with
y^ Bishop, til they came to Windsore, he entered the Castle, to the great
misliking of the Bishop: but Edward shortly returned, and went to meet Simon
Earl of Leicester, that he with his adherents were coming to beseege
Windesore Castle. Edward the Kings son met with y^ said Simon about
Kingston, and offered means of peace: but Simon trusting to Bishop Walters
counsel, deteyned Edward with him, and would not suffer him to depart till
the Castle was yielded, they that were within having liberty to depart
whither they would, and the Strangers that minded to pass the Seas, had
safeconducts granted them. Lewlin Prince of Wales confederate with Earl Simon,
in the mean time, wasted the Country of Chester, and the Marches of the same,
and overthrew to the ground the Castles of Diffard and Gannoke. After this, a
Parliament was holden at London, in the which, many that had held with the
Earl, went to the Kings part, as Henry of Almaine, son to Richard King of
Romans, and other. The Kings party being increased, he went to Dover, and
endeavored to have got that Castle out of the Earls Anno reg. 48
hands, but he traveled in vain.

Robert Mountpiler: Osbert Suffolk, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1264


Thomas Fitz Thomas Fitz Richard the. 28. of October.

Jews King of France, through procuring of Boniface Archbishop of
Canturburie (who in politic Sermons at Paris, as well at the Friars Prechers,
as Minors, declared the doings betwixt the King of England, and the Earl of
Leicester) took upon him to make a peace betwixt them: whereupon the King of
England, with his son Edward, and diverse other of the English nobility,
came to Paris about the xxij. of Januarie, but the Earl of Leicester, fearing
ye French Kings displeasure for his mothers sake, or some other cause not
known, stayed at home in England and proceeded in his business: wherefore
Roger Mortimer began to destroy the possessions which the Earl uf Leicester
held, against who^ the Prince of Wales went, and besieged the Castle of
Radnore, and brought it to yield.

Edward the Kings son, after his return from Paris, about Lent, took his
journey toward the March, and passing The Scholars and Burgesses of Oxforde
the one spoil the other.
by Oxford, the Burgesses shut up their gates against him, whereby he was
forced to lie at the kings Hall without the town till the next morrow and
then departed. The scholars of Oxford being shut within the Town, brake up
the gate that leads toward Bea^monte, for which deed the Mayor sent some of
them to prison: and not long after, while the Scholars were at dinner, the
Mayor and Commons with banners displayde, thought to have spoiled the Clearkes
ere they had bin aware, but being espied, the Scholars ran together, and with
bows and other weapons slew and wounded the Burgesses and Commons, brake up
many houses, spoiling the goods, and set the houses of the Portriues ( William
Spicer and Geffrey Hencley) on Fire, on the South side of the town. Moreover,
because the Mayor ( Nicholas Kingstone) was a Uintener, they brake up the
Uintry, Clerks of Oxforde banished.
drank the Wines, and spoiled them, for the which fact the King caused the
Clearkes and Scholars to be banished the University.

Edward the kings son took the Castles of Hay and Huntington, belonging to
the Earl of Hereforde, and the Castle of Brecon being also rendered to him, he
delivered to Roger Mortimer to keep, with the teritorie adjacent. Robert
Ferrers Earl of Darbie (who took part with Earl Simon) besieged Worcester
besieged.
Worcester, and entering by the old Castle, spoiled the Citizens of their
goods, and compelled the Jews to be christened. Gloucester besieged.
The town of Gloucester, that before was taken by the Barons, was now assailed
by Edward the kings son, who entered ye castle by great force, and in the next
morning by means of the Bishop of Worcester, and Reignald Abbot of Gloucester,
a truce was taken betwixt the Barons in the town, and the Kings son in the
Castle: but shortly after, the Barons fled, and the Burgesses submitting
themselves, were some of them hanged, the residue cast in prison, grievously
raunsomed, and the town destroyed, from whence the Kings son departed,
spoiling and wasting the Country (contrary to his oath made to the Barons)
till he came to Oxforde, where he lodged in the house of the Friar Pre^chers,
and joined his power with the King his Father, who was lately come thither to
make his offering to Saint Friswide (not fearing the superstitious opinion, yt
if any King entered ye town, the Uirgin there would be avenged on him.) The King
having now with him his brother Richard king of Almaine, his son Edward,
William de Valence his brother on the mothers side^, and John Cumyn of
Scotland, with a multitude of Scottishmen, John de Bailliol Lord of Galoway,
Robert le Bruise lord of Anandale, Roger de Clifford, Phillip de Marmio^, John
de Vallibus, Roger de Laborne, Henry Percy, Phillip Basset, Roger de Mortimer,
with an army went and besieged Northampton, Nothamton besieged.
and the fourth of April breaking the Wall, took ye town and in it fifteen
Knights bearing Banners, Simon Mountfort the younger, William de Ferrers, Peter
de Mountfort, Baldwine Wake, Adam de Newmarche, Roger Bartrandi, Simon Fitz
Simon, Berengario de Wateruile, Hughe Cubion, Thomas Maunsell, Roger
Bonteuileyne, Nicholas Wake, Robert de Newenton, Phillip de Derby, Grimbald de
Paunsevent: of whom Simon the younger was sent to Winchester, the residue to
other places to be safely kept. Other Knights of meaner degree were taken, to
the number of. xl. and not a few Esquires: from thence the king went toward
Notingham, wasting with fire and sword the manner places of the Barons, and
there he gathered his Lords and great men.

Earl Simon went to London, and from thence to Rochester, Rochester besieged.
which John Earl Warren defended, the bridge and first gate whereof when he
had won, being informed that the king was coming toward London, he left
the siege and went back to meet him: but the king turning his way from
London took the Castle of Kenington Kingston, which was Castle at Kingstone
taken.
the Earl of Glocesters, and then going to Rochester, chased away some that
remained at the siege, but slew many more: from thence he went to Tonbridge,
the Castle whereof he took, and the Counties of Gloucester within it: leaving a
garrison there, Castle of Tonbridge taken.
he went to Winchester, where he received the^ of the v. Ports to his peace*
and passing further to Jews, was received into ye Priory, and his son into the
Castle, where whiles he remained, the Barons writ to him letters, as ye may read
in Matthew Paris, and Nicholas Trivet but they taking no effect, ye Barons in
arms approached toward Jews, inuading ye kings people Battle at Jews.
y^ were gone forth for forage, whereof the king being warned, he goes forth to
meet the^ with his army divided into three sorts. The first was led by Edward
the kings son, having with him William de Valence Earl of Penbroke, and John de
Waren Earl of Surrey and Sussex. The second was guided by Richard K. of
Almain, with his son Henry. The third the K. himself had in governing. The
Barons army was divided into four wards. The first led Henry de Mountfort with
the Earl of Hereford. The second led Gilbert de Clare with John Fitz John and
William de Mou^tchance. The third in which the Londoners were, Nicholas
Segraue. The fourth Earl Simo^ himself led with Thomas de Pelueston. Edward
the Kings son with his battle brake on his enemies that he made them to
give back, of whom many were drowned.

The Londoners were put to flyghte, whom whilst the kings son pursued for
the space of four miles, he made great slaughter, but being separate from the
rest of the army, he weakened his part sore.

In the mean time many of the Kings battle were slain, and the King of
Almaine taken in a Windmil by Sir The King of Almaine taken.
John de Beuis, so was Robert le Bruis and John Commyne, which had brought the
Scotts King Henry also having his horse slain under him, yielded to the
Earl of Gloucester, King Henry taken.
who sent him prisoner to the Priory. Edward returning, is received with sharp
battle, and the Earl Waren, William de Valence, Gray de Lesmute, the Kings
half brethren, Hugh Bigod with me^ of arms to the number of. 400. Haberions
got then the Castle of Pemsey, and when many were slain on either side, the
Lord Edward ryding about the town, sound his father in the Priorie.

In the mean time an assault being given to the Castle, which was valiauntly
defended, the Barons withdrew the^: whereupon the Lord Edward being greatly
encouraged, and having gathered his people about him, would have made a new
battle, so that the Barons sued for peace, which by ye means of the Friars
Preachers and Minors, was brought to pass, that on the Friday following, the
Lords, Edward and Henry, for their Fathers, of England and Almayne kings,
delivered themselves to Earl Simon, upon hope of quietness Edward the Kings
son taken
and peace that might be concluded. On the Saterdaye the king licenced them
that were about him to depart to their houses, and writ unto the^ that were in
Tonbridge Castle, that they should not molest the Barons, as they returned
homewardes: but they notwithstanding being in arms, when they heard that the
Londoners which were fled from the battle were received into Croydon they
hasted (...) (...) (...) the kings son was delivered. There was slain in the
battle at Jews, (which was fought on the xij. of May,) about Robert of
Glocest. VVestchepe in London brent.
4500. men. About that time a great part of Westcheape in London was brent by
treason.

Earl Simon led the K. and his son Edward about with him W. Pakenton. Chro.
Glaston.
till he had got all the strong Castles of the land into his hands, and then
put Richard King of Almaine in ye tower of London, and Edward the Kings son
in Dover Castle.

In the mean time, Roger Mortimer, James Audeley, Roger Leyborne, Roger
Clifforde, Haymo Lestrange, Hugh de Turberuile, with many other, rose against
Simo^, who to restrain their boldness, associating to him the Prince of
Wales, entered the Castle of Hereforde, and caused Edward the Kings son to be
brought thither from Dover: after this he wanne the Castle of Hey, which
belonged to the Earl of Hereforde, and took the Castle of Ludlow, and after
wastyng ye Castle of Ludlovv taken.
lands of Roger Mortimer, goes toward Mountgomerie, and there taking
pledges of peace of ye said nobles, he turns to the south parts, to meet
the^ power, which was said to come out of France to the kings aid.

Pope Vrbane sent a Legate and Cardinal, the Bishop of Sabrine, into England,
but they might not enter the realm, the five Ports prohibiting them: whereupon
they called certain English Bishops first to Amience, and after to Bulloigne,
to whom he committed the sentence of excomunication to be pronounced against
the City of London, the five Ports; and al those that troubled the King of
Engla^ds peace: but the Bishops dissembled the matter.

This year about the 20. of June a notable blasing star appeared, such a one
as had not ben seen in that age, which rising from the East with great
brightness unto the midst of Blasing star. Nic. Trivet. Rober of Gloucester
Anno reg. 49 Sherifes. (...)*
the Semisperie drew his stream, it continued till after Michaelmas.

Gregory Rokesley, Thomas of Deford, the 28. of Septem. (...) (...) arose, for
that Simond not only kept the king and other, as prisoners, The Earl of
Gloucester forsook the Earl Leicester.
but also took to himself the revenues of the kingdom, etc. which should
have been equally divided amongst them, so y^ Gilbert of Gloncester departing,
joined to him in league the noble Knights of the Marches, who^ Earl Simond had
commanded to avoid the Realm, but John de Waren Earl of Surrey and Sussex,
and William de Vale^ce Earl of Penbroke, had brought a great power by sea in
the Weast parts of Wales, and arriving at Penbroke, Earl Simon leading the
king with him, went to Hereforde where he gathered a great power, to oppress
the said knights: but while the Prelates labored for peace, Edward the kings
son being in ye Castle of Hereford is permitted to exercise himself on
horssebacke Edward the kings son taken from his keepers
in a medowe without the City by his keepers, where after he had wearied
diverse horses, and mounting on a fresh appointed for that purpose, he rode
quite away, and passing the river of Wey, with two Knights and four Esquires,
was followed hard by his keepers: but when they were advised of the standarts of
Roger Mortimere and Roger Clifford coming to his relief, they returned, and
he escaped to Wigmore. And this chanced in the Whitson week. Lord Edward
being thus escaped, gathers an army, confederateth and submits to him the
Countries of Hereford, Worcester, Salop, and Chester, with the towns, Cities
and Castelles, he also wins by force the City of Gloucester, which Earl
Simon had lately fortifyed, the towns men ^led to the Castle, who xv. days
after yielded it, and departed. The Earl of Leicester wan the Castle of
Monmouth, and laid it flat with the ground, and entering into the land of the
Earl of Gloucester called Glomorgan, meeting with the Prince of Wales Castle of
Monmouth raced.
coming to his aid, they destroyed al with fire and sword.

Edward the Kings son hearing that many of Earl Simonds partakers were
come to the Castle of Kenilworthe, taking with him the Earl of Gloucester he
departed from Worcester, and came upon them at a sudden, where he took the
Earl of Oxford, sir William Mountchalsie, sir Adam Newmarch, sir Walter de
Solenle and other: and Simon the son of Earl Simon hardly escaped in the
Castle. The Earl of Leicester having the King with him, returned out of
South Wales, and on Lammas day came to Kemsey, a place of the Bishop of
Worcester, and there tarried the next day, Edward the Kings son returned from
Kenelworth to Worcester, whose return being known, Earl Simon departing from
Kemsey, by unhappy chance stayed in the town of Euesham, for on ye morrow
being the ij. of August, Edward the kings son departed from Worcester passing
the river near to the town called Cliue, closed up the passage betwixt Earl
Simon and Simon his son, who was at Killingworth. In the next morning Lord
Edward approached near to Euesham on the one side, and Battle of Euesham.
Gilbert Earl of Gloucester on the other side, and Roger Mortimer on the two
other sides, whereby Earl Simon was so enclosed, that he must either fight or
yield: on Friday therefore was the fifth day of Auguste, their armies
encountered each other in a large field without the town, where the Earls part
had the worste: the Earl was killed in the field, and Henry son to Earl
Simon, Peter de Mountfort, Hugh Dispencer Justice of England, William de
Mandeuile, Ralph Basset, Walter Greping, William de York, Robert de Tregoze,
Thomas de Hostile, John de Be^^ocampo, Guido de Baylolle, Roger de Roulens,
with sir John de Saint John, sir William de Verence, sir John de Inde, sir
William Trossel, sir Gilbert Einefielde, and other of meaner sort in great
number, especially of Walshmen, for almost none of the^ escaped thence, but
they were slain at Tewkesburie. Lords taken Lords taken. Liber Euesh.
at Euesham, sir Vmfry de Boune, sir John Saint John sir Simons son, sir
Guy, sir Baudwin Wake, sir John Vessy, sir Henry Hastings, sir Nicholas
Segraue, sir Perce and sir Roberte Mountfordes sons, and many other, Simon de
Mountfort ye son coming too late to meet his Father at Euesham, turned back
again to Kenilworth Castle, and the sixth of September, he released King of
Almain* delivered.
the King of Almain, his mothers brother, sir Reimond Fitz Pierce, and many
other.

A Parliament was holden at Winchester, where all the A Parliament at
Winchester.
statutes made at Oxforde were disanulled, and all the goods of them that were
against the king seized. London was in great danger to have bin destroyed by
the king, for displeasure he had conceived against ye Citizens, but the
Citizens wholly submitted both lives and goods unto him. Eight persons carrying
the same submission toward Windsor, met Sir Roger Leyborne knight at Colbrooke,
who turned them back again, and after they had discoursed the whole matter
with, him, he willed them to deliver to him their submission, and he would
move the King in it, which thing they did. After six days this Knight
returned to the City, and said the king had received their writings, willing
them first to take away all the chains that were in the streets of the City,
and pull the posts out of the ground that the same were fixed in, and bring
both chains and posts to the Tower of London: then the Mayor with forty
Citizens should the next day following attend upon the king at Windsor to
confirm their writing, and they should go and come safe: in witness whereof
he delivered them the kings letter and seal, for the space of four days. The
next day the Citizens being at Windsore, attended at the gate until the king
came from hunting, at which time he would not once look on them. After the
King was entered, they would have followed, but they were forbidden: shortly
after they were called into the Castle, where they were locked up in a Tower
with homely entertainment: the next day the king gave unto Prince Edward the
Mayor and four Aldermen, ye rest were committed to several prisons. Anno reg.
50 Sherifes. Mayor. 1266 Pierce Longtofe. Robert Brune.


Edward Blund: Peter Aunger, the. 28. of September.

Thomas Fitz Thomas Fitz Richard, the. 28. of October.

King Henry came to Westminster, and there gave unto diverse of his household
servants about the number of three score housholdes and houses within the
City, so that the owners were compelled to agree and redeem their houses and
goods, or else to avoid them: then he made Custos of the City, sir Othon
Conestable of the Tower, who chose Baylifes to be accomptable to him, John
Adrian, and Walter Haruy. After this the King took pledges of the best men's
sons of the City, the which were put in the Tower of London, and there kept
at the costs of their parents. By great labor and suit made, all the foresaid
persons which were in Windsor Castle, eight only except, were delivered, and
the king agreed with the Citizens for twenty thousand marks to be paid, for
the leauying of which fine, were taxed as well servants as householders, and
many refused the liberties of the City to be quit of the charge.

The Castle of Dover was yielded to Edward the kings son, into the which he
put Guy de Mountfort to be kept. The Countess of Leicester, wife to Simond
Mountfort, yielded the Castle of Pemsey to K. Henry her brother, who forthwith
banished her the realm of England for ever. About Alhalowntide the Queen of
England returned from beyond the Seas, with her came a Legate, named Othobone,
who shortly after his coming, in counsel holden at Northampton, accursed all the Bishops and Priests that had aided Earl Simon against the King,
especially he cursed by name, Walter of Worcester, Henry of London, and
Stephen of Chichester: and the Bishop of Lincoln. Worcester shortly after
deceased, the other ^. of Glocest.
there three went to Rome and were assoyled. The Legate also published the Popes
Bull, for the tenthes of Churches to be paid to the king for the next year.
Sir Simond the younger fled from Kenilworth Castle to the disherited Knights,
who then were in the I Will of Oxholme, where he remained not long, for through
messengers with fair promises, and hostages given by Edward the kings son,
he forsaking them, went to London to the king and his nobility, but being
privily warned of their guile, he made an escape and got over into France.

The keeper of Guy Mountfort about Easter being brybed, let him go, and went
with him into France: this Guy went into Tuscane and served Earl Rufus, in
whose war waxing famous, he obtained to have his daughter in marriage.

Robert Ferters. Earl of Darby Henry Hastings, Baudewinde Battle of
Chesterfielde.
Wake* John Der^^le and other with their power being in the Town of
Chesterfielde in Darbishire, there came against them John Earl Waren, sir
Henry of Almaine, sir Waren of Basingborne, and many other Knights, who on
Whitson even met without the town on hunting, sir Baudwyn Wake* sir Hen^y
Hastings sir Gregory Caldwel, sir John Clynton, sir Roger Maundeuil, sir
Richard Caldwel, and to y^ number of. xxij. Knights al under one spear, al
which they chased and put to flight: whereof when sir John Danuil being in the
town had understanding, he with a small company rode out, pierced through the
host, wounding many and escaped. Earl Waren entering the town slew many a man,
and took the Earl Ferrers, who was sick of the gout, and had that day been
letten blood: him they sent to the Tower of London, from whence but lately he
had bin delivered. Henry Hastings and his company coming to Kenilworth,
found there sir John de Eynuile and many other valiant Knights. Sir William de
la Know, and sir John de la Ware, had well stored ye Castle of all things
necessary. King Henry hastyng Kenilvvorth Castle besieged.
thither, began his siege the morrow after Midsommer day, which siege
continued til Christmasse after, for they within the Castle, not fearing his
force which was great, set open their gates, and never closed them day nor
night, come who so would, they came to their cost, so that many a man was
slain on both sides, and many were taken and raunsomed. At length the Legate,
the Archbishop, and two other Bishops, came to make accord between the king
and the disherited, and also them of the Castle: but the disherits, nor they of
the Castle would grant to the Kings will, wherefore the legate a coursed them
and all that were of their accord: but they of the Castle, not regarding the
Legate nor his cursing, in mockage thereof, clothed a priest their surgeon.
Phillip Porpeis, in a cope of white, and setting him on the Castle wall, as a
white Legate against the red, made him to accurse ye K. the Legate, and al
their partakers. Whiles this business lasted at Kenilworth, the disherites
took ye I Will of Ely, and strengthened it in such wise that they held it long:
they robbed Norffolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire, they spoiled ye City of
Norwich, and ransomed ye rich men at their pleasure. At Bartholmewtide, y^ K.
held a Parliament at Killingworth wherein by his Barons were chosen. vj.
persons, which being sworn, chose to the^ other vj. these. xij. to make an
accord between the K. and the disherits: ye first. vj. were, Walter Gefford
Bishop of Bath, Nicholas of Ely By. of Worcester, and Walter B. of Excester,
Roger de Sumerey, Roberte Walronde, and Alayne de la Souch Barons: these vj.
chose to them Gilbert E. of Gloucester, Humfry Earl of Hereford, the B. of S.
David's, sir John Bailiol, sir Phillip Basset, and sir Warayn de Basingborne, if
these xij. could not agree, the Legate, and Henry, son to Richard King of
Almaine, should be Umpiers, these met and agreed at the last. Anno reg. 51
Sherifes. Mayor.


John Hind: John Walrauen, the. 28. of September.

William Richards, the. 28. of October.

By the kings commandment, ye Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons and
knights of ye realm were assembled at Northampton on y^ twesday next before
Alhalownday, there to vnstand and to confirm by statute what the forenamed
twelve stats had deereed for the state of ye kingdom, which was for y^ Barons,
y^ none should be disherite, but ye Mountfort and the Ferrers, y^ other should
redeem their lands with money, at the hands of the^ who had y^ same in
possession of the Kings gift, so y^ none paid above vij. years value, nor
under iij. years value, which was the lest, and this shall be assessed
according to ye quantity of their trespass. The siege of Kenilworth yet
continuing, they within the Castle began to be sore troubled with ye flixe, and
also were without hope of succor to come to the^, whereupon on S. Thomas day
before Christmasse they yielded Kenilvvorth Castle ye elded.
y^ Castle to the K. with condition to depart with life and lims, without loss of
goods, or imprisonment, and not to be disherited.

Such of y^ disherited persons, as liked not ye ordinance of Kenilworth, whose
Captain was John Ciuille, after they had taken the City of Lincoln and
spoiled the Jews, they fled again to the I Will of Ely, whose coming abroad
when the King with a great army had stopped. Edward the kings son with
bridges made of Hurdles and bordes, in place convenient, as the inhabitaunts
thereabout had instructed him, he entered upon the I Will, some of them within
yielded them to him, y^ other being dispersed by flight. Whiles these things
The Earl of Gloucester, took the City of London.
were a doing a new trouble began, for the Earl of Gloucester taking part with
the disherites, came with an army gathered in Wales, unto London, the seventh
of April: therein he builded Bulwarks, cast ditches and trenches in diverse
places.

The king gathered an army at Windsor, and the v. of May, Annals of Hyde.
he with an. 109. ensigns came toward London, he pitched his tents at
Stratford, and tarried there the space of one month, where many entreated to
make peace.

The vj. of June the Earl of Gloucester, in peaceable manner rendered the City
unto the King again, and then many that were disherited were reconciled, at
the instance of the Legate and the said Earl. Four that bare the cognisaunce
of the Earl of Darby were put in sacks and cast in the Thamis. Thomas Fitz
Theobalde and Agnis his wife, sister of Thomas Mercors chapel.
Becket Archbishop of Canturburie gave to the master and brethren of the
Hospital, called Saint Thomas of Acres beyond the seas, all the land with
the appurtenaunces that sometime was Gilbert Beckets, father to Thomas Becket,
in which land ye said Thomas Becket was borne, to make there a Church.

About Michaelmasse y^ king came to Shrewsburie, to pass Nicho. Triue^.
into Wales, there to vanquish ye prince of Wales Lewlyne, who had aided
Simon Earl of Leicester* but he sending to the Peace with the prince of
Wales. Anno reg. 52
king, granted him. xxxij. M. l. sterling to have his peace, and by the Legates
means there was restored to ye prince, y^ land of 4 Cantredes, which by law of
arms the K. had taken from him.

John Adriant: Lucas Batecourt, the. 28. of September. Baylifes. Custos. 1268


Alyn Souch, the. 28. of October.

Othobone the Legate calling a counsel at London, ordained many things in
reformation of the English Church.

Uariance fell between the fellowship of Goldsmiths and A^yot in London.
Tailors of London, causing great ruffling in the City, and many men to be
slain, for which riot thirteen of the chief Captains were hanged.
Parliament at Marleborovve. Anno reg. 53 Baylifs. Custos. Sokenreure Liber
trinitatis Great Frost. 1269 Nic. Trivet.


The King held a Parliament at Marleborow, in the which were made the
statutes of Marlebrige.

Walter Haruey: William Duresme the. 28. of September.

Sir Stephen Edesworth, the 28. of October.

Thomas Wimborne.

The river of Thamis was so hard frozen, from Saint Androwes tide to
Candlemasse, that men and beasts passed on foot from Lambeth to Westminster:
the Merchandise was carried from Sandwich and other Havens to London by land.

The 8. day of April, Edmund the Kings son married the daughter of William
de Albemarle Earl of Holdernesse, named Auelina, which was heir to her
father and mother both, by reason whereof, he was to have with her the County
of Deuonshyre, and the Lordshippe of the I Will of Wight, but he deceassed before
both father and mother, and lost all. Anno reg. 54 Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Basing: Robert Cornhil, the 28. of September.

Hugh Fitz Thomas the 28. of October.

The Nobles of England, by the Kings commandment, Anuals of hyde Edmond
Campion
assembled at London, to treat of diverse matters, amongst the which, one
was, that all men should before the Justices Tho. Wikes. 1270
show by what right they held their lands, which matter did much molest the
people, until John Warren Earl of Surrey appeared, who being asked by what
right he held his lands, he drew suddenly out his sword, and said, by this
I hold my Grandfathers lands, and with this I will keep them. Upon
multiplying of words, the Earl slew Allen de la Zouch, Lord chief Justice
of Ireland, before the other Justices of the Bench. And shortly after the same
John Earl of Surrey, by the oath of 25 Knights at Winchester, affirmed, that he
did not commit that fact upon any pretenced malice, neither in contempt of
the King, and so for the sum of 1200 marks was reconciled.

Edward the kings son with his brother Edmunde and Anno reg. 55
many other nobles sailing into Asia against the infidels, by his policy and
manly Acts so demeaned himself, that oftentimes he put the Turks to great
disworship, for dispight whereof they suborned a Sarasine to wound him with a
venomous dart, whereof he was long sick. Henry son to Richard King of
Almayne as he went through Tuscane, at Viterbe was slain by Guy de Mountfort.

Walter Potter: Phillip Taylour, the, 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1271
W^. Rishanger.


John Adrian Vintener, the. 28. of October.

The steeple of Bow in Cheap fell down and slew many people, men and and
women.

The eyghte and twenty of Januarie Richard King of Almaine and Earl of
Gornewall, brother to King Henry deceased in the Castle of Berchamsteede, and
was buried at Hayles an Abbey of his foundation. Anno reg. 56 Sherifes. Mayor.


Gregory Rokesley: Henry Waleys, the. 28. of September.

John Adrian (...), the. 28. of October.

Diverse ^ournes (...) break out of the hollow places Tho. de Wike.
of the Earth, and ouerflowed a great part of Canturburie City, the stream
whereof was so swift and violent, that it bare down buildings and houses, and
drowned many people.

In June began a great riot in the City of Norwiche, 1272 W. Rishanger. Riot
at Norwich. Anno reg. 57
through the which the Monastery of the Trinity was burned, whereupon the
King rode down, and making enquiry for the chief doers thereof caused. xxx.
of them to be condemnemned, drawn, hanged and brent.

Richard Paris: John de Wodeley, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sit Water Haruy, the. 28. of October.

King Henry being sick, called before him Gilberte ^iber trinitatis
of Clare, Earl of Gloucester, and caused him to be sworn to keep the peace of
the land, to the be house of Edward his son, and then dyed the sixteench of
November, in the year. 1272. when he had reigned lvj. years and xxviij. days,
he was buried at Westminster, which Church he had newly builded; he left
issue, Edward his eldest son, unto whom he had I. Treklon.
given the Earldom of Chester, who succeeded him in the Kingdom, Edmund his
second son unto whom he had given the Earldom of Lancaster, and also after
the death of Simond Mountfort and Robert Ferrers, the Erledomes of Leicester
and Darbie, and two daughters, Beatrice and Margaret.

King Edward surnamed Longshanks.


Edward the first after the Conquest, son to Henry the third, Anno reg. 1
surnamed Longshanke, began his reign the sixteenth day of November, in the
year. 1272. being then in y^ parts beyond the sea toward 1273
Jerusalem. Of stature he was tall, and mighty of body, nothing gross: his
eyes somewhat black and in time of anger fierce, of such noble and valiant
courage, that he never fainted in most dangerous enterprices: of excellent
wit and great towardness: he was borne at Westminster.

John Horn: Walter Potter, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg.
2. 1274


Sir Walter Haruy Knight, the. 28. of October.

This year fell a great variaunce at Oxforde, between the Northren and
Irishmen, wherein many Irishmen were slain.

The second day of August, King Edward came into England from the Holy Land,
and on the fifteenth of Auguste, he with Elianor his wife were Crowned at
Westminster by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canturburie. At this Coronation
five hundred great Horses were turned loase, catch them who could. Alexander
King of Scotts did homage to King Edward. The King caused Leolin Prince of
Wales to be sommoned to his Parliament at Westminster, but he would not come,
saying, he remembered the death of his father Griffen.

Nicholas Winchester: Henry Couentry, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 3.


Henry Wells, the 28. of October.

On Saint Nicholas even was great Earthquakes, lightnings and thunder, with a
huge Dragon, and a blasing Star, which made many men sore afraid.

In a Parliament at Westminster, Usury was forbidden Usury forbidden. Io. Rouse.
to the Jews, and that they might be known, the King commanded them to wear
a Tablet the breadth of a palm, upon their outmost garments. He also ordained
that Bakers making bread lacking weight assigned after the price of Corn,
should first be punished by loss of their bread: the second time by
emprisonment: and thirdly by the Pillory: millers for stealing of corn, to be
chastised by ye Tumberel.

A rich man of France brought into Northumberland a Spanish Ewe as big as a
Calfe of two years, which Ewe being 1275 First rotte of Sheep. Hen. of
Leycester. Tho. Walsing.
rotten, infected so the Country, that it spread over all the Realm. This
plague of moren, continued xxviij. years ear it ended, and was the first rot
that ever was in England.

Lucas Batecourt: Henry Frowike, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Gregory Rokesley Goldsmith, chief master of ye Kings

Mintes, the 28. of October.

King Edward builded the Castle of Flint, strengthened Io. Rouse. Castle of
Flint. Anno reg. 4. Bocland.
the Castle of Rutland, and other, against the Welchmen.

Amicia Countess of Devonshire, and Lady of the Isle, founded the Abbey of
Bocland, for Gilbert of Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hereford her Father,
Isabell her mother, and Baldwine Earl of Devonshire.

The eleventh day of September, there was a general 1276
Earthquake, by force whereof, the Church of Saint Michael of the Mount without
Glastonburie, fell to the ground, and pieces of many famous Churches in England
fell, by force of the same Earthquake.

Gregory Rokesley, and the Barons of London, granted Canter. Record. Ex Carta.
Preaching Friars Church founded by Bainards Castle, before which time, their
Church was in Holborne.
and gave to the Archbishop of Canturburie Robert Kilwarby, two lanes or ways
next the Street of Baynards Castle, and the Tower of Mountfichet to be
destroyed, in the which place, the said Robert builded the late new Church of
the Black Friars with the rest of the stones that* then were left of the said
Tower, for the best and choice stones the Bishop of London had obtained of King
William Conqueror, to reedifie the upper part of Saint Paul's Church, that was
then by chance of fire decayed.

John Horn: Ralph Blunt, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 5.
1277 John Euersden. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 6. 1278


Gregory Rokesley Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

The Statute of Mortmaine was enacted. Michaell Tony was hanged, drawn and
quartered for Treason.

Robert de Arar: Ralph Feuto, the 28. of September.

Gregory Rokesley, the 28. of October.

King Edward gave unto David, brother to Leolin Prince of Wales, the Lordship
of Fredisham, which David attended in the Kings Court, and did him pleasant
service, etc.

Michaelmas term was kept at Shrewsburie.

John Adrian: Walter Langley, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg.
7. 1279


Gregory Rokesley, the 28. of October.

The King builded a strong Castle in Weast Wales, at Llhampaterne vaier.

Reformation was made for clipping of the Kings coin, Jews executed.
for which offense 267. Jews were put to execution.

The worthy Soldier Roger Mortimer, at Killingworth, Round Table at
Killingvvorth. Io. Rouse.
appointed a Knightly game, which was called the Round Table, of an hundred
Knights, and so many Ladies, to the which, for the exercise of arms, there
came many warlike Knights from diverse Kingdoms.

Robert Basing: William Mazaliuer, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 8. First half pence and farthings round. 1280 Pi^rce Longtofe.


Gregory Rokesley, the 28. of October.

Where as before this time, the penny was wont to have a double cross, with a
creast, in such sort that the same might be easily broken in the midst, or
into four quarters, and so to be made into half pence, or farthings, it was
now ordained that pence, halfepence and farthings should be made round,
whereupon was made these Uerses following.

Edward did smite round penny, halfepeny farthing, Robert Brune.

The cross passes the bond of all throughout the ring.
The Kings side was his head, and his name written,
The cross side, what City it was in, coined and smitten.
To poor man, ne to priest, the penny frayses nothing,
Men give God aye the least, they feast him with a farthing.
A thousand two hundred, fourscore years and mo,
On this money men wondered, when it first began to go.
At this time, twenty pence wayed an ounce of Troy Regist. of E^^ry.
weight, whereby the penny, halfepeny, and farthing, were of good quantity.

Thomas Box: Ralph de Lamere, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg.
9. Wilhel. Rishanger.


Gregory Rokesley, the 28 of October.

David, the brother of Lewlin Prince of Wales, rose against the King, and in
the night season brake into the house of Roger Clifford, when he was in his bed
a sleep, on Easter day at night, and sent him fettered in yrons as a thief
unto Snowdon, to his brother Lewlin. He also rased and laid flat on the
ground, the Castle of Flint belonging to the King. 1281 Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 10 Great Frost and Snow. Liber Roffensis. Rochester Bridge, and five
arches of London bridge borne down.


William Farrendon: Nicholas Wi^ichester, the 28. of Sep.

Gregory Rokesley, the 28. of October.

From Christmas, till the purification of our Lady, there was such great Frost
and Snow, as the old men could not remember the like, wherethrough, five
arches of London Bridge, and all Rochester Bridge was borne down, and carried
away, with many Bridges more. Men passed over the Thamis between Westminster
and Lambeth, and likewise over the River of Medway, between Stroude and
Rochester, drishod. Fishes in ponds, and birds in woods died for want of food.

Pirates of Zeland and Holland about Yarmouth and Donwich, 1282 Io. Euersden.
Yermouth and Donvvich spoiled. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 11 Corn sold by
weight.
did spoil and rob whosoever they met, slew many men, and carried away not a
few Ships with all ye goods in them.

William Mazelyuer: Richard Chigwell, the 28. of Sept.

Henry de Waleis, the 28. of October.

This year the Bakers of London were first drawn upon Herdles, by Henry
Waleis Mayor, and Corn was then first sold by weight.

This Henry Waleis Mayor of London, caused to be erected The Town in
Cornehill. Radul. Baldoke.
a certain house in one of the highest places of London, which house was
called the Tonne upon Cornehill, to be a prison for night walkers, and other
suspicious persons. He also by the Kings license, caused to be builded an house
called the Stocks, on the North side of Saint Mary Wolchurch in The Stocks
market. Customs of Lon.
London, to be a market for flesh and fish in the midst of the City, and
certain houses near unto Powles Church, the profits thereof to be received by
the Masters of the Bridge of London, toward the maintenance of the same
Bridge.

The King entered Wales with an army, appoynting his Will. Rishenger. Will.
Packington.
footmen to occupy the enemies in fight, whiles his horsemen in a wing set on
the rere battle: himself with a power kept his place, where he pight his
golden Dragon, unto the which as to a Castle, the wounded and weerie might
repair: but David fleeing, the King with his power followed, and as he passed
by a wood, there issued out of the same a four thousand Welchmen, which
inuading the Kings army, made great slaughter, but at length the King marching
through, by strong hand entered the Castle of Ox, and took Anglesey, where
he lost William de Awdley, Roger Clifford the younger, and twelve other of his
chiefest Captains.

John Peckham Archbishop of Canturburie sends commandment 1283
to the Bishop of London, to destroy all the Sinagogues of the Jews within his
dioces. After the Archbishop The Jews Sinagogues destroyed.
writes to him to tolerate them to build one Church in some open place in the
City of London, where the King should appoint, so they bestow no great cost,
nor use their fond ceremonies.

Ralph Blound: Anketin de Beteuile, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 12 Tho. Walsing. 1284 Will. Rishang. Nic. Bromfild.


Henry de Waleis, the 28. of October.

Leolin Prince of Wales, came down from the Mountain of Snowdon, to
Mountgomerie, and was at length taken at Bwelth Castle, where using
reproachful words against the Englishmen, Roger le Strange ran upon him with
the Sword wherewith he was girt, and cut off his head, leaving his dead body on
the ground. Sir Roger Mortimer caused the head of Lewlin to be set upon the
Tower of London crowned with Yuy.

King Edward founded the Abbey of Vale Royal in Cheshire. Histo. Auria. Io.
Rouse.
He also removed the Abbey of Aberconwey to another place, and there builded a
strong Castle against the Welchmen. He gave diverse Castles of the Welchmen, to
English Chr. of Dun. Will. Pakenham.
Lords, and after took David, Lewlins brother, with his wife, his two sons,
and seven daughters, at Saint Moris, which David was drawn, hanged, and
quartered at Shrewsburie.

Iordane Godchepe: Martin Box, the 28. of September.

Henry Waleis, the 28. of October. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 13


Edward Prince of Wales, borne at Carnaruan in Wales.

Laurence Ducket Goldsmith, and Citizen of London, grievously wounded one Ralph
Crepin in Weast Cheap, and then fled into Bow Church: after that, certain
evil disposed persons, friends to the said Ralph, entered the Cron. of
Dunsta. Ducket hanged in bovv Church 1285
Church in the night time, and slew the said Laurence lying in the Steeple, and
then hanged him up, placing him so by the window, as if he had hanged himself:
upon the which deed, inquiry being made: it was presented, that he had hanged
himself, for the which being drawn by the feet, he was buried in a ditch
without the City: but shortly after, by relation of a boy who lay with the
said Laurence at the time of his death, and had hid him there for fear, the
truth of the matter was known, for the which, Alice, a woman that was chief
causer of the said mischief, and xvj. men Murderers hanged. Io. Euersden.
with her, were then put in prison, and afterward more, who all were drawn
and hanged, save the woman, who was burnt: these were of the poorer sort, but
the rich of that malicious company escaped for money. The Church was Bovv
Church interdicted.
interdicted by the Archbishop, and the door with the window was stopped up
with thorns, then the said Laurence was taken up, and buried in the
Churchyard.

The great Conduit in Cheap was begone to be builded.

Stephen Cornehill: Robert Rokesley, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 14 Liberties of London seized.


Gregory Rokesley, till the feast of Peter and Paul, and that day was the
City seized into the Kings hands, and Ralph Sandwich appointed Custos until
Candlemas, and then was chosen John Briton until Saint Margarets day*

A Justes was proclaimed at Boston, in the fair time, 1286
whereof one part came in the habit of Monckes, the other in the suite of
Chano^s, who had couena^ted after the Justes Fair at Boston spoiled. Histo.
Aurea. Tho. Walsing.
to spoil ye Fair. For the atchieuing of their purpose, they fired the Town
in three places. It is said, that streams of Gold, Silver, and other metal
molten, ran into ye sea. The Captain of this confederacy was Robert
Chamberlain Esquier, who was hanged, but would never confess his fellows.

Wheat was sold for xvj. pence, and xij. pence ye Quarter.

Walter Blunt: John Wade, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 15
Yermouth, Donvvich, and Ipsvvich perished. John Euersden.


Ralph Sandwich.

On Newyeares day at night, as well through ye veheme^cie of the wind, as
violence of ye Sea, many Churches were overthrown and destroyed, not only at
Yarmouth, Donwich, and Ipswich, but also in diverse other places of England,
and other Regions adjoining to the Sea, especially in that part 1287
of England which is called Meris land. All the whole province was for the most
part turned into a standing poole, so that intolerable multitude of men were
ouerflowed, and destroyed with the water.

By reason of wrongs done by Pain Tiptot, Rice ap Merideth rebelled in Wales,
and did much hurt, against whom came Edmond the Kings brother, and at the
seege of Durselan Castle, in undermining of walls, with the ruins were slain
William Mountchensey, Gerard de Insula Banerers, Mounsire, Humfrey Hastings
Bacheler, and diverse other.

Thomas Croshe: Walter Hauteyne, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 16 W. Packington.


Ralph Sandwich.

King Edward sailed to Bordeaux, and from thence rode into France, where he was
honorably received of Phillip le Beaw King of France. He banished all the
Jews out of Gascoigne, and other his lands in France.

The Summer was so exceeding hot, that many men dyed through the extremity
thereof, and yet wheat was Hot former and cheap Corn. 1288
sold at London for three Shillings four pence the Quarter, and such
cheapenes of Beans and Peace, as the like had not bin heard of.

William Hereford: Thomas Stanes, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 17 1289


Ralph Sandwich.

Great hayle ^e^ in England, and after ensued great rain that the year
following, wheat was raised from three pence the bushel, to sixteen pence,
and so increased yearly, till it was lastly sold for twenty Shillings ye
Quarter.

The City of Carelile, the Abbey, with all the houses belonging to the Friars
Minors, was consumed with fire.

William Betayne: John of Canterbury, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 18


Ralph Sandwich. Which Ralph before Candelmas was deposed from the
Constableshippe of the Tower of London, and in his place was put Ralph de
Barneuers Knighte, who was again removed on the Custos of London, Constables
of the Tovver.
Monday after Candlemas day, from the custody of the City, and in his place
was Sir John de Briton.

Rice ap Merideth was by the Earl of Cornwall in the 1290
Kings absence taken, drawn, hanged and quartered at York.

William de Breosa called the senior, deceased at Find^^, and was buried in the
Monastery of Sele.

Falke of S. Edmond: Solomon le Sotell, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 19


Sir John Briton.

King Edward returning out of Gascoine, where he had remained three years, two
months, and eleven days, was honorably received of the Londoners.

King Edward held a Parliament at Westminster, where, in the transgressions of
diverse Justices was tried out, and Justices punished. Adam Meri. Cro. Dun.
Radul. Baldoke. Scala Croni. John Rouse.
punished accordingly: some lost their goods, and then were banished: some, as
well of the bench, as of the assizes, were sent to the Tower, which with great
sums of money obtained liberty. Sir Thomas Weyland had all his goods, both
moveable and immovable confiscate, and was banished: Sir Ralph Hengham, chief
Justice of the higher bench, offered 7000. marks: Sir John Loueter Justice of
the lower bench 3000. marks: Sir William Bromtone 1291
Justice 6000. marks. Of their Clearkes for their redemption: Of Robert
Littelburie 1000. marks: Of Roger Leycester 1000. marks: Of Sir Solomon Rusx,
chief Justice of Assizes, 4000. marks: Of Sir Richard Boylond 4000. marks:
Of Sir Thomas Sodentone 2000. marks: Sir William Hopton 2000. marks: Of
Robert Preston 1000. marks: Sir William Saham Justice 3000. marks: Of a
certain Clearke of the Courts, called Adam de Stratton, 32000. marks of old
money and new, beside iewelles without number, and precious vessels of silver,
which were found in his house, and a Kings Crown, which men said was King
John's. Moreover, the King constreyned the Justices to swear, that from
thenceforth they should take no pention, fee, or gift of any man, except only
a breakefast, or such like present.

He banished all the Jews out of England, giving the^ to bear their charges,
till they were out of his Realm, the number of Jews then expulsed, were xv.
M. lx. persons.

The Scotts by their Charter delivered to King Edward Records.
the Kingdom of Scotland, with the Castles, rightes and customs, the fourth
day of June, that upon due discussing the matter, it might be known who was
lawful heir thereunto.

Thomas Roman: William de Lier, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 20 1292


John de Briton. Who was about Saint Margarets day removed from the custody of
London, and Sir Ralph de Bernouers was removed from the Constableship of the
Tower, and in their places put again Ralph Sandwich, Custos of the City, and
Connestable of the Tower.

Roger Bacon was buried on the eleventh of June, in the gray Friars Church in
Oxford.

The wool Staple was ordained to be kept at Sandwich.

Ralph Blunt: Hamo Box, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 21
John Bay^^oll did homage for Scotland. Records.


Ralph Sandwich.

The eightenth of November, King Edward sat in his tribunal seat at Berwike,
and having heard the assertions of the competito^^ of the Crown of Scotland,
he adjudged John Bailliol to be true heir of Scotland, and therefore to enjoy
the same whole Kingdom, with the appurtenances, and assigned him to do him
homage, which was performed at Worham the twentieth of November, and also on
Saint Stephens day following at Newcastell.

Queen Elianor dyed at Herdeby, a Town near to Lincoln, 1293 Queen
deceassed. Walte. Hennig. Radul Baldoke. Charing Cross. Ghro. Dun.
her bowels were buried at Lincoln, her body was brought to Westminster, and
there buried: the King made at every place where she stayed, a costly Cross,
with the Queens image upon it, Charing Cross, the Cross in Weast Cheap of
London, Dunstable, Saint Albons, Waltam Cross, and others.

Great discord arose betwixt the Mariners of France, and The Sinque Ports
against the French.
them of Portesmouth and Yermouth, wherethrough the Englishmen sustained great
loss, but they complaining to the King, obtained license to revenge their own
wrongs, and without aid either of Wales, Scotland, or Ireland, went to the
Sea with six hundred Ships, and set upon their enemies, and took two
hundredth and fifteen French Ships, and drove them to the I Will of Gernesey, and
after presented them to the King.

The ninth of July, a great part of the Town of Cambridge, Cambridge brent.
John Euersden.
with the Church of our Lady, was consumed with fire.

The goods as well Temporal, as spiritual of all religious people in
England, were taxed, to pay the tenth part to the King.

The Minories, a Nunnerie without Aldgate of London, The Minories. Ex Carta.
Radul. Baldoke.
was founded by Edmond Earl of Leycester, brother to king Edward. The same
year the same Edmond and his wife and all the Englishmen were banished out of
the French kings dominion.

Henry Bole: Elias Russell, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg.
22. First Alderman in London.


Ralph Sandwich.

Nicholas Farrengdon was the first Alderman.

Three men had their right hands cut off in Weast Cheap, for rescuing a
Prisoner, rested by an Officer of the City of London.

Gilbert Earl of Gloucester dyed, leaving issue three 1294
daughters, and one son within age, begotten of Jane his wife.

Robert Rokesley the young corder: Martin Ambresbery Sherifes. Custos.
Ralph Sandwich. (the 28. of Sep.

The thirtenth of October, being Sunday, all the Clergy of England granted a
Subsedie of the one half of their fruits and revenues for one year to the
King.

In the quindene of S. Martin, the Justices Itinerants sat Anno reg. 23 W.
Packington.
without London in the Bishop of Couentries house, at y^ stone Cross. Roger
Pine esden Captain to the Welchme^, sp^^led and burned the Marches. Great
Snowes and winds did great harm in England. The water of Thamis ouerflowed the
1295
banks, and a great breach at Rotherheath besides London, and ye low ground
about Bermondsey, and Tothill was ouerflowed.

Henry Box: Richard Gloucester, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 24 Castle of Bevv marish. John Rouse. Ghro. Dun.


Sir Ralph Sandwich.

The King passing y^ water of Conoway, and so forth into Wales with an army
against the Welchmen, builded the Castle of Beawmarish, in the Isle of
Anglesey. The Welchmen were consumed by famine: their woods were felled, and
many Castles fortified, their Captain was taken, and brought to London, and so
for that time the wars seized.

The Frenchmen arrived at Dover, spoiled the Town, 1296 Dover spoiled.
and burnt a great part thereof, amongst other they slew Thomas of Dover, a
Monk of great holiness.

The King caused all the Monasteries in England to be Will. Paken. Monasteries
searched. W. Sheepeshed.
searched, and the money in them to be brought up to London. He also seized
into his hands all their lay fees, because they refused to pay to him such a
Tax as he demanded. Moreover, he caused the wool and leather to be stayed in
England, and there followed great dearth of corn and wine.

There rose a great discord at Oxforde, between the Discord betvvixte the
Clearkes and Tovvnesmen of Oxforde.
Clearkes and Lay men, and all because of two varlets of diverse Countries,
which fell out about a small matter, for upon that occasion, some took one
part, and some another, and so all were divided into parts, in so much that
learned and lewd by flockmeale ran to the fight, and when the Scholars or
Clearkes were gone out of their Hostles, the Laity perceiving either none, or
else very few to be remaining at home, entered the Clearkes lodgings, and
carried away a great deal, and many kinds of stuff, to the great and
unrecoverable damage of the Scholars. In this skirmish was slain Sir Fulke of
Neyrmouth, parson of Pichelesthorne, and many other on either side. The King
hearing thereof, sent Justiciaries to restore the peace, and to condemn the
murderers, which when they came, forced the Townsmen to pay the Scholars two
hundredth pounds for domages done to them.

John of Dunstable: Adam de Halingbery, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 25.


Sir John Breton. Was made Custos of London by the King, Ralph Sandwich being
removed, and the morrow after Saint Barnabes day, all the Liberties were
restored to the City of London, the Mairaltie excepted.

John Baliol King of Scotts contrary to his alegiance rebelled, Will.
Packington. Tho. Walsing.
wherefore King Edward hasted him thither, and won the Castles of Berwike,
and Dunbarre: he slew of the Scotts five and twenty thousand: he conquered
Edenborough, 1297 King Edward vvon Bervvike. Regalles of Scotland.
where he found the regal ensigns of Scotland, as Crown, Scepter, and cloth
of estate etc. In his return, he called a Parliament at Berwike, where he
received the fealties of all the great men of Scotland, and their homages.

Thomas of Suffolk: Adam of Fulham, the 28. of Septe. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 26.


Sir John Breton.

King Edward offered to Saint Edward at Westminster, the Chair, Scepter, and
Crown of Gold of the Scottish King.

The King increased the tribute of the woolles, talking for every Sack forty
Shillings, where before that time they paid but half a mark.

The Scotts by the instigation of William Walleis, rebelled, and put the
Englishmen to much trouble, and loss of many men.

King Edward sailed into Flanders, to rescue Guy their Earl, which was
grievously ouerset by the French King, so 1298
that he had won much of his lands, but shortly after a peace was concluded
for two years.

The Eschequer and the Kings Bench was removed from London to York.

King Edward wanne the battle of Fankirke in Scotland, upon Saint Mary
Magdalens day, in which battle was Nicholas Trivet. Tho. Walsing. Scala
Croni. Battle at Faulkirke in Scotland.
slain more than twenty thousand Scotts, and William Walleis their Captain
fled. Anthony Beke, Bishop of Duresme had at this battle such a retinue,
that in his company were two and thirty Banners.

At this time, the Town of Saint Andrews was destroyed, no man there
resisting.

The Citizens of London hearing of the great victory Chro. Dun.
obtained by the King of England against the Scotts, made great and solemn
triumph in their City, every one according to their craft, especially the
Fishmongers, which with solemn Procession passed through the City, having
amongst other Pageants and shows, four Sturgeons gilded, carried on four
Horses: then four Samons of Silver on four Horses: and after six and forty
Knights armed, riding on Horses, made like Luces of the Sea: and then Saint
Magnus with a thousand Horsemen: this they did on Saint Magnus day, in honor of
the Kings great victory, and safe return.

This year, the King paid to the Merchants of Gascoigne 150000. pounds
sterling, for his brothers expenses there.

Richard Reffeham: Thomas Sely, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Chro.
Dun. Anno reg. 27
Henry Waleis, the 28. of October.

King Edward held a great Parliament or counsel at Stepenheath by London, in
the house of Henry Waleis Mayor of London. Certain persons of the City of
London brake up the Tonne in Cornehill, and took out certain prisoners, for
the which nine of them were punished by long emprisonment and great fines. It
cost the Citizens more than 1299
20000. marks to purchase the Kings favor, and confirmation of their
liberties.

The xxix. of March, a vehement fire being kindled in the lesser hall of the
Palace at Westminster, the flame thereof Westminster and the Kings Palace
consumed with fire. Radul. Baldoke. Saint Martins in the Vintrie new builded.
being driven with wind, fired the Monastery adjoining, which with the
Palace were both consumed.

Saint Martins Church in the Uintrie at London was new builded, by the
executors of Matthew Columbers. The king went to York, and so into Scotland
with a great power.

A certain rich Citizen of London deceasing, a great number Io. Euersden.
of poor people were assembled to receive his charitable doale, amongst whom
suddaynely rushed in the sons of 150. Beggars murdered at London.
Belyall, coveting to snatch the money from the executors hands, but missing of
their purpose, they fell on the poor people, murdering 129. and drowned 30.
of them, because one of them had bewrayed their former wicked purposes.

This year was made an Act of common counsel for Price of Pulterie.
prices of victuals to be sold at London, by consent of the King and Nobility,
concerning the price of Powlterie. A fat Cock for three halfepence: two
pullets for three halfepence: a fat Capon for two pence halfepeny: a Goose
four pence: a Mallard three half pence: a Partridge for three half pence: a
Feasant four pence: a Heron six pence: a Plouer one penny: a Swanne for three
Shillings: a Crane for xij. pence: two Wodcocks for three half pence: a fat
Lamb from Christmas to Shrouetide sixteen pence, and all the whole year
after for four pence.

John Armenter: Henry Fingrie, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg.
28.


Elias Russell, the 28. of October.

The King made cruel war upon the Scotts, and had of them a great victory,
and then they yielded themselves to his mercy.

This Realm was troubled with false money, which False Money. 1300 Will.
Rishang.
was called Crokden, and Pollard, coined in parts beyond the Seas, and uttered
for sterling, so that many thereby were deceived, which upon Saint Stephens
day was cloven in two, and was accounted but half the value. On Easter even
the same money was forbidden through all England, and after called in, and new
coined, to the Kings great advantage.

A sodeine fire enclosed the Monastery of Gloucester, the Rob. of Gloucester
Cloister, Belfrie, the great chamber, with other buildings was consumed.

For the establishment of the peace between England and France, King Edward
took to wife Margaret, sister to Philip Will. ^aking.
le Bew then King of France: they were married at Canturburie.

Lucas de Hauering: Richard Champes, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 29.


Elias Russell, the 28. of October.

King Edward made his voyage against the Scotts, wherein he subdued a great
part of the land, took the Castle of Estreuelin, with other, and made the
Lords swear to him fealty and homage. In the mean while, the Queen was
conveyed to London, against whom, the Citizens to the number of 600. rode in
one liuerie of red and white, with the cognizance 1301
of their mysteries brothered upon their sleenes, and received her four miles
without the City, and so conuayed her to Westminster.

Robert Caller: Peter de Bosenho, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 30


Sir John Blound, the 28. of October.

The King gave to Edward his son, the Princedome of Wales, and joined
thereunto the Dukedom of Cornwall, and the Earldom of Chester. He kept his
Christmas in Scotland 1^02
with a great army, but at ye instance of the French King, he granted truce
and returned. About the feast of all Saints, the King sent a great power into
Scotland.

Hugh Pourt: Simon Paris, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 31
Tho. de la More. 1033 Ex Record.


Sir John Blount, the 28. of October.

The Scotts rebelling against King Edward, made William Wales their leader,
wherefore the King having his Army ready, passed by the Castle of
Striueling, over the whole land, nonc offering them battle, but fleeing
before the sword.

This year, on the twelfth of March, before John Blound Mayor of London,
William Leyre, Thomas Roman, William Robert Fitz Walter acknowledges his
service done to the City of London.
Biton, Walter Finchingfeld, Hen. Gloucester, Willi. Mazarar, Salamon Coteler,
John Wengraue, John Darments, Nicholas Picote, Aldermen, Hugh Pourt, and Simon
de Paris Sherifes, and before vj. men of every ward of London, Roberte Fitz
Walter acknowledged his service to the same City, and swear upon the
Evangelists, that he would be true unto the liberties thereof, and maynteyne
the same to his power, and the counsel of the same City to keep etc. The
right that belo^ged to Robert Fitz Walter, Chastelein of London, Lord of
Wedeham, were these:

The said Robert and his heirs ought to be, and are chief Banerars of London
in fee for the Chastelerie which he and his ancesters had by Castle Baynard in
the said City. In time of war, the said Robert and his heirs ought to
serve the City in manner as follows: that is: The said Robert ought to come,
he being the twentieth man of arms on horseback, covered with cloth or armor
unto the great Weast door of Saint Paul, with his Banner displayed before him
of his arms: and when he is come to the said door, mounted and apparelled (as
before is said) the Mayor with his Aldermen and Sheriffs, armed in their
arms, shall come out of the said Church of Saint Paul unto the said door,
with a banner in his hand, all on foot, which banner shall be Gueles, the
Image of Saint Paul Gold: the face, hands, feet, and sword, of Silver: and
as soon as the said Robert shall see the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs come
on foot out of the Church armed with such a Banner, he shall alight from his
Horse, and salute the Mayor, and say to him: Sir Mayor, I am come to do my
service which I owe to the City, and the Mayor and Aldermen shall answer, we
give to you as to our Banerar of fee in this City, this Banner of the City,
to bear and govern to the honor and profit of the City to your power: and
the said Roberte and his heirs shall receive the Banner and shall go on foot
out of the gate with the Banner in his hands, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs shall follow to the door, and bring a Horse to the said Roberte
worth twenty pounds, which Horse shall be sadled with a saddle of the arms of
the said Robert, and shall be covered with sendall of the said arms. Also,
they shall present to him xx. ^. sterling money, and deliver to the
Chamberlayne of the said Robert for his expenses that day. Then the said
Robert shall mount upon the horse which ye Mayor presented to him, with ye
Banner in his hand, and as soon as he is up, he shall say to the Mayor, that he
cause a Marshall to be chosen for the host, one of the City, which Marshal
being chosen, y^ said Robert shall command the Mayor and Burgesses of the
City, to warn the commoners to assemble together, and they shall al go under
the Banner of Saint Paul: and the said Robert shall bear it himself unto
Aldegate, and there the said Robert and Mayor shall deliver the said Banner
of Saint Paul from thence, to whom they shall assent or think good. And if
they must make any issue forth of the City, then the said Robert ought to
chose two forth of every ward, the most sage personages, to forsee to the safe
keeping of the City, after they be gone forth. And this Counsel shall be
taken in the Priorie of the Trinity near unto Aldegate. And before every
town or Castle which the hoaste of London besiege, if the siege continue a
whole year, the said Roberte shall have for every siege of the communaltie of
London an hundred shillings for his travel and no more. These be the rights
that the said Robert has in the time of war. Rights belonging to Robert Fitz
Walter, and to his heirs in the City of London, in the time of peace, are
these (that is to say) the said Robert has a Soken or ward in the City, that
is, a wall of the Chanonrie of Saint Paul, as a man goes down the street
before the Brewhouse of Saint Paul, unto the Thamis, and so to the side of the
Mill, which is in the water that comes down from the fleet Bridge, and
goes so by London Walls, betwixt the Friars preachers and Ludgate, and so
returns back by the house of the said Friars, unto the said common wall of
the said Chanonry of Saint Paul, that is, all the parish of Saint Andrew,
which is in the gift of his ancestors, by the said senioritie: and so the
said Robert has appendant unto the said Soken al these things under written,
that he ought to have a Soke man, and to place what Sokeman he will, so he be
of the Sokemanrie (or the same ward) and if any of the Sokemanry be impleaded
in ye Guild Hall, of any thing that touches not the body of the Mayor y^ for
the time is, or that touches the body of no Sheriff, it is not lawful to the
Sokeman of the Sokemanrie of the said Robert Fitz Walter to demand a Court of
the said Robert, and the Mayor and his Citizens of London, ought to grant him
to have a Court and in his Court he ought to bring his judgment as it is
assented and agreed upon in the Guilde Hal, that shall be given him. If any
therefore be taken in his Sokenry, he ought to have his stocks and
imprisonment in his Soken, and he shall be brought from thence to ye Guild Hall
before the Mayor, and there they shall provide him his judgment, that ought to
be given of him: but his judgment shall not be published till he come into the
Court of the said Robert and in his liberty. And the judgment shall be
such, that if he have deserved death by treason, he be tied to a post in the
Thamis at Woodwharfe, where boats are fastened, two ebbings and two flowings
of the Water. And if he be condemned for a common thief, he ought to be
led to the Elmes, and there suffer his judgment as other thieves: and so the
said Robert and his heirs has a great honor that he holds a great Franches
within the City, that the Mayor of the City and Citizens are bound to do him
of right, that is to say, that when the Mayor will hold a great counsel, he
ought to call the said Robert and his heirs to be with him in Counsel, and of
counsel of the City, and the said Robert ought to be sworn be of counsel
with the City against all people, saving the King and his heirs. And when the
said Robert comes to the Huystings in the Guilde Hall of the City, the
Mayor or his lieuetenaunt ought to rise against him and set him down near unto
him, and so long as he is in Guilde Hall, all the judgment ought to be given
by his mouth according to the Record of the Recorders of the said Guilde
Hall, and so many weifs as come so long as he is there, he ought to give them
to the Baylifes of the town, or to whom he will, by the Counsel of the Mayor
of the City. These be the Franchises that belonged to Roberte Fitz Walter in
London, in time of peace, which for the antiquity I have here noted out of an
old Record.

William Combmartin: John Burforde, the. 28. of Septem. Baylifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 32 Adam Meri. Grauesend Bishop of London.


Sir John Blound the. 28. of October.

Richard Grauesend Bishop of London deceased, who is reported by some to have
purchased the Charters and Liberties for the City of London in the year of
our Lord. 1^9^. in the sixteenth year of King Richard the second. The
untruth whereof I have thought good thus much in place to note.

King Edward went into Scotland, and there besieged the Castle of Striueline,
which William Clifford kept the space of 1304 Tho. de la More.
. 90. days with sundry valiant assaults: but being able no longer to resist,
they put off their shoes, and with haulters about their necks came forth of
the Castle and fell prostrate before the king, committing both lives and lims to
his mercy, whom the King pardoned of life, but sent them prisoners into
England.

The King returning out of Scotland by the City of York, commanded the
Courts of the kings Benche and the Exchequer, which had now remained at York
vij. years, to be removed to their old places at London.

Roger Pares: John de Lincoln, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos. Anno
reg. 33 Dravv thy staff Adam Meri.


Sir John Blound, the. 28. of October.

King Edward held his Christmasse at Lincoln, where he ordained Justices of
Traylebaston against intruders into other men's lands, truce breakers,
extortioners, murderers, and such like offenders, by which means the Kings
treasure was maruellously increased. Roger Brabason and Robert de Reuer satte
at the Guilde Hall in London to hear the complaints made concerning the
foresaid Articles of Traylebaston.

The Citizens of Norwiche made peticion unto the Norwich vvalled. Parliament
Records. 1305
King, that like as it had pleased him heretofore, to grant them his help
and license certain years for the wallyng about of their Town, which
term was now expyred, to grant them a longer time, the same being not yet
finished: whereupon v. years were granted by him and his Parliament at
Westminster.

John Leyland writes that a Marchaunte of Norwich, I. Leyland.
(whom he names not) builded a great part, almost half of that Wall.

Robert Fitz Walter requested the king that the Fries of Friars of the Sack. A
sinagoge of the Jews near Baynards Castle in London Parliament recor.
the Sack (commonly called de Penitentia Jesus) in London might assign to the
said Robert one Chapel of old time called the sinagoge of the Jews, near
adjoining to the place of the same Robert, which request was granted. These
Friars lived altogether by begging, and had of late multiplied in number
greatly, until the counsel at Lions, wherein it was decreed, that Friars
beggars should receive none into their order, except Gray and White Friars.
They were also licensed to enter into religion of larger rule, from the which
time forth all mendicant Friars began to decrease, and were in short time
brought to nothing, except the Preching Friars.

William Wales which had ofttimes set Scotland in great VV. Wales in Scotland.
trouble, was taken and brought to London with great numbers of men and women
wondering upon him: he was lodged Adam Merimo.
in the house of William Delect a Citizen of London, in Fanchurche street. On
the morrow being the even of Saint Tho. Delamore.
Bartholmew, he was brought on horssebacke to Westminster, John Segraue and
Geffrey, Knights, the Mayor, Sherifes and Aldermen of London, and many other,
both on horsseback and on foot accompanying him, and in the great hall at
Westminster, he being placed upon the South benche crowned with Laurel, for
that he had said in times past ye he ought to bear a Crown in that Hall (as it
was commonly reported) and being appeched for a traitor, by sir Peter Mallorie
ye kings Justice, he answered that he was never traitor to ye king of
England, but for other crimes whereof he was accused, he confessed them, and
was after headed and quartered. There was opened to the K. a conspiracy,
wrought by the Archbishop of Canturburie and diverse Earls and Barons against
him, at such time as he was in Flaunders. The Earl Marshal being examined of
this, and being not able to purge himself, made the king his heir, and put
him in possession of his lands to have his grace, and thus doing, the King
gave him again. 1000. pound land by the year during his life.

William cosine: Reignalde Thunderle. 28. of September. Sherifs. Custos. Anno
reg. 34


Sir John Blood, the. 28. of October.

Robert Bruce an Englishman, presuming by the right of his wife to usurp the
Kingdom of Scotland, called a Parliament of the nobles of Scotland within the
Church of the Friars 1306
Minors in Domfries, where he slew John Comin, because he would not agree to
the treason, and shortly after, to wit in the feast of the Anunciation of our
Lady, in the Abbay of Scone, he caused himself to be solemnly crowned king by
the Bishops of Glasco, and Saint Andrews first, and the third day after by
the Countess of Bowan, because her brother the Earl of Fife to whom by right
of inheritance that office belonged, was then absent in England.

In the feast of Penticost king Edward honored his eldest son, Edward of
Carnaruan with the degree of Knighthoode, and with him also more than a hundred
noble young men, at Westminster.

About the feast of the Nativity of our Lady, the king went again into
Scotland, with a great army, having sent his son Edward with Ayner de Valence
Earl of Penbroke, Roberte Clifforde, Henry Lacy, and many other noble
knights and gentlemen, at Whitsontide before, also he sent before him his
Justices of Trayle Basto^, two and two together into every City and place into
which he would come, giving the^ power to kill traitors, draw and hang
perjured persons, burn such as work deceit, destroy the wicked, and set
Englishmen in their places, and there were taken by them in the space of two
months by inquisition of Juries, Hundreds and Thousands, breakers of peace and
conspiratoures, amongst the which Nigellus de Bruise, brother to Robert de
Bruise, was drawn through Berwicke and hanged. Moreover Christopher and John
Seyton brethren were hanged: y^ Countess of Bowan was closed in a Cage, whose
breadth, length, height, and depth, was eight foot, and hanged over the wa^^
of Berwike* the Bishop of Saint Andrews and of Glasco, with the Abbot of Stone,
were sent to several prisons in England.

King Edward besieged Simon Frisell in Lilyscho, and took him and sent him to
London Tower, where he found many Scottish Lords in fetters of iron, amongst
whom was Thomas Morham with Herbert his son, and Thomas Roy* his Esquire, who
were all beheaded: Simon Frisel was hanged drawn and quartered: Earl John de
Athol because he was of the Kings blood and an Englishman, was not drawn, but
hanged and headed: Sir John Wallers was sent to the Tower of London and after
hanged and headed: Lawrence de Megos Esquire was taken at Dover and there
beheaded. The Earl of Stratherne yielded to king Edward, who condemned him to
remain during his life in iron fetters in the Castle of Rochester.

At this time, and long after, King Edward had Scotland in such good obedience,
as he gave of the lands thereof to his Ex charta regia.
servants and subjects in England, with Markets, Fayres, and Warrens:
amongst others I have seen under the broad seal of the said king Edward a
Manor called Ketnes in the County of Ferfare in Scotland; and near the
furthest part of the same nation Northwarde, given to John Evre and his Lord
Evre.
heirs, ancester to the Lord Air that now is, for his service done in those
parts, with market every Monday, fair for three days every year, at the
feast of Saint Michael, and free Warren for ye same, dated at Lauercost the.
20. day of October Anno regni. 34.

Geffrey Cundute: Simon Bylet. 28. of September. Sherifes. Custos.


Sir John Blound, the. 28. of October.

This year Margaret Queen, second wife to Edward the Registrum f^^^rum
^inor^m. Anno reg. 53
first began to build the quire of the Church of the Gray Friars in London,
to ye building whereof in her life she gave. 2000. marks, and. 100. marks by
her Testament: John of Brytai^ Earl of Richmond builded the body of the
church: Lady Marie Countess of Penbroke, Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester,
Margaret Countess, Lady Elenor le Spencer, and Lady Elizabeth de Brugh sisters
to the Gilbert de Clare, gave great sums of money toward the same: Richard
Whitington, sometime Alderman and Mayor of London founded the Library there,
in Anno. 1421.

King Edward held his Christmasse at Carlisle, with a great multitude of English
people, and in the month of January next Parliament at Carlisle. 1307
following, he called a great Parliament to be holden at Carlisle upon the
Octaues of S. Hillarie, to treat of matters concerning the state of Scotland,
whereunto were somoned many Lords both of the Spirituality and Te^poraltie,
who either appeared Parliament Records.
in person or else by proxy. My self have seen and red an ancient register
of good authority, containing ye names of lxxxvij. Earls and Barons, xx.
Bishops, lxj. Abbots* and viij. Priors, besides many Deanes, Archdeacons and
other inferior Clearks of ye Convocation. The master of the Knights of the
Temple, of every shire two Knights, of every City two Citizens, and of every
borough two Burgesses, etc.

Archbishop of York.
Bishops: Of Lincoln. London. Chichester. Excester. Hereford. Salisburie.
Landaf. S. Assafe. Bangor. S. David's. Couentrie and Li^chfielde. Bath and Wels.
Norwich. Rochester. Durham. Carlisle. Elie. Worcester.

Abbots.
Of S. Augustine in Canterbury. Of Saint Edmunde. Saint Albane. Westminster.
Waltham. Euesham. Saint Marie at York. Peterborow. Ramsey. Winchcombe.
Gloucester. Bristow. Malmesburie. Glastonburie. Selby. Cyrcester. Reding.
Furney. Sawley. Alnewike. Saint Osith. Barlyng. Tupholme. Byley. Dale. Newh^s.
Croxton. Cokersande. Saint Radegound. Tichfield. Torre. Holmcolthram. Welbecke.
Hales. New Monastery. Iereual. Fountains. Bella Land. Melsa. Kyrkested. Rupe.
Rughford. Valeden. Grendon. Stanley in Arden. Pipwel. Comb. Basing work.
Crokesden. Croyland. Werdon. Wimondham. Wauerley. Coertesey. Quarrera. Lotoley.
Hyde. Wendon. Saint Agathe. Swineshede. Stanley in Wilshire.
Barons.
Edward prince of Wales. Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln. Ralph Mounthermer Earl
of Gloucester and of Hereford. Thomas Earl of Lancaster. Humfrey Bohum Earl of
Hereforde and Essex. John Warren Earl of Surrey. Edmund Earl of Arundale. John
Brytaine Earl of Richemonde. Guy Bello Campo Earl of Warwike. Robert Vere
Earl of Oxforde. Gilberte Vmframvell Earl of Anegos. Henry of Lancaster.
Aymer of Valence. John Ferrers. Henry Percy. Hugh Spencer. Robert Fitz Walter.
William Latimer. Robert Clifford. Robert mount Alto. John Hastings. John le
Mare. John de Ripaurs. John de Mohun. Petrus de Malolacu. Rupart Fitz Pagani.
Hugh Curtney. Edmund Deycourt. John Saint John of Lageham. Galfride of Geynual.
Thomas Furniual. Robert Tony. Thomas Berkele. William de Bruise. Peter Corbet.
William Martin. Thomas Multon. John ap Adam. John Kyme. John Segraue. Robert
Fitz Roger. Hugh Veer. Walter Fauconbridge. Ralph Basset of Draiton. Roger la
War. John Paynel. Alexander Walliclo. Hugh Points. Roger Montnomere. William
Rithre. Reignald Gray. Walter Muncy. Robert Scales. Adam Wells. Almarice de
Amando. William Cantalupo. John Engaigne. Gilbert Pechy. John Glauering.
William Leyburne. John Bello Ca^po of Somerset. William Grandstone. John
Extuens. John de Insula. John Sudley. Simon Mountacute. Walter Tey. Edmund
Hastings. John Lancaster. John Saint John. Henry Treygoz. John Louel of
Tichmerch. Alan la Zusche. Henry Teyes. Nicholas Segraue, Fulco Fitz Waren.
John Fitz Reignald. Geffrey Camuile. William Vauasor. William Ferrer. Robert
Grendon. Edmund Baron of Stafford. Ralph Fitz William. Thomas de la Roche.
Theobalde de Verdon the younger. William Tuchet. Henry Huslee.
In this Parliament many complayntes were made of y^ oppression of Churches and
Monasteries, by the Popes Chapleine named William Testa Archdeacon of Araine in
ye Church of Couentrie. The same Clearke was forbidden to use any more such
extortions, and diverse statutes were ordained touching religious persons which
had their principal houses in other Realms.

There came to this Parliamente sent from the Pope, a Cardinal called Petrus
Hispanus, to treat, a marriage betwixt Edward Prince of Wales, and the
French The course of Fleet dike at London sore decayed, which sometime bare
ships of small burden to Holborn bridge, to the great commodity of the City in
that west part.
kings daughter. And amongst many other suits made there, the Earl of Lincoln
complained, that whereas in times past, the course of Water running at London,
under Holborne bridge and Fleet bridge into the Thamis, had bin of such
large breadth and deapth, that ten or twelve ships at once with Merchaundises
were wont to come to the forsayde bridge of Fleet, and some of them to
Holborne bridge, now y^ same course (by filth of the Ta^ners and such other)
was sore decayed. Also by raising up of Wharfes, but especially by turning of
the Water, which they of ye new Temple made to their milles without Baynardes
Castle, and diverse other perturbations, the said ships now could not
enter as they were wont and as they ought, wherefore he desired, that the
Mayor of London with the Sherifes, and certain discrete Aldermen, might be be
appointed to see the course of the said Water, and that by oath of honest men
all the forsayde hindraunces might be removed, and to be made as it was wont of
old time, etc. Which was answered and recorded, that Roger le Brabazon, the
Conestable of the Tower, with the Mayor and Sherifs are assigned, that taking
with them other honest and discrete men, they make diligente search and
inquiry, how the said river was in old time, and that they leave nothing
that may hurt or stop it, and to keep it in the same state that it was wont to
be.

King Edward remaining all the Winter and Summer Tho. Walsing.
at Carlisle, disposed many things of Scotland at his pleasure: but in the
mean time Robert de Bruis going about the Country, slew many that would
not obey him, and he sent with part of his army two of his brethren, Thomas
that was a Knight, and Alexander a Priest, Deane of Glasco, into another
part of the Country, that they might allure the people unto them by gentle
persuasions; which (by coming of Englishmen, upon them, they) were taken,
led to the Justices, condemned, hanged, and headed at Carlisle.

King EDWARD sent messengers into England, commaundyng all that ought him
service to be ready at Carlisle, within three weeks after the feast of Saint
John Baptiste* but himself being vexed with the bloudye Flixe, he sent to his
son that he should come with speed to hear his last words, whom among
other things he counseled to be merciful, just, and constante in all his
words and deeds: he commanuded him not to be too hastye to take on him the
Crown of England, till he had revenged the injuries done by the Scotts,
but to stay in those parts, and to cause his Fathers boanes (being closed in
a Cheaste) to be borne about with him, till he had gone through all
Scotland and overcome his adversaries. He also commanded him to honor his
mother, and love his two brethren, THOMAS Earl Marshall, and EDMVNDE Earl of
Cornwall. Moreover he charged him on his curse, that he should not presume
to call home Pierce of Glauaston, by common decree banished, without common
favor: nor to spend. xxxij, M. ^. of silver, otherwise than in the business
of the Holy Land, for the which purpose he had prepared it, and willed his
heart there to be buried.

The king also called unto him Henry Lacy Earl of Will. Pakington.
Lincoln, Guy Earl of Warwick, Aymerde Valence Earl of Penbroke, and Robert
Clifford Baron, desiring them to be good to his son, and that they should
not suffer Pierce of Gauaston to come again into England, to set his son in
riot: and the vij. of July he departed this life at Brugh upon y^ sands, in the
year 1307. when he had reigned four and thirty years, seven months, and
odd days. He was buried at Westminster.

Edward of Carnaruan.


Edward the second son Anno reg. ^
to the first Edward, borne at Carnaruan, began his reign the vij. day of
July, in the year of Christ 1307. he was fair of body, but vnsteadfast of
manners, and disposed Cro. Dun.
to lightness, haunting the company of vile persons, and given wholly to the
pleasure of the body, not regarding to govern his common weal by discretion
and justice, which caused great variaunce between him and his Lords. He foke
to be of his Counsel Patricke Earl of Lincoln, and Otho de Granson with
other. He ordained Walter Reignald to be his Chancellor, and caused Walter
Langton Bishop of Chester, to bring the King his fathers body from Carlisle
to Waltham Cross, and then to be arrested by the Conestable of the Tower and
sent to Walling ford, there to be shut up in prison, and his goods
confiscate, because in his fathers life time he had reproved him of his
insolent life. etc. He also called out of exile Pierce of Gauaston a stranger
borne, which lately in his Fathers days, had for certain causes been
banished this land. He gave to the said Pierce the Earldom of Cornewal, the
Isle of Man, and the Lordeshippe Cro. H^ntenpries W. Paking. Sherifes. Mayor.
of Wallingforde, otherwise assigned to Queen Isabel.

Nicholas Pigot: Nigellus Dru^y, the 28. of September.

Sir John Blunt, the. 28. of October.

A Parliamente was holden at Northampton, wherein it was ordained, that his
Fathers coin, which was counted bace, should not be refused upon pain of life
and lim, and that a fifteenth of the Clergy, and twentieth part of the goods
of the Layetie should be given to the king.

The. 27. of October King Edward the first was buried at Westminster, at the
head of Henry the third his Father, unto the which Church he had given lands
to the value of one hundred pound by year, twenty pound thereof yearly to
be distributed to the poor, Anthony Beck Patriarch of Jerusalem and Bishop
of Durham doing the exequies.

After the Ephiphanie of our Lord, all the Templers Adam Merimo. Knights of
the temple apprehended. Tho. de la More.
in England were apprehended and committed to prison in diverse places.

The King went over into France and married Isabel the French kings daughter at
Bolloigne y^. xxij. of Januarie. There were present at that marriage, Phillip
king of France, his son King of Nauar, the King of Almaine, and the King of
Cicile, with many other. And on the xxiiij. day of Februarye, King Edward with
his Queen were crowned at Westminster, by Henry Bishop of Winchester, being
admitted so to do by Robert Archbishop of Canterbury.

The King offered first a pound of Gold made like a King holding a ring in
his hand, and after he offered a mark of Gold (which is eight ounces) made
like a Pilgrim putting forth his hand to receive the ring. Sir John Bachauell
Knight was thruste to death at his Coronation.

The King gave unto Pierce of Guaston all such gifts and Ghro. D^n.
Jewels as had bin given to him, with the Crowns of his Father, his ancestors
treasure, and many other things, affirming that if he could, he should succeed
him in the Kingdom, calling him brother, not granting any thing without his
consent. The Lords therefore envying him, told the king, that the Father of this
Pierce was a Traitor to the King of France, and was for the same executed,
and that his mother was burned for a Witch, and that the said Pierce was
banished for consenting to his mothers witchcraft, and that he had now
bewitched the King himself. They besought the King to hear therefore their
petitions, which should be both for his own Honor and for the wealth of
his people.

First, that he would confirm and use such auntiente 1
Laws and customs, as are contained in the Charters of the Kings his
predecessonrs: and for that they would grant him the twentieth part of their
goods, and be his true subjects.

Secondly, that he would take nothing of any man, but 2
at the price of the owner the same to be paid for to the uttermost.

Thyrdlye that what soever was alyenated from the 3
Crown, since his Fathers death, might be restoared thereunto again.

Fourthly, that he would observe the oath he made before 4
his Father, as of the reuoking of Peter Gauaston, the prosecuting of the
Scottish War, and that all that was amiss should be amended, least his
enymies rejoice at it, etc.

That justice and judgment might be done in the 5
Land, as well to the rich as to the poor, according to the auntiente and
old approved Laws and Customs of England, and that no man should be
restrained by the Kings writ from prosecuting his right, or to defend
himself by Law.

Then the king taking counsel of Pierce, Hugh Spencer the Treasurer, y^
Chancellor and others, he appointed to answer the Barons at the Parliament on
Hocday. The Barons being departed out of London, the City gates were shut up
and chayned, great watch kept, and Hugh Spencer made Conestable of London. The
king with Peter of Gauaston went toward Wallingford Castle with a great
company of soldiers as well strangers as English, and Hugh Spencer tarried
still at London. The Parliament on Hocday was kept, the King and Barons being
there when they decreed the same Pierce should be banished the land to
depart on the morrow after Midsommer day, never to return again. The King
gave him two and thirty towns and so many Pierce of Gauastone banished.
Castles in Gascotgne, and great sums of money out of his Earldom of
Cornwall during his life: the king accompanied him to Bristow, sent him into
Ireland, assigning him y^ whole government and revenues of that Country.

The king sent William Lord Latimer with a hundred horssemen to fetch Henry
Lacy Earl of Lincoln, but he being forewarned, kept himself in his Castle,
and so prevented their purpose, only the Lord Latimer and he talked, and so
departed.

The king intended to give Gascoigne to the French King, Scotland to Robert
Bruis, Ireland and Wales to others, hoping thereby to have aid against his
Barons.

Robert Archbishop of Canturburie returned from Rome, and was restored to all
his goods. Anno reg. 2. Sherifes. Mayor. 1309 Tho. de la More. John Troklowe.
Anno reg. 3.


William Basing: James Botener, the. 28. of September.

Nicholas Faringdon Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

The king sent for Pierce of Gauaston out of Ireland: he la^ded at Kerneruan,
on the even of Saint John Baptist, he King met him at the Castle of Flint
with great joy: and gave to him the Earl of Glocesters sister in marriage,
they were married at Barkamsteed, which caused him again to rise in pride,
scorning the Nobles of the Realm, and to abuse the King, as before he had
done, in conuaying the treasure of the Anno reg. 3.
Realm into foreign countries, amongst the which treasure, he conuayed the
table and trestles of gold from the treasury of Westminster, and delivered
them to one Armery of Frisconband to be co^uayed into Gascoigne. The Barons
Cro. pet. Coledge.
therefore declared to the King, that except he would expel the said Pierce
from his company, they would rise against him, as against a perjured Prince,
whereupon, by the advice Chro. Dun.
of Pierce of Gauaston, the King sent for aid into Gascoigne to the Earl of
Foys, and y^ Uicount of Henoy, and they came with three hundred horsemen
through France, but Phillip the French King emprisoned the chief, and slew and
hanged the other. Also, the King of England had word from Robert Bruise of
Scotland, and from Robert Fitz Thomas of Ireland, that they would not take
part with the King against his Barons, whereupon the King being wroth,
fortifyed Windsore Castle, and began to build Towers and other strange
things.

The Abbot of Saint Denis in France, being sent Legate from the Pope to
demand the legacy that King Edwards father gave to the holy land, did
earnestly request King Edward to remove from him Peter Gauaston, with whose
conversation all the world was as it were infected. Then the King appointed a
Parliamente at North-hampton, determining from thence to pass into Scotland
the Barons came to this Parliament well furnished, but the King sent them
word he would not come there, yet at the last he came to Stony Stratford,
whither were sent to him by the Barons, the Earls of Warwike and Clare, who
requested him to come for his own profit, and the commodity of the Realm:
at length he went in the habit of a Squire, and the Barons met him without
armor, and in the end lovingly embraced, and were made friends, and the
voyage to Scotland was reiourned til another time. After Michaelmas, the
Parliament was holden at London, unto the which Parliamente came Jews the
French Kings brother, with the Bishop of Poytow from the King of France* to
entrenie unity betwixt the King and his Lords: and there were diverse get
ordinances made. And once again, though sore against the Kings mind, he
caused Pierce to obiure, with condition added by the Barons, that if he were
found again in any land subject to the Kings dominion, he should be taken
as a common enemy, and condemned. This being done^ he passed into Flanders,
and from thence to other Countries, seeking rest, which he could not find.

James of Saint Edmond: Roger Palmer, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. 1310
Anno reg. 4.


Thomas Roman the 28. of October.

Pierce of Gaueston conceyuing a trust in the friendship of the King and the
Earl of Gloucester* whose sister he had married, taking with him many*
strangers, returned into* England* And a little before* Christmas he came to
the Kings presence, who for joy of his coming forgettyng all oaths and
promises, received him as a heavenly gift.

The King kept his Christmas at Windsore, where Walter Langton Bishop of
Chester, and the Bishop of Saint Andrews in Scotland, were released out of
prison.

The second day of September at night, an horrible tempest of thunder
happened, so that Hedges and Trees lost their greenenesse, and the Church of
Middleton in Dorcetsnire, with the Steeple, Belles, Ornaments, and all other
monuments of that place, were consumed with the lightning, the Monks being at
Mattins.

Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Conestable of Chester, W. Shep.
dyed at London, and was buried in the new work of Paul's.

Simon de Co^pe: Peter Blackney the 28. of September Sherifes. Mayor. 10. Rouse.


Richard R^^^am Mercer, the 28. of October.

Bl^ckeney deceassed, in whose place succeeded John ^^ Combridge*

A Provincial Counsel was holden at London against Templers condemned.
Thomas Dele.
the Templers in England, upon Heresy and other articles, where of they were
accused, who denied the fact, saving one or two of them ^ notwithstanding all
did confess, that they could not purge themselves, and therefore were
condemned to perpetual penuance in several Monasteries, where they be haued
themselves very well.

At Paris in Frauuoe liiij. of the Templers were brent, by 1311
judgment of the French King.

Thomas who had married the daughter of Henry late Earl of Lancaster hell de in
his hands the Earledomes of Lancaster, Lincoln, Salisbury, Leyoester,
Ferra^s, the Liberty of Pickering, and the Honor of Cokermore, besides
great lands in Wales, and in the Earldom of Arthoys in France.

King Edward with Peter Gauaston his companion, went to York, where the King
was lodged in the Palace of the Archebyshoppe, and Peter in the Castle: they
caused the City to be fortified, and the walls to be repaired, and sent to
Robert Bayliol of Scotland for aid against his Lords, but Robert made
answer, he would not forth of Scotland* neither would he disquiet any man:
the like aunsweare was made by the Welchmen. The Earls assembled at Bedford*
Gilber Earl of Gloucester being one of them, they came to London, and ordained
the Seas to be kept, least strangers should enter to aid the King.

After Easter the brother of Pierce of Gauaston was taken with great treasure
which he had conveyed out of the Kings Treasury: his ship being tossed
with tempeste on the Sea, was driven where it was taken, and the treasure was
brought to London in Carles.

About this time King Edward for his recreation took the Sea, leaving Peter of
Gauaston at York, where upon the Barous brought their power, and entered the
city of York, but Peter fled to Scarborough: then the Barons besieged
Scarborough, where they took him, and committed him to ye custody of Aymerde
Valence Earl of Penbroke, who brought him to the Manor of Dedington which is
betwixt Oxford and Warwike* ^ there left him to be kept s^fer but ye next day
in y^ morning Guy Earl of Warwike with a company of armed men, took* him from
thence, and brought him to Warwike Castle: after deliberation taken, the
Earls of Lancaster, of Warwike, and John Treklow. Pierce of Gauaston beheaded.
Anno reg. 5.
of Hereford caused in their presence in a place called Gauesice or Black
Low, the xix. of June his head to be stricken off: his body by the Friar
Preachers was conuayed to Oxford* and there kept more than two years, till the
King caused the same to be translated to his manor of Langley, and there in the
Friars Church (which he had builded) to be buried.

Simon Merwood: Richard Wilford, the 28. of September* Sherifes. Mayor. 1312 Tho.
de la More. The Roades vvonne by the Christians.


Sir John Gisors Peperer* the 28. of October.

Queen Isabell was delivered of her first son named Edward at Windsore, the
xiij. day of November.

The Knights of the order of Saint John Baptist, called Saint John of
Hierusdlem, put the Turks out of the Isle of Roades, and after that wan upon
the said Turks daily for a long time after. This Religion was greatly
preferred by the fall of the Templers, whose possession was given to them by a
Counsel holden at Vienna. Anno reg. 6.


Robert de Bruce got again almost all Scotland, the Castles with munitions
(the English Garrisons being cast out) he took again into his power. This
year therefore Tho. de la More. Hugh Spencer the younger.
by consent of the Prelates, and certain nobles, Hugh Spe^cer the son was
appointed the Kings Chamberlayne in place of Peter of Gaueston, whom they the
rather preferred, because they knew the King hated him: nevertheless, not long
after, by his great diligence, he brought himself into the Kings favor. The
Father of this Hugh being old* was yet living* a Knight of great virtue, in
counsel wi^e, in arms valiant, whose confusion and shameful end he wanne
unto himself by natural love though disordinate toward his son, who was
in body very comely, in spirit proud, and in action most wicked, whose
covetousness and ambition, by the disheriting of widows and strangers,
wrought the death of the Nobles, the fall of the King; with the utter
destruction of himself and his father,

John Lambin: Richard Wilford, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1313 Tho.
de la More.


Sir John Gisors Peperer, the 28. of October.

King Edward gathering a great power, marched toward Scotland, to break the
seege of Striueling Castle, and lodged himself and his people there about in
the field on the even of Saint John Baptist: never before that time was
Battle at Striuelin.
seen the like preparation, pride and cost in the time of war, as affirms
Robert Paston, a Carmelite Friar, being present, Robert Paston.
and taken of the Scotts, which he sorowfully bewailed in his Heroycall Uerse
whiles he was prisoner. The first night (says he) ye might have seen the
Englishmen bathing themselves in Wine, and casting their gorges: there was
crying, showting, wassaling, and drinking, with other rioting far above
measure. On the other side, ye might have seen the Scotts quiet still, and
close, fasting she even of Saint John Baptist, laboring in love of the
liberty of their Country. On the morrow, the Scotts having gotten the most
convenient place in the field for victory, made ditches in the ground three
foot deep, and she like in breadth, from the right wing of the army, unto the
least, covering y^ same with weak twigges or Herdles, and again over with
Turffe and Grass, which was not of strength to bear horsemen. The army of
the Scotts being divided into certain troops, stood not far off from
this dike, which was betwixt them and the Englishmen. On the other side, the
Army of the Englishmen coming out of the weast, the sun rising, casting his
beams on their golden Targets, bright helmets, and other armoure, gave such a
reflection, as was both wonderful and terrible to behold. In the first ward
were the light horsemen, and heavy coursers. In the second were the archers,
and other footmen, who were appointed for the chase of the adversaries. In the
third was the King with his Bishops, and other religious, amongst whom was
Hugh Spencer. The Horsemen of the first front making upon their enemies,
foundered with their forefeete into the ditch, and lay ther^ tumbling, abiding
the cruelty of the Scotts, who coming upon them, slew so^e, and took a
great many richemen for ransom. There was slain Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, (whom the Scotts would gladly have kept for ransom, if they
had known him, but he had forgotten to put on his coat of Arms:) with
him was flaine Sir Edmond Manly, Sir Roberte Clifford, Sir Pain T^ptofte, Sir
Wyllyam Marshall, Sir Giles Dargenton, and many other Knights and Esquiers.

There was taken Humfrey de Bohun* Earl of Hereford, John Segraue, John
Claueringham, William Latimer, Sir Roger Northbroke, bearer of the Kings
Shield or Seal, but Sir Rauf Mounthermer that had married Ioane of Acres
Countess of Gloucester, the Kings sister, being taken, Anno reg. 7.
found such favor, that his ransom was pardoned, and he returning into
England, brought back with him the Kings Shield or Seals but Sir Edmond
Manly the kings Steward, drowned himself in Banockesborne.

Almost three hundredth men of arms were slain in that place, our archers
killing many of them, who seeing the Scotts cruelly bent upon our horsemenne
fallen in the ditche, shot their arrows with a high compass, that they
might fall betwixt the armoure of their ennimyes, which was all in vain ^
and when they sh^tte right forth they sle^^ few of the Scotts, ^ by reason of
their, armed ^eastes, but many of the Englishemen, by reason of their naked
(...).

The King with the Bishops and Hughe Spencer be* took themselves to flight
^ in which danger of fleeyng, the King ^^wed to God, that he would build
unto the ^oor^^ Earmelite ^riers an house, in the which he would place (...)
and twenty brethren, to be Students ^^ Divinity, which he afterward
performed in Oxforde.

Ralphe Bald^^^ Bishop of London deceassed, who in Cro. (...). Will. Past^^.
his life time gave two thousand Marks to the building of the new work of
the Chapel on the Southe side of Nevve work of Paul's Church in London.
the Church of Saint Paul in London, and left much by his testament to the
same work.

In digging the foundation of this work, were found more than a hundredth
heads of Oxen and Kine, which thing confirmed great lie the opinion of those
which have reported, that of old time it had been called The Temple of
Jupiter, and that there was the Sacrifice of Beasts.

Robert Gurdeine: Hugh Garron, the 28. of (...) Sherifes. Mayor. 1314 Victual
prised.


Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith, the 28. of October* (...)

The King caused his Writs to be published for prices of virtualles, that no
Ox ^^alled (...), be sold (...) more than four and twenty shillings (...)
Anno reg. 8.
Ox for more than sixteen shillings ^^^ (...) stall^d Cow at twelve
shillings: another Cow at ten shillings: a^ fa^^e Mutton corn fed, or
whose (...) well grown, ^^^wentie pence: another fat Mutton shorn, at
fourteen, pence: a fat Hog of two years old, at three shillings four
pence: a fat Goose, at two pence halfepeny, in the City at three pence: a
fat Capon at two pence, in the City two pence halfepeny^ ^^ fat Hen at
one penny, and in the City three halfpence^: two (...) a penny, in the City
three halfepence: four Pigeons for one penny, in the City three Pigeous for a
penny ^ sour and (...), eggs a penny, in the City twenty eggs a penny, (...).

Stephen Abingdon: Hamond Chigwell, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Tho.
Walsing.


Sir John Gisors Peperer, the ^8. of October.

Notwythstanding the Statutes of the last Parliament, the Kings Writs and^ ^^
things were sold dearer than before, ^^ flesh could be had; Capons and Geese
would not be found, Eggs were hard to come by, Sheep dyed of the Victual
dear. 1315 Chro. S. Alb^^^.
rotte, Swine were out of the way, a Quarter of Wheat, Beans, and Pease, were
sold for twenty Shillings, a Quarter of Malte for a Mark, a Quarter of Salt
for (...) and thirty Shillings etc.

John Poydras, a Tanners son of Excester, in diverse A Tanners son claymed
to be King.
places of England named himself the son of Edward the first, and said, that
by a false nursse he was stolen out of his cradle, and Edward that now was
King, put in his place: but shortly after he was convict of his untruth, and
confessed that he did it by the motion of a familiar spirit which he had in his
house in likeness of a Catte, whom he had served three years: for the which
service he was hanged at North ^hampion.

The King in a Parliament at Lincoln, gave the rod and (...) of Marshall
unto Thomas of Brotherton Earl of Norffolke his brother. He also revoked the
provisions before Will. Paston. Tho. Walsing.
made for selling of victualles, and permitted all men to make the best of that
they had: nevertheless, the dearth ^^creased through the abundance of rain
that fell in Harvest, so that a Quarter of Wheat, or of Salt, was sold before
Midsomer for thirty Shillings, and after forty Shillings.

There followed this famine, a grievous mortality of Anno reg. 9. Mortality
of men.
people, so that the quirke might uneath bury the dead.

The Beasts and Cattle also by the corrupt gr^^^ whereof they fed, dyed,
whereby it came to pass, that the eating of flesh was suspected of all men,
for flesh of Beasts not corrupted was hard to find* Horsseflesh was counted
great delicates: the poor stale fat Dogs to eat: some Dogs flesh good
meat. Children were eaten.
(as it was said) compelled through famine, in hid places, did eat the
flesh of their own children, and some stale others which they deuoure^.
Thieves that were in prisons, Thieves in prison devour one another.
did pluck in pieces those that were newly brought amongst them, and greedily
devoured them hal^e alive. A Gallon of small Ale was at two pence, of the
better three pence, and the best four pence.

The Londoners considering, that Wheat made in Malt Wheat forbidden to be
made into Ma^^
was much consumed, ordained, that from thenceforthe it should be made of
other grain, and also, that a Gallon of better Ale should be sold j. ^ ob.
and of small Ale for j. ^ and not above.

The King according to the Statute of London, sent his Writs through the
Realm, commanding, that as well within the liberties as without, in Cities,
Boroughs, Towns, and Uillages, a Gallon of Ale should be sold for j. ^. and
that from thenceforth no Wheat should be made into Malt: which, if he had
not the sooner caused to be proclaimed, the greatest part of the people should
have perished through famine.

Earl Waren was excommunicate by the Bishop of Cro. D^^^.
Chichester for Adultrey, whereupon the said Earl came to the Bishop with
armed men, and four more hasty than the rest, threatened the Bishop,
whereupon the Bishops men fell on them, and took the Earl.

Hamond Goodsheape: William Bodele: the. 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Tho.
Walsing. 1316


Stephen Abindon, the. 28. of October.

There arrived in England by the Kings request Gaustelinus and Lucas de Flisco,
two Cardinals, to make peace betwixt the Realms of England and Scotland,
and to reconcile unto the King. Thomas Earl of Lancaster. They brought John
Trocklow. Tho. de la More.
Bulls from the Pope to excommunicate the Scotts, except they returned unto
peace with the King of England. These Cardinals went into the North parts, to
enstall Lodowike Beomond, to whom the Pope (at the Kings instaunce) had
given the Byshopricke of Durham: and when they came near unto the Town of
Derlington, certain robbers breaking out of a valley, Gilbert Middleton and
Walter Selby being their Capitaynes, sodaynelye set upon the family of the
Cardinals and of Lodowike Two Cardinals robbed.
on Wigelesden More, robbed them of their treasure, and carried Lodowike
Bishop of Durham to Morpeth, where they constrained him to pay a great
Ransom: they brought Henrye Beaumont to the Castle of R^ntforde, and there
kept him till he had paid a great ransom: but the Cardinals came to
Durham, where they tarryed a few days for aunsweare of the Scotts, and so
under the Kings conducte they returned to York, and left their business
which they came for undone. Gilbert Middleton after many domages done Anno
reg. 10.
to the Priory of Rymuth and other, was taken in his own Castle of Nitforde,
by Wyllyam Felton, Thomas Hetton, and Robert Horneclife, carried to London. and
there in the presence of the Cardinals drawn and hanged.

The Cardinals under certain conditions, made peace betwixt the King and
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, which conditions shortly after were unjustly
broken.

Sir Gosseline De^^uile and his brother Roberte, with Thieves like Friars.
two hundred in the habit of Friars did many notable robberies, they spoiled
the Bishop of Durhams Palaces, leaving nothing in them but bare walls, for
the which they were after hanged at York.

William Cawston: Raufe Balancer, the 28. of September Sherifes. Mayor.


John Wengraue, the 28. of October.

Margaret daughter to Philip, son to Jews King of France, wife to Edward
the first, deceassed the fourteenth of Februarye, and was buried in the myddle
of the Quire of the Gray Friars Church at London.

Edward de Bruis the King of Scotts brother, who by Ioh. Trocklowe. Edward
de Bruise beheaded
the space of three years had assaulted Irelande, and had crowned himself
King, was taken by Englishemen that were the King of Englandes Subjects, and
was beheaded at Dundalke.

In that battle were slain nine and twenty Baronets of Scotland, and five
thousand and eight hundredth other, the Primate of Armakh being chief
Captain for the King of England.

This year was an earlye Harvest, so that all the corn Early Harvest cheap
corn.
was inned before Saint Giles day. A Bushel of Wheat Anno reg. 11.
that was before sold for ten shillings, was sold for ten pence: and a
Bushel of Otes that before was eighte shyllings, was sold for eight pence.

Earl Warrin took the wife of the Earl of Lancaster, and shut her up in
his Castle, for that he said she was betrothed to him before she was married:
the Earls had either of them a wife, but neither of them cared for them.

John Prior: William Furneys, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Barvvike
betrayed.


John Wengraue, the 28. of October.

About Midlent the Town of Berwicke was betrayed to the Scotts, through the
treason of Peter Spalding, and other Englishemen, whom the King of Scotts
caused to be hanged for being Traitors to their Country. The Castle held
out, till for want of victualles they within were constrained to deliver it
into the Scottishmens hands, The Scotts invaded England. Richard South. John ^
^ucklowe.
who wanne also the same time, the Castelles of Harbotel, Warke, and Mydforde,
so that they possessed the more part of all Northumberlande, even to
Newecastell upon Tyne, saving certain Castles that were defended against them.

In May they entered further into the land, brenning al before them, till they
came to Rypon, which Town they spoiled, and tarrying three days, they
received a thousand Marks of those that were got into the Church, because
they should not put the Town to the fire, as they had done the Towns of
Northallerton, and Borough Bridge, etc.

In their returning back, they brent Knaresburghe, and Skipton in Crauen, and
all other before them, carrying into Scotland a marvelous multitude of Cattle,
besides prisoners, men and women.

The Yorkeshiremen gathered together to the number of Tho. Walsing.
ten thousand, and met with the Scots at the town of Mitton, ten miles by
Northweast from York, where they lost three W. Packington.
thousand, and were overcome by the Scotts, which when the King heard tell
of, he left the siege of Barwike, and hasted to meet the Scotts, but they
returned an other way.

The Pope ordained, that Parsons should have but one Benefice the piece:
whereupon patrons straight presented new Parsons to the residue.

A great morreyne of Kine happened, which were so mortally infected, that Dogs
and Ravens eating of the carrion A morreyne of Kyne.
of the Kine, were poisoned and did swel to death, so that no man durst eat
any Beef.

John Pointell: John Dallyng, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. The Scots bren
the suburbs of York. 1319 Adam Meri. Herdmen and women go tovvard Jerusalem
Anno reg. 13


John Wingraue, the 28. of October.

The King being at York, the Scotts entered England, came to York, and
brent the Suburbs of the City, and took Sir John of Brytaine Earl of
Richemonde prisoner, with many other.

Many Herdes men and certain women of England, and of other parts of the
world, gathered themselves together, and would go seek the Holy land, to
kill the enemies of Christ, as they said: but because they could not pass over
the great Sea, they slew many Jews in the parties of Tholose, and Gascoyne,
wherefore many of them were taken, and put to death.

Simon Abindon: John Preston, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Exchequer kept
at York. Will. Paston. 1390


Hamond Chickwell Peperer, the 28. of October.

The fifteenth of October the Clearkes of the Exchequer went toward York
with the Book called Domes Day, and other records and provision that laded
one and twenty Carts, but within the space of half a year in the Kalendes of
March they did return again to London.

The same year the Kings Justices fate in the Tower 1320
of London, whereupon John Gisors late Mayor of London and many others fled the
City, for things they had presumptuously done, and knew themselves guilty.
And at this Chro. Dun.
time the Citizens acknowledged the right which they ought to Robert Fitz
Walter; and to his heirs, for the Castle of Baynard.

The Earl of Hereforde boughte of Sir William Bruis Knight, a portion of land
in the Marches of Wales called Gowers. Roger Mortimer the uncle, and Roger the
nephew, not knowing of the foresaid bargayne, had also bought the said ground
of the said William Bruis. Also the Lord Mowbray, who had married the daughter
and heir of the said William, claymed it by inheritance of his wife. Last of
al, Hugh Spencer the younger, had bought that land, and put them all out,
where through the foresaid Nobles were sore amoued, and Humfrey Earl of
Hereforde complained to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, which two Earls allured
almost all the other Earls and Barons to take their part. Thomas Earl of
Lancaster being their Captain, The Barons i^ armor.
they came to Sherborne, and from thence with banners displayed to Saint
Albons: from thence they sent to the king being at London, requiring him to
banishe the two Hughe Spencers, which were condemned by the comminaltie in
many articles: which when the King would not grant, Anno reg. 14
the Barons came to London, where at length, the King The elder Spencer
banished.
granted their petition, so that Hughe Spencer the elder was banished, but the
younger Hugh fell to spoiling on the sea, taking out of two Dronionds about
Sandwiche, goods to the value of 40000. pounds.

Reignolde at Conduit: William Produn, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Jews
and leapers poisoned waters. Conradus Memdember.


Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

Certain Leapers, who had made covenant with the Jews to poison all the
Christians in Europe, laid poison in Wells, Springs and Pittes, for the
which there were many convict and bre^t. There died in Almain for this cause
above twelve thousand Jews.

About the feast of Saint Michaell Isabell the Queen T. de la More.
came from Canterbury to ye castle of Ledes in Kent, purposing to have lodged
there that night, but she could not be permitted to enter.

The King herewith being offended, as being done in Leedes Castle besieged.
contempt of him, calling to him the Commons of Essex and London, besieged the
Castle, which belonged to Bartholomewe de Badelsmere, who, having left his
wife and children therein, was gone with the rest of the noble men to the
ransacking of the Spencers goods.

In the mean time they in Leedes Castle dispayring of their safegarde, the
noble men with their army came to Kyngston in the Uigill of Saint Simon and
Jude, demanding (by the Bishops of Canterbury and London, and the Earl of
Penbroke, who were sent between them) that the King would give over his
siege, promising, that they after the next Parliament would deliver the
Castle into the Kings hands, and become obedient unto him: but the King
would not grant the noble men's petition, who being returned into other
parts, the King with much labor obtained the Castle, and hanging six of
the chief of those whom he found therein, he sent the wife and children of
Badlesmere to the Tower of London.

King Edward held his Christmasse at Circister, and after Christmasse leanyng
Gloucester and Wircester, he with his army went to Shrewsbury and
Bridgenorth. Both the Mortimers meeting the King, reverently and peaceably
submitted themselves unto him. But the King sent them Mortimer sent to the
Tovver.
both to the Tower of London.

Mawrice Barkeley, and Hugh Audley in like sort submitting themselves, he sent
to Wallingforde Castle.

Humfrey Earl of Hereforde, Gilbert Talbot, Raufe Damary, and their adherents,
fled into the North to the Earl of Lancaster.

About the latter end of February the King gathered an host and went against
the rebels, and at Burton upon Trent put them to flighte. The King pursuyng
them the sixteenth of March, the hosts met again at Borowbridge, where
Humfrey de Bohune (by a certain Welchman, who stood under the Bridge) being
thruste into the fundament with a Spear, dyed. There were taken in the field
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, with the Lords, Knights, and other to the number of
65. the (...) ^^uing themselves by flight.

These by the judgment o^ (...)e H^^^^el^^ Earl of Carlisle, were condemned.

On the (...) twentieth of March Thoma^^ Lancaster The Earl of Lancaster
beheaded.
was b(...)ed: Warin de Lile, Wyllyam ^^ochet. Thomas ^^^duit, Henry
Bradebourne, Wyllyam Fitz William the younger, and Wyllyam de Cheyney ^^rons,
hanged and quartered at Pontfracte: John Mowbray, Roger Ioh. Troklowe. W.
Paking.
Clifford^ Goceline Deynvile, drawn and quartered at York. Bartholomewe
Badlesmere at Caunturbury: Henry de Mountfort, Henry Willington at Bristowe:
John Clifforde, Roger Elinbrough at Gloucester: Wyllyam Kerdyfe, Henry Chies at
London: Frauncis de Aldham at Windsore: Thomas Culpeper at Winchelse: Hugh de
Audley the younger, John de Wyllyngton, Roberte Talbot, John Maidut, Edmunde
Heclude, John de Sapy, Roberte de Wacheuile, Philippe de Labeche, John de
Beck, Henry de Laybourne, these ten, and three score and two Knights more,
were bestowed in diverse prisons.

The Justiciers of Trailebaston in Essex sat upon all Cron. of Dunsta.
Justices of Trailebaston.
complayntes, except Assizes touching pleas of feed lands, and others, in the
Kings Benche to be pleaded, who did abstain their hands from all kinds of
gifts. And they did not only refuse the gifts, but also would not be
called to the feasts and bankets of any man.

The third Week after Easter, a Parliament was Tho. de la M^^^.
gathered at York, where Hughe Spencer the father was made Earl of
Winchester, unto whom the King gave the Castle and Honor of Dunnington,
which was parcel of the Earldom of Lincoln.

About the feast of Saint James, the King with a great T. de la More. Hen.
Elanforde.
army entered Scotland, but the Scotts having destroyed all a^ore, were
retired beyond the Scottishe Sea. So that the King being oppressed b^^^mine,
returned into England, Addictions to Nich. Trivet. Anno reg. 15
whom the Scotts foll(...) and in a place of the Forest of Blackamore they
^et (...)ng, so that he hardly escaped. There were taken the Earl of Richemond
and the Lord of Silicico, the French Kings Ambassador, and many other: where
upon the Scotts spoiling all the Cou^^^^, and brenning even to York, they
brent Ripon, and slew many Priests of the College there: but in Beuerley they
hurt not a man, for the, Burgesses and Cannons did redeem the same with
four hundredth pounds of sterling money. And so the Scotts by reason of
Winter made return, being laden with spoils.

This year the King made Sir Andrewe Herkley Earl of Carlisle, and gave him
lands in the Marches of Scotland.

Richard Constantine: Richard Hackeney, the. 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Hamond Chickwell Peperer, the 28. of October.

About the feast of the Purification of our Lady, Andrewe de Herkeley late
made Earl of Carlisle, under color of peace, feigned, that he would marry
Robert Bruis his sister. Whereupon the King reputing him a Traitor, caused him
to be taken by his trusty friend Sir Anthony de Lucy, and after he was
disgraded of the Earldom by the taking away from him the sword, and cutting
off his spurs, 1322
and then hanged and quartred at Carlisle: also the third of March his head was
sent to London, and his four quarters to four several parts of this land.

The. xxx. of May Aymer de Valence Earl of Penbroke Hugh Spencer the younger,
Robert Baldocke Archdeacon of Midlesex, sir William Herle Knight, William de
Aizewine Cannon of York, Galfride de Scrope, were for King Edward of England
sent to Newcastel upon Ti^e, where they met with William Bishop of Saint
Andrews, Thomas Ra^^d^ ^^ Earl of Mourt, John de Mete^h, Robert de Lowther,
the Father Knights, and master Walter de Tromant Clearke for the King of
Scotts, there to talk of a final peace: but when that would not be, they ^et
to a truce, which they agreed upon for. xiij years, which was proclaimed about
the xj: of June, dated at Anno reg. 16
Thorpe near unto York.

This year Phillip King of France dyed, and his brother Charles succeeded him.

About the beginning of Auguste king Edward being at Pikering, there came
Ambassadors from the new French king, the Lord Benuille and sir Andrew de
Florentia, to cite the King to come to do homage for ^^yon, Aquitaine, and
other lands which he held of him: and though Hugh Spencer the son Lord
Chamberlayne, and Roberte Baldocke Lord Chancellor, had procured the said
Ambassadors not to declare their message to the King yet when they should
depart they did it, admoni^hing him to come. And the said sir Andrew de
Florence being a Notarie, made a public instrument of the said Citation and
admonition.

John Grantham: Richard of Ely, the. 28, of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. Tho. de la
More.


Hamond Chickwel Peperer, the. 28. of October.

The French King made a process against the King of England. And Charles de
Valoys uncle to king Charles of France a most deadly enemy to Englishmen, did
sea^e on the Dukedom of Angue, and the County of Portowe unto the use of his
nephew the King. At the length going forward to the town of Ryall, he found
it well defended by Edmond of Woodstocke Earl of Kent, betwixt whom a final
truce being taken, to continue until such time as it could be determined
between both the Kings as concerning peace, and the town being yielded up,
both the armies departed home.

The next Lent in a Parliament holden at London, Adam Tarleton Bishop of
Hereforde was accused of treason, but Henry Blanford. 1323
by the Archbishops of Ca^terburie, York, and Dubline, and their suffragan
Bishops, he was taken from the Bar and had away: notwithstanding
inquisition being made by lawefull men of that Country, they found y^ he had
aided the Mortimers with horse and armor against the King, whereupon all his
Temporalities were seized into the kings hands. In this Parliament the king
granted at petition of y^ Prelate, that all the bodies of the noble men that
were hanged on gallows, should be taken down, and buried in ecclesiastical
Anno reg. 17
sepulture.

The King also asked a subsidy of the clergy and people, for the redeeming
of John Britaigne, Earl of Richmonde.

Adam Tarleton Bishop of Hereford, being deprived of all his temporal goods,
did hate the Spencers deadlye, so did Henry Burwashe of Lincoln and their
friends, who withhelde Tho. de la More.
their hands only for reverence of the King.

On Lammas day Roger Mortimer of Wigmore, by Henry Blanford.
giving to his keepers a sleep drink, escaped out of the Tower, breaking*
through the wall and coming into y^ Kitchen near adjoining to the Kings
lodgings, and getting out of the top thereof, came to a Ward of the Tower,
and so with cords knitte ladder-wise, prepared before hand by a friend of
his, got to another Ward, and so with great fear got to the Thamis, and with
his helper and two more of his counsel passed the river, and avoiding the high
ways came to the sea, and there finding a ship, passed over into France.

Adam of Salisburie: John of Oxforde, the, 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. 1324
Tho. de la More. Anno reg. 18


Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

The King sent Ambassadors to the French King, the Bishops of Winchester
and of Norwiche, with John of Brytaine Earl of Richmonde, to take order for
the Dukedom of Brytaine, who after long debatings, took a certain form of
peace with the King.

King Edward sent the Queen his wife unto her brother The Queense^t^ into
France.
the French King, to establishe the peace, who went over with a small company.
By her mediation a peace was fullye finished, to wit, that the King of
England; should give to his eldest son Edward, the Dukedom of Aquitaine,
and the Earldom of Po^t^^e, and that the French King should receive homage
of him: whereupon Edward the Kings son, went over with a competent
household about the feast of Saint Mathewe, and did homage under certain
protestations, to his uncle the French King.

Bennet of Fulham: John Cowson, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1325


Hamon Chickwel Peperer, the. 28. of October.

Whiles the Queen with her son remained in France longer than the Kings
pleasure was, and would not come again without Roger Mortimer and other Nobles
that were fled out of England, and especially for the hatred she bare to
the two Hughe Spencers, the King in displeasure banished them both, and all
other that took their parts, whereupon many fled over the Seas to the
Queen, amongst the which was one a subtle Knight, Sir Robert Walkefare, who
slaying the Conestable of Corfe Castle, brake from them, where he had long line
prisoner.

Sir Oliver Ingham Knight, whom the young Duke Edward Oliver Ingham.
had made keeper of Aquitaine, gathered a great army, and invaded the
province of Aniowe, (which the French King contrary to couenauntes, did
wythholde) Anno reg. 19
and brought it wholby into the dominion of England.

Moreover the kings Navy took a hundred ships of the Normans, and brought
them into England, for which cause great hatred grew betwixt the two kings and
their Realms.

The Q. perceiving that y^ nobles of France, were corrupted with gifts sent out
of England, so that she could trust none of them, secretly conveyed her self
and her son to the Earl of Heynalde, desiring aid of him who received and
entreated her very honorably so long as she remained there.

Gilbert Mordon: John Cotto^, the. 28 of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1326


Richard Betaine Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

Isabel the Queen made a marriage betwixt her eldest son Edward, and Phillip
the Earls daughter of Heynalde, and and then with her: son Edward, Edmunde
of Woodstocke Earl of Kent, the kings brother, Roger Mortimer, and many other
noble men that were fled out of England, and John brother to the Earl of
Heynalde being Captain, with stipedarie knights, out of Almaine and Henalde,
she took the seas with all her power, which were to the number of MM. DCC.
LUII. men well armed, and arrived at Vrewel, or Orwel haven besides Harwich
in Essex* about Michaelmasse, whether immediately the Earl Marshal, the Earl
of Leicester, the Bishops of Lincoln, Hereforde, Diuelyn, and Ely* came, and
being joined to the Queen, made a great army: Anno reg. 20. Queen Isabel
returned.
the other Bishops, specially of Canturburie, aided her with money. When she had
refreshed her army at Saint Edmondesburie* she went forwards pursuing her
enemies, whose goods she applied to her own use. The King requested aid of
the Citizens of London, who made him aunsweare, they would The King requested
aid.
with due obedience honor the King and Queen, and their son, who was
lawful heir to the Realm, and that they would shut their gates against all
foreign traitors of the Realm: but they would not go out of their City to
fight, except they might (according to their liberties) return home again the
same day before Sun set: which when the K. heard, he fortified the Tower
of London, and left there his Proclamation by the king.
younger son John of Eltham: he caused also to be proclaimed that every ^^^
should resist them that were arrived, and to invade them to the uttermost of
their powers (the Queen with her some Edward, and the Earl of Kent his brother
only excepted) and wholoeuer could bring the head of Roger Mortimer, should
have a thousand pound. On the other s^^^ it was proclaimed in the Queens
behalf, that al men Proclimation by the Queen.
should have good peace, except the disturbers of the Realm, to wit the
Spencers y^ father and the son, Robert Baldocke bishop of Norwich the kings
Chancellor, and their fautours: and whosoever did bring to the Queen the head
of Hugh Spencer, should have a M. pound. The Citizens of London without
respect of any, beheaded such as they took to be the Queens enemies, among the
which they beheaded one of their own Citizens named John Marshal, because he
was familiar with Hugh Spencer the younger. They took also Master Walter
Stapleton Bishop of Excester, and on the. xv. day of Bishop of Excester
beheaded.
October beheaded him: the eight and twe^tith of March next following he was
buried at Excester, with great solemnity: and two of his servants, a squire
and a yeoman named William Atwall, and John of Padington, at the standerd in
Cheap, because (as the saying was) he had gathered a great army to withstand
the Queen, they did also wrest the keys of the Tower of London out of the
Conestables hands, and delivered all the prisoners.

Richard Rothing: Roger Chaunteclere, the. 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.
Saint James.


Richard Britain Goldsmith, the 28. of October,

This Richard Rothing Sheriff, builded the Parish Church of Saint James at
Garlike Hithe in London.

The Queen besieged Bristow, which was soon re^dered to The Queen besieged
Bristovv
her, and the morrow after her coming, Hugh Spencer the elder was drawn and
hanged in his armor, and then beheaded and Spencer the elder executed. Will.
Pakington.
his body hanged up again, and after four days cut al to pieces, and
cast to the dogs to be eaten, but his head was sent to Winchester.

The King, Hugh Spencer the younger, and Robert Baldocke, determined to flee
into the I Will of Lunday, which is in the mouth of the river Seuerne, two miles
in length every way, very fruitful, pleasant, and hard to conquer: but
being in great danger on the Sea the space of a The King taken. Tho. de la
More. Alexan. Netha^.
week, at last arrived in Wales, where they were taken the sixteenth day of
November, in the Monasterye of Neth. The King was committed to Henry Earl of
Lancaster his kinsman, who brought him to Kellingworthe Castle, The K. sent
to Killingvvorth.
Hugh Spencer, Robert Baldocke, and Simon Readyn; were brought to the Queen
at Hereforde: the Earl of Arundell John Daniel and Thomas Muchelden, by
procurement of Roger Mortimer were beheaded before their coming.

Hugh Spencer was condemned without answer at Hereforde, where he was drawn
and hanged upon a Spencer the yo^ger executed.
Gallows thirtye foot high, and then headed and quartered on the four and
twentieth of November.

Simon Reading was drawn and hanged on the same Gallows, but ten foot lower.

Robert Baldocke dyed in Newgate with many torments.

These things being done, the Queen with her son Edward, Roger Mortimer and
other, went to Wallingforde Castle a little before Christmasse, and before the
twelfth day they came to London, where they were joyfully received. On the
morrow after the said feast, they held a Parliamente, where by common
decree, they elected Edward his eldeste son, and then sent in the name of
the whole Parliament three Bishops, John K. Edward the second deposed.
Stratforde Bishop of Winchester, Adam Tarleton Bishop of Hereforde, and
Henry Bishop of Lincoln, two Earls, two Abbottes, four Barons, and every
County three Knights, etc. unto the King at Kenilworthe. Adam de Tarleton
Bishop of Hereforde, being the chief in malice, did the message, with many
great threats, declaring unto him their election, and required him to
renounce the Kyngly dignity and Crown to his son: the King aunsweared with
tears, that he was very sorry that he had behaved himself so evil
toward the people of his Kingdom, but seeing the matter was so
unrecoverable, he prayed them all to forgive him, and thanked them that they
had chosen his eldest son. The messengers renounce all homages and duties
due to Edward of Carnaruan late King: and Thomas Blunte Knight, steward of
household brake his rod, resigned his office, and showed that the Kings
housholdehad free liberty to depart, and then returned with the Kings
answer, and made the people joyful. He was thus deposed, when he had reigned
ninteene years, six months, and odd days. He was delivered to the
custody of Henry Earl of Leicester, and one hundred marks the month
allowed for his charges in Kellingworth Castle.

King Edward the third


Edward the third borne at Windsor, abonte the age of. xiiij. years, after
the deposing of his Father, began his reign the Anno reg. 1
xxv. day of Januarie, in the year of our Lord. 1326. He was crowned at
Westminster, on the first day of February, by Walter Reignalds Archbishop of
Canturburie. This Prince was endued with passing beauty and favor, of wit
provident, circumspect, and gentle of nature: of excellent modesty and
temperaunce. He advanced such persons to dignities, as did most excel other in
innocence of life. In feats ^. de la More. Gual. Baker of Swinbroke.
of arms he was very expert, as the noble enterprises by him achieved do
well declare. At the beginning of his reign, he was chiefly ordered by his
mother Isabel, unto whom was assigned so great a Dowry, that the third
part of the Kingdom did scantelye remain to her son.

The inhabitauntes of the Town of Bury in Suffolk, Regester of Bury. John
Prigton. The Abbay of Bury spoiled.
assembled themselves in warlike manner on Saint Lukes day last before passed
in the twentieth year of Edward the second, and besiged the Abbey of Bury,
brent the gates, bet and wounded y^ Monks, bare out of the Abbey all the Gold,
silver, ornaments, books, Charters, and other writings, with the assay of
their coin stampes, and all other things pertaining to their minte, and all
other goods, as Brass, Pewter, Iron, Lead. etc. They also brent many houses
about the Abbey, and in the Town, pertaining to the Abbot, with his manours in
Berton, Packenham, Rugham, Oldhaw, Hernigesburie, Newton, Whipsted, Westle,
Riseby, Ingham, Ferneham, Redwel, Haberdon, and others, with all the corn in
the same manours, and drove away the horses, oxen, kine, swine, sheep etc.
They drew ye monks out of their Abbey and put them in prisons, and after
brought them again to their Chapter house, where they forced them to search
Charters at their pleasure, etc. For the which factes the malefactors were
this year by virtue of the Kings commission directed to Thomas Earl of
Norffolke, Commons of Bury executed.
Marshall of England, Thomas Bardolfe and others, apprehended and convicted:
ninteene of them were hanged, and one pressed to death. After this the whole
inhabitauntes of the Town, for that they had not stayde the malefactors of
their enterprise in y^ beginning (as they might have done) were amerced to pay
ye Abbot toward his damages. 140000. pound. Nevertheless the Abbot and Covent
at the kings request, who was there present with his nobility, forgave and
remitted to them. 122333. pound six shillings eight Bury amerced.
perice of the sum, and for the rest used such favor, that if they truly
paid 2000. marks in twenty years following, and observed their couenaunts
for good order and quietness, they forgave them all the rest.

About this time, the like stir was made against the Record. ecclesia Christi
Cantu.
Monks of Canterbury, whereof I find recorded as follows.

King Edward preparing an army into Scotland commanded the Baylifes and
Citizens of Canterbury, to furnish him twelve horssemen, and send them to
Nowcastel, toward which charge, the Citizens required aid of the Monks, who
answered them, that without the assent of the King and their Archbishop,
they would not agree thereunto, for so much as the Kings of England had
founded their church in free and perpetual alms. Whereupon, William Chilham
Baylife, and many commons of the City, assembled themselves in the Preaching
Friars Churchyard, conspired and swear against the Monks as follows.

1 That they would overthrow the pentises, windows, and milne, belonging to
the Monks. 2 That no Citizen should dwell in any house belonging to the Monks.
3 That all rents belonging to the Monks of Canterbury should be gathered to
the use of the commons. 4 That no man should send or sell to the Monks any
victuals. 5 That they should sell all the horses and beasts y^ came into the
City with carriage to the Monks. 6 That al such Monks as came forth of their
house should be spoiled of their garments. 7 That a trench should be cast, to
stop all men from going in or coming out. 8 That every Pilgrim should at his
entering, swear that he should make no offering. 9 Also that every of those
commons aforesaid should wear on their finger, a ring of gold of those that
belonged to Thomas Becket.
Sir John the Earls brother of Henalt came to help Cro. Pet. Coledge.
Edward the third against the Scotts, with five hundred men of arms,
which Henawders and the Englishmen fell out by chance on Trinity Sunday at
York, where. 80. of the Lincolnshire men were slain, and buried under a stone
in S. Clements Churchyard in Fosegate.

The King went against the Scotts that were entered Journey toward scotland
England as far as Stanhope Park in Wardale, where they were besieged three
days, but they escaped. James Douglas one night secretly entering the English
camp, came near to the kings tent to have taken or slain him, but his
Chaplein being a bold man and well armed, with some other being slain, he
with much ado got back unhurt.

Isabel the Queen being persuaded that the Earl of Leicester too much
favored the old King her husband, Tho. de la More. Walter Barker of
Swinebroke.
through the subtle devise of her scholemaster Adam Tarleton Bishop of
Hereforde, appointed that Thomas Gornay, and John Maltrauers Knights, having
received him into their custody, should carry him about whether they would, so
that none of his well willers should have access unto him, or understand
where he made any long abode. These brought him out by night from Kenilworth,
and first he is brought to the Castle of Corfe, then to Bristow, where for a
season he was kept shut up close in the Castle, until such time as it was
understood of by certain, Burgesses of the same Town, who for the
deliverance of the said Edward, conveyed, themselves over Sea: whose
determination being known to his keepers, in a certain dark night they
conveyed him thence to Berkeley. These tormentours forced him to ride
bareheaded: when he would sleep they would not suffer him: neither when he
was hungry would they give him such meat as liked him, but such as he
lothed. Every word he spoke was contraried by them, giving out most
slanderously, that he was mad. And to conclude, in all matters that they
could imagine, they were contrary to his will, that either by cold or
watchyng, or unwholesome meats, or melancholy or other infirmity, he might
languishe and dye. But contrariwise, this man being of a good disposition by
nature, stout to suffer, and patiente through Gods grace to abide griefs,
he endured all the wicked devises of his enymies. For as touching poisons
which were ministered to him, by the benefit of nature he dispatched them away.
These Cha^pions (as I said) bring the old king toward Barkeley, being
guarded with a rabble of Helhoundes, along by the graunges belonging to the
Castle of Bristow, where that wicked man Gerney making a crown of Hey, put it
on his head, and the soldiers that were about him mocked him, saying,
Tprut, auaunt sir King, making a kind of noise with their mouths, as though
they had farted. These doubting to meet some of his friends, bent their
journey over the Marish grounds, lying by the ruier of Seuerne. Moreover
diuising by all means to disfigure him that he might not be known, they
determined to shave as well the hear off his head as also off his bearde,
wherefore coming by a little Water which ran in a ditche, they commanded
him to alighte from his horse to be shaven: to whom being set on a Molehill,
a Harbor came with a Basin of cold Water taken out of the ditch, to who^
Edward said, shall I have no warm water? the Barber answered, this will
serve: quoth Edward, will ye or nil ye I will have warm water: and that he
might keep his promise, he began to weep and to shed tears plentifullye,
(as it was reported by William Bishop, to sir Thomas de la More knight.) At
length they came to Berkeley Castle, where Edward was shut up close like an
Ancher. Isabel his wife taking it grievously that her husbands life was thus
prolonged, made complaint to Adam Bishop of Hereforde, fayning that she had
certain dreams, the interpretation whereof she misliked. In like sort the
Bishop being in his conscience guilty of treason, stood in fear the like
fear also stoke the hearts of other for the same offense, whom the Diuer had
gathered together to that effect. Wherefore it seemed good to many of great
dignity and blood, as well spiritual as temporal, yt al such fear should be
taken away by ye death of Edward, whervppon letters were sent to his keepers,
blaming them for suffering him to enjoy so much liberty, and nourishing him so
delicately.

Moreover there is a privy motion made to them, that Sophistical letter
procuring the murder of the old king.
the death of Edward would not be misliked unto them: and in this point, the
great deceyte of Sophisters stood in force, set down by the Bishop of
Hereforde, who wrote thus: Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est: Kyl
Edward do not fear it is a good thing. or thus:

To seek to shed king Edwards blood, Refuse to fear I count it good.

This saying is to be resolved into two propositions, whereof the first
consisting of three words, to wit, Edwardum occidere nolite, and the second
of other three, that is, Timere bonum est, do seem to persuade very subtly:
but the receyuers of the letters not being ignorant of the Sophistical writing,
changed the meaning thereof to this sense, Edwardum occidere nolite timere,
and afterward joined these words bonum est. Now when the old king was
brought to the Castle aforesaid, he was very curteouslye received by Thomas
Lord Barkeley, but after the tormentors had received letters concerning the
gouernemente of the Castle, Thomas Lord of Berkley is commanded to depart
from thence, wherefore taking his leave with sighs, he goes to his other
dwelling places.

After this the old king was shut up in a close Chamber, where with the
stincke of the dead carcasses laid in a celler under him, he was miserablye
tormented many days, in such sort, that he was well nyghe suffocated
therewith: and that the pain was almost intollorable, it appeared by the
complainte he made on a certain day at the Chamber window, certain
Carpenters then working on the right side thereof hearing the same. But these
tyraunts perceiving that this would not force his death, one night being the
xxij. of September, they came rushing in upon him, as he lay in his bed,
with great heavy The old king murdered.
^eatherbeddes, as much in weyghte as xv. men could bear, wherwyth they
oppressed and smoothered him, into whom also they thrust a plummers iron, being
made read hot up into his bowels, through a certain instrumente like to
the end of a Trumpet, or glister pipe, put in at his fundiment, burning thereby
his inward parts, providing thereby least any wound being found in the kings
body, they might be caused to aunsweare it. In this sort was this stout King
oppressed, crying with a loud voice, so that many as well within the Castle
as without heard it, perceiving it was the cry of one that suffered violente
death, which caused many of Berkeley (as they affirmed) to take compassion
thereof, and to pray for the soul of him that was then departing. Isabel and
the Bishop, that their tyranny might be hid, outlawed and banished Thomas
Gournay, The murderers fled.
and John Maltrauers. Thomas fleeing into Marcels, three years after being
known was taken and brought toward England, and was beheaded on the Sea,
least he should accuse the chief doer. John Maltrauers (repenting himself)
lay long hid in Germany.

This year died Charles king of France the third brother, which was brother
to the Lady Isabel Queen of England, K. Edward's title to France.
mother to King Edward the third, by whose death the succession of the
Kingdom of France came to the said Edward: but it was usurped and possessed
by Phillip de Valoys uncle to the said Charles; who did intrude himself by
force.

King Edward married Phillip the Earls daughter of Edward the third married.
Heynalde, at York the five and twentieth of February: she was sisters
daughter to Phillippe de Valoys aforesaid.

Henry Darcy: John Hauten the, 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Hamond Chikwel Grocer, the 28. of October.

A Parliament was holden at Northampton, in which ^ Anno reg. 2. Parliament at
Northampton. 1228 Peace with the Scotts.
shameful peace was made betwixt the Englishmen and Scots; so that David, the
son of Robert Bruis, scarce seven years old, married Joan of the Tower king
Edwardes sister, at Berwike, the twelfth of July. Also the king made the
Scotts, charters, the tenor whereof was unknown to the Englishmen: but al
was done as it pleased the old Queen, Roger Mortimer, and James Douglas. The
Scotts made many tannting times against the Englishmen, for the fond
disguised apparel by them at that time used, amongst the which was fastened
upon the Church doors of Saint Peter toward Stangate,

Long beardes hartlesse, Scottish taunts.

Painted hoodes vvitlesse,
Gay coats graceless,
Makes England thriftlesse.
Adam Tarleton was made Bishop of Worcester.

In a Parliament at Salisburie, the K. made three Earls, Parliament at
Satisburie.
John of Eltam his brother Earl of Cornewal, Roger Mortimer Earl of the
March, and James Butler of Ireland Earl of Ormond. From this Parliament the
Earl of Lancaster, ye Lord Wake, Henry Beamonde, Earl Marshal, and other
noble men did absent themselves, not being far off from thence in armor, for
the which the King was highly displeased: notwithstanding in Summer following
they submitted themselves unto the Kings mercy, seeking his favor.

Simon Fraunces: Henry Combmartin, the. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.
John Grantham, the. 28. of October.

Certain men of this land, to y^ intent to try what friends K. Edward the
second bruted to be alive.
they had in England, craftily devised that Edward the second king of England
was alive in the Castle of Gorffe, but not to be seen in the day time, and
therefore they used many nights to make shows and maskyng with dancing upon
the towers and Walls of the Castle, which being perceived by people of the
country, it was thought there had bin some great king unto whom they did
these great solemnities: this rumor was spredde over all England, to wit,
that the old King was alive, whence it came to pass, that the Earl of Kent
sent thither a Friar Precher, to try the truth of the matter, who (as it was
thought) having corrupted the Porter of the Castle with rewards, is Anno reg.
3.
let in, where he lay all the day in the Porters lodge very close, and when
night was come, he was willed to put on y^ habit of a lay man, and then was
brought into the Hal, where he saw (as he thought) Edward the Father of the
king sitting royally at supper with great majesty. This Friar being thus
persuaded, returned again to the Earl of Kente, and reported as he thought,
what he saw: whereupon y^ Earl said and affirmed with an oath, that he would
indeauoure by all the means he could to deliver his brother from prison.

The same year at the earnest request of some, the king 1329
held a Parliament at Winchester, where by procurement of the old Queen, and
Roger Mortimer, the said Earl of Parliament at Winchester.
Kent, and many other noble men and religious persons, to wit, the
prouincials of the white Carmilit Friars, and of the black Preaching Friars,
and Friar Richard Wliten were accused of conspiracy, touching (as it was
said) the deliuerye of the Kings Father, which matter although it were but
devised fantasy and a mere lie, yet the said Earl for certain confessions
which he made, and for certain letters which were found about him, was there
beheaded. The other, to wit, y^ prouincials of the Predicants and Earl of Kent
the kings uncle beheaded at Winchester.
Carmilites, were banished: but the Bishop of London, was set at liberty.
Robert de Taunton Priest, and some certain Carmilite Friars and predicants,
were condemned to perpetual prison.

The death of the said Earl was the less lamented, because his familye and
servants had above measure afflicted the commons, in taking up things (as
they trauayled,) at the Kings price, paying nothing or very little for it.

Richard Lazer: Wyllyam Gisours, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.
Richard Swanland, the 28. of October.

There was a Parliament holden at Notingham, where Roger Mortimer was in such
glory and honor, that it was without all comparison. No man durst name him
any other than Earl of March: a greater rowt of men waited at his heels,
than on the Kings person: he would suffer the King to rise to him, and would
walk with y^ King equally step by step, and cheek by cheek, never preferring
y^ King, but would go foremost himself with his Officers: he greatly rebuked
the Earl of Lancaster, cousin to the King, for that without his consent he
appointed certain lodgings for Noble men in the Town, demaundyng who made him
so bold, to take up lodgings so nighe unto the Queen, with which words
the Conestable being greatelye feared, appointed lodging for the Earl of
Lancaster one mile out of the Town: and likewise were lodged the Earl of
Hereforde, John de Bohune of Estsex, high Conestable of England, and others.
By which means a contention rose among the Noblemen, and great murmuring
among the common people, who said, that Roger Mortimer the Queens Paragon,
and the Kings Master, sought all the means he could to destroy the Kings
blood, and to usurp the Regal Majesty: which report troubled much the
Kings friends, to weete, William Mountacute, and other, who for the safegarde
of the King, swear themselves to be true to his person, and drew unto them
Robert de Hollande, who had of long time been chief keeper of the Castle,
unto whom all secreate corners of the same were known. Then upon a certain
night, the King lying without the Castle, both he and his friends were
brought by Torchlight through a secret way under ground, beginning far off
from y^ said Castle, til they came even to the Queens Chamber, which they by
chance found open: they therefore being armed with naked swords in their hands,
went forwards, leaving the King also armed without the door of the Chamber,
least that his mother should epsy him: they which entered in, slew Hugh
Turpinton Knighte, who resisted them, Master John Neuell of Horneby giving him
his deadly wound. From thence, they went toward the Queen mother, whom they
found with the Earl of March, ready to have gone to bed: and having taken
the said Earl, they led him out into the Hall, after whom the Queen
followed, crying Bele fits, bele fits, ayes pity de gentil Mortimer, Good
son* good son, take pity upon gentle Mortimer, for she suspected that her
son was there, though she saw him not. Then are the keys of the Castle sent
for, and every place with all the furniture is yielded up into the Kings hands,
but in such secret wise, that none without the Castle, except the Kings
friends understood thereof. The next day in the morning very early, they bring
Roger Mortimer, and other his friends taken with him, with an horrible shout
and crying (the Earl of Lancaster then blind, being one of them that made the
shoute for joy) toward London, where he was committed to the Tower, and
afterward condemned at Westminster, in presence of the whole Parliament on
Saint Andrews even next following, and then drawn to the Elmes, and there
hanged on the common gallows, whereon he hung two days and two nights by the
Kings commandment, and then was buried in the Gray Friars Church. He was
condemned by his Peers, and yet never was brought to answer before them, for
it was not then the custom, after the death of the Earls of Lancaster,
Winchester, Gloucester, and Kent, wherefore this Earl had that law him self,
which he appointed for other.

The causes of his death laid against him were these.

First, that he was consenting to the murdering of the Kings father.

Secondly, for that he had received a great sum of money, whereby the Kings
honor was greatly abated at Stanhope Park, where he gave a sign unto the
Scotts that they should fly.

Thirdly, for that he caused certain ancient deeds and Charters to be brent,
wherein the King of Scots stood bound unto the King of England: and especially
for that he had caused a contra^t to be made betwixt the Kings sister, and
David the son of Robert le Bruis.

Fourthly, that he had unprofitably consumed a great deal of treasure which
he found in the kings treasury, and in the treasury of the Earls of
Winchester and Gloucester.

Fifthly, for appropriating unto himself the wards and marriages of all England.

Sixthly, for being an evil counselor to the King, and to the Queen mother,
and for being overmuch familiar No Justice.
with her. There died with him his friends Simon de Burford Knight, brother to
Sir William Burford that was Justice, Anno reg. 4.
and John Deuerell Esquier, who was desirous to have made open confession of
the Kings fathers cruel death, but he could not be suffered. King Edward, the
Bishop of Winchester, Will. Mountacute, and very few others passed over 1^^0*
Sea, like as they had bin Merchants, having with him scarce xv. horsemen. He
left John of Eltham his brother Protector of the Realm. He returned again
about the beginning of April, and then held a great Turniament at Dertford in
Kent. The xv. of June was borne unto king Edward, Turniament a^ Dertford.
Edward the black Prince borne.
his first son at Wodstoke, who was after named Edward the black Prince.
The K. took into his hands all ye lands assigned to his mother, and only left
her a 1000. pound the year. About Michaelmas there was very solemn iusting of
all the stout Earls, Barons, and Nobles, at London in Cheap, betwixt the
great Cross, and the great Conduit Turniament in Cheap at London. Adam Meri.
To. Auesbery.
nigh Soper Lane, which lasted three days, where the Queen Phillip, with many
Ladies fell from a Stage, notwithstanding they were not hurt at all: wherefore
the Queen took great care to save the Carpenters from punishmente, and
through her prayer (which she made an her knees) she pacifyed the King and
Counsel, whereby she purchased great love of the people.

Robert of Ely: Thomas Whorwode, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Saint
Lavvrence Pultney.


Sir John Pultney Draper, the 28. of October.

This Sir John Pultney, builded the College in London, called Saint Laurence
Pultney, and little Alhallowes, a Parish Church in Thamis street, and also
the Carmelite Regist. Carmil.
Friars Church in Couentrie.

Such a wet Summer, with exceeding rain was this Late Harvest.
year, that the Corn in the field could not ripe, so that in many places they
began not Harvest till Michaelmas. The house of Croxton got not in their Wheat
till Hallontide, W. Sheepeshed.
and their Pease not before S. Andrews tide. The Monks on Alhallowen day, and
Martelmas day, were served with Pease green in the coddes, in stead of Pears
and Apples.

King Edward held a solemn Christmas at Wells, which Anno reg. 5.
he continued till the feast of the Epiphany, where was many strange and
sumptuous shows made. 1331


In the beginning of August, Edward Bailioll, son and heir to John King of
Scotts, came into England, which Edward had bin before that time banished out
of Scotland. At his coming, he declared what right he had in the Kingdom.
Henry Beawmont Earl of Bohune, Gilbert Vmfreuill Earl of Angus, David Earl
of Athels, Richard Talbot, Ralph Baron of Stafford, Fulx Fitz Williams, with
many other noble men, affirming they had right of inheritance in Scotland,
desired license and aid of the King of England, to recover the said Kingdom
and lands due to them, but the King having regard of the peace lately made,
and also for his sisters sake Queen of Scotts, would not suffer them to
lead an army through his land, wherefore the said Lords getting a Fleet
of Ships, entered the Sea, and sailing toward Scotland, landed at Kinkehorne,
where the Earl of Fife, and Robert Bruise, Bastard son to Robert Bruise, with
ten thousand Scotts resisted them near unto Dunfermeling, but the
Englishmen put them to flight, and slew many. Afterward, to weete on Saint
Lawrence day, they had a sore conflict at Gledesmore, where two thousand
Englishmen overcame forty thousand Scotts. By reason of the great throng of
the multitude amongst themselves, five Earls, and many other were thronged to
death. On the morrow, the Englishmen took the Town of Saint John's, well
furnished with victualles.

The seven and twentieth of September, Edward Baylioll Edward Baylioll
resigned the Crown of Scotland to King Edward of England. Sherifes. Mayor.
Hospital at Leycester.
was Crowned King of Scotts, but afterward he resigned it to King Edward of
England, and remained under his protection many years after.

John Mocking: Andrew Aubury, the 28. of September. Sir John Poultney Draper,
the 28. of October.

Henry Earl of Lancaster and of Leycester, high Steward of England, founded
the new Hospital by the Castle of Leycester, wherein were one hundred poor
impotent people provided for with all things necessary.

Edward Baylioll, and the foresaid Lords and Nobles Anno reg. 6. John
Maundeuill.
continued the wars in Scotland, unto whom came many other noblemen of the
Realm of England voluntarily, serving of their own charges, and beseeged
Berwike.

The King of England gathered a great power, and beseeged 1^^2
Berwike, which at length was yielded for want of victualles. During this
seege, the Scotts sought many ways to remove the same, leuying a great army
over all Scotland* but coming to the seege, they could not bring their purpose
to effect, yet still provoking the Kings army to battle, whereupon at length
the two armies appointed to fight, and setting out upon Halidowne hill, there
comes forth of the Scotts Camp a certain stout Champion of great stature,
who for a fact by him done, was called Turnebull: he standing in the midst
betwixt the two armies Callenge of Combat.
challenged all the Englishmen, any one of them to fight with him a Combat: at
length, one Robert Ven^^e Knight, a Nonffolke man, requesting license of the
King, being armed, with his sword drawn, marches toward the Champion, meeting
by the way a certain black mastife Dog, Turnebull a callenger overcome in
combat.
which waited on the Champion, whom with his sword he suddaynely struck, and
cut him off at his loins, at the sight whereof the master of the Dog
slain, was much abashed, and in his battle more wary and fearful: whose
left hand and head also afterward, this worthy Knight cut off. After this
Combat, both the armies met, but they fighting scarce half an hour, certain
of the Scotts being slain, they closed their army (which was in three) all
into one battle, but at length fleeing, the King followed them, taking and
chacing them into lakes and pittes, for the space of five miles. There were
slain of them eight Earls, 1300. Horsemen, and of common Souldioures 35000.
at a place by Berwike, called Bothull, near unto Halidon.

In the mean season the Scotts had beseeged the Castle of Kambrugh, in which
at that time the Queen was: but when they heard of the victory aforesaid,
they left the seege and fled. The Townsmen of Berwike yielded to the King
Edward won Barvvike.
King of England both the Castle and the Town, who placing garrisons there,
he sent Edward Baylioll, and other nobles to keep the Realm of Scotland.
Earl Patritius, in the next Parliament holden at York made fealty, and did
homage unto the King by oath, who received of the King for yielding up of
Berwike unto him, many honors and preferments: notwithstanding this Earl
returned again to Rebellion, who holding Dunbar against the King, was beseeged
by William Mountacute Earl of Salisburie.

This year, William Elsing Mercer of London (obteyning Rising Spittle. 1.
Leyland.
the Kings license) made a new Hospital of an old house of Nuns by
Creeplegate, within the wall of London, ^iber trinitate.
and placing Chanons Regular there, he became their first Priour, endowing the
same with Lands for the relief of the poor and impotent.

Nicholas Pike: John Husband, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Preston Draper, the 28. of October.

Adam Tarleton, first Bishop of Hereford, then of Worcester, Anno reg. 7.
is now translated to Winchester.

Edward Bayholl King of Scotts held a Parliamente at 1333
Gallowey, to the which came the noble men of England, and made claim for
their lands and possessions which they had in Scotland, and so returned
peaceably into their Country.

King Edward kept his Christmas at Wallingford.

The Queen was delivered of a daughter named Isabell at Wodstoke.

The King sommoned a Parliamente to be holden at York, the same to begin on
Monday the second week of Lent, to the which Parliament, the King of Scotts,
(called Conqueror) although he were warned to be there, yet he came not, but
sent messengers to excuse him, to weete, Henry de Bellemount, and William
Montacute Earls, and certain other Barons and Knights, who signified that
the King of Scotts Conqueror could not be there without great danger, for
that certain Scotts lay in the Islands ready to do him damage.

At the feast of Saint John Baptist, the said King of Scotts King of Scotts
did homage.
Conqueror did his homage to King Edward of England at Newcastell upon Tine,
and not long after that King Edward took homage of the Duke of Briteine, for
the Earldom of Richmont.

In a Parliament at London it was told the King that the Scotts had taken
Richard Talbot, and six other knights, and had slain many footmen:
wherefore the King took a fifteenth of the Laytie, and a tenth of the
Clergy, to the intent the malice of the Scotts might be brideled.

John Hamond: William Hausard, the 28* of September* Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Poultney Draper, the 28 of October.

King Edward went toward the Marches of Scotland, and wintered in those
coasts, but understanding that the Earl Dassels was traitorously turned to
the Scots, and Henry Bellemount beseeged by the Scotts, he entered Scotland,
and raised the seege, and then kept his Christmas at Roxborow* Anno reg. 8.
Presently after the feast of the Epiphany, the French King sent messengers to
King Edward, to weete, the Bishop of Aur enges, and certain Lords, to treat
a peace for the Scotts, who waited for an answer in England till Midlent,
and then at Nottingham a truce was granted unto them until the feast of Saint
John next coming, that in the mean time a Parliament might be holden of
matters 1334
concerning peace, and the state of both the Kingdoms: in which Parliament
holden at York, it was decreed that the King should pass with his army
through Scotland, beyond the Scottish Seas, the which thing was quickly
performed and done: but the Scotts desirous to fight a field, they feigned
that they would have peace, to obtain the which, many came about the feast
of Saint Michaell, and chiefly the Earl of Dascels, whereupon it came to
pass, that afterward the Earl of Morefe being taken prisoner at Edenborough,
was sent to be kept prisoner in England, and Richard Talbot was ransomed for
two thousand five hundred Marks, but the Earl of Dascels willing to show that
he was truly revolted to the King of England, rode against the Scotts at the
seege of a certain Castle, and falling into the hands of his enemies, because
he would not yield, he was slain with thirteen of his men.

After the feast of Saint Michaell, the King continuing still in the Marches of
Scotland, was daily entreated by messengers from the French King, concerning
some peace to be made.

About the feast of Saint Martine, Edward Bohune, a noble man, was drowned in
the marches of Scotland, for as he was driving a booty of Cattle over a
River, he felt himself in danger, causing his guide to ride before him
through the water, where through the smoothness of the stone whereon the water
ran, his guide not being able to take sure footing fell down, with his
master being armed, and before any help could come, they were drowned in the
bottom of the Channel.

John Archbishop of Canterbury went over the Sea to Phillip de Valoys King of
France, requesting of him the continuance of peace and amity betwixt the two
Kingdoms to be mainteyned. Secondly, that all Towns and Castles taken before
time by his father, should be restored to the King of England. Thirdly, that
the said French King should swear never to give aid to the Scotts against
the King of England: under which conditions, the two Kings of both Realms
should prepare to travel toward the holy land, and to fight against the
enemies of Christ. But the French King accounted the King of England not
worthy of his friendship, so long as he continued wars against the Scotts
his friends, whom he said were just men. Unto the second petition he would
not otherwise consent thereunto, than if all charges were repayde again which
his father Charles de Valoys laid out in the wars of Gascoigne. Thirdly, he
said, that he was a friend and lover of justice and equity, which he would
never swerve from, neither for friendship, nor affinity, but he would by all
means he could, molest and vex all breakers of the peace of the Kingdom of
Scotland: for (says he) there shall never be perfect peace and quietness
among Christians, before the King of France sit in place of Judgment for
the right of the Kingdoms of France, England, and Scotland.

John Kingston: Walter Turk, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Reignald at Conduct Vintner, the 28. of October.

Part of the University of Oxford went to Stamforde, To. de Auesbery.
because of a variance* that fell between the Northern and Southern
Scholars.

Upon Saint Clements night, through abundance of waters, Anno reg. 9.
but specially in the Thamis, all the Cattle and beasts near thereunto were
drowned, and the land made 1335
unfruitful by salt waters.

King Edward had a tenth of the Clergy, and also ^^ the burgesses, and a
fifteenth of the commons.

About the feast of Pentecost, he held a Parliament at Parliament at
Northampton. Tho. de la More.
Northampton, where leaving the Prelates, states, and commons debating about
matters, himself secretly rode to Berwike, and there taking with him a few
men of arms, he went to Saint John's Town, which he strengthened with trench
and rampire, and sent his Earls, with the King Conqueror, to make an inrode
upon the Country, and to see what Scotts they could find would resist them:
but To. de Auesbery.
none durst abide their coming, but hid themselves in hills, wooddes, and
marshes, and in the mean time many Earls and Barons came, and submitted
themselves to King Edward, upon conditions as follows.

These be the points agreed betwixt the counsel of the Kings of England and
Scotland on the one party, and Alexander Mowbrey, Geffrey Mowbrey, Godfrey de
Roos, William Bulloke, and Eustace de Loreyne, having full power from David
Stravulgi, Earl of Dassels, and Robert Steward of Scotland, to treat,
accord, and affirm all points enterparled, and to be enterparled betwixt the
said Kings, and the Earl, and Steward, as appears by their letters patents
of either party.

First it is accorded that the said Earl Dassels, the great men, and all other
of the communaltie of Scotland, which shall come in the same conditions, shall
have life and member, lands and tenements, fees and offices within Scotland,
which they ought to have by inheritance or right, those except, which shall be
surprised by common assent.

Item, that they shall be pardoned of emprisonmente, and of all manner
trespasses by them done in the Realms of England and Scotland from the
beginning of the world, unto the date of these presents.

Item, the Earl Dassels, and Alexander Mowbrey, shall have lands, tenementes,
possessions, and fees in England, which they had at their departure, after the
homage done at Newcastell upon Tine.

Item, that the franchises of the Church in Scotland shall be mainteyned
after the auntiente usage of Scotland.

Item, that the laws of Scotland in Borough Towns, Shriuewikes, within the
lands of the King of Scotland, be used after the ancient vsages and custom
of Scotland, as they were used in the days of King Alexander.

Item, that the offices of Scotland be ministered by people of the same Nation,
yet notwithstanding, that always the king of Scotland may put such officers in
as shall please him, of what nation soever they be.

Item, that all those that within the conditions of the Earl Dassels have
lands within the lands of the King of England in Scotland, shall have again
the same lands, tenements, possessions, offices and fees, as they had them at
their departure, after their homage done at Newcastell upon Tine, except those
that shall be forprised by common assent.

Item, that* if they be empleded for their lands and tenements a^oresayd, that
they have their defenses and recoueries in Court where they ought to have.

Item, as touching the demand which the Earl Dassels claymeth, that the King
of England ought to acquit his lands in England* which he has in gage for
eight hundred marks, the King neither ought, nor will do it, but as touching
the Manor of Byphingdone, which the said Earl laid to pledge for two hundred
and fifty pounds, it is accorded that if the said Earl do come within one
year, after the date of these presents, and will acquit the Manoure, the King
shall cause that he have the same Manoure.

Item, as touching the Castle and Lands of Chilham, it is accorded that the
said* Earl be in the same point that he was before at his departure, and
have his recovery by law, and the King promises in good faith that he will
cause that he may have the land, without delaying either party. And touching
the lands which the said Earl claymeth to have in Norffolke, of the which he
has Charters, it is accorded that his Charte^^ being seen of the Kings
Counsel, he will do reason.

^^em, that in case any man surmise treason upon the said Earl, he may defend
himself by his body, according to the laws and vsages of Scotland, and on the
march^^; and that all those that be within these conditions, have the like
grant.

Item, as to the pardon which William Ramsey Knight demands for the trespass
by him done to William Lord Mountagew, to weete, for beating down his Castle
of Haghtordone, the same William shall be ready to do according to that that
shall be advised by the Kings of England and Scotland.

Item, that the said Stacie de Lorayne have his lands and tenements which he
ought to have within the Realm of Scotland, and if any man have trespassed
toward him; he shall have his recovery by law. Written at S. John's Town in
Scotland the eighteenth of August, Anno 1335.

Walter Mordon: Richard Vpton, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Nicholas Wutton, the 28. of October.

Phillip Queen of England did bear her second son named Wyllyam, at
Hatfielde, who shortly after dyed.

About the feast of the Epiphany, the King and the Anno reg. 10
Archbishop returned out of Scotland, to the buryall of John of Eltham, Earl
of Cornwall, brother unto the King, who deceassed at Berwike in the month of
October, and was buried at Westminster. At which time, 1336 Parliament at
London. Duke and Earls created. W. Sheepeshed.
the King kept a Parliamente at London, which began on the Monday after
Saint Matthies day: and on the first Sundaye in Lent, he made his eldest
son Edward Earl of Chester, and Duke of Cornwall. Tho. de la More.
He made also six other Earls, Henry of Lancaster (son to Henry Earl of
Lancaster) Earl of Darby, Hugh Audley Earl of Gloucester, William Bohune Earl
of Northhampton, William Montacute Earl of Salisburie, William Clinton Earl
of Huntingdon, Robert Vffurd Earl of Suffolk, to the which Robert he at that
time gave the manor of Base court, in the parish of Saint Giles without
Cripplegate of Ba^bican at London.
London, commonly called to this day the Barbicane, because in old time ye same
had bin a Burgekening, or watchtower for the City.

The same day, the King made twenty Knights, to Will. Shepeshead.
weete, Sir Edward Mountacute, Thomas Somarton, Sir Isle, Sir Darcy Richard,
Sir Damuory, Sir John Poultney, Sir de Mere, Roger Banant, Roger Hilary, Sir
Bolingbroke, Sir Butterell, Sir Simon Swanland, William Scotte, William Basset,
Robert Sodington, William Zoustes, Sir Cogshall, Roger Sangrauile, Thomas de la
More mine Authoure, Tho. de la More*
and John Strache.

In the same Parliament it was enacted, that no wool growing within the Realm
of England, should be transposed Wool forbidden to be conuayed over the Seas.
out of the same, but that it should be made into cloth in England, and that
all Fullers, Weauers, and Clothworkers of every degree, being sufficiently
instructed, and cunning Privileges given to Clothvvorkers.
in their art, from what Country so ever they came into England* should
receive and enjoy certain privileges, yea and moreover should live at the
Kings charges out of the Exchequer, until they had provided commodiouslie to
live by their art. Although this Statute seemed at the beginning to be nothing
profitable, yet in short time the art of clothing increased so much thereby,
that it was twenty times more used than before.

Also it was enacted, that no man should after that time buy any cloth that was
made beyond the Sea, and that none should wear any Furs, but such as might
dispend one hundred pound by year.

John Clarke: William Curteis, the 28* of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Poultney Draper, the 28 of October*

After the feast of Saint Michaell, a Parliament was holden Tho. de la More.
Anno reg. 11 1337
at London, and a Connocation was assembled by the Archbishop, wherein the
Clergy granted a tenth for three years, and the commons a fiftenth, in
consideration of the Kings wars which was hot in Scotland, and also to
resist the French King, who made great bragges, and showed great cruelty, for
he outlawed, slew, and emprisoned all Englishmen, and confiscated the goods
and Cattayles of all that were found in his Kingdom of France, threatening,
that he would be revenged for his friends the Scotts.

Moreover, he left not so much as one Town or Castle in the Counties of
Aquitayne, or of Poyters, that was not seized into his hands: whereupon King
Edward sent into Brabant, to take up all the woolles which Merchants had
brought thither, and made sale thereof for ready money.

He also wrote Letters to the French King, exhorting him, that he would
continue his old amity. Sir Walter Many being the Ambassador for the King
of England, and desirous to revenge the blood of two Englishmen that were
slain coming a land for fresh water, in a certain Islande, called the I Will
of Agnes, nigh unto Flanders, he caused all that he found in the said Island
to be put to the sword, and took prisoner the Earl of Flanders brother, who
was Captain of the I Will.

Certain of the Island men being fled into a Church, Tho. Wals^^g.
were brent to the number of three thousand, with the Church and all, by the
Welchmen.

The wars b^eing thus as aforesaid begone betwixt the two Kingdoms, the
rumor thereof came unto the Court of Rome, whereupon the Pope sent two
Cardinals for the reformation and ordering of the peace betwixt the two
Kingdoms, who coming to Westminster, declared before the King the cause of
their coming, whereunto the King answered, that although without all reason
they did seem to restreyne him of right and equity, for that he ought to
succeed into the Kingdom of his forefathers, the which his adversary
Phillip de Valoys did deny him, expelling, murdering, and emprisoning his
people, and taking away the Dukedom of Aquitayne, and Earldom of Poyters
without cause, maynteyning the Scotts and other Rebels against him, yet
these injuries notwithstanding, he was contented if they could take order for
the quiet enjoying of Aquitayne and other fees belonging unto him, which his
predecessoures did enjoy.

Moreover, for the dismissing of all aid that the French King should give
unto the Scotts at any time of Rebellion, for the which he offered his money,
and also the marriage of his eldest son, and also to resign all such rites
and interest that he had to the Kingdom of France.

The Cardinals being greatly comforted with this answer, departed, hoping
that all wars were now ended. They took with them John the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Durham, and Geffrey Lord Scrope, who
altogyther went on message with the Kings answer to the French King,
having full authority to treat and conclude a peace.

These being so reasonable offers, could not pacifye the furious mind of the
French King, who reposed great trust in the Scotts, hopyng by them, and
through their means, quite to dispossess, and to disherite the King of
England of all the title he had.

Walter Neale: Nicholas Crane, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Henry Darcy, the 28. of October.

The King caused to confiscate all the goods of the Lonibards, and also of the
Monks of the order of Cluny, and Cisteaux through the whole Realm.

The King took wool, to a certain number of Sackes, Anno reg. 12
at a low price in every Country: the number that was set upon Staffordshire,
was six hundred sackes, price nine marks the sack of good wool: but nothing
was paid. First the wool was universally taken. Secondly, for the half, in
whose hands soever it were found, as well Mercha^ts as other. And the third
time the King took a fiftenth of the comminalty, to be paid in wool, price
of every stone (containing fourteen pound) two shillings.

The King appointed also all the Corn and glebe lands 1338
to serve for his wars.

About Saint Margarets day, King Edward, with Queen To. Auesbery.
Philip his wife, and a great army passed the Seas with a Navy of 500. sail
of Ships into Flanders, and ^^ to Cullen.

The fourth of October, fifty Galleys well manned and South-hampton sacked and
bre^t by the French ^irats.
furnished, came to Southampton about nine of the clock, and sacked the Town,
the Townsmen running away for fear, by the break of the next day they which
fled by help of the Country there about, came against the Pirates, and
fought with them, in the which skirmish were slain to the number of three
hundred Pirates, together with their Captain a young Souldioure the King of
Sicils son. To this young man, the French King had given whatsoever he got in
the Kingdom of England, but he being beaten down by a certain man of the
Country, cried Rancon, notwithstanding the husbandman laid him on with his
clubbe, till he had slain him, speaking these words, yea (quoth he) I know
well enough thou art a Fran^on, and therefore shall thon dye, for he
understood not his speech, neither had he any skill to take gentlemen
prisoners and to keep them for their ransom: wherefore the residue of those
Gennowayes, after they had set the town a fire and brent it up quite, fled
to their Galleyes, and in their fleeing certain of them were drowned. After
this the inhabitants of the town compassed it about with a strong and great
Wall.

The King still mayntayning his wars in France on the even of the
Annuntiation of our Lady* ^j. galleyes* approaching to the town of Harwich they
cast fire therein, the force whereof by a contrary wind was stayed, so that no
great harm was done thereby. Furthermore, in the same year about the feast of
Pentecost, certain Pirates of Normandy and Geno^, shipped in Gallenes and
Pinaces, made a show on the sea about Southampton, as they would have come
alande, and threatened sore to spoil the town again, but perceiving the
townsmen ready to resist them, they returned to the I Will of Wight, but entered
not, being put back by the inhabitauntes, whereupon they sailed about the sea
coasts, seeking to land in places less defended, and after came to Hastings,
where they burnt fishers cotages with their boats, and slew many men. Also
they made great shows many times against the I Will of Thanet, Dover, and
Fulkestone but in those places they did little harm, except to poor
fishermen: thence they sailed about to the havens of Cornwall and Devonshire,
doing in all places much harm to the fisher men, and such ships as they
found vnma^ned they fiered. At length they entered Plymouth Haven, where they
brent certain great ships and a great part of the town: these were met by
Hugh Curtney Earl of D^^onshire, a knight of four scour years old, being
accompanied with many soldiers of his Country, who having lost at the
first front a few of his men which were slain by the quarrels of the
French, joined to fight with them hand to hand, and slaying many of the
Pirates upon dry land, chased the residue which fled to take their Galleys,
and being not able to come nigh them by wading, they ^^ere drowned in the ^ea
to the number of five hundred New^s being brought to the King lying in Brabant,
that diverse Parts of England were spoiled with the Pirates, he declared to
his friends, to wit the Marquis of Iult^cence, and a cer^^^^e Cardinal, what
great causes he had to revenge himself upon them, and in the end, was answered
by the Cardinal as follows.

The kingdom of Fr^^^^ (said he) is compassed about with ^ thr^ed of ^^lke,
which can not be broken, by all the strength of the kingdom of England,
wherefore my Lord king, you must stay for the coming of the Dutchmen, and
other your friends and confederates, the greater part whereof you now ^a^l^^.
The King raking great disdain hereat, staying nothing at al^, said, that he
would ride into the land of France with Banner displayed, and y^ there he would
l^ke for that mighty power of the French men, and that he would either win
the same against any man that should with(...) (...) or else ^^nestly dye in
the field.

(...) Po^^^^et Hugh M^betel* the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Hence Dar^^* the* ^8. of October.

King Edward wintere^ at Antwerp where Queen Philip was delivered of her
third son Lionel after Earl of Vl^^er. The king took upon him to be
lieuetenauute of the King Edward made vicegere^^ of the Empire.
Empire from the D^^^ of Bauare, who held himself as Emperor.

A sudden inundation of Water at Newcastle upon Tine Richard South. Nevvcastel
drowned. 1339
bare down a piece of the Town Wall, a six pearches in length near to a
place called Walkenew, where. ^20* men and women were drowned.

In the U^g^^^^ Saint Matthy king Edward began to ride with Banner
displayed, and twelve thousand men of arms, against the French King, burning
Towns and Castles wheresoever he came. In the first night being very dark,
Geffrey Lord Scrope one of the Kings Justices, led one of the Cardinals, to wit
Bertrand de Mount Fa^^ntyne, of the title of our Lady, up into an high Tower,
showing him the whole land about toward France, for the compass of fifteen
leagues, to be in every place on ^re, (saying these words,) sir, does not this
si^^en thread wherewith France is compassed, seem to you to be broken: the
Cardinal aunswering nothing, fell down as dead for sorrow and fear.

In this sort king Edward made ^ourneyes into France daily, continuing the
space of five weeks, and caused ^y^* army to travel in such sort, that they
destroyed the whole, Country of Cambray, Tourney, Vermode^, and Landenewe*
excepting those Cities which were sword to him with churches and Castles. The
inhabitauntes of the Country fled, neither was there any man that durst
resist his enterpryses, although the French King had gathered great armies
within the Walled Cities, himself lying in the strong Town of Saint Quintines,
what time the Brabanders had determined to return home again, and were entered
into their journey, being forced there unto, partlye by want of victuals, and
partlye by the coldness of Winter which* grew on fast.

The French king understanding thereof, began to move himself with his army
toward the camp of the king of England, who gladly loking for his coming,
called back again the Brabanders, and having received letters from the French
King, that he would join battle against him, he sent him word back again,
that he would stay for him three days, wherefore on the fourth day the King
loking for the French Kings coming, which would come no nearer them than
two miles off, breaking bridges and felling of trees, that the King of England
might not follow him, he fled to Paris, whereupon king Edward returned by
Hanonia in Brabrant, where he continued almost the whole Winter.

William Thorney: Roger Frosham, the. 28. of Septe^. Sherifes. Mayor.


Andrewe Awbery Grocer, the. 28. of October.

In this Winter time king Edward grew into great friendship with the
Flemmings, who prepared themselves at all times to show their selves as good
subjects unto him, swearing to do homage and fealty, upon condition that he
would call himself King of France, and in token thereof would from thence
forth give arms with Flouredeluces, for otherwise they durst not obey him,
for fear of the Popes curse, which was to be laid upon them, if at any time
they rebelled against the King of France. Wherefore by the co^^^^ll of his
friends, the Flemmings, and consent of his noble men, he agreed there unto, and
took upon him both the name and arms of the King of France. He also took
Flaunders under his government, the people whereof long after in all matters
were to him obedient, as unto the King of France Conqueror. As touching the
title and and arms aforesaid, the French king said to certain Englishmen
sent unto him, our cousin (quoth he) does wrongfully bear quartered arms of
England and France, which matter notwithstanding does not much displease us,
for y^ he is descended from the weaker side of our kin, and therefore as being a
Batcheller we would be content to grant him license to bear part of our
arms of France: but whereas in his seals and letters patents he names
himself as well King of England, as of France, and does set the first
quarter of his arms with Leopardes, before the quarter of Liles, it does
grieve us very much, making apparaunt to the beholders, that the little
Islande of England, is to be preferred, before the great kingdom of France.
Unto whom sir John of Shordich knighte made answer, that it was the custom
of men in those days, to set the title and arms of their progenitors, before
the arms and title of the right descending of their mother: and thus of duty
and reason Anno reg. 14
(said he) does my Lord the King of England prefer his arms.

King Edward being thus busied, the Mariners of the Cinque Ports, embarked
themselves in Pinaces and small beats well appointed, who after the feast of S.
Hillarie arrived at Bononie upon the sea coast, the weather being so cloudie
and dark that they could scarsely be perceived to be in the haven, they brent
in the lower town ninteene galleys and four great ships, and twenty small
boats with all their tackling, and all such houses as were situate nyghe to
the sea cost, amongst which was one great house full of dares, sails, weapons,
and other necessaries, sufficient to furnish nineteen galleys, and men for
the^: at ye length in a skirmish betwixt the towns men and the Englishmen,
many of the land men were slain.

About the beginning of February king Edward returned into England, came
unto Gaunt, where the Queen lay John of Gaunt. Parliament a^ Westminster. 1340
in childbed of her fourth son named John he held a Parliament at
Westminster* wherein the Temporalty granted him every ninth fleece of Wool,
every ninth lamb, and every ninth sheafe of all sorts of corn, and the
clergy gave him a new tenth.

Immediatety after Easter, the Earls of Salisburie and Suffolk, being
accompanied but with a few men, gave an assault to the Town of Lile in
Flaunders, which Town was confederate with the French King, but they chasing
the French men too far within the gates, the Percolices being let fall, they
were beset with a multitude of men of arms, and being taken, they were
conveyed into France, fettered and shackeled with iron, although they had
^^orne to be true prisoners: they were drawn in a Cart through the midst of
every City, Town, Uillage and Hamlet, with great shoutes and cries, railing
on them: and at length being brought to the presence of the French King, he
would have most shamefully slain them, had he not bin otherwise persuaded by
the counsel of the King of Boemia.

King Edward kept his Whitsontide at Ipswich, for that he intended from thence
to take his passage into Flaunders, but being certified that the French king
had sent a great Navy of Spanish ships, and also the whole fleet of France,
to stop his passage, he caused his ships of the Cinque Ports and other to be
assembled, so that he had in his fleet great and small. 260. ships.
Wherefore on the Thursdaye before the matiuity of Saint John Baptist, having a
prosperous wind, he began to sail, and the next day in the even of the
said feast they escried the French Fleet lying in Swine Haven. Wherefore the
King caused all his Fleet to come to Ancker. The next day being the feast of
S. John Baptist, ^arly in the morning, the French Fleet divided themselves into
three parts, and removed themselves as it were a mile, approaching toward the
kings Fleet. Which when the king perceived, about nine of the clock having
the wind and sun on his back, set forward and met his enemies as he would
have wished, wherewithal the whole fleet gave a terrible shoute, and a shower
of arrows out of long wooden bows so powered down on the French men, that
thousands were slain in that meeting, at length they closed and came to hand
blows, with Pikes, Powle ax^s, and swords, and some threw stones from the
tops of ships wherewith many were brained. The greatness and height of the
Spanish ships caused many English men to strike many a stroke in vain: but
to be short, the French ships being overcome, and all the men spente of the
first part, the Englishmen entered and took them. The French ships were
chayned together in such sort, that they could not be separated one from
another, so that a few Englishmen kept that part of the Fleet: wherefore they
set upon the second ward, and with great difficulty gave the charge, which
being done, was sooner overcome than the first, for that the French men
leaving their ships, many of them leapt over board.

The Englishmen having thus overcome the first and second part of the Fleet,
and now having night drawyng on, partly for want of light, and partly for that
they were weary, they determined to take some rest till the next morning,
wherefore that night xxx. ships of the third crewe fled away, and a great
ship called the James of Deep thinking to have carried away a certain ship
of Sandwiche, belonging to the Prior of Canterbury, was stayde: for the
Sailors so stoutely defended themselves by the help of the Earl of Huntingdon
that they saved themselves and their ship, from the Frenchmen. The fight
continued all the night, and in the morning the Normans being overcome and
taken, there were found in the ship above. 400, men slain. Moreover the king
understanding that xxx. ships were fled, he sent forty ships well appointed
to follow them, over the which he made John Crabe governor: but what good
speed he had is not known.

In the first company of ships that were taken they found these conquered
ships, the Denise, the George, the Christopher, and the black Cock, all
which ships were taken by Erenchmen at Sluice, and carried into Normandy. The
number of ships of war that were taken, was about. 200. and. 30. barges:
the number of enemies slain and drowned were above five and twenty thousand
and of Englishmen about four thousand, among whom were four Knights, sir
Thomas Mortimer the Kings cousin, sir Thomas Latimer his son, sir William
Butteler of Seortkorne, and sir Thomas Poynings.

About the same time the Scots came with a great power into England, burning
and spoiling all the Marches by fire and sword, and when they were returning
with a great booty of Cattayle, they were never withstoode by the Nobility of
the Marches, but the common people would not suffer them so to pass, set upon
them, took their booty from them, and slew many of them, and took more than.
80. Scots of good reputation, whom they kept from ransom, for the which
fact the Noble men of the Marches were highly displeased.

About Lammas certain French Pirates gave an assault to the I Will of Wight and
suddenly entered it, but sir Peter Russel Knight, meeting them with the people
of that I Will, put them back again, and made them to flee, staying many of
them, in the which skirmish the said knight was wounded whereof he dyed. These
Pirates sailed thence toward the coast of Devonshire, and coming to
Teygnemouth, they set fire on the Town and brent it: from thence they sailed
toward Plymouth, which town was so defended, that they could not hurt it,
but burnt the farms and fair places nigh adjoining, and took a knight
prisoner, whom they carried with them.

The same year king Edward besieged Turney, but upon entreatie made by the
French, a truce was taken from Michaelmasse til midsommer, wherefore the king
coming to Gaunt in Flaunders, stayed there, looking for money out of England,
which came not.

Adam Lucas: Bartholmew Maris, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Andrew Auburie Grocer, the. 28* of October.

King Edward with eight of his men, fayning that he would ride abroad for
his pleasure, secretly came into ^elande, where taking ship, after he had
sailed three days and three nights, on Saint Andrews day at night about the
Cock crowing, he entered the Tower of London by water, being waited on by the
Earl of Northampton, Nicholas Ca^tilopo, Reignalde Cobham, Giles de Bello
Campo, John de Bello* Campo Knights, William Killesby and Phillippe Weston
Priests: early in the morning, he sent for his cha^cellour, treasurer, and
Justices then being at London, and the Bishop of Chichester being his
Chancellor, and the Bishop of Couentrie his Treasurer, he put out of office,
minding also to have sent them into Flaunders, to have been pledges for money he
owed there: but the Bishop of Chichester declared unto him what danger might
ensue to him, by the Canons of the Church: whereupon the King dismissed them
out of the Tower: but as concerning the high Justices, to wit, John Lord
Stoner, Robert Lord Willowby, William Lord Scharshel, and especially Nicholas
Lord Bech, who before that time was Lieutenant of the Tower of London, and sir
John Molens* Knight, with certain merchant men, as John Poultney, William
Pole and Richard his brother, and the Chauncellours chief Clearkes, to wit,
Master John de Saint Paul, Michael Wathe, Henry Stafforde, and certain of
the Exchequer, as Master John Thorpe, with many other more, the king commanded
to be imprisoned, some in one place, some in another, neither would he suffer
them to be discharged thence, til he were throughlye pacified of his anger
conceived for not sendyng the money which should have served at the siege of
Torney.

This year about Christmas, Henry Bishop of Lincoln, and Geffrey Lord
Scrope, chief Justiciar to the king and his chief Counselor dyed at Gaunt.
Anno reg. 15


King Edward kept his Christmasse at Gildforde, and after that a great Justing
at Reading. Also at Candlemasse he kept a great iusting at Langley, for the
honor of the noble men of Vascon^a, which he trained up there in feats of war.
He made Robert de Boursier Knight Lord Chancellor of England, and Robert
Parnike Knighte Treasurer, the one to succeed the other. Also he sent out
Justiciars that Justice of Tral^ baston.
should set in every shire, to inquire concerning the collectours of the
tenthes and fifteenthes, and of wools, and to ouersee al officers. And because
the City of London would not suffer that any such officers should set as
Justices within their City as inquisitours of such matters contrary to their
liberties, the King provided that those Justices should hold their Sessions
in the Tower of London, to make inquisition of the domages of the Londoners:
but because the Londoners would not answer there, until their liberties
were fully confirmed, neither any such confirmation could be had either of
the King, or his Chancellor touching Writs and Charters in the Tower, there
rose thereof such a great tumulte, that the Justicies appointed there to sit,
feigned that they would hold no session there, till after Easter. Whereupon
the king being highly offended for the said tumult, and desirous to know the
names of them that had raised it, could not understand but that they were
certain mean persons, who claymed their liberties: whereupon the King being
pacified of his troubled mind, forgave all the offenses committed by the
Londoners, the Justices breaking up all their sitting touching the said place.
1^41 Parliament at London.


This year within the quindene of Easter a Parliamente was holden at London
wherein the Earls and nobles of the Realm, with the commons and others,
amongst other things requested, that the Charter called Magna Carta, and Carta
Foresta, with all other liberties beelonging to the Church and kingdom should
be observed, and that the officers and chief Rulers of the Kings house should
be chosen by the Peers of the Realm, in the Parliament: but these peticions
the king would not confirm, nor could not abide to hear talked off.

About the beginning of the month of Julye, King Edward received letters from
Lodowike Duke of Bauarie, usurper of the Roman Empire, in the which
pretending friendship betwixt him and Phillip the French King, he signified
that those wars which the King of England had begone in France, did
greatly mislike him, and therefore desired that there should be concord and
amity betwixt the Kings of both Realms, the which to be performed, he
offered to bestow some labor, requestyng King Edwardes letters of authority
thereof to treat and to conclude a truce for one year or twain, toward the
end of which letter, he adds these words: The deputation, and
Lieutenauntship which we gave unto you, we do for diuers^ and sundry causes
revoke again. Dated at Frankeford the fourteenth of June in the seven and
twentieth of ^ure reign, and of our Empire the fourteenth. To the which letters,
king Edward wrote an inscription, in sort as follows.

To the renoumed Prince Lodowicke, by the grace of God Roman Emperor,
always Augustus, Edward by the same grace king of France and England, and
Lord of Ireland, etc.

Richard de Barking: John de Rokesley, the. 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


John of Oxford Vintener, the. 28. of October.

This year John Maluerne, fellow of Oriall College in Oxford, made and
finished his book entitled The Visions of Pierce Plowman. Tho. de la More.


King Edward gave the Earldom of Cambridge to John Lord Henault, uncle to
Queen Phillip, and after kept Anno reg. 16
his feast of Saint Katherine at Newcastel, and his Christmas also. Until this
time David king of Scotts threatened to levy an army and to enter the land,
whereupon king Edward entered Scotland, and followed after David, who fled
before him beyond the Scottish sea, wasting and spoiling al as he went, except
Castles and Marshes, in the which the Scotts together with David their king
hyd themselves. And William Mountacute Earl of Salisburie, having gotten 1342
a great fleet, entered an Island belonging to Scotland, where most
victoriouslye he conquered it, and the same I Will being called the I Will of Man,
the king gave it to the Conqueror franckelye and freely to be possessed, and
caused him King of Man.
to be called and crowned king of that I Will. Then King Edward returning toward
the south parts, kept solemn torneymentes at Dunstable, being accompanied with
230. Knights.

The same year was a Parliamente at Westminster, wherein the Archbishop of
Canterbury was reconcyled to the King, before whom the Archbishop swear that
although the King by his counsel and consent had done homage to the French
King for the Dukedom of Aquitaine, and the Earldom of Poytowe, yet he never
consented thereto as to be any hurt or prejudice to the King, or that by his
counsel he might incur favor, or seek to please the French King, but for
that present time he thought it best to be done, both for the obtaining of
peace and also for the profit of the King and Realm. After this Parliament the
king commanded Florences of gold to be made at the Tower of London, that is
to say, the penny of the value of six shillings eight pence, the half penye
of the value of three shillings four pence, a farthing worth twentye
Florences of gold. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 17
pence.

John Louekyn: Richard Rifling bury, the. 28. of Septem.

Simon Fraunces Mercer, the. 28. of October.

In a Parliament at Westminster, in the month of May, the religious men that
were possessours of Lands, granted to the king, toward the maintenance of
his war, al their jewels and plate, as well silver as gold, horses, carts,
and wagons, whereupon the kings treasure was notably enriched. The same year
authority was given to the kings escheters, 1343
to enquire and certifye the Counsel of al such persons, which held of the
King any lands in Capite, or by any A general survey of the whole realm of
England.
other fee, to the value of one hundred shillings, and that the names of all
such should be enrolled and given up for record. Also certain other were
put in authority to signify how many sufficient and able bow-men were in
every shire: also what other sufficient men were able to bear armor for the
defense of their Country, and to see them practiced with such kind of weapon
wherein they had best skill: and being thus assembled in all parts of the
Realm, specially such as were of lawful age, commandment was given out,
that they should be ready at the Kings commandment to fight against
their enemies.

King Edward and his nobles perceiving the derogation To. de Auesbury, Gual.
Homingford.
that was done to the realm by such reseruations, provisions and collations of
benefices, as the Pope practiced here in England, wrote to him, requiring him,
that since the Churches of England had been founded and endued by noble and
worthy men, to the end the people might be instructed by people of their own
language, and that he being so far off, could not understand the defaultes,
yet his predecessors and he, more than had been used, by diverse reseruations,
provisions, and collations made to diverse persons, some strangers, yea and
some enemies to the Realm, whereby the money and profits were carried forth,
their cures not provided for, according to the founders minds, they therefore
upon due considerations thereof signified to him, that they could not suffer
such enormities any longer, and therefore besought him to revoke such
reseruations, provisions and collations wholly, to avoid such slanders,
mischieues, and harms, as might ensue, and that the cures might be committed
to persons meet for the exercises of the same: beseeching him further, without
delay to signify his intention, since they meant to bestow their diligence to
remedy the matter, and see that redress might be had. Given in full Parliament
at Westminster, the xviij. of May in the year. 1343.

John Steward: John Aylesham, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Hamonde, the. 28. of October.

Many being called to aid the King against the Scots, but not being ready,
they contributed their money, wherewith the king might hyre soldiers in place
of them that remained at home.

King Edward caused to be called together a great many Anno reg. 18 Tho.
Walsing. 1344 Round Table at Windsor*
of Artificers, to the Castle of Windsore, and began to build an house which
was called the Round Table, the flower whereof, from the Center or midde point
into the compass, was an hundred foot, and the whole Diameter. 200. foot and
the Circunference thereof is. 600. foot and three quarters. The same time
Phillip de Valoys king of France, builded Round Table in France. Scala Croni.
a Round Table in his Country, to the end he might allure the men of
War of Germany and Italy, and so to keep them from the King of Englandes
Round Table.

King Edward in succor of John Mountfort Duke of The. de la More.
Brytaine, and of his wife and children, who then remained in the kings
custody, sent the Earls of Northampton and of Oxforde, Hugh Spencer and
Richard Talbot Knights, and master William Kilesby Clearke, every one of
them having under them many me^ of arms and archers, into Britain, who entered
there-into, in despite of al their enemies which resisted them, making many
conflictes. They took as well walled Towns as other, with diverse Fortresses
and Castelles, both by assault and surrender, by which means they had the
whole Country under their subjection, conquering till they came to the Town
of Morleis, where Charles de Bloys met them with a great army. Therefore in
the Champion ground nygh unto Morleys the Battle as Morleys.
two armies made great and most stout battle, wherein the worthiness of
both sorts did full well appear: for they fought so stout on both sides, that
in the first conflict it chanced as the like had not been seen: for the
chief Captains, Charles de Bloys, to whom the French king had given the
Dukedom of that Country, and William de Bohune Earl of Northamton, who for
the defense of ye right of John de Mountfort, natural heir and Duke of that
land, the king of England had made a general over the army of the English
men, who fought so long with hand strokes in the field that day, that no man but a liar could give more praise to the one than to the other. Three
times that day they being wearied on both sides, wythdrewe themselves to take
breathe, and then fell to it again with Spear and shield, and sword and
Targe, but in ye end the right worthy and stout Charles de Bloys, his men
fleeing away, was also forced to flee himself, whereupon after many slain on
both sides, the victory fell to the Englishmen.

Geffrey Wichingham: Thomas Leg, the. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Hamond, the. 28. of October.

King Edward sent over Henry Earl of Darbie, son to the Earl of Lancaster
his cousin, with more than five hundred men of arms, amongst whom was the
Earl of To. Auesbery* Anno reg. 19.
Penbroke and Walter de Many, with many Archers, into Gascoigne, with Ralph
Baron of Stafforde, Seneshal of Gascoigne, who being come thither, the said
Earl made fifty Knights of his army, and after wanne many walled Towns
and Castelles, making many worthy skirmishes, and at length won the town of
Dagu^lown by assault, to the keeping whereof they appointed Ralph Stafford,
afterward they appointed three iourneys toward other towns, as especially to
Brigerecke (so called for the strength thereof, and also called the Chamber of
France) and also to ye town of Saint John de Laruel, and to many other great
and strong towns well fortified, which with great toils and diverse
dangerous assaults they wan: where the Earl of Darbie and his soldiers
undermining the Towers and Walls of the said town, were very sore assaulted by
them which defended.

Thus he Conquered Cities, Towns, Castelles and Fortresses, to the number of
one hundred and fifty, bringing a great part of Gascoigne under subjection,
even to Tolouse, unto the which City he did no damage, neither to the
inhabitants thereof, but that he made them wonderfully afraid: as certain of
them told me, (says my aucthour,) their fear was such, that the religious
people were constrained to bear armor, and the Prior of the Carmelite Tho. de
la More.
Friars of our Lady of Tolouse, having a Banner of our Lady in Gold set in a
field of silver, displayed the same, provoking thereby many to take armor.

About the second sunday in Lent, the Earls being fully fraught with booty,
prisoners, gold and silver, they returned toward Bordeaux, where John de
Valoys eldest son to the French king, being accompanied with a great number
of hired Dutche soldiers, besieged the Town of Agnlowne, and the Captains
thereof the Earl of Stafforde and other so entrenched the same Town, that
without great danger, the Englishmen could have no access unto them: but
the Earl of Darby bet away them that besieged the City, and e^t soones new
victualled the same, notwithstanding they were not able to raise the siege,
because they had so entrenched themselves without the town, who refusing to
fight in the field, would answer, that they came not to pitch a field, but
to besiege a Town: wherefore they continued the same siege until the
decollation of Saint John, but understanding then that the King of England
chaced his Father Phillip very sore at Grecie, and fearing, that he should
come very late to the aid of his Father, he gave up the siege, setting all
his tents on fire, and fled in the dark, but the Earl of Stafforde with his
power pursued them, cut off their tail, took a great many of their horses,
and prisoners, and returned.

After this certain bowmen are mustered in England, appointed to be sent over
sea, who coming over, are laid in garrison fordefence of the Country. Also
twenty thousand sackes of Wool are granted to the king. Moreover Geffrey de
Harecourte a Norman, came to the King, requiring aid against the French king,
who wrongfully withhelde his lands from him: at his first coming he did
fealty, and swear homage to king Edward, but afterward he revolted.

Thomas of Hatfielde the Kings Secretary, by means of Tho. Walsing.
the Kings letters to the Pope was admitted Bishop of Durham, and when
certain of the Cardinals said, that the said Thomas was a light person, and
a lay man, the Pope answered, truly if the king of England at this time
Answer of the Pope.
had made his request for an Ass, he should have obtained it.

The same year dyed Adam Tarleton, Bishop of Winchester, that had bin long
time blind, after whom succeeded William Edendon, Treasourer of England.

This man founded the Monastery of Edendon, the religious Liber Edendon.
breethren whereof were called Bonhomes.

The same year dyed Henry Earl of Lancaster, father to Henry Earl of Darby,
and was buried at Leycester, in the Monastery of Channons, the King, and both
the old and young Queens being present, with Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and
Barons, in manner of all the land, whose son was then in Gascoigne doing
chiualrous acts.

This year, the Scotts to the number of thirty thousand, William Douglas
being their leader, entered into Westmerland, and brent Carelile, Penreth, with
many other Towns, wherefore the Bishop of Carelile, with Thomas Lucy, Robert
Ogle, and a great number, compassed them in the night season, and with lights
and noise so disquieted them, that they never durst go out for victuals, nor
give their bodies to sleep, but at the last Alexander Stragan stoutely
prepared to go out for victualles, whom the Bishop Scots overcome
and Robert Ogle met, and with a spear thrust him through the body, so that
the Scotts were soon after overcome and slain.

Edmond Hemenhall: John of Gloucester, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Laget, the 28* of October.

This year was the first co^gregating, and first Custos or guardian of the
fraternity of the Grocers in the City of London elected.

The Earl of Northampton, and the other Lords in Briteine Anno reg. 20
committed certain Castles won by them in Briteine, to the safekeeping of
faithful Captains and Souldioures, and then returned into England.

King Edward prepared to make a voyage into Normandy, 1346
his Navy being ready to transport him from Portesmonth King Edward sailed
into Normandy.
and Porchester, with the Earls of Northampton, Arundell, Warwike, Harecourt,
Huntingdon; Oxenforde, and Suffolk, the Bishop of Durham, and Master William
Killesby Clerk, every one of these leading a great army of Souldioures, well
appointed, were embarked, and waited for the wind, from the first of June, to
the fifth of July, and then Tho. de la More* Tho. Walsing. To. de A^esbury.
having a good wind, they began to make Sail with the number of one
thousand Ships of burden and Pinaces, and on the thirteenth day of July,
they landed at Hogs in Normandy, where on the shore of the Sea, King Edward
made his eldest son Knighte, and also Prince of Wales, and immediately the
Prince made Knights, Mortimere, Montacute, Rose, and other.

That night the King lodged in the Town of Hogs, and the next day the Town
was brent by the Army. Hogs in Normandy brent.


The night following, King Edward lodged in Mercels, where he stayde five
days, during which time, all the Country, with the Town of Barbefleete, was
by his men consumed with fire. From thence they departed to Veloygus, which
they set a fire: then they went to Senet comb de Mount, which is nigh the
Sea, and to Garantam, thence to Serius, and to Saint Jews, passing along unto
the Town of Turney, wasting all with fire, and that night the King lodged at
Carmalin, then to Gerin, being a Religious house belonging unto Cane, leaving
nothing behind them unspoiled.

Afterward they made an assault, and entered the City Cane in Normandy
beseeged by Edward the third.
of Cane, making their entrance by a Bridge which was strongly defended.

There was slain an hundredth three and forty Knights, among the which was
the Earls of Ewe, and Camberlin de Tankeruill, with diverse other Captains,
which were sent into England, and the Lady Abatesse of Cane: and of them of
the City, were slain above one thousand three hundred.

At this City the army remained six days, and the spoil thereof they sold
to those Mariners which followed the coast as the King went. Then they went
to the Monastery in the Town of Toward, a very strong thing, and well
defended. Afterward, they came unto Argons by night, burning still as they
went, till they came to the City of Licens, where they found the Cardinals
of Clarimount, and of Naples, and one Archbishop, who offered the King a
treaty of peace, and there the King continued three days, refusing to treat
of peace. Then they went to Lestentnoland, and to the Town of Briue, and
lodged at New Burge, and after at Selelefe upon Said, and there the Welchmen
^^amme through the water of Segan, and being resisted by the inhabitants,
they slew many of them. Then they passed nigh to the Town and Castle of
Pount Darch, being strong places, and not sautable. This night he lodged at
Lury upon Segan, nigh unto the good Town of Louars, which they did burn.
After, they passed by the Town and Castle of Gaylon, which they took, and
burnt, and lodged at Lingeuie, which is nigh the good Town and Castle of
Vernon, which they touched not, and there they first entered into France, and
the same night they burnt the Castle of Roche Blanch, which stands on the
other side of Segan, and lodged at Fremble upon Segan. After that, they passed
by the Town de Maunt, lodging that night at Oporne. On the next day they
passed to Frigmas, and the next day to the good Town of Poecie, where being
a Bridge to pass over the River of Segan, the French had spoiled it, but the
King caused it to be reedifyed: and the next day they came unto Amias, where
were three great Armies appointed to keep the King from passing that way: but
he making a great conflicte with them, slew three hundredth of them at the
first charge, put the residue to flighte, and spoiled their Tents, burning
three hundredth and two Carts and* Wagons lade^ with Crossebowes, Quarrels,
Armor, and victuals: the King staying there two days, they went to Gresile
nigh unto Pountoys, then to Antell: the next day they passed by the City of
Wenneys, which they touched not, and so by Tr^solours at the water of Some
where they lodged. The next day they wan the Town of Poys, and brent the
Castle. From thence they went to Aregnus, then to Achen, where they lodged.
The next day they came to Noell upon the Sea side: the Frenchmen of Dabuile and
the Country came to the f^^rdes side to hinder their passage, with whom the
King had a sore conflict, but the enemies were put to the worsse, and more than
two thousand slain, and the Town of Croytoy taken and brent, and above three
hundred Germans slain. The next day they followed the King on the River of
Some, and on the banckes side where the King with his host were lodged, came
traveling Phillip de Valoys the French king, Tho. de la More.
with the Kings of Boheme and Malegre, leading an army of men innumerable,
divided into eight great battles. King Edward sent to the French King, offering
him free passage over the Foorde, if he would come and choose a place apt to
fight a field in: but this Phillip would not fight, but went to another place
of passage. On the morrow King Edward removed to Cresifield, where ye army of
the French King met him. The King therefore set his son the Prince of Wales
to govern the vaward: The middle ward the Earl of Battle of Crecy.
Northampton: The third he took to guide himself.

The army of the Frenchmen were divided into nine troops. The vaward was
committed to the King of Boheme. The French King commanded his banner called
Oliflam The French Banner of oily flame signified no mercy more ^han fire in
oil.
to be set up, after which time it was not lawful under pain of death to take
any man to save his life.

This banner, that it might differ from his standard, had in it Lillies of gold
very broad.

On the other side, King Edward commanded his Banner to be erected of the
Dragon, which signified fierceness, and cruelty to be turned against the
Lillies.

These armies being thus appointed, stood in the field from one of the
clock, until the evening. About the Sun setting, after the armies had
iusted, they began by sound of Trumpettes to give sign of battle, but they
themselves felt the force of the English Archers, and as for their Quarrels,
they fell short a great way. Moreover, their footmen being placed among their
own horsemen, were by them (when they were gaulled with the English shot of
arrows) ouerrunne and trodden upon, that a great outcrie was made as it were to
the Stars, and the whole form of the array was broken, and they fighting
with the English armed men, are beaten down with Poleaxes.

In this so terrible a bickering, the Prince of Wales being then but sixteen
years old, showed his wonderful towardness, laying on very hotely with
Spear and Shield. This battle dured three parts of the night, in the which
time the Frenchmen gave five great assaults against our men, but at the
length they being conquered, ran away.

On the morrow, there came four armies of fresh Souldioures to the French side,
and making semblant as though their part had suffered no harm, they come
against the Englishmen, and gave them a fresh battle. On the other side, the
Englishmen withstoode them very stoutely, and after a sharp conflict they
forced their foes to fly, and in chacing of them together with them that were
slain in the conflict, they slew three thousand men in the said two days.
There were slain in the battle of Crecy, the Kings of Boheme and of
Maiorica, the Archbishop of Zanxinus, the Bishop of Noyone, the Dukes of
Lorayne, and Burbon, the Earls of Alanson, Harecourt, Awmarle, Sauoy, Nois,
Mountbilliard, Niuars, and of Flanders, with the graund Priour of the Hospital
of France, and four thousand men of arms, beside common souldioures without
number.

The third day after, King Edward passed by the Abbey of Mounteney, and the
next day they came to the Town of Mountney, and from thence to the Nunrie of
Saint Ioce, and after they passed over a Foorde, and came to Newcastell, where
they stayde two days, and from thence they came to Caleis, which presently
they entrenched to beseege, being King Edward beseeged Caleis.
the fourth day of September.

John Croydon: William Clopton, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Geffrey Witchingham, the 28 of October.

The French King in this mean time sent a number of Genoways, and other hired
Soldiers, unto David King of Scotts, earnestly requesting him that he would
invade England with all his force: wherefore about the seventh of October, he
with a mighty power entered England, passing along by Berwike, which was
strongly defended by the Englishmen, and so ranging over the Forest of
Alnewike, they won a certain Manor place called Luden, belonging to the
Lord Walter Wake, who yielded himself on condition Sir Walter Wake and his
sons cruelly slain by the Scotts.
to be ransomed, where Selby a Knight, being desirous by law of arms to save
his life, he was taken, which when it was known to David, he commanded him to
be slain: but Selby entreated for him, that he might be brought alive to the
presence of David, who having obtained his request, he falls down before
David, requesting his life for ransom, but he was again adjudged to dye. The
malice of the Tirant was such, that he commanded two of the children of the
poor Knight to be strangled in sight of their father, and afterward himself
being almost mad for sorrow, was beheaded.

From thence the Scotts passed forward, wasting along the Country, wherein
were many Farms belonging to the Monastery of Durham, and coming within two
miles of Durham, they took certain of the Monks, which they kept prisoners
for their ransom, making covenant with the residue for a certain sum of
money and corn to redeem their Mannoures from spoiling. The Englishmen of the
Marches fleeing before the face of the enemy, William de la Zouch, Archbishop
of York, Uizegerent to the King in the Marches, calling together the Bishop of
Carelile, the Earl of Anguise, the Lord Mowbrey, the Lord Percy, the Lord
Neuell, and other of the North, with all their aid, together with the Archers
of Lancashire, went toward the army of the Scotts, and on the even of Saint
Luke, met them at a place called Bewre Park, ^eere Neuels Cross. The
Scottish Nation not accustomed to flee, withstoode them stoutly, and having
Headpeeces on their heads, and Targets on their arms, preasing sore upon the
Englishmen, they abode the brunt of the Archers: but the men of arms which
were in the forefronts, gave their enemies many deadly wounds. The Marshall of
the Scotts, Earl Patrike, who had the charge of the rereward, when he
perceived his men to be beaten down, he fled away with other that were
privy to his cowardlinesse: he being fled, the residue of the Scotts
continuing faithfully with their King, stood about him like a round Tower,
keeping him in the middle, who so continued till there was scarce forty of
them left alive, of the which not one of them could escape away. At length,
David their King being taken prisoner by John Copland, the residue about him
being taken or* slain, the Englishmen pursued the chase after them which
were fled, slaying and taking them as far as Prudihow and Corbridge. In
this great battle were taken King of Scotts taken.
David de Bruise King of Scotts, the Earl of Mentife, the Earl of Fife, the
Lord Maleolin Fleming, the Earl Wixton, William Douglas, William de
Lemingstone, Walter de Halliburton, John Douglas, David de Anade, John de Saint
Clear, William Mowbray, David Fitz Robert, William de Ramsey, Adam Moygne, John
Steward, Roger de Kirkpatrike, John Hume, and Will. Morrey knights, James
Sudelflour, James Loren, Henry Delker Baronets. There were slain in this
battle the Earl of Morife, the Earl of Straterne* also Alex. Stragy, John de
Haliburton, Hen* de Ramsey, Naso de Ram^ey, Ada^ Nilkenson, Thomas Boid, John
Stiward, Allen Stiward, David Delahay, Edward Kethe, John Crawford, John de
Kindesey, Philip de Maldre^, Hen. Ramsey, Alex. Morey, Hum. de Boys, Gil.
Inchmarten, Robert Maltallent, and his brother Humfrey Kirkepatrike, John
Strange, and Patrike Hearing Knights. There were many slain in the chase, but
there were no more coat armours found in the main battle than we have
reckned.

This battle was fought on the seventeenth of October. The prisoners were
conuayde to London about Christmas, David le Bruce except, which might not
travel by reason of two deadly wounds in his head with arrows, but the
second of January he was brought up, and conuayed from Westminster to y^ Tower
of London, in sight of all the people, and there lodged in the black nouke of
the said Tower, near to the Connestables guard, there to be kept.

While these things were done in England, the King was Anno reg. 21 Tho. de la
More.
busied at the seege of Calleys, which Town is situated in the marches of
Artoys, being closed about with a double wall, and a double ditche, hard on
the shore of the English Calleis described.
Sea, right over against the Castle of Dover. And there is longing to the same
Town an Haven, wherein Ships may lie very safe without danger. This Town
was sometime with the Castle thereof very strongly built by the force and
valiantness of the Romans, for after that Julius Caleys builded by the
Romans.
Caesar had brought all France under his subjection, he built Calleys in
Artoys, and the Castle of Chipstowe in Venedocia, or Southwales, and the
Castle of Dover in Kent, what time Castles of Chepstovv in wales, and Dover in
Kent, built by the Romans.
he had conquered Britayne. King Edward cast a ditch about his Camp, and laid
his Navy of Ships against Caleis Haven, to the intent that the Frenchmen
should make no invasions upon his Souldioures, neither they within receive any
victualles by water. The Norman Pirates at sundry times took fifteen of his
Ships, whereof some of them they carried away for their own occupying, the
other they brent, and Sir Thomas Haclut, with Sir William Borton Knights, as
they were sailing into England, were taken prisoners on the Sea.

King Edward having fortified the seege, lay without giving 1347
any assault, knowing that it was not possible to fight with his enemies
without great loss of men, considering the deapth of the ditches, and height
of the walls: neither would he erect any engines against the Town, for there
wanted firm ground where upon to place them. Besides that, if he should beat
down the walls, yet were the ditches so deep, and full of salt water, let in
on every side, that they were able to withstand all the world, with little
strength and defense.

On that side of the Town on which the Bolloners were wont to victual Caleis,
that is along on the Sea side, and especially when the Ships could not be
suffered to pass by Sea, but along the shore with small boats, the Earl of
Northampton made a Rampire, wherewith he kept away A Rampire builded at Caleis.
and beat back such boats, and afterward when the Admiral of France had
purposed to come with his Ships of war to fight against our English Ships
that lay at the seege, thinking that in the mean time whilst they were a
fighting, the small Boats should pass to Caleis with victualles, the said
Earl of Northampton meeting with him valiantly, put him to flight.

This seege during in such sort, from the feast of the Nativity of our Lady,
and all the whole winter, with a great part of the summer, and still waxing
stronger and stronger, on Monday next before the feast of Saint James, the
French King came to the Castle of Gysnes, with his eldest son John, The
French King came to reise the seege of Caleis.
and the Kings son of Boheme, and a great power, to have removed the seege
from Caleis. Also the Emperor (promising by oath, that he would remove the
seege either by war or peace, or at the least, he would victual them that
were beseeged) came with his army toward the English Camp, and lodged scarce
a mile from thence, requesting by messengers a treaty of peace. He sent the
Duke of Detenes, and the Earls of Bulone and Darminake, who parleing with the
Duke of Lancaster, and the Earls of Northampton and Huntington, touching a
truce, could not obtain their consent, whereupon after they had exercised a
little warlike iusting, they returned to their Tents. The second day
following, the French King offered the King of England a day of battle, The
French King proffered battle.
which the King on certain conditions accepted very gladlye. In the mean
season, they which were beseeged, made known their state to the French King,
by signs and tokens, for at his first coming, they within the Town set up
his ancient on the chiefest Tower of the Castle, and also they set out
Banners of the Dukes and Earls of France, and a little after the shutting in
of the evening, they made a great light on the top of one of the highest
Towers, which was toward the army of the Frenchmen, and therewithal they
made a great shoute and noise with Trumpets and Drommes: the second night they
made the like, but somewhat less: the third night a very small fire, giving
forth therewith a sorrowful voice, signifying thereby that their strength
touching the keeping of the Town, was quite spent and done: and the same night
they took in all their flagges and ancients, except their Standart. At the
last, the day of battle drew on, against which time, there came out of
England and Dutchland, toward the help of King Edward, seauenteene thousand
fighting men, whereupon the French King betimes in the morning of the The
French King flees.
second day of August, making fire in his Tents, he fled, whose tail the
Duke of Lancaster, and Earl of Northampton Will. Norwell.
cutting off, they slew and took many of them. When they of Caleis perceived
this, they took their Standart down, and with great sorrow cast it from the
Tower down into the ditch, and on the Saturday following, John Caleis is
yielded.
de Vienna their Captain, a man very skillful in warlike affairs, opening the
gates of the Town, came out to the The order how Caleis was yielded.
King of England, sitting on a little nagge, for that he being lame on his
feet could not well go, with an halter about his neck, with the other
burgesses and soldiers following on foot, bare headed, and bare footed,
having halters about their necks. The Captain coming thus before the King,
offered him a warlike sword, as unto the chiefest Prince of arms amongst all
Christian Kings, and as one that had taken that Town from the mightiest
Christian King by noble cheualrie. Then he delivered to him the keys of the
Town. Thirdly, he requesting of him pity, asked pardon, and delivered him the
sword of peace, wherewith he should give right judgment, spare and forbear
the humble and lowly, and chasten the proud hearted.

The King receiving that which was offered him, sent the Captain with
fifteen Knights, and as many burgesses into England, enriching them with
large gifts. The common sort of people, and such as he found in the town,
being somewhat refreshed with the Kings alms, he commanded to be safe
conducted to the Castle of Guisnes. Guisnes.


After the taking of the Town of Caleis, the Soldiers at the Kings
commandemente took the Manor of Marks. Hoy.
Marks, and of Hoy, and with great difficulty they built in them Fortes,
setting in order where walls wanted Hoggesheads filled with stones against the
enemies, whilst the walls were a building within. Immediately after the
taking of Caleis, there began in those parts a general Bloody Flix.
pestilence of the Flix, coming from the East parts, into many other parts
of the world, wherevpo^ it came to pass, that a great multitude of people
died. This pestilence gave occasion y^ certain Cardinals were sent on ye
behalf of the French King, to crave a truce from that time, unto the feast of
Saint Barnabe next following, which was agreed upon on the 28. of September.

Adam Brapsen: Richard Bas, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Leggy Skinner, the 28. of October.

The truce being taken as before is said, K. Edward built a Castle at Risebanke
builded.
Castle at Risbanke, betwixt ye town of Caleis, and the Haue^s mouth, to the
intent to keep off all ye enemies force of ships from the said town: and he
made Captain of the town Sir John Mongomery, and thence conueying the Queen
and his eldest son, with a great company of noble men, he took his journey
toward England by water, and being on the Sea, he was beaten with such a
Tempest, that he King Edward returned from Caleis into England, not without
great danger of drowning.
lost many of his Ships, and hardly escaped himself, notwithstanding he came
on land the fourteenth of October, and came to London.

This peace being made, it seemed through England as a new Summer had followed,
because of the plenty of all Commodities of peace.
things, for there was no woman of any name, but she had some of the prises of
Cane and Caleis, or of other Cities beyond Anno reg. 22
the Seas, whereof the matrones being proud, did brag in French matrones
apparel.

At the feast of Easter, James Douglas, who was taken at Durham in the wars,
and brought to London with the 1348
King of Scotts, was licenced to depart home again, swearing to the King
peace and fealty, who afterward living peaceably in the marches, and being
requested by William Douglas to ride a hunting with him, was by him coming
behind his back most traitorously slain.

After Easter, the King held a Counsel, wherein it was decreed that none of
his servants should take up any victualles of any man against his will, nor
but that he paid for it ready money, upon pain to be punished and banished
the Court, Richard Talbot high Steward of the Kings house being appointed to
fee execution of that Proclamation.

The Earl of Ments was racked, areigned, and convicted, for that contrary to
his faith and homage sworn to the King of England, he did again bear arms
against him, and for that fact he was drawn, hanged, and quartered. To this
Counsel came two Earls and two Clearkes sent from the Princes electours,
signifying that their election was made to the King, for the dignity of the
Kingdom of Almayne. These messengers the King received King Edward elected
King of Almayne.
with due honor, but answered them, that he would not take so great honor
upon his shoulders, until he had the Crown of France, due unto him, in
peaceable possession.

A little after Easter, there were great Justings holden Iusting at Lincoln.
at Lincoln by the Duke of Lancaster, where were present many Ladies, with
the Countess, and also certain messengers sent from the King of Spain, for
the Lady Ioane, daughter to the King, that should be married to their Master
the Kings son, whom her husband meeting, she dyed of the great Pestilence,
so that he followed her to the grave.

The same year, King Edward with his eldest son the Earl of Warwike, and
the Bishop of Winchester went to Caleis, from whence the King sent the Duke of
Lancaster to Denemere, to receive in his behalf fealty and homage of the
Earl of Flanders which thing was by the said Earl performed.

Henry Picard: Simon Dolseby, the 23. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Tho. de la
More. Great Pestilence. Tho. Wa^sing.


John Loueken Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

There began amongst the East Indians and Tartarians a certain Pestilence,
which at length waxed so general, infecting the middle region of the air so
greatly, that it destroyed the Sarasins, Turks, Sirians, Palestinians, and the
Gretians, with a wonderful, or rather incredible death, in so much that those
peoples being exceedingly dismayde with the terror thereof, consulted amongst
themselves, and thought it good to receive the Christian Faith and Sacraments,
for they had intelligence that the Christians which dwelte on this side the
Greekish Sea, were not so greatly (more than common custom was) troubled with
sickness and mortality. At length this terrible slaughter passed over into
those Countries which are on this side the Alps, and from thence to the parts
of France which are called Hesperia, and so by order along into Germany and
Dutchland. And the seventh year after it began, it came into England, and
first began in the Towns and Ports joining on the Sea coasts, in
Dorsetshire, where, even as in other Countries, it made the Country quite
void of inhabitants, so that there were almost none left alive.

From thence it passed into Devonshire, and Somersetshire, even unto Bristowe,
and raged in such sort, that the Glocestershiremen would not suffer the
Bristowmen to have any access unto them, or into their Country by any
means: but at length it came to Gloce^^or, yea and to Oxforde, and London, and
finally it spread over all England and so wasted and spoiled the people, that
scarce the tenth person of all sorts was left alive: when Church yardes were
not sufficient and large enough to bury their dead in, they chose certain
Fields appointed for that purpose.

Gualter Mayny, Lord of Mayny, borne in Cambray, who served in company of Henry
Duke of Lancaster in his great Records of the Garter.
acts of Gaseoyne and G^ien, after this time made Knight of the Garter in
England, having a respect to the danger that might fall in time of this
Pestilence then begone in England, if the Churches and Church-yardes in London
might not suffice to bury the multitude, he purchased a piece of ground called
Spittle Croft (for that it belonged to the Master and breethren of Saint
Barthelmewes Spittle) containing Register of the Charterhouse. Ex Carta.
thirteen acres and a rod, without the bars of Weast Smithfield and caused
the same to be enclosed, and dedicated by Ralph Bishop of London, in the which
place in the year Charterhouse Churchyard by London.
following, was buried more than fifty thousand persons, as is affirmed by the
Kings Charters which I have seen, and also by an inscription fixed on a stone
cross in the same place. And in memory thereof, the same Gualter Mayny caused
upon the same ground a Chapel to be builded, Anno reg. 23.
and after founded the same to be an house of Charterhouse Ro^de Auesburie.
Charterhouse at London founded.
Monks.

Also about the same time, one John Cory, procured of Nicholas, Prior of the
Church of the Holy Trinity near unto Al^gate, one tossed of ground near unto
East Smithfield, for the burial of them that dyed, that it might be called
the Church yard of the Holy Trinity* which ground he caused to be enclosed,
and dedicated by Nicholas Northbroke Bishop of London, in the which place* King
Edward the third, by consent of the said Prior and Covent, founded the Abbey
New Abbey by the Tovver of London founded. Liber trinita Land. Lib.
Eastminster.
of Saint Mary of Grace in the year 1359. placing therein an Abbot and Monk
of the order of Cisteaux, which were white Monks, and named the place
Eastminster.

All suits and pleading in the Kings Bench, and other places, for a season
ceased.

Uery few noble men dyed, among whom departed John Mountgomery, and his Lady:
the Lord Clisteles Captain 1349
of Caleis dyed at Caleis, and was buried in the white Friars at London. Of the
common people, together with Religious and Clearkes, there dyed an innumerable
sort, for no man but God only knew how many. There dyed from the first of
January, to the first of July, in the City of Norwich 57374. persons, besides
Ecclesiastical Mendicants Norwich. Regist. of Norwich An^^. ecclesi. ^^^.
Yermouth.
and Dominikes. There was buried in the Church and Churchyard of Yermouth, in
one year 7052. men and women, before which time the Personage there was worth
700. marks by year, and afterward was scarce worth forty pound the year.
This note was certified to King Henry the seventh, in the ^^. of his reign,
and the same is written on the gates of the Church of Yermouth. This great
Pestilence began at London about the feast of All Saints, in y^ year 1348.
What time this Pestilence had wasted all England, ye Scots* greatly rejoicing,
mocked and swear oft-times by the vile death of y^ Englishmen, but y^ sword of
Gods wrath departing from thence, slew and consumed the Scots in no less
numbers, than it did the other. It also wasted the Welchmen, and within a while
passed over into Ireland, where it destroyed a great number of English people
that dwelt there, but such as were right Irishmen borne, y^ dwelt in the hilly
countries, it scarcely touched, so that few of the^ died thereof. This plague
continued sometime in one place, sometime in another, until the year of our
Lord 1357. The same year for a truce or final peace to be concluded, the B.
of Norwich, the Earl of Northampton, the Earl of Stafford, Richard Talbot,
Walter Mayny Knights, sailed over the Sea into France, whom y^ Frenchmen met
peaceably, but they would not agree to a ^^nall peace, unless that Caleis were
restored to the^ again, which would not be granted: and the truce which was
taken for a year was so continued. But the Earl of Flanders, who would not in
any case receive conditions of peace, unless the French King were quite
forsaken, notwithstanding his solemn oath, not long after entered into Flanders
with a great power of Frenchmen, burning and killing where ever he came: but
the people of the Country with a few Englishmen withstoode him stoutely, and
gave him a sore skirmish, in the which, beside that many Frenchmen were slain,
the Earl himself was forced to fly, for the which worthy act, many
Knights were made, amongst the which was John de Filebert, and English man.

In the feast of the Nativity of Saint John, the Queen was purified at
Windesore, where were solemn Iustes, and running at the Tilt, at the which,
David King of Scotts Iustes at Windsor.
was present, and the Earl of Ewe, the Lord Tankeruill, Lord Charles de
Valoys, and many other Strangers captives, who by the Kings license were
permitted to run also at the Tilte, at the which pastime the price of the
field was adjudged to the Earl of Ewe. After in Summer season, these Strangers
passed their time in hunting, in the company of the King, and other nobles of
the Realm, at Claringdon in Wiltshire nigh Salisburie, and in diverse other
Forrestes.

Whiles the King was thus occupied, the Frenchmen notwithstanding the truce,
entered the marches of Britain, but the sons of Sabater, with a few other,
who went out a forraging, took Thomas Dagworth Knight, a man of great
experience, who but with a few men, to weete, sixteen armed men, entered the
woodde against these robbers, and invaded them, slaying to the number of three
hundred, but at the length being stricken five times in the face with Quarrels,
Sir Thomas Dagvvorth slain.
all his men being first slain, he himself was thrust through the body with a
sword.

Adam of Bury: Ralph of Linne, the. 28 of September. Sherifes. Mayor. To.
Auesbery. Adam Mer^.


William Turk Fishmonger, the. 28. of October.

About the feast of Saint Michael, more than 120. persons of Sealande, and
Hollande, coming through Flaunders unto London, sometime in the Church of
Saint Paul, sometime in other places of the City, twice in the day, in the
sight of all people, from the loins, unto the heels, covered in lynnen A
bloody Procession of publicans.
clothe, all the rest of their bodies being bare, having on their heads hats
with red crosses before and behind, every one in their right hands a whip
with three cords, each cord having a knotte in the midst, beat themselves
on their bare bloody bodies going in procession, four of them singing in
their own language, all the other aunswering them.

The same year the Earl of Lancaster, the Barons of Stafforde and Greystocke,
also the heirs of the Lords Percy and Neuel, and the Lord Burniual, with
Barthelmew Burwash, and diverse other, about the feast of Al-saintes, passed
over sea into Gascoign, to delay the furious uproar that John de Valoys son
to the French king had made in that dukedom; greatly spoiling and wasting the
same. Also the kings counsel ordained, that none of the kings Justices during
the time of their offices, should receive any fee, gift, or reward of any man,
except it were of the king himself.

Also this year in the County of Oxforde, nyghe unto A Serpent with two
heads in Oxfordshire.
a town called Chippingnorton, there was found a Serpent having two heads,
and faces like women, and being shaped after the new tire of that time:
another after the manner of the old attire, and it had great wings, after the
manner of a Flyndermouse or Bat.

About the feast of Al-sainctes, king Edward being accompanied K. Edward
sailed toward Flaunders.
with the Earl of Lancaster, and Southfolke, and diverse others, passed over
the seas into Flaunders, and thence leading his army toward France, the
French men made means unto him to renew their truce: and now the Earl of
Flaunders submitted himself the third time unto the kings mercy and
dominion. Then the king returning toward England, to solemnizate the
translation of S. Thomas the Confessor and Bishop of Hereforde, did with his
presence and Nobilitye honor the same, to the great expenses of Nicholas
Cantulupus Baron, and cousin to the said Saint Thomas: during which feast
and solemnity, it was signified to the King by the Secretaries of Emericus of
Padua, who was a feed manne to the king of Calleis like to have bin betrayed.
England, that on the fourteenth day of Januarie next coming, Geffrey
Cherney Knight, and many other French men should be received into Caleis,
unto whom the said town was sold by the said Emericus: but the Town being
presentlye rescued by king Edward, the said Emericus of Padua with other
Genoways continued in Caleis, being maintained there at the costs of the
French king against the king of England, when he besieged it, who also after
the yielding of it to the King of England, being pardoned both of life and
lymme, from thenceforth continued and dwelte as a feed man of the kings in the
said Town for the defense thereof. At that time the said Geffrey was Lord
of Matas, a man more skylfull in warfare than any French man in France.
Wherefore he was greatelye esteemed, even to the time of his death. This
crafty deviser endeavored by his letters, wherein he made promise of large
gifts of gold, and other sophistical perswasitions, quite to subvert the
faith and loyalty of the said Emericus.

Finally, this crafty deviser agreed with this false man, that for twenty
thousand French crowns he should let in the French men to the Town,
and as much as lay in him, deliver up to the French men both the Town
and Castle. This bargain being most traytorously, made by oath and breaking
of ye Sacrament betwixt them, yet all this notwythstanding, he wrote letters
unto the King touching the state of the whole matter, but very priuilye, how
that he was ready to show friendship to the French men, yet meaning to
make frustrate their purpose, whereby they should be convicted of breakyng the
truce, and also many of them should be taken to be raunsomed, wherefore king
Edward speedilye passed over, being accompanied with his eldest Son, the
Earl of March, and a few other, coming before the time appointed for the
yeeldyng of the Town certain days. Therefore Anno reg. 24
he being come to Callayes, he said certain men of arms within the Uaultes
which were betwixt the outter gate and the inner part of the Castle,
buyldyng a thin and stender Wall before them newelye set up, not made of
Plaster, but of counter^ayte matter, which joined to the other Wall, craftilye
devised and made like the old work, so that no man would Judge that that
any were enclosed therein. Also he caused the maynepostes of the draw bridge
to be sawed almost in sunder, yet in such sort, that ^^me^ horssemen might
ride over it: and for the purpose he had a great stone, which was laid
up in a hole made in form of an Arche, being in the foreparte of the Tow^e
hangyng over the Bridge, in which he appointed a Faithful Soldier should
be in the time to throw down* the said stone upon the Bridge, that with
the fall thereof, the Bridge being half cut in two, should be broken in
sunder, and so that hole where the stone was laid, should be wrought in
such sort, that he within should perceive through the hole how many did
enter in ^^ ^^^^ were made privy to this practice, neither did many know of
the kings presence or of the prince of Wales, who when they had wroughte this
feate, secretly conveyed themselves into the Town. The day before the time
of delyuerie of this Town, Geffrey Cherney ^^^^^ fifteen of his faithfullest
men with the g^^a^^^ part of the gold which was to be paid, who should
also ^^y^ the faith of Emericus, and the order of the Castle, who searching
every where, in every Tower and corner which they could find open, could
perceive nothing contrary to their lykyng, whereupon on the next day in the
morning, they set up the French kings standerde in the highest Tower of the
Castle, and the auntientes also of Geffrey, and of other Lords upon other
Towers and places. Then the people of the Town who kept common watch and ward,
not knowing of this secret device, were greatly terrifyed therewith, in so much
that they taking weapon in hand, began to give a charge against the Castle:
by and by the French men who had entered the day before, took Thomas
Kingstone, then fleeing away, quite ignorant of that which was devised, and
forceably they set him in the stocks. Then certain of them being sent out to
the French men their companions and masters, who lay without in ambushes
showed them the auntients and standerd set up, and all to be well, even as they
would have it, hastening them forward to come to the defense of the Castle,
against the towns men: wherefore they rising from their lorking places,
advanced themselves in pride and bragging, and came by heaps in at the gates
of the Castle. The towns men perceiving this, had much ado to forebeare
their hands from them, had not their chief leaders withdrawn them from it,
least some danger should have happened to them that lay hid: by and by those
that lay hid closed under the Arches of the Walls, prepared themselves to
break out upon their enemies. In like sort also he that with the great stone
man shut up in the hole, after that he see so many entered in* ^^^eeming that
his fellows were sufficient to overthrow the^, with that great stone put to
his custody he brake the draw bridge, by the which the enemies had entered
in, but being once in, could not go that way out again: when the stone was
thus down, and had discharged the thing for the which it was laid up, and the
French men deceived by that policy, they were enclosed safe enough. At the
noise of this stone and the bridge that brake, these armed men of whom before I
spoke, breaking down their counterfaite wall, behind the which all the
deceyte was hyd, they presently set themselves in order to invade the French
men, bidden to a bitter breakfast. The conflict was sharp for a good season,
but at the length the enemies being overcome, yielded themselves to the pleasure
of the conquerours. They which were without and had not entered, as soon as
they perceived their companions to be deceived, fled, after whom the king with
scarce sixteen men of arms and as many Archers followed a pace, the
runnawayes not knowing what company would follow them: many in this chase
were wearied, and many more slain, and in a small time the king overcame
dangerous and great labors: but at length, when it was understood by them
that fled, how few there were that chased them, fourscore armed men turned
them against the king. I dare not ascribe this Tho. de la More.
boldness of the king in chasing of his enemies, to his wisdom, but only to
the s^outnesse of his mind, the which is well known through Gods grace to be
brought to good effect by his means, though the danger were never so great:
for when he perceived that the French men had turned themselves to withstand
him, he cast away the scaberde of his sword, and comforting his men about him,
setting them in good order, exhorted them to play the men lustily. The Archers
being placed in the March against the sides of the enemies stood on dry
Hills, which were compassed about with quag-myers and foggie places, that
neither horssemen nor footmen might approach them, but they should rather be
drowned in mud than come near to hurt them: these also did the king comfort,
saying to them (do well you Archers) play the men lustily, and know that I am
Edward of Windsor. Then the presence of the king, and necessity of the
matter, styrred up their hearts to do well: the Archers uncovering their
heads, stripping up their sleeves, bente themselves to bestow their arrows in
such sort that they might not be lost: and as the French men drew toward
the^, they saluted the^ after with their arrows. The armed men of both parts
stood in order to fight upon a long and narrow causewaye, the breadth
whereof was not able to receive scarce twenty men of arms in a front, having
on both sides thereof the Marishe, in the which the Archers were placed, who
gauled and wounded their enemies on the sides, fleeing as thick as hayle. The
king and his men before, with the Archers on the side, slew and took a great
many: and many of them stood stoutlye to it, till at the length by the
coming of the Prince of Wales, the French were put to flighte: after a long
chase in pursuing the enemies, they returning back again to Caleis, numbered
those which were fled, as well as those which were taken, and they found,
that for the taking of the Castle (as the prisoners reported) there came a
thousand men of arms, and six hundred armed men, but they which served, were
above three thousand: among the^ which were taken, was Geffrey Charney and his
son, Edward 1^50
de Renty, Robert Danquile, Otto de Gulo, the Baron of Martingham, Baldyne
Saylly, Henry de Prees, Garinus Baylofe, Peter Renel, Peter Dargemole, Eustace
de Riplemount and many other, Lords, Knights, and Baronets, who were chased
and ran away with their auntientes, as the Lord de Mountmarice, also
Laundas, who married the Lady Saint Paul Countess of Penbroke in England* also
ye Lord Fenas, the Lord Planckes, and another Eustace de Replemount. There
were slain in the skirmish the Lord Henry de Boys, the Lord Archibalde, and
many others, whose names the Conquerors were not able to certify. Thus by
policy and devised treason the aucthours thereof came to death and
destruction: neither Eustachius himself escaped scot free from the snares, for
he within a while after being taken by the French men, was burned alive with a
hot iron, and degraded from the order of Knighthood by the cutting off his
heels, and depriving of his tongue by alsitio^: afterward, he was hanged up, and
last of all beheaded and quartered, receiving just punishment for his treason
and false forswearing.

This year the Lord Fur^uall giving a rash enterprise upon his enemies, was
taken prisoner in Gascoign. Not long after king Edward prepared to make a
voyage into France, but the Earl of Lancaster, returning out of Gascoigne,
signied that there was a truce taken by him, by reason whereof the passage
prepared by the king was laid aside.

This year on Saint Georges day, the kiug held a great Tho. de la More. Great
feast at Windsor of Saint George.
and solemn feast at his Castle of Windsor, where he had augmented the
Chapel which Henry the first and other his progenitors kings of England had
before erected of eight Canons: he added to those eight Chanons, a Deane, and
fifteen Chanons more, and. xxiiij. poor and impotent Knights, with other
ministers and servants, as appears in his Tho. Walsing. Ex charta regia.
First founders of the noble order of the Garter. Records of the Garter.
Charter, Dated the two and twentieth of his reign. Besides the king, there
were other also that were contributors to the foundation of this College, as
follows.

1 The sovereign King Edward the third. 2 Edward his eldest son Prince of
Wales. 3 Henry Duke of Lancaster. 4 The Earl of Warwick. 5 Captain de Bouch.
6 Ralph Earl of Stafforde. 7 William Montacute Earl of Salisburie. 8 Roger Lord
Mortimer Earl of March. 9 Sir John de Lisle. 10 Sir Bartholmew Burwash. 11 Sir
John Beauchampe. 12 Sir John de Mahune. 13 Sir Hugh Courtney. 14 Sir Thomas
Hollande. 15 Sir John Gray. 16 Sir Richard Fitz Simon. 17 Sir Miles Stapleton.
18 Sir Thomas Wall. 19 Sir Hugh Wrothesley. 20 Sir Nele Lering. 21 Sir John
Chandos. 22 Sir James de Audley. 23 Sir Oaths Hollande. 24 Sir Henry Eme. 25
Sir Sechet Dabridgecourte. 26 Sir William Panell.
Al these together with the King were clothed in gowns Tho. de la More.
of Russet, poudered in gartiers blew, wearing the like garters also on their
right legs, and mantels of blewe, with First feast of Saint George.
scutcheons of Saint George. In this sort of apparel they being bareheaded,
heard Mass, which was celebrat by Simon Islipe Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Bishops of Winchester and Excester, and afterward they went to the
feast, setting themselves orderlye at the Table for the honor of the feast,
which they named to be of Saint George the Martyr, and the chosing of the
Knights of the Garter.

In the Summer following, variaunce rising between the fleetes of England and
Spain, the Spaniardes besette the Brytaine Sea, with four and forty great
ships of war, with the which they sonke ten English ships coming from
Gascoigne toward England after they had taken and spoiled them, and thus
their former injuries being revenged, they entered into Sluice in Flaunders.

King Edward understanding hereof, furnished his navy of fifty ships and
Pinaces, forecasting to meet with the Spaniardes in their return, having in
his company the Prince of Wales, the Earls of Lancaster, Northampton,
Warwick, Salisburie, Arundale, Huntington, Gloucester, and other Barons and
Knights with their servants and Archers, and upon the feast of the
decolatio^ of Saint Iohna, about Euensong To. de Auesbery.
time, the Nauies met at Winchelsea, where the great Spanish vessels surmounting
our ships and foystes, like as Castles to cotages, sharply as^ayled our men,
ye stone and quarrels flying from the the tops, sore and cruelly wounded our
me^, who no less busy to fight alofe with lance and sword, Battle on the
Sea.
and with the foreward manfully defend themselves, at length our archers
perced their Arbalisters with a further retch tha^ they could strike again,
and thereby compelled them to forsake their place, and caused other fighting
from the Hatches to shade themselves with tables of the ships, and compelled
them that threw stones from the tops, so to hyde the^, that they durst not
show their heads, but tumble down: then our men enfring ye Spanish Uessels with
swords and Halberds, killed those they met, wtin a while make void y^ vessels
and furnish them with English men, until they being beset with darkness of the
night, could not decern the. xxvij. yet remaining untaken: our men cast ancker,
studying of the hoped battle, supposing nothing finished, whilst any thing
remained undone, dressing the wounded, throwing the miserable Spaniards into
the Sea, refreshing themselves with victualles and sleep, yet committing the
vigilant watch to the armed band. The night ouerpassed, the English men
prepared (but in vain) to a new battle, but when the sun began to appear,
they viewing the seas, could perceive no sign of resistaunce, for xxvij.
ships fleeing away by night, left xvij. spoiled in the evening, to the
kings pleasure, but against their will.

The King returned into England with victory and triumph, the King preferred
there. 80. noble ympes to the order of Knighthoode, greatly bewayling the
loss of one, to wit sir Richard Goldesborough Knight.

This year Phillippe de Valoys French King, Phillip the french king died.
deceased, and his eldest Son John was crouned.

John Notte: William Worcester, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Killingburie, the. 28. of October.

Two hired soldiers of the King of Armenia, came into England, into the
presence of the King, where they showed the letters of the aforesaid King of
Armenia, wherein it was signified that the one of them, to wit, John de
Viscount, a man borne in Cipres, had slanderou^ly charged the other, that is
Thomas de la March, a French man borne, and bastard son to Phillippe late
King of France, saying that the said Thomas should have received of the
Turks a certain some of Gold, for the betraying the army of the Christians
unto the Emperor of the Turks: and for the proof of this slander, this John
challenged a combat with the said Thomas, to be tried by the judgment of
Edward King of England, and that by him (as by a most worthy Prince,) all
strife should be ended. For this therefore were these two worthy soldiers
appointed to fight, which they performed within the listes of the Kings Palace
at Westminster, on Mondaye next following after the feast of Saint Michael,
where Thomas, in declaration of his innocence, in that he was accused of,
overcame his enimye, but yet killed him not, for he could not, because he was
not able to wound him being so armed* with any kind of piercing weapon,
except it were in his face, which was bare. For after that they had run at
the Tilte, and fought on foot, as they were striving together on the ground,
with certain pricks both short and sharp, then called Gadlings, being
closed in the joints of his right Gauntlet, the said* Thomas struck the
said John in the face, and sore wounded him: but on the other side John had
no such short kind of weapon, wherewyth he might hurt Thomas face, and
therefore cried out aloude most horribly, whereupon by the kings commandment
the combatte was ended, and the victory adjudged to Thomas, who gave the said
John, being thus overcome, to the Prince of Wales for a Captive, and offered by
his own armoure to Saint George, in Saint Paul's Church at London, with
great devotion. These matters being thus finished, the Cipres* man is
manumitted and fette at liberty as a free man again. And Thomas thinking
boldly to go into the presence of his brother the French King, took his
journey thither, and at his coming, found the said King and the nobility of
France, greatly offended, and in indignation against him, for that he agreed
that the combat should be tried before the King of England. Wherefore Thomas
thinking secretly with himself how to win the false friendship of his
brother, being desirous to show that therein he had done well, among all
other things he greatelye praised the nobility of Edward and his worthy fame
spredde over all the world, and also the justice which he used in judging, not
accepting the person of the manne of Cipres, (yea though he loved the King
himself very well) neither suffered him to be preferred before me, which am
a French manne, and brother, and friend to thee my Lord King of France*
judge over the said King Edward my adversary. Also the Earl of Ewe hyghlye
praised the King of England, for that he had received great comfort and
commoditye at his hands during the time of his Captivity in England, showing
also how far that good King had banished envy and hatred from his heart,
who at a time of iustyng, being in the field at that exercise, and the King
also, was commanded by the King himself to bear away the price and prick
from them all. These commendations did the French King envy at* and for
indignation, he most wickedlye commanded the setters forth of those praises
to be beheaded. And for to color the matter the better, he feigned that the
Earl used too much familiarity with the Queen his wife, and that his
brother was guilty of treason against the king of France, because he
committed his cause and the combat to be tried by the judgment of the king of
England. After he had thus murdered his brother, he tormented his wife to
death by famine, who was daughter of the noble King of Boheme, lately slain in
battle by Geffrey.

William Edington Bishop of Winchester, and treasurer Groates and half
groates. Anno reg. 25 Tho. Walsing. Histo. Au^^a.
of England, a wise man, caused a new coin called a Groate, and half Groate
to be coined, but these were of less wayght than the pence, called Esterlings,
by reason whereof victualles and merchandice became the dearer thorough the
whole realm.

After the Octaues of the Purification of our Lady, in a Parliament at
Westminster.
Parliament holden at Westminster, Henry Earl of Lancaster was created Earl
of Lincoln, Leicester, Derby, Grosmount and Ferrers, and Duke of Lancaster,
unto whom also was given great privileges, such as never any Earl had before
his time. Also Lionel of Antwerpe the kings son is made Earl of V^star in
Irelande, John of Gaunte his brother is made Earl of Richmonde, and Ralph
Baron of Stafforde, is made Earl of Stafforde.

In the Lent following Walter de Maine, and Roberte Herle Captain of Caleis,
rod into France, making great praes and doing great damage, brought away great
store of beasts, A fat Covv sixteen pence. 1351
sheep, and swine, so that at Caleis a fat Cow was scarcelye sold for
sixteen pence sterling. About Easter the Duke of Lancaster departing from
Caleis marched along the Sea coasts of Artoys, and Picardie, brent the
suburbs of Bulloign, but assaulting the Town he prevailed not, for that only
the ladders were too short. Therefore he wasted the Cities of Tirwin, and the
haven, also the Towns of Fauconbridge and Staples, and in the same havens he
brent above. 120. ships of diverse moulds. After this brenning the Champion
Country, he rode unto Saint Omers, and winning by force many Fortresses, with
a great pray and many prisoners he returned to Caleis. About the feast of Saint
George things prospered well in Gascoine, for the Marshal of France, with a
great number of armed men spoiled the Country about S. Dangel, where Edmond
Rose a Norffolke man was Captain, who with the garrison, valiauntly encountered
the enemies, flew many of them, and took the said Marshal and many other
nobles of France, chasing above 400. Knights.

The same year the Spanish ships by a treaty of peace came into England,
where the last year they were restrained, but now a truce was taken for
twenty years, betwixt England* and Spain, and a truce betwixt England and
France for one year, which the French men brake, by reason of taking the
Castle of Guisnes, as in the next year shall be showed.

John Wroth: Gilbert of Steineshorpe, the. 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Andrew Auberie Grocer, the. 28. of October.

About this season the old coin of gold was changed into a new, the old Noble
was worth much above the taxed rate of the new, and therefore the Merchants
boughte the old and conveyed them out of the Realm to the great loss of the
king and kingdom, to the which there was a remedy provided, by the changing
of the stamp.

About the beginning of Januarie, the French men being occupied about y^
repayring of ye walls of Guisnes town, being before that time destroyed by the
English men, some me^ of arms of Caleis understanding their doings, devised
how they might overthrow the work, and it was done in this sort. There was an
Archer named John Dancaster, in prison in Anno reg. 26
the Castle of Guisnes, before that time taken, who not having wherewith to pay
his ransom, was let lose, with condition that he should work there amongst
the French men. The getting of Guisnes by the English.
This fellow chanced to lie with a Laundres, a strumpet, and learned of her
where beyond in the principal ditch, from the bottom, there was a* Wall made
of two foot broad stretching from the bottom to the brimme of the ditche
within forth, so that being covered with Water it could not be seen, but not
so drowned, but that a man going alofte thereon, should not be wette paste the
knees, it being made for the use of Fishers: and therefore in the midst it
was discontinued for the space of two foot: and so the Archer (his Harlot
showing it to him,) he measured the heygth of the Wall with a threede. These
things thus known, one day slipping down from the Wall, he passed the ditche by
that hydden Wall, and lying hid in the Marish till Evening, came in the night
near unto Cale^^* where tarrying for the clear day, he then went into the
Town (for else he might not:) here he instructed them that were greedy of
pray and to scale the Castle, how they might enter the same* they caused
ladders to be made to the length by the Archer appointed. Thirty me^
conspyring together, clothing themselves in black armor without any
brightness, they went to the Castle by the guiding of the said John de
Dancaster, and clyming the Wall with their ladders, they slew the watchmen,
and threw them down headlong beside the Wall: after this, in the Hall they
slew many whom they found unarmed, playing at the Chesse and Hazard. Then
they brake into the Chambers and Turrets upon the Ladies and Knights that lay
there asleep, and so were made masters of all that was within: and shutting
all their prisoners into a strong Chamber, being bereft of all their armor,
they took out the English men that had bin taken the year before and there
kept in prison, and after they had relieved them well with meat and drink,
they made them guardens over them that had them in custody: and so they wanne
all the Fortresses of the Castle, unknown to them that were in the Town,
(appointed to ouersee the repayring of the broken Walls) what had happened to
them within the Castle. In the morning they commanded the workmen in the
Town to cease from their works, who therevppon perceiving that the Castle
was won, streyghte ways fled, and the new Castilians* suffered the Ladies
to depart on horssebacke, with their apparel, writings, and Munimentes, where
they ought to hold their fees: and the same day there came from Caleis to
their aid such persons as they sent for, by whose aid they kept the
Castle: and about three of the clock there came two Knights, sent from the
Earl of Gu^snes, who demanding a truce, willed to know of them that were thus
entered the Castle, who they were, to whom they belonged, and by whose
authority they kept the Castle so taken in the time of truce, whereunto they
aunsweared, that being intruded, they would not declare to any man their
purpose, til they had tried a longer possession: and therefore on Saint Mawrice
day, the Abbot (the King being busy in Parliamente,) the French men being
sent from the said Earl of Guisnes, declared, how in prejudice of the truce,
the said Castle was taken, and therefore by right of mutual faith it ought to
be restored unto them. The king answered, that without his knowledge that
enterprice was made, and therefore he gave commandment to his subjects,
that none of them should deteyne the Castle of Guisnes, but deliver it unto
the lawful Lords thereof. The messengers being returned 1352
home, and reporting what they had done, the Earl of Guisnes comes to the
Castle, demanding of them within, as at other times, in whose name they kept
it. Who constantly affirming that they kept it in the name of John Dancaster,
he required to know if the same John were the King of Englandes liegeman, or
would obey him: who answearing that he knew not what messengers had bin in
England, the Earl offered for the Castle, besides all the treasure found in
it, many thousands of Crowns, or possessions for exchange, and a perpetual
peace with the king of France. To this they aunsweared, that before the taking
of that Castle they were English men by nation, but by their demerites
bannished for the peace of the king of England, wherefore the place which they
thus held, they would willingly sell or exchange, but to none sooner than to
their natural king of England, to whom they said, they would sell their
Castle, to obtain their peace: but if he would not buy it, then they would
sell it to the King of France, or to whom soever would give most for it.

The Earl being thus shifted of from them, the king of England boughte it in
deed, and so had that place which he greatly desired. This Fortress was
wont to stop up the passage into the higher Country, gyuing to some great
suertye from the Forragers, that were to issue forth of Caleis. The Counsel of
France therefore wishing to have that Castle again, or to build another of
like utility, for the defense of the Country thereaboutes, they sent for
Geffrey Charney latelye redeemed out of English Captivity, with authority
to build and fortifye as follows.

To them that travail from Guisnes to Caleis there was a place on the left
hand strong, but decayed, having a Church, in which certain Nuns were
resident, and it was called Lalbastie: this place was so near to Guisnes,
Lalbastie fortified.
that the English men standing without the gate of their fortress might
shoot to it. This Monastery of Nuns might easilye be made defensible, for
it had high Walls like a Castle, and a high Tower, and very large for a
steeple, and being situate in a marishe ground, it might with small labor
be compassed with a ditche. This place the English men had spared for
devotion sake, until that the forsayde Geffrey, in breach of truce, with a
mighty power besieged Guisnes, and removed the Nuns from the Church, making
a Castle of the Church, and fensing the Walls with rampire and ditch: and
this was about Pentecoste, in which season the Waters not impeaching him, his
people might work in the Marishe. They within the Castle therefore being
besieged, were uneath able to come abroad with their boats by the ditches
that were full of Water, and by the Marish impassable and also full of Water,
neither they of Caleis could victual them by any manner of mean, by reason
of the siege, and wardyng that was kept at Lalbastie. They that were thus
besieged often times sailed out and fought with the^ of Lalbastie, but slew very
few, sometime with arrows, and sometime with other weapons: at length, upon a day
appointed, the Calisians, with the^ of Oye and Marks on the one part, and they
within Guisnes on the other, met, set on their enemies, slew many, and chased
many away, and finally set fire and brent up Lalbastie, and Lalbastie brent and
rased.
dismanteling the walls, made all plain with the ground.

This year, the Duke of Lancaster going into Spruce, by the advice and
ordinance of the King, his daughter was dispousate in England to William Duke
of Zeland, eldest son to Jews Duke of Bauire, that intruded upon the Roman
Empire.

This year, about the fifteenth of August, Walter Bentley Walter Bentley, and
Robert Knolles make a voyage into France.
Captain, Robert Knolles, and other, in the marches of Briteine, valiantly
encountered their enemies, where in a fight doubtful for a good while, were
slain the principal Marshall of France, also the Lords of Quintin, of
Cur^^noke, of Richmont, of Mount Albon, of Legenell, of Launey, of Montbech, of
Vile Chastel de la March, and other Knights, in number 140. and Bachelors, to
the number of five hundred, whose coatearmours were brought away: the number of
commo^s were not compted. There were taken the Lord of Brusebeke, son of the
Marshall Bertram, also Tristram de Maleis, also the Lord of Maletret, the
Uicount of Comaine, Geffrey de Graves, William de la Vall, Charles Darchesill,
John de Bause, and other Knights, with Bachelors, above 130. This army of the
Frenchmen, under the conduct of the said Marshall, of purpose devised by him,
was so besette on the backehalfe, with the steepness of a Mountain, that
fly they could not, to the end that hope of flight being taken from them,
their courage to fight might ye more increase. There were many of those
Knights surnamed of the Star, who Knights of the Sta^^e.
in their profession had conspired never to turn their fearful backs to
their enemies, of which number of Knights, there were among them slain and
taken, numbered xlv. From that dangerous encounter few escaped unhurt, and among
other, the foresaid Walter Bentley Captain was sore wounded, who commanded
thirty archers to be condemned, for that in the greatest heat of the fight
they fled.

The Earl of Stafford also entered into Gascoigne, where encountering with a
great army of the Frenchmen that were issued forth of the fortress of
Gagent, he discomfited, took, and chased them: about the Nativity of our Lady
there was taken that valiant Knight* ^ruse Gaude, and seven Knights of the
Star. Shortly after, dyed John Dediaseles, and Thomas Wale, Knights of
great valor.

John Pe^che: John Stotley, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Adam Francis Mercer, the 28. of October.

The same year, it being heard that Pirates troubled the Seas, there were
seven Ships of war ordained, certain Pinesses attending upon them: over
the which were Admiralles, Thomas Cook, and Richard Tottlesham Knights, who
scoured the Seas about the coast of Picardie and Normandy, but before the
feast of Saint George, they returned as they wished.

Whilst these things were a doing by Sea and Land, Otto, son to the Duke of
Brunswike, the French Kings feed Otto of Brunsvvike chalengeth to combat with
the Duke of Lancaster before the French King at Paris.
man, sent letters to the Duke of Lancaster, being returned out of Spruce, by
the tenor whereof he accused him, affirming, that as he returned out of Spruce
by Colein, he malitiouslie informed the Coleners, that the said Otto went about
by stealth to have taken him prisoner, and to have presented him to the French
King, adding hereunto, that because he never meant any such taking of him, he
was ready in declaration of his good name, by a singular Combat only in the
French Kings Court, to prove the Duke of Lancaster a liar touching the said
Article. The Letters were not sealed, and therefore, least it might have bin
thought folly to have given credit to the letter, delivered by a servant, the
Duke sent unto Otto two Knights to learn the cause of the challenge, and to
demand thereof his letters patentes, sealed with his seal of arms, which
Knights accomplishing the effect of their journey, and returning with speed,
the Duke sent to the French King for a safe conduct for himself and his men,
and with much ado obteyning it, he went to Paris, where in the listes, in
presence of the French King, the King of Navarre, and the Duke of Burgoigne,
and many Peers, and other of the Realm of France, he mounted on his steed in
seemly wise, ready in all signs, without default, to try the Combat, and
so stayde till his adversary was ready, and the voice of the Herault and
Canton to be had by their common oath, for the assurance of his word, and to
obey the Law. On the contrary part, the said Otto scarcely was set on his
Horse, and was not able decently to set on his helmet, nor to weelde his Spear
(or else he feigned) whose unableness being perceived by the French King, the
King of Navarre, and other, the King took the quarrel into his hands,
whereupon Otto was commanded first to depart the listes, and so went his
way, but the Duke abode still within them. After this, by commandment of the
French King, Otto swear that he should never after that day appeach the Duke
of Lancaster of that Article: and so from thence the Duke returned home by
Zeland.

After the Epiphanie, a Parliament was holden at Westminster, Anno reg. 27
Parliament at Westminster.
wherein, an ordinance was made at the instance of the Londoners, that no known
where should wear from thenceforth any hoode, except reyed or striped of
diverse colors, Apparel appointed to harlots.
nor Furre, but garments reuersed or turned the wrong side outward, upon
pain to forfeyte the same.

This year, the dearth of Corn by them of Ireland, and the Irishmen that
brought in Corn to sell unto diverse Havens of the Realm, was a^waged, to the
great relief of the people.

King Edward altered the Chapel, which his progenitors before had founded of
Saint Stephen at Westminster, into a College of twelve secular Canons, twelve
Uicars, and other Ministers accordingly, and endewed it with revenues, Saint
Stephens Chapel at Westminster. Ex Carta. 1353
to the sum of five hundred pound by year.

The morrow after Saint Matthies day began a Parliament, wherein it was
ordained that the Staple of wool before kept in Flanders at Bridges, should
from thencefoorth be holden in diverse parts of England, Wales, and Ireland, as
at Staples of VVoll to be kept in England.
Newcastell, York, Lincoln, Canterbury, Norwich, Westminster, Chichester,
Winchester, Excester, Bristow, and Carmarden.

The Earl of Northampton went into Scotland with a great company of armed men,
and Archers, where he rode through the marches, and enforced ye Castle of
Loghmaban, and other fortresses to yield, and took the Scotts that were laid
in ambushes. He also held a treaty of peace with the Scotts, who gladly would
have redeemed their King, and made a perpetual peace with the Englishmen* but
yet so as the King of Scotts should not hold his land of the King of England.

William Weld: John Little, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Adam Francis Mercer, the 28. of October.

Innocent the 6. for the desire of peace, sent the Cardinal of Bononi to
Caleis, to hear the treaty of the final peace betwixt Treaty of peace.
the Kingdoms of England and France, to whom repaired the Counselors of
both Realms, with full authority to treat and constitute the conditions of
the same peace, and at length they agreed upon this point, that the King of
England should resign all his right that he had to the Realm of France, and
remitte it to the French King, and should have therefore the Duchy of
Aquitayne, and the Counties of Artoys and of Guisnes, for him and his
successors Kings of England, without that he should hold the Counties.
same of the French King in any manner of wise. To these conditions the King of
England gave his consent, and for the assurance of the covenants,
Embassadoures are sent to the Sea of Rome from either Realm. On the King of
Englands Anno reg. 28.
behalf went the Bishop of Norwich, the Duke of Lancaster, the Earl of
Arundell, and other knights, who going to Auinion, there came to them the
Archbishop of Rohan, the Duke of Burgoigne, Geffrey Charney, and other of the
French Kings Counsel: all these were received in great honor: many Cardinals
and Bishops met the Duke of Lancaster, who brought him for the space of two
miles unto Auinion, and to the Popes Palace: at length in the Consistory of
the Pope, he with the Cardinals and Embassadoures being present, the causes
of their message was declared, and the Embassadoures of England requested to
have the covenants confirmed, which had bin concluded at Caleis: to whom the
Frenchmen answered, that gladly they would have peace, but touching Aquitaine,
and the foresaid Countries, as they said, the French King could not, nor they
might give their assents that the same should be alienated from the entire
body of the Kingdom, to the which, as well the King as they had taken an oath
to maynteyne, but yet they could be contented that the profitable dominion of
the said Duchy and Countries should be delivered, and come to the King of
England, as his auncesters had Aquitayne, but so yet as the regalitie of the
Crown of France should ever be reserved. The Englishmen requested that these
said dominions should 1354
be absolutely, and without any condition restored to the King: answer also
was made to the reason of the Frenchmen, touching the oath of their King and
themselves, whereby they were bound to conserve the integrity of the honor of
their Kingdom, to weete, that the Pope for the benefit of peace might assoyle
them from the said oath, and this as to certain articles premitted, it
should be very well done: but yet nothing was done that might be offorce to
the furthering of the peace. And so the Embassadoures without effect returned
home, the Bishop of Norwich excepted, that deceassed, and was buried there, to
whom succeeded Thomas Percy.

The King of Navarre through a brawle raised, slew Charles de Spain, Marshall
of France, whereupon to avoid the displeasure and punishment of the French
King, he fled into his own Country, sending his Uncle unto the Duke of
Lancaster with Letters, humbly besieching him that he would come into
Normandy to his aid and defense, and to receive an oath of fidelity and
amity of him against all men. The Duke therefore getting license of the King,
assembled together a great Navy at Southampton, where when the Duke was ready
to have made Sail, Knights that he had sent into Normandy, came back to
view the truth of this business, by whom it was notifyed to the Duke, that
the said King of Navarre his Cousin, was reconciled to the King, and so the
Dukes voyage was stayde.

The Friars Augustines Church in London was reedified by Humfrey Bohun Earl of
Hereford and Estsex, whose Friar Augustines Church in London. To de Auesberie.
Dissension at Oxford. ^isto. Auria.
body was buried in the Quire of the same Church.

A great dissension fell in Oxford, between a Scholar and a Uintner, for a
quart of Wine, so that the Scholar poured the Wine on the Uintners head, and
brake his head with the pot, by reason whereof, a great conflict was made
betwixt the Scholars of the University, and the Lay men of the Town, in the
which, many Lay men were wounded, and about twenty slain. These troubles
continued the space of two days, and then the Religious men of the Town
laboring to make peace, the Lay men pursued a Scholar, and wounded him to
death, yet that day the tumult was appeased, but on the morrow, the people of
the Uillages about Oxford, being co^federate with the Lay men of the Town,
came with great force, and erected a black Banner, whereupon, the Scholars
fled to their Colleges, but the Lay me^ breaking up the doors, slew many of
them, and threw them into their priuies: they cut and rent their Books, and
bare away what they listed. By this means the University was dissolved, the
Scholars (saving of Marton College) went to their friends, and so continued
more than a year. Many, both Scholars and Lay men were endited Citizens of
Oxford endited.
by y^ Kings Justices, amongst y^ which, four burgesses y^ had bin Majors of
Oxford, were sent to the Tower of London.

William Totingham: Richard Smelt, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Leggy Skinner, the 28. of October.

About the xx. of November, K. Edward held a Parliament To. Auesbery.
at Westminster, in the which was granted toward the recovery of his title in
France, fifty Shillings of every sack of wool to be transported over the
Seas for the space of six years then next following, by means whereof, the
King might daily dispend during the said six years, more than 1000. marks
sterling, for by the common opinion, there were more tha^ an 100000. sackes of
wool yearly into foraigne lands transported, so that during those six
years, the said grant extended to fifteen hundred thousand pounds sterling.

King Edward held a great Justing at Wodstoke, for honor Anno reg. 29 Iusting
at VVodstock.
of the Queen, who was then purifyed of her son Thomas.

After Gaster, in a Parliament at Westminster, the King 1355
took the quarrel of Oxford into his hands, and saving every man's right, he
forgave the Scholars all the whole trespass, To. de Auesburie.
so that in the Summer following, the University began University of Oxford
restored.
again to flourish, and the King gave to the Chancellor of Oxford the only
view of the assise of Bread, Ale, and Wine, and all other victualles, excluding
the Mayor utterly from that office. The communaltie of the Town gave to the
University 250. pounds for amends, saving unto them nevertheless the actions
which they had unto every singular person of the Town.

In this Parliament, the process of the judgment made against Roger Mortimer
Earl of March, was revoked, so Ex Recordis.
that the young Roger Mortimer, son to Edmond Mortimer, was restored to the
title and possessions of the Earldom of March, as Cousin and heir to his
Grandfather.

King Edward being about Sandwich, on his journey toward King Edvvard^ sailed
into France.
France, and the Prince of Wales at Sutton in Devonshire, on his voyage
toward Aquitayne, looking for a prosperous wind, by the space of forty
days or more, all things else being ready, the French King had his armie^
divided in sundry places about in the Havens of Normandy, and other parts,
to empeach the landing of the King and Prince, and so long they lay there, that
the Frenchmen with their hired Souldioures did fowly wast their own Country,
and consumed so many thousands of Crowns out of the French Kings coffers
vaynely, that in the end he being needy, paid not his people, and so he was
forsaken of them, that when King Edward wasted France, the French King had not
men to encounter him, but fled before him, as he followed, brenning his own
Towns, and destroying victuals, that the King should find neither harborough
nor meat.

After the month of August, the King of England, and the Duke of Lancaster,
with seven thousand armed men, and their retinue, entered France, and by the
space of nine days journey, as they went, wasting all by fire that came in
their way, and returning to Caleis, the King heard that the Scots entered by
stealth, and had taken the Town of Berwike, the Bervvike taken by the Scotts.
Baron of Graystoke being in the army with the King, to whom the charge of
that Town had bin committed, whereupon the King hasted unto Berwike, and
within fifteen days recovered the Town again, being delivered Bervvike
taken by the Englishmen.
unto him, life and liberty to depart, being given unto them that were found
therein.

After this, he passed through Scotland unto the Scottish Sea, but because
victuals failed for his army, the King giving them license, they all returned
toward England. There followed on the tail of the army, by the space of
twelve miles, Robert Herle, Almerike de saint Edmond, Robert de Hildesley, and
other, whom the Scotts in the night season found asleep and at rest,
doubting nothing of any misaduenture, wherefore they gave a cruel assault
upon them, with an hideous noise and cry, where after long resistance, Robert
de Hildesley, and John Brancester Knights were taken prisoners, Robert Herle
and Almerike having much ado to escape, for the said Knights perceiving the
Scotts to be too strong for them, thought with themselves, that their Lords
being Barons, of whom they held in fee, would redeem them, and so wily
withdrawing, delivered them from the Scotts captivity.

The Duke of Lancaster being appointed chief Admiral of the English Navy,
landed it at Hogs about the feast of Saint Barthelmew, and from thence, rode
toward Normandy, being accompanied with Philip, brother to the King of
Navarre, who desired aid of the said Duke, and requested him to come to help
him. At this season, the French King having the King of Navarre, Geffrey
Harecourt, and diverse other noble men in great suspection, touching the Realm
and Kingdom, bid them all to a feast, where he took the said King of
Navarre, and cast him in prison, and murdered the rest of the noble men,
saving Geffrey Harecourt, whom he caused to be beheaded with an axe.

The King of Navarre being thus emprisoned, his brother Phillip seized many
Castles and holds into his hands which were in Normandy and there about,
strongly fortifying them with men and victualles, through the help of the Duke
of Lancaster, being manned as well with Englishmen, as with the men of the same
Country, to withstand the Frenchmen.

Walter Forester: Thomas Brandon, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Simon Frances Mercer, the 28. of October.

The same time, when the King passed over to Caleis and France, his eldest
son Prince of Wales, having with him the Earls of Warwike, Suffolk,
Salisburie, and Oxforde, took shipping in the beginning of October, at Sutton
Haven in Devonshire, and luckely sailed, and landed at Bordeaux, where he was
honorably received by the Bishop and Clergy, being accompanied with all the
common people in the first Sunday of that month. The Monday following, the
Prince going out, lodged two miles from Bordeaux, in the Castle of Vrnoun. On
the next day, he passed through a straight woodde, and so through the middle
of the Town of Lougan, sometimes walled, but now defaced: and so passing on a
long journey, he lost many Horses, and came at length to the strong Castle of
Dandert. On Thurseday he came to the City of Besas, having in it a Cathedral
Church, and a covent of Friars Minors. On Friday Proclamation was made in the
army, that every man should bear the arms of Saint George, and it was said
that his enemies bare the same also. On Saturday he passed to the Castle of
Nan, where stand three Castles of three Lords, whereof one shows a far
off. On Friday the twelfth of that month, his army passed the lands of
Wordiux, which are belonging to the Earl of Flux, this days journey being
long and tedious, he lost many of his Horses in the wast ground called the
Laundes. Two miles from the Town of Areule, he displayde his Banners, and
divided his armies into diverse troops. In the vaward, wherein was three
thousand men of arms, were the Earl of Warwike high Connestable, Reignold
Cobham, Lord Marshall, Lord Beawchamp, a Somersetshire man, the Lord Clifford,
and the Lord Thomas of Hampton, belonging to the Auntients, and with them
seven Barons of Gascoigne. In the middleward, wherein were seven thousand men
of arms, besides Clearkes and Pages, there was the Prince himself with a
double Ancient, the Earl of Oxford, the Lord Barthelmew Burwash, the Lord
John de Lile, the Lord Wilowby, the Lord Le Ware, ye Lord Maurice Barkeley,
son to Thomas Lord Barkeley then living, very old, the Lord John Boursers,
Lord John Rose the elder of Bordeaux, Captain de la Busch, the Lord Camount,
the Lord Mountferraunt, with their Auntients. In the rerewarde was four
thousand me^ of arms, committed to the charge of the Earl of Suffolk, the
Earl of Salisburie, and the Lord Nemers, who led the Bernences. In the whole
army was of me^ of arms, Clearkes, Pages, Archers, Brigants, and other, above
60000. men, and this day was Ienken Barefort, and diverse other made Knights,
and the village of Aurule, with three other villages (whereof Will. Lord Raymond
was Captain) were delivered up unto ye Prince, wherein he lodged his army, and
resting there two days, as many as would were suffered to go out, and took
victuals, and brenned their enemies country. On Tuesday, they lodged in ye
town of Mount Clear, where ye Castle belonging thereunto was given up to the
Prince, and after he left it again to the Frenchmen, by the reason of fire
which brake up in the town, whereupon, the Prince went out into the field, and
lodged in his tents, ever after refusing to lie in any town. This day having
taken three Towns, and brenning them, he made Knights Gilotus de Straton, and
diverse other. Also John de Lile stricken with a Quarrel at Austage, died. On
Wednesday and Thurseday he lay still, and on Friday he came before the strong
town of Loegeron, where he lodged in his tents. On Saturday he came before
Placence, a very fair town, and a strong, the inhabitants whereof fled away
into ye Castle, where the Earl of Molesni, and many Knights were taken by
Captain de la Bouch, and the Lord Mountferrant, and de Loachis, who was y^ day
made Knight. On Sunday S. Lukes day, they staid at Ewant, and taking the fort
of Galian by force, they set it on fire, and brent it. On Monday casting fire
in the towns of Placence, they passed along, leaving the town of Beal Marchi
on the right hand, and lodged before the Town of the Archbishop of Anfer,
called Le Base. On this day, Richard Stafford, brother unto the Earl of
Stafford, led his men with his Ancient toward ye town, and on the next day
being Tuesday, ye town was yielded unto him, and because it belo^ged to ye
Church, the Prince would not suffer any man to enter into it, excepting certain
persons appointed of purpose, for the delivering of victuals. On Wednesday they
leaving ye fair town of Escamount, on ye left hand, they came before the noble
town of Merand, belonging to ye Earl of Commege, which was full of armed
soldiers, and the Prince lodged in the great Monastery of Bartons, in ye
which Abbey, there was not so much as one living creature found. On Thurseday
they lay still, doing no harm to the said Abbey. On Friday they went out of
the fair and rich Country of Arminake, and entered the Country of Austerike,
through the which, the passage was very hard and hilly, and lodging at Saxaunt
a town, they set it on fire, contrary to the commandment of ye Prince. All that day, and three days following, they passed along by the high hills of
Aragon. On Saturday, they came to the town of S. More, where ye rereward of
the army lodged in a great Monastery of black Monks, which were all fled
away: the middleward at Vilfrankes, and the vaward at Tremaine: these villages
being very rich, and full of victualles, had no man in the^, for all the
inhabitants were fled. Sunday, the xxiiij. of October, they passed a certain
foord, and entered into the lands of ye Earl of Comenge, which reached unto
Tolouse, but these Countries were wasted with fire and sword, and leaving on the
left hand the Town called Sannetere in Austrike, they passed by the strong
City of Winbers, where Pope John the 22. removing the black Monks, erected a
Bishops sea, and they were lodged in a great and rich town called Sotanco,
belonging to ye Earldom of Comenge, where was a coue^t of friars Minors: and
burning this town, on Monday they passed through a goodly wide country, very
plain, and so came to the towns of S. Foy, and S. Litz. On Tuesday they
rested, and on Wednesday being the feast of Simon and Jude, the army passed
through ye River of Gerou^d, being a water very fierce, stony, and terrible:
and again the same day, through ye River of Arage, much more dangerous, and
came unto Tolouse: before that time, never durst any horsema^ pass over these
waters, wherefore ye people of this country being wonderfully made aferd,
could not tell what to do, for being sodeinly taken, they could not flee: that
night, the Prince lodged at Falgard, a little town, one mile from Tolouse. On
Tuesday, they came unto the fair and great town called Mount Gistard, being
part of the inheritance of the Lord Almerike de la Fossad, the which Town the
French King had taken from him, because he was ye King of Englands feed man.
Fast by the said Town were twelve Windmilles, the which they set on fire all
at once. There were taken two espies, that certified the Prince that the Earl
of Arminake was at Tolouse, and the Connestable of France at Mount Maban, four
leagues from Tolouse. On Friday, they passed on toward Auinion, by the good
town of Basige, and the town called Frank, and the whole army lodged at the
great Town called Auion^t, and the middleward and rereward lay in one side of
the suburbs, and the vaward lay on the other side of the Town, which the
Townsmen perceiving, fled every one. There was about this Town twenty
Windmilles, which they set on fire. On Saturday the last of October, they
lodged in the great Town called Clastalnannar, where a Church of Chanons, a
coue^t of Friars Minors, and another of Carmelites, with an Hospital, and a
Uillage called Les mauns de Pucels, with a covent of Friars Augustines, were al
consumed with fire. On Sunday, the feast of All Saints, the army rested, out
of the which army, certain going to take booties, they took a little town,
the inhabitants whereof to be spared from spoiling, gave them x. M. Florens of
gold. On monday, they marched along by the Towns of S. Mathele Port, and the
great Town called Vilkapinch, and from thence, they entered the Country of
Carkason, and the Prince lodged at a little Uillage called Alse. On Tuesday
they came to Carkason, a fair town, rich and well built, bigger than London.
Within the walls, betwixt the town of Senburge, and the City being double
walled, there ran a goodly water, which passed under a fair stone Bridge, at
the foot whereof, were four couents of Religions, of ye which, the Friars ran
not away, but the other fled into the City. The whole army was lodged in the
town, which abounded with Muskadell, and all other delicate victuals: this
day, the sons of the Lord Libret, and Master Basset, with Rowland Daues, and
many other, were made Knights. On Wednesday and Thurseday, the army lying
still in the Town, and having made a truce, they parlied with them of the
City concerning a peace, the Citizens Carkason in France burned.
offering for saving the Town from burning 250000. of golden Souses: the
Prince answered, he came not for gold, but to take Cities and Towns, together
with their inhabitants, and the next day commanded the Town to be brent. On
Friday, the Town being brent, the army departed, leaving on the left hand the
Castle of Botenake untouched, passing through the champion Country, burning
Towns called La Rustican, and all the Country thereabout. On Saturday they
trauayled through a great wind and dust, leaving on the left hand a great
poole of fresh water, being in compass about thirty leagues, and is called
Casibon. They came to a Town called Silony, which was yielded to the Prince,
and therefore never touched: and the Prince was lodged that night at a good
Town called Canet. On Sunday the eight of November, they passed the water of
Sandey, partly at the Foord called Chastel de Terre, and partly over a Bridge,
and so trauayled betwixt high hills, unto the great City of Narbon, whereof
that Country taking his name, is called Gallia Narbonensis. This City was
very strong, and well walled, having in it a great Cathedral Church: also, a
notable Castle, belonging to the Bishop, and a very strong Tower for the Earl
of the same Town. It had also a Suburb called a Borough, much bigger, and
better built, than the Borough of Carkason. In the Borough, were four Couents
of Religious persons. Betwixt the Borough and the City, there runs a water
called Ande, coming from Carkason, and runs into the Greekish Sea. Betwixt
the City and the Borough are two Bridges of stone, and the third of timber,
built with storehouses for diverse Merchandises. The Prince was lodged in the
house of Carmelite Friars. On Tuesday the Borough being set on fire, the army
passing to the water side, went over it in diverse places. From thence, they
went and lodged at the Town and Castle of Ambion. On Wednesday they traveled
an evil journey, and hurtful to the Horse for lack of water. On Thurseday,
Theodorike Dale, Porter of the Princes Chamber, was made Knight: thence the
Army passed by a good town called Vlmes: the middleward passed unto the good
Town of the Earl of Lile, called Arnile, where they lodged that night. The
Prince lay at the Friars Minors, where was great abundance of Muskadell,
being provided for the Countess of the I Will, which was all spoiled. This day
also, the good Town of Pipions was destroyed, with the Castle thereof called
Redote. On Friday, the army passing by a long stony way, lodged at Lamian. On
Saturday, returning back toward Gascoigne, they left on their right hand the
great poole of Esbone, and Carkason, and all the journey that they went
before, and the rereward lodged at a good Town called Abier, and the
middleward at Puch^iancies, where a Castle being defended, withstoode them a
season, but at length was won, and the Prince lay beyond the Bridge, by a
fair running water, on both sides whereof, the Country was spoiled with fire,
together with the good Town of Pesaunce, where the vawarde was lodged y^
night. On Sunday they traveled a* long journey, because the Prince should be
lodged in the great Abbey of our Lady de Prolion, where in several Cloisters,
did live 100* Predicants, whereunto, the Prince was deuoutely received. In y^
day, the army set on fire ye town of Lemeins, where there was far greater
Couents of Religions, than at Carkason. Also, they brent the fair Town called
Falanges, unto which town belonged xxj. Windmilles. They brent also the towns
of Vnlard, and Serre, with all ye whole Country lying theraboutes. On Monday
the middleward lodged at the good town called Dealpuhbon, which long time was
defended, but at length gotten by force, the Castle whereof yielded, unto the
which Town and Castle, the Prince commanded that no harm should be done by
fire. On Tuesday early passing over ye river of Beseile, they entered into a
country which was broad. About one aclocke, they came before a great Abbey
called Bourgbon, where the Earl of Fluxens with great joy received the Prince,
he being newly escaped out of prison from Paris, where he had lain by the
space of two years: and the said Earl remained from that time faithful to the
Prince. This day they rode in the Lordships and seigniories of the same Earl,
by the Towns of Masell and Colmon, and on the right hand they passed by the
great Town of Saint Canole, and the high Castle called Hautripe: but on this
day they brent nothing for reverence of the foresaid Earl and his Uineyards,
but passed again over the water of Arage, leaving also Tolous as they did at
the first: but then one mile on the left hand, and now four leagues on the
right, and the middle ward was lodged in the great Town of Mermount, which
together with the Castle was brent. On Wednesday, they passed by the Castle
of the Earl of Flux* called Mounthane, at the foot whereof, all the horsemen
passed over the great water of Geround, and there took the Town and Castle
of North, then leaving the River of Gerond on the left hand, and so passed unto
the town of Marconaw, which they took: then they returned over the River
again, and took the strong Town of Carbone. On Thurseday ye army rested. On
Friday word was brought to the Prince that the French were up, and had gathered
a great force, which they had divided into five great battles, being in the
field not far from them, wherevpo^ our men set themselves in battle array,
about one mile from the place where they lodged, and being now ready to
fight, some one of the Souldioures by chance start a Hare, whereupon a great
shout was made, which the enemies hearing, they sent out forty light
Horsemen, to see what was the cause thereof, who drawing nigh to the English
army, and perceiving them to be set in battle array, returned back again,
and declared what they had seen: whereupon presently the whole army of
Frenchmen fled with great fear. The same day, Barthelmew Burwash, John
Chandos, and James de Audley, with xxiiij. light horsemen, were appointed
scoutes, and coming to y^ tail of y^ Frenchmen, they took prisoners xxxij.
Knights and gentlemen, amongst whom, they took the Earl of Romeme, also they
slew many Carters and Wagoners. The Prince lodged in ye town of Muwose. On
Saturday they marched to the Castle of Oradrie, in which Castle the Prince
lodged, and in the morning they brent it. On Sunday the two and twentieth of
November, about evening, they perceived that their enemies were on the other
side of ye great Hill hard by the great town of Gemount, so that the English
men being be-nighted, sent out. lx. light horssemen, and certain bowmen unto
the right hand of the town called Auremount, where finding. 400. men of
arms of the Conestable of France, they chased them out of the Town, and
slew and took many: the middle Ward lodged at Auremount, and the Uawarde at
Colimont. Earelye in the morning the Wagoners being commanded to remain in
the Town of Auremount, all the residue being divided into troops, went into
the field, waiting for the coming of their enemies, all in vain: for the
Prince taking the Town of Gamount, was told that his enemies fled away at
midnight. On Twesday the army lodged in the field, and for lack of Water,
their horse were feign to drink Wine, whereof it came to pass, that the
next day their horses were so drunk they could not go right forth, and
many of them dyed. On Saint Katherines day, with much a do they came to
Water, and leaving the Town of Florence on their right hand, they passed to
the great town called Silard, and the middle ward was lodged at a Town
called Realmount, which they took by maine force, and therefore brent it. On
Thursday they rested. On Friday they trauayled a long journey, by Walled towns
and strong Castles, the middle ward lodged at Serde. On Saturday they passed
over a certain Water with great difficulty, and through woods, till they came
to a good Town called Mesin. On Sunday the Prince rested, and took homage and
oaths of the Townsmen. Monday Saint Andrews day traveling a long journey,
they came to the Town of Tolows, where were three Castles. On Twesday the
prince traveled to the Castle of Melan, where he lodged. On Wednesday the
Prince came to Regla, where his horses and Wagons passed through the river of
Gerond. In this Anno reg. 30
town of Regla, the Prince appointed diverse Barons and such like to Winter
in diverse places of the Marches, to the intent they should keep the inland
parts of Gascoigne against the French men.

The Prince of Wales touching these matters aforesaid, and for other
considerations also, caused a new coin of gold to be made in Gascoigne,
being busied himself about the repayring of such things as were decayed and
thrown down. And in this season, there sprang up a foolish fantasy in the
French men's heads, that the King of England was come into Normandy, the
cause of which rumor rose up, for that the Duke of Lancaster, after that he
had fortifyed the strong places belonging to the King of Nauar, which were in
the I Will of Constance and other places, did direct his journey toward
Brytaine, whereof he was newly made chief Captain. Another cause was this,
Phillippe brother to 1356
the King of Nauar, came into England, and earnestly craved aid of the King,
against the French King, who kept his brother in prison, that he might by
force of arms restoare all such lands unto him as were wrongfully withholden
from him, whereupon he offering to do homage and fealty, he had (of the
Kings appoyntmente,) Miles Stapleton, a man of great integrity, and in
martial affairs very skilful, him (I say) the king appointed to be his
faithful fellow. These men with two thousand men well appointed traveling
through Normandy, took towns and Fortresses, burning diverse of them,
passing along till they came to a Castle nine leagues distaunte from the City
of Paris: neither did they a^lake their travail, until they had forced their
enymies to enter into a yearelye truce. By this means a great report and no
less fear filled the hearts of all French men, which report at length came
to the ears of the Prince lying at Regla, wherefore he gathering all the power
he had with him in his Dukedom, to the intent to meet his Father, which he
must do by traveling through France, he came at length to Brugetat, where
he was certifyed that the Earl of Armenia, would after his departure have
spoiled the Country, and for that intent had provided a great band of men:
wherefore he sent back to the governor of Gascoigne, unto Barnarde de
Libret, and other. From thence the prince went into France, through the coasts
of Barny and Lymon, still encouraging his men against their enemies, sending
before him John Chandos, James Dawdeley, and other accomplices, to try out the
state of their enemies country, least perhaps some crafty ambushment might
suddenly assault our men, before they were ware. He himself removing his camp
every day, and now being entered into Pictauia, his espies brought word that
the French king had gathered a great army, being now in Aurelian, who also
knew of the Princes coming, for he sent out espies to discover our army,
amongst who^ Griffin Micco of Chambly, petie Captain of two hundred men,
meeting with other espies, came to his coaste: for our espies took thirty of
the^, and slew the residue, so that there was not one of them left to carrye
word what was become of their fellows. Our espies proceeded toward
Romerentine, where meeting with the Lord Crone, and Lord Brisgande, they set
upon them and slew them, their chief Captains being forced to flee to a
castle, and having taken their lodging in a town, the prince commanded that on
the morning a great assault should be given to the^ of ye Castle. The day
following our men being al armed, passed through the ditches, and came unto ye
walls of the Castle, some applied to scale ye wall with ladders, some burn the
gates, and entering, slew a great many of the chief men, but ye Lords before
named fled unto the principal tower of ye castle: but ye prince determined not
to depart, til they that were besieged, were either taken or yielded: at length
the Castle being undermined, the men besieged, with all humility yielded up
the Castle. After this the spies declared that the French King was come down
to Turon, to provide armies to go against the Prince, of the which tidings the
Prince being glad, he pighte his tents against the French King, but could
not pass the river of Ledger, by reason of great floudes, and the French King
had broken all the bridges, to the intent there should be no passage
betwixt the Prince and the Duke of Lancaster, whose armies might well every
night perceive each others fires in the Camps: but the Prince following
along the river of Legers Eastwarde, he pyghte his tents near unto Turon,
where loking for the French King four days, hoping to fight with him, for
that he was distaunte but one league off, he understood that the French King
was retired back to Blamia, ten leagues off: passing over by a Bridge the
River of Legers at a place used betwixt two strong Towns, and so toward
Poyters. This retyring of the French king certifyed, the Prince returned
back, intending to have met him in his way, which he could not do: yet
crossing over all, as he imagined the nerer way, he set upon the tail of his
enymies, and cut from them the Earls of Inyni and Winters, and also the
Marshall of Burgonie, these being taken, died, as was thought, through the
great toil they had taken: night drawing on, our men gave themselves to rest
in a wood, intending the next day to take their journey toward Poiters, and by
the way they were certifyed that the French King, with great provision
prepared himself to battle, and drew nigh to our tents: The Battle of
Poyters.
the Prince therefore committed the vawarde of the army to the Earls of
Warwick and Oxford, the middle ward was guided by the Prince, and the rerewarde
was led by the Earls of Salisburie and Suffolk. In all the whole army of the
Prince there was not above four thousand men of arms, one thousand armed
soldiers, and two thousand Archers. The pompous nobility of the French men
drew nygh, greatly disdayning the small company of the English men, for they
had in number eight thousand fighting soldiers, they had also seven
auntients. At this matter a great many of our men murmured, because of late, a
great part of our army was sent to defend Gascoigne. There was among the
French men a certain Scotte called William Douglas, a man of great force and
practice in the Wars: this manne did the French king make Knight, and because
he knew he would be a deadly enemy to the English men, he gladlye hearkened
to his aduices. This William was Captain over two hundred Scotts: these men
understood well that it was the custom of the English men in those days to
fight on foot, in which point they followed the Scotts, and the Scots also
provoked the French king and other French men to fight in like manner. The
French king obeying his foolish counsel, gladly agreed unto his sayings,
whereupon he sent light horssemen into the City, that they should suffer
no man to make any chase, but only. 500. horssemen well appointed to come out
against the Archers, in the beginning of the conflict, and to run them over
and to tread them under their horse feet: but these performed not that
which was commanded them, as it appeared by the sequel thereof. The armies
being set in a readiness on both sides for to fight early on Sunday in the
morning, which was notable fair, behold there came the Cardinal of
Petragoren, and charged the prince, in the name of God who was crucified, that
it might please him to defer the war for a time, both for ecclesiastical
peace, and also for the sparing of Christian blood, and to the end there might
be a treaty had of peace, the which he promised should be performed with
great honor on both sides. The Prince neither feared nor refused peace, but
modestly agreed to the request of this Father. All this day now being
appointed for the obtaynyng of peace, the army of the French men increased by
the number of a thousand men of arms, and also of other. On the morrow
after, the Cardinal came again from the French king, in his behalf to
request a truce, which should endure for one whole year, the which the Prince
denied, yet at the importunate suit of that Cardinal, he granted a truce to
continue till Christmasse next coming. Therefore the Cardinal returning to
the French King, requested him of pledges for the truce, but the Marshall
Dawdenam, Geffrey de Charney, and Douglas the Scot, persuaded him that by
common reason it could not come to pass that the English men should at that
time prevail, and especially, because they were but few, and in a strange
Country, and wearyed out miserably with their toil in travel, and therefore
not ableto endure so great a number of the French men of France, who stood in
defense of their own land. The Prince of Wales being certified, that the
Captains of the French, would have no kind of peace, but such as they could get
by force of arms, and calling his men together, he made to them an Oration
first in general, and then to his Archers as follows: your ma^hoode (says
he) has bin always known to me, in great dangers, which shows yt you are
not degenerate from true sons of English men, but to be descended from the
blood of them which heretofore were under my fathers dukedom, and his
predecessors kings of England, unto whom no labor was paineful, no place
invincible, no ground impassable, no Hill (were it never so high) inaccessible,
no tower vnscaleable, no army inpenitrable, no armed soldier, or whole hosts
of men was formidable. Their lively couragiousnesse tamed the French men, the
Ciprians, the Siracusians, the Galabrians, and the Plestinis, and brought under
the stiff necked Scotts, and unruly Irish men, yea and the Walsh men also,
which could well endure all labor. Occasion, time, and dangers, makes of
fearful, very strong and stout, and does many times of dull witted men
make witty: honor also, and love of the Country, and the desire of the rich
spoil of the French men, does stir you up to follow your fathers steps*
Wherefore follow your auntients, and wholly be intentive to follow the
commandment of your Captains as well in mind as in body, that if victory
come with life, we may still continue in firm friendship together, having
always one will, and one mind: but if envious Fortune (which God forbid)
should let us at this present, to run the race of all flesh, and that we
end both life and labor together, be you sure that your names shall not want
eternal fame and heavenly joy, and we also with these gentlemen our
companions, will drink of the same cup, that you shall do, unto whom it shall
be an eternal glory and name, to have won the nobility of France: but to
overcome (as God forbid) is not to be ascribed unto the danger of time, but to
the courage of the men. Having spoken these words, he perceived that there was
a Hill hard by, which was planted on the top with hedges and ditches, the
inside whereof was very plain, and a pasture field on the one side thereof,
with many roughe bushes, and on the other side it was all planted with vines,
and the residue was plain, in the top whereof he did imagine the army of the
French to lie betwixt our men and the Hill. There was great and low vallyes, and
a piece of marish ground. One company of the Prince finding out a narrow
passage, entered the valley and took the Hill, where among the bushes they hid
themselves, taking the advantage of the place. The field wherein our men lay,
to wit, the vawarde and middle ward, was divided from the plain where the
French army lay, with a long hedge and ditche, the one end whereof did
reach down to the Marishe aforesaid: that of the Hill next the Marishe, the
Earl of Warwick kept, Captain of the vawarde. In the upper part of the
hedge, toward the hanging of the Hill, there was a great gap, from the which a
stones cast stood our rereward, over the which the Earl of Salisburie was
Captain. Our enymies perceyuyng our Princes auntiente to be displayed, and
ofttymes to be removed from place to place, and by reason of the Hill to be
some time quite out of sight, they judged that the Prince fled, yet Douglas
the Scotte and Marshal de Clarimount, said that it was not so, but Marshal
Dawdenam being deceived in his own opinion, thought otherwise, crying out
still to follow and chase the Prince now fleeing, and with him also Douglas,
to the intent to get preferment and a worthy name of his new warfare: but
Clarimount to wash away the evil opinion which was conceived of him
touching his fidelity, was the more vehement to persuade them forward, for
unto them the charge of the vawarde was deputed: before these went out, as the
fashion was, certain to chase and to just, against whom certain that were
under the Hill of our vaward came to meet Marshal Dawdenam, who staying to see
the end of the iusting, kept himself from encountering. In the mean time
Clearimount thinking to come out by the gap in the hedge, and so to come at the
back of our vawarde, and to compass them in, met with the Earl of
Salisburie, who perceiving his coming and purpose, suspected his whole intent,
and so they which governed our rereward, making haste to take the gap, and
keep the enemy from passing that way, sustained the first charge of the
battle. Then began a terrible meeting betwixt the armed men, who laid on
load with swords and spears, neither did the Archers slack their duty,
but lying in safe trenches, start up above the ditche and shot over the hedge,
preuayling more with their arrows, than they did that fought in arms: thus
our rerewarde slaying the enemies, who came straggling to the gap, and the
vawarde which lay on the hanging of the Hill, toward the Marish, being governed
by the Earl of Warwick, were always ready and met with the French men,
beating them down. The Archers of the vawarde were placed in the Marishe, out
of danger from the horssemen, yet for all that they did prevail there
somewhat, for ye horsemen were appointed to no other purpose but to ouerrunne
the Archers. The Earl of Oxforde considering the discommodity that might ensue
thereof, departed from the Princes ward, and leading with him the Archers, set
them on the one side of the French men, commanding them to shoot at yt hinder
parts of the horses, by means whereof the horses being gauld and wounded,
fell to tumbling with them that sat on their backs, or else turned back and
ran upon them that followed after, making great slaughter upon their own
masters. The horssemen being thus beaten back, the Archers retired toward
the place from whence they came, shooting and gauling the sides of the French
men which fought right over against them: by this time the force and heat of
the battle began to be in prime, when as the Earls of Warwick and
Salisburie, like fierce Lions endeavored of purpose which of them should dung the
land of Poyters most with French men's blood. Nether was the wise Counselor
Thomas Dassord of Suffolk idle at that season, who right worthylie in all his
acts behaved himself, being expert and skillful in actiuitie. For he
continually running from ward to ward, and into all troops and companies,
comforted and styrred them up with good words to do well, having a great
regard that the youthful sort of lusty soldiers being to bold upon
their good hearts and courage, should not without regard go out too far,
and placed the Archers at sundry times to great advantages, and oftentimes as
leisure would suffer him, he would encorage up the minds of the soldiers.
Clarimount was slain, William Douglas also being wounded fled, having with
him a few Scots of his band, with Archebald Douglas his brother: our men
retiring, put themselves in good array, and our vaward and midle-warde joined
themselves together, by and by there marches forth a new army of the French
men, the which the eldest son of the French king, Dolphin of Vienna, brought
forth. The order and array of this army was more terrible and fierce than the
show of that which was last oppressed, yet for all that could not it make our
men afraid, who were sharp set, and very desirous of honor, and also of
revenge, both for themselves, and their fellows, which a little before were
slain and wounded. And therefore boldly they go to it on both sides, making
showts and noyses, crying out, Saint George to borrow, or Saint Denis be for
us. Within a while they were come to fight man to man, and every man ready to
die, fight now to save their lives, neither does ye Lion make the Wolf afraid,
or the Tegre is more terrible to the simple beast, than our lusty gentlemen
were to their enemies, who chaced them, and slew them like as the Wolves chase
and kill Sheep. And though that this battle withstood our men more than the
first, yet, after they had lost a great many of their men, they had such a
devise, that they saved many, and yet, not by running away, but by a fair
retreat, which the Frenchmen are accustomed to use. But our men considering,
that the victory of the field was doubtful, as long as the French King might
be in presence with his army, who lay there half hid in a Ualley, they would
not afterward, when they had chaced any that fled, go out of the field, but the
worthy man Maurice Barkley, son of Thomas Barkley, had no regard there unto,
who for ye space of two hours together with his men, never spared, but would be
still in the forefront of the battle, inuading his enemies with the first, This
Maurice being in ye midst of y^ Dolphens guard sowed blows among them, first
with a spear, than with a sword, and at length he being al alone compassed with
the multitude, and forely wounded, he was taken prisoner. In the mean time our
me^ carried those which were wounded of their camp, and laid the^ under bushes
and hedges out of y^ way, other having spent their weapons took y^ spears and
swords from them who^ they had overcome: and the Archers lacking arrows, made
have to draw them from pore wretches y^ were but half dead: there was not one
of the^ all, but either he was wounded or quite wearied with great labor,
except. 400. me^ who keeping yt chief standart, were appointed to meet y^
French king. The Dolphin being thus put to flight, one came to y^ French K.
and said, my Lord K. the field is fallen to the English men, and your eldest
son has withdrawn himself: unto who^ y^ French King answered with an oath, y^
he would not y^ day forsake y^ field unless he were taken or slain, and so by
y^ means carried away by force: wherefore the auntiente bearers are comanded to
march forwards, after who^ followed two great co^panyes of armed me^ into a wide
field, showing themselves to our men, and struck a great fear into their
hearts, in so much y^ they were out of hope to conquire any more. The which
thing a man of great wisdom standing by ye prince signified with a howling
voice, (saying alas we poor wretches are overcome,) but the prince having a
great trust and says in Christ, checked him, saying, thou lie thou dastardly
fellow, for thou can not say yt we can be overcome as long as I live. Captain
de la Buche, a noble man in all affairs, as soon as he perceived the arms of
the French King, marching forth of their tents, asking license of the Prince
departed away with lx. soldiers, and a hundred Archers, whom many of our men
thought to have fled away: wherefore our soldiers (excepting the chief
Captains) being quite out of hope of victory, committed themselves wholly to
the mercy of God. Then the Prince commanded his Ancient bearer sir Walter
Woodland, to march foreward toward his enemies, and with a^ew fresh men he joined
battle with ye great army of the French king: by and by they sound their
trumpets, one giving answer to another, they made such a noise y^ the Walls of
Poyters sou^ded with the Echo thereof like a wood, in such sort y^ a man would
have thought y^ the hills had bellowed out to ye valleys, and that ye clouds had
given forth a most terrible thu^der, to ye which there wa^ted no cruel
lightnings, whylest the air shone on ye bright armor and spears dashing
against shining harneis. The^ came on the cruel company of crosbowme^, making a
darkness in y^ s^ies with yt multitude of quarrels which they shot, against
who^ came a worthy company of English bowmen: out flies also Darts of Ash
which met with the enemy afar off: but ye French army being full of diverse troops,
and many armed me^ defe^ding their breasts with their shields, proceed forward
against their enemies: wherefore our Archers having emptied their quiuers in
vain, being armed only with swords and Targets, are fayn to encounter with them
that were laden with armor. Then bestirreth himself the worthy Prince of
Wales, cutting and hewing the French men with a sharp sword. In the mean time
Captain de la Buch marches a compass about, under the hangyng of the Hill,
which he with the Prince a little before forsook, and privily compassing about
the field, at the length comes close under the place where the French Camp
lay, from thence he ascended to the top of the Hill that way, which the
French men had beaten with their travail, and so suddenly breaking forth
unlooked for, and showing by the ensign of Saint George that he was our friend,
the Prince with great courage gives a fresh charge on the French army, being
desirous to break their ranckes, before the captain aforesaid, should set
on the side of the battle. The Prince lustilye encountering with his enemies
goes into the middle of the throng, and where he sees most company there he
lays about him on every side.

In the mean time on the other side, his friends which served with Captain de
la Buche, were at the backs of the enemies, beating down and killing without
pity, and the Archers also placed for the purpose shot so thick, wounding the
backs and sides of the French men, in such sort, that the form of the
battle was quite spoiled, neither could they put themselves in order or array
any more. This was the courage of the Prince, who at the lenghth thrusts
thorough the throngs of them, that guarded the French King, then should you
see an ancient begin to nod and stumble, the bearers of them to fall down,
the blood of flaues and Princes ran mingled together into the waters which
were nigh. In like sort the Bore of Cornwall rages, who seeks to have none
other way to the French Kings standard, tha^ by blood only: but when they came
there, they met with a ^o^pany of stout men to withstand them, the English me^
fight, the French men also lay on, but at length Fortune making have to turn
her wheel, the Prince preaceth forewarde on his enemies and like a fierce Lion
beating down the proud, he came to yielding up of the French King. The French
men being scattered abroad in the fields of Poycers perceiving that the
standard with the flouerdeluce was beaten down, fled with all speed toward
the Town, which was not far off, the English men perceiving them to be
fleeing, though themselves were either sore wounded or wearied, followed them
in chase even to the gates of Poyters where in a great skirmishe and very
dangerous, they slew a great number of French men. At the last our me^ being
called back by retreat with ye sound of trumpet, and assembling together,
there were diverse Pauilians and tents set up in the fields, and the whole
company being throughlye comforted with this victory, gave their whole
endeavor to provide for them that were wounded, for the quiet rest of them
that were wearied, for safe keeping of them that were taken prisoners, and for
the refreshing of them that were almost famished, until they had full
understanding who and how many were wanting, among them which were found half
dead, was found the Lord James Dawdeley, by reason of his broad bucklet, and
being carried in the arms of his soldiers, was brought to the Princes
lodging, and the Prince himself rise from his supper, and came to him, and
caused him to be stripped and laid in a soft bed, and being somewhat better
come to his remembrance, the Prince comforted him, swearing unto him that he
had the French King yielded unto him, which news when the languishing Noble
man heard, he straight ways revived. The Prince returning to the French King,
willed him not to deny that to be an unworthy deed of his that rose from his
supper to comfort him that was almost dead, who spared not his own blood to
purchase victory. After that they having had some talk concerning the wars
which James Dawdeley made, the French king said that amongst all other
stout Champions, which valiauntly that day behaved themselves, he did greatly
wonder at the noble deeds of that knight, and he spoke not much more in all
his supper, but what he spoke to the Prince, who comforted his noble pray.
Such like words, it is said that the French king spoke: Although it be our
chance to fall into an everlasting sorrow, yet for all that we thought it
good to refrain from the same by a kind of measure, for though we be under
subjection by law and right of war under our noble cousin, yet are we not as
rascals, or faint hearted runne-awayes, or taken lying hid close in a corner,
but after the manner of the field by the end and success of war, where we
were as ready to dye as live for justice sake. And in the same field were
many richmen taken, whose lives were reserved for ransom, the fainte hearted
and lewd chased away, but the worthyest and stoutest were spoiled of their
lives. This battle of Poyters was fought on the nineteenth day of September.

The next day after the battle, all the prisoners were numbered, to wit the
French king, also Phillip his son, the Archbishop of Senon, the Earl of
Pontue, the Earl of Longuile* the Earl of Ewe, the Earl of Tankeruile, the
Earl Daunter, the Earl of Vendadour, the Earl of Slauncer, the Earl of
Wademount, the Earl of Vandome, the Earl of Iuyny, the Earl Don Martin, the
Earl of Selabruse, the Earl of Sasso, Vicount Nerbon, the Lord Daubeny,
Marshal Dawdenam, the Lord Guinc^arde de Angle, Seneshal de Seintong, the Lord
Mores Mawnimet, the Lord Leonard de Guilhoy, the Seneshal of Poyters, the Lord
great Master, the chief master of the Hospital of Spaigne, the Lord of
Saint Tigre, the Lord Damboyd Seneshal of Annar, the Lord Tower, the Lord
Dars, the Lord Durual, the Lord of the Town of Ernell, the Lord Maugeler,
the Lord Planke, the Vicount de Belimount, and the Lord of Suly: there were
also the bodies found of many that were slain, as the Duke of Burbon, the
Duke Dasines, the Conestable of France, Marshal de Garimount, the Lord
Geffrey de Charney, the Lord Pounce, y^ Bishop of Chaloner, the Lord of
Laundas, yt Lord Ripemou^t* the Lord Chaneny, the Lord Io^e, the Lord Nele,
the Lord Aunger, the Lord de Mount John, the Lord Dargenton, the Lord Groose,
the Lord Ruas, the Lord Rochechicheward, the Lord de Vilem. The Prince bought
all the prisoners and Captives of them that kept them, and carried them with
him to Bordeaux, there to remain in safe custody, during his abode there.

Richard Notingham: Thomas Dossel, the. 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. ^^ 1^57
Anno reg. 21


Henry Picarde Vintener, the. 28. of October.

Edward Prince of Wales returning into England with John the French King,
Phillip his son and many other prisoners, arrived at Plymouth* on the fifth of
May, and the. 24. of May entered London with them, where he was received with
great honor of the Citizens, and so conuayed to the kings pallaice at
Westminster, where the King sitting in his estate in Westminster Hall, received
them, and after conveyed the French King to a lodging, where he lay a season:
and after the said French King was lodged in the Sauoy, (which then was a
pleasant place belonging to the Duke of Lancaster.) In the Winter following
were great and royal iustes holden in Smithfielde at London, where many knightly
sights of arms were done, to the great honor of the king and realm, at the
which were present the Kings of England, France, and Scotland, with many
noble estates of all those Kingdoms, whereof the more part of the strangers
were prisoners.

Henry Picarde Uintener, Mayor of London, in one day did sumptuouslye feast
Edward King of England; John King of France, the King of Cipres (then
arrived in England) David king of Scotts, Edward Prince of Wales, with many
noble men and other, and after the said Henry Picarde kept his Hall against
all comers who soever, that were willing to play at Dice and Hazard. In like
manner the Lady Margaret his wife did also keep her Chamber, to the same
intent. The King of Cipres playing with Henry Picarde in his Hall, did win
of him 50. marks, but Henry being very skillful in that art, altering his
hand did after win of the same king, the same. 50. marks, and 50. marks
more, which when the same king began to take in ill part, although he
dissembled the same, Henrye said unto him, my Lord and King be not agrieued, I
covet not your gold but your play, for I have not bid you hither that I might
grieve you, but that amongst other things I might try your play, and gave him
his money again, plentifully bestowing of his own amongst the retinue:
besides he gave many rich gifts to the King and other Nobles and Knights,
which dyned with him, to the great glory of the Citizens of London in these
days.

Stephen Candish: Barthelmew Frostling, the. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Stody Vintener, the. 28. of October.

This sir John Stody gave unto the Uinteners of London all the quadrant wherein
the Uinteners Hal now stands with the tenements round about, from the lane
yet called Studis Lane, where is founded thirteen houses for xiij. poor
people which are there kept of charity rent free.

About Halowntide, David le Bruce king of Scots was delivered from the long
imprisonment of a. xj. years, in the castle of Oldiham, his ransom being set,
a 100000. marks to be paid the next ten years following.

Normandy and Brytaine were soar spoiled and wasted Tho. Walsing. Anno reg.
32 Rob. Knovvles
by Phillippe the King of Nauers brother, Jacob de la Pipe, and Roberte
Knowles, with many other English men which were Captains of that
company, who raged in warlike sort in these Countries, the space of three
years and more, contrary to the King of Englandes pleasure. This Roberte
Knowles being a mean man of birth became Captain of many soldiers, and did
many marvelous acts.

Isabel daughter to Phillippe the fair, king of France 1358
now wife to King Edward the second, deceased, apnd Risinges Registrum fratrum
minorum.
iuxta London, the. xxij. of August, and was buried in the Gray Friars Quire at
London, in a Tomb of Aliblaster.

John Barnes: John Buris, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 33


John Louekinstoke Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

John of Gaunt the Kings son (by dispensation) took to wife Blaunch, dauhter
of Henry Duke of Lancaster his kinswoman.

The French King under color of peace, offered to King Edward Flanders,
Picardie, Aquitayne, and other lands, which the Englishmen had ranged through
and spoiled, for the perfourma^ce whereof, messengers were sent into France, but
the Frenchmen would not perform the offer, wherefore King Edward being angry,
with a Navy of Ships passed the Sea to Caleis, wherefore dividing his army
into three parts, committed one company unto Henry Duke King Edward invaded
Burgundy.
of Lancaster, another to Prince Edward, and the third he reserved to himself,
and so passed into Burgundy.

In the mean season, the Normans with a small Navy 1359 Frenchmen arrived at
VVinchelsea.
arrived at Winchelsey, and partly brent the Town, and slew such as did
withstand them, wherefore the Prelates of England assembled from all parts in
armor to withstand them, but when they had prepared themselves to battle,
the French were gone.

Simon of Benington: John of Chichester, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 34. 1360


Simon Dolseby Grocer, the 28. of October.

King Edward with his power rode through France, by Picardie, Artois, Roan,
Champaine, and so to Briteine, destroying the Country before him. And here is
to be noted, that the fourteenth day of April, and the morrow after Easter
day, King Edward with his host lay before the City of Paris, which day was
full dark of mist and hayle, and so bitter cold, that many men died on their
Horse backs with the cold, wherefore unto this day it has bin called the
black Monday. The King of Navarre vexed sore the marches of Normandy. Thus
was the Realm of France miserably beset on all sides. At the last, a final
peace was concluded on Peace with France.
this condition, that King Edward should have to his possession, the Countries
of Gascoine, Gwyen, Poytiers, Limosin, Baleuile, Exantes, Caleis, Gwisnes, and
diverse other Lordships, Castles, Towns, and all the Lands to them belonging,
Tho. Walls.
without knowledge of any sovereignty or subjection for the same. This peace
being confirmed by writing and by oath, King Edward came into England, and so
straight to the Tower to see the French King, where he appointed his ransom
to be three millions of Florences, and so delivered French King releassed.
him of all imprisonment, and brought him with great honor to the Sea, who
then*sayled over into France.

John Denis: Walter Berney, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Wroth Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

King Edward the 24. of Januarie began a Parliament at Westminster, where the
form of the agreement was read, and allowed of all estates, where the King on
the last of Januarie caused his Nobles to swear to hold and Anno reg. 35 1361
keep the said agreement, especially those as well Prelates as other that were
not at Caleis, where he swear, and other that were there with him.

A great dearth and pestilence happened in England, which was called the second
pestilence, in which died Henry D. of Lancaster The second mortality.
in March at London, and was buried at Leycester, in the colegiate Church which
he had founded, with a Deane, twelve Chanons, Prebendaries, as many Uickers,
and other ministers accordingly.

There dyed also Reginald Lord Cobham, and Walter Lib. Lichfield.
Fitz Waren, valiant and famous Knights, and five Bishops, to weete, Reginald
of Worcester, Michael of London, Thomas of E^lie, John of Lincoln, and Robert
of Cicester. To Worcester was preferred John of Barnet: to London, Simon
Sudburie: to Ely, Simon Langham: to Lincoln, John Bokingham: to Cicester,
William Linlinere.

Leonell Earl of Hulster by his wife, and son to King Edward, went into
Ireland to recounter the Irishmen that vexed the English.

Edward Prince of Wales took to wife by dispensation the Countess of Kent,
daughter unto Edmond Earl of Kent, brother to King Edward the second: she had
bin before wife unto Thomas Holland and before that, she was wife to the Earl
of Salisburie, and divorced from him.

A route of the great company of the Englishmen were commanded to depart out of
France, and they discomfited in Anuerne the Frenchmen, and took diverse
prisoners of the nobles of France that had bin before taken of the Englishmen,
and there was slain Jacques de Burbon, and the County of Salbrig. Also a route
of Britons, part of the great company aforesaid, were disco^fited in Limosin
alias Garet, by Will. Felton knight, of England, and at that time Steward of ye
Country for K. Edward.

William Holbech: James Tame, the 28 of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Sore
rempest of vvinde.


John Peche Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

The King held his Christmas at Windsore, and the xv. day following, a sore and
vehement Southweast wind brake forth, so hideous, that it overthrew high
Houses, Towers, Steeples, and Trees, and so bowed them, that the residue which
fell not, but remained standing, were the weaker.

The first five days of May, at London in Smithfield, were Anno reg. 36
Iusting in Smithfield.
Justes holden, the King and Queen being present, and the most part of the
Chivalry of England and France, and of other Nations, to the which came
Spaniards, Cipriets, and Armenians Knightly requesting the King of Englands
aid against the Pagans that had invaded their confines. The 1362 First Staple
of wool at Caleis.
staple of wools, notwithstanding the oath received of the King of England, and
other great men of the land, is sent to Caleis.

In the feast of the Apostles, Peter and Paul, King Edward at Westminster by
his Charter, gave to the Abbot of Westminster, and Covent, two Stagges of his
Uenison, yearly to be taken in the Forest of Windsore.

Edward Prince of Wales, about the feast of Saint Margaret, Edward the Kings
eldest son Prince of Aquitayne.
at Westminster, in presence of the great men of ye Realm, received of his
father the principality of Aquitayne, fealty and homage first made to him,
but yet he left not the principality of Wales, the Duchy of Cornwall, the
Counties of Chester and Kent.

Simon Islip, Archbishop of Canterbury did ordeyne, that Priests became
thieves, for lack of living. ^
more should not be given to Priests for their yearly stipend, than three
pound, six shillings, eight pence, which caused many of them to steal.

John of Saint Albons: James Andrew, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Stephen Candish Draper, the 28. of October.

The sixteenth day of October, began a Parliamente at London, which continued
till the feast of Saint Brice, the thirteenth Tho. Walsing.
of November, on which day the King was borne, having now accomplished the 50.
year of his age, whereupon, he pardoned such as were guilty of Treason to his
person, releassed prisoners, revoked outlawes, and at the petition of the
commons, he commanded pleas to be used in English, and not in French, as they
had continued since the Conquest. He made Leonell his son, Earl of Hulster,
then being in Ireland, Duke of Clarence: and his son John, Earl of Richmond,
he made Duke of Lancaster: and Edmond his son, he made Earl of Cambridge.

In the said Parliamente was granted to the King for Subsedie of vvoolles.
three years following, six and twenty shillings, eight pence, of every
Sack of wool to be transported beyond the Seas.

Ioane Queen of Scotts, and wife to David Bruise, and sister to King Edward
the third, dyed, and was buried in the gray Friars Church at London by her
mother. Sea. Cro.


A Priest in London was murdered, and being cut in four quarters, was cast
contemptuously in four parts of ye City, y^ doers whereof were not known
what they were.

Sir John Cobham Knighte, founded the College of Cobham College. Anno reg. 37
1363 Three Kings came into England. The French King dies.
Cobham in Kent.

The French King, the King of Cipres, and the King of Scotts, came all into
England to speak with King Edward, who received them with great honor, and
gave them great gifts, the Kings of Cipres and of Scotland returned home
shortly, but the French King fell sick at London, whereof he shortly after
died.

A Frost in England lasted from the midst of September, Great Frost. Adam
Merim^.
to the month of April.

Richard Croydon: John Hiltoft, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Cro.
col. reg* ^ ^x^.


John Not Peperer, the 28. of October.

This year, the Castle of Quinborough was builded by King Edward.

The ninth day of April, died John King of France, at the Anno reg. 38 1364
Sauoy beside Westminster, through grief of mind, that the Duke of Angiow one
of his pledges had deceived him, and came not into England, according as he had
promised and sworn. His corpse was honorably conveyed to Dover, and so to
Saint Denis in France, where he was buried.

John de Mitford: Simon de Mordon, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 39 1365 Sherifes. Mayor.


Adam of Bury, Skinner, the 28 of October.

Ingram, Lord of Cowsie, married Lady Isabell the Kings daughter, at Windsore.

John Bukulsworth: Thomas Ireland, the 28. of September.

John Loukin, Fishmonger. Adam of Bury Skinner.

The 28. of January, John Louekin Fishmonger, was elected Mayor, and Adam Bury
removed by the Kings commandment.

The King commanded that Peter pence should no more Anno reg. 40 Peter pence
forbid.
be gathered nor paid to Rome. Saint Peter's pence is the Kings alms, and all
that had twenty penny worth of good, of one manner cattle in their house of
their own proper, should give that penie at Lammas.

The third day of April was borne at Bordeaux Richard, 1366
son to Edward the black Prince, who was after King of England, by the name
of Richard the second.

John Ward: Thomas at Lee, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Louekin Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

This John Louekin Stockfishmonger, four times Mayor of London, twice by
election, and twice by the Kings appointment, John Leyland.
for that he was borne in the Town of Kingston Hospital at Kingston upon
Thamis.
upon Thamis, he builded there a Chapel called Magdalenes, ^o the which he
joined an Hospital, wherein was a Master, two Priests, and certain poor
men: and for that the Saint Michael^ Church in Crooked Lane builded.
parish Church of Saint Michaell by Crooked Lane of London, in which Parish he
then dwelled, was a very small and homely thing (standing in part of that
ground, where now of late the Personage house is builded) and the ground
therabout a filthy plot, by reason of the Butchers in Eastcheape, who made the
same their Lest haw, he on the same ground builded the fair new parish Church
of Saint Michaell, now standing, and was there buried in the middle of the
Quire, under a fair Tomb of Stone, with the images of him and his wife graven
in Allablaster upon the same Tomb. He also (as writes John Leyland) founded a
College to the same Church near thereunto adjoining. The said parish Church
of Saint Michaell, has bin since increased Eastwarde, with a new Quier, and
side Chapels, by Sir William Walworth Fishmonger, and Mayor of London (as
shall be showed in the fourth year of King Richard the second.) Also, the
Tomb of John Louekin was removed, and a ^lat stone of gray Marble, garnished
with plates of Latin, and an Epitaph, was laid upon him, as it yet remains.

Edward Prince of Wales, taking compassion upon Peter Tho. Wall. Anno reg. 41
The Bastard brother disheriteth the lavvful. 1367
King of Spain, who was driven out of his Kingdom by Henry his Bastard
brother, entered Spain with a great puissance, and in a battle at Nazers, the
third of April, put to flight the foresaid Bastard, overcame his power, and
slew six thousand of his men, where there was taken threescore persons of
name, and two thousand of the common Souldioures, which done, he restored the
said Peter to his former dignity, and returned home with great triumph and
victory, but not long after, Henry the Bastard, The Bastard brother;
murthereth the lavvfull.
whiles King Peter sat at a Table, sodeinly thrust him thorough with a Spear,
and invaded the Land by Treason, which by open war he could not do.

John Tornegold: William Dikeman, the 28 of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


James Andrew Draper, the 28. of October.

The Frenchmen* took diverse Towns and Castles in Poytow, that belonged to the
King of England, and to the end Anno reg. 42
they might the more effectually deceive the King of England, the French King
sent him word, that he was ready to pay the residue of his fathers ransom,
and to perform the conditions of peace. Also, he sent him Wines out of 1368
Boheme, and other presents, in token of love, but it fortuned whiles the
Ambassadors were in the Kings presence, the lamentable news were brought of
the forcible invasion of the Frenchmen in Poytow, which when the King heard,
he Sutteltie of Frenchmen.
commanded the Ambassadors to get them home with their deceiptfull presents,
to their deceiptfull Lord, whose mockes he would not long leave unrevenged.
The Embassadoures returning home, were met by the men of Caleis, who took
their Wines, and other goods from them.

Robert Girdler: Adam Wimondham, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 43
Third Pestilence. Dearth of Corn. 1369


Simon Mordin Stockfishmonger, the 28. of October.

The third mortality or Pestilence was this year, whereof dyed Blaunch,
Duches of Lancaster, and was buried in Paul's Church at London.

This year was a great dearth of Corn, so that a Bushel of Wheat at London
was sold for two shillings six pence, of Barlie twenty pence, of Otes twelve
pence.

The xv. of August died Queen Philip, wife to Edward the third, and was
buried at Westminster.

Quenesborough, Kingston upon Hull, and Saint Botolphes, alias Bostowne, made
Staples by Parliament.

The Kings son John Duke of Lancaster, and Humfrey Bohan Earl of Hereford,
with a great Army went into France, where they little prevailed, because an
huge Army of Frenchmen had pitched their Tents upon the top of Chalk
hill, near unto Caleis, so strongly, that they could not be set on without
great loss and damage, but shortly after, Thomas Beawchampe, Earl of
Warwike, arrived at Caleis with a number of chosen Soldiers, at whose coming,
the Frenchmenne leaving their tents and victualles, fled away,
nevertheless, he passed forth, spoiling and wasting the Isle of Caws with fire
and sword, but as he returned toward Caleis, he fell sick, whereof he dyed,
and the other Captains returned without honor.

John Piel: Hugh Holditch, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 44
The King borovved great sums. 1370


John Chichester Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

King Edward borrowed of the Prelates and other, many great sums of money,
saying, he would bestow the same in defense of the Church and Realm, but about
Midsomer he sent a great army into France, whereof Sir Roberte Knowles was
general, a man, who before time had fortunately handled the beyond sea wars,
so long as they were ruled by his counsel, but toward Winter, the young Lords
said they ought not to be subject to him who was not so noble of birth as
they, and so dividing themselves into diverse companies, Sir Robert Knowles
departed into Briteine to his own Castles which he had conquered. The Lords
being so divided, the Frenchmen set upon them, took prisoners whom they
listed, and slew the residue.

A great part of Gascoigne fell from the Prince, because of the strange
exactions he laid upon them: also sickness increasing upon him, he returned
into England with his wife and his son Richard, and resigning into his
fathers hands the government of Gascoigne.

The Monastery of Abingdon, five miles from Oxforde, was spoiled by them of
Oxford, together with the Artificers Matthew Parker.
of Abingdon.

William Walworth: Robert Gayton, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Barnes Mercer, the 28. of October.

This John Barnes gave a Chest with three locks, and a thousand Marks, to be
lent to young men upon sufficient A Chest with three locks, and never a
penie. Anno reg. 45 1371
gage, so that it passed not one hundred Marks: and for the occupying thereof,
if he were learned, to say at his pleasure Deprofundis, for the soul of John
Barnes: if he were not learned, to say Pater noster: but how so ever the money
is lent, at this day the Chest stands in the Chamber of London without money
or pledges.

In a Parliament at London, the King demanded of the Great subsedie. Adam Meri.
Clergy and Communaltie, a subsedie of 50000. pounds, for the leuying
whereof, Chauntrie Priests, and small benefited were taxed. Also, the Bishops
were removed from the offices of Chanceler, Treasurer, and Priuis Seal, and
Lay men put in their steed.

Robert Hatfield: Adam Staple, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg.
46 1372


John Barnes Mercer, the 28. of October.

John, Duke of Lancaster, and Edmond Earl of Cambridge, returning out of
Gascoigne, brought with them two daughters of Peter late King of Spain, whom
afterward they took to be their wives: the Duke married the elder, and from
that time wrote himself King of Castile.

The Englishmen fought a battle on the Sea with the Battle on the Sea.
Flemings, and took five and twenty ships laden with salt.

The Frenchmen beseeged Rochell, to the removing whereof, was sent the Earl of
Penbroke, with a number of men of arms, upon whom fell the Spanish Navy in
the Haven of Rochell, who slew and took the Englishmen, and burnt their Navy.
The Earl and many noble men were carried into Spain, together with the Kings
money. King Edward with a great Navy entered the Seas toward Rochell, to
have rescued the same, but the wind being contrary, with heavy cheer he
returned again, having spente in this preparation (as it was said) nine
hundred thousand pound.

John Philpot: Nicholas Brember, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 47 1373


John Piel Mercer, the 28. of October.

John Duke of Lancaster entered France with a strong power, and passed through
the Realm without battle, but in the Deserts and Mountains of Aluerne, for
lack of victualles, many of his army dyed: from thence, he went to Bordeaux,
and brought scantly forty horses back with him: it was commonly talked that
he lost thirty thousand Horses in that unlucky voyage. It was a great
misery ^bo. Walsing.
to see the poor state of the men of war, such as were Knights of great
wealth in their Country, having lost men and Horses, were glad to beg from
door to door, and found no relief, for the Country was destroyed, and not
manured, by reason whereof, such dearth was in that Country, that victualles
could scant be gotten for any money. The Duke yet wintered. The tenth of April
following, a day of battle was appointed betwixt him and the Duke of Aniow
at Toulouse. In the mean time, truce was taken till the twentieth of May next
following, but the King of England knew nothing of it. When the day came, a
great power of armed men for the French appeared, the which the Duke of Aniow
had assembled, but yet that day passed without battle, to the great shame
and reproach of the English, for the Frenchmen said, they were ready in field
the day appointed to look for their coming, that came not at all, wherefore
they spoke many reproachful words against the Englishmen, calling them false
cowards, and ha^^ less. And such was the end of that journey.

John Northwold Mercer of London, was slain at the Black heath, for whose
sake, began great debate among the Crafts of London, at the White Friars in
Fleetestreete, for him, and Sir William of Windsore. Lib. Mayor and vic. Lon.


The Clergy granted to the King tenthes, and the Laytie a fifteenth.

John Awbrey: John Fished, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 48
1374


Adam of Bury Skinner, the 28. of October.

John Duke of Lancaster came again out of Gascoigne, after whose departure,
almost all Gascoigne fell from their allegeaunce, which they had couenaunted
with the King ^^ England, saving Bordeaux and Bayon.

John Duke of Lancaster, William Earl of Salisbu^^^* Reignold Lord Cobham,
with Simon Sudbery and other assembled at Brudges to treat a peace between y^
Real^^^ of England and France, where met with them the Duke ^ Aniow, and many
other Nobles of France. This treaty continued almost two years, and ended
without conclusion of peace, but on a truce.

Richard Lions: William Woodhouse, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 49 1^75


John Walworth Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

The sixteenth of April died John Hastings, Earl of Penbroke, coming into
England, after he had raunsomed himself for a great mass of money, which he
never paid. The Isle of Constantine was delivered to the French King, to the
great detriment of England, for which cause afterward Sir John Ansley
appeached Thomas Catrington of Trenson. A great heat was in England, so that
many both A ho^e summer.
men and women died thereof.

John Hadle: William Newport, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg
50 Good Parliament.


John Ward Grocer, the 28. of October.

A Parliament, commonly called the good Parliament, was holden at Westminster,
in the which* when a Subsidy was demanded, answer was made by Peter de la
Mare, Proloc^tor of the Parliamente, that the King needed not the substance of
his poor Subjects, if he were well and faithfully governed, which he offered
to prove effectually, and promised that if it were found that the King had
need, his subjects should be ready most gladlye to help him according to
their power.

The Knights required to have the Lord Latimer with 1376
other, removed from about the King, whom they said did give him evil
counsel, which being done, certain Prelates, Earls, and other, were
ordained to govern the King, who then was an old man, but this endured not
long. The commons also requested to have removed out of the Kings house, a
certain proud woman called Alice Perce, who by overmuch familiarity that she
had with the King, was cause of much mischief in the Realm, she exceeding
the manner of Women, sat by the Kings Justices, and sometimes by the Doctors
in the Consistories, persuading and dissuading in defense of matters, and
requesting things contrary to law and honesty, to the great dishonor of the
King.

Also Richard Lious and Adam of Bury, Citizens of London, Adam Bury late Mayor.
Richard Lions late Sheriff, a Goldsmith.
were accused by the commo^s, of diverse frauds and deceipts, which they had
done to the King: Richard Lions for money did wisely compou^d and escaped, the
other conuayde himself into Flanders, but Sir Peter de la Mere, who told the
troth, was at the instance of Alice Pierce condemned to perpetual prison at
Notingham.

The eight day of June, Prince Edward departed out of Black Prince deceassed.
Adam Meri^o.
this life, who was in his time the flower of Chivalry: he was buried at
Canterbury, and then King Edward created Richard son of Prince Edward, Earl
of Chester, Duke of Cornwall, and Prince of Wales, and because the King waxed
feeble and sickly, he betook the rule of the land to John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster.

The Earl of Warwickes men made a great spoil of the Euisham spoiled.
Abbey of Euisham, and the tenementes thereto belonging, beating and sleying
many of the Abbots men, but by the King an agreement was made betwixt them, but
no full satisfaction.

John Northampton: Robert Laund, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Adam Staple Mercer, the 28. of October.

In a Parliament at London, there was granted such a tax as never was heard
of before, to wit, of every Lay person A great tax.
both man and woman, above the age of fourteen years, four pence, and of even
Religious person, both man and woman, that had any Ecclesiastical promotion,
twelve pence, and of them that had no promotion, four pence, except the four
orders of begging Friars: and also the Statutes of the good Parliament were
disanulled, and the abiured persons restored.

The Londoners at S. John's Inn of Ipres, being stirred up The Londoners meant
to have slain the Duke of Lancaster.
with fury, sought to kill the D. of Lancaster, for a certain proud word
which he spoke against their Bishop, and they had brent his Manor of Suuoy, if
the B. had not staid their rage: this was called the wood Saturday: the Duke
fled to Kenington beside Lamheth, where Richard the Prince remained, he made
lamentable complaints upon the Citizens, for The Mayor and Aldermen of London
deposed.
the which, the King caused Adam Staple Mayor, to be put down, and in his
place Nicholas Brember was elected on the 21. day of March. Also, the Aldermen
were deposed, and other set in their places, and Sir John Minsterworth Knight,
and other were drawn and hanged.

About this time, rose up in Oxford a certain Northren Adam Meri. John
VVicklefe.
man called John Wickleffe, a Doctor of Divinity, who in Schools, and
elsewhere, held certain conclusions, contrary to the public state,
especially against Monks, and other Religious men that had possessions: his
companions dwelling together, were apparelled in long garments down to the
heels of russet, going barefooted etc.

King Edward ended his life at his Manor of Shene, the King Edward deceassed.
New Abbey. John Rouse.
xxj. day of June, in the year 1377. when he had reigned 50. years, four
months, and odd days* whose body was buried at Westminster. He builded the
Abbey of our Lady of Grace by the Tower of London. He newly builded S. Stephens
Chapel at Westminster: the Castle of Windsore, and the Nunrie of Dertford.
He also founded a Masondieu for the poor in the Town of Caleis.

Richard of Bordeaux.


Richard the second, borne at Anno reg. 1.
Bordeaux, the son of Prince Edward, being but eleven years old, began
his reign the xxj. day of June, in the year of our Lord God 1377. and was
Crowned at Westminster the sixteenth day of July, by the hands of Simon
Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury.

Before his Coronation, he set agreement between the Duke of Lancaster, and
the Citizens of London, and set at liberty Sir Peter de la Mere, who as is
aforesaid, was by instigation of Alice Perce cast in prison.

In beauty, bounty, and liberality, he far passed all his progenitors,
but was overmuch given to rest and quietness, loving little deeds of arms,
and for that he was young, was most ruled by young counsel, and regarded nothing
the counsels of the sage and wise men of the Realm, which thing turned this
Land to great trouble, and himself to extreme misery, as is by these Uerses
declared.

When this King first began to reign, the Laws neglected were, Vox
clamantis. John Gower.

Wherefore good fortune him forsook, and the earth did quake for fear.
The people also whom he pollde, against him did rebel,
The time does yet bewail the woes, that Chronicles do tell.
The foolish counsel of the lewd, and young he did receive,
And grave advise of aged heads, he did reject and leave.
And then for greedy thirst of Coin, some subjects he accused,
To gain their goods into his hands, thus he the Realm abused.
The King at his Coronation made four Earls, Thomas Earls created.
of Woodstocke, King Edwardes youngest son, Earl of Buckingham and
Northampton. To him he gave 1000 Marks yearly out of his Treasury, til he
had provided him lands to that value. Thomas Moubray Earl of Notingham,
Gifford Angolisme, a Gascoigne, Earl of Huntington, to whom he likewise gave
1000. Marks the year, out of his Treasury, till he had provided him Lands
to that value: and Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland.

On S. Peter's day, the Frenchmen with 50. Ships arrived The Town of Rye
spoiled. The I Will of VVight taken.
at Rye, and spoiled the Town and brent it. The same time the Scotts brent
the Town of Rokesborow. In the kalendes of September, the Frenchmen took the
I Will of Wight, saving the Castle, which Sir Hugh Tirell kept manfully. When the
Frenchmen had spoiled the Country, they took 1000. Marks of the inhabitants,
to spare their houses vnbrent.

After taking of the said I Will, the Frenchmen entering their The Frenchmen lie
before VVinchelsea.
Galleys again, coasted the Sea strond, till they came over against the Town
of Winchelsea, and understanding that the Abbot of Battaill was come thither to
defend it, they sent to him, that he should redeem the Town: the Abbot
answered, that he needed not redeem the thing which he had not lost, the
Frenchmen then requested there might be sent forth to fight man to man, or a
more number, to try the matter in view of arms, but the Abbot answered, he
was a Religious man, and therefore not lawful for him to admit any such
petition, and that he came not thither to fight, but to defend the Town and
Country. These things being heard, the Frenchmen supposing that the Abbot and
his people wanted courage, they assailed the Town with such instruments of
war as cast forth a far off, whereof they had plenty, not ceassing from
noone till evening: but by the prowess of ye Abbot, and such as were with him,
the French prevailed nothing. In the mean time, whilst they were busy thus
at Winchelsea, they sent part of their company unto The Town of Hastings
brent by Frenchmen.
Hastings, where finding the town almost empty, they brent it. The Frenchmen
perceiving they could do no good at Winchelsea, departed from thence, and left
it as they found it.

Andrew Pikeman: Nicholas Twiford, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28. of October.

The same year, the Frenchmen coming up at y^ town of Rotingdon in Sussex,
near to the Town of Jews, where Tho. Walsing.
the Prior of Jews, with a small company met them, and by The Prior of Jews
taken by Frenchmen.
a multitude of Frenchmen that came upon him, he was taken, and led to their
Ships, with two Knights, to weete, Sir John Fallesley, and Sir Thomas
Cheynie, and a Squire, called John Brokes. There died in this battle almost
an hundred Englishmen: the Frenchmen therefore with all their Navy returned
home, being 37. Galleys, eight Caruales of Spain, and certain Barks:
streightwayes therefore as they came to land, some of them went unto the seege,
that was about Arde, and by treason, which always is familiar to them, the
keeper of that Castle being an Almayne, to weete, the Lord of Gunney,
delivering to them the Town, they straight got the Castle also, for the which
the same keeper being taken by Sir Hugh Caluerley, keeper of Caleis, was sent
into England, and committed to prison.

A Parliament was holden at London, which ended about Saint Andrews tide, in
the which Parliamente, Alice Peers was banished the land, and all her
moveable goods Alice Peers banished.
being forfeited to the Kings use.

There was granted to the King of the Clergy two Two tenthes granted by the
Clergy.
tenthes to be paid that year, with condition, that from thenceforth the King
should not extort from his subjects by such petitions or demaundes but live of
his own, and continue his war, for as it was aunsweared there, his own
goods pertaining to the crown, sufficed both to the finding 1378
of his house, and mayntayning of his wars, of the same were bestowed by
fit ministers, and for the keeping of the money, two Citizens of London were
appointed, William Walworth, and John Philpot. The English men hearing of a
number of Spanishe ships to remain at sluice for want of wind, assembling a
great company of armed men, and a great navy, meant to take the seas, their
chief Captains were Thomas of Woodstocke Earl of Buckingham, the duke of
Brytaine, the Lord Latimer, the Lord Robert Fitz Walter, sir Robert Knowles,
and many other valiant personages, who being entered the Sea, tasted Fortune
disfauourable, for by a tempestuous wind that rose, their ships were
scattered in sunder, their mastes are broken down, their sails rent, and many
of the small vessels that were victuallers were drowned, at length, the ships
got together again, and arrived in England, and being now rigged are
eftsoons freight with men, and to the Sea they go. About y^ same time, sir
Hugh Caluerley making a journey toward Bulloign, found a Barge in y^ haven of
ye town, y^ bare ye name of the town, and another that was the French Kings
and a xxvj. other vessels more and less, all the which with a great part of
the suburbs of Bulloigne, he caused to be dispoyled, taking with him
whatsoever was there to be desired, with certain prisoners: he drove before him
also a great booty of sheep and beasts, which he found pasturing near the
town, which might well serve to victual Caleis for a great time: he recovered
the same day the castle Mark, of which through negligence before had bin lost.

The English fleet whereof we spoke, returned without any great good success,
they took an eight Spanish ships in the Brytish coasts near to Breast, and
more had taken if there business had bin so well done, as was pretended: and
therefore the fleet returned home, so tossed with storms and contrary
weather, and after with intestine discord, that it seemed there wanted among
them gods favor. The Lord Percy (this fleet remaining for the mending of his
ships, whilst the other were abroad) went now to the sea, with a great ship
and some smaller vessels, and meeting with fifty ships laden with French wares
and merchandise, of which some were of Flaunders, some of Spain, he set on
them al, who beholding his bold enterprice, and thinking that he had some
aid at hand gave over to make resistaunce, and so xxviij. escaping by flight.
xxij. yielded themselves to the said Thomas Lord Percy Sir Hugh Caluerley with
a power secretly armed, went to the town of Staple, where the fair was then,
to the which were come many Merchauntmen from Bulloigne, Mutterel, Amience,
and Paris, where he falling on them that were unarmed, slew many, took many to
be put to their ransomes, sacked all the goods, and set fire in the town, so
that it was wholly consumed, few places excepted. This done, he returned to
Caleis with his men in safety, bringing from that fair wares which turned to
the great profit of the Calisians many years after.

The men of Winchelse and Rye, gathered a great number of people together, and
imbarqued themselves toward Normandy, desirous to requite ye losses which
before they had received, and so in the night arriving in a Town called Peter's
Haven, entered the same, slaying so many as they met, and those whom they think
able to pay ransom, they carry to their ships: they spoiled the houses with
the Churches, where they found many rich spoils which sometime had bin by the
French men fet from Ric, and especially the belles and such like, which they
shipped, set the rest on fire, and the^ they land at Wilet, not far from
thence, where they practiced ye like cheuance, and so with their rich spoil
returned home.

About the same time John duke of Lancaster requested ye ye money granted to the
K. by ye clergy and laity; might be committed to his custody, affirming yt
he would keep ye enemies of from the coasts of England, by the space of one
year with yt money, and moreover bring to pass some further great commodity,
to whose importunate petition the Lords, although against their wills agreed.
They appoint therefore ye first day of March to meet in counsel, in which
every of those should go forth on this journey: and least ye sea should in ye
mean time want those y^ should keep it, there were. ix. ships hired of the^ of
Baion, to defend ye sea and land from incursions of the French and others.
These ships being furnished with sufficient numbers of armed me^, wein a short
time coasting ye seas, met the navy and marchandice of ye Spaniards, and
entering battle with them, in short time take. xiiij. of their ships laden with
wines and other merchandise, and return to England joyfully: unto sir Robert
Knowles captain of Breast, they give the first fruits of their pray, an C.
tun of their best wines as they passed by him homewardes. In the mean time
Henry ye bastard, calling himself King of Spain, hearing y^ they of Baion, had
done such harm unto his people, and that the D. of La^caster had prepared a
great number to enter ye sea, he was sore afraid, thinking ye he minded not only
to defend the sea, but rather to seek his kingdom, which by right of his wife
ye lawful inheritour of Spain, he meant to challenge: wherefore ye said Henry
commanded a navy to be prepared of al his land yt he might stay the said D.
from entering his country, and if he might, to take him prisoner, which happily
they had done, if ye king of Portingale with almost an inumerable number had not
entered ye kingdom of Spain, ye self same time yt the bastard Henry prepared
him self against ye D. but the D. deferring his journey from day to day, they
y^ were appointed captains over the navy we certain me^ of war, got the^ to ye
sea, there to stay for the Dukes coming, esteeming it more glorious to live on
the sea by prays taking from the enemies, than to live by spoil of their own
countrymen at home. When they had certain days wa^ted up and down the Seas,
the Spaniardes met with them with an armed company of men, so that either part
in hope of pray joined together in fight, but our men having the wind and
weather contrary to them, lost the victory to their enemies, some escaping by
flight, and some being taken, amongst the which sir Hugh Courtney a noble
Knight was one.

About the same time John Mercer a Scotte, gathering together no small number
of French men, Scots, and Spaniards, set upon certain ships of Scaborow, took
them and led them into Scotland, this he did in revenge of his Fathers
injury, who was before taken by the English men, and kept prisoner in the
Castle of Scarborow.

John Philpot a Citize^ of London, a man of jolly wit, and very rich in
substance, considering the want of ye Duke of Lancaster and other Lords that
ought to have defended ye realm, Anno reg. 2.
and lamenting the oppressions of the inhabitauntes, hired with his own money,
to the number of a thousand soldiers, the which might take from the said
John Mercer both his ships and goods, which he had by revenge taken, and
defended the Realm of England from such incursions: and it came to pass
within a small time, that his hired me^ took the said John Mercer with all his
ships, which he had violently taken from Scarborow, and fifteen Spanish
ships that were laden with much riches, and were with him in aid at that
present. There was great joy made among ye people, all men praising that
worthy man's bountifulness and love toward the king. The Earls and Barons
seeing so laudable an act, achieved by John Philpot, took it grievously,
although they knew themselves guilty, first they secretly lie in awayte, to
do him some displeasure, and after they spoke against him openly, saying it was
not lawful for him to do such things without the counsel of the King and
Realm, certain of the Lords but the chief being Hugh Earl of Stafforde
that rehearsed these things thus against him, were aunsweared by the same John
Philpot, sir, know (says he) that I neither sent my money nor men to the
danger of the Seas, that I should take from you, or your fellows, the good
renoume of Chilualrie, and win it to me, but being sorrowful to see the
peoples myserie, in my Country, which now through your slothfulness, of the
most noble Lady of Nations, is brought to lie open to the spoiling of every
vilest nation, when there is not one of you that does put his hand to the
defense thereof. I have therefore set forth my self and mine, for the saving
of my nation and Country: the Earl had not to answer.

The. xi. of August, certain wicked persons of the Kings Murder in the Church
of Westminster. Tho Walsing.
house being armed, at high Mass time entered the Church of Westminster Abbay,
and there set upon two valiant Esquiers, John Schakel and Robert Hawley,
which had escaped out of the Tower of London, to the said Abbay, for refuge
of Sanctuary: they slew the said Robert Hawley in the quire before the
Priours stal, and slew a Monk which entreated them to spare the said Robert
in that place. Sir Ralph Ferreis* and sir Alan Buxule, Captain of the Tower
(some say the Lord Latimer) were the captains of this mischief.

The aforesaid two Esquires, Robert Hawley and John Shakell, in the battle of
Nazers in Spain took the Earl of Dene poisoner, who delivered unto him his so^
for a pledge: and because they would not present the said Earls son to the
King, who would give them little or nothing for him, the foresaid Allen
Buxule with other were sent to do this myschiefe, who slew the one, and cast
the other in prison.

John Boseham: Thomas Cornewalis, the. 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor. John
Philpot his charity.


Sir John Philpot Grocer, the. 28. of October.

This John Philpot Mayor of London, gave to the same City certain tenementes,
for the which the Chamberlain pays yearly to xiij. poor people, every of
them seven pence the week for ever, and as any of those thirteen persons
dies, the Mayor appoints one, and the Recorder another.

The Scotts began to Rebel, and a Squire of theirs, 1379 Tho. Walsing.
called Alexander Ramsey, with fortye persons, in a night took the Castle of
Berwicke, but the ninth day following, the Earl of Northumberland recovered it,
and slew the Scots* that were therein.

The Merchants of London wickedly slew a rich merchant of Genua, for that he
would carry to a better market the spices that he had promised to bring into
this Country, the doers whereof were after apprehended, and some for that fact
executed, as after shall appear.

So great a mortality of men happened in the North parts Pestilence in the North.
Tho. Walls.
of England, as never had bin seen before, which the Scots seeing raunged:
through and slew with the sword, them that were sick of the plague, and so
pursued them that had not the plague, that they drove out of the Country
almost all the able men.

In a Parliament at London, it was decreed, that every Tax.
Duke should pay ten marks to the King, the Archbishops the like, Earls,
Bishops and mitered Abbots should give six marks, and every Monk. xl.
pence, no religious person, man or woman, Parson, Uicar, or Chapleine escaped
this tax. John Mountfort Duke of Brytaine, returned to his country, where he
was received with great honor.

A bushel of Wheat was sold for six pence: a gallon of Anno reg. 3. Wheat
and Wine cheap.
white Wine six pence, and a gallon of red Wine for four pence.

John Heylisdom: William Barret, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Tho.
Walsing. S. John Aru^dale drowned.


John Hadley Grocer, the. 28. of October.

John of Arundale, brother to the Earl of Arundale, was sent to help the Duke
of Brytaine, with many other noble knights and Esquires, who beginning their
voyage with spoiling their own Country, rauishing wives, widows, and Uirgins,
and robbing of Churches, were by tempeste driven on the rocks of a certain
Islande in Ireland, when they were al most miserablye drowned, with their
treasure and provisions which was of inestimable value. Sir T. Banister, Cro.
Matoris Lon.
sir Roger Trumpington, sir Nicholas K^riel, sir Thomas Dale, sir John Sentcler
and six other knights perished there the sixteenth of December.

In a Parliamente at London was granted to the King 1380
a tenth of the Ecclesiastical persons, and a fifteenth of the secular, upon
condition that no other Parliament should be holden from the Calendes of March
til Michaelmasse.

A combat was fought at Westminster in the kings presence, A combat at
Westminster.
between John Ausley knight, and Thomas Catrington Esquire, whom the forsayde
knight had appealed of treson, for selling the Castle of Saint Saviors, which
the Lord Chandos had builded in the I Will of Constantine in France, and the
knight overcame the Esquire.

Thomas of Woodstocke Earl of Buckingham, Thomas Percy, Hugh Caluerley, Robert
Knowles, Lord Basset, sir John Harleston, William of Windsore, approved and
tried Knights, were sent with a great power to aid the Duke of Brytaine, who
were conuayed to Caleis, and from thence rode about through France, spoiling
the Country, and slaying the people to the borders of Brytaine, and entered the
same without loss, either of man or beast.

In this journey sir John Philpot, Citizen of London John Philpot his good
service
deserved great commendations, who hired ships for them of his own charges,
and with his own money released the armor which the soldiers had gaged for
their victuals, more than a thousand in number.

The Scotts entered Comberlande, Westmerlande, and ye forest of Engelwood,
slew the inhabitauntes, drove away the Cattle, and robbed the Market and Town
of Penreth, and whiles the Earl of Northumberland prepared to have been
revenged, the king sent letters to the contrary. John Vian Anno reg. 4. French
men took VVinchelsey.
knight with the French kings galyes took the town of Winchelsea, put the Abbot
of Battle to flight and took one of his Monks.

He also brent the Towns of Apledor and Rye about the least of Saint Laurence.

The eight of September four Galeys of France came to Grauesende, and burnt a
great part of the Town.

Walter Ducket: William Knighthoode, the. 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Guns
invented. Polidor. Sebastian Munster


William Walworth Fishmonger, the. 28. of October.

About this time the making of Gunnes was found, by a certain Almaine, who
having the powder of Brimstone in a Mortar which he had beaten for a medicine,
and covered with a stone, as he stroke fire, a spark chanced to fall into ye
ponder, whereby a flame out of the mortar raised the stone a great height,
which after he had perceived, made a Pype of iron, and tempered the ponder
with other, and so finished that deadly engine, as reports Blondus, and R.
Volaterianus, the first that used shot, to their behalf and profit, were the
Venetians against the inhabitauntes of Genoa. During the Parliament at
Northampton, beginning the first of November, was hanged John Kirby that slew
the mercha^t of Genoa, whom he spoke of before.

In this Parliamente an exceeding great Tax was demanded, 1381 Great Tax.
which afterward was cause of great disturbaunce: Of all religious persons
men and women six shyllings eight pence, secular priests as much, and every
person, man or woman, four pence to the King, which was paid.

It was also ordained, that every couple wedded, should pay two shillings, for
every foot of Beast, and also homegilde, but this was never asked.

By means of which payment, in ye Summer following, the commons of Kent and
Essex, suddenly rebelled, they being Commons rebelled. John Bal his Sermon.
Tho. Walsing.
animated thereunto by John Ball a seditious Priest, who in his sermons used
to take for his Theme, When Adam dalfe and Eve spanne, who was then a
Gentleman, etc. Affirming that al men were made a like by nature, and therefore
ought to lay away the yoke of bondage, that they might enjoy the wished
liberty, etc. too shameful, sedicious, and damnable to be taught, which
nevertheless so pleased the common people, that they cried he should be
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England.

This rebellion began at Dertford in Kent, in manner as Rebellion began at
Dertford. Cro. S. Albons.
follows. The Collectours appointed to gather the foresaid groats or pole
money, coming into the house of John a Tiler, demanded ye same for him, his
wife, his daughter, and other his family: but the Tilers wife denied to pay for
her daughter, saying she was under age. The^ said yt Collector, that shall I
soon wit, and took the maid violently, and dishonestly searched whether she
were of age or no, wherewith the mother made an outcry, her husband being in ye
town at work. When tidyngs came to him, he caughte his lathing staff in his
hand, and ran reeking home, where he reasoning with the Collectour who made
him so bold, the Collectour being a proud fellow, let fly at the Tiler, but
the Tiler voyding the stroke, smote the Collectour on the head with his
lathing staff, that the brains fell out, where through great noyses arose in
the streates, and the poor people being glad, every man arrayed him to
support this John Tyler. Thus the commons drew together and went to Maidstone,
from thence back again to Black Heath, and so forth to London, and entered
the City on Corpus Christ's day, where they destroyed many goodly places of the
Rebels entered London. Sauoy S. John's. Highburi brent
nobles and other, as the Sauoy, Saint John's by Smithfielde, the Manor of
Highburie by Yseldon, and the Temple where the Prentises of law were lodged for
the increase of their study. They set out of the Tower of London (where the
King was then lodged) Simon Sudburie Archbishop of Canterbury, The Archb. of
Canterbury. The priour of S John's a Friar and John Leg beheaded.
Lord Chancellor of England, Robert Halles Priour of Saint John's, and
Treasurer of England, William Apelto^ a Friar Minor the Kings confessor, and
John Leg a Sergeaunt of the Kings, and beheaded them on the Tower hill: they
beheaded diverse other in many places, as sir John Cauendishe Lord chief
Justice of England, the Priour of Saint Edmundesburie, and other. Rychard
Lions a famous Lapidarie of London, was drawn out of his house and beheaded in
Chepe. They beheaded all men of Law, as well prentices, and utter Baresters, as
Justices, and al Jurers that they might get into their hands, they spared none
whom they thought to be learnes, were it never so little, especially if they
found any to have pen and ynke, they pulled of his whoode, and all with one
voice of trying out, as they had bin so many Devils, hale him into the streets
and cut of his head.

They also beheaded all Flemmings, not sparing any Flemmings beheaded.
for reverence of the church or other place, where they found them: they set
thirteen forth of the Friar Austines Church, and seauenteene out of another
Church in London* they took two and thirty in the Vintrie, and many other
here and there in the City and Southwarke, all which if they could not
plainly pronounce Bread and Cheese, but Brot and Cause, lost their heads* They
spoiled all books of law, records, and monuments they could meet withal,
and set al prisoners at liberty.

The king to pacify their fury, offered them peace, on Essex men pacified.
condition they would cease from burning of houses and slaughter of men,
which the Essex men took, and returned home, but the Kentishe men remained
burning and slaying as before. Whereupon the King sent sir John Newton The K
sent to VVat Tiler.
Knight, to Wat Tiler their Captain, to entreat him to come and talk with
him about his own demaundes: the Knight doing his message, Wat Tiler answered
that he would come at his own pleasure, nevertheless he followed softly,
and when he came near Smithfielde, where the king aboade his coming, the same
Knighte was sent again to meet him, and to know his requests, but Wat Tiler
seeing the knight come near unto him on horsseback, said it had become him
better to be on foot in his presence: the Knighte answered that it was no
harm, ^ith himself was also on horssebacke, therewith Watte Tyler drew his
dagger, and offering to strike, called the Knight The ^^outnesse of VVat Tiler.
traitor. The knighte aunsweared that he lied, and drew his dagger. The King
seeing the Knighte in danger, commanded him to alighte one foot and to
deliver his dagger unto Watte Tiler, and when his proud mind would not be
pacifyed, but would needs run on the Knighte, there came to the King the
Mayor of London William Walworth, and many other Knights and Esquires,
affirming it to be a shameful reproach if they should permit the Knight to
be murdered: Whereupon the King taking boldness upon him, commanded the
Mayor to arreste the Rebel, which Mayor being a man of incomparable
boldness, straight arrested him on the head, in such sort that he astonyed
him: and forthwyth they which attended on the King environed the Rebel, and
thruste him in, in diverse places of his body* with their weapons, and then
drew him from among the peoples feet, into the Hospital of Saint
Bartholmewe, which when VVat Tiler arested and slain.
the commons perceived, they cried out that their Captain was trayterouslye
slain, but the King rode to them, and said, what mean you to do, I am your
King, I will be your Captain, follow me into the field, there to have
whatsoever ye will require. They therefore followed him into the fields
without the suburbs toward Yseldon, and in the mean time the Mayor rod into
the City, raised the Citizens, and shortly returned with a thousand well armed
men, Sir Robert Knowles being their leader. The King and The Citizens of Lon.
delivered the King.
other in his company rejoicing of this unlooked for aid, sodainelye
compassed the multitude of the commons with fighting men, which commons
forthwyth throwing down bows, bills, and all other their weapons, fell
themselves to the ground, humbly craving pardon, which was granted, and
Charters delivered to the Captains of every shire, who then departed home. The
rude multitude being thus dispersed, the King made William Walworth Mayor,
Nicholas Brember, John Philpot and Robert Land Aldermen of London* Knights in
Smithfield* and upon the said Hill were created the Earls Marshal and Penbroke.
And a little after Nicholas Twiforde, and Adam (...)rmen of London were made
Knights.

Jack Straw being taken, when at London he should by The co^fessor of Jack
Straw.
judgment of the Mayor lose his head, confessed as follows.

The same time (says he) that we came to Black Hea^h, when we sent for the
King, we purposed to have murdered all the Knights, Esquiers and gentlemen that
should have Conspira^ie of the Rebels*
come with him, and to have led the king royally used, up and down, that
with the sight of him, al men especially the common people might have come
unto us the more boldelye, and when we had got together an innumerable
multitude, we would have suddenly put to death in every Country, the Lords
and masters of the common people, in whom might appear to be either counsel
or resistance against us: and specially we would have destroyed the Knights
of Saint John's, lastly we would have killed the King himself, and all men
that had ^in of any possession, Bishops, Monks, Chanons, Parsons, to be
brief, we would have dispatched: only begging Friars should have lived,
that might have sufficed for ministering the Sacraments in the whole Realm,
for we would have made Kings, Wat Tiler in Kente, and in every other shire
one. But because this our purpose was hyndered by the Archbyshoppe, we studied
how to bring him shortly to his end.

Against the same day that Wat Tyler was killed, we purposed that evening
(because that the poor people of London seemed to favor us) to set fire in
four corners of the City, so to have brent it, and to have divided the riches
at our pleasures amongst us. He added that these things they purposed to have
done, as God should help him at the end of his life.

After this confession made, he was beheaded, and his head set on London
Bridge by Wat Tilers and many other.

The principal leaders of the commons were Wat Tiler* Principal Captains.
the second Jack Straw, the third John Kirkby, the fourth Ale Jack Straw
beheaded.
Threder, the fifth Thomas Scot, y^ sixth Ralph Rugge: these and many others
were leaders of the Kentishe and Essex me^. At Mildenhall and Bury in Suffolk,
was Roberte Westbrom* that made himself king and was most famous after John
Wraw, who being a priest would not set crown upon crown, but left the name of
king and crown to the said Roberte. At Norwiche^ John Lercester a Dier
exercised the name and power of a king, til he was taken and hanged for his
pains. Here I think good to note some Epistles of John Ball and others, with
some short notes of their Devilish demeanor, under the color of zeal and
conscience, and so to end this matter.

John Bal Saint Marie Priest, gre^teth well all manner of men, Epistle of I. Bal^
ye may read an other in Tho. of VVa^^ingham new in Print.
and bids them in the name of the Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
stand manlike together in truth, and help truth, and truth shall help you:
now reigns pride in price, couetise is hold wise, leacherie without shame,
gluttonye without blame: envy reigns with treason, and sloth is taken in
great season. God do bote, for now is time Amen.

Jack Milner asks help to turn his Mil aright, he has Epistle of Jack
Milner.
grounden small, small, the kings son of heaven he shall pay for all: look thy
Mill go right with four sails, and the post stand in steadfastness, with
right and might, with skill and with will, let might help right, and skill
before will, and right before might, then goes our Mill arighte: and if might
go before right, and will before skill, then is our Mill misdight.

Jack Trewman does you to understand that falsenesse I leave out Jack
Carter, and this is Jack Trevvmans Epistle.
and guile has reigned too long, and truth has bin set under a lock, and
falsenesse reigns in every flock, no man may come truth too, but he sings
Si dedero: speak, spend, and speed, quoth John of Bathon, and therefore
sin fares as wild floude, true love is away that is so good, and Clearkes
for wealth wurcheth them woe: God do bote, for now is time.

When these rebels burned the Sauoy, one of them took One of the rebels by his
fellows, cast into the fire.
a goodly silver piece and hid it in his bosom, but another had spyed him and
told his fellows, which hurled him and the piece of plate into the fire,
saying: we be zealous of truth and Justice, and not thieves and robbers.

Two and thirty of them entering the seller of the Sauoy, xxxij. of the rebels
mured up.
drunk so much of sweet Wines that they were not able to come out, but were
shut in with wood and stones that mured up the door, they called and cried
seven days, and were heard of many, but none came to help them and so they
dyed there.

After a number of them had sacked the new Temple, The end of the Rebels.
what with labor, and what with wine, they lay down under the walls and
howsing, and were slain like swine, and one of them killed another for old
grudge and hatred, and others also made quick dispatch of them.

Watte Tiler being killed, Jack Straw and other their principal Captains
hanged, the hope and confidence of the commons decayed, but because the minds
of the King and Nobles was yet wavering, seeing the people ready to mischief,
they granted to them Charters of manumission and suffered them to depart, the
which being done, the king caused an army to be assembled from London, and
sent into al Countries that those who were his friends should make haste to
come to him to London, furnished with horse and armor, and it came to pass
that within three days he had a. xl. thousand horssemen about him in seemly
sort armed, he mustered them on Black Heath, himself ryding on a great
courser, with his standarde borne before him, when therefore so mighty an
army was assembled, the King was advertised that the Kentishe men had
eftsoons conspyred, whereupon he forth with set forewarde, but by the
mediation of the Nobles and great men of Kente that undertook for them, he
was stayde and pacisied with them, and then first Justices were sent to seek
and inquire of malefactors, and that Country became quiet at the sight of
them. Then the Mayor of London sitting in judgment, caused the malefactors to
be tried, as well of the City as also of Kente, Essex, Southsex, Norffolke,
and Suffolk and other Countries, that might be taken within the liberties of
the City, and all those whom he found guilty of the foresaid Treason, he
caused to hoppe headless, among the which were Jack Straw, John Kirkesty,
Alen Threder, etc. also John Starling of Essex, that gloryed to have beheaded
the Archbishop, was beheaded himself.

The king remained now at London, now at Waltham, with a great army of
armed men, considering what was to be done for the commodity of the realm.
At length the Counsel thought good to send the Kings commission into every
shire, for the resisting of the disquieters of the peace of the kingdom. These
commissions did much comfort the faithful subjects, and troubled the false,
for they were now compelled to seek corners, that before took upon them to
do all things abroad, lawyers now durst come forth of their dens, and
those which before fled from the tyranny of the time, looked for th^se that
now feared judgment and justice to be done on them.

The commons being thus feared, but not in all places alike, they of Essex
gathering a new multitude together at Byllarica, a village near to Hatfielde
Peuerell, decreed either to inioye lybertye gotten by force, or to dye in
fyghting for the same, they sent to the King then being at Waltham messengers
to know if he thought good to permit them to inioye their permitted Anno
reg. 5.
liberty, like to their Lords, and that they should not be compelled to come
to Courts but only to great Leetes twice in the year, unto the which the King
answered thus. Oh miserable and hateful both to Land and Sea, not worthy to
live: Do ye require to be equal to your Lords? ye were worthy to be put to
most shameful death: But fith ye are come as Messengers, ye shall not dye
now, to the end ye may declare your answeares to your fellows: declare to
them therefore on the Kings behalf, that as they were Husbandmen and bondmen,
so shall they remain in bondage, not as before, but more vile, without
comparison far, unto this. Whilst we live, and by Gods sufferaunce shall
govern the Kingdom with Wit, Strength, and goods, we will endeavor our selves,
to keep you under, so that the duty of your service, may be an example for
posterity, and that your matches both present, and that shall succeed, may
ever have before their eyes, and as it were in a Glass, your misery, and to
you matter to curse, and fear to commit the like. When the Messengers were
gone, there was sent straightwayes into Essex, Thomas of Woodstocke Earl of
Buckingham, and sir Thomas Percy brother to the Earl of Northumberlande, to
repress the boldness of the said commons. These Commons had fortified
themselves with ditches and carriages: nevertheless, although there was a
great number of them, with small business, they were scattred into the woods,
where the Lords enclosed them, least any of them might escape: and it came to
pass, that v. C. of them were slain, and viij. C. of their horses taken, the
other y^ escaped this slaughter, being gotten together, hasted to Colchester,
and began to stir the townsmen to a new tumult, and when they profited not
there, they weut to Sudbury, but the Lord Fitz Walter and sir John Harlestone
followed them, and slew as many of them as they list, and shut up the rest in
prisons. The king came to his Manor of Hauering at Boure, and after to
Chelmesford, where he appointed sir R. Trisilian his Justice to set and enquire
of the malefactors, wherefore y^ Essex men seeing the evils y^ hung over their
heads, there came above. 500. humbly to the King barefooted and bareheaded,
beseeching him of pardon and mercy. To whom pardon was granted, with
condition, to deliver the styrrers of the said trouble. It came therefore to
pass, that many were committed to word, upon whom, the Justice charged
xxiiij. men of their conscience to say the truth, and many being condemned,
were put to execution, by drawing and hanging, nine or ten being hanged on
one beam. The Justices that before had sit in Essex, Kent, London, and other
places, for all the multitude that were to be executed, used to head the
commons, till now it seemed not a kind of death answerable to so many and
manifest crimes. These things were done in Essex, the King being present: the
like by his Justices was done in other Countries.

John Ball Priest being taken at Couentrie, was brought John Ball hanged.
to Saint Albons, and there before the King condemned, drawn and quartered,
the fifteenth of July. He would not ask the King forgiveness, but utterly
despised him.

John Rote: John Hind, the 28 of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Northampton Draper, the 28. of October.

About the feast of All Saints, a Parliamente was began, which endured
long, to small purpose, by reason of contention among the Lords, especially the
Duke of Lancaster, and the Earl of Northumberland, whose quarrel in the end
was taken up by the King, and then the Lords proceeded to treat of the Kings
business and the Realms, but they lingered so long in vain, that nothing was
brought to effect, for hearing of the new Queens coming to Caleis, the
Parliament was proroged. There were diverse of ye Nobles sent to meet the
Bride, and she was conuayde with all the glory of the world unto Dover, many
both of her Country, and also of England, attending on her.

After the feast of the Epiphany, all the Nobility of the 1382
Realm assembled at London, to be present at the Kings marriage, and to do
their service according to the custom of every one in ancient time used. This
Uirgin named The King married.
Anne, the daughter of Veselaus King of Boheme, is at Westminster consecrate to
the Kings wife, and by the Archbishop of Canterbury is Crowned Queen. There
were Iustes kept for the honor of such a solem^^^ation, certain days
together, in which, both the Englishmen showed their force, and the Queens
Country men their pro^esse.

In this Queens days, began the detestable use of piked shoes, tied to their
knees with cheines of silver and gilt. Also, Piked shoes, high heads, and long
tayled govvnes, with women riding aside first used in England.
noble women used high attire on their heads, piked like horns, with long
trained Gowns, and rode on side Saddles, after ye example of the Queen who
first brought that fashion into this Land, for before, women were used to ride
astride like men. The solemnity of the marriage being ended, the Parliament is
now begone again, in which, many articles are proponed and decreed, to weete,
of admitting Strangers to sell personally their wares, without impeachment of
the Merchants of England: of the abrogating of Fi^^res, and silver garnishing
of girdles etc. of the price of Wines, that is, that the Tonne should not
exceed six Marks etc.

William Vfford Earl of Suffolk, in this Parliament, ^^ing elected by the
Knights of the Shires, to pronounce on their behalfes the business of the
Realm, the very day and hour in which he should have executed the business
he had taken in hand, as he was going up the stairs that led up into the
Chamber where all the Nobility of the Realm sat, he sodeinly fell down, and
among his men's hands that were about to hold him, he yielded up the ghost,
although being very merry, and feeling no evil, a little before, as even at
that instant he had entered Westminster Hall, of whose sodeine death, not only
all the Nobles of the Realm were greatly amazed, but all the meaner sort, for
in all his life time he had showed himself amiable to al men. After his death,
the Parliament was ended, after the Merchants of England had granted to the
King a subsedie, the Custom of vvoolles.
customs of wool for four years next ensuing; which the commons called Le
M^^tot. In this Parliament, the Lords and commons requesting it, Sir Richard
Scrope Knight was ordained as the man which in excellent knowledge and
inflexible justice, had not his like for his calling in this realm. Sir Hugh
Segraue Knight was made L. Treasourer.

Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, departed this life in Anno reg. 6.
Irelande, after he had brought that land all in manner unto peace and
quietness, having governed it most nobly and wisely.

About the feast of S. John Ante port latin, all the nobles of the Realm were
called to London, and other that of custom were wont to be called, although y^
Lent before there had bin another Parliament, as before we have showed, in
which, by the petition of the Knights of the Shires, John John VVravv hanged.
Wraw Priest, that was leader of them that did rise at Mildenha^e and Bury,
was adjudged to hanging and drawing, though many believed that he would have
bin redeemed with money. The xxj. of May was a great Earthquake in Earthquake.
England at nine of the clock, fearing the hearts of many, but in Kent it was
most behement, where it soncke some Churches, and threw the^ down to the
earth. There followed also Histo. Auri^.
another Earthquake the xxiiij. of May in the morning before the Sun rising,
but not so terrible as the first. Sir Richard Scrope is deprived of the
Cha^cellorship, which he had governed lawdably, and Rob. Braybroke B. of
London, is made Chancellor. There arrived in a great tempest, a Ship called a
Carike, at Sandwich, an huge vessel, and so fraught with riches, that she
might have furnished the want of all the land, if the envy of the inhabitants
would have permitted, but y^ Mercha^ts of London having much old wares, as
fruits, spices, oils, and such like, they co^pounded with ye Ienewayes to
forsake y^ Haven, and to pass over into Flanders, and so for y^ covetousness of
a few, y^ whole Realm sustained great hindera^ce.

Adam Bawme: John Sely, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Northampton Draper, the 28. of October.

About the feast of S. Thomas the Apostle, great raynes and inundations of
waters chanced, so that the water rose four times more in height than before,
drowning up Uillages and Cattle, destroying Bridges and Milles.

The Fishmongers in London, through ye counsel of John Northampton then Mayor*
William Ess^x, John More, and Stir against Fishmongers.
Richard Northburie, were greatly troubled, hindered of their liberties, and
almost destroyed, by congregations made against them: but in a Parliament at
London, by the Kings 1383
Charter patent, they were restored to their liberties.

About the month of May, the Bishop of Norwich sailed over the Seas into
Flanders with a great power, where he wanne the Towns of Graueling, Brugh,
Dunkerke, and Newport.

Whilst these things are thus doing in Flanders, the King of England and his
Queen, with their Bohemians, visited the Abbeys of this Realm, to the which,
their coming was very chargeable, for they came with an excessive number, all
which came to take, but not to give.

The Scotts taking occasion of the time, for that a great Anno reg. 7.
number were gone over with the Bishop of Norwich, entered into Northumberland,
and did much hurt to the inhabitants, taking prays in every place, and leading
away the people prisoners, and carrying them into Scotland: they took the
Castle of Warke upon the River of Twede, and brent it.

Simon Winchcombe: John Moore, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Parliament at London.


Sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28 of October.

About the feast of All Saints, a Parliament was holden at London, in which,
the half fifteenth was granted to the King by the Laytie, and shortly after
the half of a tenth by the Clergy, a portion of which money, the Lords of
the North demanded, because in this Parliament they were appointed to defend
those parts against the irruptions of Scotts, to whom, answer was made by
Sir William Wikeham, Bishop of Winchester, that they were made for that cause,
of poor men, rich me^ and Lords, that they might the more franckly keep the
Scotts, and that the King and Lords of the South parts should be the less
troubled. And because the Scotts came not to this Parliament, according to
covenant, and beside that did displeasures unto the inhabitants of the North
parts, it was decreed by this Parliament, that unto faithbreakers, faith
should be broken again, and that a chosen power should be sent thither, forth
of England, under the leading of Thomas of Woodstoke, to Thomas of VVoodstocke
sent against the Scotts.
weete, a thousand Lances, and two thousand Archers, to restreyne their
attemptes. These things being known, the Scotts being afraid of themselves,
in the end of the Parliament came, and were desirous to entreat of peace or
truse, but the Englishmen having tried their falsehoode so often times, would
neither treat, nor compounde with them, but commanded them to return home,
and warned them to save their heads as well as they might, and to defend their
rightes. The Scotts being returned, the Lords of the North took upon them to
defend the Country, till Thomas of Woodstoke Earl of Buckingham were ready
to come with a greater power.

The King took the temporalities of the Bishop of Norwich Temporalties of the
Bishop of Norwich seized.
into his hands, because he was disobedient to his commandment when he sent to
have stayde him from his journey into Flanders, and the Knights that were over
with him were put in prison, till they were redeemed with gold.

King Richard held his Christmas at his Manor of Eltham, and with him his
Queen Anne.

After Christmas, John Duke of Lancaster, which before Christmas went over into
France to treat of peace betwixt the Realms, returned into England bringing
with him an abstinence of war till the feast of Saint John Baptist, at 1384
what time he was to return to treat again, and to confirm the peace if it
might be agreed upon betwixt ye Kings.

The night of the Purification of our Lady, great Lightning and Thunder
happened, that put men in great fear: and shortly after John Northampto^,
otherwise called Combartowne, that had bin the year before Mayor of London,
that with his seditions had filled the City full of comber, attempted new
troubles, for in contempt of the Mayor that was elected for that year, Sir
Nicholas Brembar Knight, he went up and down with a multitude of seditious
people to guard him, not once, but oftentimes, to the terror of many, and when
the said Brembar Mayor would have withstanded his attemptes, the favorers of
the said John Combertowne were turned into such a fury, that a Cobbler, which
in his own estimation seemed to be Mayor, required the voices of the
communalty, for which cause, by the counsel of Sir Robert Knowles Knight, he
was drawn out of his house, and committed to prison, as a stirrer of
insurrection, which act for that time staide the commotion of the commons,
that were said to have conspired at that time to have murdered the elect
Mayor, and many other worthy men.

When Lent aproched, John Duke of Lancaster, with his brother Thomas of
Woodstoke, Earl of Buckingham, and an innumerable number of Knights,
Esquires, and Archers, went toward Scotland, but stayde in the North till all
the victualles in the Country were consumed: he did more hurt to the
inhabitants, than the Scotts had done before, at length, about the feast of
Easter, he entered Scotland, but did little good.

The custody of the Castle of Dover was vacant, by the death of Robert
Ashtonwald, then was made Connestable thereof Simon Burley.

After Easter, the Nobles came to a Parliament at Salisburie, Parliament at
Salisburie.
whither a certain Irish Friar, of the order of the Carmelites, or white
Friars, a Batcheler of Divinity, named John Latimer, hasted, and accused the
Duke of Lancaster, Duke of Lancaster accused.
that he had devised the Kings death, which Friar, was committed to Sir John
Holland Knight, till a day that was assigned him to make proof of that he had
said, but the night before the day given to the Friar, the said Sir John A
Friar tormented to death.
Holland, and Sir Henry Green, Knights, put a cord about the Friars neck,
and with the same cord tying him by the stones, hanged him up from the
ground, laying a stone of great weight upon his belly, till they by tormente
had made an end of his life. The morrow after, they ^a^sed the Friars body to
be drawn through the Town as a Traitor, that they might put away all
suspection, that he were put to death wrongfully: but it is to be wondered at,
that neither Esquire, Yeoman, nor Grome, or any other of mean estate, would
harm the Friar, but the Knights did it themselves, they were Judges,
Officers, and Executioners, and this was the fruit of this Parliament, except
that the King asked and had of the Laity half a fifteenth, and of the
Clergy half a tenth.

About this time, because the Scotts ceased not to do diverse Anno reg. 8.
domages to the Northumbers, the Earl of Northumberland Henry Percy, prepares
to invade Scotland, and to requite damage for damage, which enterprise
accomplished, the Earl was no sooner returned, and sent home his army, but
that the Scotts came again, and heaped up damage upon damage in the Country.

This Summer, Sir John Philpot, Knighte, and a most Sir John Philpot deceassed.
noble Citizen of London, that traveled for the commodity of the Realm more
than all other, and both with expenses laid forth, and good affection borne,
had oftentimes relieved the King, departed this life, leaving none behind him
his like in good affections.

About the beginning of August, the Duke of Lancaster went into France, to
treat with the Frenchmen of peace, or else of truce to be had, the Duke with
his company of noble men remaining long there, when it was thought that he
should have brought glad and joyful news to his Country, he returned with
knowledge of wars, to follow the beginning of the next Summer, the truce to
endure but^^^ the first day of May, and so he returned, after he had spente
500000. Marks of Silver.

Many of the Nobles assembled at Reading, to repress the John Northampton
convict, and committed to perpetual prison.
seditious sturres of John Northampton, late Mayor of London, that attempted
great and heinous enterprises, of the which he was convict, his own
Chapleyne uttering many things that he went about and had devised as
well to the hinderance and harm of the King, as of the City of London, and
when sentence should have bin pronounced against him, the King being present,
the wicked man made exclamation, and mainteyned that such judgment ought not
to pass in absence of his Lord the Duke of Lancaster, but yet the Justice
used such words, John (says he) the naughty deeds that are objected against
thee, thou ought to refell by battle, or else by the laws of the land to
be drawn, hanged, and quartered, and when he stood mute, nor would utter one
word, it was deecreede that he should be committed to perpetual prison, and
his goods to be confiscate to the Kings use, and that he should not come
within one hundred miles of London during his life, he was sent therefore to
the Castle of Tintagell in the confines of Cornwall, and in the mean space
the Kings servants spoiled his goods, John More, Richard Northbery, and other,
were likewise there convict, and condemned to perpetual prison, and their
goods confiscate to the King, for certain congregations by them made against
the Fishmongers in the City of London.

Nicholas Exton: John French, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28. of October.

About the feast of Saint Martine, a Parliament was holden at London, in the
which nothing was done worth the memory, but that which still was in hand,
and exacting of money of the Clergy and common people, to maintain the men
of war. And besides this, there was a Combat fought in listes betwixt an
Esquire of England, and one of A Combat fought.
Navarre, that had accused the English Esquire, whose name was John Welsh, of
Treason to the King and Realm, but the effect was, that when he was Captain
of Cherbrugh he forced the wife of this Nauaroys, as the said Nauaroys being
afterward overcome, and being ready to suffer death, did ^penly confess, for
the which cause, by the Kings judgment, he was drawn and hanged, although the
Queen and many other did make earnest intercession to have his life saved The
Parliament was not yet ended when new ^ came Bervvike lost, and vvo^^^ again.
out of the North of the taking of Berwike Castle by the Scotts, the custody
whereof, the Earl of Northumberland, Sir Henry Percy did possess, by right of
his predecessors. The Scotts by mediation of money, got entrance into that
Castle, by one that was put in trust with keeping of it. The Duke of Lancaster
that loved not the Earl, was glad of this hap when he knew it. It came to
pass therefore by the Dukes procurement, that the Earl was condemned by
judgment of the Lords there present, the which execution was within a short
while after releassed. The Earl of Northumberland, through the Kings favor
restored to his life and possessions, without any long delaye^, prepares al
furniture of war to beseege and win the said Castle of the^ that were
within it, and after he had gathered a mighty army, he sodeinly beseeged it,
and after he had layne about it a certain time, it was compounded betwixt them
without, and them within, that they within should forsake the Castle, and have
their lives and moveable goods, and for surrendering the Castle, they should
have of the Earl two thousand marks of English money, and by this means did
the Earl recover the Castle forth of the Scottishmens hands.

Through certain young men brought up with the King, Tho. Wal^.
there arose great dissension betwixt him and the Duke of Lancast^r; who
departed from the Court, and went to his Castle of Pomfret, which he had
fortified, but by means of the Kings mother, this discord was appeased for a
time.

The third of May was an Earthquake. 1^85 The King entered Scotland*


King Richard* with a great army entered Scotland, but the enemies would not
show themselves, wherefore he brent the Country and returned. The eighteenth of
July there was an Earthquake. Sir John de Vienne that served the French King,
was sent into Scotland with a great multitude of Ships and men of war, that
ioining with the Scotts, they might in^e^t all England, and that whilst they
might^ draw the power of this Realm that way forth, the French King with his
Navy and army, might the more at liberty enter other parts of the Realm, few
or none being left at home to prohibit them their entry. The arrival of the
said John being known in England, the King with all the Nobility prepared
themselves to make a journey thither: The King makes a journey into Scotland.
there came flocking unto the King such a number of Knights, Esquires, and
Archers, as the like had not bin heard of in those days, in so much, as the
number of Horses amou^ted to three hundred thousand, as they were judged. The
King rejoiced heereat, as well he might, but the rejoicing was shortly darkened
at York, by fierceness of Sir John Holland the Kings brother, that slew the
Lord Ralph Stafford, Ralph Stafforde ^ayne.
son to the Earl of Stafford, in the way as he went to the Queen, whose
servant of household he was, and greatly in fa^eur with her, and he was no less
beloved of the King, as he that had bin brought up with him, and bin his
playfellow from his tender age, where the King taking great indiguation,
determined to pursue the said Sir John Holland: he caused therefore his goods
to be co^fiscate. But Sir John Holland fled to Beuerley, there to enjoy the
liberty of the Church. The Lady Jane the Kings mother, sent to entreat him
for her other son, and his brother, but when the messengers were returned to
Wallingforde, and that the mother could perceive no hope of grace to be gotten
in that behalf of the King, she took it heau^^ie, and fell sick, and Queen
Jane the Kings mother dyed.
within four or ^^ue days departed this life, her body being seared and
closed in Lead, was kept at Wallingford, till the Kings return forth of
Scotland, then to be buried at Stanford, in the Church of the Friars Minors.

In the month of August, the King of England with a mighty power entered
Scotland, to whose force the Scotts and Frenchmen perceiving themselves not
able to match, they seek to get them into the wooddes and places where they
might be out of the way. The English army then, the which there has not bin
seen a fairer, stronger, or greater, rides through the Country, that was
destitute of inhabitants, ^^yd of Cattle, and wanting victualles, for the
land was left desolate (as our men confessed) that they saw not so much as a
bird, Owls only excepted. They found green Corn on the ground, very fair
and plentiful, which they either eat up with their Horses, or tread down
with their feet, but the enemies fleeing battle, our men did nothing to be
accounted of, but brent the Abbey of Melroys, and the Meltoys and Edenborough
brent.
Town of Edenborough, with such houses as they found by the way. When our
army was come to Edenborough, and that victualles failed them, many of them
began to ware sick, and some to die for hunger, whereupon, the King returned
with his army into England. While King Richard was in Scotland, the Scotts
and Frenchmen entered into England, brenning Towns, taking spoils, and
leading away many prisoners, returned home into their Country.

John Organ: John Churchman, the 28. of September, Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir* Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28. of October.

The Soldiers of Caleis went secretly forth into France, and got a booty of
four thousand Sheep, and three hundred head of great beasts, which they draw
to their holds.

About the feast of Saint Martine, there was a Parliament at London, in which,
the Laytie granted to the King a fifteenth and a half, with condition, that
the Clergy should give a tenth and a half, William Courtney, Archbishop of
Canterbury standing there against, said, the Church ought to befree, and in no
wise to be taxed by the Laytie, which answer A bill put against the Clergy
for their temporalties.
so moved the commons, that they forthwith presented to the King a bill against
the Clergy of the Realm, moving him to take from them their temporalities,
and thereby to abate their pride, but the King hearing the inordinate cryings
out on this side, and the just answers of the other, he commanded that the
Bill should be cancelled, and such inordinate petitio^s to cease, saying, that
he would preserve the Church during his time, in as good state as he found it,
or in better. The Archbishop therefore having made the Clergy privy, went
to the King, and declared to him that he with his Clergy of their whole
consents and free wills, had provided for his uses a Tenth, which grant the
King so thankefully received, that he openly affirmed, that he had rather have
this free grant, than any other four times double, that were constreyned.

The eleventh of Noueinber, Robert Vere, Earl of Oxford, States created.
was made Marquess of Diuelin in Ireland: Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of
Gloucester: and his brother Edmonde, Earl of Cambridge, Duke of York: Michaell
de la Poole Chancellor of England, was made Earl of Suffolk, and had given
him by the King a thousand marks by the year. The Earl of March, Mortimer,
was proclaimed heir apparent Lib. Peter. col.
to the Crown. Also, King Richard at the earnest request of the Bishops,
restored to the Bishop of Norwich his temporalities which he had holden from
him many years. King Richard, with Queen Anne his wife, kept their Christmas
at Eltham, whether came to him the King of Ermony, under pretense to reform
peace betwixt the Kings of England, but what his coming profited, he only
understood, for beside innumerable gifts that he received of the King and of
the Nobles, the King granted to him a Charter of a thousand pounds by year
during his life. He was (as he affirmed) chased out of his Realm by the
Tartarians, and for that cause he got great gifts of the Christian 1386
Priuces. About the feast of Easter, John Duke of Lancaster, with a great
company of Knights, Esquires, and Archers, prepares to go into Spain, which
was due to him by the inheritable right of his wife the Lady Constance,
daughter sometime to Peter, King of Castile and Lion, so that now he meant to
challenge it either with consent of the inhabitants, or by law of arms. He
with a great power took the Seas, and landed in Spain, at the Haven of
Greyne, on the even of Saint Lawrence, with all his Navy in safety.

At the suit of the King of Spain, King Richard releassed out of prison John
Northampton, John More, and Richard Norburie.

The Londoners fearing y^ coming of the French K. ran to their walls, and
pulled down houses near about ye City.

About Michaelmas, the Nobles came to the Parliament at London, with great
numbers of armed men, to the end they might be ready to withstand the
Frenchmen who were coming, but through contrary winds returned.

The King created Robert Vere Marquess of Irelande, Robert Vere Duke of Ireland
Duke of Ireland.

Not long after this, Michaell de la Pole was by y^ Knights of the Parliament
deposed from his Chancellorship, and amerced to pay to the King 20000. Marks,
but the King caused this to take small effect.

William Stondon: William More, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Nicholas Exton Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

Richard Earl of Arundell, and Tho. Mowbray Earl of Notingham, went to the
Sea, of the which, the first was made Admiral, and upon y^ Uigill of our Lady
the Annuntiation, a great Navy of Flanders, France, and Spain, fraught with
me^ of 1387
war, and diverse engines, was discovered, with whom, the Earls encountered,
and took of them 100. ships and more, the which contained xix. M. Tonnes of
Wine, which they Rochell Wine taken.
brought to diverse parts of England, whereby Wine was then sold for thirteen
shillings four pence the Tonne.

Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland for sooke his wife, a young Lady noble and
fair, borne of the Lady Isabell, daughter to y^ noble K. Edward, and married
another that came with Queen Anne forth of Boheme: she was called in the
vulgar tongue of her Conntrey Lancecrona. The Lords took indignation heerewith,
especially the Duke of Gloucester, Uncle to ye young Lady that was forsaken. The
Duke of Ireland studied how to take the Duke of Gloucester out of ye way. Easter
was now past, the time, in which the Duke of Ireland should have transported
into Ireland, but least there should be too much stir in the Realm among
the Lords, the King as it were to bring him to the water side, goes with him
into Wales, as not to leave him, but there to keep him, that they might denise
how to take away the D. of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell, Warwike, Darby,
and Notingham, with other. There were with the^ the Earl of Suffolk, Michaell
at Pole, Robert Tresilian Justice, and many other, which no more slowly than
the D. of Ireland, conspired the death of the said noble me^. After a great
time was passed, the King, as if the Duke of Irela^ds journey had bin
forgotten, returned with him and the other forth of Wales, to the Castle of
Notingham, there to treat of Anno reg. 11
the death of the said noble men: there therefore he sent for diverse from
London, whom he knew would be ready to which way soever they should be moved:
he called thither also all the Sherifes and Justices of the Realm, and there
interdited the Lords of many crimes which the King had imagined against them.
In the mean time, the rumor of this doing came to the Lords ears, whereupon
first of all ye Kings Uncle, the D. of Gloucester, that he might mitigate the
Kings displeasure, before the Bishop of London, and many other Nobles,
swearing upon the Evangelists, took it upon his oath, that he never had
imagined any thing to the kings hinderance, or done any thing to his
displeasure, except that he had not given good countenance to the D. of
Ireland, nor would hereafter give him any, who had dishonested his kinswoman,
the which he firmly had determined to revenge.

William Venor: Hugh Forstalfe, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Nicholas Exton Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

The D. of Gloucester calling together secretly the Earls of Arundell, Warwike,
and Darby, that were in like danger of co^demnatio^, if they provided not the
more speedily, he discovers to the^ the matter: they therefore gathering their
armies together, determine to talk with the King upon the premises. Contraryly
the King for his party did deliberate how he might take each of the^ by
themselves out of the way, and first he sent to the Castle of Rigate, where
the Earl of Arundell lay, the Earl of Northumberland with many other so
arrest him, who perceiving a great number of me^ of war about him, fearing to
do that he was commanded, departed without doing his errand for which he came,
after whom, there were sent many that by night should have taken him, or have
slain him, but a messenger sent from the D. of Gloucester, prevented their
coming, that caused him to ride al night, so that in the morning he was come
to Haringey, having passed with his army a xxx. miles, not without great
travail, where he found assembled the D. of Gloucester, and the Earl of
Warwike, with a great power of men. The K. being informed of this assembly in
Harnesey wood, as is said, demanded of his familiars what was to be done in
this case, but in y^ end, by the mediation of the^ that came betwixt the^, the
matter was brought to this issue, that y^ Lords should come to Westminster to
receive answer before y^ King of those things, the Bishop of Ely, with many
other me^ of worthy credit, taking an oath for y^ Kings part, that no fraud,
deceit, or peril, should be prepared. When the Lords had prepared themselves
according to ye covenant, the foresaid mediators for peace sent the^ word, yt
treason was devised by an ambush laid for the^, in a place called the Mewes,
near to Charing Cross, and therefore willed the^ not to come, but with sure
hand, whereupon they stayed there, and the K. demanding why the Lords kept not
covenant, the B. of Ely answered, because (says he) there is an ambush laid of
a M. armed men or more, in such a place, contrary to the covenant, and
therefore they neither come, nor repute you to be faithful: the King moved
forthwith, swear he knew of no such thing, and therefore commanded the
Sheriffs of London, that going to the Mewes, they should kill, if they found
any assembled there for that cause, but Thomas Treuit, and Nicholas Brembar
Knights, had secretly sent away the armed men to London: the King therefore
sent again to the Lords, who streightwayes came to Westminster with a strong
power, against whose coming, the King adorning himself with Kingly robes,
with Crown and Scepter, enters Westminster Hall, where the Bishop of Elie,
Lord Chancellor, speaking for the King, demanded the cause of their assembling
of such a power, whereunto the Lords answered, that it was done for the Kings
profit, and the Realms, to pluck from him the Traitors which he kept about
him, whom they named to be Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland: Alexander Neuell
Archbishop of York: Michaell at Pole, Earl of Suffolk: Robert Trisilian, a
false Justice: Nicholas Brembar, a false Knight of London: and thereupon they
threw down their gloves, swearing that they would prosecute it by battle:
nay says the King, it shall not be so, but in the next Parliament which was
appointed to be holden the morrow after the Purification of our Lady, all this
was pacified for that time.

A manner of exhalation in likeness of fire, appeared in y^ Strange likeness
of fire. John Leycester.
night in many places of England, which went with men as they went, and stayde
as they did, sometime like a Wheel, sometime like a Barrel, sometime like a
Timberlogge, but when many went together, it appeared to be far off.

The Lords departing from the K. notwithstanding kept together, which seemed
great wisdom in them, for the D. of Ireland in the parts of Chester and
Wales, had assembled a great number, whose Captain was ye Connestable of
Chester, Thomas Moleneux, a man of great wealth, and hardy. The D. of Ireland
with such a multitude hasted toward London, yt joining with the Londoners, he
might make the^ both as it were an invincible army, but ye D. of Ireland riding
forth in stately and glorious array with ye army, thinking none durst have
encountered him, sodeinly as he looked on the one side, he beheld where the host
of the Lords was ready not far from them tarying his coming, in the midst of
the valley, with which sight, his heart streightwayes failed, and he said,
friends, I must fly, for a greater puissance seems to be yo^der, against you
they have no quarrel, so ye I being shifted away, ye shall escape well enough,
and forthwith setting spurs to his horse, he flees away. There was then ye
foresaid Tho. Moleneux y^ prepared himself to the battle, for the Lords
were not yet al come to that place, who when he had fought a while, being
awearied, entered the river which was there by. Among other sir Thomas Mortimer
knighte, exhorted him to come up, or else he would shoot him through in the
river: if I do come up says Thomas Moleneux, will thou save my life, I do
make no such promise (says he) but either come up or you shall steight die for
it. To who^ (he answered) suffer me to come up and let me fight either with
thee or some other, and dye like a man. As he came up, the knight caught him by
the Helmet, and plucked it off his head, and streighte ways with his dagger
struck him into the brains.

The Duke of Ireland fleeing, came to the river of Thamis, and forced his
horse to enter, in the which being made of an horsseman a swimmer, he got to
the other side: his horse, Helmet, gauntlets and breast plate came to the share
of the Lords, so that he was thought long after to be drowned* but he got
over into Flaunders.

The Archbishop of York fled, and Robert Tresilian, and Michael de la Pole
got him to Caleis. The Lords being returned from the battle, which had bin
nere to Burforde, fast by Bablack, made great joy for the overthrow of their
enemies, but much lamented the escape of the Duke of Ireland.

A head of Earth was made at Oxforde by Art of Negromancie, that at a time
appointed, spoke these words, Caput decidetur, The head shall be cut off, Caput
Eleuabitur; The head shall be lift up: Pedes eleuabuntur super caput, The
feet shall be lift above the head.

Dissension fell at Oxford between the Sotherne and Welsh men, on the one parts,
and Northern Scholars on the other, where through many were slain, and the
more part went to their Countries, wherefore the Chancellor was deprived, and
Doctor Nicholas Brightwel Deane of Newerke in Leicester was made Chancellor.

The Lords hasted to London, where the king kept his Christmasse in the Tower
of London, they having assembl^ an army of near hand. 40000. the morrow
after Christmasse day came to London and mustered in the fields, where they
might be seen of the^ in the Tower: the Londoners were then in greatfeare,
waying diverse perils as the Kings displeasure, if they opened their gates to
the Lords, and if they shut them forth, the indignation of the indiscreet
multitude. The Duke of Gloucester with other entered the Tower, and having a
little talk with the King, they recited the conspiracy, whereby they had bin
indicted, and they showed forth also the letters, which he had sent to the
Duke of Irelande, that he should assemble an army to their destruction. etc.
in the end the King promised on the next morrow to come to Westminster, and
there to entreat at large for reformation of all matters.

In the morning the King came to Westminster, where after a little talk, the
Nobles said that for his honor and commodity of his Kingdom it was
behouefull, that the traitors, whisperers, flatterers, and unprofitable people
were removed out of place, and that other might be placed in their rooms,
which when the King had granted, they judged that Alexander Neuell
Archbishop of York, John Forde Bishop of Durham, Friar Thomas Rushoke the
Kings Confessor Bishop of Chichester, should be banished. They expulsed
also the Lord Souch of Haringworth, Burnel and of Beamount, Albery de Vere,
Baldwine de Bereforde, Richard Aderburie, John Worth, Thomas Clifford, and John
Louel knights, not as altogether dismissed but to appear at the next
Parliament: there were certain Ladies also expelled the Court, as
unprofitable. They arrested Simon Burley, William Elmham, John Beauchamp of
Holte steward of the kings house, John Salisburie, Thomas Treuet, James
Barnes, Ni. Dagworth, and N. Brember Knights. They took also the Chaplens
Richard Clifforde, John Lincoln, Richard Mitforde and Nicholas Slake Deane of
y^ kings Chapel, and John Blake an Aprentice of the law, all which was sent
to diverse prisons.

The third day of February a Parliament was begone at Westminster, to y^ which
the Lords came with a sufficient army, and this Parliament continued until the
feast of Pentecost. 1388
The xj. of February was Robert Tresilian Justice of y^ Kings Bench, a
Cornishman arested at Westminster, where he had lain hid in sanctuary, and was
the same day drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there, with a great
ado was hanged: consequently by judgment of the Lords, Nicholas Brembar
Knight, was put to the like execution. After which John Salisburie, and James
Barnes knights were by judgment of the Parliament drawn and hanged, then John
Beauchampe of Holt the Kings steward, whom the King purposed to have made
Baron of Bridgenorth, was drawn and hanged. John Blake Esquire was hanged and
drawn, and John Vske a Sergeaunt at arms was drawn and hanged. Lastly on the
fifth of May sir Simo^ Burley Lord Chamberlayne to the King, and Conestable of
Dover, was beheaded, although the Earl of Darbie did what he could to save
him, for the which great dissension rose betwixt him and the Duke of Gloucester.

There was condemned also in the same Parliamente these Justices, Roberte
Belknape, John Holte, Roger Fulthorpe: and William Brough, John Locton,
Richard Graye, Justices, with the Lords before fled, were all banished.

There was granted to the King, of the Clergy half a tenth and of the Laytie
half a fifteenth, and of the Marcha^ts twelve pence of the pound, three
shillings of the Tun, liij. shillings four pence of the sack of Wool. The
Duke of Gloucester, and sir John Cobham, asked pardon of the Abbot of
Westminster, for violence done in ye sanctuary of Westminster, in the taking
of the Justice Trisilian. The last save one of May there were delivered out of
the Tower W. Elmhame, T. Treuet, and Nicholas Dagworth Knights. Also the first
of June, John Holand the Kings brother was created Erie of Huntington.

The third of June, the king in the Church of Westminster renewed the oath,
which he took when he was crowned, and all the Lords swear homage and fealty
to him, and all the Bishops did excommunicate all those that would go about
to hinder the statutes of this last Parliament, or y^ Anno reg. 12
great Charter.

After Whitsontide Richard Earl of Arundale, with a company of valiaunte men
went to the sea, and fought with certain ships of his enemies, taking
drowning* or bre^ning. lxxx. ships, he entered into the I Will of Beas, which he
spoiled, and brent.

The same year the Scotts prepared themselves that as soon as the truce was
exspired they might be ready to invade the North parts, and with a great
army entered England, committing great slaughters of people and took booties in
every place, and led away many prisoners, and burned* Towns, and approached
to Newcastel upon Tyne, and picht their Tents not far from thence. There was
then in the same Town sir Henry Percy the younger, and Sir Ralph his brother,
both desirous of warlike renown, and sore enemies to the Scotts. This sir
Henry came upon them on the sudden, and assailed them in the camp, making
great slaughter of them: William Douglas also chief Captain of the Scotts,
beholding the thing that a thousand times he had wished, that is, sir Henry
Percy within his Camp, rydeth against him, but was slain by the said
Henry, and then comes the Earl of Dunbar with an excessive number of
Scotts, and took the said Henry, with his brother Ralphe, slaying many
English men in that place: but yet the Scotts lost many of their best
men.

This battle was at Otterborne, the soarest fought that Battle at
Otterborne. John Belandine. John Mayor. ^. Frosert. ^ ^h. Rudborae. Parliament
at Cambridge.
ever was between English men and Scotts (says Froysert)

The seventh of September a Parliament was holden at Cambridge, in which were
new statutes ordained for servants wages, for beggars, for weapons not to be
born, of plays or games none to be used but shooting, of the staple to be
brought from Middleborow to Caleis, etc. and in the end a tenth of the
Clergy and a fifteenth of the Laytie.

Thomas Austine: Adam Carlehul, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Nicholas Twyforde Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

The sixth of October as sir John Treuet rode with the King to the kings
lodging, which was at Bernewel, as he forced his horse too much with the
spurs, the horse falls and breaks the inner parts of the rider, who
lived till the next day.

King Richard discharged the old officers of his Court, 1389
and also his Counselors, appointing other at his pleasure: he took the Seal
from Thomas Arundale Archbishop of York, and delivered it to William Wickam
Bishop of Winchester, and made him Chancellor: the Bishop of Excester his
Treasurer: and Edmund Stafford Keeper of the privy Seal.

A truce was granted for three years betwixt England and France.

A fighting among Gnats at the Kings manner of Shine, where they were so thick
gathered, that the air was darkened with them: they fought and made a great
battle. Two parts of them being slain, fell down to the ground, the third
part having got the victory flew away, no man knew whether. The number of the
dead was such, that might be swepte up with Besomes, and Bushels filled
with Anno reg. 13
them.

Michael at Pole sometime Earl of Suffolk, and Chancellor of England
deceased at Paris.

John Walcotte: John Loueney, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Vener, Grocer, the. 28. of October.

In the month of November, John Duke of Lancaster came from the parties
beyond the seas into England, after he had abidden in Spain and Gascoigne,
three years space, who in Spain first tasted great misfortunes, yet in the
end brought his matters to very good case, not with the force of men, but by
the favor of God: for when he came first to yt parts of Spain with an army
sufficient enough, through want of victualles, they first dyed through
hunger, and after through flixe, so that 1000. famous knights of his army
dyed miserably, the residue leaving the Duke, fled to the French army.

King Richard with his Queen Anne held their Christmasse at Woodstocke, and
the Duke of Lancaster in the Castle of Hertforde. The same time John Hastings
Earl of Penbroke, as he was desirous to Just, he was stricken about the privy
parts, by the Knight that ran against him, called 1390
sir John Saint John, where he dyed.

In a Parliamente at London it was ordained that none should purchase
provisions at the Popes hands: there was granted to the King xl. shillings of
every sack of wool, and of the pound six pence. John Duke of Lancaster was
made Duke of Aquitaine, by the Rood and Bonet, which the King gave him, and
Edward the Duke of Yorkes son was made Earl of Rutlande, to whom the king
gave the Castle of Okam. Anno reg. 14


A great Pestilence in the North parts of England, so that in a little space a.
1100. were buried in the City of York.

A Merchant of Dertmouth waged the Navy of ships, of the Ports, of his own
charges, 34. ships laden with Wine, to the sum of. 1500. Tun.

A woeful variaunce rose in Oxforde, for the Welche and Southern Scholars
assaulted the Northern, whereby many murders were done on each side, and a
field was appointed, but by help of the Duke of Gloucester it was appeased,
and the Welsh men bannished.

John Francis: Thomas Viuent, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Adam Bawme Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

The. x. xj. and. xij. of October the King held a great Court at London, in
the Bishops Palace and a great insting in Smithfield, to the which Court
came many strangers forth of France, Almain, Zealand, and many other parts,
bringing with them horses and armor, in which pastimes there was given first
the Badge of the White Heart with golden chains and crowns. And upon Saint
Edwardes day the King held his feast in his Regalibus, sitting crowned at
mass with his Scepter. etc. and likewise the Queen, and they sat likewise at
the table at Kenington crowned, at which solemnity were present the Earl of
Saint Paul, and his wife, sister to the King of England, and the Earl of
Ostreuaunt who was made Knight of the Garter.

The Duke of Gloucester took his journey toward Spruys, 1^91
but being tossed with unfortunate storms, driven now hither, now thither,
was so far distant of hope, that he dispayred of life, and at length after he
had passed the Barbarous coasts of Denmark, Norway and Scotland, he arrived
in Northumberlande, and came to the Castle of Tinmouth where having refreshed
himself certain days, he took his journey toward his manner of Plecy.

Such a mortality increased in Norffolke, and many other Countries, that it
was not unlike to the great pestilence, within York, there dyed a. xj.
thousand persons.

The Citizens of London took out of the Orphans cheste. Anno reg. 15
2000. marks to buy victualles, and the. xxiiij. Aldermen each of them laid
out twenty pound to like purpose of buying corn, which was bestowed in
diverse places, where the poor might buy it at an appointed price, and such
as lacked money to pay down, put in surety to pay in yt year following.

A Brewer that dwelt at the sign of the Cock in Westcheape by the little
Conduite, near unto Powles gate, was murdered in the night time by a thief
that came in at a gutter window, as it was known long after by the confession
of the same thief, when he was at the Gallows to be hanged for fellonie, but
the Brewers wife was first burnt therefore, and three of his men drawn to
Tiborne and there hanged wrongfully.

John Chadworth; Henry Vamer, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Hind Draper, the. 28. of October.

A Parliament began at London on the Friday next after the feast of Al Saints,
wherein half a tenth by the Ceargie, and half a fifteenth by the Laity was
granted to the king, which money should serve for the treaty to be had for
peace with the French men, which treaty the Duke of Lancaster should
prosecute.

King Richard with Queen Anne his wife, four Bishops, as many Earls, the
Duke of York, many Lords, and fifteen Ladies, held a royal Christmasse at
Langley near to Saint Albons. The same Christmasse day a Dolphin came forth of
the sea and playde himself in the Thamis at London, to the Bridge, for showing
hapily the tempests that were to follow within a week after, the which being
seen of the Citizens and followed, was with much difficulty intercepted, and
brought again to London, showing a spectacle to many, of the height of his
body, for he was ten foot in length. These Dolphins are fishes of the sea, yt
follow the voices of men, and rejoice in playing of instruments, and are wont
to gather themselves at music. These when they play in rivers, with hasty
springings or leapings, do signify Tempest to follow. The seas containt nothing
more swift nor nimble, for oftentimes with their skippes, they mount over the
sails of ships.

The King sent to the Londoners requesting to borrowe of 1392 Tho. Walsing.
them one thousand pound, which they stoutely denied, and also evil
entreated, bette and near hand slew a certain Lumbard that would have lent
the King the said su^^me, which when the King heard he was maruellously
angried, and calling together almost all the nobles of the land, he opened to
them the malitiousnesse of the Londoners, and co^playned of their presumption,
the which noble men gave counsel, that their insolency should with speed
be oppressed, and their pride abated. By the Kings judgment therefore was the
Mayor of London and the Sherifes, with other of the best Citizens arrested, the
Mayor was sent to Windsor Castle, and the other to other prisons, til the King
with his counsel should determine, what should be done with them, and there it
was determined, that from thenceforth the Londoners should not chose nor have
any Mayor, but that the King should appointe one of his Knights to be ruler
of the City: their privileges were revoked, their liberties adnulled, and
their laws abrogated. The king then appointed to be Warden of the City a
certain Knighte called sir Edward de Dalingrige, but he was quicklye deposed
by the King, because men said he favored the Londoners, and Baldwin Radinton
was constituted in his place. In the mean time, through suit of certain
Knights, but Anno reg. 16
specially of the Duke of Gloucester, the King is somewhat pacified, and by
little and little abateth the rigor of his purpose, calling to mind the
diverse honors, and the great gifts he had received of the Londoners,
whereupon he determines to deal more mildely with them, and to call them to
some hope of grace and pardon, he sends commandment to them to come to
Windsore, there to show their pryuiledges, liberties and laws, which being
there showed some of them were ratifyed and some condemned, but they could not
obtain the Kings full favor, till they had satisfied ye King of the injuries
which was said they had done, the King at this assembly at Windsor, had got
together almost all the Lords, and so great in army, that the Londoners had
cause to be afraid thereof, about the which preparation he was at great
charges, for the which it was sure that the Londoners must pay. They
therefore not ignoraunte that the end of these things was a money matter,
submitted themselves to the Kings pleasure, offering ten thousand pound. They
were yet dismissed home to return again, uncertain what satisfaction and sum
they should pay.

When the Citizens were returned, and that the nobles and other were gone home:
the King hearing that the Londoners were in havens, and dismayde, he said to
his men, I will go (says he) to London, and comfort the Citizens, and will not
that they any longer despair of my favor, which sentence was no sooner known
in the City but al men were filled with incredible joy, so that every of
them generally determined to meet him, and to be as liberal in gifts as they
were at his coronation. The king therefore as he came from Shine in Surrey to
London, with Queen Anne his wife. On the xxj. of August, the principal
Citizens rode to meet them at Wandesworth, and at Saint Gorges Church in
Southwarke they were received with procession of Rob. Braybroke Bishop of
London, and all his Clergy of the City, who conuayed him through London, the
Citizens, men women and children in order meeting the King, and doing him
honor, attended on him to Westminster. As he passed the City the streets were
hanged with cloth of gold silver and silk. The Conduite in Chepe ran with red
and white Wine, and by a child Angel-like he was presented with a very costly
crown of gold, and the Queen with another. A table of the Trinity of gold
was given to the King, valued worth eight hundred pound, and another to the
queen of Saint Anne* because her name was Anne, with diverse other gifts, as
horses, trappers, plate of gold and silver, clothes of gold, silk, veluets,
Basins and Ewers of gold, also gold in coin, precious stones, and jewels, so
rich, excellent, and beautiful, that the value and price might not well be
esteemed, and so the Citizens recovered their ancient customs and liberties,
and then the kings Bench from York, and the Chauncerie from Notingham, was
returned to London. And it was granted to them that they might choose them a
Mayor as before time they had done. The Londoners believed y^ by these gifts
they had escaped all danger, and that from thenceforth they should be quiet,
but they were deceived, for they were compelled to give the K. after this 10000,
pound, collected of the commons in great bitterness of mind, and so the
troubles of y^ Citizens came to quietness, which trouble the Dolphin in Thamis
at Christmasse last past did happily signify a far off. W. Caxton and Robert
Fabian report these troubles to happen through a fray in Fleetstreete, about an
horse loaf taken out of a Bakers basket, by a yeoman of the Bishop of
Salisburies, and that the same troubles were pacified, and liberties again
restored by means of Richard Grauesend Bishop of London, in reward whereof the
Citizens repair to the place of burial in the middle I Will of Saint Paul's Church
etc. but all that is untrue, for at this time Rob. Brabroke was Bishop of
London, and Richard Grauese^d had bin Bishop, and deceased in the time of
Edward the first, in Anno. 1303 almost 90. years before this time. Moreover
the place of burial in Saint Paul's, whereunto the Mayor and Citizens of London
have repaired, is of William, who was Bishop of London in the time of William
Conqueror, who purchased the first Charter of the said king William, for ye
same City as I have before declared.

Gilbert Maghfelde: Thomas Newington, the. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Stoudon Grocer, the. 28. of October.

Albeit Vere was created Earl of Oxforde, in a Parliament at Winchester, and
William Scrope Uizechamberlaine, the same William Scrope bought of William
Mountacute Earl of Salisburie the I Will of Man, with the crown, for the Lord of
this I Will is called king, and it is lawful for him to be crowned 1393
with a crown of Gold: sir John Euers Knighte Conestable of Dover, and the
Kings steward died suddenly, and T. Percy brother to the E. of Northum. was
made the kings steward in his place yt was before the kings vnderchamberlaine.
T. Beamond was made Conestable of Dover. Certain Anno reg. 17
thieves brake into the Chapel of our Lady at the Pewe at Westminster, and
took out of it many jewels and much treasure. Also shortly after ye same
thieves brake into ye Church of S. John of Clerkenwel. The dukes of Lanc. and
Gloucester passed over into France, to make somewhat of ye truce, or to conclude
a final peace betwixt ye kingdoms: but it was not so brought to pass, as it
was wished, by reason of the French Kings sickness.

In September, lightnings and thunders, in many places of England did much
hurt, but especially in Cambridgeshire, the same brent houses and corn near
to Tolleworke, and in the town it brent terribly.

Drew Barentine: Richard Whittington, the. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Hadley Grocer, the. 28. of October.

Such abundance of water fell in October, that at Bury in Suffolk, the
Church was full of Water, and at Newmarket it bare down walls of houses, so that
men and women hardly escaped drowning. The same year Lord T. de Ros, 1394
as he returned forth of the Holy Land, in the City of Paphos in the I Will of
Cipres, through intemperauncie of the air departed this life there. In the
Octaues of S. Hillerie, a Parliament was holden at London, in which a subsidy
was demanded for the King that was minded to go into Irelande, wherefore the
Clergy granted to him a full tenth if he would pass thither, and if he went
not, they granted him but half a tenth. Certain Lords of Scotland came
into England to get worship by force of arms. The earl of Mar challenged the
Earl of Notingham, to just with him, and so they rode together certain
cources, but not the full challenge, for the Earl of Mar was cast both horse
and man, and two of his ribs broken with the fall, so that he was borne out
of Smithfielde, and conuayed toward Scotland, but died by the way at York
Sir William Darrel Knight, ye Kings Ba^ner bearer of Scotland, challe^ged sir
Pierce Courtney knight the kings Banner-bearer of England, and when they had
ru^ certain courses, they gave over without conclusion of victory. Then
Cockborne Esquire of Scotland challenged sir Nicholas Hawberke Knight, and rode
v. courses, but Cockborn was borne over horse and man. The seventh of June
Queen Anne dyed at Shine in Southerie, and was buried at Westminster. Anno
reg. 18
The K. took her death so heavily, that besides cursing the place where she
dyed, he did also for anger throw down the buildings, unto the which the
former Kings being wearyed of the City, were wont for pleasure to resort.

About the month of Auguste proclamation was made that all Irishmen should
avoid the realm and get them home before the feast of the nauitie of our
Lady, on pain of life.

William Bramstone: Thomas Knowles, the. 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Froysh Mercer, the. 28. of October.

King Richard went over into Ireland, and ye Duke of Gloucester with him, and
the Earls of March, Notingham and Rutlande. The Irish men being afraid of
such preparation as was made, durst not show themselves openly, but with
secret assaultings they often troubled the Kings army, yet when the Englishmen
prevailed, many Lords of the land submitted themselves to the King, of which
some the King held with him, least they should attempt some new styre.

The King held his Christmasse at Dublin in Irelande, and after that feast
held a Parliament there: also the same time the Lord Warden of England called a
Parliament at London, to the which came (being sent forth of Ireland) the Duke
of Gloucester, the which before all the states showed the Kings need, who had now
spent his treasure amongst the Irishme so that a tenth was granted by the
Clergy, and a fifteenth by the 1395
Laytie. This voyage being chargeable to the King, came to small effect, for
after Easter he was forced to return again into England, to appease certain
troubles, begone by sir Richard Sturry, sir Thomas Latimer, sir Jews
Clifforde, sir John Montacute and other.

This year England suffered great loss by Pirates, of ye Queen of Donmarke,
who spoiled Mariners and Mercha^ts, Anno reg. 19
especially the men of Norffolke that assembled a multitude together, and took
upon them to fight with them, but the enemies preuayling, many of them were
slain, and very many taken prisoners, were reserved to grievous redemption,
with loss of twenty thousand pounds, which they had a board with them to
make their merchandice.

Roger Else: William Sherington, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William More Vintener, the. 28. of October.

In the month of November King Richard caused the body of his dear friend
Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, to be brought from Louaine, and after to be
buried in the Priorie of Colne in Essex, with solemn funerals, which he
honored with his presence, and causing the Co^^en of Cipres, wherein his body
being embalmed lay to be opened, y^ he might behold his 1^^6
face, and touch him with his fingers openly showing the love to the dead
carcass, which he ought to it being alive. John Duke of Lancaster, to whom the
K. had given the Duchy of Aquitaine, when he now had laid forth an estimable
sum Anno reg. 20
of treasure in those parts, to purchase the good wills of those Countrymen,
and should have his desire, he was sodainelye called home by the K. who
returning into England came to Langley, where the K. held his Christmasse, and
was received of the K. with honor, after taking his leave of the Court he made
have to Lincoln, where he took to wife Katheren Swinford. This year according
to the covenant before made and established betwixt the kings of England and
France, the said Kings met at the place by Caleis which was appointed for
them to talk in, where they concluded a peace, took a corporal oath, to
perform the same. And K. Richard took to wife Isabel the little daughter of
the French king, being but seven or eight years old. In a Parliament at
Westminster, Robert Bolgnope, John Holt, William Brough Knights of the Bathe,
were revoked out of Ireland and pardoned, these were men of law and Judges.

Thomas Wilforde: William Parker, the, 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Adam Bawme Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

And Richard Whittington the sixth of June.

The tenth of November, the K. was married at Caleis with great solemnity, and
shortly after returned into England. The xiij. of November the queen came to
London through Southwarke, and such a multitude of people went to see her, that
upon 1^97
Lon. bridge nine persons were crowded to death, of whom y^ Prior of Tiptor in
Essex was one, and a worshipful matrone of Cornehil was another. After
Christmasse a Parliament was holden at Land. in which the D. of Lancaster
caused his issue which he had by Katheren Swinford, to be made legitimate. Also
Thomas son of the D. of Lancaster and the said Katheren, was created E. of
Somerset, the D. gave him to surname Bello Forty or Bewfort. There was
granted to the K. half a tenth by the Clergy. This year when the realm of
England seemed to enjoy the chiefest peace y^ might be, by reason of the Kings
marriage, and the great riches y^ were heaped up together by the same, and by
the reason of y^ truce of. 30. years established and the presence of so many
noble men as y^ like no foreign realm was able to show, suddenly all things
were troubled and brought into a turmoyle, whiles the King at Anno reg. 21
Plashy in Essex, upon a sudden took his uncle the D. of Glo. by force of
arms, he suspecting no such thing, and caused him to be conveyed to Caleis,
there to be kept in prison, and caused the Earl of Warwick to be arrested and
imprisoned, the same day that he had bidde^ him to dinner, notwithstanding that
he showed him very good countenance, and had promised him great friendship,
beside that he deceived the E. of Arundale, with fair words, (who was well able
to have defended himself, and to have delivered his friends, the D. of
Gloucester and the E. of Warwick*) who notwithstanding he yielded himself
quietly, he sent him to the I Will of Wight, there to be imprisoned until y^
Parliament. And to y^ end there should be no co^motion among y^ commons for the
imprisoning of the nobles he caused to be proclaimed y^ the apprehension of
them, was not for any old displeasure, but for new transgressions committed
against y^ k. shortly after he caused y^ said nobles to be indicted at
Notingha^, and suborned such as should appeach the^ in the next Parliament, to
wit Ed Earl of Rutland, T. Moubery, E. Marshal, Tho. Holland E. of Kent, John
Holland Earl of Huntington, Tho. Bewford Earl of Somerset, I. Mountacute Earl
of Salisburie, and Thomas Spencer, and William Scrope, the Kings Chamberlayne.
And in mean yeseason the King assembled together to guarde his parson, many
malefactors of the County of Chester which kept watch and ward both day and
night about him. Then the K. caused a great and general Parliament to be
summoned at Westminster, when he caused a great Hall to be builded in the midst
of the Pallaice betwixt the Clock tower, and the door of the great Hall.
This Parliament began about the fifteenth of September, at the beginning
whereof Edward Stafforde Bishop of Excester L. chanceller, made a proposition
or sermon, in the which he affirmed that the power of the K. was alone and
perfect of it self, and those that impeached it were worthy to suffer pain of
the law: to this Parliament all the Nobles came with their retinue in arms, for
fear of the King: the prelocutours were Knights, in who^ no goodness at al
could be found, but a natural covetousness, insatiable ambition, intolerable
pride, and hatred of the truth, their names were John Bushy, William Bagot and
Thomas Grene. These required Tho. Walls.
chiefly to have the Charters of pardons revoked and dissanulled: and Bushy
said to the K. because we are charged to say what they be that have committed
any offense against your majesty, and regal authority, we say that Tho.
duke of Gloucester and Richard E. of Arundale, in the. xviij. year of your
reign, have traitorously compelled you, by mean of the new Archbishop of
Canterbury then Lord Chancellor, to grant to them a commission to govern
your Realm, and to dispose of the state thereof, to the prejudice of your
majesty and royalty. The same day was that commission dissanulled with all
Articles dependyng therevppon. Also the general pardon granted after the
great Parliament by them procured, and one special pardon for the Earl of
Arundale were revoked.

Also there was a peticion made by ye commons, I. Bushy speaking for them, that
the general pardon procured and got forth, the Archebyshoppe of Canterbury
then Lord Chancellor procuring it should be disanulled, and he to be judged a
Traitor for granting to it, whereupon the Archbishop rose and would have
answered, but the King said, to morrow to morrow, but he came not into the
Parliament house again: the King said, that he would deliberate of the commons
petition.

Also it was established, that any Traitor convicted, to stand against the
Kings regalitie, should be adjudged worthy to suffer punishment to be
appointed for such offense.

Also it was enacted, that criminal causes from thenceforth-should be
determined in every Parliament, and then license being had to depart, a great
stir was made as is used, whereupon the Kings Archers, in number four
thousand, compassed the Parliament house, thinking there had bin in the house
some broyle or fighting, with their bows bent, their arrows set in them, and
drawing, ready to shoot, to the terror of all that were there, but the King
heerewith coming, pacified them. On the next day, the Prelates were enjoined,
upon pain of losing their temporalities, that they should the same day agree
upon some procurator, to consent in their names to al things in that Parliament
to be dispatched, and the King had these words: Sir John Bushy, because many
desire that I would explane the fifty persons exempted in y^ general pardon, I
will briefly, that what man soever desires this, is worthy of death: first,
because he flees: secondly, because I have excepted those that are to be
impeached in this Parliament: thirdly, because other of their associates
hearing the^ oppressed, would be afraid where no fear is. On the next day,
the Archbishop of Canterbury comes to the palace to appear in the
Parliament, but the King commanded him by the Bishop of Carelile, that he
should return to his house, and from thenceforth he appeared not. The
Prelates made Thomas Percy the Kings Steward of household, their procurator, to
consent in all things in this Parliament to be done. Also Sir John Bushy had
these words, our sovereign Lord the King, because the second Article in the
Parliament is for punishmente to be appointed for such as violate the Kings
royal authority, I beseech your grace that you will authorice me by way of
appealing, of accusing, or impeaching, with license to make declaration from
one to the rest so often and when to me and to my fellows it may seem
expedient, and it was granted, then Bushy had these words: I accuse Thomas of
Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury, of threefold treason.

Frst, of the commission in granting the regiment or government of the Realm
to Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and to Richard Earl of Arundell at his instance,
who rather because he was your Chancellor, should have refused it.

Secondly, for that under pretext of that traiterous commission, they
traitorously usurping the jurisdiction of your regalitie, or royal authority,
held a solemn Parliament trayterouslie in prejudice of your regalitie.

Thirdly, because that by the said traiterous usurping, Sir Simon de Burley,
and Sir James Barnes Knights, and faithful lieges to you, were trayterouslie
murdered, and put to death, of which things, we your commons demand
judgment, worthy of so high treason, to be terribly pronounced by you, and
because the Archbishop is a man of great consanguinitie, affinity, power, and
most politic wit, and cruel nature, for the preservation of your estate,
and the whole Kingdoms, by the petition of this present Parliament, I require
that he may be put into safecustodie, until the final execution of his
judgment.

The King hereunto answered, that for the excellence of his dignity he would
take deliberation till the next morrow, and all other that were put into the
same commission, he pronounced them to be his faithful liege people, and void
from that treason, and especially Alexander Neuell, late Archbishop of York,
and then Sir Edmond of Langley. Duke of York, Uncle to the King, and Sir
William Wikeham Bishop of Winchester, that were put into the same commission,
with tears fell down on the ground before the King, and gave him humble
thanks for that grace and benefit bestowed on them.

Also on Saint Mathewes day, the Earl of Rutland, the Earls of Kent,
Huntington, Notingham, Somerset, and Salisburie, with the Lords Spencer and
Scrope, in a suit of read Gowns of Silk guarded, and bordered with white
Silk, and embrodered with Letters of Gold, proponed the appeal by them to
the King at Notingham, before set forth, in the which, they accused Thomas
Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundell, Thomas Earl of Warwike, and
Thomas de Mortimere, Knight of the premised treasons, and of an armed
insurrection at Haringey Park, trayterouslie attempted against the King, and
putting in sureties for the prosecuting of their appeal. Richard Earl of
Arundell was arreigned in a red Gown, and a Scarlet whood, and forthwith the
Duke of Lancaster said to the Lord Neuell, take from him his girdle and
whoode, and so it was done, and heerewith the Articles of appeal being to the
said Earl declared, with a valiant and a bold mind, he denied that he
was a Traitor, and required the benefit of the pardon, protesting that he
would not go from the favor of the King and his grace. The Duke of Lancaster
said to him, thou Traitor, that pardon is revoked. The Earl answered, truly
thou lie, I was never Traitor. Also, the Duke of Lancaster said, why did
thou purchase thy pardon, the Earl answered, to escape the tongues of mine
enemies, of whom thou art one, and verily, as far forth as touches
Treason, thou have more need of pardon than I. The King said, make answer
unto thine appeal. The Earl answered, I see well that these persons have
accused me of Treason, showing the appealementes* but truly, they all lie, I
was never Traitor, but I ask always the benefyte of my pardon, the which
your Grace granted to me within these six years now last past, being of full
age, and of your francke good will and proper motion. Then said the King, I did
so grant it that it should not be against me: then said the Duke of Lancaster,
then the grant avails not. The Earl answered, truly of that pardon I know
less than thy self, that was then on the further side the Seas. Then said Sir
John Bushy, that pardon is revoked by the King, the Lords, and us his
faithful people: the Earl answered, where be those faithful people? I know
thee well and thy company how ye are gathered together, not to deal
faithfully, for the faithful people of the Realm are not here, and therefore
the people do lamente for me, and well I know that thou have bin ever false.
And then Bushy and his fellows cried out, Behold sovereign Lord and King, how
this Traitor goes about to reyse sedition betwixt us, and those people that
are at home. The Earl answered, ye lie, I am no Traitor. Then rose the Earl
of Darby and said, did not thou say thus to me at Huntington, where we were
first assembled together to rise, that it was the best before all things to take
the King. The Earl said to the Earl of Darby, thou lie on thy head, I never
thought of my sovereign* Lord the King, but that that was good, and for his
honor. Then said the King, did not thou say to me in time of thy Parliament,
in the Bath behind the White Hall, that Sir Simon de Burley was worthy of
death for many causes, and I answered, that I knew no cause of death in him,
and yet thou and thy fellows did trayterouslie put him to death, and then
the Duke of Lancaster pronounced judgment against him in this manner: Richard,
I John, Steward of England judge thee to be a Traitor, and I condemn thee to
be drawn and hanged, to be beheaded and quartered, and thy lands, tailed and
not tailed, from thee and from thine heirs of thy body descending, to be
confilcate: then the King for reverence of his blood, commanded him only to be
beheaded, and then was he led to the Tower hill, and there beheaded, and was
buried at the Augustine Friars in London. Also the same day, the King appointed
the Lord Cobham (accused by the commons) to be arraigned. Also upon the
Saturday, Sir Thomas de Mortimer was sommoned, upon pain to be banished as a
Traitor, within six months to come to be tried in judgment: and then said
the King, peradventure the Earl of March can not take him, and therefore I
will so long stay for his certificate out of Ireland.

Also, a declaration was made, that all benefices or gifts, granted or
alienated by those that were already condemned, or after were to be condemned
in this Parliament, and other whatsoever, granted since the tenth year of this
Kings reign, should be revoked. Also, on Monday following, the certificate
given in of the Earl of Notingham, then Captain of Caleis, in whose custody
the Duke of Gloucester was, that the same Duke might not be brought to be tried
in judgment, because he was dead in his custody at Caleis: at the petition
yet of the said appellents, the same sentence was pronounced against him,
which had bin pronounced erst against the Earl of Arundell.

Also, the Archbishop of Canterbury, first his temporalities being confiscated,
was banished the Realm. On the Tuesday, Rikell, on of the Kings Justices,
borne in Ireland, read certain confessions drawn in writing upon the said
treasons put forth, affirming, that the same were the confessions of the said
Duke, by him put forth or discovered, and written with his own hand.

Also, the Earldom of Chester was advanced to the honor of a Duchy, by
annexing thereto the Lands of the said Earl of Arundell confiscate.

Also the same day, the Earl of Salisburie made request to have a Scire facias
granted to him against the Earl of March, for the Lordship of Denbigh in
Wales, and the King answered thereupon that he would take deliberation. Also on
the Wednesday, it was ordained, that the Lands of the said Earl of Arundell,
annexed to the Duchy of Chester, should enjoy the liberties of the same
Duchy, excepted that to the Welchmen of those parts, their old Laws and
customs should still remain, and be continued.

Also, it was ordained, that such as gave either counsel, aid, or favor to
the children of them that were condemned, or that should be condemned in this
Parliamente, should be punished as Traitors.

On Friday, the King appointed a prefixed day to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
to weete, the third of the sixth week, to depart the Realm.

Also it was ordained, that all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, should
swear inuiolably to observe whatsoeeuer in this Parliament were enacted, and
that the censures of the Church should be pronounced by the Prelates against
all those that should go against the same.

Also, the Earl of Warwike was arreigned, and his whood being taken off, and
the appeal read, as he had bin some miserable old woman, confessed all things
contained in the appeal, weeping, wayling, and howling, to be done
traitorously by him, and submitting himself to the Kings grace in all things,
sorowing that ever he had bin associate unto the appellants. Then the King
demanded of him by whom he was allured to join with them, and he answered, by
Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and the Abbot of Saint Albons, and a Monk recluse in
Westminster, and ever besought the King of grace and mercy, and the King
granted him life to be led in perpetual prison out of the Realm, his goods
moveable and immovable to be confiscate, as the Earl of Arundels had bin, and
the King commanded that he should be had to the Tower of London, and after, to
be conuayde ^uer to the Castle within the Isle of Man, under the wardship of
William Scrope, then Lord of the said I Will, to remain there in perpetual
prison, and on the morrow, the King granted to him and his wife five ^. Marks
yearly during their lives. Also, the writ of Scire facias was granted to the
Earl of Salisburie, against the Earl of March, for the said Lordship of
Denbigh, fifteen days respite being given to put in an answer. Item, it was
ordained, that those which ought money to Rochester Bridge, should be put in
execution for the payment, to the use of the same Bridge. Also, Henry
Bolenbroke Earl of Derby, son and heir of Dukes created.
John of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, was created D. of Hereforde. Edward Earl of
Rutland, was created Duke of Aumarle. Thomas Earl of Kent, Duke of Surrey, the
Earl of Notingham, Duke of Norffolke. John Earl of Huntington, Duke of
Excester. John Earl of Somerset, Marquis of Dorset. Thomas Lord Spencer,
Earl of Gloucester. The Lord Neuell Earl of Westmerland. Thomas Percy Earl
of Worcester. William Scrope, L. Treasourer, Earl of Wiltshire. Sir John
Mountagew, Earl of Salisburie. The K. added the arms of K. Edward the
Confessor to his, and bare them together part for pale, and then the Parliament
was proroged till the octaues of S. Hillary, then to be holden at Shrewsburie.

John Woodcocke: William Askam, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Westminster Hall repaired.


Sir Richard Whitington Mercer, the 28. of October.

King Richard caused the great Hall at Westminster to be repaired, both the
walls, windows, and ruff, with a marvelous work, and great costs, which
he levied of Strangers banished out of their Countries, who obtained license to
remain in this Country, by the Kings Charter which they had purchased with
great sommes of money.

King Richard kept his Christmas at Liechfield, and then 1398
took his journey toward Shrewsburie, where the Parliament lately proroged,
began again, in the which it was ordained, that all Statutes ordained at
Westminster in the xj. year of y^ Kings reign, should be revoked and
disanulled, and al y^ articles of the same, and the heirs of the^ that were
adjudged in y^ said Parliament, should be reconciled, and restored to all their
lands, inheritances, and possessions: excepted, y^ they should have no claim
against the with-holders of the profiles, and revenues of those lands in the
mean time. On the morrow it was ordained that the heirs of them which were
judged and convicted in the four Articles of high treason, should not enjoy
the Lands, nor any possessions of their progenitors, but should be excluded
from all and every action and claim for ever.

The first Article of high treason was this, if any man, of what condition
soever he were, did imagine the kings death.

The second Article was, if any man should have an imagination to depose the
King.

The third, if any man did ride armed within the Realm of England, in manner of
war against the King.

The fourth was, if any man disclaymed y^ kings homage.

Also the same day, the Lord Cobham was arraigned, to make answer unto two
Articles of high treason.

The first was, that he the said Lord Cobham was in counsel to make one
commission against the state of the King, and likewise, that he used the same
commission in doing judgment against the Kings will, and to the prejudice of
him.

The second, that he sat in judgment to judge Sir Simon de Burley, and James
Barnes, Knights of the kings, in his absence, and against his will: and upon
this, he was co^uict and judged to perpetual prison within the I Will of Iersey.

On the morrow, Henry Duke of Hereford accused Thomas The Duke of Hereford
accuses the Duke of Norffolke.
Mowbray Duke of Norffolke, of certain words by him spoken, as they rode
between London and Brayneford, tending to the dishonor of the Kings person,
which the Duke of Norffolke utterly denayd to have spoken, where upon, a
Combat was granted them by the King to be fought at A Combat is granted.
Couentry, upon the seventeenth of September.

A fifteenth and a half was granted, and the customs of woolles, fifty
Shillings of every Sack of every Englishman borne, and three pound of every
Stranger.

This Parliament ended, the King visited many places in the Weast part of
England, as Worcester, Hereford, Bristow, and other places, to weete,
Glastonbury, and Bath.

After this also, the King caused a Theater to be made at Anno reg. 22
Bristow, for a Combat to be fought betwixt two Scotts, to weete, the one
being an Esquire appellant, and the other a Knight defendant, and the
appellant was overcome and hanged: but after this time, he made a great and
marvelous strong Theater at Couentrie for the Combat betwixt the Duke of
Hereford, and the Duke of Norffolke, and gave them day for the fight, the
sixteenth of September, to weete, the feast day of Saint Edith, at which day
and place, a great concourse and assemble of people was there gathered out of
all parts of England. When the said Champions appeared in the Listes, ready
to fight, the King commanded them to be quiet and not to fight, and then the
King sitting in his royal apparel within his Tente girt with his Sword, he
commanded his decree to be proclaimed, and this was the Kings decree, that
Henry Duke of Hereforde, for his disobedience toward the King, Dukes ^anished.
should be banished for ten years, and likewise the Duke of Norffolke to
be banished for ever out of England, taking of his revenues a thousand Marks
by year, till the Town of Caleis were repaired.

John Wade: John Warner, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Drew Barrentine, Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

At the feast of Saint Michaell, the King caused seauenteene Counties in East
England to be indicted, and laid to their charges, that they had bin against
him, with the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell and Warwike, wherefore,
he sent honorable men to induce the Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, to
make a submission by writing, sealed with their own hands, acknowledging
themselves to be Traitors to the King, though they never offended him in word
or deed. Moreover, he compelled all the Religious Gentlemen and commons, to
set Blancke Charters.
their Seals to blanckes, to the end he might as it pleased him oppress them
severally, or all at once: some of the commons paid a thousand Marks, some a
thousand pound etc.

Also, he ordained through every Province in England, that all Gentlemen, and
me^ of substance, should be sworn Vn^customed oaths.
firmly to maynteyne according to their possible power, all the Statutes,
Articles, and Constitutions ordained in the last Parliament.

On Newyeares day, near unto Bedforde, a very deep water which ran betwixt
the Towns of Swelstone, and Harleswode, stood sodeinly still, and divided it
self, so that by the space of three miles, the botome remained dry, which
wonder, many one thought, did signify the division of the people, and falling
away from the King, which happened shortly after.

Roger Mortimere Earl of March, and of Vlstar in Ireland, Earl of March
slain in Ireland. Cro. Pet. Coledge. W. l. Wilum.
lying there in a Castle of his, there came on him a great multitude of wild
Irishmen to assail him, and he issuing out, fought manfully, till he was by
them hewn to pieces, whose death the King determined to revenge.

About Candlemas, dyed John of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, at the Bishop of Elyes
Inn, in Holborne by London, and was Duke of Lancaster deceased. 1399
honorably buried in S. Paul's Church at London, his son Henry Duke of
Hereford being then beyond the seas.

About Whitsontide, King Richard with a Navy of 100. Ships, sailed from
Milford Haven, toward Ireland, and arrived King Richard sailed into Ireland.
at Waterford on the last day of Maynfrem whence, he marched with his army of
thirty thousand, to Kilkenny, fourscore miles within the Country, and there
remained xiiij. days, tarying for Edward Duke of Aumarle. On Midsommer even he
went from thence toward Mackmore, who Anno reg. 23
remained amongst the woods with 3000 me^, right hardy, and such as seemed but
little to fear the Englishmen. At the entering of the woods, the King commanded
fires to be used, so that many a house, and many a village was brent, and there
the King made the Duke of Herefords son Knight, with ten other. 2500. Pioners
were appointed to fell the woods, and make ways for ye Englishmen. The
Irishme^ feared greatly the shot of the Englishmen, but yet with their Darts
they assailed, and slew diverse as they caught them at advantage. The Uncle of
Mackmore came in and yielded himself The Uncle of Mackmore submitted to King
Richard.
to the King, with a withie about his neck, and many other naked and bare
legged, did the like, all which, the King pardoned. After this, the King sent
to Mackmore, promising him, that if he would come in as his Uncle had done,
with the withie about his neck, he should be pardoned: but he utterly
refusing, said, he would fight to death in defending his right, for he knew the
Englishmen wanted victualles, and more than they had brought with them could
not be bought for Gold or Silver. There was already such scarcity, that there
were some four, some six, that had but a small lofe of bread to live by the
day, and some that eat not a grain in five days together. The King therefore
departed the 28. day of June, toward Diuelin, at what time Mackmore sent a
beggar, with notice to the King, that he would be his friend, and ask him
mercy, or else, if it pleased him to treat of peace, to send some noble me^ to
him: whereupon the Earl of Gloucester was sent, who led with him the reregard
whereof he was captain, being two C. Lances, and a M. Archers: betwixt two
woods far from the Sea they met with the Irish. Mackmore himself rode on a
white Mackmore a good horseman.
Horse, without saddle or other furniture, that cost him (as was said) four
hundred Kowes, which Horse he ran down the hill, that the beholders
reported they never had seen Hare nor Dear to have run so swiftly. In his
right hand he bare a Darte great and long, which he threw exceeding well.
He was a mighty strong man of personage. There the Earl and he talked a good
while, about the murdering of the Earl of March, and after of other things,
but agree they could not, and so departed.

The Earl advertised the King what he had found, which was nothing, but that
the enemy would cry mercy, so as he might be sure to have peace without
other grief, otherwise, he would (so long as he lived) defend himself:
wherefore, the King (in his wrath) not knowing what let might happen, swear,
that he would never depart Irelande, till he had him either alive or dead. The
host dislodged for lack of victualles, they were a thirty thousands at their
coming over, that lay then at Diuelin fifteen days, the King forthwith
dividing his army into three parts, sent them out to seek Mackemore,
promising an hundredth Marks to him that could bring him in, which offer was
well hearkened unto, for it sounded well, but he could not be caught: and the
same day, Edward. Earl of Rutlande, Duke of Aumarle, Connestable of England,
arrived with an hundredth Sail, of whose coming, the King was very glad,
though he indeed had tarried long, and might have come much sooner. They
remained six weeks at Diuelin, and heard no news out of England, the
passage was so dangerous, the wind being contrary, and tempests so great,
at length, came a Ship with heavy news, how the Duke of Hereforde, and now
by the deceasse of his father Duke of Lancaster, was arrived in England at
Rauenspore The Duke of Hereford returned into England.
beside Wadlington, in Yorkshire, and had beheaded William Scrope Earl of
Wilshire, Treasourer of England, John Bushy, Henry Green, and other, and had
caused Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury, to preach against King
Richard, who also showed a Bull procured from Rome, promising remission of
sins to all those which should aid the said Henry, in conquering of his
enemies, and after their death, to be placed in Paradise, which preaching,
moved many to cleave to the Duke. Upon this news the King being persuaded to
make have over, the Duke of Aumarle said, it was better to stay till his
Ships might be brought together, for there were but an hundredth ready to
make Sail, whereupon, John Mountacute Earl of Salisburie, was sent with a
power, whilst the King going to Waterforde might gather his Fleet, who
promised within six days to have followed him. The Earl of Salesburie landed
at Conwey, where he was soon advertised, how the Duke had taken the more
part of England, and that all the Lords were got to him, with more than
threescore thousand men. The Earl of Salesburie caused to sommon the Welchmen,
and them of Cheshire, to come to him, so that (weening the King had bin arrived
at Conwey) within four days there were come together forty thousand men,
ready to go against the Duke of Hereford, where they stayed fourteen days,
but when they saw the King came not, they stealed away, and left the Earl of
Salisburie in manner alone, so that uneath he had a C. men with him. The Duke
of Hereford advanced toward the Earl of Salisburie, who withdrew him into
Conwey. The King through evil counsel King Richard returned out of Ireland,
and landed at Milford Haven.
stayed after the Earls departure eyghteene days, and then arrived at Milford
Haven, from whence, about midnight following, desguised like a Priest, for
fear to be known, with thirteen persons only, who went to Conwey, thinking
the Earl of Salisburie had there held the field. There were with him the
Dukes of Excester and Surrey, and the Earl of Gloucester, that continued
faithful unto the last hour. There were three Bishops also, of which, two did
not like good men, the Bishop of Lincoln, and Saint David's, but the third
continued faithful, that was, the Bishop of Carelile. He had also two
Knights, Stephen Scrope, and William Fireby, and Ianico, a Gascoigne. The King
rode so warely, that he came to Conwey at the break of the day. Great sorrow
and lamentation was made by the King and the Earl at their meeting, for that
the Earls host was dispersed and gone, some to the Duke, and some otherwise.
The Duke of Aumarle, Connestable, and chief governor of the Kings army at
Milford, immediately when the Kings departure was known, he said to the
Soldiers, let us shift for our selves masters, for the King is fled,
whereupon every man trussed, and away. Sir Thomas Percy Steward of household,
talking with the Connestable, also departed, and took their way through Wales.
The Welshmen seeing such disorder, assembled them together, and spoiled the
Englishmen of all their goods, and sent them packing in their dublets, with
white staves in their hands, for there rode here ten, here twenty, here
fifty, here an hundred, and so the Welchmen coming down the Mountains, the
English lost that they had. The King had many Horses of beyond the Sea brood,
and great riches in apparel and jewels, which was in the keeping of Sir Thomas
Percy, who with the Connestable came to Duke Henry of Hereford, and more than
five hundred of their company, all naked, whom the Welchmen had despoyled,
and beaten well. The King being at Conwey in great discomfort, sent the Dukes
of Excester and Surrey, to Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, to know what
his meaning was, himself remaining still at Conwey in great perplexity, and
with him the Earl of Salisburie, the Bishop of Carelile, Sir William Ferebe
Knight, Sir Stephen Scrope mine Author, and another Frenchman, in all but xvj.
persons, then was news brought to the King how his Connestable had demeaned
him, and likewise his Steward, that had caused his riches to be brought aland,
and going through Wales with it, the Welchmen had taken it. The King then by
the advice of the Earl of Salisburie departed from Conwey unto Beawmareis, a
ten miles off, and from thence, he went to Carnaruan. Beawmaris was a strong
Fortress if it had bin manned and victualled. Carnaruan is a fair Town, and
a strong Castle, but these were unprovided of all things, so that for five or
six nights he lay very hard and base, and for victualles, there was none,
wherefore he returned again to Conwey, where he sore lamented his estate. The
Dukes of Excester and Surrey entering the City of Chester, which Duke Henry had
taken, were brought straight to the Castle to the Duke, who was glad to see
them, and forthwith asked the Duke of Excester what news, who told him from
point to point, what shame and dishonor it would be to him, if he dealt so
unjustly toward his Prince, and that through him he were deposed: he
therefore demanded an^were with speed: but the Duke of Lancaster was as slow
to dispatch him, and told him he should not go for one week, and that the
King was not well advised to send him and his fellow, being men of such
calling, since he had other ynow of meaner estate to do the message: so they
remained to their great discomfort. The Duke of Excester, Duke Henry still
kept in his company, but the Duke of Surrey was committed to safekeeping
within the Castle of Chester.

There is a Castle six miles from Chester, called Beston Castle, builded on
a Rock, very strong by situation, therein were an hundred men of arms,
chosen and able men, but not diligent, for they delivered it to the Duke, where
they might well enough have kept it, the ascending is so steep: it was
victualled for six years. There was found within it Coin better than an
hundred thousand Marks, beside other Jewels, which King Richard caused to be
kept, to the value of two hundred thousand Marks, all which Duke Henry took
with him, and returned to Chester, and there taking counsel of his friends
what was best to be done, the Archbishop of Canterbury said, that since the
King was in Wales, which was a Country strong, by reason of the Mountains, so
that it was impossible for an Army to pass with bag and baggage, he
thought it best to send unto King Richard, and to make him believe that he
sought nothing but peace, and a Parliamente to be made, wherein, those that
had offended in putting to death his Uncle the Duke of Gloucester, should be
punished, and so from thenceforth the King and the Duke to be good friends,
and that it should be at the Kings pleasure to appoynte the day and place for
this Parliamente, for without this shifte, it should be impossible for the
Duke to get him into his hands, for he might depart by Sea when he
would, having retained at Conwey Ships for that purpose.

All the other Lords assenting to this counsel, the Duke appointed the Earl
of Northumberland to go to the King with four hundred Lances, and a thousand
Archers, which Earl, when he came to Flint Castle, had it delivered to his
hands: from thence he hasted to Rudland, which was also given over to him: then
laying under a rock two great embushments of his people, with commandemente to
keep that passage, he went with five other in his company by the Sea coast,
till he came before the Town, and then he sent an Herault to the King for a
safeconduct, to come to his presence, to declare his message from the Duke
about an agreement, which safeconduct being granted, he passed the water, and
entered the Castle of Conwey, where he found the King, and the Earl of
Salisburie. he declared to them that peace would be made if he would be a good
Judge and a true, and cause those that should be named, to be tried by justice
at a certain day of Parliament at Westminster, which he and the Duke should
hold together, and that the Duke might keep his place of high Judge as his
father and other auncesters before him had done, for the space of one hundred
years. Those that he would have to be tried by the Law, were the Duke of
Excester, the Duke of Surrey, the Earl of Salisburie, the Bishop of Carelile,
and Thomas Mark, which five, had given the King counsel to put his Uncle y^
Duke of Gloucester to death, and then if it should please him to pardon the Duke
his wrath, he would be ready to come to him on his knees to ask him mercy,
and so they might go to London together, or the one one way, and the other
another. The Earl offered to swear that all this should be performed, and
that the Duke had assured him by oath to stand to it. The King liking that it
should be at his liberty to go either in company with the Duke, or alone unto
London, purposed to take the offer, and so to pretend some excuse for his going
alone, after he should meet with the Duke, as lack of victualles, or such
like, and so to take a byway thorough Wales, and there to raise a power, he
accorded to go to the Duke, and then (Mass being celebrate) the Earl of
Northumberlande swear upon the host, that the Duke should hold all that he had
told the king. The Earl hasted the king forward to horssebacke, but the King
prayed the Earl to go before unto Rutland, there to prepare dinner. The earl
rode a pace till he came where he might see his people under the mountain,
whom he much commended for observing his commandment.

The King passing the water rode a four miles before he came to the Rock, where
when he saw the ambushes was K. R. betraye^*
sore abashed, knowing well he was betrayed by the Earl, for he was in such a
place as he could not escape. The Sea beating on the one side, and the Rock
keeping him in on the other, and if he should have fled back, they would
have caught him, or he could have come to Conway, for he had not past three and
twenty in all of his company. The K. disse^ding the Rock, the Earl came and
kneeling down excused the matter, saying* he had caused those people to come
to guarde his person, but the king told him, fewer would have served, and that
it was contrary to his oath, for he had promised to have but six in his
company, and said therefore that he would go back to Conway, but the Earl
aunsweared, that now since he had him, he would lead him to the Duke as he had
promised ten days since, and so he caused Bread and Wine to be brought and
offered the king who durst not refuse it, and after leaping on horssebacke
again they rode to Rutlande to dinner, and after to Flinte, where they lay
that night.

The Morrow being the two and twenty day of August, the King got him to the
Castle Walls, where he beheld the D. with all his host of an hundred thousand
men coming by the sands. there came before that were departed from the army,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, sir Thomas Percy and the Earl of Rutland from
whom the Duke had taken the office of Conestable, more for a color, than for
displeasure, for they bare the Dukes order, and not the Heart, which was the
kings, the Archbishop entered first, and after the other with a great train,
they went up to the dungeon, and then the King came down from the walls, unto
who^ they did reverence lowlye on their knees, the King took them up, and drew
the Archbishop apart, and they two talked long together, but the Earl of
Rutland kept him aloof. They took horse again, and rode toward the Duke that
now approached near. The King went up again to the walls, lame^ting sore when
he saw the Dukes host within two bow shootes of the Castle, who compassed it
round about down to the sea. The Earl of Northumberland went forth to the
Duke, who after long talk, concluded that the duke should not enter the Castle
before the King had dyned, for he was fasting: so the Earl returned, and the
King was set to dynner, with whom sat his assured friends the Earl of
Salisburie, and the Bishop of Carlisle, sir Steven Scrope, and Feribe, they sat
long and eat little, for they had no haste to rise.

After dinner the Duke entered the Castle all armed, his Basenet excepted. King
Richard came down to meet the Duke, who as soon as he saw the King, fell
down on his knees, and coming near unto him, he kneeled the second time with
his hat in his hand, and the king then put off his hoode, and spoke first,
fair cousin of Lancaster ye are right welcome. The Duke bowing low to the
ground answered, my Lord, I am come before you sent for me, the reason why I
will show you. The common fame among your people is such, that ye have for the
space of twenty or two and twenty years, ruled them very rigorously, but if
it please our Lord I will help you to govern better. The King answered,
fair cousin of Lancaster, since it pleases you, it pleases me well.

The Duke spoke as ye have heard to the king, he spoke also to the Bishop of
Carlisle, to sir Stephen Scrope, and to Feribe, but to the Earl of Salisburie
he spoke not, whereby the Earl perceived that the Duke hated him deadly.

The duke with an high sharp voice, bad bring forth the Kings horses, and then
two little nagges not worth forty franks, were brought forth, the King was
set on the one, and the Earl of Salisburie on the other: and thus the Duke
brought the King from Flinte to Chester, where he was delivered to the Duke of
Glocesters son, and to the Earl of Arundales son that loved him but a
little, for he had put their fathers to death, who led him strayghte to the
Castle.

The third day they went to Nantwich, and the next day to new Castle, and
there the Earl of Warwickes son met the^, and so iournying forth, the next
day they came to Stafford, and after they departed to Lichfield, where the K.
thought to have escaped, slypping down into a Gardaine out of a Window of a
great Tower, but he was espied and thrust into the Tower again: from
Liechfielde the Duke went to Couentrie, but before they could come thither the
Welchmen did them much harm and slew many of them, and the Englishmen, when
they by great chance could take any of the Welchmen, they tied them to their
horse tails, and drew them after them, through ways full of stones, and
caused them to die miserablye. The Duke passed from Couentrie to Deintrie, the
next day to Northampton, from thence to Dunstable, and then to Saint Albons,
and a five or six miles before his coming to London, the Mayor and the
Companyes in their liveries, with great noise of Trumpets met the Duke,
doing more reverence to him than to the King, rejoicing that God had sent them
such a Prince, that had conquered the Realm within one months space. When
the Duke came within two miles of the City, the duke caused the host to stay,
and then said to the commons of the City. My masters behold here your King,
consider what ye will do with him. They answered they would he should be
led to Westminster, whereupon he was delivered unto them, and they led him
to Westminster, and from thence by water to the Tower of London.

The D. entered into London by ye chief gate; and rode through Cheap to Saint
Paul's, where he was after lodged in the Bishops Palace five or six days,
and after at Saint John's, without Smithfield, where he remained. xv. days, from
thence he removed to Hertforde, where he abonde three weeks, and then came
back to London, to hold the Parliament, that began the first Wednesday of
October in Westminster Hall, which they had hung and trimmed sumptuously, and
had caused to be set up a royal chair, in purpose to chose a new king,
near to the which the Prelates were set, and on the other side sat the Lords,
and after the commo^s in order, first sat the Duke of Lancaster, then the Duke
of York, the Duke of Aumerle, the Duke of Surrey, the Duke of Excester, and a
Marquis, then in order the Earls of Arundale, Norfolk, March, Stafford,
Penbroke, Salisburie and Devonshire, the Earls of Northumberlande and
Westmerlande sat not, but went up and down, and oftentimes kneeled as it fell
in doing their offices. The Archbishop of Canterbury made a Sermon and took
for his Theme* Habuit Jacob benedictione^ a pre^ suo, which sermon being ended
in latin, a Doctor of the law, stood up and red an instrument, in the which
was contained, that K. Richard had by his own confession disabled himself to
be worthy to reign, and that he would resign the crown to such a one as was
sufficient to rule, this instrument being red, the Archbishop persuaded the^
to proceed to the election of a new K. and perceiving they were al contented,
for there were not past four persons that were of king Richards part (and they
durst say nothing (he asked each of the^ who^ they would have to their King,
whether the Duke of York or not? and they answered no, he asked if they would
have his eldest son the D. of Aumarle, and they said no? he asked if they would
have his youngest son, and they said no? and so of diverse other, the^ staying a
while, he asked if they would have the D. of Lancaster, and then they answered
they would have none other. This Diamounde, being made thrice, they drew
certain instruments and charters, and red them in presence of all that were
there. The^ ye Archbishops coming to the Duke, fell on their knees declaring
to him how he was chosen King, and willed him to take regard if he would
consent thereto. the^ the D. being on his knees rose and declared y^ he
accepted the realm, since it was ordained by God. The^ ye Archbishop red what yt
new K. was bound unto, and with certain ceremonies signed him with the cross,
the^ he kissed the Achbishop, and they took the ring, with which the Kings be
wedded to the realm, and bare it to the Lord Percy, that was Conestable, who
receiving it, showed it to all the assembly, and then put it on the kings
finger, the King then kissed the Conestable, and then the Archbishops led him
to the (...) Royal, and y^ K. made his prayers on his knees before it, and
after spoke unto them all, first to ye Prelates and then to the Lords and al
other, and so set him down in the seat, and thus he was invested, and K.
Richard put down, he sat a good while and kept silence and so did all the rest
for they were in prayer for his prosperity in his government, and when they
had ended, where the offices were void, the K. created the Lord Percy
Conestable, and took him the staff. Then was chosen Ralph Earl of Westmerland
Marshal, John Skirley Chanceller, sir Richard Clifforde keeper of the privy
seal, and many other officers were newely confirmed. After this the
Arcbishoppe spoke certain things in latin, praying for y^ Kings prosperity
and the realms, and after spoke in English, exhorting all other there present
to pray the like, and then every man sat down. Then the king rose and made his
eldest son Prince of Wales, then the Lords were sworn to be true to the
Prince, as before they had done to his Father: his second son was there made
Duke of Lancaster. Thus was king Richard deposed when he had reigned two and
twenty years, three months, and odd days.

Henry of Bolengbroke


Henry the fourth, son to John of G^unte Duke Anno reg. 1.
of Lancaster, was ordained king of England, more by force than by lawful
succession or election: he began his reign the 29. of September, in the year
of our Lord God 1399. And was crowned at Westminster the xiij. of October, by
Thomas Arundale Archbishop of Canterbury. The Dukes of York, Surrey, Aumarle,
and the Earl of Gloucester bare the Canapie over him, sir Thomas Dimmocke was
champion, and rode three times about the Hall. This was a noble and valiant
Prince, and after the Civil wars were appeased, showed himself loving to
his subjects. He made Henry his son Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl
of Chester, and heir apparaunt to the crown.

William Waldren: William Hyde, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Thomas Knowles Grocer, the. 28. of October.

After the solemnity of the coronation, the Lords and commons straight
proceeded to the Parliament. In which it was inquired out of the death of the
Duke of Gloucester, and how he had bin murdered at Caleis by the Duke of
Norsfolke, upon y^ Kings commandment. King Hent^e created his eldest s^^ne
Prince of Wales Duke of (...) and Earl of Chester, duke of Aquitaine. In this
Parliament it was ordained that the statutes made in the Parliament holden in
the, 21. year of king Richard at Westminster, and after proroged unto
Shrewesburie, with all the circumstances to be adnulled, revoked, made void,
and utterly blotted out. Also that the Parliament holde^ at Westminster, in the
xj. year of K. Richard be holden firm and stable. Also that the Lords and
other persons which were judged forth in the Parliament holden the 21. year of
King Richard, and their heirs that be dead, should be wholly restored to
their possessions without any ^uing liuerie thereof to be made, excepted that
the Lords and other shall have nothing of ye issues received in ye mean time.
The ^. gave to the E. of Northumberland ye I Will of Man, to be holde^ of the K.
by service, to bear the sword with which he entered into England. And to the ^.
of Westmerland he gave the Cou^tie of Richmond Also Judgment was given against
the Appellauntes of the Duke of Gloucester in this manner: The Lords in this
present Parliament by she Kings assent, judge that the Dukes of A^^erle Surrey,
and Excester now present and were appellantes, shall love thryr names of Dukes,
and h^nors from he^ceforth, together with the dignities of Dukes, and that the
Marquis Dorset, that is present, lose his name of Macques, and the E. of
Gloucester which is present, lose his name for him and his heirs, as ye above
named persons do theirs, and that al^ the castles, possessions or manor's which
they had of the^ that belonged to those whom they appelled from ye day of y^
arrest of the D. of Gloucester, and the other Lords, or after at any time,
simply, and without favor or mercy, they shall lose the^: and that al other
castles, possessions, manours, Lordships, and liberties; which they held of
the Kings gift, that day or after sh^ld rest in the king grace from ye h^^re,
and that all letters patents and Charters, which they or any of them, had of
y^ said names, Castles, Dominions, possessions and liberties should be
surrendered up, into ye Chancerie there to be canceled, and that they stand in
state which they had in name and possession before the said day ^f the said
arrest.

The King to show to all men in all Countries about by what right and title he
had taken upon him the crown and realm, sent Ambassadors to Rome, John
Treneuant Bishop of Hereforde, John Cheyne Knighte, and John Cheyne Esquire.
Into France he sent Walter Tricklowe Bishop of Durham, Thomas Percy Earl of
Worcester, and William Heron. Into Spain John Trenor Bishop of Saint David's,
and fir William P^t Knight: Into Almaine the Bishop of Bangor with other.

The Scots in time of the Parliament taking occasion by the absence of the
Northren Lords, and because the same time the North parts were sore oppressed
by a great Pe^^^lence, entered as enemies into those parts, and took the Costell
of Warke, and kept the same a certain time, but at length spoiled and ^^terly
ruinated it, and many other mischients they did in the Country. Thomas Manbery
duke of Norffolk which was exiled, dyed at Venide, in his return from
Jerusalem. Also the Duches of Gloucester dyed, and her son and heir^ Humfrey
dyed of the pestitence when he was sent for forth of Irelande.

The King held his feast of Christmasse in his Castle of Windsor, where John
Holland late Duke of Excester and Erie of Huntington, Thomas Holand late Duke
of Surrey and Earl of Kente, Edward late Duke of Aumerle, and Earl of
Rutlande son to the Duke of York, John Mountacute Eri^ i^ Sabsburie, Thomas
Spencer, sir Ralph Lumley, sir Thomas Blunt, sir Benedict Cely Knights, with
other that favors King Richard, conspired against King Henry, and appointed
privily to murder him, under the color of Justing and other pastimes
pretended. And the time approaching of their purpose, they sent messengers to
London with letters to the Duke of Aumerle, that he should not fail to come
at ye day appointed with his company, to help to do the feate whereunto he was
sworn: but his mind being altered, he bare the letters streighte to his
Father the Duke of York, who caused a number of his men forthwith to carrye
his son to the King, where he showing his letters, the King would not believe
them: but the same morning came the Mayor of London to the Court, and informed
him of the matter, whereupon the King made no tariance, but got him forth toward
London, in company of the Mayor and other. But before the King could get
London on his back, his enemies were come to Windesore, and entered the Castle
with an armed band of. 400. me^, on the fourth of Januarie at night, where
understanding that the King was escaped their hands, being sore amazed, they
withdrewe from Windesore, unto Sunning, a certain manor near to Reading,
where the Queen wife to King Richard then lay, where they persuaded her
household, that King Richard was escaped out of Romfrete ^astel, and they would
go to him: from thence they went to Walling forde, and after to Abingdon,
moving the people to take arms upon them, and to go meet their King
Richard. After this they came to Farindon, in the vale of White Horse in
Barkeshire, and the same day to Circester, on the xij. day late in the
eneni^g, and there harbored, with a great number of men of ar^es and many
Archers: there they bruted that K. Richard was escaped forth of prison, and that
he was there with them, and to make their words to^ have the more credit,
they had got a Chaplain of King Richardes called Madeleine, so like to him in
all proportion and favor, that one could uneath be descerned from the other:
many times (says mine aucthour) I have seen him in Ireland ride with the King
his Master, so fair a Priest and goodly a person, he had not lightly seen.
They put him in armoure with a Crown on his Helmet, so as all men might take
him for King Richard. On the morrow being Wednesday, the people of that town
misliking of their proceedings, fought against them, and at length took the
chiefest of them and led them to the Abbay there, and put them in a fair
chamber, under safe custody. And on the Thursday the said Lords fearing the
people, imagined how to escape out of their hands, and caused some of their
servants to set fire on certain houses in the Town, thinking that
therevppon the people would depart from them, and seek to staunche the fire:
but it chanced contrary, for the people turned into a marvelous rage against
them, ran upon them with great violence, and drew them into the market
place, and there they beheaded the Duke of Excester, the Duke of Surrey, and
the Earl of Salisburie, the third day after the Epiphanie^ their servants
that were with them were by and by taken, and as prisoners bound and brought to
Oxforde, and on Monday following were beheaded in the Castle there, to the
number of.xxvj. persons. Also sir Thomas Blount Knight, was beheaded with them.
The week next following, was beheaded Thomas Spencer Earl of Gloucester at
Bristow: and about the same time was beheaded John Holland Earl of Huntington
brother to King Richard on the mothers side, at Plashy in Essex: not long after
was sir Barnarde B^ocas beheaded at London, and a Priest named John Maudelen,
that was like King Richard, and another Priest called William Feribe. The
Bishop of Carlisle was impeached and condemned of conspiracy, but was
pardoned.

The sixth day of February King Henry caused ye blank Charters, made to king
Richard, to be brent, at the standert in Cheap of London.

King Richard was imprisoned in Pomfrait Castle, where xv. days and nights
they vexed him with continual hunger, thirste and cold, and finally bereft
his life, with such a kind of death as never before* that time was known in
England. He dyed the xiiij. day of February, whose body was brought to the
tower of London, and so through the City to Paul's Church bare faced, where
he stood three days for all beholders, and had service, where king Henry was
present. From thence he was carried to Langley, and there buried in the church
of ye Friars Preachers. Upon his death the famous and excellent Poet John
Gower, wrote certain verses, which may be englished thus.

O Mirror for the world meet,
which should in Gold be bette,
By which all wise men, by foresight,
their prudent wits may whette.
Lo, God does hate such rulers, as
here vitiously do live:
And none ought rule, that by their life,
do ill example give.
And this King Richard witnesses well,
his end this plain does show,
For God allotted him such end,
and sent him so great woe,
As such a life deservde: as by
the Cronicles thou may know.
The King with a great army went into Scotland, spoiled 1400
the Country and returned to York, where two Knights, the one a Frenchman, the
other an Italian, challenged to fight within listes against sir John Cornwall,
and James of Artois, which two strangers were overcome in battle, and
Challenge of co^bat at York
sir John Cornewal obtaining the Kings favor, married the kings sister, that
had bin wife to sir John Holland Earl of Huntingdon.

The Welchmen taking occasion by the Kings absence The VVelchmen rebel.
when he was in Scotland began to rebel, by the setting on of Owe^
Glendouerdew son to Griffyth Vicha^ an esquier of Wales, and so called
Glendour, because his dwelling was in a place called Gle^dordwy, for Glyn in
Welsh is a vale, and Dor is water, because the place was in a dale, at the side
of ye water or River of Dew in the Parish of Corwrn, in the County of
Mer^^neth in Northwales. He served King Richard, at the time of his oppression
by Henry Duke of Lancaster, at Flint Castle.

The first cause of this stir was about a piece of land in controversy
betwixt him and the Lord Reignolde Gray of Ruthiue, for when he saw his cause
not favored, first he began to spoil the lands of the said Lord Gray,
whereof the king being certified, went with an army into Wales: but the
Welchmen fled to the mountains, the King burnt the Country, slew the
people with whom he met, and returned with a great pray of Cattaile.

John Wakel: William Ebot, the, 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 2.
Geffrey Chavvcer chief Poet of Brytaine.


Sir John Frauncis Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

Geffrey Chawcer, the most excellent Poet of England, deceased the xxv. of
October, who was buried at Westminster, where of late at the charges of one
master Bridgeham, is made over him a fair monument, on the Southside of the
Quire: his works for the most part are published in print by sir John Thin
Knight, and somewhat increased by my travel in the last impression.

Not long after deceased the like famous Poet, John Gower, John Govver a most
excellent Poet of England
who lies buried in Saint Marie Oueries Church in Southwarke. He new builded
a great part of that Church, and co^piled three famous books. The first in
Latin, Vox Clama^tis. The second in French Speculum Meditantis: The third in
English Confessio Amantis, which last book is in Print, the other hard to
come by: of the first I have seen three very fair copies, but of the second I
never saw any one.

The Emperor of Constantinople, came into England, to requyrs aid against
the Turks, whom the King with sumptuous preparation met at Black Heath,
upon Saint Thomas day the Apostle, and brought him to London, and paying for
the charges of his lodging, presented him with gifts worthy for one of so high
degree.

Soon after came news, that the King of Leto had ^lain in battle Bassacke
the son of the noble Balthazardan, ^ destroyed Jerusalem, and all the
Country round about. And because he had by Gods grace so overcome contrary
to his opinion, he became christened and 60000. men of his sect.

The Emperor of Constantinople, hearing this, was very 1401 The Emperor
returned.
glad, and departed out of England, being honored by the King with precious
gifts.

The five and twentieth day of July, Isabel late wife to K. Isabel late wife to
K. R. returned into France*
Richard, not yet twelve years of age, departed from Dover toward Caleis,
and so into France to her Father.

Owen Glendouerdew we his Welchmen did much harm to the Englishmen and
returned.

There was found in the Kings bed clothes, an iron K. H. escapes ^ great
danger.
with three sharp pikes, slender and round standing upright, laid there by
some Traitor, that when the King should have laid him down, he might have
thrust himself upon them.

This time was used exceeding pride in garments, gowns with deep and broad
sleeves, commonly called poke sleeves, the servants ware them as well as
their Tho. Walls. Aditions to polic*
masters which might well have been called receptacles of the Devil, for
what they stole, they hid in their sleeves, whereof some hung down to the
feet, and at least to the knees, full of cuttes and iagges, whereupon were made
these Anno reg. 3*
verses.

Now has this land little need of Bromes,
To sweep away the filth out of the street: The. Hoc^li^^*

Sen side sleeves of pennilesse gromes,
will it up lick be it dry or weete.
O England stand upright on thy feet,
so foul a waste in so simple a degree
Banish, or it shall ^ore repent thee.
William Venor: John Fremingham, the. 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Chadworth Mercer, the. 28. of October.

The Conduit upon Cornehil in London was made, which before time had been a
prison, called the Tun in Cornehill* whereunto, nightwalkers that were taken
in suspicion of fellonie, or other trespasses, were committed.

In the month of March appeared a blasing star, first betwixt the East and
the North, and last of all putting fiery beams toward the North, foreshewing
peradventure the effusion of blood, about the parts of Wales and
Northumberlande.

Owen Glendouerdew with his Welchmen, wasted y^ lands 1402
of the Lord Reignalde Gray, took him prisoner, and slew many of his people.

Certain men affirmed King Richard to be alive, and Conspiracy against K.
Henry
that he should shortly show himself openly, and reward them y^ were faithful
unto him. But after a certain priest was taken at Warwike, who had written ye
names of many, which were the aucthours of these troubles, both the hope and
fear of this conspiracy vanished. The Priest was drawn hanged and quartered.
Also Walter Waldocke late Priour of Land a Priorie in Leicestershire, because
he confessed he knew evil against the king and did conceal it, was likewise
hanged and headed. Moreover certain gray Friars were taken, of the which one
Richard Friseby, doctor of Divinity, being A stout Friar executed.
asked what he would do if K. Richard were present, answered, that he would
fight in his quarrel against any man, even to the death, wherefore he was
condemned, drawn, and hanged in his religious habit and weed.

At Daneburie in Essex, upon Corpus Christi day, the Devil appeared in
likeness of a Gray Friar, who entering the Church, raged insolentlye, to the
great fear of the Parishioners: and the same hour with a tempeste of
whyrlewinde and thunder, the top of the Steeple was broken down, and half
the Chauncel scattered abroad.

Shortly after, sir Roger Claringdon Knighte, a bastard son to Edward the
black Prince, and with him a Squire and a yeomanne were beheadded, and eyghte
Graye Friars hanged and beheaded at London, and two at Leicester, all which
had published King Richard to be alive.

Owen Glendouerdew, with a company of Welchmen invaded all the shires that
bordered near unto him, wherefore sir Edmund Mortimer with many Knights and
Esquiers went out to encounter with Owen, stronger than he was of the
Country: but when it came to martial affairs, their own Archers turned their
hands against them, whom they should have defended. There were flayne above
eleauen hundred of our men. Sir Edmunde Mortimer was taken, and the Welchwomen,
when ye battle was done, using the dead carcasses to shamefullye to be
spoken, would not suffer them to be buried without great ransom.

The King went with a great power into Wales, to pursue Owe^ Glendouerdew,
where he profited nothing, but lost much, for the Welchmen conuayed
themselves into unknown places: wherefore the King constrained by necessity,
returned into England, after he had spoiled and brent the Country.

The same time the Scotts cruelly entered into England, for they supposed all
the Lords beyond Humber to be occupied in the parties of Wales, but the Earls
of Northumberlande, Henry Percie, and his son Henry with the Earl of
Dunbarre, (that a good while agone having forsaken the Scotts, had sworn to
be true to the King of England) with a number of armed men and plenty of
archers, suddenly came to resist the Scotts as they would have returned
home, after they had spoiled and burnt the Country, but now upon a
sudden their way was forelayde, so that they must needs abide and take a
place to fight upon: they chose therefore a mountain near to the Town of
Wollor, called Halydowe Hill, in the which they place themselves with their
armed men and Archers, which when our men beheld, leaving the way in which they
stood against the Scotts, they clynie the hill that stood over against the
Scotts, and without delay of time, our Archers placed in the valley, set
their arrows against the Scotts battle, that they might by some means force
them to come down: on the other side, the Scottishe Archers let fly at our
men, who yet after they felt the grievous waighte, and as it had bin a shower
or tempest of the arrows shot by the Englishmen, they fled. The Earl
Douglas perceiving his men so to flee, for he was their general leader, took
his Spear, and manfullye with a multitude came down the Hill, trusting
doubtless in his armor and ye armor of his accomplices that had bin three
years in making, and forced himself to run upon the Archers, which when
the Archers saw, they stepped back, and shot so fiercely, that they pierced
the armed men's bodies, stroke through their Helmets, ryued their Spears, and
rent their armoure with light ado. Earl Douglas himself was wounded in
five places, the residue of the Scotts that were not come beside the Hill,
turnyng back from the arrows that flewe, fled away, but their flyghte
nothing auayled them whilst the Archers followed them, but that they were
compelled to yield themselves. Earl Douglas also was taken, and many drowned
in the River of Tweede, whylest they knew not the Fourdes, to the number of
five hundred (as was said.) In this battle no Lord, no Knighte, nor
Squire, gave any stroke to the enimyes, but only God gave the victory to the
English Archers, the Lords and armed men being only lookers on. That
day the flower of the Scottishe Chi^alrye was taken, to wit, the Earl
Douglas, Murdake the eldest son of the Duke of Albanie, that was heir
apparente to the Realm of Scotland: The Earls of Murrey, Angus, and Orkeney,
the Lords of Mountgomorie, Erskin, and Gram, with many other Knights* to the
number of fourscore, besides Esquires and Yeomen, whose number was not known.
There were slain of Barons, the Lord Gordon, the Lord John of Swinton that was
false to both the Realms etc. This battle was fought on the fourteenth of
September.

Richard Marlow: Robert Chicheley, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 4.


Sir John Walcot Draper, the 28. of October.

Edmond Mortimere which before was taken by Owen Glendouer dew, now professed
to take Owens part against King Henry, and did contract marriage with the
daughter of the said Owen.

In a Parliament at London which began the morrow after Michaelmas day, and
lasted seven weeks, there was granted to the King a tenth and a half of the
Clergy, a tenth of the borough towns, and a fifteenth of the commo^s through
the Realm.

The messengers that had bin sent for Ioane, late wife to John of Mountfort
Duke of Briteyne, returned with her into England, and landed at Falmouth in
Cornwall. The King met with her at Winchester the seventh of February, where
they were married in the Church of Saint Swithen. The six and twentieth of
February she was Crowned at Westminster.

In the Summer following, by the Towns of Bedforde 1403
and of Broklesward, Monsters were seen oft-times mornings and euenings to
come out of the woods, under diverse colors, in the likeness and similitude
of me^ of war, which met one with another, and seemed to fight cruel
battayles, which although they that were a far off might see, yet they that
were near hand could not see nor find, which thing deceived* many that
coueted to approach and come near.

Henry Percy* the younger, did sodeinly show himself to be the Kings enemy,
unto whom joined Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester, Uncle to the said Henry:
and to make their conspiracy excusable, they did write unto the Shires
Battle at Shrevvsburie.
about, that they pretended nothing against the allegiance nor fidelity which
they ought to the King, neither to gather to any other end an army, but only
for the saving of their persons, and for the better government of the common
wealth, because the payments and taskes granted to the King for the safe
custody of the Realm, were put to such v^es as they ought not to be, and were
unprofitably consumed and wasted.

Moreover they complained, that because of the evil slanders which their
enemies had made of them, they durst not personally appear in the Kings
presence, until the Prelates and Barons had entreated for them, that they
might be permitted to purge themselves before the King, and be lawfully judged
by their peers, so that many that saw these letters, did praise their
diligence, and extol their fidelity toward the common wealth. But the King
being disquieted with these doings, that he might appease the communaltie, he
wrote to them, that he marvelled much, that seeing the Earl of Northumberland,
and Henry his son had received the most part of the payme^ts and sums granted
to him by the Clergy and co^munaltie, for y^ defense of the Marches of
Scotland, what occasion they had to make such manifest slanders etc. but the
young Henry Percy putting his confidence in the aid of Owen Glendouerdew, and
Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, with the Welchmen, and men of Cheshire,
published that King Richard was alive, and was with them, whom if any man would
see, they should without delay come in armor to y^ Castle of Leycester which
declaration made diverse variable motions in the hearts of many, and caused the^
to waver. King Henry considering all things wisely, gathered together as many
as he could, and came sodeinly into the parties where the Rebels kept their
rage, and when Henry saw upon a sodein the Kings banner, and was even ready to
have scaled y^ town of Shrewsburie he streightways Shrevvsburie beseeged.
desisted from the assault of the town, and said to his men, we must now
needs turn our weapons upon them that come against us: ye see the Kings
Sta^dert: neither ca^ we, though we would, seek any startinghole, stand to it
manfully therefore, for this day shall either bring us all to promotion and
honor, if we overcome, or else if we be overcome, it shall deliver us from the
Kings malice: for it is a more comely thing to die in battle for the common
wealth, than after battle to die by the sentence of condemnation by the
enemy: and with that, 14000. of the best me^ that were with Henry, made vow and
promise to stand by him so long as breath would serve, and they took the field
that was commodious for them, and the King and his men lay in the field right
against the^. The bowmen of Henry Percy began the battle, whose arrows fell
not upon the ground, but upon the bodies of the Kings soldiers, and the Kings
archers shot as fiercely against their enemies, so that on both sides many were
slain, and many thousands fled, thinking the King had bin slain: but the
Earl of Dunbar withdrew the King from the place that he stood in, which was a
good turn for him, for the foresaid Henry Percy, and Earl Douglas the Scot
(than whom was never man more stout) raged so, that the Kings Standert Tho.
Wal^
was overthrown, and those about it slain, among whom was slain Humfrey
Earl of Stafford, Sir Walter Blunt the Kings Standertbearer, Sir Nicholas
Langford, Sir John Clifton, and the two breethren Genetels, with many other
Knights and Gentlemen, and of the commons on both sides about 5000. slain.
Henry the Prince was wounded in y^ face Titus (...)*
with an arrow. In the mean season Hen. Percy, whilst he went before his me^
in the battle, preasing upon his enemies, was sodeinly slain, which being
known, the Kings enemies fled, but the Earl Douglas was taken, and also Tho.
Percy Earl of Worcester, with Sir Richard Vernon, and the Baron of Kinderton,
and many other were taken. This battle was fought on Mary Magdalen eue^, near
unto Shrewsburie, in a place called Old field, alias Bull field. On the Monday
following, were condemned and beheaded at Shrewsburie y^ Earl of Worcester,
the Baron of Kindarton, and Sir Ri. Vernon. The body of Hen. Percy was
delivered to the L. of Furniuale to be buried, but the King caused the same
body to be taken by, and to be reposed between two Milstones in the Town of
Shrewsburie, there to be kept with armed men, and afterward to be headed and
quartered, commanding his head and quarters to be carried unto diverse Cities of
the Kingdom.

The Earl of Northumberland with a strong power was coming toward his (as
men thought) or at the least toward the King, but the Earl of Westmerland,
and Robert Waterton had gathered a great army, and had entered to meet him
sodeinly, but he taking none of them both to be his friends, returned unto the
Castle of Werworth.

When all things were set in a stay at Shrewsburie, the King went toward
York, where, when he was settled, he sent to the Earl of Northumberland,
commanding him to dismiss his company, and to come to him, and the Earl at
the Kings commandment came to him on the morrow after Saint Lawrence day, but
the King received him not friendly, but as one that sued for pardon, and
pardoning him of his life, committed him to safe custody.

The Britons Amorikes, the Lord of Cassels being their leader, Plimmouth
spoiled by the Britons. Anno reg. 5.
invaded the Town of Plimmouth, spoiled and brent it, and went their way free,
but immediately the Western Navy, under the conduct of William Wilford
Esquire, in the coast of Briton, took forty Ships laden with Iron, Oil,
Soap, and Wine of Rochell, to the number of a thousand Tonne, and in returning
back again, he brent forty Ships, and at Penarch the said William arrived
with his men, and burned Towns and Lordships the space of six leagues, and
set the Town of Saint Matthew on fire, and their Milles about the said Town.

Thomas Falconer: Thomas Poole, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Frenchmen invade the Isle of VVight.


Sir William Askham Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

A little before Christmas, the Frenchmen came into the Isle of Wight, boasting
that they would keep their Christmas there, and when a thousand of the
Frenchmen were entered into the Island, and driving flocks of Cattle toward
the Sea, sodeinly there came upon them a company of the Island men, that forced
them to leave their pray behind them, and to get them gone (with shame enough)
to their Ships, with no small loss of their men.

In a Parliament holden at London after the Octaues of the Epiphany, the Earl
of Northumberland was restored to his former estate and dignity. And in this
Parliamente was granted unto the King an unaccustomed task, very heavy and
paynefull for the inhabitants, the manner of which task the grannters thereof
would have to be kept secret for evermore: and under that condition only it was
granted, that it should not be any example to them that should come after, and
that there should remain no record thereof, but the same forthwith to be brent.

The Frenchmen about that time came before the I Will of 1404 Frenchmen come to
the I Will of VVight.
Wight with a great* Navy, and sent certain of their men to demand in the
name of King Richard, and of Queen Isabell, a tribute or subsedie of the
inhabitants: who answered, that King Richard was dead, and the Queen, sometime
his wife, was sent home to her parents, without condition of any tribute: but
if the Frenchmens mind were to fight, they willed them to come up, and no man
should let them for the space of six hours to refresh themselves, but when
that time were exspired, they should have battle given to them, which when
the Frenchmen heard, they went away, and did nothing.

The Lord of Cassels in Briteine, arrived at Black poole, two Dertmouth
invaded by the French.
mile out of Dertmouth with a great Navy, where of the rusticall people, whom
he ever despised, he was slain. There were taken that day three Lords, and
twenty Knights of name, and the vplandish people presenting their captives to
the King, returned with their pursses full of gold.

In the month of April, the Clergy granted unto the king a tenth. All the
summer following, Owen Glendouerdewe Own Glendouerdevve.
and his Welchmen, rob, burn, and destroy the Countries adjoining unto them:
he took many captives, and slew many Englishmen: he laid flat certain
Castles that he had taken, and some he kept for his own defense.

The Flemings and Briteines took certain Ships of ours laden with
Merchandises, and slew or hanged all the mariners.

The old Countess of Oxforde, (mother to Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, who
as we said before died at Louaine) did cause such as were familiar with her,
to brute throughout all the parts of Estsex, that King Richard was alive, and
that he should shortly come and challenge his old estate and dignity. She
caused many Hearts of Silver, and some of Gold, to be made for badges, such as
King Richard was wont to bestow on his Knights, Esquires, and friends, that
distributing them in the Kings name, she might the sooner allure the Knights,
and other valiant men of the Country, to be at her will and desire. Also, the
fame and brute which daily was blazed abroad by one William Serle, sometimes
of King Richards Chamber, that the same King Richard was in Scotland, and
tarried with a power of French and Scottishmen, caused many to believe that he
was alive. This William Serle had forged a privy* Seal in the said King
Richards name, and had sent diverse comfortable letters unto such as were
familiar with King Richard, by which means, many gave the greater credit to
the Countess, in so much, that some religious* Abbots of that Country did
give credit unto her tales, who afterward were taken af the Kings
commandment, and emprisoned, because they did believe and give credit to the
Countess in this behalf, and the Countess had all her goods confiscate, and
was committed to close prison: and William Serle was drawn from Pomfret,
through the chiefest Cities of England, and put to death at London. About the
feast of S. John Baptist, at the Kings commandment, the Earl of
Northumberla^d came to Pomfret, and brought with him his Nephues, and nephues
sons, by which doing he mitigated the minds of many, which thought that he
had given the young men counsel to rebel. There came also with him William
Clifford Knight, who brought with him that William Serle K. Richards
chamberlain, whom we spoke of before, who by a wile he had caught Anno reg. 6.
and apprehended, by which doing, the King held him excused, and pardoned him,
for that he had kept the Castle of Berwike against the Kings will and pleasure.

William Louth: Stephen Spilman, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Hind Draper, the 28. of October.

About the feast of Saint Faith, the King called a Parliament at Couentry, and
sent process to the Sheriffs that they should choose no Knights nor burgesses
that had any knowledge in the laws of the Realm, by reason whereof, it was
called the Lay man's Parliament. These piked out Knights Lay man's Parliament.
and Burgesses, could devise none other way to relieve the Kings lack of
money, but to deprive the Clergy of their temporal lands and goods: but
Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury made answer, that the Clergy did
always give the King as much as the Lay people did, considering that they did
of^^er give the King tenthes, than the laytie gave fifteenes: and moreover,
that more of their Tenants did serve the King in his wars, tha^ of the
Tenants of the lay fee: and besides this, they prayed for the prosperity of
the King, and of all them that faithfully served him. And when the speker of ye
Parliament said with a loud voice, that he little regarded ye prayers of the
Church, the Archbishop of Canterbury answered: then (quoth he) I know to what
end the fortune of the Realm will come, when the suffrages of ye Church are
not set by, wherewith ye Godhead is wont to be appeased: surely that Kingdom
never continues stable y^ is void of prayer and devotion: notwithstanding,
think not that thou shall without punishment take away the possessions of the
Church, for if the Archbishop of Canterbury live, thou shalt have evil
taking of any thing that is his. Then the Archbishop rose up, and kneeled
down before the King, desiring him to consider how graciously, and by Gods
favor he had atteyned to the Kingdom* that he would consider his first
promis, which was, that he would preserve unto every man their right and title
so far as lay in him. He also willed him to remember the oath which he
voluntarily made, which was, that he would honor and defend the Church, and
Ministers thereof, wherefore he desired him to permit and suffer the Church to
enjoy the privileges and liberties which in time of his predecessors it did
enjoy, and to fear that King, by whom all Kings do reign.

When the Archbishop had said these and like words, the King commanded him to
go to his seat again, and said, that his intent and purpose was to leave the
Church in as good state or better than he found it. And then the Archbishop
speaking to the Knights and burgesses, said: you, and such like as you be,
have given such counsel unto our King, and to his predecessors* to confiscate
the goods of the In Edward the thirds time.
Celles which the Frenchmen and Normans did possess in England, and said,
that by them he should heap up great riches, as in deed they were worth many
thousands of gold: notwithstanding it is most true that the King at this day is
not the richer thereby of half a Mark, for you have extorted, or at the least
begged them out of his hands, and have appropriated the said goods unto your
selves, so that it may be coniectured that your request to have our
temporalities, is not for the Kings profit, but for your own covetousness:
for without doubt, if the King (as God forbid he should) fulfill your wicked
purpose, he should not be one farthing the richer the next year following: and
surely, I will sooner let my head be cut off, than that the Church should be
destitute of the least right that perteyneth to it etc.

The Clergy granted a tenth and a half, and the commons two fifteenes, on
condition the Lord Furniuall should receyne it to spend in the Kings wars.

The same time such abundance of water brake sodeinly over the banks in Kent,
as was never seen the like in those parts, whereby were drowned Beasts and
Cattle without number: neither did England only bewail their losses, but also
Zeland, Flanders, and Holland, sustained the like, by the great excess of
waters.

This year died William Wikeham Bishop of Winchester, College at Oxford.
by whose charges and travel, the Clergy of England was much increased, for
he builded a notable College in Oxford, for the increase of learning, where he
placed the Warden and his company, to the number of lxx. besides children,
servants, and ten Priests, to keep daily service, enduing the said company
with sufficient lands.

He began the foundation of a new College at Winchester, College at
Winchester.
and in six years finished the same, where he placed the like number of
Scholars to learn their Gra^mer, and other principles, to be sent afterward
to his other College at Oxford. These two Colleges are called the new
Colleges, dedicated to our blessed Lady.

He builded the great body of the Church of Saint Swithens in Winchester, where
the Sermons are made, and where his body is enterred, a very princely work:
neither did he for all this diminish any thing of his ordinary household
charges, and fed (as the writing engraued on his Sepulcher shows) both rich
and poor. He deceassed at the age of fourscore years. He dyed rich, for
beside that he gave to his kinsefolke and to the poor, he gave somewhat to
every Church in his Dioces. He gave many things to the King, and to his own
servants, and to his Colleges: neither do I doubt but yt he that thus lived,
is now with God, whom I beseech to reyse up many like Bishops in England.

John Leyland writes (by the report of Doctor London) John Leyland.
that this William Wikeham was borne at Wickham in Hampshire, and was son to
one William Perot, parish clarke there, of which place he took his surname:
and that one Master Wodale of Wickham brought him up at schole, where he
learned his Grammar, and to write fair. After this, the Connestable of
Winchester Castle, at that time a great ruler in Hampshire, got Perot, alias
Wickham of W^dall, and made him his Clearke. Edward the third coming to
Winchester Castle, liked Wickham, and took him to service, and understanding
that he had mind to be a Priest, made him first Parson of Saint Martins in
London, and then Deane of Saint Martins le Graund, and then Archdeacon of
Buckingham. He made him also surueyor of his buildings, as of Windsore,
Quinborow in Kent, and other buildings. After this, he preferred him to be
bearer of the privy Sealt, master of the Wards and Forests, and Treafourer
of the Kings revenues in France, then Bishop of Winchester, Chancellor and
Treasourer of England, as it very manifestly (says John Leyland) appears by
writing.

The black Prince scant favored Wickham, wherefore Wickham procured to keep
the Prince in battle out of the Realm, but at length John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, and Alice Peers, Concubine to Edward the third, caused him to be
banished the Realm, and then he dwelled in Normandy and Picardie seven
years, Edward the third yet living, but he was restored about the second
year of Richard the second, of whom he had a general pardon.

About the feast of Saint Valentine, the sons of the Barle of Marches sons.
Earl of March were taken out of the Castle of Windsore, and led away into
Wales to Owen Glendouerdewe, but shortly after were recovered again. The Smith
that made the keys, by the which they that conuayde them got into them, had
first his hands, and then his head cut off.

The Lady Spencer, Sister to the Duke of York, and widow of Thomas Lord
Spencer, before executed at Brestow, being apprehended, and committed to
prison, accused hit brother the Duke of York to be chief author, in stealing
away of the Earl of Marches sons, wherefore the said Duke was kept by Sir
John Pelham in the Castle of Pemsey till the next Parliament.

After the feast of the Purification of our Lady, the King assembled his Barons
at London, to treat of the government of the Realm, and to have aid of
money to be given him, but the Nobles would not at that time obey his request.
In the Lent following therefore, the King caused the Clergy and the Barons to
assemble at Saint Albons for the matter aforesaid, but by reason the Nobles
strove against him, there was nothing done, and so departed on Palm sunday.

About the fifteenth of March, in a fight betwixt the Englishmen 1405
Conspiracy against King Henry by the Archbishop of York and other.
and Welchmen, the son of Owen Glendouerdewe was taken, and fifteen hundred
with him were taken or slain.

Henry Percy Earl of Northumberlande, Richard Scrope Archbishop of York,
Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshall, Thomas Lord Bardolph, and other, co^spiring
against King Henry, assembled together the Citizens of York, and many other,
to stand with them for the commodity of the Realm. And to animate the commons
to be the readier unto this business, they set articles upon the doors of the
Monasteries and Churches of the same City, written in English against the
King, because he had put down King Richard, offering themselves for those
articles to live and die, which caused great number of people to resort to
them: but Ralph Neuill Earl of Westmerland that was not far off, together
with John Duke of Lancaster the Kings son, being informed of these things,
gathered an army with speed to go against the Archbishops company, but all
was in vain, for the Archbishops power was far greater than theirs,
whereupon, the Earl of Westmerland sent messengers, to enquire of the
Archbishop the cause of so great an assembly in armor, contrary to the Kings
peace, whereunto the Archbishop answered, that he took nothing in hand against
the Kings peace, and he was in armor and munited with men, only for fear of
the King, whom he could not safely come unto to speak, but his purpose (he
said) was good and commodious both for ye King and Realm, if happily they
would know it: and the^ he showed a scedule, in which ye articles were
contained, which when the Earl of Westmerland had read, he with word and
countenance praised the Bishops holy and virtuous intent, and promised, that he
and his would prosecute the same with the Archbishop. The Archbishop being glad
of this, believed the Earls words, and persuaded the Earl Marshall, being
unwilling thereunto, to go with him to a place appointed to talk together, to
whom they with like number came, and the writing with the Articles was read
over: streightway the Earl and they that were with him gave their assent to
these articles, then said the Earl being subtiller than the rest, behold the
labor that we have taken in hand is come to such end as we would have it, and
the people has now bin long in armor, let some of your me^ bear word unto
the people to go their way home, and to lay down their armor, and every man
to fall to his occupation, and accustomed labor: in the mean season we, in
token of concord will drink together, that the people on both sides shall see
it, and without delay, after they had taken each other by the hands, a Knight
was sent on the Archbishops behalf, to bear word to ye people that it was
peace, and to command every man to lay down their armor, and to go to their
own home. The people beholding signs of peace, and the Lords drinking
together, being aweeried with the unaccustomed travel of war, turned the
reins of their bridles homewards, and so it came to pass y^ when the people
of ye Archbishops side went away, ye number of the adversaries increased as
before it was appointed, and the Archbishop did not perceive yt he was betrayed,
until such time as ye Earl arrested him: he arrested the Marshall also, and
many other with him, to all which it was promised yt they should have no harm,
but that promise was not kept, for both the Archbishop Archbishop of York
beheaded.
and the Earl Marshall were beheaded when the King came to York the morrow
after Whitsonday. After this, when the King had punished the me^ of York at
his pleasure, he set forth with an army to pursue the Earl of Northumberland,
and Thomas Lord Bardolph, and took all manner of munition with him, and an
army of 37. thousand fighting men. The Earl of Northumberland perceiving the
Kings intent, got himself to Berwike with three hundred horse, and from
thence into Scotland. The King being bent against the Earl of Northumberland,
went to Berwike, from whence the Earl fled into Scotland, and the Lord
Bardolph with him, whom David Lord Fleming the Scotte received into alliance.
The King understanding that the Earl was fled, he commanded them in the
Castle to render it unto him, which when they refused to do, the King caused
a great Gunne to be shot, which ouerthrewe part of a Tower, whereupon they
of the Castle gave over, and submitted themselves to the King, who caused some
of them to be beheaded, and the residue to be sent to prisons. After this, the
Castle of Alnewike, and the rest of the Earls Castles, were with small ado
rendered to his hands, with which success, the King being encouraged, went
straight into Wales, where contrariwise nothing prospered with him, wherefore
he returned, loosing Charets, Carts, and Wagons to the number of 50. with his
Treasure, so that coming back to Worcester, he sent for the Archbishop and
Bishops, and declared to them his misfortune, desiring the^ to help him: to
whom the Archbishop answered, that he would talk with the Clergy in that
matter. In the mean season the Frenchmen came to succor the Welchmen with
140. Ships: they l^nded in Milford Haven, having lost almost all their
horses for lack of fresh water. The Lord Barkley, and Henry Pay burnt
fifteen of those Ships in the same Haven. These Frenchmen beseeged the Town
of Carmarden, and took it, granting to the inhabitants all their moveable
goods, and to go whether they would.

The same time the foresaid Lord Barkley, Thomas Anno reg. 7.
Swinborne, and Henry Pay, took fourteen Ships of the French, in the which
they took the Steward of France, and right Captains more.

The Town of Reystone in Hartfordshire was brent. Reyston brent.


Henry Barton: William Groom, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Woodcocke Mercer, the 28. of October.

This year, all the Wears in Thamis from the Town Wears in the Thamis and
Medvvay destroyed.
of Stanes in the Weast, unto the water of Medway in the East, by the Mayor and
communaltie of London, were destroyed, and the trunckes brent, for the which,
great plea and discord followed between Thomas Arundell Archbishop of
Canterbury, and other Lords and Knights of the one party, and the Mayor and
communaltie on the other party, but the Citizens prevailed by virtue of their
Charter and Statutes.

A Parliamente began, which lasted nigh one Parliament. A great task. 1406
whole year, for after the Knights of the Parliament had long delayde to
grant to the King a subsedie, yet in the end being overcome, they granted the
task demanded. The Priests and the Friars that lived of alms, were forced
every one to pay half a mark.

Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and the L. Bardolfe, by the counsel of
David Fleming, fled into Wales, for he had declared to them, that the Scotts
had conspired to deliver them unto their own King, in exchange for other
prisoners, and for this doing of David Fleming, the traiterous Scotts flew
him, and raised such a civil war amongst themselves, that in the end they
were constreyned to request truce for a year, which when they had obtained,
the Scotts sent James, the son of Robert King of Scotts, being but The
King of Scotts son and heir taken on the Sea.
nine years old, toward France, there to be brought up, and to be
instructed in the pleasant eloquence of the French tongue, whom certain
mariners of Cley in Norffolke took on the Seas, and with him a Bishop, and
the Earl of Orkney, to whom his Father had committed him: and they brought
him into England, and delivered him to the King, who forth with burst out into
a laughter, and said, surely the Scotts might have sent him to me, for I
can speak French. The Bishop escaped and fled, but the Earl of Orkeney, and
the said James the young ladde, was sent to the Tower of London, where he
remained prisoner till the second year of Henry the sixth, which was above
eighteen years.

The Frenchmen came to help Owen Glendouerdew with 38. Ships, whereof 8. were
taken, full of armed men, the rest escaped into Wales, but not long after were
taken fiftene Ships laden with Wine and Wax.

Whilst the Parliament yet continued, the Duke of York was restored to his
old dignity, whom many men thought to have bin dead in prison.

Edmond Holland Earl of Kent, married the Duke of Anno reg. 8.
Millaynes daughter in the Priory of Saint Mary Ouery in Southwarke.

Nicholas Wootton: Geffrey Brook the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Richard Whittington Mercer, the 28. of October.

John Couentry, and Iankin Carpenter, executors to this VVhittington College
founded.
Richard Whittington, with his goods builded Whittington College in London,
and a great part of the Hospital of Saint Barthelmew in Smithfielde. He
builded the Library of the Gray Friars, and the East end of the Guild Hall in
London, with diverse small conduites, called Bosses, and the Weast Nevvgate
builded.
Gate of London called Newgate.

Also Iankin Carpenter, one of the executors to the Worshipful Knight Sir
Richard Whittington aforenamed, of his own costs and charges, caused to be
painted about the Cloister of Saint Paul's Church in London, a most excellent
monument, or remembrance of Death, the original pattern whereof, was sometime
devised by Machabre, a Doctor of France, and therefore called The Dance of
Machabre, which Dance was richly painted about Saint Innocents Cloister in
Paris, with Metres in French, signifying The Dance of Death, commonly called
the Dance of Paul's.
the speeches of Death to all estates, and their several answers again to
Death, all which being translated into English by John Lidgate, Monk of Bury,
was as before said richly painted in the said Cloister of Saint Paul's Church,
and therefore commonly called The Dance of Paul's.

Henry Pay, and other with him of the five Ports, with Tho. Walls.
fifteen Ships, took an hundred and twenty Ships, which lay at ancker in
the Sea of Briteine, laden with Iron, Salt, Oil, and Rochell Wine.

This Summer, through corruption of the air, so great a Plague was shed upon
men's bodies, as was not seen the like in many years in this land, so that men
might say

The South winds warm did blow, with heat pestiferous, Pestilence.

And Pestilence did bear great rule in Cities populous.
For at London in short while it consumed above thirty thousand men and women,
and in the Country Towns great mortality fell among the husbandmen, so that
great households dyed clean up, and the houses were emptied.

About the fifteenth day of August deceassed Sir Roberte Knowles Knight, at his
Manor of Sconethorp in Norffolke, Sir Robert Knovvles. John Leyland.
he was brought to London, and there honorably buried in the white Friars
Church which he had newly reedifyed and builded.

This Sir Robert Knowles had bin a most valiant Captain in the wars of
France, during the reign of Edward the third, and Richard the second, whose
force the Realm of France both felt and feared, so did the Dukedom of
Briteine, Register of Bermondsey.
and all the people from hence to Spain. Of him in his life were made Uerses
in Latin, which may be englished thus,

O Robert Knowles, most worthy of fame, Verses.

by thy prowess France was made tame:
Thy manhood made the Frenchmen to yield,
by dint of sword, in town and field.
This Sir Robert Knowles founded in the Town of College and Hospital at
Pontfract.
Pontfract a College to the honor of the holy Trinity, with an Hospital
joined thereunto. In the which College was placed a Master, and 6. or 7.
Priests, and in the Hospital 13. poor men and women. He was once minded to
have made this College at his Manor of Sconethorp, but at the request of
Constance his wife (a woman of mean birth, and sometime of a dissolute life
before her marriage, he turned his purpose, and made it in the very place of
Pontfraite, where she was borne, enduing the same with 180. pound land by
year. He also builded the fair new great bridge at Rochester, over the river
of Medeway, with a Chapel and a chauntrie at the East end thereof. In the which
chapel was sometime a table hanging, wherein was noted the benefactours to
that Bridge, as follows.

Sir Roberte Knoles founder of the Trinity Chapel at Rochester Bridge,
Constaunce wife to Knowles.

Sir John Cobham Lord, principal benefactour to the making of Rochester
Bridge: Margaret wife to Cobham.

Thomas Boucher Cardinal.

John Morton Archbishop.

Henry Chicheley Archbishop.

Thomas Langley Bishop of Durham.

John Langedon Bishop of Rochester.

Thomas Arundale Archbishop.

Sir John Cornewal.

Lord Fanhap.

Richard Whittington.

William Cromer.

Geffrey Boleyne Mayor of London.

John Darby Draper, Alderman of London.

William Midleton Mercer of London.

William Martin Justice.

Sir Willlam Nottingham chief Barron of the Exchequer.

William Wangforde.

John Buckingham Bishop of Lincoln.

John Kempe Bishop of London.

Sir William Richal.

Sir John at Pole.

All these had given money or lands toward the building and repayring of the
said Bridge.

John Warner a Merchaunt of Rochester, made the new coping of Rochester
Bridge: and William Warham Archbishop of Canter bury, made the iron pikes and
bars about the same coaping.

This summer Henry Prince of Wales besieged the Castle of Abrustwich, but not
long after Owen Glendouerdew Anno reg. 9. Sherifes. Mayor.
entered into it, and placed new keepers.

Henry Pontfract: Henry Halton, the. 28. of September.

Sir William Stondon Grocer, the. 28. of October.

In November a Parliamente being called at London, a tax of money was levied
of the whole Realm.

This year was a sore and sharp Winter, and such abundance of Snow, which
continued, December, Januarie, February and March, so that almost all small
Birds dyed through hunger and cold. Whiles the King held a great Counsel at
London with the nobles of the Realm, Henry Earl of Northumberlande, and
Thomas Lord Bardolfe came again into England, who after long iournying, when
they came to the Town of Thriske, they caused to be proclaimed, that who so
would have liberty, should take up armor and weapon and follow them,
whereupon much people resorted to them: but sir Thomas Rockley Sheriff of
Yorkshire, with other Knights of that Country went against them, and at
Bramham Moore nere to Hasewold, fought with them a great battle, and slew the
Earl, whose head was straight ways cut off. The Lord Bardolph was sore
wounded and taken alive, but dyed shortly after. This battle was fought on
the xviij. day of February. The Earls head was put on a stake, and carried
openly through the City 1408
of London, and set on London Bridge. The Bishop of Bangor was taken with the
Lords, but pardoned of his life, because he was not found in armor. The King
went to York, and there condemned such as transgressed, confiscated their
goods, pacified the Country, hanged the Abbot of Hayle, who had bin in armor,
and returned to the South parts again.

Upon the seventh of September there were such floods of rain, as the old
men of that age had never seen before. Edmunde Hollande Earl of Kent whilst
he besieged the Castle of Briake in Brytaine, he was wounded with an arrowe of
a crossebowe in the head, notwithstanding he took the Castle and destroyed it
to the ground, and not long after his brains rotted, and he died. Anno reg. 10
Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Ducke: William Norton, the. 28. of September.

Sir Drew Barentine Goldsmith, the. 28. of October.

About the feast of Al Saints the Cardinal of Burges came into England,
being sent from the College of Cardinals, to inform the King and Clergy,
of the vnconstaunte dealing of Pope Gregory, as also he had informed the
French King and his Clergy and realm, to the end that those two Kings might
set to their helping hands, to induce the said Gregory to observe the oath
he had made, and that by the magnificence of those two Kings, co^corde might
be made in the Church, unto the which business the French King had gladlye
granted, and sent messengers unto Pope Gregory, who notwythstandyng 1409
was obstinate. The King of England when he understood the Cardinals
message, he commanded that courtesy and gentle entertaymente should be given
him, and offered to bear his charges so long as he would abide in England.
After the feast of the Epyphanye, the Archebyshoppe of Canterbury caused to
assemble at London, all the Cleargye of the Realm to chose personages meet to
go to the general counsel holde^ at Pisa, where unto were chosen Roberte Holam
Bishop of Salisburie, Henry Chiseley bishop of Saint David's, and Thomas
Chillingdon Prior of Christ's Church in Canterbury, and the King had sent
before John Coluile Knighte, and master Nicholas Rixton Clearkes, with letters
to be given to the^. And in ye letter to the Pope it was written, most holy
father, etc. if ye providence of ye Apostolic sea would vouchsafe to consider
how great harm and danger is sprung up through out the whole world, under
pretense of Scisme, and chiefly the destruction of Christian people, which
above the number as men say of 200000. are perished by the raging of diverse
wars, that have risen in sundry parts of the world, and even now of late, to
the number of thirty thousand, which (by reason of the dissension had upon
the Bishopric of Leons, betwixt two which do strive and contend the one in
the authority of the true Pope, and the other by the authority of the
Antipope) were in slaughter field (a lamentable thing to be spoken) slain and
distroyed. Truly the Apostolic sea would be in great heaviness of heart,
and would rather forsake the honor of the Apostolical sea, tha^ then to see
from henceforth such wicked slaughter to be committed, and would take example
of the true mother, who before King Solomon, rather chose to give place, than
that the child should be cut in pieces, etc. thus much of the Epistle
sent by the King of England to the foresaid Gregory.

This year was a great play at the skinners Well, nere unto Clearkenwel besides
London, which lasted viij. days, and was of matter from the creation of the
world: there were to bethe same, the most part of the nobles and gentles in
England: and forthwith after began a royal iusting in Smithfielde, between
the Earl of Somerset and the Seneshall of Henalt, sir John Cornwall, sir
Richard of Arundale, and the son of sir John Cheyne, against other Frenchmen.
Anno reg. 11 Sherifes. Mayor.


John Law: William Chicheley, the. 28. of September.

Sir Richard Marlow Ironmonger, the. 28. of October.

Thomas Beuforte Earl of Surrey was made Chanceller, and Henry Scrope was made
Treasurer.

In a Parliament holden at London, in the Lent season, 1410
the Knights and Burgesses presented to the King a Bill in this form:

To the most excellent Lord the King, and all the Nobles in this present
Parliament assembled, your faithful Commons humbly do show, that our
sovereign Lord the king may have the Temporal possessions and lands, which
by Th. Walls.
the Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, are proudely spent and wasted in this
Realm, which would suffice to find 150. Earls, 1500. Knights, 6200.
Esquiers, and 100. Hospytals more than now be, etc. but when they went about to
declare out of what places, those great sums were to be levied, whereby the
forsayde states should be endued, they wa^ted in their account: wherefore the
King commanded the^ that from thenceforth they should not presume to move any
such matter.

Upon the even of Saint John Baptist the kings son being in Eastcheap at
supper, after midnight, betwixt two and three of the clock, a great debate
happened between his men and men of the Court, lasting an hour, til the Mayor
and Sherifes with other Citizens ceased the same: for the which afterward the
said Mayor, Sherifes, and Aldermen, were sent for to appear before the King,
to aunsweare: at which the King with his sons, and diverse other Lords, were
highly moved against the City, where through William Gascoigne chief
Justice, enquired of the Mayor and Aldermen, for the Citizens, whether they
would put them in ye Kings grace, whereunto they answered, they had not
offended the King nor his sons, but according to law stanched the debates:
then the King seeing it would be none otherwise, forgave altogether, and they
departed. King Henry founded a College at Battelfielde in Shropshire, where
he overcame Anno. reg. 12 Battelfield founded. Sherifes. Mayor. 1411 Guilde Hal
in London builded.
sir Henry Percie and other.

John Pen: Thomas Pike, the. 28. of September.

Sir Thomas Knowles Grocer, the. 28. October.

About Easter the Guilde Hall in London, was begun to be made new by the
forsayde Mayor and Aldermen. The Custos or Guardian, with the brethren of the
Grocers in London, purchased their Hall in Cunihope Lane, for 320. marks, and
the^ ^aide the foundation thereof on the tenth of May.

John Prendergest Knight, and William Long, kept the seas from Pirates and
Rouers, so that the passage by Sea was quiet, but by the ill willers they were
accused of theft and robbery themselves, whereupon the Knight took Sanctuary
at Westminster, where he could not have an house or cotage to hide his head,
for that the same was forbidden by the King, so that he was forced to lie in a
Tente which he set up in the Church Porch, and to have men to watch him in the
night season, for fear of his enemy: but his fellow William remained on the
sea, until the Admiral had prepared ships ready, and went in person to
fetch him, which he could not do, till he promised him by his fidelity,
that he should have no harm, which promise notwithstanding, William was
imprisoned in the tower of London. The Earl of Arundale, the Earl of Kime,
sir Robert Vmfreuile, sir John Oldecastle Lord of Cobham, sir John Gray, and
other warlike power, and a great number of Archers were sent into France to
the aid of the Duke of Burgoine, against the Duke of Orleaunce, which at Saint
Elo beside Paris incou^tred with the enimyes, upon whom they had a noble
victory, wherefore they were bountifully rewarded by the Duke of Burgoine, and
then returned into England.

A Squire of Wales named Rice ap Dee, which had long time rebelled against the
King, was brought to London, and there drawn, hanged and quartered. Anno reg.
13


John Raynwel: William Cotton, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Robert Chicheley Grocer, the. 28. of October.

After the feast of All Saints a Parliamente was begun at London.

The King caused a new kind of Nobles to be made 1412
which were of less value than the old by four pence in the noble.

King Henry founded the College of Fodringhey in Northamptonshire: Henry the
fifth gave it land of Priories of Monks aliantes by him supressed.

A Goldsmith and his man of Fleet in London were both murdered by night, in
the Duke of Yorkes place without Temple bar, and were cast into the river of
Thamis.

About the fifteenth of August the King by determination of the Counsel
appoynting to send help to the Duke of Orleaunce, sent his second son Thomas
Duke of Clarence, Edward Duke of York, and Thomas Earl of Dorset, and many
valiant men, with a strong power to help to the Duke of Orleaunce, against the
Duke of Burgonie, or ever al y^ other were returned, which a while ago went
over with ye earl of Arundale to aid the Duke of Burgonie, so that many men
marvelled of the sudden change, that in so small a time the Englishmen did
aid and assiste the two contrary parts: notwythstandyng the foresaid Nobles
went forewardes and arrived in Normandy, where when the Duke of Orleaunce did
not meet them at the time appointed, they brent his towns, and spoiled his
Country, and took many holds.

At length, though late, the Dukes of Clarence and of Orleance, met and
talked together. And the matter was so entreated of between them, that our
men should desyste from raungyng through the Country, and refrain from
robbery, which when our men had granted, they departed into Aquitaine to
Winter there, and the Duke of Orleaunce went home to his Country. Anno reg. 14


Ralph Leuenhynd: William Seuenocke, the. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Waldren Mercer, the. 28. of October.

About this time the Lord Herle Marshall of France, with many other noble
men and men of arms, to the number of four thousand, besieged a certain
hold in Aquitaine, which was in the keepyng of John Blunte Knight, who with
three hundred that aided him, put to flight the whole army of the Frenchmen,
and took twelve of their men of name, and other gentlemen to the number of 120.

King Henry kept his Christmasse at his manor of Eltham, being so sore sick,
that sometime men thought that he had bin dead: notwithstanding it pleased God
that he recovered his strength again a little.

After Christmasse he called the Nobles of ye realm together to a Parliament at
London, but he lived not to the end thereof, for now after the great and
fortunate chances happened Titus Liuius
to him, and being delivered of all Civil division, he was taken with
sickness, of the which he languished til his appointed hour, during which
sickness, some evil disposed people labored to make dissension between the
King and the Prince his son, by reason whereof, and by the act of youth,
which he exercised more than meanly, and for the great recourse of people unto
him, of whom his Court was at all times more abundant than the King his
father, the King suspected that he would presume to usurp the crown, he being
alive: which suspicious jealousy was occasion that he in part withdrewe his
affection and singular love from the Prince. But when this noble Prince was
advertised of his fathers jealousy, he disguised himself in a gown of blew
^atten, made full of small Oylet holes, and at every Oylet the neeble wherewith
it was made hanging still by a threede of silk. And about his arm he ware a
dogs collar set full of S S of gold, and the Tirets of the same also of fine
gold. Thus apparelled, with a great company of Lords and other noble men of
his Court, he came to the king his father, who at that time lay at
Westminster, where at his coming (by his own commandment) not one of
hi(...)panye auaunced himself further tha^ the fire in the Hall,
notwithstanding that they were greatly and often desired to the contrary, by
the Lords and great estates of the Kings Court: and that the Prince had
commanded, to give the less occasion of mistrust to the King his father, but
he himself only accompanied of the kings house, passed forth to the king his
Father, to whom after due salutation) he desired to show the intent of his
mind in secret manner. Then the King caused himself to be borne in his
chair into his secret chamber (because he was deseased and might not go)
where in the presence of three or four persons, in whom the King had most
confidence, he commanded the Prince to show the effect of his mind: Then the
Prince kneeling down before his Father, said to him these words, most
redoubted Lord and Father, I am this time come to your presence, as your
liegman, and as your son natural, in all things to obey your grace as my
sovereign Lord and father. And whereas I understand ye have me suspect of my
behavior against your grace, and that ye fear I would usurp your Crown
against the pleasure of your highness, of my conversation your grace knows
that if ye were in fear of any man, of what estate soever he were, my duty
were to the endaungering of my life to punish that person, thereby to race that
sore from your heart. And then how much rather ought I to suffer death to
bring your grace from the fear that ye have of me that am your natural
son, and your liegeman. And to that intent I have this day by confession
and receiving the Sacrament, prepared my self, and therefore most redoubted
Lord and Father, I beseech you in the honor of God, for the easing of your
heart, heretofore your knees to slay me with this dagger, and at that word
with all reverence he delivered to the king his dagger, saying my Lord and
Father my life is not so desirous to me, that I would live one day that
should be to you displeasure* nor I covet not so much my life as I do your
pleasure and welfare, and in your thus doing, here in the presence of these
Lords, and tofore God at the day of judgment I clearelye forgive you my
death. At these words of the Prince, the King taken with compassion of
heart, cast from him the dagger, and embracing the Prince kissed him, and with
effusion of tears said unto him, my right dear and heartily beloved son, it
is of truth that I had you partly suspecte, and as I now perceive, undeserved
on your party: but seeing this your humility and faithfulness, I shall
neither slay you, nor from henceforth have you any more in mistrust, for no
report that shall be made unto me, and thereof I assure you upon mine honor.
Thus by his great wisdom was the wrongful imagination of his Fathers hate
utterly avoided, and himself restored to the Kings former grace and favor.

After this, as was reported by the Earl of Ormonde (to the translatour of
mine author Titus Liuius) the king gave to his son the Prince, diverse
notable doctrines, and insignments, among which eruditio^s, one is this: the
King lying grievously diseased, called before him the Prince his son, and
said unto him: My son, I fear me sor^ after my departure from this life,
some discord shall grow and arise between thee and thy brother Thomas Duke of
Cla^ence, whereby the realm may be brought to destruction and misery, for I
know you both to be of great stomach and courage* Wherefore I fear that he
through his high mind will make some enterprise against thee, intending to
usurp upon thee, which I know thy stomach may not abide tasily. And for
dread hereof, as often as it is in my remembrance, I soar repent me, that
ever I charged my self with the Crown of this Realm. To these words of the
King the Prince aunsweared thus: Right redoubted Lord and Father to the
pleasure of GOD your grace shall long continue with us, and rule us both: but
if God have so provided that ever I shall succeed you in this Realm, I shall
honor and love my brethren* above all men, as long as they be to me true,
faithful and obediente, as to their sovereign Lord, but if any of them
fortune to conspyre or rebel against me, I assure you I shall as soon
execute justice upon one of them, as I shall upon the worst and most simplest
person within this your Realm.

The King hearing this aunsweare, was therewith maruellouslye rejoiced in his
mind, and said: My dear and well beloved Son, with this answer thou haste
delivered me of a great and ponderous agonye: and I beseech thee, and upon
my blessing charge thee, that like as thou haste said, so thou minister
justice equally, and in no wise suffer not them that be oppressed long to call
upon thee for Justice, but redress oppressions, and indifferently, and without
delay, for no persuasion of flatterers, or of them that be partial, or such
as use to have their hands replenished with gifts, defer not Justice until
to morrow, if that thou may do justice this day, least (peradventure)
GOD do Justice on thee in the mean time, and take from thee thine authority:
remember, that the wealth of thy body and thy soul, and of thy Realm, rests
in the execution of Justice, and do not thy Justice, so that thou be called a
Tyraunte, but use thy self meanly betwixt Justice and mercy in those things
that belong to thee. And between parties do justice truly and extremely to
the consolation of thy poor subjects that suffer injuries, and to the punition
of them that be extortioners and doers of oppressio^s, that other thereby may
take example: and in thus doing, thou shall obtain the favor of God, and the
love and fear of thy subjects, and therefore also thou shalt have thy Realm
more in tranquillitye and rest, which shall be occasion of great prosperity
within thy Realm, which Englishmen naturally do desire: for so long as they
have wealth and Riches, so long shalt thou have obeysaunce: and when they be
poor, then they be always ready at every motion to make insurrections, and
it causes them to rebel against their soueraygne LORD: for the nature of them
is such, rather to fear losing of their goods and worldly substance, than
the ieoparding of their lives. And if thou thus keep them in subjection mixed
with love and fear, thou shalt have the most peaceable and fertyle Country,
and the most loving, faithful, and manlye people of the World: which shall
because of no small fear to thine adversaries. My son when it shall please
God to call me to the way decrede for every Worldely creature, to thee (as my
son and heir) I must leave my Crown and my Realm, which I advise thee
not to take vaynelye* and as a man elate in pride, and rejoiced in Worldly
honor, but think that thou art more oppressed with charge, to puruie for
every Person within the Realm, than exalted in vain honor of the World.
Thou shall be exalted to the Crown, for the wealth and conservation of the
Realm, and not for thy singular commodity and avail: my Son thou shalt be
a minister to thy Realm to keep it in tranquillity and defend it. Like as
the heart in the myddest of the body is principal and chief thing in the
body, and seruesh to covet and desire that thing that is most necessary to
every of thy members, so (my Son) thou shalt be amongst thy people as
chief and principal of them to minister, imagine and acquire those things
that may be most beneficial for them. And then thy people shall be obediente
to thee, to aid and succoure thee, and in all things to accomplish thy
commaundeme^ts, like as thy members labor, every one of them in their office
to acquire and get that thing that the heart desires, and as thy heart is of
no force and impotent without the aid of thy members so without thy people,
thy raygne is nothing. My son thou shall fear and dread God above all
things, and thou shall love honor and worship him with all thy heart, thou
shalt attribute and ascribe to him all things wherein thou see thy self to
be well Fortunate, ^ee it victory of thine enymies, love of thy friends,
obedience of thy subjects, strength and actiuenesse of body, honor, riches, or
fruitful generations, or any other thing whatsoever it be, that chances to
thy pleasure. Thou shall not imagine that any such thing should fortune to
thee, by thine act, nor by thy desert, but thou shalt think that all comes
only of the goodness of our Lord. Thus you shall with all thine heart, praise,
honor, and thank God of all his benefits that he gives unto thee. And in thy
self eschew al vaineglorie and elation of heart, following the wholesome
counsel of the Psalmist, (which says) Non nobis Domine non nobis, sed
nominituo dagloria^ (which is to say) Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but to thy
holy name be given laud and praise. These and many other admonishments and
doctrines this victorious king gave unto this noble prince his son: who with
effect followed the same, after the death of his father: whereby he obtained
grace of our Lord to attain to great victories and many glorious and
incredible conquests, through the help and succor of our Lord, whereof he was
never destitute. The king his father drawing to his end, after due thanks
given, and supplications made to God, gave his benediction to the Prince his
son, and so yielded to God his spirit, the. xx. day of March Anno. 1412. when
he had reigned. xiij. years, six months and odd days. He was conveyed by
water to Feuersham, and from thence by land to Canterbury and there buried.

()

King Henry of Monmouth.


Henry the fifth began his reign yt xx. day of March Anno reg. 1. Titus
Liuius.
in y^ year. 1412. This Prince exceeded the mean stature of men, he was
beautiful of visage, his neck long, body slender and lean, and his bones
small: never the less he was of marvelous great strength, and passing swifte
in running, in so much that he with two other of his Lords without bow or other
engine, would take a wild Buck or Do in a large Park: he delighted in so^gs
and musical instruments, in so much y^ in his chapel amongst other his private
prayers, he used certain Psalms of David translated into heroycall English
meeter, by John Lydgate, Monk of Bury.

Whilst his father lived, being acco^panyed with some of his young Lords and
gentlemen, he would wait in disguised array for his own receyuers, and
distress them of their money: and sometimes at such enterprices both he and
his company were surely beaten: and when his receivers made to him their
complaints, how they were robbed in their coming unto him, he would give them
discharge of so much money as they had lost, and besides that, they should not
depart from him without great rewards for their trouble and vexation,
especially they should be rewarded that best had resisted him and his
company, and of whom he had received the greatest and most strokes. But after
the decease of his father, was never any youth, or wildnes, that might have
place in him, but all his acts were suddenly changed into gravity and
discreation.

To this noble Prince (by assent of the Parliamente) all 1413
the estates of the realm, after three days offered to do fealty before he
was crowned, or had solemnized his oath, well and justly to govern the common
weal, which offer, before was never found to be made to any Prince of England.

The King gave them all generallye thanks, for their good minds toward him,
and therewyth exhorted them to the zeal of the public prosperity and honor
of the Realm. If any man had offended him, he pardoned their trespass, and
desired heartily of GOD, that if he should rule and do all things well to
the honor of GOD and the prosperous commodity of the Realm, that then God
would suffer him to be Crowned. But if his fortune should be to do
otherwise, that then GOD should take him to his mercy, and suffer him rather
to be buried than to enterprise the charge of the Realm.

The ninth day of April he was crowned at Westminster, by Thomas Arundell
Archebyshoppe of Canterbury, after which Coronation, he called unto him all
those young Lords and Gentlemen that were the folowers of his young acts, to
every one of whom he gave rich and bounte^^s gifts, and then commanded that
as many as would change their manners as he intended to do, should abide with
him in his Court, and to all that would persevere in their former light
conversation, he gave express commandment upon pain of their heads, never
after that day to come in his presence.

About this time Thomas Duke of Clarence, the Kings brother, came from the
coasts of Aquitaine, who (as we said before) was sent to aid the Duke of
Orleaunce, against the Duke of Burgoine.

A great part of the City of Norwich was brent, with all Tho. Walls.
the house of the Friar Preachers, and also two Friars of that order. Sir John
Oldcastle, at that time Lord of Cobham, for diverse points touching the
Sacrament, before the Archebyshoppe of Canterbury, the Bishops of London,
Winchester and other, was convict and committed to the Tower of London, out of
the which he brake over the walls in the night and escaped, about the feast of
Simon and Jude.

John Stutton: John Michel, the. 28. of September. Sherises. Mayor.


Sir William Cromer Draper, the. 28. of October.

Richard the second, sometime king of England, which was at the first enterred
in the church of the preaching Friars of Langley, was taken up and royally
buried at Westminster with no small charges to the King. The K. keeping his
Christmasse at his manor of Eltham (vij. miles from London) was warned y^
certain had conspired against him, either to have taken, or suddenly slain him
and his brethren on Twelfth day ^t night, whereupon the king sent word to the
Mayor of London, yt he should arrest all suspicious persons: whereupon the
Mayor forthwith caused every Alderma^ in his ward to keep great watch, and
about ten of the clock at night went himself with a strong power, to the
sign of the Are without Bishops Gate, where they apprehended the man of the
house, called John Burgate Carpenter and vij. other, and sent them to Eltham,
where they confessed before the King that they were confederate with Sir John
Oldcastell to fight against him and his Lords in Saint Giles field above
Holborne. On the morrow after the Twelfth day, the King King Henry kept the
field by S. Giles without Holborne.
re^^^ued privily to Westminster, and with a great army kept the field of
S^^^t G^les, for he was warned that Sir John Oldcastell* and Sir Roger* Acton,
would be in the same field on the next day following with five and twenty
thousand people* and the same night were taken more than fourscore men in
armor of the same faction. Also the King being told of an am^^shment gathered
in Harengay Park, ^^nte thither certain Lords* who took many, among whom,
was one William Murl^ a rich ^aultma^, or Bruer of Dunstaple, who had his two
Horses trapped with Gold following him, and a pair of gilt Spurs in his
bosom; for he thought to have bin made Knight on the morrow by the hande^ ^^
Sir John Old^^stell. The twelfth of January, threes^^r^ and nine of them were
condemned of treafo^^ Many men hanged, and some brent in Ficket^ field.
at Westminster, and on the morrow after seven and thirty of th^^ were
dr^^^^^ from the Tower of London to Newgate, and so to Saint G^^^^* and there
in a place called Fickets field, were all hanged* and ^e^^ien of them brent
Gallows and ^^. The xix. of January, were drawn and hanged Sir John Be^erley
Priest, John B^^gate Carpenter, a Text writer in S^^^^ John's street, and a
Glouer on London bridge, and shortly after, Sir Roger A^^on Knight was taken,
who on the tenth of February, was drawn, hanged, and buried under the Gall^wes.

The twentieth of February, deceassed Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Conterburie.
Anno reg. 2.


The King taking compassion upon Henry Percy a young 1414
man (who by his Grandfather Henry Percy Earl of North^^^^erland, was carried
into Scotland, after the death of his father, who was s^aine in the battle of
Shrewsburie, when this young man was then but a child) commanded the^ that were
of his kindred, and nearest friends, to solicit for his reclayming home again
out of Scotland, minding not only to honor him by calling him home again, but
also to ^^^^^ him Earl of Northumberland.

In the month of May, a Parliament was begone at Leycester, Parliament at
Leycester. Porter of the Tovver executed.
and there was a Porter of y^ Tower of London drawn, hanged, and headed, whose
head was sent to London, and set over the Tower gate, for consenting to one
that brake out of the Tower, named* (...). In this Parliamente, John the Kings
brother was made Duke of Bedford, Humfrey Dukes created.
his brother Duke of Gloucester, and Richard, brother to the Duke of York, was
made Earl ^^ Cambridge. To this Parliament came the Ambassadors of the French
King, and also of the Duke of B^^g^^dy, but not with like in^^^te and purpose,
for the D. of ^^^g^ndy desired aid against the ^. of Orleance, promising (as
men laid) more than he was able to perform, wherefore the King of England
^^^^ (...) Ambassadors to them both, amongst whom were the Bishops of Durham
and Norwich as chi^f(...) were often times sent into France, and the French Kings
Ambassadors were sent hither, with great cost on both ^^^^s, but no hope of
peace to be had. On Mary Magdalens day, in London, John ^^^nser Esquire, with
mine of his men, set upon and ^lew The Queens Chancellor flayne.
John T^^bey Clearke, Archdeacon of Hun^^^g^^ and Chancellor to Queen Ioane,
late wife to Henry the fourth, for the which fact, the said Esquire, and four
of his men fled to Saint Annes Church within Aldersgai^, where they were mured
up with board, and watched day and night till the xxj. of August, on the which
day, they forsware the land, Men foresvvare the land.
and passed through the City toward Caleis in their shirtes and breeches,
each of them having a Cross in his hand.

This year dyed the ^oalours of Newgate and Ludgate Prisoners dyed.
of London, and many prisoners in Newgate, to the number of threescore and
four.

The tenth of September, John Claydon Skinner; and A Skinner and a Baker brent.
Richard Gurmonfrench Baker, in Lombardstree^e of London, were brent in
Smithsield.

John Michel^. Thomas Allin, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Mooregate
first made in the wall of London.


Thomas Fawconar Mercer, the 28. of October.

This* Thomas Fawconar Mayor, caused to break the wall of London, near to the
end of Colmanstreete, and made there a Gate upon the moore side, where was
none before.

He also caused the ditches of the City to be cleansed, and a comm^^ privy
that was on the moore without the wall to be taken down* and another to be
made within the City upon Walbrooke, into the which brook he caused the water
of city to be turned by grates of iron in diverse places.

Our Ambassadors* the Bishops of Durham and Norwich, returning now the second
time out of France, declared to the King, that the Frenchmen, did but use
fraud and deceiptes, wherefore the King being stirred up unto anger,
determined to a^at^ their ^^^rnin^^^* and to teach them to understand their
fully* in ^^aking of a ^^eeping Dog: and forth with, the King commanded all
the Pre^^tes, and Nobles of the Realm, to come to London, there to entreat of
waight^ affairs concerning y^ Realm, at y^ which time, the Archbishop of
Canterbury held a great counsel, in y^ which were chosen (...) of the
Clergy of England, to go to the general Counsel that should be holden at
Constance, a City of Germ^^ and so there were sent the Bishops of Salisburie,
Bath, and Hereford, and with them the Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of
Worcester, and many other wise men, in co^^ ^^^^ of the Earl of Warwike, whose
presence did the^ much honor*

This year, the order of Church service throughout Anno reg. 3. 1415 Order of
Church service in England altered.
England was changed, from the use of Saint Paul, to the use of Salisburie,
which was to the great disliking of many men in those days.

When King Henry percey^ed that the Frenchmen had with deceit entreated him
with feigned promises, and fair words* he gathered his ^a^y together, appointed
his bowme^ ^ men of arms, prepared his engines, and all things necessary ^or y^
wars, commanding all y^ should go we him, to be ready against the feast of
Saint John Baptist, and to m^e^e him at Hampton.

The eyghtenth day of ^^^e, King Henry with many Lords and others rode from
London toward South-hampton* the Mayor, (...)* and Crafts of the C^tle
(...)*ing him on his ^^^y to ^he ^owne of Kingston upon Thamis, while^^ the
King (...) ^^ (...)* where he abode for his reli^^^^ and ^^^ffe ^^nging to the
wars.

On the last ^^ July was discovered a great conspiracy Conspiracy disclosed.
Tho. Walls. Regist. Mayor.
against him, by three (...) is (...) of all the rest he pat greatest trust and
confid^^^^ (...) of them was Henry Scrope, Lord Treasours* the second, Richard
^a^^e of Cambridge, brother ^o Edward Duke of York, and Sir Thomas Gray, a
Knight of the North* these had made Edmond Earl of Ma^^h (...) upon a Book,
not to d^^^^ose their counsel, and then ^^l^^ him that they thought to (...)
the King* and to (...) the said Ed^^o^^^ King, the which ^^ he refused to take
upon him* they would ^^ey him: where upon, the Earl praise them to give him
one hou^es spa^e to take ^^uise^ent what was best to do, which being granted,
the Earl went secretly and ^ol^ the King^ ther^^^, who caused them forthwith
^o be apprehended, and brought before him, where they confessed the ^^^ason,
for the which, on the sixth of August they were ar^^^gned in y^ Kings presence,
and the same day all three beheaded. The Earl was buried head and all, bu^ the
other hea^^ were ^e^^^, the one to York, the other to Newcastell upon Tine,
and there se^ up.

On the eleventh of August, the King took shipping, and entered the Sea with a
thousand Sail, Enguerant says King Henry sailed into Normandy. Tho. W^^s.
Titus Liuius. Enguerant.
1600. Sails, and the third night after arrived at Kedeca^x in Normandy,
which is betwixt Hereflete and ^imflete, of whose coming, all the Cities,
and States of th^^^ parts being advertised, were stricken with great fear. The
King, the Dukes of Clarence and of Gloucester his breethren, the Duke of York
his Uncle, the Earls* Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, (...)
an^^^^*^ there, and took land without any resistance, and the King forthwith
falling to the ground upon his knees, deuoutely prayde to God that to his honor
he would give him justice of his enemies. He had at his landing in his host*
six thousand Spears, and xxiiij. thousand footmen, besides Gunners, and
other enginars, artificers, and laborers, of whom the King had great
abundance.

The King gave to diverse Gentlemen the order of Titus Liuius.
Knighthoode, and assigned the bearing of his Standarts and Banners to such me^
as he knew to be of great strength and prowess. All thing being set in good
order and array, the King with all his host ascended to the top of an high
hill there nigh, and there he rested the next day.

On the sixteenth day of August, the Duke of Clarence, leader of the foreward,
in good ordinance, entered his journey toward a Town called Herefleete,
distant from Kedecamp scarcely three leagues, where he lodged his host in a
field before the town. The King at his coming, lodged himself nigh to the
first ward, not far from the Town. The Earl of Suffolk, Michaell at
Poole, Chiefetayne of the rereward, lodged on the other side before the Town.
Other noble men that had the conduct of the two wings, lodged them, one on the
right hand, the other on the left. Forthwith were sent to the Town, men of
arms in great number, to see the situation thereof, who shortly returned with
a great pray of Cattle, and informed the King of all his demaundes.

Hereflete is the key of the sea of all Normandy, and is situate Enguerant.
Description of Herefleete.
upon the Sea side, by the River of Seen, betwixt two hills, and through the
middle thereof runs a River, which not far from the same Town enters
into the Seane, and from thence, both those Rivers in one descend into the
Sea, where as a great and goodly Haven is, belonging to the same Town, which
Haven, is garnished with the defense of two fair and strong Towers: and in the
same Haven a right great Navy of Ships may ride in safety: and if the
inhabitants of this Town enclose and keep within the Town the course of the
foresaid River by their sluices, as they may right well do, then the River
rises without the Town so high, that it forecloseth all entries to the
walls, so that no man may approach the town on that part. This Town is also
defended with high and thick walls and towers, and is also environed with
broad and deep ditches. To this Town also belongs only two Gates for
entries, the one called Calturances, the other Mostrouillier. In this Town,
besides the inhabitants thereof, for the defense of the same, were four
hundred men of arms deputed in Garrison, amongst whom, were these Lords, Lord
Discouteuile, chief Captain of the Town, Lord Blanuile, Lord Haqueuile, Lord
Harmanuile, Lord Eancourt, Lord Gaillard Bos, and diverse other Lords and men
expert in war. The King commanding the Duke of Clarence to asseege the Town,
he endeavored Titus Liuius.
to convey his people over the River, in the passage whereof, he had a great
skirmish with the inhabitants of the Town, but at the last his adversaries
being put to flight, recoyled within the walls. The Duke conuayde over the
River all his ward and company, and because the River divided the Kings Camp
from the Dukes, they ordained a ready and sure passage over the same River
betwixt both the Camps, to the keeping whereof, certain Gentlemen were
appointed, so that their enemies might not endomage them neither by Water nor
Land.

In this mean time befell a great misaduenture to the Enguerant.
Frenchmen that were beseeged, for the Gonnepouder and shot that was sent
unto them by the French King, was encountered upon the Sea by the Englishmen,
and taken, to their great displeasure and damage.

The King gave the charge of the field to his brother Titus Liuius.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester. On the same side the River that the King lay, was
ye Duke of York, high Connestable of England lodged with his band. When every
man was placed, ye Town was so straightly asseeged, that all entries and
issues of the Town were stopped, so y^ they of ye town were in despair to
have any succor from the Realm of France. Many engines were raised by the
English, which in short time should have bin the destruction of the walls, if
they of the Town had not the sooner stopped the River of the same town
within, whereby the water gathered and reised without the town betwixt the King
and the D. of Clarence, to the semblance of a little Sea, which caused the
Englishmen to withdraw their Gonnes, and other engines, whereby at that time the
walls were saved. Then the King caused to Enguerant.
be made under the water three great Mines unto the walls of the town, which
in like manner had bin the cause of their ruin, if the inhabitants had not
countermined them, and let their purpose. The inhabitants of the Town
perceiving Titus Liuius.
themselves thus straightly asseeged, as well by Land as by Sea, conuayde all
their Ships within their Haue^, and bound them together with cheynes, and in
the two towers that were made for the defense of the Haven, they put certain
Garrisons, and armed men, who oftentimes attempted to invade the Kings Navy,
but at all times they were by his Ships beaten, and constreyned to recule
still within their Haven: at the last, the Captains and inhabitants
considering that by such skirmishes (as well upon the Land as upon the Sea)
they gained nothing, took this appointment with the King, that if they were
not rescued by the Frenchmen within certain days limited, they should then
deliver into his hands the Town, with thirty persons of the greatest and
most noble within the Town, such as the King would desire, to be ordered at
the Kings pleasure, and all the residue, as well men of War, as the
inhabitants of the same Town, without armoure, and leaving behind them their
goods, should freely go where they would, for the surety of which
appoyntemente to be kept, they delivered unto the King twelve of their
greatest personages for pledges. The Captains and inhabitants of the Town
seeing their day of appointment to approach, and themselves utterly desperate of
any succors of their people, ordained to perform their covenant at their day
prefixed, which was the xxij. of September, on which day came Sir Lionell
Braquemont, governor of the Town, unto the King, and kneeling before him,
said: Most victorious Prince, behold here the keys of this Town, which
after our promis I yield unto you, with the Town, my self, and my company.
Then were brought to the King the Lord Coteuile, the Lord Gangcourt, and other,
to the number of thirty, and all the residue, as well souldioures, as
inhabitants, were suffered unarmed to depart. The King constitute Captain of
the Town Sir Thomas Beawford Earl of Dorset his Uncle, to whom he also
committed two thousand soldiers, chosen men of his host. Then considering that
winter drew on, as also the loss of their men, by reason of the Flix then
reigning amongst them, by which infirmity, died Michaell at Poole, Earl of
Suffolk, the Bishop of Norwich, the Enguerat.
Lord Beawmont, and others, and of the commons to the number of two thousand
and above. King Henry created the son of Michaell at Poole, Earl of
Suffolk, who lived not long after.

After King Henry had remained at Harefleete fifteen days, after ye delivery
of the Town, and of the Towers, he departed from thence toward Caleis,
whereof, when his Titus Liuius.
enemies were advertised, and also by what way he intended to pass, all the
people of the Country, Cities, and Towns, were maruellouslie oppressed with
fear, wherefore they hasted them to defensible places, and other that were apt
to war, took them to their horses, and assembled them together in great
number, with no small company of footmen, and in all that they might they
oppressed the Englishmen.

The Kings host kept an easy pace, without making any have, and when they
approached the Town of Ewe, their enemies assailed them in the fields with
great force and noise, where on both parties it was foughten sore and
vigorously: Enguerant.
but the Frenchmen reculed to the Town, where they were in good surety. From
thence the King departed, and came to a passage of the River of Some, which the
Frenchmen call Blankhestoke, or Blanch* tache. This passage, at Titus Liuius.
the coming unto it, was fixed with sharp stakes by their enemies, so that
they could not pass there, but were constreyned to go farther seeking their
passage, until they came directly to have the City of Amiens, and the Castle
of Gorby on their left side, where they of the said City began with them a
new fight: but they were soon forced by the English to return to their City
again. The xix. of October the King passed the River of Some, at the passage
of Vienna, and Bethew-court, and went then to lodge him at Mouche-legach, from
whence, he advanced him toward the River of Miramont. In the mean time, the
French King, and the Duke of Guyen his son, then Dolphin, purposing to resist
the Englishmen, came to Roane, from whence, they sent three Heraults to the
King of England, to give understanding that he should not escape without
battle: unto whom the said King answered, All things be done at the
pleasure of God, I will keep the right way toward Caleis: if our adversaries
do attempt to disturb us in our journey, we think they shall not do it
without their own great danger and peril. From thence, King Henry removed
Enguerant.
to a Uillage called Forceuile, advancing his host toward the River of
Miramont, and the next day they passed by the Cheue, and the King lodged that
night at Bonyers lestaillon. The next day the King removed unto Bangy. The
Titus Liuius.
next day late in the night the King came to a Uillage named Agencourt,
Enguerant says Masencelles, where they lodged not distant from the French
host the space of two hundred and fifty spaces. The Frenchmen fixed their
Banners Enguerant.
and Standerts with the Banner Royal, whereof the Connestable had the conduct,
in the field by them devised and chosen, which was in the County of S. Paul,
in y^ ground of Agencourt, by which the day following, the Englishmen The
Battle of Agencourt. Titus Liuius.
should pass to go to Caleis.

The xxv. day of October, the King of England in the morning very early set
forth his host in array. He commanded that his Horses and other carriages
should be left in the Uillage where he had lodged. The order of his field was
thus: The middle battle whereof the King was conductor, was set in the midst
of the field, directly against the middle battle of his adversaries. On the
right side was the first battle, and therewith the right wing: and on the left
side the last battle, and the left wing. And these battayles joining nigh
together, by the providence of God, proved unto this King a defensible place
for his host, for the Uillage wherein he was lodged before, defended his host
from all invasions on the back, and the field wherein he was, was defended on
both sides with two small Rivers.

This noble King was armed with sure and right beautiful armor. On his head a
bright Helmet, whereupon was set a Crown of Gold, repleate with pearl and
precious stones, marvelous rich. In his Shield he bare the arms both of
England and France. And thus armed, he was mounted upon a goodly great Horse,
and after him were led certain noble Horses, with their bridles and
trappers of Goldsmithes work, and upon them also were beaten the Arms of
England and of France. Thus this victorious King prepared to battle,
encouraged his people to the field that approached at hand.

The night before this cruel battle, by the advice and counsel (as it is
said) of the Duke of York, the King had given commandment through his host,
that every man should puruey him a stake sharp at both ends, which the
Englishmen fixed in the ground before them in the field, to defend them from
the oppression of Horssemen. The Frenchmen had such confidence in the great
multitude of their people, and in their great Horses, that many of their great
Princes and Lords leaving behind them their Soldiers, Standerts, and other
Ensigns, came toward the Englishmen in right great have, as if they had bin
assured of victory.

The battayles of the Englishmen were as large as the Enguerant.
field wherein they fought would suffer, which was greatly to their advantage,
for by that means their enemies were let to come upon them at the sides and
backs of their host.

The Frenchmen had ordained their battles with two sharp fronts, like unto two
horns, which always backward was broader and broader: and these sharp battles
set upon the Englishmens middle ward, intending to have run thorough the
whole field, but the Frenchmen were slain and wounded by the English Archers,
and by the help of the stakes which the Englishmen had fixed before them in
the ground, whereby the Horssemen were constreyned to return, or else to
run upon the stakes, where many of them were overthrown and wounded, and
many both Horses and men slain. The battle and fight increased maruellously
by the space of three hours, in all which time no man was taken prisoner, but
innumerable were slain, upon whose dead bodies they that followed were
overthrown and slain. Thus after a long and cruel battle, there approached
no man to battle, but to death, of whom, after that an innumerable company
were slain, and that the victory remained to the Englishmen, they spared to
sley and take prisoners of the Frenchmen.

In this mortal battle, the noble King of England fought with his enemies as
a famished Lion for his pray, receiving on his Helmet, and other armor, many
and great strokes: at the last, the victory obtained, and the great host of
the Frenchmen slain, taken, wounded, and vanquished, forthwith another host of
Frenchmen, no less than the first, supposing the Englishmen now to be
weeried, prepared themselves to begin again a new battle. The King of
England seeing this second assemble of his adversaries, Titus Liuius.
sent his Heraults unto them, commanding them either forthwith to come to
battle, or else immediately to depart: and if they delayed to depart, or if
they came to battle, both those of theirs which were already taken prisoners,
and also all those that after should be taken, without redemption should be put
to death, which message when the Frenchmen had heard, fearing the strength of
the Englishmen, and also the death of themselves, and of the prisoners taken,
with heaviness they departed forthwith. Then the King of England being assured
of the victory, gave the greatest laud and praise to God that might be.

In this battle were slain on the French part, the Dukes of Alaunson,
Barry, and Braban, and the Lord of Helly, Enguerant.
the Lord Labret chief Connestable of France, the Archbishop of Saunce, eight
Earls, an hundred and mo Barons, fifteen hundred Knights, and above ten
thousand of all estates, whereof scarcely fifteen hundred were Soldiers or
laborers, the rest were of cote armor.

At this battle were taken prisoners of the Frenchmen, Titus Liuius.
the Dukes of Orleaunce, and of Burbon, Arthure, brother to the Duke of
Briteine, the Earls of Vandisme, of Ewe, and Enguerant.
Richmount, and Sir Boumeycault, Marshall of France, and Titus Liuius.
many other, to the number of fifteen hundred Knights and Esquiers. And of
the English party were slain the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk, and to
the number of an C. persons in the vantgard, and of all estates on ye English
Enguerant.
party, were not found dead above vj. C. in the field.

When night approached, the K. of England returned with his host into that
Uillage wherein they harbored the night before, where he found his Horses and
other baggages and cariages ye he left there before the field, stolen, and
carried away by the Frenchmen. On the day next ensuing, the King with his people
entered his journey toward Caleis. Titus Liuius.


William Cambridge: Allin Euerard, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Nicholas Wotton Draper, the 28 of October.

The morrow after Saint Simon and Jude, early in the Regist. of Majors.
morning, came tidings to London of this victory, for joy whereof, Te deum was
song in all the Churches, and at nine of the clock, all the orders of
Religious men of the City, went on Procession from Saint Paul's, unto
Westminster, with the new Mayor, his Aldermen, and the Crafts, the Queen and
her Lords and all her train, who all offered at Saint Edwards Shrine, and then
the Mayor took his charge, and every man returned with great joy.

The xxiij. of November, King Henry arrived at Dover, King Henry returned.
the Mayor of London, with the Aldermen and Crafts riding in red, with hoods
red and white, met with the King on Black heath, coming from Eliam, and so
brought him thorough London to Westminster, with all his prisoners of France.
On the next morrow, the Mayor, Aldermen, and 200. of the commoners, presented
the King with a thousand pound in two Basens of Gold worth 500. pound.

In the feast of the Purification, seven Dolphins of the sea came up the River
of Thamis, and played there whiles four of them were kilde.

In a Parliament begun the fifteenth of March at Westminster, the halfepens of
Ianua (commonly called Galey halfepens) Halfepens of Ianua forbidden.
were forbid to be used as lawful payment among the English people.

The first of May the Emperor landed at Dover, and the Anno reg. 4. 1416.
seventh of May, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Crafts of London receive him at
Black heath, and the King with his Lords met him at Saint Thomas Waterings,
and so brought him thorough London to Westminster. The Emperor returned out of
England the sixteenth of August, after he had labored, but could make no peace
between England and France.

John Benet Woolma^ who had in London scattered scedules Tho Walls. VVoolman
beheaded.
full of sedition, was drawn, hanged, and beheaded on Michaelmas, day. The
viij. day of October, was a Parchment maker of Trillmell street, drawn,
hanged, and headed, for that he had harbored Sir John Oldcastell.

Robert Widington: John Couentrie, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 5.
Henry Barton Skinner, the 28. of October.

In the Parliament at London, the Earl of Dorset was made Duke of Excester.

The xxvij. of November, was a Beggar drawn and hanged for dismembring of young
children, he was drawn in his own carre from the Leaden Hall unto Tiborne.

A Spicers wife of Saint Albons, and the Bayliffes wife of Vinesburie, were
hanged at Tiborne, and shortly after, the Bailey of Vinesburie himself was also
hanged at Tiborne.

On Easter day in the after noone, at a Sermon in Saint Dunstons in the East of
London, a great fray happened in the 1417 A fray in Saint Dunstons Church.
Church, where-through many people were sore wounded, and one Thomas Petwarden
Fishmonger, dwelling at Sprots Key, was slain out of hand, wherefore the
Church was suspended, and the beginners of the fray (which was the Lord
Strange, and Sir John Tussell Knight, through the quarrel of their two wives)
were brought to the Counter in the Pultry: the Archbishop of Canterbury caused
them to be excommunicate, Records of Caunt. The L. Strange and his wife does
penance.
as well at Paul's Cross, as in all other Parish Churches of the City. The
xxi. of April, the said Archbishop sat at S. Magnus, to enquire of the
authors of that disorder, where he found the fault to be in the Lord Strange
and his wife, who upon the first of May following, in Paul's Church before the
Archbishop, the Mayor of London, and other, submitted themselves to penance,
and swear to do the same, which was enjoined them, that immediately al their
servants should in their shirtes go before the Parson of S. Dunstons, from
Paul's, to S. Dunstons* Church, and the Lord bare headed, with his Lady bare
footed, Reignold Kenwood Archdeacon of London following them, and at the
halowing of the Church, the Lady should fill all the vessels with water, and
also offer an ornament to the Alter of ten pound, and the Lord Strange
should offer a Pixe of Silver of five pound.

The xxix. of June, the Earl of Huntington, with his retinue fought with nine
Carikes of Iene, and took four of them to their patrons, and the Admiral of
them all, that was called the Bastard of Burbon, with all the treasure that
they all should have bin waged with for a quarter of a year.

The thirtith of July, King Henry with his host sailed into Normandy, and took
the Castle of Tonke, and shortly after gat Cane, Beyonx, and many other Towns
and Castles.

Henry Read: John Gedney, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Marlow Ironmonger, the 28. of October.

Sir John Oldcastell was sent unto London by the Lord Tho. Walls.
Powes out of Wales, which Sir John was convict by Parliament, drawn to Saint
Giles field, where he was hanged by Tho. Walls.
the neck in a chain of iron, and after consumed with fire.

The 14. of December, King Henry continuing his Anno reg. 6.
wars in France, held his Christmas in Normandy at Bayaux, about which time
the Castle of Falase was yielded unto 1418
him, and the City of Aueraunce was also yielded.

After Easter, Thomas Duke of Clarence was sent by the King to beseege the
Monastery of Beck Helowin, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester was sent to beseege
the Town Cherburghe, Richard Earl of Warwike was sent to beseege the Castle
of Daunfrount, and the Earl of Kime was sent to beseege the Castle of Milly
Leuisque.

About the feast of the holy Trinity, the King sent Thomas Duke of Excester*
his Uncle into Normandy, with fifteen thousand men of arms.

In the month of June, King Henry beseeged the noble Town of Louens, and
compelled them within, to yield to him upon conditions, on the even of Saint
John Baptist.

Then the King on the xxij. of June, removed his army Titus Liuius.
toward Pount large, where he laid his seege on the one side of y^ Town, by
the middle whereof, the River of Seen has his course, but could have no
passage over the river to lay seege on ye other side, for ye bridge which was
without ye town was defended with a strong Tower, and a Garrison, but King
Henry commanded to make Boats of wickers, and those to be closed in Beasts
Skins, by which Boats, on the fifth of July, the Duke of Clarence with his
company passed over secretly in great number, and then beseeged the other side
of the Town: but because the River of Seen divided his host, whereby if
either part should have need of other, they could not come together for the
River, the King caused to be made so many small square Boats of the wicker
aforesaid, that being tied together, and cast into the River, he made of them a
Bridge. When the inhabitants and Garrisons perceived them thus environed in all
parts, they agreed with the King, that if within fifteen days they were not
delivered from this seege, they should deliver to the King the Town and
Castle, and when the day was come, they performed promise: and this was the
first Bridge over the River of Seen that the King subdued to his power.

After the King had thus obtained that Bridge over the River of Seen, and that
there was none other River or flood might let his journey, with all the have
he might, he entered his journey toward Roane. The Citizens hearing the
approach of their enemies, and fearing least they should be lodged in the
Suburbs which were much larger than the City was within the walls, and was
also much replenished with Monasteries, Churches, and Towers, burned the same,
and made all even with the ground. To this City on the thirtith day of Julye
this victorious King approached, against whom came the Citizens with their
Garrisons and men of war, where the more part of all that day they continued
in battle, and fought sore on both parts, but the French were forced to
seek their succor within the walls of the City, whom in their recoyle the
King pursued still before the City, where he ordered his seege in this manner.
First, the King with a noble company of young and hardy men lodged himself
before the gate of Saint Hillarie. The Duke of Clarence with his power was
lodged before the gate of Caulx. The Duke of Excester, after he was come to the
king was lodged with his people before the gate of ye Castle, called Beanuice.
Earl Marshal was lodged before ye gate called Markeuile. The Earl of Warwick,
after he was come from the Castle of Donfrounte, was lodged upon the Hill, where
the strong Monastery of Saint Katherie was: The Earls of Salisburie and
Huntingdon, were lodging there upon the other side of the River of Seen: upon
whom their enemies made many assaults: and because the River of Seen divided
the English hoaste in two parts, the King caused to be made a strong bridge of
Timber over the same River, that when need should require, they might have
free passage on foot and horse: and because their enemies should not approach
unto it, with their ships or Galleys, the K. caused to be made a great cheyne to
be drawn over the River, betwixt the city and the Bridge. At that time the
King of Portingale co^^ to the King of England, sent a navy of ships well
manne^ into the Kings aid, whom the King commanded to lie betwixt the City
and the sea, to enclose the City from all succors by Water. The town of
Caudbeke fearing the danger of the time, couenaunted with the King of England,
that when the City of Roane were taken and delivered into the Kings
obeysaunte; they in like manner would yield them to him, without any
assault, and under the same appointed according with the King. xiiij. other
defensible Towns and Castles that were nigh borderers unto Roane. After many
cruel battayles and assaults, the Citizens fearing at length to be famished,
daily put out of the City great number of poor people and other, but the
hunger increasing, they were forced to eat their horses, dogs, cattes,
rattes and mise: and these and other like things were consumed and eaten. Then
the plague of famine entered the City, so that the people for defaulte of
relief dyed, that the living might scarcely bury the dead, whereby that
noble City was brought into so much misery, that it is not less maruayle
than pitiful to hear.

In this mean time during this siege of Roane. The duke of Excester besieged
the City of Eneroys, also about the xx. of August king Henry had three
marvelous victories in Normandy. The first was that one hundred Englishmen
take iij. great Lords at a place called Kilbuife, and put to flight three
hundred and fourescoure persons besides. The second was, four hundred of his
enemies entered within the suburbs of the Town of Ebroicens, and eleauen
Englishmen chased them away and took four of them, and slew twelve and took
40. of their horses. The third was, the enemies would indeed have taken the
town which was called Leuers, but the Captain of the same with an hundred of
our men went out against a thousand of them, and overcame them, and took 180.
gentlemen of the enemies. About this time also Captain de la Bouche took the
Town of Pontoys by Paris.

The Parson of Wrotham in Norffolke, which haunted New market Heath and there
robbed and spoiled many, was with his Concubine brought to Newgate of London,
where he dyed in prison.

John Brian: Ralphe Barton, the. 28. of Sep. John Parnesse, Sherifes.
the. 28. of October.

This John Brian Sheriff, as he came one a time from Wapping in the Woose,
thinking to have eased himself beyond Saint Katherines Mill, fell into the
Thamis and was dragged up again by his men and the Miller, but dyed thereof
within a seauen-night, in whose place was chosen John Parnesse.

William Seuenoke Grocer* the. 28. of October. Mayor.


This William Seuenoke, when he was a new borne babe, was found at a Town
called Seuenoke in Kent, where by charitable people he was christened by the
name of William, and for that his father or mother could not be known, they
gave him to surname Seuenoke being by the^ brought up till he was able to
serve, they then bound him prentise with a Citizen of London, where after his
good service, God endued him with such wisdom and wealth, that he came to be
Mayor of that City: who being not unthankful to God and the common wealth,
among other his charitable works, founded in the Town of Seuenoke, where he
had bin nourished, a Free schole and thirteen alms houses.

When the Citizens of Roane, perceived themselves maruellously afflicted by
famine, (as is before showed, and also to be in despair of succor, from the
Frenchmen, now after half a years siege and more, upon certain conditions,
they delivered to the king of England their City, castle, Tower, Abbayes,
Churches, houses, Citizens, Captains, Garrisons, and generallye all, things
that were within the City, whatsoever they were. The xix. day of Januarie,
there had dyed within this City (as was said) for defalt of victuals during
this siege mo than xxx. thousand people. This Anno reg. 7. 1419
noble King the rather to relieve this oppressed City, ordained the same to be
the chief Chamber of all Normandy, and ordained his exchequer, his Treasury,
and his coynage to be kept in the same, he also ^dified a strong tower behind
the Castle. Whilst the King ordered his business at Roane, he sent diverse
Lords with strong puissaunce of people, to receive the Castelles of Towns
borderyng upon Roane, amongst whom the Duke of Clarence, in short time redused
to the King, the mighty Castle of Galiarde, the Town of Vernon, the Town of
Naunte, the Castall of Bandmounte, and many other strong places and holds.

The Earl of Salisburie, with the Garrison to him assigned took the Town of
Hounslowe, the Town of Moun^iour de Villers, the town of Ewe, the Town of
Gurney, the new Castle, and generallye all the places in that part.

This year Queen Jane the Kings stepmother being de^amed by certain persons,
of some wicked practice by witch craft* or (...), that she had devised against
the (...) the counsel of (...)dolph a Doctor of Divinity her Confessor*
(...)ing all her servant put from her, was committed to the custody of John
Wellam, who appointed nine servant to attend her, brought her unto the
Castle of Pemsey to be governed under his providence. Friar Randolph ^^^ sent
to the Tower, where at length, to weete, in Anno. (...). the fifte of June, he
was slain by the Parson of the Tower, falling out at words with him. And
after, Queen Ioane was delivered. King Henry sent his brother Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, accompanied with the Earl Marshall, and a great power of armed
men to lay siege before the Town and Castle of Yuory, which Town, after many
assa^^ts and battayles, the Duke took by force: But the Castle thereof was not
yielded, til the thirteenth of May. The King also sent the Earl of Huntington
with a power from Maunt, to the Town of Pontois, by which, if it were taken,
he might have the more sure and easy passage to Paris. Those which were sent,
at the entry of the night were come nygh unto Pontois, where, in a Wood they
left their horses, and that done, in the darkness of the night, they went on
foot to the ditches of the Town, which then were dry, where part of them
lay on the banks of the ditches, with their Ladders in their hands ready to
scale the walls when time should serve, and the residue hyd them in the
Uines, where they might be ready to enter the town at the opening of the gates.
At the break of the day they of the town changed their Watch, at the which
change, the ^^^^es were left without Watches for the time. But the Englishmen
seeing time to accomplish their intent, ^aysed their Ladders, and scaled the
walls, and by that means, entered the Town: where, some of them forthwyth
brake the gate, and made entry for the rest of their company, which, when the
garrisons of the Town perceived, as me^ amazed, they turned themselves to
flight. But not long after, they armed them, and assailed their enemies, but to
the Englishmens great avail, the Earl of Huntingdon with his company set
spurs to their horses, and hasted them to the succor of their first
company, whereby the Frenchmen as al discouraged and in despair to save the
Town, at the sight of these new rescues that came to the Englishmen, leaving
behind them all their riches and substance endeanoured themselves, to escape
by flighte, and so the town of Pointois, avoided of all Frenchmenne, was left
free to the English, After these enterprises thus achieved, the king with all
his company came to this Town of Pointois, where he aboade a certain time,
from whence he sent the Duke of Clarence with a chosen power of men to Paris, to
view ye situation and strength thereof, before which City, when he had
tarried certain days and had seen all that him liked, and that none of the
French men would issue out of the City, to fight with him, he returned to
the King, and assertayned him of all that he had seen.

On the. xviij. of August, King Henry with all his host departed from
Pointois. And because the Castle of Bokinvillers Bokinvillers yielded.
had done certain inhumane cruelties to the Kings lands that bordered
thereabout, to the intent to repress their malice, the King lodged himself
not far from thence, and sent certain to assault the same Castle, where both
the inhabitants and garrisons feared so much the King, that as men desperate of
all succors they yielded both Castle and goods. And then all the towns,
Castles and holds within a great circuit, without abiding battle, yielded
them to the King, but that strong and mighty town of Gysors, whereof the Castle
is much more defensible, than the Town, would not submit to the King, wherefore
on the last day of August the King with all his host took his journey thither,
and enclosed the Town with his pauilions and tents. Betwyxt him and them of
the Town, were many sharp battayles and cruel assaults, but at all times
the Englishmen put the Frenchmen to flight, wherefore the inhabitants and
garrisons of the town and Castle delivered the same to the King in the xxiiij.
of September.

Richard Whitingham: John Butler, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Whitington Mercer, the. 28. of October.

King Henry returned with his army to Maunt, where he divided his host into
three battayles, whereof he delivered the one to the Duke of Gloucester, whom
he sent to subdue the Town of Saint Germans, which after many battayles
and assaults, in short time was yielded to him: the second battle he sent
to the Castle of Mount Oye, which in like manner was yielded: with the third
battle, the King in his own perfom went to besiege Mewlance, which above al
other was most strong. The situation of this town was in a plenteous I Will
betwixt two arms of the sea etc. notwithstanding when the inhabitauntes and
Garrisons saw the great provision of the King they yielded the town; on the
last day of October: from thence the King returned again to Maunt, and sent
the Duke of Excester to besiege the Castle of G^^^arde, which to him was
yielded the xx* of December.

King Henry kept his Christmasse in the City of Roane, he sent the Earl of
Salisburie, to take the Town of Fresvey* which in short time he took. The
Earl Marshal and the Earl of Huntington, were sent by the King to subdue the
Province of Shenon* where the Dolphin had deputed a Captain with a strong
power, which Captain met the two Earls, and gave them battle, but the
Englishmen remained conquerors. And thus those two Earls subdued the province
of Shenon* without any other great resistaunce.

Whilst these and many other victories were achieved, the King continuing in
the City of Roane, the ambassadors of Charles the French King, and of the Duke
of Burgoigne, came to the King to treat of peace, where of the King they were
right honorably recoyued, and sent with him to the French King and the Duke of
Burgoigne* his ambassadors, with full aucthority to conclude this long sought
peace: the principal ambassador was the Earl of Warwick, in company of
certain Bishops and other discrete men, accompanied with a strong power of
armed men. These ambassadors were first brought to the Duke of Burgoigne,
because he was next unto them, and after they took their journey until they
came to the City of Troys, where they found King Charles Anno reg. 8. 1420
of France with the Queen his wife, and that beautiful Lady Katheren their
daughter. And entering into communication of peace with the Kings counsel of
France, the way of peace was found betwixt those two Kings by aliance, that
is to say, by a marriage to be made betwixt y^ most victorious K. of England*
and the Lady Katherin daughter to y^ King and Queen of France: but because
they perceived that many things might not be done without the presence of the
kings, as well for y^ apposition of their seals for ye ratifying of y^ articles
of this peace, as for the solemnization of ye matrimony, and also y^ King
Charles was a man of many years, they condescended y^ the K. of England at a
certain day amongst them limited should come to the foresaid City of Troys*
with as great an armed power as he would. At which day appointed, if he failed
to be there, al his co^municatio^ of peace should be as void. These things thus
concluded and set down in writing, y^ earl of Warwick with his company returned
to y^ K. of England, to who^ they declared by order what they had done, who
was content in all things to perform their appointments, and prepared for his
journey. He called together knights, men of arms and archers to y^ number of
xvj. M. of the^ the more part were Archers: and when the time came that he
would depart toward Troys (as he was accustomed) he divided his people in three
parts and battayles, and two wings, and in that manner the. viij. day of May, he
entered his iourny toward Troys in Campaine, where he was met by the Duke of
Burgoigne accompanied with many noble me^, two leagues without the town, who^ he
received with great honor and due obser^ance. Then this most victorious king
accompanied both of English and Frenchmen of every estate and degree, entered
the (...)resaid City of Troys, y^ streets whereof without any abiding he passed
until he came to the kings place, where K. Charles and the Queen* his wife
abode his coming, of whom the was received goodly and after a Princely manner.
When y^ King of England was thus royally received, after the due resolutions on
his part made to King Charles and the Queen, he departed from them, and by the
Duke of Burgoine and other great estates as well of England as of France, he
was conveyed to his lodges. The City was divided into two p^rts, whereof the
one half was assigned to the Frenchmen, and Burgonians, and the other half to
the Englishmen: and because that part assigned to the Englishmen, suffised not
to receive them all within the walls, but that a great part of the^ must be
lodged in the suburbs, the King of England, because his people on that part
should have free concourse together, he caused the wall on that part of the
City where he was lodged, to be cast down to the ground. King Charles gave
authority and power to Isabel his wife and Queen, to Phillip Duke of
Burgoigne, and to certain other of his Counsel plenarily to conclude the
peace with King Henry, for him and for his realm of France, under such
conditions as should be decreed, and also to prove, ratify, and confirm the
same, by oath solemnized in the parso^ of K. Charles, without fraud, in all
things to be observed unto the said K. Henry, his heirs * successors, by the
said King Charles, his heirs and successors, etc. On the xxj. of May, in the
xl. year of the reign of King Charles, in the Cathedral Church of Troys, the
King of England with the Duke of Clarence his brother and other Dukes, Earls,
Bishops, Barons, Lords of estat, and other Prelates of England, and Isabel
the Queen of France with the Duke of Burgoigne and other of the Kings Counsel
of France* and in that part his especial commissioners, for and in the name
of the king of France, and also for themselves, and in their proper names, in
a great assembly of the iij. estates of France, vulgarly called their*
Parliamente, concluded a peace betwixt the two Realms of England and France,
and the same ratified and approved with the conditions and Articles that in
part shall follow, whereupon writings were made; sealed with the brao^e seal of
the said king Charles. Then immediately Isabel the Queen and the Duke of
Burgoigne, in the name of King Charles, made a solemn oath upon the holy
Evangelists, that y^ same Charles his heirs and successors should observe
and keep without fraud the peace made betwixt the two Realms. And the same
oath the Queen and the Duke of Burgoigne in their own names and for
themselves their heirs and successors, made unto the King for him his heirs
and successors, and after them as many as were there present both of the Kings
counsel, and also of the Parliament, as Bishops, Lords, Knights, and
commons, made the same oath to the King. And the. xxiij. and. xxiiij. day of
May the Chancellor of France, and many other Lords, Bishops, Prelates, and
noble men gave the like faith and oath.

The third of June, being present the Counsel of K. Charles, Isabel Queen of
France, the Duke of Burgoigne, and the Parliament of France, and also the
Duke of Clarence, with many Bishops, Lords, and Knights of England, with King
Henry, the matrimony was solemnized betwixt the most victorious King Henry
of England, and the excellent and glorious Lady Katherin, daughter to Charles
of France and Isabel his Queen. The peace that was confirmed betwixt the
said two kings and their realms was red as follows.

King Henry from nowforth during the life of King Charles shall not name or
write himself King of France, nor shall not suffer himself of his people so
to be named or written. After the death of king Charles, king Henry shall be
king of France peaceably with his heirs and successors. And because King
Charles by reason of his infirmity is unable to govern the common weal, king
Henry during ye life of Charles, shall rule and govern the realm of France,
to the profit and honor of the same king Charles. King Charles in all his
writings shall name the same King Henry our son and heir of France, during the
life of the said king Charles. King Henry shall be written, Henry King of
England, and heir and Regent of France, and in the like manner he shall write
himself in all things that shall be aucthorized under his own seal. King
Henry shall call King Charles his Father, and Queen Isabel his mother and
shall honor them. Nor King Henry shall not prohibit, with hold, nor
defraude King Charles his Father of the Crown of France, nor the issues or
revenues thereof. And the Queen his mother at all times during hi^ life he
shall keep in due estate as belongs to hi^ majesty, etc. with diverse other
Articles which for liberty I set not down in this place.

After the final end and accomplishing of this marriage, covenants and
conditions, ratifyed in all parts, King Henry, accompanied of King Charles
and of his counsel, of the two Queens, Isabel and Katherin, and of the Duke of
Burgoigne, departed from Troys, and took his journey to Paris, and from Paris
not many days after they all went to lay siege to the City of Sens, which
was to them contrary, but before the whole host were settled in their places,
the Captain Citizens and Garrisons submitted their bodies and City with all
that they had to the King. Then they hasted to Monstrean, which Town they took
by force.

On the xv. of July they went to the City of Melune, and environed the same
with a strong siege, for there were the Kings of England, of France, and
Scotland, the Duke of Burgoigne, Tho. Walls.
Bauier, Clarence, Bedforde, and Excester, the Earls of March, Warwick,
Huntington, and Somerset* etc. This siege continued. xiiij. weeks and odd
days, from the feast of Mary Magdalen* to the feast of All Saints, not
without in a manner every day a conflict and sore skirmishe, but at length for
want of victualles the besieged, yielded themselves to the Kings of England
and France, from whence the forsayde Kings with a great part of their army
went to Paris.

John Butler: John Wels, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Cambridge Grocer, the. 28. of October.

King Henry kept his Christmasse in the City of Paris, in the Castle of Saint
Anthony. And after he had holden a Parliamente there, he went to Roane, and
therewith his Titus Liuius.
Normans, and Englishmen held a Parliament. And the^ when he had established
sure guarde for this Realm of France and Duchy of Normandy, he passed
through Picardie to Caleis, and so to Dover, where with his Queen he landed
on Candlemasse day.

The fourteenth of February Queen Katherin was Crowned at Westminster, unto
whom the King assigned to her dowry. 10000. marks, also he consented to the
delivery of the King of Scots, who had bin long prisoner in England, with
condition, that before his departure out of England, he shall take to wi^e the
Duke of Somersets sister, niece to the Cardinal of Winchester. Anno reg. 9. 1421


The. xxij* of March the duke of Clarence* with many other Lords were slain
beyond the Water of Leire in France, and many Lords were taken prisoners, of
the which the Earl of Huntington and the Earl of Somerset were principal.

In a Parliament at Westminster it was ordained that no man should profer gold
in payment, but if it held weight, wherefore was ordained Balances and
weightes. The king suppressed the French houses of religious Monks and Friars,
and such like in England, because they thought ill of the Conquest over
France, their* lands were given by him and Henry the sixth, to Monasteries
and Colleges of learned men.

In this Parliament was demanded subsidy. The Bishop of Winchester lent the
king ^0000. pound to strain y^ matter. The King having disposed all thing in
order concerning the realm of England and the wars in Scotland* leaving in
England his Queen, with a great power to the number (after Enguerant) of
thirtye thousand, returned into France, where, after he had visited the
King and Queen of France at Paris, he took the Castle of D^wex* by assault.
And when he heard, that his enemies prepared themselves to battle, he
approached the floude of Loyre, about which Titus Liuius.
flood it was said his enemies were: but against him came no man. Wherefore the
King led his host to lay siege to the City of Sens, commonly called the
Kings new Town, which Town for lack of victualles yielded themselves and the
Town to the King.

John Mortimer brake forth of the Tower of London, and being afterward
taken, he was drawn and hanged.

Richard Gosselin: William Weston, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Robert Chicheley Grocer, the 28. of October.

This Sir Robert Chicheley, when he deceased in Anno 1439. willed in his
Testament, that upon his mind*day, a competent dinner should be ordained for
2400. pore men, householders of the City, and twenty pound in money to be
distributed amongst them, which was to every man two pence. He also with his
brother William Chicheley Alderman of London gave liberally to the Alms houses
founded by his brother Henry Chicheley Archebyshop of Canterbury, at Higham
Ferrers in Nothamptonshire, in which Town they were borne.

In the Month of October, when King Henry had delivered Ti^us Liuius.
the City of Paris from all annoyaunces, he with his h^ste went to bes^ege the
City of Meaulx in Brye, to which City nigh adjoining, is a place called y^
Market of Meaulx, betwixt which two places flows the river of Marne, which
also enuironeth both the same places.

This City was besieged all the Winter, wherein were so many, and so great
storms and floods of rain, that the kings host was often annoyed with hunger
and cold.

The sixth of December, Lady Katherine Queen of England, brought forth her
first begotten son in the Castle of Windsore, and his name was given him
Henry: for there received him at the Font, John Duke of Bedford his uncle Lord
Warden of England, and Henry the Kings uncle B. of Winchester, and Iaquelyn
duchess of Holland that remained then in England. Henry Archbishop of
Canterbury, doing the office of Baptism.

In the month of February the Knights that were in Garrison, and the
principal of y^ City of Mealx perceiving that the Summer coming should
cause the siege to be more light, and less painful to the Englishmen, and
difficil unto themselves, departed the City and went into that Anno reg. 10
1422
place, that is called the Market of Mealx, as to the more defensible hold*
after whose departing the common people having none ability to resist the Kings
power, yielded themselves and the City to the King. After this in the month
of May, when the King had sore beaten the foresaid Market of Meaulx, he
constrained the Frenchmen that were besieged, to condescende unto certain
couenauntes, and to deliver the place unto him: and shortly after were
delivered to the King the town of Orepy in Valois, the Castle of Pier
Pountmeralaw, Offemou^t and many others. After the rendering of these Towns
and Castles the King returned to Paris.

In the month of April Katherin Queen of England shipped at Hampton, and
sailed over into France with a strong power, under the conducte of John Duke
of Bedforde y^ kings brother, Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, being appointed Warden
of England, in the Duke of Bedfordes place: when the coming of Queen Katherin
was known to King Henry her husband, and to Charles king of France, both these
Kings, and with them the Queen of France, accompanied with many great Lords
and estates, as well of England as of France, went to meet her at Boys de
Viscenne, where she was joyfully received of them, as if she had bin an Angel
sent from God. The. xxx. day of May the two Kings of England and France,
with their Queens departed from Bois de Viscenne, and went to Paris: the king
of England and his Queen were lodged in the Castle of Lowre, and the King of
France and his Queen were lodged in the palace of Saint Paul.

King Henry hearing that the Dolphen with a great power besieged the Town of
Guisney, he determined to go himself to the raising of the siege, and so came
to the town of Corbeil, and so to Senlis, where he waxed so sick, that he was
constrained to tarry and send his brother the Duke of Bedforde, to rescue the^
of Cosney: but the Dolphin raised his siege and departed thence. King Henry
his disease increasing, he departed this life in the Castle called Boys de
Visceme, not far from Paris, on the last of August, in the year 1422. when he
had reigned nine years five months and odd days. There was present at his
death King Charles of France, and the two Queens: but before his death this
most prudent King disposed the guarde of the young Prince his son, and the
defense of the realm of England, to his brother Humfrey Duke of Gloucester,
but the custody of the body of this young Prince the King, committed to his
uncle the Duke of Excester: and the revenues of the Duchy of Normandy, he
bequethed to his brother John Duke of Bedforde, for the governance of the same
Duchy and of the Realm of France. In his life time he reedified his royal
manor that then was called Shine, now Richmount: he founded two Monasteries
upon the Thamis not far from Richmount, the one of Carthusians, which he
named Bethlem, the other of religious men and women of Saint Bridget, and that
he named Sion. He founded Gartar, principal King at arms of all Englishmen,
and also the brotherheade of Saint Gyles without Creple Gate of London.
Shortly after his departing, his bowels were enterred in the Church of Saint
More de Fosses, and his corpse well enbaulmed and seared, was closed in lead:
and accompanied with all the Lords, Enguerant.
estates, and commons of England, that were there present, with also many
Lords and great estates, as well of France, Normandy, Burgondie, and Picardie,
was brought with great honor to Paris, and set in the Church of our Lady,
where were done for him right solemn exequies, with distributio^ of money and
great alms to the poor. From thence he was brought to Roane, where he aboade
long. When all things necessary were prepared for the conueyaunce of the dead
King into England, his body was laid in a Chariot, which was drawn by four
great horses: and above the dead corpse they laid a figure made of boiled
hydes or leather, representing his person, as nyghe to the semblaunce of him as
could be devised, painted curiously to the similitude of a living creature:
upon whose head was set an Imperial Diadem of gold and precious stones: and
in his right hand he held a Scepter royal, and in his left hand a ball of
gold. And in this manner adorned was this figure laid in a bed in the said
Chariot, with his vnsage uncovered toward the heavens: and the couerture of his
bed was of red silk beaten with gold: and besides that, when the body
should pass through any good Town, a Canapie of maruaylous great value, was
borne over the Chariot, by men of great worship. In this manner accompanied
of the King of Scotts, and of all Princes, Lords, and Knights of his house,
he was brought from Roane to Abeuile, where the corpse was set in the Church
of Saint Offr^ne. From Abuile, he was brought to Hedin, and from thence to
Menstreull, so to Bulloigne, and to Caleis. In all this journey were many men
about the Chariot clothed al in white, which bare in their hands torches
burning, after whom followed all the household servants in black, and after
them came the Princes, Lords, and estates of the Kings blood, adorned in
vestures of mourning: and after all this, from the said Corpse the distaunce
of two English miles followed the Queen of England right honorably
accompanied. In this manner they entered Caleis, from whence after a few days
they departed, and continued their iourneys by water and land until they came
to London, where they arrived about the tenth of November, and so were conuaied
by London bridge through Cheap to the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul: upon
the covering of the for most of the four horses that conuayed the Chariot,
were imbrodered the ancient arms of England: upon the couerture of the second
horse were the arms of England and France, in one shield quarterly: upon
the couerture of the third horse was imbrodered the arms of France, without
any manner of difference: and on the fourth horse were the arms of King
Arthur. When his exequies were solemnized at Saint Paul's Church in London, he
was brought from thence to be enterred in the Abbay of Saint Peter at
Westminster amongst his noble auncestoures. Thus this most victorious and
renoumed King entered the way decreed for every creature, in the flower and most
lusty time of his age, to wit but six and thirty years old.

King Henry of Windsor.


Henry the sixth, being an infant of eight months old, began Anno reg. 1.
Titus Liuius.
his reign the last of August, in the year 1422. Continuing the time of his
youth, the governance of the Realm was committed to ye Duke of Gloucester, and
the guard of his person to the Duke of Excester: and to the Duke of Bedford was
given the regiment of France, who right wisely and nobly ruled the same so long
as he lived. This Henry was of wit and nature simple, gentle, and meek: he
loved better peace than war, quietness of mind than business of the world:
honesty than profit: rest and ^ase than trouble and care: all injuries that
ever happened to him, which were many, he suffered patiently, and reputed them
to be worthily sent of God for his offenses.

William Gastfield: Robert Tatarsale, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Walderne Mercer, the 28. of October.

The xxj. of October, Charles King of France passed out of this world, and was
buried at S. Denis in France after he ha^ History of Loys Duke of Orleance.
Charles le bievv King of France dyed.
bin Crowned King 46. years. He was greatly beloved of his people all his life
time, and therefore was called Le Roy Charle le biew ame: but yet he had a
sickness the more part of his reign, that being out of his wit, he would
strike all that came near him: it took him first in the City of Man's shortly
after he had bin in Flanders to reduce the Flemings to obedience. There was by
reason hereof great trouble in France, because those that were near to him in
lignage, sought every one to have the chief government in their hands. When
he thus dyed, the Realm was left in miserable state, for people of each
strange nation were gouernoures in the Realm. First, the Englishmen had
conquered a great part, and sought to have the rest: and the Duke of
Burgoigne, with many other great Lords alied with him, sought to conquer all,
for the young King Henry of England who claymed then to be King of France, and
likewise in all Henry King of England and of France.
the money that was coined, the Axmes of both Realms were quartered. The
Crowns that were stamped in the time of Charles, and all other money more,
were forbidden to be current, and called to the Minte. King Henry caused a
piece to be stamped called a Salus, worth two and twenty Shillings, and Blans
of eyghtpence a piece, and so in no place of France where King Henry was
obeyed, any other money was received, but such as had the Arms of France and
England stamped on it.

Charles Duke of Tourayne the Dolphin, son to King Charles le biew ame,
clayming to be right inheritor to the Dolphin of France proclaimed King of
France.
Realm of France, by the ancient Edictes and customs of the said Realm as
was alleged, proclaimed himself King after the deceasse of his father,
notwithstanding, by the agreement made at the marriage of his Sister to the
King of England, it was otherwise concluded (as before is recited) and so there
were two Kings in France, Henry and Charles, both which striving for the
Crown, the Realm Two Kings of France, Henry and Charles.
was in way of perdition.

A Parliament at London began the ninth of November, Parliament at London.
wherein was granted to the King a subsedie for three years, five nobles of
every sack of wool that should pass out of the land.

This year, the Weast Gate of London (sometime called Nevvgate of London new
builded. A^i. S. Paul. Lon. 1423
Chamberlain Gate) was begone to be new builded, by the executors of Sir
Richard Whitington, late Mayor of London.

King Charles of France began now to advance himself into the D. of Burgoignes
lands, and the Connestable of Scotland, accompanied with many Lords, and men of
war of K. Charles side, laid seege to the town of Carnens, but the Marshall of
Burgoigne assembled men of war to raise the seege, with whom went the Earl
of Salisburie, a valiant man, and The Earl of Salisburie won diverse holds in
France, and rased them.
now being come together, fought with their enemies, wan the field, took the
Connestable, whose son was slain in the field. Many of K. Charles men were
slain and taken to the number of ten or twelve hundred good men of war.
After which victory, the Earl of Salisburie laid seege to Montaguillon in
Champeigne, and continued there an eight months before he could have it
rendered, and then caused the same to be rased and thrown down. Then the Earl
of Salisburie beseeged the Castle of Monnes, which at length Anno reg. 2.
was yielded to him: this Castle he also rased and bet down, which was the
strongest place in all Champaigne, it was after repaired by King Charles.

Nicholas James: Thomas Wanford, the 28. of September* Sherifes. Mayor. Duke of
Bedford married the Duke of Burgoignes daughter.


William Crowmar Draper, the 28. of October.

About the same time, the Duke of Burgoigne gave his sister the Lady Anne in
marriage to the Duke of Bedford, and so the alliance was made more strong
betwixt the English and the Burgonians.

Phillip de Comines writes, that John D. of Bedford, was Phi. Comi*
Regent in France for the Englishmen, his monthly allowa^ce in that office
amounting to 20000. Crowns at the least.

Also, y^ Dukes of Burgoigne, Bedford, and Britein, met in ye town of Amiens,
there was also the Earl of Richmont, brother to the Duke of Briteine, and many
other great Lords, which Earl of Richmont had married the Duke of Briteines
eldest sister Margaret, sometime wife to the Duke of Guyen, and Dolphin of
France. These three Dukes were five or six days together in Amiens, in great
friendship and reverence each to other, promising perpetual amity to
continue. After this, the Duke of Briteine returned into his Country, the Duke
of Bedford, (Regent of France,) to Paris, and the D. of Burgoigne, to Arras,
but within a while after: the Earl of Richmont revolted to King Charles, upon
some misliking he had conceived against the Duke of Bedford. King Charles
received him joyfully, and made him Connestable of France.

About the same time, the Duke of Bedford caused Crotoy to be beseeged both by
water and by land, which after four or five months seege, was both Town and
Castle delivered to the Duke, where he ordained Ralph Butler to be Captain.
At that time, the Duke of Bedford was obeyed as Regent in all places through
Vimeu, Pontieu, and Picardy, from Paris to Reins, Chalons, and Troyes, up to
the water of Loyre.

About the feast of Saint Andrew, the Captains of King Charles assembled their
forces about Le Fere, and Nelle, and took by night the Town of Campeigne, and
spoiled the inhabitants of all their goods. Shortly after came the Duke of
Bedford to Mondidier with twelve hundredth fighting me^, and requested the Lord
of Sanenses to lay seege to Campeigne, and he would find him men and money to
wage them, whereunto he granted, and after fifteen days seege, had the same
delivered.

In the month of February, James Steward, the young King of Scotts, who was
taken by the Englishmen in the King of Scotts releassed of imprisonment.
eight year of King Henry the fourth, and had remained in England prisoner
till this time, was now delivered, and married in Saint Mary Oueryes Church in
Southwarke to the Lady Jane, daughter to John Earl of Somerset, Cousin to King
Henry.

Sir John Mortimer Knight was drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged and
quartered, but his body was buried in Saint John's Church at Clarkenwell.

King Henryes people beseeging the Castle of Dinry in 1424
the marches of Normandy, they within compounded to yield at a day assigned, if
the Englishmen were not fought withal before the same day by the Frenchmen:
whereupon as well King Charles, as the Duke of Bedford, made great leuies of
men to keep the day appointed, and heerewith they drew both toward Yury: but
when King Charles heard how the The Battle of Vernole in Perch.
Duke of Bedford was coming toward him with such a puissance, he was
counseled to draw back, and so he did toward Vernole in Perch, whom the
Duke of Bedford followed, so that he found his army near to Vernole. And when
either army was in sight of the other, they put themselves in order of
battle, and the Englishmen made an hedge of their Horse behind their battle,
because the French should not strike in among them on the backs: and the
Frenchmen ordered themselves in battle array, making a great battle of
footmen, in the which, they put the flower and chiefest men. They appointed
their Horssemen to set on the Englishmen a trauerse, the battayles on foot
came upon and joined, where was a sore fight betwixt them, continuing two
hours together, that no man might judge which way the victory would incline:
but at length, the men of King Charles began to break, and then the Englishmen
began to thrust in among them, and did so much, that they discom^^ted their
enemies. There were slain the Earl Douglas, Duke of Turon, James Douglas,
Earl of Wighton, John Earl of Boughan, with the Uicount Nerbon, and many
other, to the number of ten thousand (says Fabian) four Robert Fabian*
thousand says mine Author (a Frenchman) who says, that the Duke of
Bedford bare himself most valiantly, fighting with an axe so fiercely, as he
had the praise of all other. The Earls of Salisburie and Suffolk governed
themselves also right valiantly.

The Lord of Torsy, and other Lords of Normandy, which before had taken part
with the Englishmen, this day turned to the French, hoping that the Englishmen
should have lost the battle. True it is, that the Frenchmen would never
suffer their King Charles to be present in person at any battle, but when
they thought to pitch a field, they sent him into some strong Town. By the
loss of this battle fought on the seventeenth of August, before Vernole in
Anno reg. 3.
Perch, King Charles was put to great hinderance, so that he was not able in
puissance to give the Englishmen any battle, having enough to defend and
keep his Towns and fortresses against them.

The Duke of Bedford returned into Normandy, where he punished many that fled
from him the day of the battle. Then went he to Paris, where he found the
Duke of Burgoigne, who received him, and the Duchess of Bedforde The Duke of
Burgoigne enamored with the Countess of Salisburie, where of came great
displeasure and loss to England, by the breach of amity betwixt the English,
and the Burgonions.
his wife, the said Duke of Burgoignes Sister, right joyfully, and made to
them great feast, at which feast also were the Earls of Salisburie and
Suffolk, the old Queen of France, mother to King Charles, and many other
great estates of diverse nations, amongst the which, the Duches of Bedford was
holden for the most gallantest Lady of all other, and with her, the Countess
of Salisburie, a very fair Lady. The Duke of Bedford that had never iusted
before, iusted there.

The Duke of Burgoigne was a very goodly and amiable man of personage, doing
excellently well whatsoever he took in hand, and especially in dansing and
iusting he exceeded all other of his Country. At this feast, he became
desirous of the Countess of Salisburie, and some messages passed betwixt them,
which came to the Earl of Salisburies ear, whereof he was nothing contented
with the Duke, and therefore sought to do him displeasure afterward. This feast
being ended, the Duke of Burgoigne went into his Country of Burgoigne, and
there took to wife the Duches of Neuers, which had bin wife to his Uncle the
Duke of Neuers* and had by her two Children. She was half sister to the Duke
of Burbon, but she lived not long with him. The D. of Burgoigne also gave his
sister the youngest, named Agnes, The second cause of breach of amitle betwixt
England and Burgoigne.
in marriage unto Charles de Barbon, Earl of Cleremont, for the which, the
Duke of Bedford, and other Englishm^ were wroth, for that he made such
alliance with the enemies without their accord. This year, the Frenchmen
repaired the Castle of Mouns in Champaigne, which had bin a little before
destroyed by the Englishmen, and now it was well stuffed with victuals and men,
which began to make sore war to the Country, but shortly after the Earl of
Salisburie beseeged the^, and with him Messire John de Luxenburg, who did so
much, that the Castle was yielded to him. The D. of Bedford, with his wife the
Duches, lay for the most part in Paris, leading there a pleasant life with the
Lady whom he greatly loved, and was lodged in ye house of the Tournels, ^eere
to the Castle Saint Anthony, where he made fair buildings, and his men still
made sore wars against the French, toward the River of Loyre, and other
places, upon base Normandy, and toward the Duchy of Alanson.

This year in England, Edmond Mortimere Earl of March, with many other
Lords, and a great retinue were sent Earl of March sent into Ireland.
into Ireland, where the said Earl of March ended his life.

Simon Seman: Bythewater, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Michaell Stockfish monger, the 28. of October.

This year 1424. the wars began in Henault, by reason of Iaqueline Duches of
Henault, daughter to Duke William Iaqueline Duches of Henault.
of Henault, Uncle to Phillip Duke of Burgoigne, and also daughter to Duke John
of Burgoignes sister, wife to the ^^renamed William, and so double Cousin
german to Phil^^p, Duke Phillip now living. This Iaqueline was married ^^ John
Duke of Brabant her Cousin german, and Cousin ger^^n also to Duke Philip of
Burgoigne, and before that, she ^^s married to the Earl of Pontioue, son to
King Charles le ^^^n aim, eldest Brother to King Charles now living, ^^t
notwithstanding that she was thus married to the Duke of Brabant, yet was she
conuayed by Sir Robersart Knight, and brought into England to the Duke of
Gloucester, and there married to the said Duke of Gloucester: and so she
Iaqueline married to the D. of Gloucester.
had two husbands alive at once, Brabant and Gloucester, ^ thing thought
unreasonable, both against God, the world, and the Church, for she had bin four
or five years in company with the Duke of Brabant, but there had fallen some
variance betwixt them, and so she was come from him into Henault.

About the last of April began a Parliament at Westminster, wherein was
granted a Subsedie of twelve in the Robert Fabian. Parliament at London. First
Subsedie paid.
pound of all manner Merchandise coming in, or passing out of this Realm:
three Shillings of a Tun of Wine for the term of three years to be holden.
And furthermore it was enacted, that all Merchant strangers should be set to an
English host within fifteen days of their coming to their port sale, and to
make no sale of any Merchandise, ere All Strangers to be lodged within English
hosts.
they were so lodged: and then within forty days following, to make sale of
all they brought: and if any remained unsold at the said forty days end, that
then all such Merchandise unsold, to be forfeyted. Also, that all Strangers
that carried any woolles out of this land, should pay. xliij. shillings four
pence for a sack custom, where the English Merchants and Denisons paid but
five nobles etc.

After the marriage had bin solemnized between the Duke of Gloucester, and
Iaqueline Duches of Holland, as is aforesaid, The Duke of Gloucester goes into
Holland.
within a month after the Duke of Gloucester assembled an army of twelve
hundred fighting men at the least, all Englishmen, and taking the Duches with
him in company, passed over to Caleis, and straight from thence to L^^^ in
Artois, and so into Henault, making no outrage as he passed through Duke
Phillips Countries. At their coming into Henault, many towns obeyed the^, and
other refused ^^ to do: likewise were y^ Nobles divided. The D. of Burgoigne
hearing of this, was sore offended for the injury done to his Cousin of
Brabant, the dishonor of his Cousin the Duch^^ Iaqueline, and the evil dealing
of the Duke of Gloucester, A third cause of the amity to be broken betwixt
England and Burgoigne, and the loss of many Towns in France.
and therefore, to aid the Duke of Brabant, he appointed many of his
Captains, with xij. C. fighting me^ Pickards, to go against the Duke of
Gloucester. The Duke of Brabant was a man but of weak complexion, and therefore
by the Counsel of Brabant it was ordained, that his younger brother Philip,
Earl of Saint Pol, should be chief Captain of the war, against the Duke of
Gloucester. He had a great Army, as the more part of the Nobles of Brabant, of
Henalt, and of Burgoigne, in all, 50000. Piere de Luxenburge, Earl of
Conuarson; his near kinsman, had the leading of the Army, for himself was
but young. The Duke of Burgoigne had put of his men in garrison within the town
of Brain, in the County of Henault, who made sore war to the Country
about, but the Earl of Saint Pol, and Conuarson, did come and beseege Brain,
continuing before it twelve days before they within yielded, compounding to
depart with bodies and goods saved: these having won Brain, destroyde it
utterly, and that done, took the Field with all puissance, which was great:
and the Duke of Gloucester likewise came into the field, so that they approached
near together, and the vauntcurrers skirmished, but the battle joined not.
The Duke of Gloucester had sent his Heraulte, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester
chalengeth the Combat with Phillip Duke of Burgoigne.
written to the Duke of Burgoigne, calling him Traitor, and disloyal to the
King of England and France, for that he had sent men in aid against him, and
offered him the Combat, whereunto the Duke of Burgoine answered, that he
would accept the Combat, denying that ever he had failed of his promise, but
that the Duke of Gloucester had done great wrong to the Duke of Brabant, to have
bereft him of his wife, contrary to the ordinance of God, and of holy Church,
and for other words which the Duke had uttered against the Duke of Burgoignes
honor, he gave him the lie, and so far the matter went in words betwixt them,
that the day was appointed for the Combat, and the Duke of Burgoigne chose for
Judge of the Combat the Emperor of Almayne, and the Duke of Burgoigne sent
the Duke of Gloucester a safeconduct, to depart safely into England, to prepare
himself of things necessary for the Combat, whereupon, both the Camps brake
up: the Duke of Gloucester went to Mons in Henalt, to the Duches his wife (so
termed) and gave her to understand, that he was desirous to try the Combat
with the Duke of Burgoigne: and many other things he told her, which he
performed not, for within four days after, he took all his power with him,
and returned into England, and left the Duches in Mons, smally acco^panyed with
ye people of that Country. Shortly after his departure, the Duke of Burgoigne
sent the Lord Lilladam to the Town of Men's, to receive Iaqueline the Duches,
who being delivered unto him, he conveyed her to Gaunt, where the Duke and she
made great semblance of joy together, she promising to be governed always by
his advise, but to go to her old husband the Duke of Brabant she would not:
and when she espied her time, she stale away into her Country of Holland,
where she was well received of many Lords, and began forthwith to mainteyne
war against Duke Philip of Burgoigne, and sent to the Duke of Gloucester for
aid, who sent to her a thousand fighting men, under the conduct of the Lord
Fitzwaters. The Duke of Burgoigne fearing least Iaqueline would deliver the
Country of Holland into the possession of the D. of Gloucester, he assembled
his power, and went into Holland, to put the Country into obeisance. At his
coming thither, Iaqueline, accompanied with many Nobles of the Country, and
the Lord Fitzwaters, would have defended his landing, but notwithstanding all the defense they could make, he entered upon the^, and there, near to ye Town
of Brusseils, they joined in battle, the D. of Burgoigne and his people
against the Englishmen and Hollanders, taking ye Duches Iaquelines part: there
was a fierce battle on all sides, but in the end, the Hollanders and
Englishmen were all discomfited, and there dyed in that place above seven or
eight hundred, besides those that were taken prisoners: the Lord Fitzwater
hardly escaped. After this battle got by the Duke of Burgoigne, 1425
diverse Towns of the Country revolted to him, against Iaqueline the Duches,
as Dordrecht, Sericzee, and many other. Shortly after, the Duke of Burgoigne
leaving garrisons in those Towns that obeyed him, to make resista^ce against
the Duches that lay in the Town of Gaunt, he returned into his Country of
Flanders and Artoyes, there to prepare such abiliments as were necessary for
him to use at the Combat appointed betwixt him and the Duke of Gloucester. The
Duke of Gloucester likewise in England made his pronision of his habilimentes
and furniture, but the Duke of Bedforde, brother to the Duke of Gloucester,
took great pains to make them friends: and also the counsel of the young
King of England, were nothing content with this variance, doubting least it
might be occasion that the Duke of Burgoigne might withdraw himself from
their amity, whereby their business in France should be hindered. The Duke of
Bedford therefore took his journey from Paris, to Caleis, and so into
England, to the end to agree the said Anno reg. 4.
Dukes: he took with him the Duches his wife, and not past a four or five
hundred men.

About Michaelmasse, the Prince of Portugale came into England, and was
honorably received and feasted by the Kings Uncles.

William Mildred: John Brokell, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Rob.
Fabian.


John Couentry Mercer, the 28. of October.

The morrow after Simon and Iudes day, when the Mayor of London had bin at
Westminster to take his charge, as Debate betvveene the Duke of Gloucester, and
the Bishop of Winchester.
the custom is, at such time as he was holding his great dinner, he was by
the Duke of Gloucester Lord Protector, sent for in speedy manner, and when he
came to his presence, he gave to him commandment, to see the City were
surely watched in the night following, and so it was done.

On ye next morrow, about ix. of the clock, certain servants of y^ Bishop of
Winchester, brother to ye said Protector, would have entered the City by the
Bridge, but the warders or keepers thereof, kept them out by force, as before
they were commanded, wherewith they being grievously discontented, gathered to
them a greater number of Archers, and men of arms, and assaulted the Gate with
shot, and other means of war, in so much, that the commons of the City shut
in their shoppes, and spedde them thither in great number, so that great
bloodshed would have followed, had not the wisdom of the Mayor and Aldermen
stayde the matter in time.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Prince of Portugale, and other, took
great labor upon them to pacify this variance betwixt the two breethren, the
Protector and the Bishop, in so much, that they rode between them eight
times, ere they might bring them to any reasonable conformity, and lastly,
they agreed to stand to the rule of the Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, or
of such as he would assign, whereupon the City was set in more quiet, and the
Bishop of Winchester wrote a Letter to the Duke of Bedford Lord Regent, as
follows.

RIght high and mighty Prince, and right noble, and after one leuest earthly
Lord, I recommende me unto your Grace with all my heart: and as ye desire the
welfare of the King our sovereign Lord, and of his Realies of England and of
France, and your own weal, with all yours, have you hither, for by my troth,
and ye tarry long, we shall put this Land in ieoperdy with a Field, such a
Brother ye have here, God make him a good man. For your wisdom knows
well, that the profit of France stands in the welfare of England.

Written at London, the last of October.
On the tenth day of January next ensuing, the said Duke of Bedford, with his
wife, came unto London, and with them also came the said Bishop of Winchester,
and the Mayor and Citizens received him at Merton, and ^on^ayde him through the
City unto Westminster, where he was lodged in the Kings Palace, and the
Bishop of Winchester was lodged within the Abbots lodging. On the morrow
following, the Mayor presented the Regente with a pair of Basins of Silver,
and ouer-gilt, and in them a thousand Mark of gold. The xxj. of February,
began a great Counsel at Saint Albons, which was after reiorned to
Northampton, but for that no due conclusion might be made, on the 1426
Parliament at Leycester.
xxv. of March was called a Parliamente at Leycester, the which endured till
the xv. day of June. This was called the Parliamente of Battes, because men
being forbidden to bring Swords or other weapons, brought great battes and
staves on their necks, and when those weapons were inhibited the^, they took
stones and plomets of Lead. During this Parliament, the variance betwixt the
two Lords was debated, in so much, that the Duke of Gloucester put a Bill of
complaynt against the Bishop, containing six Articles, all which Articles were
by the Bishop sufficiently answered, and finally, by the counsel of the Lord
Regent, all the matters of variance between the said two Lords, were put to
the examination and judgment, with the assistance of the Lords of the
Parliamente, Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Duke of Excester, John
Duke of Norffolke, Thomas Bishop of Durham, Philip Bishop of Worcester, John
Bishop of Bath, Humfrey Earl of Stafford, Raulph Lord Cornewell, and Master
William Alnewike, then keeper of the privy Seal, which Lords, made a decree
and awarde, so that either party took other by the hand with friendly and
loving words, none having amends of other. Upon Whitsonday following, was a
solemn feast holden at Leycester aforesaid, where the Regente dubbed King
Henry Knight, and then forthwith the King dubbed Richard Duke of York, that
after was father to King Edward the fourth, and other, to the number of forty.

After the Parliamente, the King went to Killingworth Castle.

Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury, founded a College at Higham
Ferrers, in Northamptonshire, of eight College and Hospital at Higham Ferrers
fellows, four Clearkes, and six Choristers. He also founded there an
Hospital for poor folk, with many preferments to the said Town, which house
for the poor, his Anno reg. 5.
breethren Robert and William Chichely Aidermen of London, augmented with
goodly legacies.

On Saturday, the even of Saint Michaell the Archangell, John Audley. An
Earthquake during two hours.
in the morning before day, betwixt the hours of one and two of the clock,
began a terrible Earthquake, with lightning and thunder, which continued the
space of two hours, and was universal through the world, so that men had
thought the world as then should have ended, and the general dome to have
followed. The unreasonable Beasts rored and drew to the Towns with hideous
noise. Also, the Fowls of the air likewise cried out: such was the work of
God at that time to call his people to repentance.

John Arnold: John Higham, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Wards in
London discharged of fifteenes.


John Reynwell Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

This John Reynwell, Mayor of London, gave certain Lands or tenements to the
City of London, for the which, the same City is bound to pay for ever all
such fifteenes as shall be granted to the King (so that it pass not three
fifteenes in one year) for three wards in London, to weete, Reignwels
Testament.
Downegate ward, Billingsgate ward, and Aldgate ward.

This year, the Tower at the Draw Bridge of London Tovver on London Bridge.
was begun by the same Mayor of London.

On the Newyeares day, Thomas Beawford, Duke of Excester deceassed at
Greenewich, and was buried at Saint Edmonds Bury in Suffolk.

About the Purification of our Lady, the Duke of Bedford Regent of France, with
his wife and family, passed the seas unto Caleis, and so through Picardy into
France: but ere he departed from Caleis, to weete, upon the feast day of the
Annuntiation 1427
of our Lady, the Bishop of Winchester, within the Church of our Lady of
Caleis, was created Cardinal, and after the solemnity done, the Regente took
him on his right hand, and so conuayed him unto his lodging.

This year, was unseasonable weathering, for it reyned most part continually
from Easter to Michaelmasse.

This year, the Duke of Alanson, that before was taken prisoner at the
battle of Vernole in Perch, was delivered for a ransom of 200000. Scuttes
of Gold, which was Rob. Gagwin.
50000. Marks sterling.

This year also, the Earl of Salisburie accompanied with the Earl of
Suffolk, the Lord Talbot, and other, laid Rob. Fabian.
a strong seege unto the City of Orleance, and hilde the Citiezens very
straight, and maugre the Duke of Orleance, and the Marshall of France, the
Englishmen wanne from them diverse strong holds, adjoining to the City, and
forced them to bren a great part of their suburbs, but one day as ye said Anno
reg. 6.
Earl of Salisburie, Thomas Mountagew rested him at a bay window, a Gunne was
leuelled out of the City, which all tosquashed his face, whereof he dyed,
after which mishappe, the Englishmen lost rather than wanne, so that by little
and little, they lost all their possessions in France.

This year, Humfrey Duke of Gloucester took to wife Duke of Gloucester married
Elianor Cobham.
Elianor Cobham, whom before he had wantonlye kept.

Henry Frowike: Robert Otley, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Parliament. Subsedy.


John Gidney Draper, the 28. of October.

In a Parliament at Westminster, was granted to the King a Subsedie of every
Tun of Wine three shillings, and of other Merchandise, except wool, fell,
and cloth, xij. 1418
pence of the pound. Also, of every parish through ye Realm, (excepted Cities
and Boroughes) the benefice being in value x. Mark, ten of that parish
should pay vj. s. viij. d. every man viij. d. and of every benefice that were
x. pound, x. parishners to pay xiij. s. iiij. d. and so rate and rate like of
every benefice, from the lowest to the highest. And for the inhabitants of
Cities and Boroughes, every man being in value of xx. s. above his household
stuff, and the apparel of him and his wife, should pay four pence, and so
after that rate unto the richest.

On Corpus Christi day, a Briton, that a good widow and honest woman had
cherished and brought up of alms, Murder quitte with murder.
dwelling in White Chapel parish without Aldgate, murdered the said woman in
a night sleeping in her bed, and after conuayde such jewels and stuff as he
might carry, but he was so pursued upon, that for fear he took a Church,
and there foresware the Kings land, and the Connestables caused him to be
brought to London, and so intended to have conuayde him Westward, but so soon
as he was come into the parish where before he had committed the murder, the
wives cast upon him so much filth and ordure of the street, Anno reg. 7.
that notwithstanding the resistance made by the Connestables, they slew him
there out of hand.

On the first of September, the Cardinal of Winchester Cardinal of
Winchester.
being returned from beyond the Seas, was met by the Mayor and his
breethren, and certain Citizens of London on horseback without the City, and
so brought to his palace in Southwarke.

This year, was a great fire at Baynards Castle in London. Fire at Baynards
Castle. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Duffehouse: John Abbot the 28. of September.

Henry Barton Skinner, the 28. of October.

The viij. of November, the Duke of Norffolke was like to have bin drowned,
passing through London bridge: his Duke of Norffolke escaped drowning.
Barge being set upon the piles overwhelmed, so that to the number of thirty
persons were drowned, and the Duke, with other that escaped, were drawn up
with ropes.

The xxj. of February, Ri. Neuill was made Earl of Salisb. 1429


The fifth day of June, Friar Randolph, a Master of Divinity, that had bin
long prisoner in the Tower of London, 1. Treuise.
was there slain by the Parson of the Tower.

In the month of June, the Cardinal of Winchester with a warlike company
passed the Sea, intending to have made war upon them that then inhabited the
Country of Prage, but for need of men that the Regente had in France, the
Cardinal changed his purpose, and tarried there a season with the Regent.

William Ruff: Ralph Holland, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Castfielde Mercer, the. 28. of October.

The sixth of November, King Henry being about the age of ninteene years was
solempnely crowned in Saint Peter's Church of Westminster, at whose
coronation were made xxxvj. Knights of the Bath, and after solemnization in
the Church finished, an honorable feast in the great Hall of Westminster was
kept, whereof ye may read a large discourse in Robert Fabian. After which
feast great preparation was made for the Kings journey into France.

The. xxiiij. of Januarie a battle was done in Smithfielde 1430
within the listes before the King, between two men of Feuersham in Kent, John
Vpton appellaunte, and John Down defendaunt, when they had long fought, the
King took up the matter and forgave both parties.

The. xxvij. day of April the King took shipping at Dover, and landed the same
day at Caleis, having in his company the Dukes of York and Norffolke, the
Bishops of Bath, Ely, and Rochester, the Earls of Huntington, Stafforde,
Warwick, Oxforde, Devonshire, Mortaine of Ewe, and of Ormonde, and Barrons,
the Lord Boucher, Beaumond, Typtoft, Fitz Water, Roos, Arundale, Audley,
Fauco^bridge, Gray, Codner, Scrop, and Wells.

Whilst the King remained at Caleis, many skirmishes were fought between the
Englishmen and the French, in diverse parts of France, and the Frenchmen
prevailed greatly by help of a Woman which they named The Maiden of God. So
that lastly she with her company came to the Town of Champaigne, to the end
to remove the siege laid thereunto by the Duke of Burgoigne and other of the
English Captains, and the. xxiij. of May, she gave battle to the
Englishmen, and fought with them a long time, but in the end by the manhood
of a Burgonian Knight named sir John Luxemborough, she was taken alive, and her
company distressed, she was conuayed to the City of Roane, and there kept a
season, where she fained her self to be with child, but when ye contrary was
known, she was condemned and brent.

After this King Henry by small iorneyes into France, came to Paris, where he
was honorably received of ye Citizens and taken for their sovereign Lord and
King, whiles he Robert Gagwine.
there remained, (says Gagwine) the Frenchmen, wan many holds of the
Englishmen, and the Burgonians in the country of Bry. The third of August dyed
the the Countess of Vrmonde, and was buried at Saint Thomas of Acres in
London. Anno reg. 9. Sherifes. Mayor.


Walter Chertesey: Robert Large, the. 28. of September.

Nicholas Wotton Draper, the. 28. of October.

Soon after Easter the Lord protector was warned of an assembly of certain
lewd persons to be assembled at Abington, wherefore he sent thither certain
persons, and also rode thither himself, and there arrested the Baylye of the
Town named William Mandeuil a Weauer, the which was appointed for a Captain,
who had named himself Jack Sharp of Wigmers land in Wales, who being
examined, confessed that he meant to have done many mischiefs, especially
against Priests, so that he would have made their heads as cheap as Sheeps
heads (that is to say) three for a penny, or as some write, ten for a penny:
many of his complyces were taken and sent to dyuarse prisons. Their Captain
was drawn, hanged, and headed at Abingdon, and his head was sent to London,
and set on the bridge: his other fautors were executed in diverse places and
Countries to the terror of other.

The. xiij. of Julye Richard Russel a Wooll-man, was drawn, hanged, and
quartered, for that he would have made Dukes and Earls at his pleasure.

Richard Robsert Lord Bourcher deceased, and was buried at Westminster.

King Henry remaining still in France, the Earl of Arundale accompanied with
two thousand Englishmen, sent a certain of his company unto a Town called
Bealmount, to provoke she Frenchmen to issue out of the town, which small
company when Boyssycant and Sentrales the^ Captains beheld, they with their
soldiers sped them forth to take the said Englishmen, y^ which by little and
little gave back, till they had tolled the Frenchmen a good space from the
Town, and then set upon them with a stout courage, and held them on hand,
till the Earl with his company rescued them: then betwixt them was a cruel
fight, but in the end the Frenchmen were chased, and the said Sentrayle with
many footmen of the said Town were slain.

John Aderle* Stephen Brown, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Wels Grocer, the. 28. of October.

This JOHN WELLS Mayor of London caused the Conduite commonly called the
Standarde in Cheap to be builded.

On the seventh day of December King Henry was Crowned in Paris, by the
Cardinal of Winchester, at the which Coronation was present, the Duke of
Burgoigne, the Duke of Bedforde Regente, and diverse other Nobles of France.
After the solemnity of this feast was ended, the King departed from Paris,
and so came to Roane, where he held his Christmasse, and that done, he
returned to Caleis, where when he had soiourned a season, he took shipping
and returned into England, and landed at Dover, the eleauenth of February, and
then rydyng toward London, he was met on Barham Down, betwixt Dover and
Canterbury, by a great company of Gentles and Commons of Kent., all cladde
in a liuerie with read hoods, the which accompanied him till he came to
Black Heath, which was on the one and twentieth day of February where he was
met by the Mayor of London, who rode in a gown of Crimson Ueluet, his
Aldermen in Scarlet, and the Citizens al in white gowns and red hoodes, with
diverse works or Cognisances brodered upon their sleeves after ye faculty of
their mysteries or crafts: and after due obeysa^ce and saluting of the king,
they rode on before him toward ye City. And when the King was come to the
Bridge, there was devised a mighty Giaunt, standing with a sword drawn in
his hand, having written certain speeches in meter of great rejoicing and
welco^ming of the King to the City, on the midst of the Bridge, and in
diverse other places of the City, were diverse fair and sumptuous pageants
replenished with goodly and beautiful personages, the order and speeches
whereof, are set down by Robert Fabian in his cronicle. Thus being conveyed
to his palace at Westminster, the Mayor with the Citizens returned to London,
and on the xxiitj. day of February the Mayor and Aldermen yode to the King,
and presented him with a Hampire of Gold and 1433
therein a thousand pound of nobles.

This year by reason of the soldiers of Caleis, a restraynte was made there
of the Woolles, for they were not content of their wages, wherefore the Regente
of France, came down thither in Easter week, at which time many soldiers
were arrested: and rode again to Tirwine. And having not long buried the Lady.
Anne his late wife, sister to the Duke of Burgoigne, he married there the
Earls daughter of Saint Paul, and shortly after returned to Caleis where he
caused four of those soldiers to be beheaded, on the. xj. of June, and. 110.
soldiers to be banished the town, besides. 120. that were banished before
that time. And upon Midsommer even the Lord Regent with his new wedded spouse
came to London, and remained there till the Anno reg. 11 Sherifes. Mayor.
latter end of August.

John Olney: John Peddesley, the. 28. of September.

John Perneis Fishmonger, the. 28. of October.

On the. xxv. day of November was the Lord Fitz Water drowned on the sea, and
much other harms were done by tempest. 1433 Parliament.


On the eight day of July, King Henry began his Parliament at Westminster,
continued it till Lammas, and then adiourned it until Saint Edwards tide.

This year in the South-Weast appeared a blasyng star.

During the reign of this King Henry the sixth were lieutenaunts over the
realm of Irelande, Edmond Earl of March and James Earl of Ormond his
deputy: John Sutton Knight Lord of Dudley, and sir Thomas Strange his
deputy: sir Thomas Stanley, and sir Christopher Planket his deputy: Lion
Lord Wells, and the Earl of Ormonde his deputy: James Earl of Ormonde the
Kings Lieuetenaunt by himself: John Earl of Shrewesburie and the Archbishop of
Diuelin, Lord Justice in his absence: Richard Plantagenet Anno reg. 12
Duke of York, Father to Edward the fourth and Earl of Vlstar, had the
Office of Lieutenaunt by letters patents, during the space of ten years, who
deputed under him at several times, the Baron of Diuelin, Richard Fitz
Eustace Knight, James Earl of Ormonde, and Thomas Fitz Moris Earl of Kildare:
to this Richard then resident in Diuelin, was borne within the Castle there,
the second son George Duke of Clarence, afterward drowned in a Butte of
^almesey.

Thomas Chalton: John King, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Brokeley Draper, the. 28. of October.

The ninth of November, the tormente of the Earl of Saint Paul, Father to the
Duchess of Bedford, was solemnly holden in Paul's Church of London, where the
more part i^ estates of this realm were present.

The ninth of March the Lord Talbot with a goodlye company passed through
the City of London, toward France, where he wrought much woe to the
Frenchmen. The 1434
Town of Saint Denis, which is within two English miles of Paris, was gotten
by the practice of one John Notice a knight of Orleance, from Matthew Gouglye,
and Thomas Kiriel Captains, they slew there many Englishmen, and took many
prisoners, but soon after, the said Captains with strength taken from Paris,
laid such a strong siege about Saint Denis, that finally they agreed to
deliver the Town to the Englishmen.

In this season also the earl of Arundale, which in Normandy, had manly born
him, hearing that one Hirus, ^ Fr^ch Captain, had fortifyed a strong Castle,
named Gerborym, before destroyed of the Englishmen, took with him a certain
number of soldiers, and belaied the Castle with a strong siege, and assaulted
it sundry times manfully: but Gagwine says, the said Hirus with his company
issued out of the Castle, and gave unto the said Earl a cruel skirmish, in
the which the said Earl received a deadly wound and dyed shortly after. Anno
reg. 13 Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Barnewel: Simon Air, the. 28. of September.

Roger Otley Grocer, the. 28. of October.

Through a great Froste, that lasted from the five and Great Frost.
twentieth of Noue^ber, unto the tenth of February, the Thamis was so frozen,
that the Merchandice which came to the Thamis mouth, was there landed, and
carried through Kent to London.

When the Pope Eugeny the fourth, and his Cardinals 14^5
after long labor could make no peace betwixt King Henry of England and
France, and Charles also named King of France, they at length made a peace
betwixt the said Charles and Philip Duke of Burgoigne, whereby the said Duke
of Burgoigne became utter enemy to the King of England, and soon after the
said Duke began his order of the Lilly, and the Golden fleece, and ordained
certain Knights of that order, and made thereunto many Statuts, whereof some of
them were like unto the Statutes of the Garter.

On the fourteenth day of September at Roan in Normandy dyed the noble Prince,
John Duke of Bedforde, and Regent of France, and was after with great
solemnity ^^ryed within the Church of No^ir Dame of the same ^itie. Anno reg.
14 Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Catworth: Robert Clopton, the. 28. of September.

Henry Frowike* Mercer, the, 28. of October.

King Charles of France recovered the City of Paris* and at Newyeares tide
wanne the Town of Harflewe, and 1436
Saint Denis, and many other Towns and holds, expellyng and murdering the
English people in great number.

The ninteenth day of Julye the Duke of Burgoigne, with a great multitude of
Burgonians and Flemmings appeared Caleis besieged.
before Caleis, and there pight his pauilions and tents, at which season was
Lieutenaunt of Caleis Sir John Ratclife Knight, and of the Castle was
Lieutenant the Baron of Dudley: this siege endured about three weeks, in
which season many knightlye acts were done and exercised on both parts.

On the second day of August the Duke of Gloucester, protector Robert Fub^^^.
of England, with 500. sails, (as some write,) landed at Caleis, and intended
upon the third day following to have issued out of the Town* and to have
given battle to the Flemmings, (but as testifyeth our English writers,) so
soon as the Duke of Burgoigne was ware of the great power of the Lord
Protector, he took with him of his ordinance that he might lightly carrye, and
the other that were cumberous he left behind. When the Duke with his host was
thus fled, the Lord Protector with his people followed him into the
Country by the space of eleauen days, in which season he burnt the two
Towns of Popering and Bell, and returned to Caleis and so into England.

This year was the Castle or Town of Rokesborough in Scotland besieged by
the King of Scotts, but when he Anno. reg. ^^.
heard that Sir Ralph Graye Knight was coming thither with a competente
number to remove the siege, anon he departed leauyng some part of his
Ordinance behind him, to his great shame and dishonor.

Thomas Norstede: William Gregory, the. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Michel Fishmonger, the. 28. of October.

The second of Januarie Queen Katherin late wife to Henry the fifth, and
mother to King Henry the sixth, dyed at Bermondsey, and was buried at
Westminster, but being taken Part of London bridge fell.
up again, in the reign of Henry the seventh, when he laid the foundation
of his new Chapel there, she was never buried since, but lies still above
ground* in a Coffin of bordes, behind the East end of the Friars.

The. xiiij. of Januarie at noone of the day, the gate on London bridge with
the Tower upon it, next to Southwarke, fell down, and two of the furdest
Arches of the same bridge, and no man perished.

Ralph Lord Cromwell, erected the College of Ta^eshall 1437 Ta^eshall College.
in Lincolneshire.

King Henry put down the Mayor of Norwich, sent the Aldermen, some to Linne,
some to Canterbury, took their fra^chises into his hand, and appointed John
Wels Alderman, sometime Mayor of London, to be Warden of Norwich, who so
continued eight months, as I have red on his Monument, in Saint Antholines
Church in London, which Monument is now amongst many other by lewd
persons defaced.

The ninth of July Queen Jane wife to King Henry the fourth dyed at Hauering
a Boure, and was buried at Canterbury.

All the Lions in the Tower of London dyed. Anno reg. 18 Sherifes. Mayor.


William Hales: William Chapman, the. 28. of September.

William Eastfielde Mercer, the. 28. of October.

This William Eastfield Mayor, of his own costs caused to be builded the Water
Conduite in Fleetestreete of London.

On Easter day, John Gardener was taken conuaying 1438 Gardene^brent
the Sacrament from his mouth with a soul cloth* after he had received the
same at the Priests hand, in Saint Marie at the Axe Church of London, for the
which he was brent in Smithfielde the xiiij. of May.

Owen Tewther ^ouly hurting his keeper, brake out of Newgate but was again
taken afterward: this Owen had priuilye (as it was said) married Queen
Katherin late wife to Henry the fifth, and had four children by her, which
was not known, till she was dead and buried.

On the Uigil of Mary Magdalen, the town of Nantwich, in the County of Chester
was pitifully consumed with fire.

A great dearth of corn, for wheat was in some places Dearth of corn Anno
reg. 17 Sherifes. Mayor.
sold for two shillings six pence the Bushel.

Hugh Diker: Nicholas Yoo, the. 28. of September.

Stephen Brown Grocer, the. 28. of October.

The five and twentieth of November a great wind did Great vv^n^es.
much harm in many places. In London it bare much lead of the Gray Friars
Church, and almost blewe down the one side of the street called the Old
Change, so that the same was feign to be underset with Timber.

On New years day a stacke of woodde fell down at Baynardes Castle, and
killed three men: many more were sore hurt. By fall of a Staire at Bedforde,
where the shire day was kept, eighteen persons were slain, and many more
hurt.

Richard Beauchampe Earl of Warwick dyed at Roane in Norma^die, the last of
May, and the fourth of October next following his corpse was honorably conveyed
as well by water as by land from Roane unto Warwick, and there worshipfully
buried in the College of our Lady Church founded by his noble ancestors.

Wheat was sold at London for three shillings ye bushel, Malt at thirteen
shillings y^ quarter, and Otes at eight pence the bushel, which caused men to
eat beans, pease, and barley, more than in a hundred years before. Anno reg.
18 Stru^pets vvare Raye hoodes.


Many Stumpets were set on the Pyllerye, and banyshed the City, except
they ware their Raye hoodes.

Phillip Malpas: Robert Marshal, the 28. of September. Sherifes. ^^ior.


Robert Large Mercer, the. 28. of October.

In a Parliament at Reading, it was ordained, that all Merchant strangers
should go to host with Englishmen, and to make sale of their Merchaundises,
and buy again what they would, within the space of six months, giving their
host for every twentye shillings worth two pence, except the Esterlings. And
that every householder that Order for strangers.
was alien, should pay to the King xuj. pence the year, and every servant
alien vj. pence.

Sir Richard Which, Uicar of Hermetsworth in Essex, who 1440
had before abiured, was bre^t on the Tower Hill, the xvij. of June. After whose
death was great murmur among the people, for some said he was a good man and
an holy, and put to death by malice: and some said the contrary: so that
many men and women went by night to the place where he was burnt, and
offered their money, Images of wax, and other things, making their prayers,
kneeling, and kissing of the ground, bare away with them the Ashes of his body
for holy relics. etc. This endured eight days, till the Mayor and Aldermen
ordained men of arms, to restrain the people, who apprehended many, and
sent them to prison, among whom was taken the Uicar of Berking Church beside
the Tower, in whose Parish al this was done, who had received the offering of
the simple people. And to excite them to offer the more feruentlye to the
fulfilling of his false covetousness, he had meddled Ashes with the poulder
of spices, and strewed them in the place where the Priest was burnt, and so
the simple people were deceived, weenyng the sweet savor had come of the
Ashes of the dead Priest. All which the said Uicar of Barking Church
confessed in prison. This have I noted the more at large, because some have
written the Uicare of Berking to be burnt, which is false, for he was not
burnt, though he better deserved than the other.

The eighteenth day of July the Posterne gate of London by East Smithfielde,
against the Tower of London sancke by night, more than seven foot into the
Earth.

The twelfth of Auguste, the Star in Breadstreet, an Inn of London, was
fiered by lightning, and about fiftye load of Hey burnte. The Eagle in Cheap
was also burnt. Anno reg. 19


The first of September, John Knighte a soldier, prisoner of Newgate in
London, as he was led by one of the Sherifes Officers, from thence toward
Guilde Hall, five of his fellow soldiers with their daggers drawn, came
suddenly out of the Pannier Alley, and berefte him from the Officer, thrusting
him into Saint Martins Lane, and so into yt church, where they all claymed
privilege of the Sanctuary, thinking to have remained there: but the same
day Phillip Malpas, and Richard Marshal Sherifes, came with a number of other,
and by force took them from thence fettered fast to the Counter, and from
thence chayned by the necks two together, sent them to Newgate, where they
remained till the third of November following, at which time they were by the
Kings Justice restored again to the same Sanctuary of Saint Martin.

John Sutton: William Wetinhall, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Paddesley Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

The Duke of York was made Regente of France, 1441
and the sixteenth day of May the said Duke with the Earl of Oxforde, the
Earl of Ewe, sir Richard Wooduile, Sir James of Ormonde, the Lord Clynton,
and many other, shipped at Portesmouth, and Sailed thence into Normandy.

The six and twentieth day of November was a challenge in arms done before
King Henry within listes in Smithfielde, between Sir Richard Woduile a
Knighte of England, and a Knighte of Spain, but the King took the matter
into his hands after the third stroke.

Also a Combat was fought at Totehil between two thieves, the apealer and
defenda^t, the apealer had the field of the defendant within three strokes.

Roger Bolingbroke, a great Astronomer, with Thomas Southwell a Chanon of
Saint Stephens Chapel at Westminster, were taken as conspiratours of the
kings death, for it was said, that the same Roger should labor to consume the
Kings person by way of Negromancie, and the said Thomas should say Masses,
in the lodge of Harnesey Park beside London, upon certain instruments, with
the which the said Roger should use his craft of Negromancye, against the
Faith, and was assen^yng to the said Roger in all his works. And the five
and twentieth day of Julye being Sunday, Roger Bolingbroke, with all his
instruments of Negromancye, that is to say, a chair painted wherein he was
wont to sit, upon the four corners of which Chair stood four swords,
and upon every sword an Image of Copper hangyng, with many other
instruments: he stood on a high Scaffolde in Paul's Churchyard, before
the Cross, holding a Sword in his right hand, and a Scepter in his left,
arrayed in a marvelous attire, and after the Sermon was ended by master Low
Bishop of Rochester, he abiured all Articles longing to the craft of
Negromancye or missownyng to the Faith.

On the Twesday next following, Dame Elianor Cobham Elianor Cobha^ apprehended.
Duchess of Gloucester fled by night into the Sanctuary at Westminster,
which caused her to be suspected of treason.

In the mean time Roger Bolyngbroke was examined before the Kings Counsel,
where he confessed that he wroughte the said Negromancye at the styrryng and
procurement of the said Dame Elianor, to know what should be fall of her, and
to what estate she should some, whereupon she was cyted to appear before*
Henrye Chicheley Archebyshoppe of Caunterburie, Henry Beauforte Bishop of
Winchester Cardinal, John Kempe Archbishop of York Cardinal: William Ascothe
bishop of Salisburie, and other in Saint Stephens Chapel at Westminster,
there to aunsweare to certain Articles of Negromancie, Witchcrafte, Sorcery,
Heresy, and Treason, where when she appeared, the foresaid Roger was brought
forth to witness against her, and said, that she was cause and first styrred
him to labor in the said Art. Then she was committed to the ward of sir
John Steward Knight, and John Stanley Esquire, and other, to be conveyed to the
Castle of Ledes, there to remain till three weeks after Michaelmasse.
Shortly after a commission was directed to the Earls of Huntington, Stafforde,
and Suffolk, and to certain Judges of both Benches, to enquire of all manner
of Treasons, Sorceries and other things that might be hurtefull to the Kings
Person, before whom the said Roger, and Thomas Southwel, as principalles, and
dame Elianor as accessarie, were indicted of Treason in the Guild Anno reg. 20.
Hall of London.

There was taken also Margerie Gurdemaine a witch The VVitch of Eye brent.
of Eye in Suffolk, whose Sorcerie and Witchcrafte the said Elianor had long
time used, and by her medicines and Drinks enforced the Duke of Gloucester to
love her, and after to wedde her, wherefore, and for cause of relapse, the same
Witch was brent in Smithfield, on ye seven and twentieth of October.

The one and twentieth of October, in the Chapel beforesayde, before the
Bishops, of London Robert Gylbart, of Lincoln William Alnewike, of Norwich
Thomas Brouns, the said Elianor appeared, and Adam Molins Clearke of the Kings
Counsel read certain Articles objected against her of Sorcerye and
Negromancie, whereof some she denied, and some she granted.

The three and twentieth of October Dame Elianor appeared again, and witnesses
were brought forth and examined, and she was conuicte of the said Articles:
then was it asked if she would say any thing against the witnesses,
whereunto she aunsweared nay, but submitted her self. The seven and twentieth
day of October she abiured the Articles, and was adjoined to appear again the
ninth of November. In the mean time Thomas Southwel dyed in the Tower of
London, as himself had prophesied that he should never dye by Justice of the
Law.

William Combis: Richard Rich, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
Elianor Cobha^ did penance.


Robert Clopton Draper, the. 28. of October.

The ninth of November Dame Elianor appeared before the Archbishop and
other, in the said Chapel, and received her penance which she performed. On
Monday the. xiij. of November, she came from Westminster, by water, and landed
at the Temple Bridge, from whence with a taper of wax of two pound in her
hand, she went through Fleetestreete, hoodlesse (save a kerchefe) to Paul's,
where she offered her Taper at the high Altar. On ye Wednesday next she landed
at ye Swan in Thamis street, and then went through Bridgestreet, Grace Church
Street, straight to Leaden Hall, and so to Christ Church by Aldegate. On
Friday she landed at Queen Hiue, and so went through Cheap to Saint Michels
in Cornehil, in form aforesaid: at all which times the Mayor, Sherifes, and
Crafts of London, received her and accompanied her. This being done, she was
committed to the ward of sir Thomas Stanley, wherein she remained during her
life in the castle of Chester, having yearly an hundred marks assigned for her
finding, whose pride, false, couetise, and lechery, were cause of her
confusion.

The xviij. of Noue^ber Roger Bolingbroke, with sir John Hum Priest, and
William Woodham Esquire, was arraigned in the Guild Hall of London, where the
said John and William had their Charters, but Roger Bolingbroke was condemned,
and had judgment of sir John Hody, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and the
same day he was drawn from the Tower to Tiborne and there hanged and
quartered: and when ye said Roger should suffer, he said yt he was never guilty
of any treason against the kings person, but he had presumed too far in his
cunning, whereof he cried God mercy: and the Justice that gave on him
judgment lived not long after.

Henry Beauchampe succeeded in his fathers inheritance, who being kept two
years in the Kings hands, was restored to al his livings with great glory,
for he was crowned King of Wight, by the kings own hands, and nominated
chief Earl of England.

A challenge was done in Smithfield within listes, before 1442 A Combat in
Smithfielde.
the King, by the Lord Beawfe of Aragon, and John Ansley Esquire of the Kings
house, which Ansley had the field, and at the Kings hand was made Knight:
and the Anno. reg. 21
Lord Aragon offered his harneis at Windsor.

In the month of August was a great fray in Fleetstreete, between the young
Students of the Innes of Court, and the inhabitauntes of the same street,
which Fray began in the night, and so continued the assaults and bickeryngs
till the next day, in which season much people of the City was thither
gathered, and diverse men on both parts slain and many hurt, but lastly, by
the presence of the Mayor and Sherifes, this Fray was appeased, of which was
chief occasioner one of Cliffords Inn named Herbotel.

Thomas Beaumount: Richard Norden, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Athirle Ironmonger, the. 28. of October.

John Beaufort Earl of Somerset was made Duke of Somerset and Lord Talbot
Earl of Shrewesburie.

The steeple of Waltham Holy Cross in Essex, was burnt with lightning on
Candlemasse day.

The Citizens of Norwiche, rose against the Priour of 1443
Christ's Church, within the same City, and would have fiered the priorie,
they kept the town by strength against the Duke of Norffolke, and all his
power, wherefore the King sent thither the chief Judge John Fortescue, with
the Earls of Stafforde and of Huntington, who indicted many Citizens, and the
Priour also. The Liberties of the City were seysed into the Kings hand, and
Sir John Clifton made Captain there, and many of the Citizens fled over the
seas etc. Anno reg. 22. Sherifes. Mayor.


Nicholas Wilforde: John Norman, the. 28. of September.

Thomas Catworth Grocer, the. 28. of October.

John Earl of Huntington at Windsore was made Duke of Excester. John Beauforde
Duke of Somerset deceased, and was buried at Wimborne.

The Earl of Stafforde was created Duke of Buckingham, Henry Beauchampe Earl
of Warwick, Duke of Warwick, 1444 Cro. of ^ewx.
unto whom the King gave the Castle of Bristowe with all the appurtenances,
which King John had kept in his hands, he gave unto him also the Isles of
Garnsey and Iarnsey.

The Earl of Dorset was made Marquis of Dorset, and the Earl of Suffolk,
Marquis of Suffolk.

King Henry sent into France Ambassadors, William de la Pole Marquis of
Suffolk, Adam Molens Bishop of Chichester and keeper of the privy seal,
sir Roberte Roos and other, to treat of a marriage between King Henry, and
Margaret the kings daughter of Scicil, which was concluded in the City of
Towers in Touraine. Anno reg. 13 Sherifes. Mayor.


Stephen Poster: Hugh Which, the. 28. of September.

Henry Frowike Mercer, the 28. of October.

In the month of November William de la Pole Marquis of Suffolk, with other
went again into France for to conduct the said Lady Margaret into England.

On Candlemasse even in diverse places of England, was heard terrible thunders
with lightning, whereby the church of Baldoke, in Hertfordshire, the Church of
Walden in Essex, and diverse other, were sore shaken. And the steeple of Saint
Paul's in London, about two of the clock in the after noone, was set on fire in
the midst of the shaft, but by the labor of many well desposed people the
same was quenched and no man perished. The steeple of Kingstone was likewise
fiered by the same lightnings.

Lady Margaret landing at Portchester, went from thence 1445
by water to Hampton, and rested there in a place called Gods house, from
thence she went to the Abbay of Tychfielde and Queen Margaret crowned.
was there wedded to King Henry, ye xxij. of April. She was received at the
Blackeheath by the Citizens of London, ryding on horseback, in blewe gowns
with brodered sleues and red hoods the 28. of May, and on the 30. of May she
was crowned at Westminster: her badge was the Daysie.

With the fall of Kingstone steple, one man was slain Kingston steple fell.
An* reg. 24. Sherifes. Mayor. Leaden hall in Lon. builded.
and many sore hurt.

John Darby: Godfrey Filding, the 28. of September.

Simon Air draper, the 28. of October.

This Simon Air builded the Leaden hall in London (to be a store house for
grain and fuel for the poor of the City,) and also a beawtifull Chapel in
the East end of ye same, over the gate whereof he caused to be written, Dextera
Domini A notable example.
exaltauit me, that is to say, The Lords right hand has exalted me: Whereby
he doing so notable a work for the common weal, also left example to other
Citizens coming 1446 Cronicle of Thevvkesbury. John Rovvse, Duke of vvarvvik
and King of vvight died.
after him, who^ God likewise exalts with such temporal blessings, that they
be not unthankful to God, and their common weal, wherein they have received
them.

Henry Duke of Warwike, chief Earl of England, Lord Spencer and Aburgaueny,
King of the Isle of Wight, Garnsey and Iarnsey, and Lord of the Castle of
Bristow, died without issue, and was buried at Tewksburie.

John David appeached his master William Catur an Armorer Co^bat between a
master and the servant.
dwelling in S. Dunstones Parish in Fletestreete, of treason, and a day being
assigned them to fight in Smithfield, the master being well beloved, was so
cherished by his friends, and plied with wine, that being therewith overcome,
was also unluckily slain by his servant. An. reg. 25. Baylifes. Custos.


Robert Horn: Godfrey Boleine the 28. of September.

John Olney Mercer, the 28. of October.

Pope Eugenius sent a golden Rose to the King of England, expressing the
property and aplicatio^ of the same, with the ceremony that is yearly used
on Palm Sunday, touching Record. Ecclesi. Canta.
the same Rose, exhorting the King against the Turks. Which Rose Lodouicus
Cordona Doctor of Divinity did present to the King in S. Stephens Chapel at
Westminster upon S. Andrews day, in presence of the Dukes of York and
Excester, Cardinal Kempe Archbishop of York and John Stafford Archbishop of
Caunterburie Chauncellor of England.

The x. of February began a Parliament at Saint Edmondesburie Parliament at
Bury.
in Suffolk, at which time all the ways about the same Town were kept with
armed men both day and night, so that many dyed with cold and waking. Humfrey
The Duke of Gloucester arested and sone after dyed.
Duke of Gloucester being at the castle of the Vies in Wilshire, came from
thence to the Parliament, and was lodged in the Hospital, where shortly after
he was arrested by John Lord Beaumount high Constable, the Duke of Buckingham,
the Duke of Somerset and other, who appointed certain of the Kings household
to wait upon him: but on the. xxiiij. 1447
day he died for sorrow, as some said, that he might not come to his answer:
he was buried at Saint Albons. xxxij. of his principal servants were
arrested and sent to diverse prisons, and five of them were arraigned at London
and condemned, v. ^^n hanged and after pardoned.
whose names were, sir Roger Chamberlain knight Middleton, Herbert, Arteyse
Esquiers, and Richard Nedam gentleman, which were al five drawn from the Tower
of London to Tiborne and there hanged, letten down quick, stripped naked,
marked with a knife for to be quartered, and then a charter showed for their
lives: but the yoman of the crown had their liuelode, and the hangman had
their clothes. Henry Beauford Cardinal of Winchester deceased, and after him W.
Wainflete Provost of Eaton, was made Bishop of Winchester. The v. of August
died John Holla^d duke of Excester An. reg. 16.
and was buried at S. Catherins nygh the Tower of London.

William Abraham: Thomas Scot, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Gidney Draper, the 28. of October.

This year during y^ peace between England and France ^ knight of the
English part, named sir Frances Aragonoyse, took a town named Fogars upon the
borders of Norma^die belonging 1448
to y^ duke of Britain. For the which he complained him to y^ French king, and
he at ye said dukes request sent unto y^ king of England* to ask restitutio^
of the harm. The which messengers were answered of ye kings Counsel, that y^
deed was right displeasant unto ye king, and that sir Francis Aragon had
enterprised y^ feate of his own presumption. Whereupon it followed shortly
after, that ye French by like policy took y^ town and castle of
Pountallarche, and after that many other, so y^ the taking of y^ foresaid town
of Fogiars by ye English men, An. reg. 27.
was y^ occasion by ye which the French after gat al Normandy.

William Catlow: William Marow, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1449
Roane yield ^ to the French.


Steven Brown Grocer, the 28. of October.

This year the Frenchmen got many towns in Normandy, out of the possession of
ye Englismen. Also y^ city of Roane was yielded to the French, with condition
that the Captains and garrisons might depart with armor and goods, and not
long after was rendered (with the like co^ditio^ as of Roane) the towns of
Harflewe, and Hounflewe. A knight of France called sir Jews de Breyll,
challenged an Esquier of England named Ralph Chalons of certain feats of
War, the which to prove, a day to them was given to meet at a town in
France named Maunce where y^ French king at that day was present: But Chalons,
can the French knight through the body with his An. reg. 28.
spear, whereof the said Jews dyed.

William Hulin, Thomas Cannings, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. B. of
Chichester murdered.


Thomas Chalton Mercer, the 28. of October.

The 9. of Januarie Ada^ Molins Bishop of Chichester, keeper of the kings
privy seal, through y^ procurement of Richard duke of York was by shipmen
slain at Portesmouth.

The 9. of February Thomas Thany, otherwise Blewberd Blevvberd hanged. 1450
a Fuller, was taken beside Caunterburie for raising a rebellion, who was
hanged and quartered.

William Delapole duke of Suffolk was banished ye land for v. Duke of Suffolk
murdered.
years, to appease ye rumor of ye commons of England, who taking ship at
Ipswich the 3. of May, sailed toward France, but was met on the sea, by a
ship of war named* Nicholas ^^ the Tower, and beheaded, and his corpse was
cast up at Dover and buried in the Charter house at Hull. This William de la
pole Duke of Suffolk, and Alice his wife, daughter to Thomas Chawcer, son to
Geffrey Chawcer the famous Poet, translated and increased the manner place of
Eweline in Oxfordshire: they builded a new the parish Church of Gods house
at new Evveline in Oxfordshire.
Eweline, a comely piece of work standing on a hill: and also hard adjoining
to the West end of Eweline parish Church they founded a pretty Hospital or
alms house for. ij. priests ^iber fundationis.
and xiij. poor men to dwell and be sustained in for ever, one of the priests
to be master of the alms house, the other priest a scholemaster, freely to
teach the children of the tenaunts of the said Lordship of Eweline and other
Lordships pertaining to the said alms house their Gra^mer, and either of
those. ij. priests to have. x. pound the year. One of the 13. poor men to be
called minister, to present the faults of the other to the master, and to
ring their common bell to service, and to have. xvj. pence the week, the other
xij. poor m^ to have every of them xiiij. pence y^ week. This house has to
name Gods house, or the house of alms, unto the which he gave iij. Manors,
Ramruge in Hampshire, Conocke in Wilshire, and Mershe in Buckinghamshire, with
their appurtenaunces, Hospital at Donington Castle.
they also founded* the Hospital of Donnington Castle.

In the month of May the commons of Kent in great Jack Cade Captain of the
rebels in Kent.
numbers assembled, having to their Captain Jack Cade, who named himself
Mortimer, cousin to the Duke of York, or as he was named of some John amend
all: this Captain brought a great number of people to the Blackcheath, and
there kept the field more than a month, pilling the country about, to whom
the City of London at that time was full favorable. And the said Captain (as
I find recorded) sent for such Citizens of London as it pleased him to command
to repair unto him, under letters of safe conduct, as follows:

The safeguard and sign manuell of the Captain of Kent, sent to Thomas Cock
Draper of London, by the Captain of the great assemble in Kent.
BY this our writing ensealed, we grant and will permit truly, that Thomas Cock
of London Draper, shall come in good suertie and in safeguard to our presence,
without any hurt of his person, and so avoid from us again at his pleasure,
with all other persons assigned at his denominatio^ with him coming in likewise.

The commandment by the Captain of Kent, sent unto Thomas Cock above said.
FOr your instruction, first ye shall charge all Lumbardes and strangers, being
marchaunts, Ienewe^s, Venetians, Florentines, and other, this day to draw them
together, and to ordain for us the Captain. xij. Harnises complete of the best
fashion, xxiiij. Brigandines, xij. battle Axes, xij. Glaues, vj. Horses with
saddle and bridle completely harnessed, and a thousand marks of ready money:
and if this our demand be not observed and done, we shall have the heads of
as many as we can get of them.

What answer to this demand was returned I find not, but like it is the same
was granted and performed, for I find not thesaid Captain and Kentishmen, at
their being in the City, to have hurt any stranger.

In the mean time the King sent notable men to the said Captain and his
fellowship, to know their purpose and the cause of their insurrection: unto
whom the Captain answered, that he and his company were assembled there to
redress and reform the wrongs that were done in the Realm, and to withstand
the malice of them that were destroyers of the common weal, and to amend the
defaultes of them that were chief counselors to the King, and showed unto
them the articles of complaints touching the misgouernment of the realm,
wherein was nothing contained but seemed reasonable, whereof a copy was sent to
the Parliament holden that time at Westminster, with also one other byll of
requests by them made, of things to be reformed, and to have answer thereof
again, but he had none. The bill of Articles they entitled

The complaint of the Commons of Kent, and causes of the assembly on the
Blackheath.
1 Inprimis, it is openly noysed that Kent should be destroyed with a Royal
power, and made a wild forest, for the death of the Duke of Suffolk, of which
the Commons of Kent thereof were never guilty. 2 Item the King is styrred to
live only on his Commons, and other men to have the revenues of the Crown, the
which has caused poverty in his excellency, and great paymentes of the
people, now late to the King granted in his Parliament. 3 Item that the
Lords of his Royal blood been put from his daily presence, and other mean
persons of lower nature exalted and made chief of his Privy Counsel, the
which stops matters of wrongs done in the Realm, from his excellent
audience, and may not be redressed as law will, but if bribes and gifts be
messengers to the hands of the said Counsel. 4 Item, the people of his
Realm be not paid of debts owing for stuff and purueyaunce taken to the use
of the Kings household, in undoing of the said people, and the poor Commons
of this Realm. 5 Item, the Kings meniall servants of household, and other
persons, asken daily goods and lands, of empeached or indicted of treason, the
which the King grants anon, ere they so endaungered be convict. The which
canseth the receyuers thereof to enforge labors and means applied to the
death of such people, so appeached or indicted, by subtyl means, for couetyse
of the said grauntes: and the people so empeached or indicted, though it be
untrue, may not be committed to the Law for their deliverance, but held still
in prison, to their uttermost undoing and destruction, for couetyse of goods. 6
Item, though diverse of the poor people and Commons of the Realm, have never
so great right, truth and perfect title to their land, yet by untrue claim
of enfeffement made unto diverse States, Gentles, and the Kings meniall
servants in maintenaunces against the right, the true owners dare not
hold, claim, nor pursue their right. 7 Item, it is noysed by common voices,
that the Kings lands in France been aliened and put away from the Crown,
and his Lords and people there destroyed with untrue means of treason, of
which it is desired, enquiries thorough all the Realm to be made how and by
whom, and if such Traitors may be found guilty, them to have execution of
Law without any pardon, in example of other. 8 Item, Collectors of the. xv.
penny in Kent be greatly vexed and hurt in paying great sums of money, in
the Eschequere to sue out a Writ called Quorum nomina for the allowaunce of the
Barons of the Ports, which now is desired, that hereafter in the lieu of the
Collectors the Barons aforesaid may sue it out for their ease at their own
costs. 9 Item, the Sherifes and Undersherifes, let to ferme their offices and
Bayliwikes, taking great suertie therefore, the which causes extortions done by
them and by their Baylifes to the people. 10 Item, simple and poor people that
use not hunting, be greatly oppressed by inditements fained and done by the
said Sherifes, Undersherifes, Baylifs, and other of their assent, to cause
their increase for paying of their said Ferme. 11 Item, they return in names
of Enquests in writing into diverse Courts of the Kings not somoned nor
warned, where through the people daily leese great su^mes of money, welny to
the uttermost of their undoing: and make levy of amercementes called the
Green Wax, more in sums of money than can be found due of record in the
Kings books. 12 Item, the ministers of the court of Dover in Kent vex and
arest diverse people through all the Shire out of Castle ward passing their
bands and liberty used of old time, by diverse subtle and untrue means and
actions falselye fained, taking great see at their lust in great hurt of the
people on all the Shire of Kent. 13 Item, the people of the said Shire of
Kent, may not have their free election in the chosing Knights of the Shire, but
letters been sent from diverse estates to the great Rulers of all the Country,
the which enbraceth their tenaunts and other people by force to choose other
persons than the common will is. 14 Item, where as Knights of the Shire should
chose the kings collectors indifferently without any bribe taking, they have
sent now late to diverse persons, notifying them to be collectors, whereupon
gifts and bribes be taken, and so the collectors office is bought and sold
extortionously at the Knights lust. 15 Item the people be sore vexed in costs
and labor, called to the Sessions of peace in the said Shire, appearing from
the farthest and uttermost part of the West unto the East, the which causes to
some men. v. days journey, where upon they desire the said appearaunce to be
divided into two parts the which one part, to appear in one place, an other
part, in an other place in releuing of the greeuaunce and intolerable labors
and vexations of the said people.
The requests by the Captain of the great assemble in Kent.
INprimis, desires the Captain of the commons, the welfare of our sovereign
Lord the King, and al his true Lords spiritual and temporal, desiring of our
said sovereign Lord, and of all the true Lords of his counsel, he to take
in all his demaines, that he may reign like a King royal, according as he is
borne our true Christian King anointed, and who so will say the contrary, we
all will live and die in the quarrel as his true liege men.

Item desires the said Captain, that he will avoid all the false progeny and
affinity of the Duke of Suffolk, the which been openly known, and they to
be punished after the custom and Law of this Land, and to take about his
noble person the true Lords of his Royal blood of this his Realm, that is to
say, the high and mighty Prince ye duke af York late exiled from our said
Sovereign Lords presence (by the motion and stirring of the traitorous and
false disposed the Duke of Suffolk and his affinity) and the mighty Princes
and Dukes of Excester, Buckingham, and Norfolk, and all the Earls and Barons
of this land: and then shall he be the richest King Christen.

Item, desires the said Captain and commons punishment upon the false
traitors, the which contrived and imagined the death of the high and mightful
excellent Prince the Duke of Gloucester, the which is too much to rehearse, ye
which duke was proclaimed as traitor. Upon the which quarrel, we purpose all
to live and die upon that it is false.

Item the Duke of Excester, our holy father the Cardinal, the noble Prince Duke
of Warwike, and also the Realm of France, the Duchy of Normandy, Gascoyne,
and Gwi^^, Anioy and Main, were delivered and lost, by the means of the said
traitors, and our true Lords, Knights, and Esquiers, and many a good yoman lost
and sold ere they went, ye which is great pity to hear, of the great and
grievous loss to our Sovereign Lord and his Realm.

Item, desires the said Captain and Commons that all the extortions used
daily among the Common people, might be laid down, that is to say, the Green
Wax the which is falsely used, to the perpetual destruction of the kings true
Commons of Kent. Also the kings Bench, the which is too greefefull to the shire
of Kent without provision of our Sovereign Lord and his true Counsel. And
also in taking of Wheat and other graynes, Beef, Mutton, and all other
victual, the which is importable to the said Commons, without the brief
provision of our said Sovereign Lord and his true Counsel, they may no
longer bear it. And also unto the statute of laborers and the great
extortioners the which is to say the false traitors, Slegge Crowmer, Isle, and
Robert Este.

These bylles when the Counsel had well perused, they did not only disalowe
and condemn them and the authors, as proud and presumptuons, but also
persuaded the King rather to suppress those rebels by force, than by fair
promises. Whereupon the King removed from Westminster unto Greenewiche, from
whence he would have sent certain Lords with a power to have destressed the
Kentishmen, but the men said to their Lords they would not fight against them
that labor to amend the common Weal: whereupon the Lords were driven to
leave their purpose. And because the Kentishmen cried out against the Lord Say
the Kings Chamberlayne, he was by the King committed to the Tower of London.
Then went the King again to London, King Henry went against the Kentishmen
with a great power.
and within. ij. days after went against the Kentishmen with. xv. thousand men
well prepared for the war, but the said Kentishmen fled the night before his
coming into the wood country near unto Senocke, whereupon the King returned
again to London, and sent sir Humfrey Stafforde* Knight with William Stafford
his brother, and other Gentlemen, to follow the Kentishme^, who finding them at
Senock, set upon the rebels, and fought with them a long time, but in the end
both the Staffordes were slain with many other King Henry's power overcome.
of their people. When Jack Cade had thus overcome the Staffordes, he
forthwith apparelled himself with the knights apparel, and after he had
refreshed his people, he returned to the Blackeheath, and there pight again
his field, and lay there from the. xxix. day of June, till the first day of
July, in which season came unto him the Archbishop of Caunterburie, and the
Duke of Buckingham, with whom they had a long communication, and found him
right discrete in his aunsweres. Howbeit they could not cause him to submit
himself and lay down his people.

In the mean while, the King and Queen hearing of the increasing of his
rebels, and also the Lords fearing King Henry went to Killingvvorth.
their own servant, least they would take the Captains part, removed from
London to Killingworth, leaving the City without aid, except only the Lord
Scales, which was left to keep the Tower, and with him a manly and warly man
named Mathewe Gowghe. Then the Captain of Kent thus houering at Blackeheath,
to bring himself the more in fame, that he kept good Justice, beheaded there a
petie Captain of his named Paris, for so much as he had offended against such
ordinances as he had established in Captain of Kent and his K^ttishmen entered
the City of London.
his host: and hearing that the King and his Lords were thus departed, drew
him near unto the City, so that upon the first of July, he entered the
Borough of Southwarke, then being Wednesday, and lodged him there at the Heart,
for he might not be suffered to enter the City.

And upon the same day, the Commons of Essex in great Robert Fabian.
number pight them a field upon the plain of Miles end.

And upon the second day of the said month, the Rebels of Essex pight their
field on the Miles end.
Mayor called a common Counsel at the Guild hall, to pur^ey for the
withstanding of these rebels, in which assembly were diverse men of sundry
opinions, so that some thought good that the said rebels should be received
into the City, and some otherwise. Among the which Robert Horn Stockefishe
monger then being an Alderman, spoke sore against them that would have them
enter. For the which, the Commons were so moved against him, that they ceased
not till they had him committed to ward. And the same afternoon about. v. of
the clock, ye Captain with his people entered by the bridge, and cut the
Ropes of the draw bridge a sunder with his sword, when he was passed into the
City. He made in sundry places thereof Proclamations in the kings name, that
no man in pain of death should rob or take any thing without paying
therefore. By reason whereof he wanne the hearts of the Commons, but all was
done to beguile them, after as he came by London stone he struck it with his
sword, and said: now is Mortimer Lord of this City, and then showing his
mind to the Mayor for the ordering of his people, he returned into Southwarke
and there abode as he before had done, his people coming and going at lawful
hours when they would. On the morrow ye third of July, the said Captain
again entered the City, and caused the Lord Say to be fette from the Tower to
the Guild hall, where he was araygned before the Mayor and other the Kings
Justices, and Robert Horn Alderman before named should have been likewise
araygned, but that his wife and other friends for. v. hundred marks gat him
restored to his liberty. The Lord Say desiring he might be tried by his
Peers, was by the rebels forceably taken from the officers, and brought to ye
Standard in Cheap, where they struck off his head, pight it on a pole, and
bare it before them, and his body they caused to be drawn naked at a horse
tail upon the pauement from Cheap into Southwarke to the said Captains Inn.

Also a Squier called Crowmer that was then Sheriff of Kent, that had wedded ye
said Lord Says daughter, by commandment of the Captain was brought out of
the Flete, that was committed thither for certain extortions that he had done
in his office, and led to Mile end without London, and there without any
judgment his head was smit off, and the Lord Says head and his were borne
upon. tj. long poles unto London bridge and there set up, and the Lord Says
body was quartered. The same day the Captain went unto y^ house of Philip
Malpas Draper and Alderma^, and robbed and spo^led his house, taking from
thence great substance, and returned into Southwarke: on the next morrow he
again entered y^ City, and dyned that day in the Parish of Saint Margaret
Patyns at one Cherstis house, and when he had dyned, like an discourteous guest
he robbed him, as the day before he had Malpas. For which two robberies,
although the poor people drew to him and were parteners in the spoil, yet
the honest and wealthy commoners cast in their mynds the sequel of this
matter, and feared least they should be dealt with in like manner. Then the
Mayor and Aldermen with assistaunce of the Worshipful Commoners, in safegarde
of themselves and of the City, took their Counsel how they might drive the
Captain and his adherents from the City, for the performaunce whereof the
Mayor sent unto the Lord Scales, and Matthew Gowghe, then having the Tower in
their government, requiring their aid and assistaunce, which they promised. On
the. v. of July the Captain being in Southwarke, caused a man to be beheaded
there, and that day entered not the City. When night was come, the Mayor and
the Citizens, with Matthew Gowghe kept the passage of the Bridge, and defended
the Kentishmen which made great force to reenter the City. Then the Captain
seeing this bickering, went to Harneys, and assembled his people, and set so
fiercely upon the Citizens, that he drove them back from the stoupes in
Southwarke, or Bridgefoote, unto the drawbridge, in defending whereof many a man
was drowned and slain. Among the which was John Sutton Alderman, Mathewe
Gowghe a Squire of Wales, and Roger Hoysand Citizen. This skirmish continued
all night till nine of the clock on the morrow, so that sometime the Citizens
had the better, and sometimes the other, but ever they kept them upon the
bridge, so that the Citizens passed never much the Bulwark at the Bridge
foot, nor the Kentishmen no farther than the draw Bridge. Thus continuing the
cruel fight to the destruction of much people on both sides, lastly after the
Kentishmen were put to the worst, a truce was agreede for certain hours,
during which truce, the Archbyshoppe of Caunterburie, then Chauncellor of
England, sonte a general Captain, and rebels pardoned.
pardon to the Captain for him self, and an other for his people, by reason
whereof, he and his company withdrewe them little and little, and their Captain
put all his pillage and goods that he had robbed, into a Barge, and sent it to
Rochester by water, and himself went by land and would have entered into the
Castle of Quinborow with a few men that were left about him: but he was there
let of his purpose: wherefore he fled into the wood Country beside Jews in
Sussex. The Captain and his people being thus departed, not long after
Proclamations were made in diverse places of Kent, Sussex, and Southerey, that
who might take the foresaid Captain alive or dead* should have a thousand
marks for his travail.

The Copy of the Writ and Proclamation by the King, for the taking of the said
Cade and his fellowship.
HENricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and dominus Hibernia, vniuersis
and singulis custodibus* etc.

For as much as one John Cade borne in Ireland, which calls himself John
Mortimer, and in some writing calls himself Captain of Kent, the which John
Cade the last year tofore his dwelling in Sussex with a Knight called sir
Thomas Dagre, slew there a woman with child, and for that cause took the
greeth of the Church, and after for that cause for swear the Kings land: The
which John Cade also after this, was sworn to the French part, and dwelled
with them, which has now of late time, (to the intent to enrich him self by
robbyng and dispoyling of the Kings liege men, as it is* now openly known, to
bring himself to great and high estate) falsely and untruly deceived many of
the Kings people, and under color of holy and good intentes, made them to
assemble with him against the Kings Regalitie and his Laws, and naught setting
by the Kings Grace and pardons granted, not only to him but to all the Kings
subjects, the which by his deceyt have assembled with him, the which he with
great reverence received on Monday last passed, and so did all that were
assembled with him: not withstanding all this, he labors now of new to
assemble the Kings people again, and to that intent bears them on hand, that
the Kings letters of pardon granted to him and them, be not available nor of
none effect without authority of Parliament: whereas the contrary is true, as
it is openly known by that, that the King grauntes from time to time his
Charters of Pardon to such as him list, of all manner of crimes and offenses
both general and special.

The King therefore wills and commands, that none of his subjects give
faith nor credence to the said fals^ Informations of the said false ^raylor,
nor accompany with him in any wise, nor comfort nor sustain him nor his with
victual, nor with any other things. But will whosoever of the Kings subjects
may take him, shall take him, and that who so ever takes him and brings him
quick or dead to the King or to his Counsel, shall have a thousand marks for
his labor truly paid him without fail or delay by the provision of the
Kings Counsel. And who so ever takes any of those that from this day forth
accompany with him, shall have. v. mark for his reward, truly to be paid in
manner and form above said.

And over this, commanding all Constables, Ministers, and Officers of the said
Shire, that none of them on pain of death take upon them to execute any
commandment by word or writing sent or* made unto them by the said Cade,
calling himself Mortimer and Captain, be it to rere any people or to any
other intent: but to arest and make to be arested such as take upon them to
bring any such commandment by writing or by word. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis
Test me ipso apud Westminster* x. die Iulij, anno regni. 28. After which
Proclamation Captain of Kent taken and beheaded.
thus published, a Gentleman of Kent named Alexander Eden awayted so his time,
that he took the said Cade in a Garden in Snssex. And there he was slain at
Hothfield* and brought to London in a cart, and there quartered, his head set
on London bridge, and his quarters sent to diverse places in Kent. This done, y^
King sent his Commisioners into Kent, and rode after himself, and caused
inquiry to be made of this riot in Canterbury, where for y^ same. vitj. me^
were judged and executed, and in other towns of Kent, and Sussex was dane y^
like execution.

This year the Commons also in diverse parts of England, and in Sussox,
Salisbury, Wilshire, and other places, did much harm to many persons, among
the which, on the xxix. of June, William Ascoth Bishop of Salisburie, (after he
had said Mass at Edington) was by his own tenauntes drawn from ye Altar, in
his Albe with his Stole about his neck to the top of an hill, and there by
them shamefully murdered, and after spoiled to the naked skin: they renting
Bishop of Salisburie murdered.
his bloody shirt, took every man a piece, and made boast of their
wickedness. The day before, his Chariot was robbed, An. reg. 29.
to the value of. x. thousand marks.

John Middleton: William Dear, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Fray in
London against the Mayor.


Nicholas Wilforde Grocer, the 28. of October.

Soldiers made a fraye against the Mayor of London the same day he took his
charge at Westminster, at night coming from Saint Thomas of Acres, after he
had been at Paul's.

The. vj. of November began a Parliament at Westminster, and the first of
December the Duke of Somerset which was newly come out of Normandy, was put
under arest, 1451
and his goods by the Commons was foulely despoyled and borne away from the
Black Eryers. After which riot, on the next morrow, Proclamation was made
through the City, that no man should spoil or rob, upon pain of death:
and the same day at the Standard in Cheap was a man beheaded for doing
contrary to the Proclamation. And thus began malice to spring between the
Lords of the Land, and specially against the Duke of Somerset and other of
the Queens Counsel, for the leesing of Normandy, whereof the chief City
of Roane was lost or given up by appointment the year proceeding (as
witnesses Gagwyne,) upon condition that the Duke of Somerset Robert Gagwyne.
with his wife and English soldiers, should with such goods as they might
carry, dep^rte freely from the City: For which free passage he should pay
unto the French king lvj. M. Scu^s, which amount to fourteen thousand marks
sterling. And also he was bound to deliver into the French Kings possession,
all Towns and Castles that at that day were in the possession of Englishmen,
within the Duchy of Normandy: for performaunce of which couenauntes, the
Lord Talbot was sent for one of the pledges, and so by one Floquet all the
Towns and Castelles were to the French Kings use received, Harfleete only
excepted, whereof the Captain named Curson. with the assistance of sir Thomas
Auringham, in despite of all the French Kings power laid both by Sea and
land, held the same a full month or more, and then for lack of rescue gave
it up by appointment. An. reg. 30.


Matthew Phillip: Christopher Warton, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Gregory Skinner, the 28. of October.

The sixteenth of February, King Henry accompanied with the Duke of Somerset
and many other Lords, took toward the Marches of Wales, for as much as he
was credibly informed, that the Duke of York assisted with diverse other
Lords and men of name, had in those parts gathered a strong power of people,
and with them was entering the land, and so held on his journey toward him:
but when the Duke had witting of the Kings great power, he returned from the
way which was taken by the Kings host, and hasted toward London*, and when
he had received knowledge from the City, that he might not there be received,
he went over Kingstone Bridge, and so into Kent, and there upon Brent Heath
near unto Dertforde, he pight his field, whereof the king having knowledge,
sped him after, and lastly came unto Black Heath and there pighte his field.
When both the hosts were thus embattelled, mediation of peace was made
between them, for furtheraunce whereof, to the Duke were sent the Bishops of
Winchester and of Ely, with the Earls of Salisburie and Warwick. To whom it
was answered by the Duke, that he nor none of his company intended any hurt to
the Kings person, nor to any of his counsel, being lovers of the Common
wealth* and of him and his land: but his intent and purpose was to remove from
the King a few evil disposed persons, by whose means the common people was
grievously oppressed, and the communaltie greatly impouerished, of whom he
named the Duke of Somerset to be the principal etc. And further to understand
of the Dukes meaning by this his forcible entering of the Realm, (as himself
pretended) may appear by certain letters by him written to the King, and also
the Kings aunsweares, to the same, both which I think good here to set down
as I find them recorded.

PLease it your highness to conceive, that since my departing Richard Duke of
York his letter to King He^rie.
out of this your Realm, by your commandment, and being in your service in
your land of Ireland, I have bin informed that diverse language has been said
of me to your most excellent estate, which should sound to my dishonor
and reproach, and charge of my person: how be it that, I aye have been, and
ever will be, your true liegeman and servant: and if there be any man that
will or dare say the contrary, or charge me otherwise, I beseech your
rightwisenesse to call him before your high presence, and I will declare me for
my discharge as a true Knighte ought to do, and if I do not, as I doubt not
but I shall, I beseech you to punish me as the poorest man of your land: And
if he be found untrue in his suggestion and information, I beeseech you of
your highness that he be punished after his desert, in example of all other.
Please it your excellence to know, that as well before my departing out of
this your Realm, for to go into your Land of Irelande, in your full noble
service, as since, certain persons have line in awayte for to hearken upon me,
as Sir John Talbot Knighte at the Castle of Holte: Sir Thomas Stanley Knighte
in Cheshire: Pulforde at Chester: Elton at Worcester: Brook at Gloucester: and
Richard grome of your Chamber at Beaumarres: which had in charge (as I am
informed,) for to take me and put me into your Castle of Conway, and to
strike of the head off Sir William Oldehall Knighte, and to have put in prison
Sir William Deuereux Knight, and Sir Edmond Malso Knight, withouten enlarging,
until the time that your highness had appointed their deliverance. Item, at
such time as I was purposed for to have arrived at your haven of Beaumarres,
for to have come to your noble presence to declare me your true man and
subject, as my duty is, my landing was stopped and forbarred by Henry
Norres, Thomas Norres, William Bulkeley, William Grust, and Bartholmew Boulde,
your officers in Northwales, that I should not land there, nor have victual
nor refreshing for me and my fellowshippe, as I have written to your
excellence here before, so far for the that Henry Norres deputye to the
Chamberlayne of Northwales, said unto me that he had in commandment that
I should in no wise have landing, refreshing, nor lodging, for men nor for
horse, nor other thing that might turn to my worship or ease, puttyng the
blame upon William Say Usher of your Chamber, saying and affyrmyng that I am
against your intent, and as a Traytoure, as I am informed: and moreover,
certain letters were made and delivered unto Chester, Shrewesburie, and to
other places for to let mine entrye into the same. Item above all wrongs and
injuries aboue-sayde done unto me of malice, without any cause, I being in your
land of Irelande, in your honorable service, certain commissions were made
and dyrecte unto diverse persons, which for the execution of the same, satte
in certain places, and the Juries empaneled and charged, to the which
injuries, certain persons labored instauntlye to have me endited of treason,
to the intent for to have undone me and mine issue, and corrupted my blood,
as it is openly publyshed: beseeching your Majesty Royal, of your
righteousness, to do examyne these matters, and therevppon to do such
Justice in his behalf as the cause requires, for mine intent is fully to
pursue to your highness for the conclusion of these matters.

COosin we have seen the byll that ye took us late, and Answer of King
Henric to the Duke of York.
also understand y^ good humble obedience that ye in your self show unto us,
as well in word as in deed, wherefore our intent is, the more hastily to ease
you of such things as were in your said Bil. How be it that at our more
leisure we might answer you to your said Byll, yet we let you wit, that for
the causes aforesaid, we will declare you now our intent in these matters:
since it is that a long time among the people has been upon you many strange
language, and in especial anon after your disordinate and unlawful slaying of
the Bishop of Chester, diverse and many of the untrue shipmen and other*
said in their manner, words against our estate, making manace to our own person
by yoursayings, that ye should be fetched with many thousands, and ye
should take upon you that, which ye neither ought, nor as we doubt not, ye
will not attempt, so far forth that it was said to our person by diuerse^
and especially we remember of one Wasnes which had like words to us. And
also there was diverse of such false people, that went on and had like language
in diverse of our towns of our land, which by our subjects were taken and
duly executed: wherefore we sent to diverse of our Courts and places, to
hearken and to take heed if any such manner coming were, and if there had
bin, for to resist it: but coming into our land our true subject as ye did,
our intent was not that ye, nor less of estate of our subjects, nor none of
your servants should not have bin let nor* warned, but in goodly wise
received: how be it that peradventure your sudden coming, without certain
warnyng, caused our servants to do as they did, considering the causes above
said. And as to the enditement that ye spoke of, we think verily, and hold
for certain warning, caused our servant to do as they did, considering the
causes above said. And as to the enditemente that ye spoke of, we think
verylye and hold for certain, that there was none such. And if ye may
truly prove that any person was thereaboutes, the matter shall be demeaned as
the case shall require, so that he shall know it is to our great displeasure.
Upon this for the easing of your heart in all such matters, we declare,
repute, and adn^tte you as our true and faithful subject, and as your
faithful Coosin.

PLease it your highness tenderly to consider, that great Richard, Duke of
York to K. Henry again.
murmur and grudging, is universally in this your realm, in that Justice is not
duly ininistred to such as trespass and offend against your laws, and in
especial of them that be endited of treason, and other being openly noised of
y^ same, whereby great inconveniences have fallen, and great is like to fall
hereafter in your said Realm, which God defend, but if by your highness
provision couenable be made for due reformation and punishment in this behalf.
Wherefore I your humble subject and true leigeman, Richard Duke of York,
willing as effectuallye as I can, and desiring the surety and prosperitye of
your most royal person, and the welfare of this your noble Realm, counsel
and advertise your excellency for the conversation of good tranquillity and
peaceable rule among all other subjects, for to ordain and provide, that true
justice be had, against all such that so be endited, or openly named, wherein I
offer my self, and will put my endeavor for to execute your commandment in
the premises, for the punishing of such offenders, and redress of the said
misrules, to my might and power. And for the hasty execution hereof, like it
your highness to address these letters of privy seal and writs to your
officers and ministers, to do, take, and arrest, all such persons so noysed
and endited, of what estate, degree, or condition, soever they be, and them to
commit to the Tower of London and to other of your prisons, there to abide
without Bail or main prise, until the time they be utterly tried, and
determined termined after the course of your laws.

COosin as touching your Bill last put up to us, we understand Aunsvvere of K.
Henry to the Duke of York
well that ye of good heart, counsel and aduertice us to y^ setting up of
Justice, and to the speedy punishing of some persons endited or noysed,
offering your seruise to be ready at commandment in the same, sith it is
that for many causes moving us to have determined in our soul to stablishe a
sad, and a substancial counsel, giving them more ample authority and power
than ever we did before this, in the which we have appointed you to be one, but
sith it is not accustomed sure, nor expedient, to take a conclusion and
conduct by advise or counsel of one Person by himself for the conservation,
it is observed that the greatest and the best, the rich and the poor, in
liberty, Virtue, and effect, of your voices be equal, we have therefore
determined within our self to send for our Chancellor of England, and for
other Lords of our Counsel, yea and al other, together within short time
ripelye to common these and other our great matters, in the which
communication, such conclusion by the grace of God shall be taken, as shall
sound to his pleasure, the Weal of us and our land, as well in these matters
as in any other.

At length it was agreed by the King, that the Duke of Somerset should be
committed to ward, there to abide and answer such Articles as the Duke of
York would lay against him, upon which promises so made by the King to the
Duke, who saw that the people of Kent, and of other places, came not to him as
they had promised, and that they were not strong enough, for the Kings part was
much more than his, he brake up his field on the first of March, and yielded
himself to the King at Dertforde, where contrary to promise before made, he
found the Duke of Somerset chief about the King. Then was the Duke of York
sent before to London and holden, partly as prisoner, and streighter should
have been kept, but it was noysed that sir Edward Earl of March son to the
said Duke of York was coming toward London with a strong power of Welchmen,
which feared so the Queen and Counsel, that the Duke was set at full
liberty. And on the tenth of March the said Richard Duke of York made his
submission, and took his oath to be true, faithful, and obedient subject to
King Henry the sixth, King of England, in Saint Paul's Church at London, there
being present the King and most of his nobilitye, that is to say, the Dukes of
Buckingham, Northampton, and Somerset: the Earls of Warwick, Arundale,
Salisburie, Shropshire, Devonshire, Wiltshire, Northumberlande, Stafford and
Dorset: viconnts of Beaumount and Wells, Barons Fitz Warren, Sainmounde,
Cobham, Douglas, and others: Bishops, the Cardinal, Archbyshoppe of York,
and Canterbury, Winchester, Ely, and London, in these words following.

I Richard Duke of York, confess and beknowe that I am and ought to be
humble subject and liegeman to you my sovereign Lord King Henry the sixth,
and owe therefore to bear you Faith and truth, as to my sovereign liege
Lord, and shall do all days unto my lives end, and shall not at any time
will or assente that any thing attempted or done against your most noble
person, but where so ever I shall have knowledge of any such thing imagined
or purposed, I shall with all speed and diligence possible to me, make that
your hyghenesse shall have knowledge thereof. And over that, do all that
shall be possible to me, to the withstanding and let thereof, to the
vttermoste of my life: I shall not any thing take upon me against your
royal estate or obeysaunce that is due thereto, nor suffer any other man to
do, as far forth as it shall be in my power to let it: And also shall come
at your commandment whenever I shall be called by the same, in humble and
obeysaunte wise, but if it be let by any sickness of impotence of my
person, or by such other cause as shall be thought by you my sovereign LORD
reasonable. I shall never hereafter take upon me to gather any row^e, nor to
make any assembly of your people, without your commandment or license, or in
my lawful defense, in interpretation or declaration of the which my lawful
defense, I shall report me at all times to your highness, and if the case
require, to my peers, nor any thing attempt against any of your subjects, of
what estate* degree, or condition, ye they be. But when soever I find my self
wronged and agreeued, I shall sue humblye for remedy to your highness, and
proceed after the course of your laws, and in none otherwise, saving in mine
own lawful defense in manner above said, and otherwise have to your
highness as an humble and true subject ought to have him to his sovereign
Lord. All these things above said I promise you truly to observe and keep,
by the holy Evangelists contained in the book that I lay my hand here upon,
and by the holy Cross I here touch, and by the blessed Sacrament of our
Lords body, that I shall now with his mercy receive. And over I agree me
and will* that if I any time hereafter* as by the grace of our Lord God I never
shall, any thing attempt by way of feate or otherwise against your royal
Majesty and obeysaunce that I owe thereto, or any thing take upon me
otherwise than is above expressed, I from that time forth be unabled, held and
taken, as an untrue and openly foresworne man, and unable to all manner of
worship, estate, and degree, be it such as I now occupye, or any other that
might in any wise grow unto me hereafter. And this I have here promised and
sworn, proceeds of mine own desire and free volunte, and by no constraynyng
or coaction. In witness of all the which things above written, I Richard Duke
of York above writ subscribe, with mine own hand and seal.

This oath he also took at Westminster, and at Couentrey, at sundry times. Anno.
reg. 31 Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Lee: Richard Alley, the 28. of September.

Godfrey Filding Mercer, the 28. of October.

On the Twelfth day after Christmas, the King holding a Robert Fabian. 1453
solemn feast at Westminster, made his two brethren on the mothers side
Knights: he also made Edmunde the elder, Earl of Richemonde, and Jasper the
younger, Earl of Penbrooke.

In the month of March (as witnesses Gagwine,) was the Town of Harflewe
won by the Frenchmen. And soon after the City of Bayons was given up by
appointment, that the souldioures should leave their armoure behind them.

The one and twentieth of July John Talbot Earl of Shrewsburie with his son
Lord Lisle, and Sir Edward Hull Knight, was slain besides Bordeaux: and the
Lord Molins was taken prisoner, who was after delivered for a great ransom.

On Bartholmewe day, at the Wrestling near unto Clearken well, a Gentleman
belonging to the Prior of Saint John's, made a rumor or tumulte, for the
which, by the commandment of the Mayor, he was arrested by Richard Alley,
one of the Sherifes, and delivered to Paris a Sergeant: but such resistance
was made by parts taking, that the Sheriff was feign to crave help of the
Mayor, who with his brethren the Aldermen arose from the game, and strengthened
the Sherifes, and for the rescue of the said Gentleman, one named Calleis, came
out of Saint John's with a great strength of Archers, to resist the Mayor, in
the which fray, a Yeoman of Saint John's was ^laine, and many other sore hurt:
the Mayor himself escaped hardly, for his Cap was smitten from his head with
an arrowe: but the Mayor with his Citizens put the other to flight, sent the
principal of them to Newgate, and then took his place again til ye games were
ended, by which time, the Citizens had gathered them selves in great number,
and fetched him home, never Mayor so strongly, nor so honorably. Anno reg. 32*


This year the King lay longsicke at Claringdon, and was in great danger to
have ended his life.

The thirteenth day of October, the Queen at Westminster was delivered of her
first son, who was named Edward.

John Waldren: Thomas Cock, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1454


John Norman Draper, the 28. of October.

Before this time the Majors, Aldermen, and Commoners of the City of London,
were wont all to ride to Westminster, when the Mayor should take his charge,
but this Mayor was rowed thither by water: for the which the watermen made of
him a song, Row the boat Norman, etc.

The ninth of March in the night, was a great fire next without Ludgate, in
a Cordwayners house, which Cordwayner with his wife, three young men and a
maid were all burnte, the prisoners of Ludgate were removed to Newgate,
because they were almost smouldered. An reg. 35. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Field: William Tailor, the 28. of September.

Stephen Foster Fishmonger, the. 28. of October.

A great Fray at London by the Sanctuary men of Saint Martins le graunde, who
issued forth and hurt diverse Citizens, but it was appeased by the Mayor and
his brethren.

The one and twentieth of May king Henry taking his journey 1455
from Westminster toward Saint Albons, to mete with the Duke of York, the
Earls of Warwick and Salisburie lodged that night at Wateforde or Wadeforde,
on this side Saint Albons, and on the morning early he came to Saint Albons,
with him assembled on his party the Dukes of Somerset, and of Buckingham, the.
Earls of Penbroke, Northumberlande, Devonshire, Stafforde, Dorset, and
Wiltshire, the Lords, Clifforde, Sudley, Barons, and Roos, with diverse
Knights, Esquiers, Gentlemen, and Yeomen, to the number of. 2000. and more. And
at the same time were there assembled Richard Duke of York, Richard Earl of
Warwick, Richard Earl of Salisburie, with diverse Knights and Esquiers in
the field called Keyfielde, beside Saint Albons. The King hearing of the dukes
coming with the Lords aforesaid, pight his banner in a place called Goselowe,
which place was sometimes called Sandforth in Saint Peter's street, and
commanded in strong manner to keep the wards and Barriers of the same Town.
The Duke of York knowing the strength made against him abiding in the field
before said, from seven of the clock in the morning until it was almost ten
of the Clock without any stroke smitten on either part, by the advice of his
Counsel, sent unto the King under these words following.

Words in writing by the Duke of York to the King.
PLease it unto your excellent grace, Richard Duke of York, to take him as
your true liege manne and humble subject, and to consider and tender at the
reverence of God, and in the way of Charity, the true intent of my coming,
and to be good and gracious Sovereign unto me, and all other your true liege
men, which, that with all their power and might will be ready to live and
dye with you in your right, and to do al things as shall like your Majesty
royal to command us, if it be to the worship of the Crown of England, and the
welfare of this your noble Realm. Moreover, gracious Lord, please it unto
your Majesty Royal, of your great goodness and rightewisenesse, to
incline your will to hear and feel the rightwise part of us your true
Subjects and Liege men. First, praying and beseeching to our Sovereign,
Christ Jesus, of his high aod mighty power, to give the virtue of Prudence,
and that through the prayer of the glorious Martyr Saint Albon give you
very knowledge of our trothes, and to know the intent of our assembling at
this time: For God that is in Heaven knows, our intent is rightful and
true. And therefore we pray unto that mighty LORD in these words: Domine
sis clypeus defensionis nostrae: wherefore gracious Lord, please it your
Majesty royal to deliver such as we will accuse, and they to have like as they
have deserved. And this done, you to be honorably worshipped as most rightful
King and our true governor. And if we should now at this time be promised,
as before this time is not unknown have bin promises broken which have bin full
faithfully promised, and thereupon great oaths sworn, we will not now cease
for no such promises, nor oath, till we have them which have deserved death, or
else we to dye therefore.

The answer by the King to the Duke of York.
I King Henry charge and command, that no manner person of what degree,
estate, or condition soever he be, abide not, but that they avoid the field,
and not be so hardy to make resistaunce against me in my own realm. For I
shall know what traitor dare be so bold to arise any people in mine own
land, where through I am in great disease and heaviness: by that Faith I owe
unto Saint Edward, and unto the Crown of England, I shall destroy them every
mothers son, and eke they to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, that may be taken
afterward of them, in example to make all such traitors to beware, for to
make any rising of people within mine own land, and so traitorously to abide
their king and governor. And for a conclusion, rather than they shall have any
Lord that here is with me at this time, I shall this day for their sake in
this quarrel my self live and dye.

The words of the Duke of York to all Gentlemen and other assembled with him.
SIrs, the king our soueraign Lord will not be reformed at our beseeching ne
prayer, nor will not in no wise understand the intent wherefore we be here
assembled and gathered at this time, but only is in full purpose to destroy us
al and there upon a great oath has made, that there is none other way but
that he with all his power will pursue us, and if we be taken to give us a
shameful death, leesing our liuelodeand goods, and also our heirs shamed for
ever. Therefore sirs, now since it will none otherwise be, but yt we shall
utterly die, better it is to us to die in the field, than cowardly to be put to
an utter rebuke and shameful death, for the right of England stands in us.
Considering also in what peril it stands at this time, and for to redress
the mischief thereof, let every man help to his power this day, and in that
quarrel to quite us like men, to the crown of England, praying and beseeching
unto that Lord the which is eternal, that reigns in the glorious kingdom
celestial, to keep and save us this day in our right, and through the gifts
of his holy grace we may be made strong to withstand the great abominable and
horrible malice of them, that purpose to destroy us and the realm of England,
and put us to a shameful death: pray we therefore unto that Lord to be our
comfort and our defendour, saying these words, Domine sis clipeus defensionis
nostri.

And when these words were said, the Duke of York, and the Earls of
Warwick and Salisburie, with their host, between eleauen and twelve at noone
break in in three several places of the said street. The King the^ being in
the place of Edmond Westby Hundreder of the said Town of Saint Albons,
hearing of the said Dukes coming, commanded his host to slaye all manner
Lords, Knights, Squiers, Gentlemen and yeomen, that might be taken on the
party of the foresaid Duke of York. This done, the Lord Clifforde kept so
strongly the barriours of the same Town, that the forsayde Duke of York might
in no wise with all the power that he had enter, nor break into the said
Town. The Earl of Warwick knowing thereof, took and gathered his men
together with him, and brake in by the Garden side into the said Town,
between the sign of the keye, and the Exchequere in Holywel street: and
anon as they were within the fayde Town they blew vppethe Trumpet and cried
with an high voice a Warwick, a Warwick, that maruayle it was to hear. And
till that time the Duke of York might never have entry into the Town, and then
with strong hand they brake up the Barriers, and fought a fierce* and cruel
battle, in the which were slain, Lords of name, Edmonde Duke of Somerset,
the Earl of Northumberlande, the Lord Clifforde, sir Barton Entewsell
Knighte, William Souche, John Botreaux, Ralphe Balithorpe and his son,
William Coruin, William Cotton receyuer of the Duchy of Lancaster, Gilbert
Faldinger, Reignalde Griffin, John Dawes, Ellis Wood, John Cyt^e, Robert
Woodwarde, Gilbert Scarlocke, and Ralph Willowby Esquires, a Gentleman of the
Court Roger Mercraft the Queens messanger, Hawbin the Kings Porter, Malener
Padington and William Butler Yeomen, and five and twenty more, whose names were
not known, and of them that were slain, been buried at Saint Albons eighte
and forty persons. And at that battle were wounded Lords of name, the King
was shot into the neck with an arrowe. The Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord
Sudley, in the visages with arrows, the Earl of Stafforde in the right hand
with an arrowe, the Earl of Dorset was so sore hurt that he might not go,
but was feign to be carried home in a carte, and Sir John Wenloke Knighte in
likewise hurt and carried from thence in a Chair, and diverse other Knights
and Esquiers sore hurt, and the substance of the Kings host dispoyled of
their harneis, at their own request, made deliuerye to the Dukes host for
sauation of their lives and fled. The Earl of Wiltshire, and Thorpe, with many
other fled, and cast away their harneis in ditches and woods. This done, the
Duke of York, the Earls of Warwick and Salisburie, came unto the King where
he was, and besoughte him on their knees, of grace and forgiveness of that
they had done in his presence, and besoughte him of his highness to take the^
to grace, and as his true liege men. The king desired them to cease their
people, that there should be no more hurt done, and to obey his
commandment, did cause to be proclaimed in the Kings name, that all manner of
people should cease off their malice, and not to smite one stroke more, and so
ceased the battle. And upon the day next after, the King and the Duke of
York, the Earls of Warwick and Salisburie, came to London and were lodged in
the Bishops Pallaice of London, where they kept their Whitsontide with great
joy and solemnitye, concluding there to hold a Parliament, the same to begin
on the ninth of July next following.

This year in the month of June appeared a comet or star, called Stella
Cometa, betwixt the North and the East, extending his beams toward the South.

In the Parliament begun the ninth of July as is before said, Richard Duke of
York was made protector of the realm. The Earl of Salisburie was made Lord
Chancellor of England, and Richard Earl of Warwick was made Captain of
Caleis.

John Young: Thomas Owlgraue, the. 28. of September. Anno. reg. 34* Sherifes.
Mayor.


William Marrow Grocer, the 28. of October.

This year by means of the Queen and the Lords of her Counsel, the Duke of
York was discharged of the Protectourship, and the Earl of Salisburie of the
Chauncellourship, and being called by privy seal to Couentrie, they were like
to have been intrapped there, and hardlye escaped.

In the month of May, an Italians servant walkyng 1456 Robert Fabian.
through Cheap of London, with a dagger hangyng at his gyrdle, a Merchauntes
servant that before time had bin in Italy and there blamed for wearing of the
like weapon, challenged the stranger, how he durst be so bold to bear
weapon, consydering he was out of his native Country, knowing that in his
Country no stranger was suffered to wear y^ like. To the which question such
answer was made by the stranger, that the Merter took from him his dagger and
brake it upon his head, whereupon the stranger complained to the Mayor, who on
the morrow sent for the young man to ye Guilde Hall: wherefore after his answer
made unto the complaynt, by agreemente of a full Court of Alderme^, he was
sent to ward, and after the Court was finished, the Mayor and Sherifes walking
homewarde thoroughe Cheap, were there met by such a number of Mercers
servants and other, that they might not pass, for ought they could speak
or do, till they had delivered the yonug manne that before was by them sent
to prison. And the same day in the afternoon suddenly was assembled a
multitude of lewd and pore people of the City, which without head or guide
ran unto certain Italians houses, and especially to the Florentines,
Lukesses and Venetians, and there took and spoiled what they found, and did
great hurt in sundry places, but most in four houses standing in Breadstreete
ward, whereof three stood in Saint Bartholmewes Parish the little, and one
in the Parish of Saint Beni^s Finke. The Mayor, Aldermen and worshipful
Commoners of the City, with all their diligence resisted them what they
could, and sent diverse of them to Newegate: and fynallye, not without
shedding of blood and mayming of diverse Citizens, the rumor was appeased.
The young manne beginner of all this business, took Sanctuary at Westminster,
and not long after the Duke of Buckingham with other noble men were sent
from the King into the City, who there charged the Mayor by Virtue of a
Commission, that inquiry should he made of this riot, and so called an Oyer
determyner at the Guilde Hall, where satte for Judges the Mayor, as the Kings
Lieuetenaunte, the Duke of Buckingham on his right hand, the chief Justice
on the left hand, and many other men of name, where while they were
enpanelyng their inquestes, the other Commons of the City many of them
secretly put them in armor, and meant to have roong the common bell, so to
have raised the whole force of the City, and so to have delivered such persons
as before for the robbery were committed toward. But this matter was
discretely handled by the counsel and labor of some discrete Commoners, which
appeased their neighbors in such wise, that all this fury was quenched: but
when word was brought to the Duke of Buckingham, that the commonaltie were in
harness, he with the other Lords took leave of the Mayor and departed, and
so ceased the inquiry for that day. Upon the morrow the Mayor commanded the
common counsel with the Wardens of fellowships to appear at the Guild Hall,
where by the Recorder in the Kings name and the Majors, was commanded every
(...)den, that in the afternoon either of them should assemble his whole
fellowship at their common Halles, and there to give straight commandment,
that every man see the kings peace kept within the City. After which time the
Citizens were brought to such quietness, that after that day, the inquiry was
duly perused, and. iij. persons for the said riot put in execution and hanged
at Tyborne, whereof ij* were Sanctuary men of Saint Martins le graunde, the
other Anno reg. 35
a shipman, for robbing of Anthony Mowricine and other Lumbardes.

John Steward: Raph Verney, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Canings Grocer, the 28. of October.

In the month of November, in the I Will of Portland not far from the town of
Weymouthe was seen a Cock coming out of the Sea, having a great crest upon
his head, and a great red beard, and legs of half a yard long: he stood on
the water and crewe. iij. times, and every time turned 1457
him about, and beckened with his head, toward the North, the South, and the
West, and was of color like a Fesaunt, Robert Fabian.
and when he had crowed. iij. times he vanished away.

And shortly after were taken at Erithe within. xij. miles of London, iiij.
great and wonderful Fishes, whereof one was called Mors Marina, the second a
Sword Fish, the other two were Whales.

The. xxvitj. day of August Peter Brice Steward of Normandy; John Mayor.
with a flete of Frenchmen landed at Sandwiche, and with fire and sword wasted
the Town to ashes, and slew the inhabitauntes almost to the last man. Also
Fowey in Devonshire was spoiled by Pirates in the month of August.

In this year was a great fray in the North Country Robert Fabian.
between the Lord Egremond and the Earl of Salisburies sons, whereby many
were maimed and slain, but in the end the Lord Egremonde was taken, who was
by the Kings Counsel found in great default, and therefore condemned in great
sums of money, to be paid to the Earl of Salisburie, and in the mean time
committed to Newgate. Not long after this sir Thomas Percie Lord Egremount, and
sir. Richard Percie his brother being prisoners in Newgate condemned in a great
sum to the Earl of Salisburie as is aforesaid, brake out of prison by night,
and went to the King, the other prisoners took the leads of the gate and
Regester of Mayor.
defended it a long while against the Shriues and all their officers, in so
much that they were forced to call more aid Anno reg. 36 Sherifes. Mayor.
of the Citizens, whereby they lastly subdued them.

William Edwards: Thomas Reyner, the 28. of September.

Godfrey Boleyne Mercer, the 28. of October.

Master Reginald Pecocke Bishop of Chichester, a secular Doctor of Divinity,
that had labored many years to translate the holy Scripture into English, was
accused to have passed the bonds of Divinity and of Christian belief in
certain Articles, of the which he was convict before the Archbyshoppe of
Counterburie, and other Bishops and Clerks, and after utterly abiured,
revoked, and renounced those Articles openly at Paul's Cross in his mother
tongue on the fourth day of December, as follows. In the name of the
Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, I Reynold Pecocke Bishop of
Chichester unworthy, of mine own power and will without any manner coertion
or dread, confess and knowledge that I here before this time presuming of mine
natural wit, and preferring my judgment and natural reason before the new
and the old Testament, and the authority and determination of our mother holy
Church, have held, written and taught otherwise than the holy Roman and
Uniuersall Church teaches, preaches, or observes. And one is against the
true Catholic and Apostles faith, I have written, taught, and published many
and diverse perilous doctrines, books, works and writings, containing Heresies
and errors, contrary to the faith Catholic, and determination of holy
Church: and especially these Heresies and errors following, that is to say.

In primis quod non est de necessitate fidei credere quod dominus noster Jesus
Christus post mortem descendit ad inferos.

Item, quod non est de necessitate salutis credere in sanctoru^ communionem.

Item, quod Ecclesia vniuersalis potest errare in hijs quae sunt fidei.

Item, quod non est de necessitate salutis credere and tenere illud quod
consilium generale and vniuersalis Ecclesia statuit, approbat, seu determinat,
in fauorem fidei, and ad salute^ animarum, est ab vniuersis Christi fidelibus
approbandum and tenendum.

Wherefore I miserable sinner which here before long time have walked in
darkness, and now by the mercy and infinite goodness of God reduced into y^
right way, and light of truth, and considering my self grievously have sinned
and wickedly have informed and enfected the people of God, return and come
again to the unity of our mother holy Church, and all heresies and errors
written and contained in my said books, works and writings, here solemnly and
openly revoke and renounce, which heresies and errors and all other spices of
heresies I have before this time before ye most Reverend father in God, and my
good Lord of Caunterbury in diverse and lawful form iudicially abiured,
submitting my self, being then and also now at this time very contrite and
penitent sinner, to the correction of the Church and of my said Lord of
Caunterburie.

And over this, exhorting and requiring in the name and virtue of almighty
God, in the salvation of your Souls and mind, that no man hereafter give
faith and credence to my said pernicious doctrines, heresies and errors,
neither my said Books keep, hold, or read in any wise, but that they all
such Books, works, and writings suspect of heresies, deliver in all goodly
have unto my said Lord of Caunterburie, or to his Commissioners and Deputies,
in eschewing of many inconveniences and great perils of souls, the which else
might be cause of the contrary. And over this declaration of my conversation
and repentance, I here openly assent, that my said Books, works and
writings, for declaration and cause above rehearsed, be deputed unto the fire,
and openly brent in ensample and terror of all other, etc. After this, he was
deprived of his Bishopric, having a certain pencion assigned unto him for to
live on in an Abbey, and soon after he dyed. His Books were entitled:

1. Of Christian Religion, and a Book perteyning thereunto. 2. Of Matrimony.
3. Just oppressing of holy Scripture, divided into three parts. 4. The Donet
of Christian Religion. 5. The follower of the Donet. 6. The Book of Faith. 7.
The Book filling the. 4. Tables. 8. The Book of Worshipping. 9. The Prouoker
of Christian men. 10. The Book of Council.
In the month of Januarie dyed the Earl of Devonshire, in the Abbey of
Abindon, poisoned (as men said) being there at that time with Queen Margaret,
to appease the malice between the young Lords, whose fathers were slain at
Saint Albons, and they that held with the Duke of York. A meeting was
appointed by the King to be at London, in obeying whose commandment, the Duke
of York came unto London on the. xxvj. day of Januarie, and was lodged at
Baynards Castle, and before him, to wit the. xv. of Januarie came the Earl of
Salisburie, and was lodged at his place called the Erber: shortly after came
the Dukes of Somerset and Excester, who were lodged without Temple Bar,
likewise the Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Egremond: and the young Lord
Clyfford, were lodged in ye Suburbs. And on the. xiiij. day of February came
the Earl of Warwike from Calleis with a great band of men all arrayed in red
Jaquets with white ragged staves upon them, who was lodged at the Gray Friars.
And the. xvij. day of March the King and Queen with a great retinue came to
London, and were lodged in the Bishop of Londons Palace. And ye shall
understand, that with these Lords came great companies of men, some had. 600.
some. 500. and the least had. 400. Wherefore the Mayor had daily in harness.
5000. Citizens and rode daily about the City and Suburbs of the same, to see
the Kings peace were kept, and nightly. 2000. men in harness, to give
attendance upon. iij. Aldermen, which kept the night watch till. vij. of the
clock in the morning, that the day watches were assembled, by reason whereof,
good order and rule was kept, and no man so hardy once to attempt the breaking
of the Kings peace. During this watch, a great Counsel was holden by the
Lords, and a faygned agreement was made, between the King, the Queen, and the
Duke of York with 1458
his retinue: for joy whereof the. xxv. day of March a general Procession was
made in Saint Paul's Church at London, where the King in Royal habit with his
Diadem on his head kept the state, before whom went hand in hand y^ duke of
Somerset, the Earl of Salisburie, the Duke of Excester, the Earl of Warwike,
and so one of the one faction, and an other of that other sort. And behind the
King, the Duke of York led the Queen with great familiarity to all men's
sightes.

The. xiij. of April there was a great fraye in Fletestreete, The Queens
attorney slain.
between men of Court and the inhabitants of the same street, in which fray
the Queens Attorney was slain. For this fact the King committed the
principal governors of Furniuals, Clifforde and Barnardes Inn to prison in
the Castle of Hertforde, and William Taylour, Alderman of that ward, with many
other, were sent to Windsore Castle the vij. of May.

On Thursday in Whitson week, the Duke of Somerset Iusting in the Tower of
London.
with Anthony Rivers and other. iiij. kept Justes before the Queen in the
Tower of London against three Esquiers of the Queens. And in like manner at
Greenewiche the Sunday following.

On the Trinity Sunday or Monday following, certain The Earl of VVarvvike
took Spanish Ships.
ships appertayning to the Earl of Warwike, met with a fleet of Spanyardes,
and after long and cruel fight took vj. of their Ships laden with Iron and
other Marchandies, drowned and chased to the number of. xxvj. not without
shedding of blood on both parts, for of the Englishmen were slain an hundred,
and many more wounded Anno reg. 37 Sherifes. Mayor.
and sore hurt.

Ralph Ioseline: Richard Medtham, the 28. of September.

Thomas Scot Draper, the 28. of October.

The King and Queen being at Westminster the. ix. day of November fell a great
debate between Richard Earl of Warwike and them of the Kings house, in so
much that they would have slain the Earl: and uneath he escaped to his Barge
and went after to Calleis, for he was not long before made Captain thereof by
authority of the Parliament. Soon after, the young Duke of Somerset by
stirring of them that hated the Earl of Warwike, was made Captain of Calleis,
and a Privy Seal direct to the Earl for to discharge him of the
Captayneshyp: but the Earl for as much as he was made by Parliament, he
would not obey the Privy Seal, but continued forth in the said office.

The Noble Science of Printing was about this time 1459 Printing first invented.
found in Germany at Magunce by one John Cuthembergus a Knight: One Conradus
an Almaine brought it into Rome: William Caxton of London Mercer brought it
into England about the year a. 1471. And first practiced the same in the
Abbay of Saint Peter at Westminster, after which time it was likewise practiced
in the Abbayes of Saint Augustine at Caunterburie, Saint Albons, and other
Monasteries of England.

In a little Town in Bedfordshire there fell a bloody It reigned blood.
rain, whereof the red drops appeared in sheets the which a woman had hanged
out for to dry.

In this time the Realm of England was out of good order, as it had been of
long time: for the King being simple and pitiful, was led by covetous
Counsel. The King grew in debte daily, but payment was not made. All the
possessions and Lordshippes that pertayned to the Crown, the King had given
some to Lords and some to others, such as would beg them, so that himself
had almost nothing left to live on, but such impositions as were put to the
common people, as Taxes, Tallages, Quinzimes, all which was spent in vain, for
he held no household, nor maintained no wars, for which misgouernaunce the
hearts of the people were turned from them that had the Land in governance.
The Queen with such as were of her affinity, ruled the Realm as her lyked,
gathering riches innumerable. The Officers of the Realm, especially the Earl
of Wilshire Treasurer of England, for to enriche himself, pilled the poor
people, and disherited rightful heirs, and did many wrongs. The Queen was
defamed and sclaundered that the young Prince was not her son but a Bastard
gotten in adultery: wherefore she dreading that he should not succeed his
father in the Crown of England, allied unto her all the Knights and Esquiers
of Chestershire, for to have their favor: she held open household among them,
and made her son the Prince to give a liuerie of Swannes to all the Gentilmen
of the Country, and to many other through the land, trusting through their
strength to make her son King, making privy means to some of the Lords of
England for to stir the King that he should resign the Crown to her son,
but she could not bring their purpose about.

The. xxj. day of September Richard Earl of Salisburie having An. reg. 38.
gathered a well appointed army for dread of his enemies, especially of the
Queen, took his way toward Ludlowe, where at that time the Duke of York
lay, to the intent that they both together would have rydden to the King to
Colshull in Staffordshire, to have excused them of certain articles laid
against them by malice of their enemies as they said. Whereupon those that were
about the King, and also the Queen, who lay at Eglishall, moved him to
assemble a great power, whereof James Twichet Lord Awdley was made chief, and
had the leading of them into the field called Bloreheath near unto
Mucklestone, by the which the said Bloreheath field.
Duke and the Earl must needs pass, and there both hosts met and fought a
mortal battle, wherein the Lord Audley was slain with Hugh Venables of
Kinderton, Thomas Dutton of Dutton, Richard Mollynes, William Trowtbek, John
Legh del Bothes, John Done of Vtkinton, and John Edgerton of Edgerton
Knights, Richard Done of Croton, John Duttes Esquiers, and many other of
Chestershire, that had received the Princes liuerie of Swannes: and there were
taken prisoners the Earl of Salisburies. ij. sons Thomas and John, and sir
Thomas Harington, which were sent to Chester, but soon after delivered. After
this discomfiture, the Earl of Salisburie passed forth to Duke Richard to
Ludlowe, and thither came to them for Calleis the Earl of Warwike, which all
three writ a letter unto King Henry, whereof the tenure is this.

MOst Christian King, right high and mighty Prince, and our most dread
Sovereign Lord,
after as humble recomme^dations to your high excellency as will suffice. Our
true intent to the prosperity and augmentation of your high estate, and to the
common Weal of this Realm, has be^^^ showed unto your highness in such
writing as we make thereof. And over that an Indenture signed by our hands in
the Church Cathedral of Worcester, comprehending y^ proof of the truth and
duty that (God knows) we bear to your said estate, and to the
pre-eminence and prerogative thereof, we sent unto your good Grace by the Prior
of the said Church, and diverse other Doctors, and among other, by M. William
Lynwood Doctor of Divinity, which ministered unto us severally the blessed
Sacrament of the body of Jesus, whereupon we and every of us deposed for our
said truth and duty, according to the tenor of the said Indenture. And
since that time we have certified at large in writing and by mouth, by Garter
King of Arms, not only to your said highness, but also to the good and
worthy Lords being about your most Noble presence, the largeness of our
said truth and duty, and our intent and disposition, to search all the
motions that might serve conveniently to the affirmation thereof, and to our
perfect suerties from such inconvenient and vnreuerent ieopardies as we have
been put in diverse times here before. Whereof we have cause to make, and ought
to make such exclamation and complaint, not without reason, as is not unknown
to all the said worthy Lords, and to all his land, and will offer us to your
high presence, to the same intent, if we might so do without said suertie,
which only causes us to keep such fellowshippe as we do in our leefull
manner. And hereto we have forborne and avoided all things that might serve to
the effusion of Christian blood, of the dread that we have of God, and of your
Royal Majesty: and have also eschued to approach your said most Noble
presence, for the humble obeysaunce and reverence wherein we have, and during
our life will have the same. And yet nevertheless we hear, that we be
proclaimed and defamed in our name unrightfully, unlawfully, and saving your
high reverence, untruly, and otherwise (as God knows) than we have given
cause, knowing certainly, that the blessed and noble intent of your said good
grace, and the righteousness thereof is, to take, repute and accept your true
and lawful subjects, and that it accords neither with your said intent, nor
with your will or pleasure, that we should be otherwise taken or reputed. And
over that, our Lordshippes and tenantes been of high violence robbed and
spoiled, against your peace and laws, and all righteousness. We therefore,
as we suffice, beseech your said good Grace to take, repute, and receyne
thereunto our said truth and intent, which to God is known, as we show it
by the said tenor of the same Indenture. And not apply your said blessedness
ne the great righteousness and equity wherewith God has ever endued your
high nobility, to ye importune impacience and violence of such persons as
intend of extreme malice to proceed under the shadow of your high might and
presence, to our destruction, for such inordinate couetise (whereof God is not
pleased) as they have to our Lands, Offices, and goods, not letting or sparing
therefore, to put such things in all lamentable and too sorrowful ieoperdie,
as might in all wise take effect, by the mystery of Gods will and power, nor
not having regard to the effusion of Christian blood, ne any tenderness to
the noble blood of this Land, such as serve to the tuition and defense thereof,
ne not waying the loss of your true liege men of your saydo Realm, that God
defend, which knows our intent, and that we have avoided there from as far
as we may with our suerties, not of any dread that we have of the said
persons, but only of the dread of God and of your said highness, and will
not use our said defense until the time that we be provoked of necessity,
whereof we call heaven and earth unto witness and record, and therein
beseech God to be our Judge, and to deliver us according to our said intent,
and our said truth and duty to your said highness and to the said Common
Weal. Most Christian King, right high and mighty Prince, and most dread
Sovereign Lord, we beseech our blessed Lord to preserve your honor and
estate in joy and felicity.

Written at Ludlowe the. x. day of October: R. York, R. Warwike, R.
Salisburie.



After their excusation contained in this letter sent to the King, they
withdrewe them, and went into diverse parts beyond the Seas, for the more
suertie of their persons. The Duke of York went into Ireland, where he was
honorably received: the Earl of March, Salisburie, and Warwike, not without
great ieoperdie and peril, as well on the land as on the sea, went to
Calleis, and abode there.

Then was a Parliament holden at Couentrie, wherein Parliament at Couentrie.
were attaint of treason, Richard duke of York, Edward Earl of March his
son and heir, Richard Earl of Warwike, Edmond Earl of Rutlande, Richard
Earl of Salisburie, John Duke of York and other attaint.
Lord Clifford, Lord Clinton, sir Thomas Harington, sir John Wenlocke, Thomas
Neuill, John Neuill sons of the Earl of Salisburie, James Pickering, John
Conyers, Thomas Par, William Oldhall, and Henry Ratforde Knights, John
Bowser, Thomas Cook, John Clay, Richard Gyton, Robert Brown, Edward Bowser,
Thomas Vaughan, John Roger, Richard Gray, Walter, Deuorux, Walter Hopton, Roger
Kynderton, William Bows, Foulke Stafforde, the Lord Powys, and Alice
Countess of Salisburie, their goods and possessions escheted, and their heirs
disherited unto the 9. degree, their tenauntes spoiled of their goods, bemaymed
Ludlovv spoiled.
and slain, the town of Ludlowe longing to the Duke of York, was robbed to
the bare walls, and the Duchess of York spoiled of her goods.

The Earl of Warwike having a great Navy, kept the Earl of VVarvvike fought
with the Spa^^^ ardes.
narrow seas, and sought with the Spaniards, killed many of them, took their
great vessels, with one Carrake of Iene, and got in them great riches.

John Plummer: John Stocker, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Hulin Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

In this month of October, Henry the young duke of Somerset, Henry Lord Roos,
and Lord Audley, with men of Arms sailed toward Calleis, to the intent the
Duke should have been Captain there: but when he came to land, they Duke of
Somerset fled to Gvvynes. The Lord Audley taken into Calleis. The lord Roos
fled into Flaunders.
of Calleis would have taken him, so that he hardly escaped to the Castle of
Gwines: his soldiers were stripped out of their harness and let go. The Lord
Audley was taken into Calleis, and the Lord Roos fled into Flaunders, and after
returned into England.

Not long after, Richard Lord Rivers was sent to Sa^dwich to keep the town
and certain great ships which lay there at Anchor, but when the Earl of
Warwike saw time convenient, The Lord Rivers and the Lord VVoodvile by force
carried from Sandvvicke.
he sent some of his men to Sandwich by night, ye which took the Lord Rivers
and Antonie Wooduile his son in their beds, and led them over to Calleis,
with all the great ships save one called Grace de Dieu, the which might not be
had away because she was broke in the bottom. Sir Baudwyne Fulford, undertook
on pain of loosing his head, yt he would 1460 Sir Baudvvin Fulford his
enterprise.
destroy yt Earl of Warwike, but when he had spent ye King a thousand marks
in money, he returned again. Then was the Duke of Excester Admiral sent to
the sea with a great The Duke of Excester sent to the Seas.
Navy for to distress the Earl of Warwike and his Navy, he sailing from
Sandwiche to Dertmouth, for lack of victuals and money his Soldiers forsook
him there. And between Sandwiche and Dertmouth he met the Earl of Warwike
coming out of Ireland that had bin there for to speak with the Duke of York,
and brought with him his mother that was sled thither for dread, and led her to
Calleis: but the Duke of Excester durst not set upon the Earl of Warwike, nor
the Earl would not distress him, because he was Admiral and of the Kings
blood, but let him pass by.

In ye month of June. 500. men were sent to conduct the duke of Somerset from
Gwynes into England, but abiding ye wind in ye port of Sandwich, ye Earl of
Warwikes men spoiled them of their harnes, killed their captain Mou^ford and
many other. The Earls at Calleis, sent to the Archbishop of Caunterburie,
Captain Mount sort slain.
and at large to the commons of England certain Articles in writing, beginning
thus: Worshipful sirs, we the Duke of Articles sent from the Duke of York, and
the Barles, to the Archbishop of Caunterburie and to the commons.
York, the Earls of March, Warwike, and Salisburie, sewed and offered to have
come unto the King our Sovereign Lords most noble presence, to have declared
there asore him for our duty to God and to his highness and to the
prosperity and welfare of his noble estate, and to the Common Weal of all his
Land as true liege men, the matters following, that is to say.

In primis the great oppression, extortion, robbery, murder and other
violences done to Gods Church and to his ministers thereof, against Gods and
man's law.

2 Item, the poverty and misery that to our great heaviness our Sovereign
Lord stands in, not having any liuelode of the Crown of England whereof he
may keep his honorable household, which causes the spoiling of his said
liege men by the takers of his said household, which lyuelode is in their
hands that have been destroyers of his said estate, and of the said common
Weal.

3 Item, how his Laws be partially and unrightfully guided, and that by them
that should most love and tender his said Laws, the said oppression and
extortion is most favored and supported, and generally, that al righteousness
and Justice is exiled out of the said land, and that no man dreadeth to offend
against the said Laws.

4 Item, that it will please his said good Grace to live upon his own
liuelode, whereupon his noble Progenitors have in days heretofore lived as
honorably and as worthily as any Christian Princes, and not to suffer the
destroyers of the said land, and of his true subjects, to live thereupon, and
therefore to lack the sustenances that should be belonging to his said estate,
and find his said household upon his poor commons, without payment, which
neither accords with Gods nor man's law.

5 Item, how often the said commons have been greatly and maruellously charged
with taxes and tallages to their great empouerishing, whereof little good has
either grown to the king or to the said land, and of the most substance
thereof the King has left to his part not half so much, and other Lords and
persons, enemies to the said common Weal, have to their own use, suffering
all the old possessions that the King had in France and Normandy, Aniow and
Maine, Gascoyn and Gwiene, won and gotten by his father of most noble memory,
and other his noble progenitors, to be shamefully lost or sold.

6 Item, how they can not cease therewith, but now begin a new charge of
imposition and tallages upon the said people, which never before was seen, that
is to say, every town, ship to find men for ye Kings Guard, taking ensample
thereof, of our enemies and adversaries of France, which imposition and
tallage, if it be continued to heir, heirs, and successors, will be the
heauiest charge and worst ensample that ever grew in England, and the
foresaid subjects, and the said heirs and successors, in such bondage as
their auncetors were never charged with.

7. Item, where the King has now no more liuelode out of his Realm of
England, but only the Land of Ireland, and the town of Calleis, and that no
King Christened has such a Land and a Town without his Realm, diverse Lords
have caused his highness to write letters under his Privy Seal, unto his
Irishe enemies, which never King of England did here to fore, whereby they may
have comfort to enter into the conquest of the said Land, which letters the
same Irishe enemies sent unto me the said Duke of York, and marvelled greatly
that any such letters should be to them sent, speaking therein great shame and
villainy of the said Realm.

8 Item, in like wise the King by excitation and labor of the same Lords,
wrote other letters to his enemies and adversaries in other lands, that in no
wise they should show any favor or good will to the town of Calleis, whereby
they had comfort enough to proceed to the wynning thereof. Considered also,
that it is ordained by the labor of the said Lords, that no where victual nor
other thing of refreshing or defense should come out of England, to the
succor or relief of the said town, to the intent that they would have it
lost, as it may openly appear.

9 Item, it is deemed and ought greatly to be deemed, that after that the same
Lords would put the same rule of England, if they might have their purpose and
intent, into the hands and governance of the said enemies.

10 Item, how continually sith the piteous, shameful, and sorrowful murder
to all England, of that Noble, worthy, and Christian Prince Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester the Kings true uncle, at Bury, it has been labored, studied, and
conspired, to have destroyed and murdered the said Duke of York, and the
issue that it pleased God to send me of the Royal blood, and also of us the
said Earls of Warwike and Salisburie, for none other cause but for the true
heart that God knows we ever have born, and bear to the profit of the Kings
estate, to the Common Weal of the same Realm, and defense thereof.

11. Item, how the Earls of Shrewsburie and Wilshire, and the Lord Beaumount,
our mortal and extreme enemies now and of long time past, having the guiding
about the most Noble person of our said Sovereign Lord, whose highness
they have restrained and kept from the liberty and freedom that belongs to
his said estate, and the supporters and favorers of all the premysses, would
not suffer the Kings said good grace to receive and accept us, as he would
have done if he might have had his own will, into his said presence, dreading
the charge that would have been laid upon them, of the misery, destruction,
and wretchedness of the said Realm, whereof they becauses and not the King,
which is himself as noble, as virtuous, as rightuous and blessed of
disposition, as any Prince earthly.

12. Item, the Earls of Wilshire and Shrewsburie, and the Lord Beaumount, not
satysfyed nor content with the Kings possessions and his goods, stirred and
excited his said highness to hold his Parliament at Couentrie, where an Act
is made by their provocation and labor, against us the said Duke of York, my
sons March and Rutlande, and the Earls of Warwike and Salisburie, and the
Sons of the said Earl of Salisburie, and many other Knights and Esquiers,
of diverse matters falsely and untruly imagined, as they will answer before
almighty God in the day of Dome, the which the said Earls of Salisburie and
Wilshire, and the Lord Beaumount provoked to be made, to the intent of our
destruction and of our issue, and that they might have our lyuelode and goods,
as they have openly robbed and dispoyled all our places and our tenementes, and
many other true men, and now proceed to hangyng and drawing of men by
tyranny, and will therein show the largeness of their violence and malice as
vengeably as they can, if no remedy be provided at the Kings highness, whose
blessedness is neither assenting nor knowing thereof.

We therefore seeing all the said mischiefs, hearing also that the French
King makes in his land great assembly of his people, which is greatly to be
dread for many causes, purpose yet again with Gods grace to offer us to come
again to the said presence of our said Soueraygne Lord, to open and declare
there unto him the mischiefs above declared, and in the name of the land to
sue, in as reverent and lowely wise as we can, to his said good Grace, to
have pity and compassion upon his said true subjects, and not to suffer
the same mischiefs to raygne upon them. Requiring you in Gods behalf, and
praying you in our own, therein to assist us, doing always the duty of liege
men in our persons to our said Sovereign Lord, to his estate, prerogative, and
pre-eminence, and to the suertie of his most Noble person, whereunto we have
ever been and will be as true as any of his subjects alive, whereof we call
God, our Lady S. Marie, and all the Saints in heaven unto witness and record.

In the mean time the Earl of Wilshire treasurer of England, The Earl of
VVilshire and other spoiled Nevvbery.
the Lord Scales and the Lord Hungerforde, went to Newberie, which longed to
the Duke of York, and there made inquisition of all them that in any wise had
favored the said Duke, whereof some were found guilty, and were drawn,
hanged, and quartered, and all the inhabitauntes of the Town were spoiled of
their goods. From thence the Earl of Wilshire went to Southampton, where under
The Earl of VVilshire stale over the Seas.
color to take the Earl of Warwick, he armed five great Caraks of Iene with
souldioures, taking victuals of the Kings price without payment, and put a
great part of his treasure into the said Caraks, and after sailed about in the
sea, and at last stale into Dutchlande, sending back again his soldiers
into England. Then were the Kings Privy seals for money.
privy seals directed to all Bishops, Abbots, Priours, and other states, to
lend the King money, therewith to wage soldiers to keep the Sea coasts: but
the commons of Ke^t dreading the like vengeance to be taken upon them, as was
done upon them of Newberie, sent privily messangers to Caleis, The men of Kent
sent to Galeis for the Earls.
to the foresaid Earls, beseeching them in all haste possible to come to
their succor, whereupon the said Earls sent over into Kent the lord
Fawconbridge to know if their deeds would accord with their words, and
anon the people of Kent and other shires adjoining, resorted to the said
Lord Fawconbridge in great number. When the Earls knew the wylling hearts
of those people, they prepared to come into this land, against whose coming,
a long Ballet was fixed upon the gates of Canterbury, made in favor of the
Duke of York and the said Earls, beginning thus: In the day of fast and
spiritual affliction, The celestial influence of bodies transitory, etc The
Earls of March, Warwick, and Salisburie, arrived at Sandwich, where met with
them Thomas Bourcher, Archebyshop of Canterbury, The Earl entered into London.
who with his cross borne before him, and a great number of other people,
accompanied them to London, into the which City they entered on the second of
Julye: with them came the Popes legate, to treat of peace if need were. Th^n
was a convocation of the Clergy holden in S. Paul's Church* where the said
Earls being present, the Earl of Warwick recited the cause of their coming
into the land, with the misgouernements thereof, and then made open oath upon
the cross of Canterbury, that they had ever borne true faith and alegiaunce
to King Henry. Then the Earls of March and Warwick, with the Lords
Fauconbridge, Clinton, Borser Priour of Saint John's, Audley, Burgavennie, Say,
and Scrope, the Archbishop, the Popes legate, the Bishops of Excester, Ely,
Salisburie, and Rochester, addressed the^ forth to the King at Northampton,
leaving the Earl of Salisbury to be governor of the City in their absence.
The Lord Scales and Hungerforde, that before the coming of the Earls, were
in the City of London, and would have had the governance thereof, went to the
Tower of London, and with them the Lords Vessy, Louel, Delaware, Kendale a
Gascoigne: Knights, sir Edmond Hampden, Thomas Brune Sheriff of Kent, John
Bruyn of Kent, Geruayes Clyfton treasurer of the King house, Thomas Tyrel, the
Duchess of Excestex, and many other. Then was the Tower of London besieged
both by water and land, that no victualles might come to them. And they that
were within the Tower cast wild fire into the City, and shot many small
Gunnes, whereby they brent and slew me^, women, and children, in the streets:
also they of the City laid great Gunnes on the furtherside of the Thamis
against the Tower, and brake the Walls in diverse places. The King lying in the
Friars at Northa^pton, ordained a strong and myghtie field in the Meddowes
beside the Nunrie, having the river at his back. The Earls with their power
coming to Northampton, sent certain Bishops to the King, beseeching him to
admit y^ Earl of Warwick to come to his presence, to declare their innocence,
which request being denied by the Duke of Buckingham, the Earls sent an
Heralde of Arms, desiring to have hostages for his safe coming and going, but
he might not be heard. The third time the Earl of Warwick sent word to the
King, that at two hours after noone he would speak with him, or dye in y^
field. The Bishop of Hereford, a white Friar the kings Confessor, encouraged
the kings part to fight, wherefore after the battle he was committed to the
Castelf of Warwick, where he was long prisoner. The tenth of July at two of y^
clock after noo^re, y^ Earls of March and Warwick let cry through the field
y^ no man should lay hand upon the King ^e on y^ common people, but on the
Lords, Knights and Espuiers: then both hosts incountred and fought half an
hour, the Lord Gray that was the Kings vaward break the field and came to
the Earls party, and was a great help to them in obtaining the victory:
many on the kings side were flayn, and many y^ fled were drowned in ye river,
y^ Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Shrowesburie, ye Lord Beaumont and the Lord
Egremont were slain by y^ Kings ^e^t, with many Knights and Esquires: ye kings
ordinance of Guns might not be shot, there was so great rain that day: When
the field was done, and the Earls had the victory, they came to the King, he
being in his tent, and said in this wise. Most noble prince, displease you not
though it have pleased God of his grace to grant us the victory of our mortal
enemies, y^ which by their venomous malice have vntxuely stirred and moved your
highness to exile us out of your land, and would have us put to final shame
and confusion: we come not to y^ intent for to unquiet ne grieve your said
highness, but for to please your noble person, desiring tenderly the high
welfare and prosperity thereof, and of al your realm, and to be your true
liegemen while our lives shall endure. The King of these words was greatly
recomforted, and anon was led to Northampton with procession, where he rested
three days, and came to London the sixteenth of July, and was lodged in the
Bishops Pallaice.

The ninteenth of Julye they that were in the Tower of London, for lack of
victualles yielded and came forth, of the which afterward some were drawn and
headed.

The Lord Scales late in an evening entered a Wherry with three persons, and
rowing toward Westminster, there to have taken Sanctuary, was descried by a
woman, and anon the Wherry men fell on him, killed him, and cast him a land
beside Saint Marie Oueries.

When Queen Margaret heard that the king was taken, she with her son, and
eight persons fled, to the Castle of Hardlagh in Wales, and was robbed by the
way in Lancashire, of all her goods to the valewe of ten thousand marks:
from thence she went into Scotland.

The tenth of August James King of Scotts besieging the Castle of
Rockesborough, was slain with a Gun that brake in his Camp.

The one and twentieth of September the Duke of Somerset came from Gwines into
England. Anno. reg. 39 Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Flemming: John Lambert, the 28. of September.

Richard Lee Grocer, the. 28 of October.

The vitj. of October a Parliament was begun at Westminster, unto the which
came Ri. duke of York, that a little before Parliament.
was come out of Irelande, and being lodged in the Pallaice, the King being
there, he brake up the doors of the Kings Chamber, so that the King giving him
place, took an other Chamber. Then the said Duke, as right heir by lyneall
descent from Richard the second, challenged the realm, purposing to have bin
crowned on Alhallown day next following, and herevppon sent to the Parliament
in writing his said claim, title, and pedigree. The which claim after
diligent deliberation had and approved, by the said Parliamente, peace and
concord between the king and Duke on the Uigil of Alhalow was established and
concluded, as in Articles follows.

BLessed be John in whose hands and bounty refieth The Articles betwixt King
Henry and the Duke of York
and is the peace and unity betwixt Princes and the Weal of every Realm: I
know by whose direction agreed it is appointed and accorded as follows,
betwixt the most high and most mightis Prince King Henry the sixth King of
England and of France, and Lord of Irelande, on y^ one party, and the right
high and mighty Prince Richard Pla^tagenet Duke of York on that other party,
upon certain matters of variaunce moved betwixt them, and especially upon the
claim and title unto the Crowns of England and of France, and Royal power,
estate and dignity appertayning to the same, and Lordship of Irelande, opened,
showed, and declared, by the said Duke, before all the Lords spiritual and
Temporal, being in this present Parliament.

First where the said Richard Duke of York has declared and opened, as
above is said, title and claim in manner as follows:

That the right noble and worthy Prince, Henry King of England the third, had
issue and lawfullye got Edward his first begotten son, borne at Westminster
the xv. Kalendes of July, in the year of our Lord 12^9. and Edmond his second
son, which was borne on Saint Marcels day, the year 1200. the which Edward
after the death of King Henry his Father, entitled and called King Edward
the first, had issue, Edward his first begotten son, called after the
decease of his Father, King Edward the second, the which had issue, Edward
the third: which Edward the third had issue, Edward Prince of Wales* William
of Hatfield his second son: Leonel the third, Duke of Clarence: John of
Gaun^ fourth, Duke of Lancaster: Edmond of Langley fifth, Duke of York: Thomas
of Woodstocke the sixth, Duke of Gloucester: and W. of Windsor the seventh. The
said Edward Prince of Wales, which dyed in the life time of his Father, had
issue Richard, which succeeded Edward the third his grandsire: Richard dyed
without issue: William of Hatfield the second son of Edward the third, dyed
without issue: Leonel the third son of Edward the third, Duke of Clarence,
had issue Phillip his daughter and heir, which was coupled in matrimony unto
Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, and had issue Roger Mortimer Earl of March
her Son and heir, which Roger had issue of Edmond earl of March, Roger
Mortimer, Anne, and Elianor: which Edmonde, Roger and Alianor dyed without
issue. And the said Anne coupeled in matrimony to Richard Earl of Cambridge,
the son of Edmond of Langley, the fifth son of Henry the third, and had
issue Richard Plantagenet, commonly called Duke of York: John of Gaunt, the
fourth son of Edward, and the younger brother of the said Leonel, had issue
Henry Earl of Darby, which incontinent, after that King Richard resigned the
Crowns of the Realms and Lordship of Irelande, unrighteously entered upon the
same, then being alive Edmonde Mortimer Earl of March, son to Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, son and heir of the said Phillippe, daughter and
heir of the said Leonel, the third son of the said King Edward the
third, to the which Edmonde the right and title of the said Crowns and
Lordship by law and custom belonged. To the which Richard Duke of York, as
son to Anne daughter to Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, son and heir of
the said Phillip, daughter and heir of the said Leonell, the third son of
King Edward the third, the right, title, dignity Royal, and estate of the
Crowns of the Realms of England and France, and the Lordshippe of Irelande,
pertayneth and belongs a fore any issue of the said John of Gaunt, the
fourth son of the same King Edward. The said title notwithstanding and
without prejudice of the said Richard Duke of York, tenderly desiring the
wealth, rest, and prosperity of this land, and to set apart all that might be
trouble to the same, and consyderyng the possession of the said King Hen the
sixth, and that he has for his time been named, taken, and reputed for King
of England and of France, and LORD of Irelande, is contented, agreede, and
consents, that he be had, reputed, and taken for King of England and
France, with the Royal estate, dignitye, and pre-eminence belonging
thereunto, and Lord of, Irelande during his natural life. And for that time,
the said Duke without hurt or prejudice of his said right and title, shall
take, worship, and honor him, for his sovereign Lord.

Item, the said Richard Duke of York, shall promis and bind him by his
solemn oath, in manner and form as follows

In the name of God Amen: I Richard, Duke of York, The oath of Richard Duke
of York.
promise and swear by the faith and truth that I owe to Almighty God, that I
shall never consent, procure, or stir, directly or indirectly, in privy or
aperte, neither, (as much as in me is) shall suffer to be done, consented,
procured, or stirred, any thing that may sound to the abridgement of the
natural life of King Henry the sixth, or to y^ hurt or diminishing of his
reign or dignity royal, by violence or any otherwise, against his freedom
or liberty: but if any person or persons would do or presume any thing to y^
contrary, I shall with all my might and power withstand it, and make it to be
withstoode, as far as my power will stretche there^herevnto, so help me GOD
and his holy Evangelists.

Item, Edward Earl of March, and Edmund Earl of Rutlande, sons of the said
Duke of York, shall make like oath.

Item, it is accorded, appointed, and agreed, that the said Richard Duke of
York, shall be called and reputed from hence forth very and rightful heir to
the crowns, royal estate, dignity and Lordshippe above said, and after the
decease of the said King Henry, or when he will lay from him the said
crowns, estate, dignity, and Lordshippe, the said Duke and his heirs shall
immediately succeed to the said crowns, royal estate, dignity and Lordship.

Item, the said Richard Duke of York, shall have by authority of this
present Parliament, castles, manors, lands and tenementes, with the wards,
marriages, reliefs, services, fines, amercementes, offices, anowsions, fees,
and other appurtenaunces to them belonging, what soever they be, to the yearly
valewe of ten thousand marks over al charges and reprises, where of five
thousand marks shall be to his own state, three thousand five hundred marks
to Edward his first begotten son Earl of March for his estate, and one
thousand pound to Edmond Earl of Rutland his second son, for his yearly
sustentation, in such considerations and such intent as shall be declared by
the Lords of the Kings Counsel.

Item if any person or persons imagine or compass the death of the said Duke,
and thereof probably be attaynte, of open deed done by folks of other
condition, that it be deemed and adjudged high treason.

Item, for the more establishing of the said accord, it is appointed and
consented, that the Lords spiritual and Temporal, being in this present
Parliament, shall make oaths to accept, take, worship, and repute the said
Richard Duke of York, and his heirs, as above is rehearsed, and keep and
observe, and strength in as much as apperteyneth unto them, all the things
abouesayd, and resist to their power, all them that would presume the
contrary, according to their estates and degrees.

Item, the said Richard Duke of York, Earls of March and Rutland, shall
permit and make other to help, aid, and defend the said Lords, and every
of them, against althose that will quarrel, or any thing attempt against the
said Lords or any of them, by occasion of agreemente or consenting to the
said accord, or assistaunce giving to the Duke and Earls or any of them.

Item, it is agreed and appointed, that this accord, and every Article
thereof, be opened and notifyed by the kings letters patents, or otherwise, at
such times and places, and in manner as it shall be thought expedient to the
said Richard Duke of York, with the advice of the Lords of the Kings
Counsel. The King understands certainly, the said title of the said
Richard Duke of York, just, lawful, and sufficient, by the advice and assent
of the Lords, spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this Parliament
assembled, and by authority of y^ same Parliament declares, approves,
ratifyeth, confirms and accepts the said title, just, good, lawful, and
true, and thereunto gives his assent and agreemente of his free will and
liberty. And over that, by the said advice and authority declares,
entitleth, calls, stablisheth, affirms, and reputeth the said Richard
Duke of York, very true and rightful heir to the Corones, Royal estate, and
dignity of y^ realms of England and of France, and of the Lordship of
Irelande aforesaid, and that according to y^ worship and reverence that thereto
belongs, he be taken, accepted and reputed, in worship and reverence, by all
the states of the said Realm of England, and of all his subjects thereof,
fauyng and ordayning by the same authority, the King to have y^ said
Corones, Realm, royal estate, dignity, and pre-eminence ofthe same, and the
said Lordshippe of Ireland during his life natural. And furthermore by the
same advice and authority will, consents and agrees, that after his
decease, or when it shall please his highness to lay from him the said
Corones, estate, dignity, and Lordshippe, the said Richard Duke of York and
his heirs, shall immediatelye succeed him in the said Corones, Royal estate,
dignitye, and worship, and them then have and inioye, any act of Parliament,
statute, or ordinance, or other thing to the contrary made, or interruption,
or discontinuaunce of possession notwithstanding. And moreover, by the said
advise and authority, stablisheth, grants, confirms, approves,
ratifieth, and accepts the said accord, and al things therein contained, and
thereunto freely and absolutely assenteth agrees, and by the same advice and
authority ordayneth and establishes, that if any person or persons ymagine
or compass the death of the said Duke, and probably be attaynt of open deed
done by folks of that conditions, that it be deemed and adjudged high
Treason. And furthermore ordayneth and establishes by the said advice and
authority, that all statutes, ordinances and acts of Parliament, made in
the time of the said King He^rie the fourth, by the which he and the heirs of
his body coming of Henry late King of England the fifth, the son and heir
of the said King Henry the fourth, and the heirs of King Henry the fifth,
were or be inheritable to the said Crowns and Realms, or to the heritage of
the same, be adnulled, repelled, dampened, cancelled, void, and of none effect.

And over this, the King by the said advice, assent and authority, ordayneth
and establishes, that all other acts and statutes made before this time by
act of Parliamente, not repelled or adnulled by like authority, or otherwise
void, be in such force, effect, and virtue, as they were before the making of
these ordinances, and that no letters pattents royalx of record, nor acts
Judicial, made or done before this time not repelled reuersed, ne otherwise
void by law, be prejudiced or hurt by this present act. Also it was
ordained by the same Parliamente, that the said Richard Duke of York,
should be called Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and
protector of England.

In the month of December, the Duke of Somerset and the Earl of Devonshire,
went into the North Country with eighte hundred men, and anon after, the
said Duke of York, the Earl of Rutlande his son, and the Earls of
Salisburie a little before Christmasse with a few persons went into the
North also for to repress the malice of the Northern men, the which loved
not the Duke of York, ne the Earl of Salisburie, and were lodged at the
Castle of Sandale, and at Wakefielde. Then the Lord Neuill, brother to the
Earl of Westmerlande, under a color of Friendship, came to the Duke of
York, requyring of him a commission for him to raise the people for to
chastise the Rebels as he said, but when he had raised to the number of
eighte thousand men, he brought them to the Lords of that Country, that
is to say, the Earl of Northumberlande, Lord Clifforde, and the Duke of
Somerset, that were adversaries to the Duke of York, and on the last of
December they fell on the said Duke Richard, killed him and his Son the
Earl of Rutland, and many other knights and Esquiers, to wit the Lord
Harington, Thomas Harington Knighte, Sir Thomas Neuil son to the Earl of
Salisburie, and Sir Henry Ratforde Knight, and other, to the number of 2200.
The Earl of Salisburie was taken alive and led by the Duke of Somerset to
the Castle of Pomfraite, and had grant of his life for a great sum of
money, but the common people of the Country which loved him not, took him out
of the Castle by violence, and smote off his head. When the death of these
Lords was known ^^ the King, he commanded writs and commissions to be sent
into the shires to the people, and to go against the Rebels into the North
to suppress them, but they of the North came sodainelye down to the Town of
Dunstaple, robbing all the Country and people as they came, spoiling Abbayes,
Priories, and Parish Churches, bearing away Chalisses, books, ornaments and
other, whatsoever was worth the carriage, as though they had bin Sarisens and
no Christians, against whom, the twelfth of February, the Duke of Norffolke
and Suffolk, the Earls of Warwick and Arundale, the Lord Bonuile and other,
with the King, went out of London toward Saint Albons; and when they heard
that they of the North were so nyghe, they took a field beside a little
Town called Sandriage not far from Saint Albons, on Barnarde Heathe, in a
place called No man's Land, where the King stood and saw his men slain on
both sides, till at the last through the wythdrawyng many of the Kentishmen
with their Captain Louelace that was the vaward, King Henry's part lost the
field, the Lords fled, and the King went to Queen Margaret that was come with
the Northern men and her son Edward. The Earl of Warwick went toward
the Earl of March that was coming toward London out of Wales. The Lord
Bonuile would have withdrawn him, but the King assured him to have no bodylye
harm: nevertheless at the instance of the Queen, the Duke of Excester, and
the Earl of Devonshire, he was beheaded at Saint Albons, and with him Sir
Thomas Kyriell of Kente. This battle was fought on Shroue Twesday the
seventeenth of February, Exlibre Norwicensis.
in the which was slain. 1916 persons. The same day Thomas Thorpe Baron of the
Exchequer was beheaded at High Gate by the commons of Kent. Then the Citizens
of London dreading the malice of the Queen and the Duke of Somerset, sent
unto them the Duchess of Buckingham with other, to treat for to be
beneuolent to the City, for the which a sum of money was promised, and that
they should come to the City with a certain number of persons, where upon
certain spears and men of arms were sent to have entered the City before
the Dukes coming, whereof some were slain, some sore hurt, and the remnaunte
put to flighte by the Commons, who took the Keys of the gates, and manfully
defended the City until the coming of Edward Earl of March,
where-throughe King Henry with Queen Margaret and the Northern men were
forced to return again Northwarde.

The third of February, Edward Earl of March fought with the Welchmen
beside Wigmore in Wales, near unto Mortimers Cross, whose Captains were the
Earl of Penbroke, and the Earl of Wilshire, where he put them to flight, and
slew of the Welchemen about four thousand. Owen Tewther (whom John
Leylande says should be called Me^^dicke,) Father to the said Earl
Penbroke, which Owen had married Katherin mother to King Henry the sixth,
was there taken and beheaded, and afterward buried in the a Chapel of the Gray
Friars Church in Hereforde: the day before this battle, about ten of the
clock before noone, were seen three Suns in the firmament, shyning a like
clear, which after closed together all in one.

The eight and twentieth of February, Edward Earl of March, accompanied with
the Earl of Warwick, and a mighty power of Marchmen, came up to London, where
he was joyfully received, and on the second day of March being Sunday, all his
host was mustered in Saint John's field, where was read among the people
certain Articles and points that King Henry had offended in, and then it was
demanded of them whether the said Henry were worthy to reign still, and the
people cried nay, nay. Then was it asked if they would have the Earl of March
to be their King, and they said yea, yea: then certain Captains were sent
to Earl of March elected King.
the Earl of March, at Baynardes Castle, and told the Earl that the people
had chosen him King, whereof he thanked God and them, and by the advice of the
Archbyshoppe of Canterbury, the Bishop of Excester, and the Earl of
Warwick with other, he took it upon him. The Duchess of York, mother to
Edward Earl of March, fearing the fortune of the world, sent her two
younger sons George and Richard over the seas, to the City of Vtricke in
Almaine, where they remained till their elder brother had got the Crown. Also
Phillip Malpas Alderman of London, Thomas Citizens of London fled.
Vaghan Esquire, Master William Atclife, with many other, fearing the Queens
coming to London, shypped them in a ship of Antwerpe, purposing to have
sailed thither: but by the way they were taken by a French ship named the
Colmapne, and at length delivered for great ransom.

Edward Earl of March, being elected as is abouesaid, Edward Earl of March
took on him the kingdom.
on the next morrow went in procession at Paul's, and offered there, and after
Te Deum being sung, he was with great royalty conveyed to Westminster, and
there in the Hall set in the kings seat with Saint Edwards Scepter in his
hand, and then asked of the people if they would have him King, and they cried
yea, yea. Then after certain homages by him received, he was with Procession
conuayed into the Abbay there, and set in the Quire as King, while Te Deum
was singing: that done, he offered at Saint Edwardes Shryne, and then returned
by water unto Saint Paul's and was there lodged within the Bishops Pallaice.
Thus took he possession of the Realm, upon a Tuisday being the fourth of
March, and was proclaimed King of England, by the name of Edward the fourth
when King Henry had reigned thirty years, eight months and odd days.

Edward Earl of March.


Edward Earl of March borne at Roane, son and heir to Anno. reg. 1 10.
Rouse.
Richard Duke of York, about the age of eighteen years, began his reign
the fourth day of March, by the name of Edward the fourth, in the year. 1460.
he was a man of noble courage and great wit: but in his time was much trouble
and unquietness in the realm.

The twelfth of March, Walter Walker a Grocer that Walter Walker beheaded.
dwelt in Cheap, for words spoken touching King Edward, was beheaded in
Smithfield. This Grocer is he, whom Master Hal mistaketh to be Burdet, of whom
ye shall find in the xvij. year of this King.

The same xij. day of March in the afternoon: King Edward with great triumph
rode through the City of London 1461
to Bishops Gate, and so took his journey toward the North, where between
Shirburne in Elmet, and Todcaster, all the North party met him, and on
Palm Sunday the. xxix. of March fought a great battle between Towton and
Saxton, in which were slain, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberlande, John Lord
Clifforde, John Lord Neuil, Leo Lord Wells, Ranulph Lord Dacre, and many
other on both parties, to the number of five and thirty thousand seven
hundred and eleauen persons, but King Edward gatte the field. Many of the
Bones of these men were buried John Leyland.
in the Churchyard of Saxton: they were first buried in five pittes half a
mile off by North in Saxton field, yet appearing. Towton village is a mile
from Saxton, where a great Chapel was begone by Richard the third, but not
finished, in which Chapel were buried also many of the men flaine at
Palmsonday field. This field was as much in Saxton Parish, as in Towton,
yet it bare the name of Towton.

The Duke of Excester, the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Roos, the Hungerford and
many other, fled to York to king Henry, and then they with the King, Queen,
and Prince, King Henry fled into Scotland.
fled toward Scotland to Barwicke, and so to Edenborough.

King Edward went to York, and then to Durham, and when he had quieted the
Country, returned Southwarde. Thomas Courtney Earl of Devonshire, was taken
and beheaded in York Castle, James Butler Earl of Wilshire was beheaded at
Newcastell, the Lord Fitz Walter was drowned at Ferybridge.

The town of Barwicke was delivered to the Scots by king Henry the sixth on
Saint Marks day.

The. xxvj. of June the Mayor of London with the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the
Commons in green, brought King Edward from Lambeth to the Tower of London,
where he made eight and twenty Knights, and on the morrow he dubbed four
mo, and on the eight and twentieth of June he was crowned at Westminster with
great solempnitie of Bishops and other temporal Lords.

And on the morrow after the King was crowned again in Westminster Abbay in the
worship of God and Saint Peter and on the next morrow he went Crowned in Paul's
Church of London, in the honor of God and Saint Paul, and there an Angel
came down and censed him, at which time was so great a multitude of people in
Paul's, as ever was seen in any days. And soon after his Coronation, the
King made his States created.
brother George Plantagenet Duke of Clarence and his other brother Richard,
duke of Gloucester: William Stafford Esquier, Lord Stafford of Southwike: sir
William Hebert, Lord Herbert, and after Earl of Penbroke: and the said Lord
Stafford Earl of Devonshire. After this he made Edward Lord Gray of Ruthen
Earl of Kent: Henry Lord Bourcher Earl of Essex: John Lord of Buckingham,
Lord of Mountioy: sir John Heyward, Lord Heyward* William Hastings, Lord
Hastings, and after that great Chamberlain: Richard Woodvile Lord Rivers:
Denham Esquier, Lord Denham, etc. Not long after John Dauy had his hand stricken
of in Cheap.
the Coronation of King Edward, one John Dauy had his hand stricken off, at the
Standard in Cheap, because he smote a man before the Judges in Westminster
Hall, contrary to the Law.

George Ireland: John Lock, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Hughe Wiche Mercer, the 28. of October.

The. iiij. of November began a Parliament at Westminster, wherein King Henry,
his Queen, and his son, were disherited of the Crown: Henry Duke of
Excester, Henry Duke of Somerset, Thomas Earl of Devonshire, etc. to the
number of. 140. were attainted and disherited. Shortly the Earl Anno. reg. 2.
of Oxford, and Awbrey his son, sir Thomas Tudenham Knight, William Tirrell,
and John Mongomerie Esquiers, 1462
were detect and at several times beheaded at the Tower hill, and after that
many other.

The. xxvij. of March King Edward went Northwarde so far as Stamforde, where
he was informed that King Henry had procured the Frenchmen and Scots to enter
this land, in resisting whereof King Edward sent his Privy Seal through
England, to move men to give him a certain su^me of money, which they granted
liberally. The Lord Fauconbridge Earl of Kent, was appointed to keep the
Seas, with the Lord Audeley, Lord Clinton, Sir John Heyward, sir Richard
Walgraue, and other, to the number of ten thousand, which landed in Britain,
and wanne the town of Conqnet, with the Isle of Reth, etc. In Michaelmas Term
king Edward sat in the Kings bench three days together in open court, to
understand how his laws were executed.

William Hampton: Barthelmew James, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Coke Draper, the 28. of October.

Queen Margaret wife to Henry the sixth, landed in the North, where having but
small succor and evil fortune, she was feign to take the Sea again, and by
tempest of weather was driven to Barwicke, where she landed, but lost her
ships and goods. In December King Edward laid siege to the Castles of
Bambrugh, Dunstonbrugh, and Alnewike. Henry Bowfort Duke of Somerset, sir
Ralph Percie, and other yielded Bambrugh on Christmas even, and were taken to
the Kings favor. King Edward granted to the Duke of Somerset a. 1000. marks
by the year, where of he was never paid, the Earl of Penbroke, sir Thomas
Fyndern, and other, went into Scotland.

On S. John's day Dunstonburgh was yielded. On y^ Twelfe even Peirs^e Brasile
the great warrior of Normandy came to help the Queen Margaret with
Frenchmen, and. xx. thousand Scots, to remove King Edwardes men from Alnewike
siege, and the residue of other Castles there. By whose coming King Edwardes
men were afearde of the Scotts, as reculing from the siege, and the Scotts
afearde of Edwardes men, least they had reculed to bring them into a trap. And
Henry's me^ issuing out, of too much boldness, gave Edwards me^ opportunity
to enter into the Castle: on the morrow after the Twelfe day, the Earl of
Warwike made xv. knights: Anno reg. 3.
these. iij. Castles were committed* to ye keeping of sir Ralph Gray, and after
again King Henry with his Queen and 1463
their fellowship entered them and kept them.

About Midsomer the Scots with many French and Englishmen, laid siege to the
Castle of Norham, but were forced to leave it as they found it. The Earl of
Warwike wan the town of Barwike, where he made five Bannertes and* xxij.
knights and went into Scotland, where he burnt Lawghmaban, Iedeworth, Galowey,
and many other Towns, and returned to Barwike.

The Minster of York, and the steeple of Christ's Church in Norwiche were
brent.

Robert Basset: Thomas Muschampe, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Matthew Phillip Goldsmith, the 28* of October.

In the month of April, King Edward made great Anno. reg. 4. 1464
preparation against King Henry, and on Saint Marks day Ralph Percie Lord
Hungerforde, with a great power, purposing to have distressed sir John Neuil,
Lord Mountacute, was himself slain, with many other.

The. xv. of May King Henry's power being at Hexham, the Lord Mountacute with
a power came thither, and enclosed them round about. There were taken and
slain many Lords that were with King Henry, but he himself was fled iiij.
days before into Lancashire, where he and other lived in caves full hardly
unknown more than a year. On Trinity Sunday King Edward made the Lord
Mountacute Earl of Northumberland and warden of the Marches. The Earls of
Warwike and Northumberlande took Bambrugh Castle and beheaded sir Ralph Gray,
at Doncaster. The Earl of Warwike was sent into France, to conclude a marriage
with the French Kings sisters daughter for K. Edward, which he did, K. Edward
married.
but in the mean while, on the first of May, King Edward took to wife
Elizabeth Daughter to Iaquet Duches of Bedforde, sister to the Earl of Saint
Paul, late wife to sir John Gray, slain at Courton field on King Henry's
part, which marriage was kept secret almost half a year.

King Edward took the Chauncellorship from the Bishop of Excester, brother to
the Earl of Warwike, and gave it to the Bishop of Bathe.

In the month of May, the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Roos, the Lord Molyns,
Talbois Earl of Kyme, sir Philippe Wentworth, sir Thomas Finderne, gathered an
host in the Duke of Somerset and other beheaded.
North Country, and sir John Neuill Earl of Northumberland with. x. thousand
men came upon them, whom the commons forsaking, their Captains were taken and
beheaded. King Edward searing the Lord Mou^tacute the Earl of Warwike, whom he
had of late made Earl of Northumberland, he caused the men of the / Country
to desire the rightful heir Percie son to Henry y^ was slain at York
field: and so Percie Earl of Northumberland made Marquis Mountacute.
was restored, and Mountacute was made a Marquis, and his son Duke of
Bedforde, which should wed the Kings eldest daughter; which by possibility
should be King of England.

About Michaelmas the King held a Counsel at Reading, where the Queen was
showed openly and received as Coin enhau^sed
Queen. After this wedding known, the Earl of Warwike and King Edward were
never friends. The King changed the Coin both gold and silver, and ordained
that ye new Pestilence.
Grote waied scantly. iij. d. and that the Noble of. vj. s^. viij. d. should go
for. viij. s^. iiij. d. etc. A great Pestilence, and the Thames over frosen. In
Michaelmas Term were made Sergeantes at Law, Thomas Young, N. Geney, Richard
Serieants feast. Regester of majors
Neale, Thomas Brian, Richard Pigot, I. Grenefield, I. Catesby and Gwy Fairfax,
which held their feast in the Bishop of Eles place in Holborne to the which
feast, the Mayor of London, with the Aldermen, Sherifes, and Commons of diverse
Crafts being bidden, repaired: but when the Mayor looked to be set to keep
the state in the Hall, as it had been used in all places of the City and
liberties out of the Kings presence (unknown to the Sergeauntes and against
their wills as they said) y^ Lord Gray of Ruthin then Treasurer The Mayor of
London departs from the Serieants feast.
of England was there placed, whereupon the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons
departed home, and the Mayor made all the Aldermen to dyne with him, howbeit he
and all the Citizens was greatly displeased that he was so dealt with, and the
new Sergeaunts and other were right sorry therefore; and had leauer th^n much
good it had not so happened. This was then (as my Record reports more at
large) recorded to be a president in time to come.

John Tate: John Stone, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. New coin,
Anno. reg. 5.


Ralph Iosseli^ Draper, the 28* of October.

A new Coin was made, a Rose Noble at. x. shillings, the half Noble five
shillings, and the farthing two shillings sir pence, an Angelet six shillings
eight pence, ye half thereof three shillings four pence.

On the. xxvj. of May Queen Elizabeth was Crowned at 1465
Westminster being Trinity Sunday, against the which time King Edward made.
xxxix. Knights.

King Henry was taken in Cletherwood, beside Bungerley King Henry taken.
Hyppingstons in Lancashire, by Thomas Talbot son and heir to sir Edward
Talbot of Basshall, and John Talbot his cosyn of Colebry, which deceived him
being at his dynner at Wadington Hall, and brought him toward London, with his
legs bound to the stirops, where he was met by the Earl of W^rwike, and
arested at Esyldon* Doctor Manning Deane of Windsore, Doctor Bedle and young
Ellerton being in his company, with their feet bound under the horse bellyes,
were brought to the Tower of London.

A license was granted to convey certain Coteswold sheep Sheep tra^sported
ouet the seas. Long piked Shone forbid.
into Spain, which have since greatly multiplied there.

It was proclaynied throughout England, that the beakes or pikes of Shoone and
Boots should not pass. ij. inches, upon pain of cursing by the Clergy, and
forfeting. xx. s^. to be paid one Noble to the King, one other to the
Cordewayners of London, and the third to the chamber of London: and for other
Cities and Towns the like order was taken. Before this time and since the
year of our Lord. 1282. the pikes of shoes and boots were of such length,
that they were feign to be tied up to their knees with chains of silver and
guilt, or at the least with silk laces.

Henry Waver: William Constantine, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Ralph Verney Mercer, the 28. of October.

The. xj. of February Queen Elizabeth was delivered at Westminster of a
Daughter also named Elizabeth; who was long after married to King Henry the
seventh; whose Christening was done in the Abbey with ye most solemynitie that
might be, and the more, because the King was assured by his Physicians, that
the Queen was conceived with a Prince, which proved otherwise as ye have heard.

This year was the Lord Hungerford beheaded at Salisburie. Anno. reg. 6 1466
Also sir Thomas Hungerford Knight, son to the Lord Hungerford, and Henry
Courteney of right Earl of Deuo^shire, were beheaded at Salisburie. The Lord
Stafford of Southwike, procured the said Courteneys death, to be made Earl of
Devonshire, as in deed he was shortly after.

John Brown: Henry Brice, the 28. of September.

Sir John Young Grocer, the 28. of October. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Stocton, the 26. of June.

The. iij. of June began a Parliament at Westminster, Anno. reg. 7. 1467 All
the Kings gifts revoked.
wherein was resumed to ye Kings honor all manner of gifts that had bin given
from the first day he took possession of y^ Realm to that time, except
certain things then named.

On Thursday next after Corpus Christi, Antonie Wooduile Iustes in Smithfielde.
Lord Scales, iusted in Smithfield with the Earl of the Roche called the
Bastard of Burgoygne, and had the victory of the field. The listes were of
length. 120. Taylers yardes, and. 10. foot, and of breadth. 80. yardes. 10.
foot, double barred, v. foot between the bars. etc.

Diverse persons Jurors in Assizes falsely forsworn for rewards, were judged
that they should ride from Newgate Jurors on the Pillery.
to the Pillerie in Cornehill, with Myters of paper on their heads, and there
to stand on the Pillerie the space of one hour, and then led again to
Newgate. And this judgment was given by the Mayor.

Thomas Stalbroke* Humfrey Heyford, the 28. of Sept. Mayor. Sherifes. Anno reg.
8* 1498


Thomas Olgraue Skinner, the 28. of October.

The. viij. of May began a Parliament at Westminster, where was granted two
fiftenes and a demi.

The xviij. of June Margaret sister to King Edward the Lady Margaret the Kings
sister married to the Duke of Burgoigne.
fourth began her journey from the Wardrobe in London, toward her marriage we
Charles Duke of Burgoigne: first she offered in the Church of S. Paul, and then
rode through the City, the Earl of Warwike riding before her, with Earls and
Barons a great number, the Duchess of Norfolk, with other Ladies and
Gentlewomen in great number. And at her entry into Cheap, the Mayor of London
and his brethren the Aldermen, presented her with a pair of rich Basins, ^ in
them an. 100. ^. of gold, and that night she lodged at the Abbey of Stratford,
where the King then lay: from thence she took her journey to Canterbury. The
King riding after to see her shipping, on ye first of July, she took ye sea at
Margate, and there took leave of ye King her brother, and departed. There
returned back again with ye King, the Duke of Clarence, the Duke of
Gloucester, ye Earls of Warwike, Shrewsburie, and Northumberland. And there
abode with her in the ship, the Lord Scales, the Lord Dacres her
Chamberlain, sir John Wodvile, sir John Heyward, and many other famous
Knights and Esquiers: she was shipped in the new Ellen of London, and in her
Navy the John of Newcastle, the Marie of Salisburie, and many other Royal
ships, and the morrow landed at Sluice in Flanders, and as soon as her ship
and company of ships were entered into ye Haven, there received her sir Simo^ de
Leleyn and the water Bailie, in diverse Boats and Barks apparelled ready for
her la^ding. The first estate y^ received her was ye Bishop of V^right well
accompanied, and the Countess of Shorn bastard daughter to Duke Phillip of
Burgoygne, and with her many Ladies and Gentlewome^, and so proceeding in at
the gate of the town, the same town was presented to her, she to be
Sovereign Lady thereof: also they gave her. xij. marks of gold Troy weight,
the which was. 200. ^ of English Money, and so she proceeded through the town
to her lodging, every householder standing in the street with a torche in his
hand burning. On the morrow the old Duchess of Burgoygne came to her,
accompanied with many great Estates. On the. iij. of July came the* Duke of
Borgoigne to Sluice with xx. persons secretly, and was there openly affianced to
the Lady Margaret, by the Bishop of Salisburie and the Lord Scales, in
presence of the Lord Dacre, the Duches of Norfolk, the Lady Scales, and all
the Knights, and Esquiers, Gentlewomen enuironing the Chamber.

On the viij. of July being Saturday, by the Duke of Burgoignes appointment,
the Lady Margaret removed by water to the Dame. And on the Sunday in the
morning betwixt v. and. vj. of the clock, the marriage was solemnized betwixt
them, by the Bishops of Salisburie and of Turney, there being present the old
Duches of Burgoigne, the Lord Scales, the Lord Dacre, with the Knights,
Esquiers, Ladies and Gentlewome^ that came out of England, the great triumphs,
feastings, shows of Pageants, with other strange devises, and Justings, were
such as I have not read the like, and would be over long in this place to set
down.

Sir Thomas Cook late Mayor of London, was by one named Robert Fabian. Sir
Thomas Cook.
Hawkins appeached of treason, for the which he was sent to the Tower, and his
place within London seized by the Lord Ryuers, and his wife and servants
clearly put out thereof. The cause was this: The forenamed Hawkins came upon a
season unto the said sir Thomas, requesting him to lend a thousand marks upon
good suertie, whereunto he answered, that first he would know for whom it
should be, and for what intent, at length understanding it should be for the
use of Queen Margaret, he answered he had no current wares whereof any shifts
might be made without too much loss, and therefore required Hawkins to move him
no farther in that matter, for he intended not to deal withal: yet the said
Hawkins exhorted him to remember, what benefits he had received by her when
she was in prosperity, as by making him her Wardrober, and customer of
Hampton, etc. but by no means the said Cook would grant goods nor money,
although at the last the said Hawkins required but an hundredth pound, he was
feign to depart without the value of a penny, and never came again to move
him which so rested two or three years after till the said Hawkins was cast
in the Tower, and at length brought to the brake, called the Duke of Excesters
daughter, by mean of which pain he showed many things, amongst ye which the
motion was one, that he had made to sir Thomas Coke and accused himself so
far that he was put to death: by mean of which confession the said sir
Thomas was troubled as before is showed. After the said sir Thomas had lain in
the Tower from Whitsontide fill about Michaelmas, in the which season many
enquiries were made to find him guilty, and ever quit, till one jury by
means of sir John Fogge, endited him of treason, after which an other
determine was set at the Guildhall, in the which sat with ye Mayor, the Duke of
Clarence, the Earl of Warwike, ye Lord Rivers, sir John Fogge with other of
ye Kings counsel, to the which place the said Thomas was brought and there
arraygned upon life and death, where he was acquitted of ye said indictment, and
had to the Counter in Bredstreete, and from thence to the Kings bench. After a
certain time that he was thus acquitted, his wife gat again the possession of
her house, ye which she found in an evil plight, for such servants of y^ Lord
Rivers and sir John Fogge, as were assigned to keep it, made hauoke of what
they listed. Also at his place in Essex named Guydy hall, were set an other
sort to keep that place, the which destroyed his Dear in his Park, his
Connies and his Fish without reason, and spared not Brass, Pewter, bedding
and all that they might carry, for the which might never one penny be gotten
in recompense, yet could not sir Tho. Cook be delivered til he had paid 8000.
^. to ye* K. and 800. ^. to ye Queen.

In the end of August the Castle of Harlowe was won Harlovv Cas^l^ vvonne.
by the assault of the Lord Herberd, the which Castle was one of the
strongest holds in Wales.

This year many murmurous tales ran in the City, between ye Earl of Warwike,
and the Queens blood, ye which Earl was ever had in great favor of the
Commons of this land, by reason of y^ exceeding household which he daily kept in
all Countries where ever he soiourned or lay, and when Earl of VVarvvike his
house keeping.
he came to London, he held such an house, that. vj. Oxen were eaten at a
breakefast, and every Tavern was full of his meat, for who that had any
acquaintance in that house, he should have had as much soden and roast as he
might carry upon a long Dagger.

Simon Smith: William Hanot, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Cordvvainer
street discharged of fiftens. Anno reg. 19.


William Tailour Grocer, the 28. of October.

This W. Tailour gave to ye City of London certain tenements, for the which
ye City is bound to pay for ever, at every fifteen granted to ye King, for
all such as shall dwell in Cordwainers street ward, seized at. xij. d. a
piece or under.

The Duke of Clarence went to Calleis, and there wedded Isable one of ye
daughters to ye Earl of Warwike. Sir John Coniers 1469
knight, Robert Hiltard, who named himself Robin of Ridsedale, and other,
gathered an host of. 20000. me^ in ye North, Robert of Ridsedale.
against who^ K. Edward sent W. Herbert late made Earl of Penbroke, with.
18000. Welsh men, and Humfrey Stafforde of Southroike, late made Earl of Deuon
with 6000. good archers, which ij. Earls falling out for lodging in ye town of
Ba^bery, Edgecote field.
Hu^frey* Stafford departed with his power, whereby W. Herbert and Richard Herbert
his brother were overcome and taken by the^ of the North* and. 5000. (says
Hall) of the Welchmen slain in a plain called Danes more, near to ye town
of Edgecote, iij. miles from Ba^bery, y^ 26. of July. The men of name slain of
y^ Welsh party, were sir Roger Vaugha^ knight, Henry ap Morgan, Tho. ap Richard
Vaugha^ Esquier, W. Herbert of Brecknocke Esquier, Watkin Thomas son to Roger
Vaughan: Ina^ ap John ap Meridik, Dauy ap Iankin ap Limorik, Harrisdon ap
Pikton, John Done of Kidwelly, Rice ap Morga^ ap Visto^, Iankin Perot ap Scots
Burg, John Euerard of Penbrokeshire, John Courtor of Hereford. The Northre^ men
of name slain were, sir Henry Latimer son and heir to ye Lord Latimer, sir
Roger Pigot Knight, James Coniers son and heir to sir John Coniers Knight,
Oliver Awdley Esquier, Tho* Wakes son and heir to W. Mallerie Esquier:
Richard Woodvile Lord Rivers, with John his son, were taken in y^ forest of
Dene and brought to Northampto^, where they with sir W. Herbert and Richard his
brother were all* iiij. beheaded, by y^ commandment of ye duke of Clarence,
and the Earl of Warwike. T. Herbert was slain at Bristow. Humfry Stafford was
by the commo^s taken at Bridgewater, and beheaded. King Edward was taken at
V^nar, a village beside Northampton, by ye archbishop of York, and brought to
Warwick Castle, and thence to York, from whence by fair promises he
escaped, and came to London.

Richard Gardener, Robert Drope, the 28, of September, Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Lee Grocer, the 28. of October.

The 29. of Sept. Humfrey Neuile Knighte, and Charles his brother, were taken
by the earl of Warwike, and beheaded at York, King Edward being present. In
the month of Anno reg. 1^*
March the L. Willoughby, Rich. Lord Wels, sir Roberte his son, sir Tho.
Delaband, sir Tho. Dimoke the Kings Champion, drove out of Lincolnshire sir
Tho. Burgh a Knighte of the kings house, pulled down his place, and took al his
goods and cattels, and with 30000 of the commons, cried, King Henry. K. Edward
gave Lord Wels his pardon, and sent for him, and having him in custody,
commanded him upon pain of death, to cause the Lincolneshire men i^ lay down
their host, and so he wrote, but all in vain: Whereupon the Lord Wels head
was cut off. King Edward sprinkeled the Lincolnshire men with his ordinance,
and slew many of them. Sir Robert Wels, sir Thomas Delaband, and sir Thomas
Dimoke were taken and beheaded beside Stamforde the 13. of March: and the 19.
day the Lord Willoughbey was beheaded at Doncacter. The Duke of Clarence, and
the Earl of Warwike fled into Fr^unce, where they made a marriage betwixt
Prince Edward son to King Henry the sixth, and one of the Earl of Warwikes
daughters. At this marriage was concluded, that King Henry should reign
again, and Prince Edward after him, and for lack of their heirs, George
Duke of Clarence, and his heirs, ^^.

The. xiij. day of Sept. George Duke of Clarence, Jasper Earl of Penbroke*
Richard Earl of Warwike, the Earl of Oxford with the bastard Fawconbridge and
many other arrived at Plymmouth* and an other sort at Dartmouth, of whom the
Earl of Penbroke went into Wales, the other toward Excester, proclaiming in
the name of King Henry that all men betwixt the ages of. xvj. and. lx. should
be ready to assist the said Lords on the behalf of King Henry, against King
Edward. Also on the Sunday next after the feast of Saint Michael the
Archangell, Doctor Godard preaching at Doctor Godard preached at Paul's Cross
against King Edward.
Paul's* Cross, declared by the reading of byls and diverse other arguments and
proofs that Henry was true and lawful King of England, and not King Edward.
Moreover the Marquis Mountacute who had gathered a. vj. thousand men in King
Edwardes name, and was come near unto the said Edward, he told them how King
Edward had served him: first, making him* Earl of Northumberland, and after
giving the same Erledome to T. Percie, made him Marquis Mountacute, allowing
him a Pies neste to maintain it* with all, wherefore he would leave to serve
him and take part with the Earl of Warwike his brother. Whereof when King
Edward understood, he fled from his host, besides Notingham, King Edward
fled beyond the Seas.
and the. iij. day of October, he with the Lord, Rivers, Lord Hastings his
Chamberlain, the Lord Say and other to ye number of. vij. or. viij. Earls
took shipping at Lynne, Phil. Kom^in^^.
and sailed toward the duke of Burgoigne his brother in law.

The Queen had before that, to wit, on y^ first of October, The Queen took
sanctuary at* VVestm^ster.
stolen secretly in ye night out of the Tower of London, by water to
Westminster and there taken Sanctuary. This time was great watch kept in ye
City of London* for the Kentishmen had Kentishmen robbed the Flemings, and
chased them out of London.
assembled themselves in great companies, and so had come to the outer part of
the City as to Ratcliffe, Saint Katherins, Southwarke, and other the suburbs*
and many of them were entered the City, where they robbed the Flemings at
Blanchapelto^, and other places, making* them to fly out of the City with
sorrow enough.

On Wednesday following the tower of London was yielded The tower of London
yielded to the Mayor of London.
to the Mayor, and his brethren the Alderme^, who forthwith entered the same,
and delivered King Henry of his imprisonment, and lodged him in the Kings
loding. On the Friday following came to London the Archbyshoppe of York,
brother to the Earl of Warwike, the Lord Prior of Saint John's, and other to
the number of 2000. men of arms. On the morrow following, came the Duke of
Clarence, the Earl of Warwike, the bastard Fawconbridge, with other to the
number of four thousand men. On the. vj. day of October John Fortescue.
the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of Warwike, the Archbishop of York, the Lord
of Saint John's, with other, entered the Tower of London, and King Henry being
there prisoner K. H. restored.
nigh the space of nine years, they elected him to be their lawful King, and
forthwith rode with him through London to the Bishops Palace, where he rested
til the. xiij. of October, on which day he went a procession Crowned in Paul's
Church: the Earl of Warwike bare his train, and ye Earl of Oxforde his
sword. etc.

King Edward was proclaimed usurper of the Crown, and John Tiptoft Earl of
Worcester was found in the top of an high tree, in the Forest* of Wabridge, in
the County of Huntington, and brought to London and beheaded at ye Tower hill,
and was buried at the Black Friars,

John Crosby: John Ward, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Stockton Mercer, the 28. of October.

Sir John Crosby Knight, one of the late named Sherifes of London for this
year* deceased in Anno Domini. 1475 Sir John Crosby his gifts to the City.
and was buried in the Parish Church of Saint Helen in Bishops gate
street, unto the repayring of which Parish Church he gave five hundred
marks, and. xxx. pound to be distributed to poor householders in the ward of
Bishops gate: to the repayring of the Parish Church at Heneworth in Myddlesex
forty pound: to the* repayring of London Wall one hundred pound: toward the
making of a new Tower of stone at the South end of London bridge, if the same
were begun by the Mayor and commonaltie within. x. years next after his
deceasse, one hundred pound: to the reparations of Rochester bridge. x. pound:
to every the prisoners in and about London liberally. Also he gave to the
Wardens and Commonaltie of the Grocers in London two large pottes of Silver
chaced half guilte, waying. xitj. pound v. ounces of Troy weight, to be
occupied in their common hall, and else where, at their discretions. Queen
Elizabeth wife to Edward the fourth, being in the Sanctuary at Westminster,
Prince Ed. born in the Sa^ctuarie.
was delivered of a Prince on the. iitj. of November, who was after King Edward
the fifth.

King Edward with the Lord Hastings, the Lord Say, ix. hundred Englishmen, and
iij. hundred Flemings, would have landed in Essex, but there the Earl of
Oxfordes brother put them Anno reg. 11
off, and after he landed sore weather beaten at Rauenesporne, within Humber on
Holdernesse, and there rose on him Holdernesse 1471
men, whose Captain was sir John Westerdale a Priest, after cast into the
Marshalsea at London. As K. Edward passed the country he showed ye Earl of
Northumberlandes letters and Seal, that sent for him, saying that he came to
claim no title of the Crown, but only his Dukedom of York, nor would not
have done before, but at ye exciting of the Earl of Warwike, and cried in every
place K. Henry, and Prince Edward, wearing an Estriche Feather Prince
Edwardes lyuerie. King Edward came to Notingham where sir William Stanley, sir
William Norres, and diverse other brought him men; so that he had then 4000. or
more. Then Edward marched toward Lecester where the Earl of Warwike and
Marquis Mountacute had 4000 men, and would have fought with King Edward, but
that he had received letters from the Duke of Clarence, that the should not
fight until he came. Whereupon he keeping Lecester still, suffered Edward to
march toward London. A (...) of Clarence with seven thousand(...) Edward,
agreed to him, and brake all the promises made in France. King Edward coming
to London, by Master Vrswike the Recorders means and others entered, into the
Bishop of Londons Palaice by a King Henry again sent to the Tovver.
Posterne, and there took King Henry, and the Archbishop of York, and sent
them both to the Tower on Mau^dye Thursday.

The Earl of Warwike, the Duke of Excester, the Marquis Barnet field.
Mountacute, and the Earl of Oxford, we many Knights came with their host
toward Barnet: Wherefore King Edward took King Henry with him, and
preoccupied ye town of Barnet all the night: the Earl of Warwike and his
retinue remained on the plain without the town, shooting gu^nes one at the
other. And in ye morning being Easter day and ye xiitj. of April, they fought
in a thick mist from. iitj. of ye clock in the morning till. x. and diverse
times the Earl of Warwikes men supposed that they had got the victory of
the field, but it happened that ye Earl of Oxfords men had a star we
streams both before and behind on their liueries, and King Edwards men had
the sun with streams on their lyuery: whereupon the Earl of Warwikes men by
reason of the mist not well decerning the badges so like, shot at the Earl of
Oxfordes men that were on their own part, and then the Earl of Oxforde and
his men cried treason, and fled with eight hundred men. The Marquis Mountacute
was privily agreed with King Edward, and had gotten on his lyuerie, but one of
his brothers the Earl of Warwikes men espying this fell upon him and killed
him.

The Earl of Warwike seeing all this, lepte on a horse to fly, and coming to
a woodde where was no passage, one of King Edwardes men came to him, killed
him, and spoiled him to the naked skin. Sir William Tirrell Knight was
killed on the Earl of Warwikes ^^rt. The Duke of Excester fought manfully and
was diss^^yled, wounded, and left for dead from seven in the morning till. 4.
of the clock in the afternoon, and then being brought to a servants house
of his there by, called Ruthland, he had a Surgeon, and after was conveyed
into Westminster Sanctuary. The Lord Cromwell son and heir to the Earl of
Essex, the Lord Barnes son and heir, to the Lord Say, were slain on King
Edwardes party, and on both parts to the number of four thousand, which
were buried on the same plain, where after a Chapel was builded.

The morrow after Easter day, were ye bodies of the Earl Job. Rastall.
of Warwike, and the Marquis Mountacute laid naked in Paul's Church in
London, that all men might see them, King Henry with the Archbishop of York,
were sent to the Tower of London.

At this time Queen Margaret, and Prince Edward her son had line on ye sea.
xvtj. days let with foul weather, and on Easter day at even they landed
with their French Battle at Tevvkesburie.
Navy at Weymouth, and so came to Excester, from thence to Tewkesburie, and
pitched his field by Seuerne. Edward the fourth being come from London,
fought with Prince Edward Liber Tewx.
at Tewkesburie, on the fourth of May, took Queen Margaret prisoner with
Prince Edward her son, whom cruelly he smote on the face with his gawntlet,
and after his servants slew him. Edmond Duke of Somerset, and sir Hugh
Courteney fled from Prince Edward and lost him the field. There was slain
Courteney Earl of Devonshire, Lord John of Somerset, Lord Wenlocke, sir
Edmond Flamdene, sir Robert Whittingham, sir William Vaus, sir Nicholas Haruie,
sir John Deluis, sir William Filding, sir Thomas Fizhony, sir John Laukenor.
King Edward entering a Church in Teweksburie with his sword drawn, a Priest
brought the Sacrament against him, and would not let him enter until he had
granted his pardon to these that follow: the Duke of Somerset, the Lord of
Saint John's, sir Humfrey Audeley, sir Geruis of Clifton, sir William Crimeby,
sir William Carry, sir Thomas Tresham, sir William Newbrough Knights, Henry
Tresham, Walter Courteney, John Florie, Jews Miles, Robert Iackson, James
Gower, James Deluis, son and heir to sir John Deluis, all these where they
might have escaped, tarryed in the Church (trusting in the Kings pardon,) from
Saterdaye till Mondaye, when they were taken out and beheaded.

About this time sir Walter Wroitile, and sir Geffrey Thomas the Bastard.
Gates Knights, governors of Caleis, sent sir George Broke Knight from
Caleis with. 300. soldiers to Thomas the Bastard Fauconbridge, Captain of
the Earl of Warwickes Navy, willing him to raise the Country of Kente, and
to go to London, there to take King Henry out of the Tower, and then to go
against King Edward.

The fourteenth day of May Thomas, the Bastard with a ryotous company of
shipmen, and other of Essex and Kent, came to London, where being denied
passage through the City, he set upon Bishops Gate, Aldegate, London bridge,
etc. along the Thamis side, shooting arrows and Gunnes into the City, fiered
the Suburbs, and brent more than 60. houses, wanne the Bulwarks at Aldegate
and entered the City, but ye Parcolise being let down, such as had entered
were slain, and then the Citizens pursued the rest, as far as Stratforde and
Black Wall, slaying many, and took many prisoners. Thomas the Bastard went
from London Weastwarde, as far as Kingstone upon Thamis, to prosecute King
Edward, but the Lord Scales, with Nicholas Faunte Mayor of Canterbury, by
fair words caused Fawconbridge to return to Black Heath in Kent, from
whence in the night he stale from the host with six hundred horssemenne to
Rochester, and so to Sandwiche, where he abode the Kings coming.

The one and twentieth of May King Edward came to King Henry murdered.
London with thirty thousand men, and the same night king Henry was murdered
in the Tower of London: on the morrow he was brought to Saint Paul's Church in
London, in an open Cophen bare faced, where he bled: thence he was carried to
the Black Friars and there bled: and thence to Chersey Abbay in a boat, where
he was then buried, but since removed to Windsor, where he rests.

Thus ended the King his transitory life, having inioyed as great prosperity,
as favorable fortune could aforde, and as great troubles on the other side,
as she frownyng could pour out, yet in both states he was patiente, and
virtuous, that he may be a pattern of most perfect virtue, as he was a
worthy example of Fortunes inconstancy, he was plain, upright, far from
fraud, wholye given to prayer, reading of Scriptures, and almes-deedes, of
such integrity of life, that the Bishop which had been his Confessor
ten years, auowched that he had not all that time committed any mortal
crime: So continente as suspicion of unchaste life never touched him: and
having in Christmasse a show of young womenne with their bare breasts laid
out, presented before him he immediately departed, with these words, fie, fie,
for shame, forsooth you be to blame: before his marryage he liked not that
women should enter into his Court, and for this respect, he committed his two
brethren by the mothers side, Jasper and Edmonde, to most honest and virtuous
Prelates, to be brought up, so far he was from covetousness, that when
the executors of his uncle the Bishop of Winchester, surnamed the rich
Cardinal, would have given to him 2000. pound, he playnelye refused it,
willing them to discharge the will of the departed, and would scarcely
condescend at length to accept the same some of money toward the endowing of
his Colleges in Cambridge and Eaton: he was religiously affected (as the time
then was) that at principal holidays, he would were sackeclothe next his
skin. Oath he used none, but in most earnest matters these words: forsoothe
and forsooth: he was so pityfull, that when he saw the quarter of a Traitor
against his Crown over Criple Gate, he willed it to be taken away, with
these words: I will not have any Christian so cruellye handeled for my sake:
many great offenses he willinglye pardoned, and receiving at a time a great
blow by a wicked manne which compassed his death, he only said, forsooth,
forsooth, ye do fowelye to smite a King anointed so: another also thruste
him in the side with a sword when he was restoared to his state and Kingdom:
not long before his death, being demanded why he had so long held the
Crown of England unjustly, he replied, my Father was King of England,
quietlye enjoying the Crown all his reign, and further my grandsire was King
of England, and I even a child in my Cradle, was proclaimed and crowned King
without any interruption, and so held fortye years, well near all the
states doing homage unto me, as to my antecessors: Wherefore I may say with
King David: The lotte is fallen unto me in a fair ground, yea, I have a
goodlye heritage, my help is from the Lord which saves the vprighte in
heart.

This good King, of himself always naturally inclined The Kings College in
Cambridge.
to do good, and fearing lest he might seem unthankful to almyghtye GOD for
his great benefittes bestowed upon him since the time he first took upon
him the regimente of the Realm, determined about the six and twentieth year
of his raygne, for his primer notable work (as by the words of his will I
find expressed) to erecte and found two famous Colleges in the honor and
worship of his holy name, and for the increase of virtue, the dilation of
cunning, and establishment of Christian Faith, whereof the one in Cambridge,
to be called his College royal of our Lady and Saint Nicholas: And the
other at Eaton beside Windsor, to be called his College of our blessed
Lady. And for the performaunce of this his devout purpose, he enfeffed
certain Bishops with other Noble and worshipful personages by his letters
patents with lands and possessions, parcel of his enheritance of the Duchy of
La^caster, to the clear value of well near xxxiiij. hundred pound by year,
which letters patents he after confirmed by his Act of Parliament, declaring
also by his will unto his said feoffees, his intent and meaning, how the same
should be employed upon the edifications of his said two Colleges, whereof in
my judgment the device is so excellent, and the buildings so princely and apt
for that purpose, as I can not omit to set forth unto you the very plat of
the whole College in Cambridge, even as I find mentioned, almost Verbatim, in
his said will, supposing that if the rest of the house had proceeded according
to the Chapel already finished (as his full intent and meaning was) the like
College could skant have bin found again in any Christian land. The words of
the Will are thus. As touching The Chapel.
the dimensions of the Church of my said College, of our Lady and Saint
Nicholas of Cambridge, I have devised and appointed, that the same Church shall
contain in length 288. foot of assise, without any Isles, and all of the
wideness of xl. foot. And the length of the same Church from ye West end unto
the Alters at the Quire door, shall contain 120. foot. And from the Prouostes
stall, unto the greece called Gradus Chori. 90 foot, for 36. stals on either
side of the same Quyre, aunscoering to lxx. fellows and ten Priests conduits,
which must be de prima forma. And from the said stalles unto ye East end of
the said Church, lxij. foot of assise. Also a Reredosse bearing the
Roodelofte, departing the Quire and the body of the Church, containing in
length xl. foot, and in breadth xiiij. foot. The walls of the same Church to
be in height 90. foot imbattelled, vawted and Charerooffed, sufficiently
butteraced, and every Butterace fined with finials. And in the East end of the
same Church shall be a Window of nine days, and betwixt every Buttrace a
Window of five days. And betwixt every of the same Buttraces in the Body of
the Church, on both sides of the same Church a Closet with an Alter therein,
containing in length twenty foot, and in breadth ten foot, vawted and finished
under the soil of the I Will windows. And the pauement of ye Church to be
enhansed 4. foot above ye ground without. And ye height of the pauement of the
Quire one foot and a half above the pauement of the Church. And the
pauemente of the Alter three foot above that. And on the North side of the
Quier a The Vestry.
Uestry containing in length fifty foot, and in breadth. 22. foot, departed
into two houses beneath, and two houses above, which shall contain in hight 22.
foot in all, with an entrey from the Quire vauted. And at the West end of the
The Cloister.
Church a Cloister square, the East pane containing in length. 175. foot and
the West pane as much. The North pane two hundred foot, and the South pane
as much of the which the Deambulatorie^ thirteen foot wide, and in heyght
twenty foot, to the Corbill Table, with clear stories and Butteraces with
finalles, vawted and embattelled. And the ground thereof, four foot lower
then the The Steeple.
Church ground. And in the middle of the West pane of the Cloister a strong
Tower square, containing four and twentieth foot within the Walls. And in
height one hundred and twenty foot, to the Corbill table. And four small
Turrets, over that fined with Pynacles. And a door into the said Cloister
inward, but outward noone. And as touching the dimensions of the housing of
the said The base Cour^
College, I have devised and appointed in the Southside of the said Church a
Quadraunte, closing to both ends of the same Church, the East pane whereof
shall contain 230. foot in length, and in breedth within the Walls The East
pane.
two and twentieth foot. In the same panes myddle a Tower for a Gatehouse
containing in length thirty foot, and in breadth two and twentieth foot, and
in height lx. foot with The great Gate
in three Cha^bers over ye Gate every one over ye other. And on either side of
the same gate four Chambers, every one containing in length five and twenty
foot, and in breadth two and twenty feet. And over every of these Chambers,
two Chambers above of the same measure or more, with two Towers outward, and
two Towers inward. The Southe pane shall contain in length 238. foot, and
The south pane
in breadth two and twenty foot within, in which shall be seven Chambers,
every one co^tayning in length nine and twenty foot, and in breadth 22. with
a Chamber percell of the prouosts lodging containing in length. 35. foot, and
with a Chamber in the East corner of the same pane containing in length. 25.
foot, and in breadth. xxij. foot. And over every of all these Chambers two
Chambers, and with five Towers outward, and three towers inward. The West pane
The west pane
shall contain in length 230. foot, and in breadth within 24. foot, in which
at the end toward the Church shall be a The Library.
Library, containing in length 110. foot, and in bread the The disputation
house.
24. foot. And a large house for reading and disputations co^tayning in
length. xl. foot. And two Chambers under the same Library, each containing
29. foot in length and in breadth four and twenty foot. And over the said
Lybrary a house of the same largeness, for diverse stuff of the The wardrobe
said College. In the other end of the same pane a Hall, The Hall.
containing in length 100. foot upon a vaute of 12. foot high, ordained for
the Cellor and Buttrie: and the breadth of the Hall six and thyrtie foot. On
every side thereof a Baye Window. And in the nether end of the same Hall
toward the middle of the same pane a Pantrey and Buttrie The Pantrie and
Buttrie.
every of them in length twenty foot, and in breadth seauenteene foot, and
over that two Chambers for Officers. And at the nether end of the Hal toward
the West, a goodlye The College Kitchen.
Kitchen. And every corner of the same pane shall have inward two Towers,
ordained for the ways into the Hall and Library. And in every corner of the
said Quadraunt, shall be two corner towers, one inward, and one outward, more
than the Towers above rehearsed. The prouosts lodging.
And at the upper end of the Hall, the Prouosts lodgins, that is to wit, more
than the Chambers for him above specifyed, a Parlour on the ground containing
six and thirty foot in length, and two and twenty in breadth, and two
chambers above of the same quantity. And westwarde closing thereto a Kitchen
for him, a Larderhouse, Stables and other many housings and grounds. And
westwarde The Bake house and Brevvhouse
beyond these houses, and the said Kitchen ordained for a Hall, a Bakehouse,
a Brewhouse, and other houses of office, between which there is left a
ground square of four scour foot in every pane, for wood and such stuff.
The vvoodyarde. The water Conduite.
And in the middle of the said large Quadraunt shall be a Conduite goodly
devised for ease of the same College. And I will, that the edification
proceed in large form of my said College clean and substancial, setting
apart superfluity of too great curious works, of entaile and busye moulding.
And I have devised and appointed that the precinct The Precinct of the College.
of my said College, as well on both sides of the garden from the College to
the Water, as in all other places of the same precinct, be enclosed with a
substanciall Wall, of the height of fourteen foot, with a large Tower at the
principal entry against the middle of the East pane, out of the high
street. And in the same Tower a large Gate, The water Gate.
and another Tower in the middle of the Weast end at the new bridge. And the
same Wall to be creasted, embattelled, and fortifyed with Towers, as many as
shall be thought convenient thereunto. And I will that my said College be
edified of the most substantial and best abiding stuff, of stone, lead,
glass, and Iron, that may best be had and provided thereto.

Thus much I have enlarged by occasion of reading this good Kings Will: the
cunning devise whereof I leave to be considered by such as be expert in
Architecture, heartily desiring almighty God to put into the heart of some
notable Prince one day to make perfect this princely work so charitably
begone.

And now to return again to King Edward. At this his coming to London, at
Bishops Gate he made these Knights of Aldermen, Sir John Stocton, Sir
Ralphe Verney, sir Richard Blee, sir John Young, sir William Tailor, sir George
Ireland, sir John Stokar, sir Matthew Phillip, sir William Hampton, sir Thomas
Stalbroke, sir John Crosby, sir Thomas Vrswike Recorder of London.

The four and twentieth of May King Edward with his host rode through Kent, to
Canterbury, and so to Sandwiche, where Bastard Faulconbridge, submitted
himself and all his to King Edward, and yielded to him lvj. ships great and
small which had been under his leading, whereupon King Edward pardoned him,
made him Knight and v^zeadmiral of the sea. The L. Denha^ and sir John Fog,
with others were left in Kent, to sit in judgment of the rebels, whereof were
a great number punished by the purse, Nicholas Faunt Mayor of Caunterburie,
with other, were hanged, and headed there, the heads of Spicing and Quinton
were set on Aldegate of London.

The fourth of June George Neuill Archbishop of York: and brother to the
Earl of Warwike, was delivered out of the Tower of London.

The first of July Edward the son of King Edward, was made Prince of
Wales, Duke of Lancaster, and Earl of Cornwall.

In September Thomas the Bastard of Fauconbridge was taken at Southampton, and
beheaded at the Castle of Midleham in Yorkshire, his head was set on London
bridge.

John Allein: John Shelley, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Edward Grocer, the. 28. of October.

The xij. of November the Lady Anne the Kings sister was deuorsed from the
Duke of Excester, by her own suit.

King Ed. on Christmasse day was Crowned at Westminster, and the Queen also:
likewise the twelfth day the King was again Crowned and went on Procession
crowned, Anno. reg. 12 1472
but the Queen was not at that time crowned because she was great with child.

This year were sent Ambassadors from King Edward to the Duke of Burgoigne,
who landed at Bridges on the second of April, where they were honorablye
received without the Town, by the Lord Grantehuse. The names of the
Ambassadors was, sir John Scot Knight Marshall of Caleis, Master William
Hatclofe Secretary to the King, Master John Russel Doctor and Archdeacon,
master Richard Marten Archdeacon of London, sir John Young Knighte, and
Merchaunte of London, on the fourth of April they were conveyed on horssebacke
to the Dukes lodging. etc.

George Neuill Archebishoppe of York, being at Windsor with King Edward on
hunting, the King promised the Archebishoppe to come to the More (a place in
Hartfordeshire, which the Archebishoppe had purchased and builded
commodiouslye) there to hunte and make merry with him, whereupon the
Archebishoppe made great provision for the King, and sent for much plate
that he had hid, ^at the time of Barnet and Tewkesburie fields, and
besides this, borrowed much of his friends, this being done, the King
sodaynely sent for the Archbishop to come to Windsor; where he was arrested
of Treason, that he should help the Earl of Oxforde, and so was sent to
Caleis and to Hames, where he continued long after prisoner.

In this mean while sir William Parre Knight, and sir Thomas Vahan Esquire,
and other were sent to the More to cease all his goods for the King, which
came there to the samme of twenty thousand pound, King Edward at this time
brake the Bishops miter, that had many rich stones and made thereof a Crown
for himself.

Also the Earl of Oxforde that had withdrawn himself from Barnet field,
first into Scotland, after into France, then getting much goods on the Sea,
landed in the Weast Country, and entered Saint Michaels Mount with 397. men,
the last of September, whereon he was, by the kings appointment, besieged by
Bodrigan and other, but with such favor, that the Earl reuictualled the
Mount. Then was Fortescue sent thither to continue the siege, and King Edward
sending pardons to the Earls men, so long practiced with them, that at the last
if the Earl had not submitted himself to King Edward, he had bin taken of his
own me^, and so Fortestue entering y^ Mount, the fifteenth of February, found
victual enough there to have served them till Mydsommer after* John Vere Earl
of Oxforde, the Lord Beaumonde, two brothers of the said Earl, and Thomas
Clifforde were brought prisoners to the King. The Earl of Oxforde was sent
prisoner to Gwines, where he remained so long as this King raygned. In all
which time the Lady his wife, might never come to him, or had any thing to
live upon, but what people of their Charityes would give her, or what she
got by her needle.

In the month of September Jews de Bruges Lord Grantehuse, came into
England from Charles Duke of Burgoigne, and on the thirteenth of October was
created Earl of Winchester openly in the Parliament Chamber.

John Broune: Thomas Bledlow, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Hampton Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

This Mayor above al other his predecessors, corrected Strumpets, and caused
them to ride about the City with Rey hoodes upon their heads, and after
banished them the City for ever. He also caused a pair of stocks to be set
in every ward of London.

The sixth of October began a Parliamente at Westminster by authority,
whereby an aid was granted to the King, toward the charge of his Wars, which
was levied of men's lands, as well of Lords as of other.

The Duke of Burgo^gne having great Wars with Anno. reg. 13 1473
the French King, sent Ambassadors into England to require King Edward his
brother in Law to make War on the French King, unto the which request,
King Edward easily granted, because he wished to be revenged on the French
King, as of his enymie, for ayding the Earl of Warwick, Queen Margaret and
her son Prince Edward and their accomplices: whereupon he promised and also
determined in the beginning of the next year to bring a great army over to
Caleis, and to invade the Kingdom of France. And forthwith with all diligence
prepared all things ready for his journey, making many shifts for the
provision of money to serus his turn.

William Stocker: Robert Ballisdon, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Tate Mercer, the 28. of October.

This year the Duke of Excester was found dead in the Sea between Dover and
Caleis, but how he came there the certainty could not be known.

King Edward having prepared his army, led the Anno reg. 14 1474
same to Dover from thence to cross the seas to Caleis. The force that passed
with him at this present was the greatest that ever came into France, most
of them being Horssemenne, all in very good order well armed. All the Nobles
of the Realm were there, a few excepted, they were fifteen hundred men of
arms very well mounted, and the most of them barded and richly trapped, after
the manner of the French Wars, and well accompanied with horssemenne of
their retinue, they were at the least fifteen thousand Archers on
horssebacke, and a great number of f^^temenne and others, as well to pitche
their Tents, whereof they were well furnyshed, as also to attend upon their
Artyl^erye, and enclose their Camp, and in all their army they had not one
pledge. Besides this, were thr^e thousand English men appointed to land in
Brytaine. When King Edward came to Dover the Duke of Burgoigne to help his
passage, sent. 500. boats of Hollande, and Seland, called Cuttes, which are
flat and low, builte very commodiously for transporting of horses, but
notwithstanding all this help they had from the Duke, and all the King of
England could command himself: he was above three weeks in passing
between Dover and Caleis, one ship of Ewe took two or three of his small
passengers, before King Edward embarked, he sent from Dover to the King of
France, one Heralte alone called Gartera Norman borne, who brought a letter
of defiaunce from the King of England, in very good language and so
excellently well penned, that mine Aucthour was persuaded it was never English
man's doing. The contents whereof were, that the King should yield unto him
the Realm of France, being his inheritance, to the end he might restore the
Cleargye and Nobility to their ancient liberty, ease them of the great
charges they sustained and deliver them of the miseries they were in, which if
he refused to do, he protested what great mischief should ensue thereof,
in manner and form as in such cases is accustomed. The King read the letter
softlye to himself, and afterward all alone withdrewe himself into a
wardrobe, and commanded the Heralte to be brought to hyepresence, to whom he
made this answer.

First that he knew well that the King of England had not passed the seas of
his own free motion, but by the persuasion of the Duke of Burgondie, and the
comminaltie of England.

Secondelye that the Summer was now almost paste, and that the Du^^ of
Burgoigne, was returned from Nunz, as a man discomifited and utterly
unfurnished of all things.

Thirdlye as touching the Conestable (of France) he knew well (he said) yt the
intelligence with ye K. of England, because he had married his niece: but
would deceive the King his Master as he ^ad him, notwithstanding all the great
benefits that he had received of him, which he that rehearsed, adding thereunto
that the said Conestable meant to live in continual dissimulation, and
entertain every man to make his profit of him. Last of all he alleged to the
Heralte diverse reasons to persuade the King his Mastor to peace, and gave him
with his own hand. 300. crowns, promising him. 1000. more if the peace were*
concluded: further openly he gave him for a present a goodly piece of Crimson
Ueluet of thyrtie Else. The Heralte aunsweared that he would travail the
best he could for peace, and thought the King his Master would easilye be
won thereunto: but he willed the King of France, to send an Haraulte to the
English Camp to demand a safeconduite for certain Ambassadors, that he
would send to the King of England, and to direct his letters to the Lord
Hawarde, or to the Lord Stanley, and to himself also to conuene his Haralte.
At one time in a ma^oure, both the King of England landed at Caleis, and the
Duke of Burgoigne departed from before Nunz, who in great haste rydde
streyghte to Caleis, to the said King with a very small train, for he had
sent his army to spoil the Country of Barroys and Loraine. The King of
England departed from Caleis in company of the Duke and passed through
Bolloigne, and from thence marched to Peronne where the Duke gave the English
men but cold entertaynemente, for he caused the Gates to be straightly kept,
and would suffer but few to enter, so that the greatest part of them lodged
in the fields. After they were come to Peronne the Conestable of France sent
to ye Duke of Burgoigndie one of his servants, by whom he ^^^used himself for
the wythholdyng of S. Quintins, alleging that if he had restored it he could
have stood him in ^^ stee^e in the Realm of France, for he should utterly
have lost his credit and intelligence, but now seeing the King of England
was come over in person, he promised to do hereafter all that the Duke should
command him, whereof the better to assure him, he sent him a letter of
credit to the declaration of the Duke. Further he gave the Duke his Faith in
writing, to serve and suc^^ure him, his friends and confederates, as well the
King of England as others, against all men none excepted.

The Duke delivered the King of England his letter, and all the matter of
credit, adding somewhat thereto of his own head: for he assured the King,
that the Conestable would deliver into his hands both Saint Quintines, and
all his other places, which the King easilye believed, partly because he
had married the Conestables Nie^e, and partlye because he saw him in so
great fear of the King of France, that he thought he durst not fail his
promise made to the Duke and him: and the Duke believed i^ also. But the
Conestable meante nothing less, for the fear he was in of the French King
was not so great that it could force him thus (...), but he used s^yl his
^onted dissimulation. The King of England reioycyng at this message sent by
the Conestable, departed from Peronn^, with the Duke of Burgoigne, toward
Saint Quintins, whereunto when he approached, a great band of English men
ran before, thynkyng that the belles should have been rong at their coming,
and that the Citizens would have received them with Cross and Holy Water,
but when they drew near to the Town, the Artill^^^e shot, and the
Souldi^urs ^^^ed for the (...)he (...) she both on hors^e back and on foot,
so that two or three English men were slain, and some taken ^ and in this
state returned they in great rage to their Camp, (...) against the Conestable.

The next morning the Duke of (...) would have taken his leave of the King of
England to depart to his army in Barrays, promising to do maruayles in his
favor.

The French King sent a servant of the LORD Halles in the likeness of an
Herraulte, with a coat made of a Trumpets Banner, to the English Camp, where
when he came, he was brought to a Tente, and after dynner talked with the
King: his message was chielely grounded upon the great desire the King had
of long time to be in peace with the King of England, saying further, that
since he was Crowned King of France he never had attempted any thing
against the King of England or his realm.

Secondly he excused himself, for the receiving in times paste the Earl of
Warwick into his Dominions, saying, that he did it onely^ against the Duke
of Burgoigne and not him.

Further, he declared that the said Duke of Burgoigne had for none other cause
called him into France, but that by the occasion of his coming, he might
conclude a bett^r peace for himself with the King: And if happily any other
furthered the matter, it was only to amend the broken estate of their own
affairs, and for their own private commodity: but as touching the King of
Englandes good success, they were altogether careless thereof. He put him
also in mind of the time of the year, alleging that Winter approached, and
likewise the great charges he sustained.

Lastly he said, that notwithstanding a great number in England desired
War with France, yet if the King o^ England inclyne to peace, the King for
his part would condescende to such conditions as he doubted not but he and
his Realm would allow of: finally he demanded a sa^e conduite for certain
Ambassadors, to come well informed of his masters pleasure.

The King of England and part of his Nobles liking these ouertures very well,
granted to the Harrault of France as large a safe conducte as he demanded,
and gave him four Nobles of gold in reward. He also sent an English
Harrault, with him to bring the like safe conducte. And in the next morning in
a Uillage near to Amience, the Commissioners of both Princes met being these.
For, the King of France, the bastard of Bourdon Adm^ral of France, the Lord of
Saint Pierre, and the Bishop of Eureux, called Heberge: And for the King of
England, the Lord Howard, one Chalenger, and Doctor Morton Many articles of
peace were treated of, but the last resolutions were these, That the French
King should pay to the King of England, presently before his departure out
of France, 72. thousand crowns, that the Dolphine should marrye King
Edwardes eldest daughter, and that she should have the Duchy of Guien, for
her maintainaunce, or 5000. crowns yearly to be paid in the Tower of London
the space of nine years, which term expired, the Dolphine should peaceably
enjoy the revenues of the whole Duchy of Gnien, and then the King of France
to be clearly discharged of all payments to the King of England. Further it
was decreed, that the two Primes should meet together, and be sworn to the
treaty, which meeting was observed in a town called Picquigny on the 29. of
August.

The King of England upon receipt of his money, departed toward Cal^is in
great haste, fearing the Duke of Burgoignes malice, and his subjects.

At his departure he left for hostages with the King of France, till his
return into England, the Lord Howarde, and the Master of his horse called
sir John Cheyney. King Edward took shipping at Calais, and landed at Dover,
and was received on the Blacke-heath by the Mayor of London and his brethren in
Scarlet, and 500. commoners, all clad in Murrey, and so conveyed to London
through the City to Westminster, on the 28. of September.

This year was one John surnamed Gose, brent on she Tower hill in the month
of August.

Edmond Shawe. Thomas Hill, the 28. of September. Mayor. Sherifes.


Robert Drope Draper, the 28. of October.

This Robert Drope Mayor of London, enlarged the Condite upon Cornehill, making
an East end thereunto.

The. xvi^j. of April, were inhaunced to the honor of Anno reg. 15 1475
Knights made by the King.
Knighth and after the custom of England, in the time of peace his eldest
son Edward Prince of Wales, Duke of Connewall and Earl of Chester, his
second son the Duke of York, and with them the Earl of Lincolnes son and
heir, the Duke of Suffolk, the Lord Thomas Gray* ye Queens son, and
Richard his brother: the Earl of Shrewsburie* the Earl of Wilshire, Master
Edward Woduile: the Lord Neuib^: the Lord Barkleys son and heir: the Lord
Awdeleys son and heir: the Lord Saint Ainand: the Lord Stanleys son and
heir: the Lord Sturtons son and heir: the Lord Hastings son and heir:
the Lord Ferrors of Chartleys son and heir: Master Harbert brother to the
Earl of Penbroke, Master, Vaughon Brian chief Judge: Litilton one of the
Little (...).
Judges of the Common place, Master Bodringham, Master Brian Stapleton, Kneuit,
Pilkinton, Ludlow, Charleton, etc. The same day the King created the Lord
Thomas Marquis Dorset before dinner, and so in the habit of a Marquis above the
habit of his Knighthood, he began the table of Knights in Saint Edwards
Chamber. At that time he ordained that the Kings Chamberlain should go with
the ancient and well nurtred Knight to advertise and teach the order of
Knighthood to the Esquiers being in the bayne. The King himself came in person
and did honor to all ye company with his noble Counsel and his hands.

Hugh Brite: Robert Colwitch, the 28. of Sept.

Robert Basset Salter, the 28. of October. Sherifes. Mayor.


This Mayor did sharp correction upon Bakers, for making Anno. reg. 16. 1476
of light bread, he caused diverse of them to be set on the Pillorie in
Cornehill. And also one Agnes Dainty a Butter-wife for felling of butter new
and old myngled together, Agnes Dainty set on the pillerie.
being first trapped with butterdishes, was then set on the pilery.

The Countess of Oxforde, deceassed and was buried at Windsor.

Richard Rawson: William Horn the 28. of Sept. Sherifes.


This Richard Rawson one of the Sherifes of London, caused to be builded one
house in the Church yard of S. Marie Hospitle without Byshopsgate of London,
where the Mayor of that City and his brethren the Aldermen use to sit and
hear the Sermons in the Easter holidays, as in times past appeared by an
inscription on the front of the same house, now by wethering defaced, which I
have red in these words: Pray for the souls of Richard Rawson late Mercer and
Alderman of London, and Isabel his wife, of whose goods this work was made and
founded. Anno Domi. 1488.

Ralph Io^celine Draper, the 28. of October. Mayor.


By the diligence of this Mayor the Wall about London was new made betwixt
Aldgate and Creplegate the caused Part of London vv^^^ new builded.
the Moore field to be fearched for Clay, and the Brick ^o be made and burnt
there: he also caused Chalk to be brought out of Kent, and in the same Moore
field to be brent into John Rouse.
Lyme, for the furtheraunce of that work. The Mayor with his company of the
Drapers, made all that part betwixt Bishops gate and Athalowes Church in the
same Wall. And Bishops gate itself new builded by the Merchants Almaynes
Bishops gate new builded.
of the Stillyard, and from Alhallowes Church toward Mooregate a great part of
the same was builded of the goods, and by the executors of sir John Crosseby
late Alderman of London, as may appear by his arms in two places fixed. Anno
reg. 17. 1477
The company of Skynners made that part of the wait between Aldgate and
Buryes Marks, toward Bishops gate, as may appear by their arms in three
places fixed: the other companyes of the City made the other deal of the
said Wall, which was a great work to be done in one year.

Thomas Burdet an Esquier of Arrowe in Warwikeshire, Burdet for a word spoken
beheaded.
son to sir Nicholas Burdet who was great butlar of Normandy in Henry y^
sixth days) was beheaded for a word spoken in this sort: K. Edward in his
progress hunted in Tho. Engwarant.
Burdets park at Arrow, and flew many of his Dear, amongst the which one was
a white bucke, whereof Tho* Burdet made great account, and therefore when he
understood thereof, he wished Register of the Gray Friars.
the buckes head in his belly y^ moved the King to kill it. Which tale being
told to the King, Burdet was apprehended and accused of treason, for wishing
the buckes head horns and all in the Kings belly: he was condemned, drawn
from the Tower of London to Tyburne, and there beheaded, and then buried in the
gray friars Church at London.

Henry Collet: John Stocker, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Humfrey Heyford Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

The. xv. day of Januarie K. Edward the fourth solemnized the Matrimonial
feast of his son the Duke of York, and Lady A^^e daughter and sole heir to
John Duke of Norfolk.

The. xvj. day of Januarie began a Parliament at Westminster Duke of Clarence
murdered Anno reg. 18
where George Duke of Clarence K. Edwards brother was attainted of treason: and
y^. xj. of March after he had offered his own Mass penny in y^ Tower of
London, made his end in a vessel of Maluesey, and after buried at Tewkesburie,
by his wife sometime daughter to y^ earl of Warwike, which being with child
died of poison but a little before him.

Margaret Duchess of Burgoygne, sent to her brother King 1478
Edward of England for aid against the French King, which he would in no case
grant to do but sent Ambassadors to y^ French King with le^ing letters,
requiring him to grow to ^^^e reasonable agreement with the said Lady of
Burgoygne.

Robert H^^ding: Robert Byfield, the 18. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno. reg.
19 1479


Richard Gardener Mercer, the 28. of October.

This year was a great mortality and death of y^ pest not on^^^^ London, but
in diverse parts of y^ Realm, which began in the ^^tter end ^^ ^^pt. in the
year la^^ before a passed, and continued all this year till the beginning of
Noue ^^her, which was about. xiiij. months, in the which space dyed
innumerable of people in the sa^d City and else where.

This year the Mayor of London being in Paul's, kneeling in his devotions at
Saint Erkenwaldes shrine, Robert Byfield one of the Sherifes unadvisedly,
kneeled down nigh unto the Mayor, whereof afterward the Mayor charged him to
have done more then becommed him, but the Sheriff answering rudely and
stubbornly, would not acknowledge to have committed any offense, for the which
he was afterward by a court of Aldermen fined at fifty pound to be paid
toward the reparations of the Condites in London, which was truly paid.

Thomas Ilam, John Ward, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Bartholmew James Draper, the 28. of October.

This Thomas Ilam one of the Sherifs last before named, newly builded the great
Condite in Cheap, of his own charges.

This year King Edward began his Christmas at Waking, and at five days end
removed to Greenewich, where he kept out the other part of his Christmas with
great Royalty.

The. xxij. day of February, were five notable thieves put to death, for
robbing the Church called S. Martins le graund Anno reg. 20 1480
in London, and other places, three of them were drawn to the Tower hill
hanged and brent, the other two were pressed to death.

Thomas Daniell: William Bacon, the 28. of Sept.

John Brown Mercer, the 28. of October.

King Edward required great sums of money to be tent him, the Citizens of
London granted him 5000. marks Anno. reg. 21 1481
which was sessed of the. xxv. wards, which 5000. marks was truly repayde
again in the next year following.

This year on Whitsonday King Edward the fourth created the Lord Barkeley,
Uicount Barkeley, at Grenewiche.

An house on London bridge called the common siege, or privy, fell down into
the Thames, where through it five persons ^ala tempo.
were then drowned.

Robert Tate: William Wiking, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Chawrie, the first of February.

William Harriot Draper, the 28. of October.

This year King Edward with his Queen kept a Royal Christmas at Windsor.

About the end of Januarie deceassed William Wiking, one of the Sherifes of
London. In whose place was chosen Richard Chawrie, on the first of February.

King Edward so greatly favored this Mayor that he Anno reg. 22 1482
took him, with certain of his brethren the Aldermen, and commons of the
City of London into the Forest of Waltham, where was ordained for them a
pleasant lodge of green vowghes, in the which lodge they dyned, with great
cheer, and the King would not go to dynner till he saw them served. After
dynner they went a hunting, with the King, and slew many dear as well red, as
fallowe, whereof the King gave unto the Mayor and his company good plenty, and
sent K. E. banqueted the Mayor and aldermen of Lon.
unto the Lady Maires and her sisters the Aldermens wives, ij. Hearts. vj.
Buckes, and a tun of wine to make them merry with, which was eaten in the
Drapers hall. The Scots began to stir, against whom the King sent the Duke of
Gloucester and many other, which returned again without any notable battle.

William White, John Mathewe, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Creplegate
builded.


Edmond Shaw Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

This Edmond Shaw, new builded Creplegate of London, from the foundation, which
gate in old time had been a prison, whereunto such citizens and other as were
arrested for debt, or like trespasses were committed, as they be now to the
Counters, as may appear by a writ of King Edward the second: in these words.

Rex vic' London salutem ex graui querela capri ex detenti in Records.
prisona nostra de Creplegate pro. x, li* quas coram Radulfo Sandwico, tune
custode Ciuitatis nostre London, and I. de Blackewell cuius recognum debitorum,
etc.

King Edward held his Christmas at Eltham and kept his estate all the whole
feast in his great Chamber, and the Queen in her Chamber, where were daily
more than 2000, persons.

The same year on Candlemas day, he with his Queen went on procession from
Saint Stephens Chapel into Westminster hall, accompanied with the Earl of
Angwyse, ye Lord Gray, and sir James Liddall Ambassadors from Scotland, and at
his proceeding out of his Chamber he made sir John Anno reg. 23 1483
Wood under Treasurer of England, and sir William Catesby one of the Justices
of the common place Knights.

After King Edward had been long time in quiet in his Realm, and had received
yearly 50000. Crowns paid him in the Tower of London, and was grown so
ritche that richer he could not be (says mine Author) having a marvelous
great desire to accomplish ye marriage of his daughter with Charles Dolphin of
France, according to the Articles of truce taken as is before showed, was now
by the Lord Heyward (returned out of France*) certified that the Dolphin had
already joined himself in marriage with the Lady Margaret of Austriche,
daughter to Maximilia^, son to Frederike the Emperor. Which news so highly
offended King Edward, now seeing how he had been abused with the unjust and
dubble dealing of the French King, that he forth with took counsel how to be
revenged, and preparing his power to make wars in France, through melancholy
(as was thought) fell sick, and ended his life at Westminster the ix. day of
April, Anno Domini 1483. when he had reigned 22. years, one month and odd
days. He was honorably buried at Windsor: he left issue, Edward the Prince,
and Richard Duke of York, and fine Daughters, Elizabeth that after was Queen,
Cicely, Anne Katherine and Briget.



King Edward the fifth.
Whose History was written by sir Thomas Moore.


KIng Edward of that name the fourth, after that he had lived fifty and
three 1483
years, seven months and six days, and thereof raygned two and twenty
years, one Month, and eight days, dyed at Westminster ye ninth day of
April, the year of our redemption a thousand four hundredth four score and
three, leaving much fair issue, that is to wit, Edward the Prince, of
thirten years of age: Richard Duke of York, two year younger: Elizabeth,
whose fortune and grace was after to be Queen, wife unto King Henry the
seventh, and mother unto the eight: Cicelie not so for tunate as fair: Briget
which representing the virtue of her, whose name she bare, professed and
observed a Religious life in Dertforde, an house of close Nuns: Anne, that
was after honorably married unto Thomas, then Lord Heyward and after Earl of
Surrey: And Katherine, which long time tossed in either fortune, sometime in
wealth, often in adversity, at the last, if this be the last, for yet she
lives, is by the benignity of her Nephewe King Henry the eight, in very
prosperous estate, and worthy her birth and virtue.

This noble Prince deceassed at his Palaice of Westminster, The love of the
people.
and with great funeral honor and heaviness of his people from thence
conveyed, was entered at Windsor. A King of such governance and behavior, in
time of peace (for in war each part must needs be others enemy) that there
was never any Prince of this land, attayning the Crown by battle so heartily
beloved with the substance of the people: nor he himself so specially in any
part of his life, as at the time of his death. Which favor and affection, yet
after his decesse by the cruelty, mischief, and trouble of the tempestuous
world that followed, highly toward him more increased. At such time as he dyed,
the displeasure of those that bare him grudge, for King Henry's sake the sixth,
whom he deposed, was well assuaged, and in effect quenched, in that, that many
of them were dead in more than twenty years of his reign, a great part of
a long life: And many of them in the mean season grown into his favor, of
which he was never strange. He was a goodly Description of Edward the fourth.
personage, Princely to behold, of heart courageous, pollitique in counsel in
adversity nothing abashed, in prosperity rather joyful than proud, in peace
just and merciful, in war sharp and fierce, in the field bold and hardy,
and nathelesse no further than wisdom would aduenturous, whose wars who so
well consider, he shall no less commend his wisdom where he voyded, than
his manhood where he vanquished. He was of visage lovely, of body mighty,
strong, and clean made: Howbeit in his latter days with over liberal diet,
somewhat corpulent and boorely, and nathelesse not comely; he was of youth
greatly given to f^eshely wantonness: from which health of body in great
prosperity and fortune, without a special grace hardly refraineth.

This fault not greatly grieved the people: for neither could any one man's
pleasure, stretch and extend to the displeasure of very many, and was without
violence, and over that in his latter days lessed and well left. In which time
of his latter days, this Realm was in quiet and prosperous estate, no fear
of outward enemies, no war in hand, nor none toward, but such as no man
looked for: the people toward the Prince, not in a constrained fear, but in a
willing and loving obedience: among themselves, the commons in good peace. The
Lords whom he knew at variaunce, himself in his death bed appeased: he had
left all gathering of money (which is the only thing that withdraws the
hearts of Englishmen from the Prince) nor any thing intended he to take in
hand, by which he should be driven thereto for: his tribute out of France he
had before obtained: Tribute.
and the year foregoing his death, he had obtained Barwike. And albeit that
all the time of his reign he was with his people, so benign, courteous, and
so familiar, that no part of his virtues was more esteemed: yet the condition,
in the end of his days (in which many Princes by a long continued
soueraintie, decline into a proud port from debonair behavior of their
beginning) maruellouslye in him grew and increased: so far forth, that in
Summer the last y^ ever he saw, his highness being at Windsor in hunting,
sent for the Mayor and Aldermen of London, to him for none other errand, but to
have them hunt and be merry with him, where he made them not so stately, but so
friendly and so familiar theare, and sent venison from thence so freely into
the City, that no one thing in many days before, gat him either ^o hearts or
more hearty favor amongst the common people, which oftentimes more esteem
and take for greater kindness, a little courtesy, than a great benefit. So
deceassed (as I have said) this noble King, in that time, in which his life was
most desired. Whose love of his people, and their entire affection toward him,
had been to his noble children, (having in themselves also as many gifts of
nature, as many Princely virtues, as much goodly towardness as their age could
receive) a marvelous fortress and sure armor, if division and dissension of
their friends had not unarmed them, and left them destitute, and the execrable
desire of soueraintie provoked him to their destruction, which if either kind
or kindness had holden place, must needs have been their chief defense. For
Richard the duke of Gloucester, by nature their uncle, by office their
Protector, to their father beholde^, to themselves by oath and allegiaunce
bounden, all bands broken that binden man and man together, without any
respect of God or the world, unnaturally contrived to bereue them, not only
their dignity, but also their lives.

But for as much as this Dukes demeanor ministers in effect all the whole
matter whereof this book shall entreat, it is therefore convenient, somewhat to
show you ere we farther go, what manner of man this was, that could find in
his heart so much mischief to conceive.

Richard Duke of York* a noble man and a mighty, began not by war, but by
law so challenge the Crown, putting Richard Duke of York.
his claim into the Parliament, where his cause was either for right or favor
so far forth auaunced, that King Henry his blood (albeit he had a goodly
Prince) utterly rejected, the Crown was by authority of Parliamente entailed
unto the Duke of York and his issue male in remainder, immediately after the
death of King Henry. But ye duke not enduring so long to tarry, but intending
under pretext of dissension and debate arising in the Realm, to prevent his
time, and to take upon him the rule in King Henry his life, was with many
nobles of the Realm at Wakefielde slain, leaving three sons, Edward, George
and Richard. All three as they were great states of birthe, so were they great
and stately of stomach, greedy and ambitious of authority, and impatient of
partners. Edward revenging his Edward.
fathers death, deprived* King Henry, and attained ye Crown* George Duke of
Clarence, was a goodly noble Prince and at George Duke Clarence.
al points fortunate, if either his own ambition had not set him against his
brother, or the envy of his enemies his brother against him. For were it by
the Queen and Lords of her blood which highly maligned the Kings kindred (as
women commonly not of malice, but of nature hate them who^ their husbands
love,) or were it a proud appetite of the Duke himself, intending to be King:
at the least wise heinous treason was there laid to his charge, and finally,
were he faulty, were he faultlesse, attaynted was he by Parliament, and judged
to the death, and thereupon hastily drowned in a butte of Malmesey, whose death
King Edward (albeit he commanded it) when he wist it was done, piteously
bewailed and sorowfully repented.

Richard the third son, of whom we now entreat, The description* of
Richard the third.
was in wit and courage egall with either of them, in body and prowes far
under them both, little of stature, ill featured of limbs, crook backed, his
left shoulder much higher than his right, hard favored of visage, and such as
is in states called warlye, in other men otherwise: he was malicious,
wrathful, envious, and from before his birth ever froward. It is for truth
reported, that the Duchess his mother had so much a do in her travail, yt she
could not be delivered of him uncut, and that he came into the world with the
feet forward, as me^ be borne outward, and (as ye fame runs) also not
vntoothed, whether me^ of hatred report above ye truth, or else y^ nature
changed her course in his beginning, which in the course of his life many
things unnaturally committed. None evil captain was he in ye war, as to
which his dispotio^ was more meetely tha^ for peace. Sundry victories had he,
and sometimes ouerthrows, but never in default as for his own person, either of
hardines or politic order: free was he called of dispense, and somewhat above
his power liberal: with large gifts he gat him unsteadfast friendship, for which
he was feign to pill and spoil in other places, and get him steadfast hatred.
He was close and secret, a deep dissimuler, lowly of countenance, arrogant
of heart, outwardlye coumpinable where he inwardlye hated, not letting to kiss
whom he thought to kill: dispiteous and cruel, not for evil will always, but
ofter for ambition, and either for the fuertie or increase of his estate.
Friend and foe was much what indifferent, where his advantage grew, he spared
no man's death, whose life wythstoode his purpose. He slew with his own hands
King Henry the sixth, being prisoner in the Tower, as men The death of King
Henry the sixte.
constantly said, and that without commandment or knowledge of the King,
which would undoubtedly, if he had intended that thing, have appointed that
butcherly office to some other, than his own borne brother.

Some wise men also ween, that his drift covertly conveyed, lacked not in
helping forth his brother of Clarence to his death: which he resisted openly,
howbeit somewhat (as men deemed) more faintly, than he that were heartily minded
to his wealth. And they y^ thus deem, think that he long time in K. Edwardes
life, forethought to be King, in case that the King his brother (whose life he
looked that evil diet should shorten) should happen to deceasse (as in deed
he did) while his children were young. And they deem, that for this intent he
was glad of his brothers death ye Duke of Clarence, whose life must needs have
hindered him so intending, whether the same duke of Clarence had kept him true
to his Nephew the young King, or enterprised to be King himself. But of all this
point, is there no certainty, and who so deuineth upon conjectures, may as well
shoot to far as to short. Howbeit this have I by credible information
learned, that the self night, in which King Edward dyed, one Mistlebrooke long
ere morning, came in great have to the house of one Pottier dwelling in
Redcrosse street without Creplegate in Loxdon: and when he was with hasty
rapping quicklye letten in, he showed unto Pottier that King Edward was
departed. By my truth man quoth Pottier, then will my Master the Duke of
Gloucester be King. What cause he had so to think hard it is to say, whether
he being toward him, any thing knew that he had such thing purposed, or
otherwise had any inkeling thereof: for he was not likely to speak it of
naught.

But now to return to the course of this history. Were it that the Duke of
Gloucester had of old foreminded this conclusion, and was now at erste
thereunto moved, and put in hope by the occasion of the tender age of the
young Princes, his Nephews, (as opportunity and likelihoode of speed, puts
a man in courage of that he never intended) certain is it, that he contrived
their destruction, with the usurpation of the regal dignity upon himself.
And, forasmuch as, he well wiste, and help to maintain, a long continued
grudge and heart-burning between the Queens kindred, and the Kings blood,
either party envying others authority, he now thought their division
should be (as it was indeed) a furtherly beginning to the pursuit of his
intent, and a sure ground for the foundation of al his building, if he might
first, under the pretexte of revenging old displeasure, abuse the anger and
ignorance of the one party, to the destruction of the other, and then win to
his purpose as many as he could, and those that could not be won, might be
lost ere they looked therefore: For of one thing was he certain, that if his
intent were perceived, he should soon have made peace between the both
parties with his own blood.

King Edward in his life, albeit that this dissension between his friends
somewhat irked him: yet in his good health he somewhat the less regarded it,
because he thought whatsoever business should fall between them, himself
should always be able to rule both the parties. But in his last sickness, when
he perceived his natural strength so sore enfeebled, that he dispaired al
recovery, then he considering the youth of his children, albeit he nothing
less mistrusted than that that happened, yet well foreseeing that many harms
might grow by their debate, while the youth of his children should lack
discretion of themselves, and good counsel of their friends, of which either
party should counsel for their own commodity and rather by pleasant advise
to win themselves favor, than by profitable advertisement to do their
children good, he called some of them before him that were at variaunce, and in
especial the Lord Marquis Dorset the Queens son by her first husband, and
William the Lord Hastings a noble man then Lord Chamberlain, again who^ the
Queen specially grudged, for the great favor the King bare him: and also for
that the thought him secretly familiar with the King in wanto^ company. Her
kindred also bare him sore, as well for that y^ King had made* him Captain of
Calleis, which office the Lord Rivers brother to y^ Queen claimed of y^ kings
former promise, as for diverse other great gifts which he received, y^ they
looked for. When these Lords with diverse of both the parties were come in
presence, the King lifting up himself and underset with pyllows, as it is
reported, on this wise said unto them. My Lords, my dear kin^men and alies,
in what plight I lie you The Oration of the King in his death bed.
see, and I fee^e. By which the less while I look to lo live with you, the
more deeply am I moved to care in what case I leave you, for such as I leave
you, such be my children like to find you. Which if they should (that God
forbid) find you at variaunce, might hap to fall themselves at war, ere
their discretion would serve to set you at peace: ye see their youth, of which
I reckon y^ only suertie to rest in your concord. For it suffiseth not y^ all
you love them, if each of you hate other. If they were me^, your faithfulness
happily would suffice: but childhood must be maintained by men's aucthority, and
slipper youth underpropped with elder counsel, which neither they ca^ have, but
ye give it* nor ye give it, if ye gree not. For where each labors to break
that the other makes, and for hatred of each of others person, impugneth each
others counsel, there must it needs be long ere any good conclusion go
forward. And also while either party laboreth to be chief, flattery shall have
more place tha^ plain and faithful advise, of which must needs ensue ye evil
bringing up of y^ Prince, whose mind in tender youth infect, shall redily fall
to mischief and riot, and draw down with his noble Realm to ruin, but if
grace turn him to wisdom: which if God send, then they y^ by evil means
before pleased him best, shall after fall furthest out of favor, so y^ ever at
length evil drifts draw to naught and good plain ways prosper. Great
variaunce has there long been between you, not always for great causes.
Sometime a thing right well intended, our misconstructio^ turns unto worse, or
a small displeasure done us, either our own affection or evil tongues
agreeueth. But this wot I well, ye never had so great cause of hatred, as ye
have of love. That we be al men, that we be Christen me^, this shall I leave for
preachers to tell you (and yet I wot near whether any preachers words ought
more to move you, tha^ his that is by and by going to the place that they al
preach of.) But this shall I desire you to remember, y^ the one part of you is
of my blood the other of mine alies, and each of you with other either of kindred
or affinity, which spiritual kindred of affinity, if the Sacraments of
Christ's Church bear that weight with us, y^ would God they did, should no
less move us to charity, than ye respect of fleshly consanguinitie. Our Lord
forbid, y^ you love together ye worse for the self cause ye you ought to love
ye better. And yet y^ happens, and no where find we so deadly debate, as
among the^, which by nature and law most ought to agree together. Such a
pestilent Serpent is ambition, Ambition.
and desire of vain glory and soueraintie, which among states where he once
enters, creeps forth so far, til with division and variaunce he turns all
to mischief, first longing to be next the best, afterward egall with the best,
and at last chief and above y^ best. Of which immoderate appetite of worship,
and thereby of debate and dissentio^, what loss, what sorrow, what trouble
has with in these few years grown in this Realm, I pray God as well forget, as
we well remember. Which things if I could as well have foreseen, as I have with my
more pain the^ pleasure proved, by gods blessed Lady (y^ was ever his oath) I
would never have won y^ courtesy of men's knees, with y^ loss of so many heads.
But sithen things passed cannot be gainecalled, much ought we the more beware,
by what occasion we have taken so great hurt before, that we eft soones fall not
in that occasion again. Now be those griefs passed, and all is (God be thanked
quiet) and likely right well to prosper in wealthfull pear under your cousins
my children, if God send them life and you love. Of which two things, the less
loss were they, by whom though God did his pleasure, yet should the Realm
always find Kings, and peradventure as good Kings. But if you among your selves
in a childs reign fall at debate, many a good man shall perish, and happily he
to and ye to, ere this land find peace again. Wherefore in these last words
that ever I look to speak with you, I exhort you and require you all, for
the love that you have ever borne to me: for the love that I have ever borne
unto you: for the love that our Lord bears to us all, from this time forward
all griefs forgotten, each of you love other. Which I verily trust you will,
if ye any thing earthly regard, either God or your King, affinity or kindred,
this Realm your own country, or your own suertie. And therewithal the King
no longer enduring to sit up, laid him down on his right side, his face
toward them: and none was there present that could refrain from weeping. But
the Lords recomforting him with as good words as they could, and answering
for the time as they thought to stand with his pleasure, there in his presence,
as by their words appeared, each forgave other, and joined their hands
together, when (as it after appeared by their deeds) their hearts were far a
sunder. As soon as the King was departed, the noble Prince his son drew
toward London, which at the time of his deceasse kept his household at Ludlowe
in Wales, which country being far off from the law and recourse to
Justice, was begone to be far out of good will, and waxen wild robbers and
reuers; walking at liberty uncorrected.

And for this encheason the Prince was in the life of his father sent thither,
to y^ eude y^ the au^thoritie of his presence, should refrain evil disposed
persons fro the boldness of their former outrages. To the governance and
orderyng of this yo^g prince at his sending thither, was there appointed sir
Anthony Wood^ile Lord Rivers, and brother unto Lord Rivers.
the Queen, a right honorable man, as valiant of hand as politic in
Counsel. Adjoined were there unto him other of the same party, and in effect
every one as he was nearest of kin unto the Queen, so was planted next
about the Prince.

That drifte by the Queen not unwisely devised, whereby her blood might of
youth be rooted in the Princes favor, the Duke of Gloucester turned unto their
destruction, and upon that ground set the foundation of all his unhappy
building. For, whom soever he perceived either at variaunce with them, or
bearing himself their favor, he brake unto them, some by mouth, some by
writing and secret messengers, that it was neither reason nor in any wise to
be suffered, that the young King their Master and kinsman, should be in the
hands and custody of his mothers kindred, sequestered in manner from their
company* and attendaunce, of which every one ought him as faithful service
as they, and many of them far more honorable part of kin than his mothers
side. Whose blood (quoth he) saving the Kings pleasure, was full vnmeetelye to
be matched with his: which now to be as who say removed from the King, and
the less noble to be left about him, is (quoth he) neither honorable to his
majesty nor unto us, and also to his grace no surety, to have the mightiest
of his friends from him, and unto us no little ieopardie, to suffer our well
proved evil willers to grow in over great auctority with the Prince in youth,
namely which is light of belief and soon persuaded. Ye remember I trow King
Edward himself, albeit he was a man of age and discretion, yet was he in
many things ruled by the bend, more than stood either with his honor, or
our profitte, or with the commodity of any man else, except only the
immoderate aduancemente of themselves. Which whether they sort thir^ted after
their own weal, or our woe, it were hard I wene to guess. And if some folks
friendship had not holden better place with the King, than any respect of
kindred, they might peradventure easilye have betrapped and brought to confusion
some of us ere this. Why not as easilye as they have done some other already,
as near of his royal blood as we? But our Lord has wrought his will, and
thanks be to his grace that peril is past. Howbeit as great is growing, if we
suffer this yo^g king in our enemies hand, which without his witting might
abuse the name of his commandment, to any of our undoing, which thing God and
good provision forbid.

Of which good provision none of us has any thing the less need, for the
late made atonement, in which y^ Kings pleasure had more place than the
parties wills. Nor none of us, I believe, is so unwise, ouersoone to trust a
new friend made of an old foe, or to think that an hourly kindenes, suddenly
contracte in one hour, continued yet skant a fortnight, should be deeper
settled in their stomach, than a long accustomed malice many years rooted.
With these words and writings and such other, the Duke of Gloucester soon set
a fire them that were of themselves eathe to kindle, and in especial twain,
Edward Duke of Bu^kingham, and Wiliam Lord Hastings and Chamberlain, both men
of honor and of great power.

The tone by long succession from his auncestrie: the the other by his office, and
the Kings favor. These two not beryng each to other so much lone as hatred,
both unto the Queens part, in this point accorded together with the Duke of
Gloucester, that they would utterly amoue from the Kings company all his mothers
friends, under the name of their enemies.

Upon this concluded, the Duke of Gloucester understanding, that the Lords
which at that time were about the King, intended to bring him up to his
coronation, accompanied with such power of their friends, that it should be
hard for him to bring his purpose to pass, without the gathering a great
assemble of people, and in manner of open war, whereof the end he wiste was
doubtful, and in which the King being on their side, his part should have the
face and name of a rebellion: he secretly therefore, by diners means caused the
Queen to be persuaded and brought in the mind, that it neither were need,
and also should be ieopardous, the King to come up strong. For, whereas now
every Lord loved other, and none other thing studied upon, but about the
Coronation and honor of the King: if the Lords of her kyndred should assemble
in the Kings name much people, they should give the Lords at wixte whom and
them had bin sometime debate, to fear and suspect, least they should
gather this people, not for the Kings safegarde, whom no man impugned, but for
their destruction, having more regard to their old variaunce, than their new
atonement: for which cause they should assemble on the other party much
people again for their defense, whose power she wiste well far stretched. And
thus should all the Realm fall on a ^ore. And of all the hurt that thereof
should ensue, which was likely not to be little, and the most harm there
like to fall where she least would, all the world would put her and her
kyndred in the wight, and say that they had unwisely and untruly also
broken the amity and peace, that the King her ^usbande so prudentlye made,
between his kin and hyrs in his death bed, and which the other party
faithfully observed.

The Queen being in this wise persuaded, such word sent unto her son, and
unto her brother being about the King, and over that the Duke of Gloucester
himself and other Lords the chief of his bend, wrote unto the King so
reuerentlye, and to the Queens friends there so lovingly, that they nothing
earthly mistrusting, brought the King up in great haste, not in good speed,
with a sober company. Now was the King in his way to London gone from
Northampton, when the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham came thither, where
remained behind the Lord Rivers the Kings uncle, intending on the morrow to
follow the King, and be with him at Stony Stratforde, xij. miles thence,
earelye or he departed. So was there made that night much friendlye cheer
between these two Dukes and the Lord Rivers a great while. But incontinent
after that they were openly with great courtesy departed, and the Lord
Rivers lodged, the Dukes secretly with a few of their most privy friends,
set them down in counsel, wherein they spent a great part of the night. And
at their rising in the dawning of the day, they sent out priuilye to their
servants in their Innes and lodgings about, giving the^ commandment, to make
themselves shortly ready, for their Lords were to horssebackewarde. Upon
which messages, many of their folk were attendaunt, when many of the Lord
Rivers servants were vnreadye. Now had these Dukes taken also into their
custody the Keys of the Inn, that none should pass forth without their
license. And over this, in the high way, toward Stony Stratforde, where the
King lay, they had bestowed certain of their folk, that should send
back again, and compel to return, any man that were gotten out of
Northampton, toward Stony Stratforde, till they should give other license.
For as much as the Dukes themselves intended for the show of their diligence,
to be the first that should that day attend upon the Kings highness out of
that Town: thus bare they folk in hand. But when the Lord Rivers understood
the Gates closed, and the ways on every side beset, neither his servants nor
himself suffered to go out, perceiving well so great a thing without his
knowledge not begun for naught, comparing this manner present, with his last
nights cheer, in so few hours so great a change, maruellously misliked.
Howbeit, since he could not get away, and keep himself close he would not,
least he should seem to hyde himself for some secret fear of his own fault,
whereof he saw no such cause in himself. He determined upon the surety of his
own conscience, to go boldly to them, and inquire what this matter might
mean, whom as s^one as they saw, they began to quarrel with him and say,
that he intended to set distaunce between the King and them, and to bring them
to confusion, but it should not lie in his power. And when he began (as he
was a very well spoken man) in goodly wise to excuse himself, they tarryed not
the end of his aunsweare, but shortly took him, The L. Rivers put in ward.
and put him in ward, and that done, forthwyth went to horssebacke, and took
the way to Stony Stratforde, where they found the King with his company,
ready to leap on Horssebacke, and depart forward to leave that lodging for
them, because it was to straighte for both companyes. And as soon as they came
in his presence, they light adown with all their company about them. To whom
the Duke of Buckingham said, go before Gentlemen, and yeomen keep your rooms.

And thus in goodly array, they came to the King, and on their knees in very
humble wise salued his grace, which received them in very joyous and amiable
manner, nothing earthlye knowing nor mistrusting as yet. But even by and by in
his presence, they piked a quarrel to the Lord Richard The Lord* Gray.
Gray* the Kings other brother by his mother, saying, that he with the Lord
Marquis his brother, and the Lord Rivers his Uncle, had compassed to rule the
King and the Realm, and to set variance among the states, and to subdue and
destroy the noble blood of the Realm. Toward the accomplishing whereof they
said, that the Lord Marquis had entered into the Tower of London, and thence
taken out the Kings Treasure, and sent men to the Sea.

All which things these Dukes wist well, were done for good purposes and
necessary, by the whole counsel at London, saving that somewhat they must
say. Unto which words the King answered. What my brother Marquis has done I
cannot say: But in good faith I dare well aunsweare for mine uncle Rivers and
my brother here, that they be innocent of any such matter. Yea my liege quoth
the Duke of Buckingham, they have kept their dealing in these matters far fro
the knowledge of your good grace. And forthwyth they arested the Lord Richard
and sir Th. Vaugha^ Knight, in the Kings presence, and brought the king and al
back unto Northampton, where they took again further Counsel. And there they
sent away from the King, who^ it pleased the^, and set new servant about him,
such as liked better the^ than him. At which dealing he wept, and was nothing
content, but it booted not. And at dinner, the Duke of Gloucester sent a dishe
from his own table to the Lord Rivers, praying him to be of good cheer, all
should be well enough. And he thanked the Duke, and prayed the messenger to
bear it to his nephew the Lord Richard, with the same message for his
comfort, as one to whom such adversity was strange, but himself had bin all
his days in ure therewith, and therefore could bear it the better. But for all
this comfortable courtesy of the Duke of Gloucester, he sent the Lord Rivers,
and the The death of the L. Rivers and others.
Lord Richard, with sir Thomas Vaughan into the North Country, into diverse
places to prison, and afterward all to Pomfraite, where they were in
conclusion beheaded.

In this wise, the Duke of Gloucester took upon himself the order and
governance of the young King, whom with much honor and humble reverence, he
conveyed upward toward the City. But anon, the tidings of this matter came
hastily to the Queen a little before the midnighte following, and that in the
sorest wise, that the King her son was taken, her brother, her son, and other
friends arrested, and sent no man wist whether, to be done with God wot what.
With which tidings, the Queen in great flight and heaviness, bewayling her
childs reign, her friends mischaunce, and her own infortune, damning the
time that ever she dissuaded the gathering of power about the King, gatte her
self in all the haste possible with her yo^ger Son and her daughters, out of
the Pallaice of Westminster, in which she then lay, into the Sanctuary, The
Qu. takes Sanctuary.
lodging her self and her company there in the Abbots place.

Now came there one likewise not long after midnighte from the Lord
Chamberlayne, unto the Archbishop of York, then Chancellor of England, to
his place not far from Westminster. And for that he showed his servants that
he had tidings of so great importance, that his master gave him in charge,
not to forbear his rest, they let not to wake him, nor he to admit this
messenger into his bed side. Of whom he heard that these Dukes were gone
back with the Kings grace from Stony Stratforde unto Northampton.
Notwythstanding Sir (quoth he) my Lord sends your Lordshippe word, that
there is no fear: for he assures you that all shall be well. I assure him
quoth the Archebishoppe, be it as well as it will, it will never be so well as
we have seen it: And thereupon, by and by after the messenger departed, he
caused in all the haste all his sernauntes to be called up, and so with his
own household about him, and every man weaponed, he took the great seal
with him, and came yet before day unto the Queen. About whom he found much
heaviness, rumble, have and business, carriage and conueyaunce of her stuff
into Sanctuary, chestes, coffers, packes, fardels, trussed all on men's backs,
no man unoccupied, some lading, some going, some discharging, some coming for
more, some breaking down the walls to bring in the next way, and some yet
drew to them to help to carry a wrong way.

The Queen her self sat alone allow on the rushes al desolate and dismayde,
whom the Archebishoppe comforted in the best manner he could, showing her
that he trusted, the matter was nothing so sore as she took it for, and that he
was put in good hope and out of fear by ye message sent him from the Lord
Chamberlain: Ah woe worth him (quoth she) for he is one of them that labors
to destroy me and my blood.

Madam (quoth he) be ye of good cheer, for I assure you, if they Crown any
other King than your son, whom they now have with them, we shall on the
morrow Crown his brother, whom you have here with you. And here is the great
seal, which in likewise as that noble Prince your husband delivered it unto
me, so here I deliver it unto you, to the use and behoof of your son, and
therewith he betook her the great seal, and departed home again, yet in the
dawning of the day. By which time, he might in his chamber window, see all
the Thamis full of boats of the Duke of Glocesters servants, watching that
no man should go to Sanctuary, nor none could pass unsearched. Then was
there great commotion and murmur, as well in other places about, as specially
in the City, the people diversely divining upon this deling. And some Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, either for favor of the Queen, or for fear of
themselves, assembled in sundry companies, and went flockmeale in harneys: and
many also, for that they reckoned this demeanor attempted, not so specially
against the other Lords, as against the King himself in the disturbaunce of
his Coronation. But then by and by the Lords assembled together, toward
which meeting, the Archbishop of York fearing that it would be ascribed
(as it was indeed) to his overmuch lightness, that he so suddenly had
yielded up the great seal to the Queen to whom the custody thereof
nothing perteyned, without special commandment of the King secretly sent
for the seal again, and brought it with him after the customable manner. And
at this meeting, the Lord Hasting, whose troth toward ye king, no man doubted
nor needed to doubt, persuaded the Lords to believe, that the Duke of
Gloucester was sure and fastly faithful to his Prince, and that the Lord Rivers
and Lord Richard, with the other Knights, were for matters attempted by them
against the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham, put under arest for their
surety, not for the Kings ieopardie: and that they were also in safegarde, and
there no longer should remain than till the matter were, not by the Dukes
only, but also by all the other Lords of ye Kings counsel indifferently
examyned, and by other discretions ordered, and either judged or appeased.

But one thing he advised them beware, that they judged not the matter too
far forth, ere they knew the truth, nor turning their private grudges into
the common hurt, yrking and provoking men unto anger, and disturbing the Kings
coronation, toward which the Dukes were coming up, that they might
peradventure bring the matter so far out of ioynte, that it should never be
brought in frame again. Which strife if it should hap, as it were lykely,
to come to a field, though both parties were in all things equal, yet should
the authority be on that side where the King is himself. With these
persuasions of the Lord Hastings, whereof part himself believed, of part he
wist the contrary, these commotions were somewhat appeased, but specially by
that, that the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingha^ were so near, and came so
shortly on with the king, in none other manner, with none other voice or
semblance than to his coronation, causing the fame to be blown about, that
these Lords and Knights which were taken, had contrived the destruction of the
dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham, and of other the noble blood of the Realm,
to the end that themselves would alone demean and govern the King at their
pleasure.

And for the coulourable proof thereof, such of the Dukes servants as rode
with the carts of their stuff that were taken (among which stuff no marvel
though some were harneys, which at the breaking up of the household, must
needs either be brought away, or cast away) they showed unto the people all
the ways as they went, lo here be the ^^rels of harneys that these Traitors
had priuilye conveyed in their carriage to destroy the noble LORDS withal.

This devise albeit that it made the matter to wise men more unlikely, well
perceiving that the intendours of such a purpose would rather have had their
harneys on their backs than to have bound them up in barrels, yet much part
of the common people were therewith very well satisfied, and said it were almoyse
to hang them.

When the King approached near to the City, Edmonde Shaa Goldsmith, then
Mayor, with William White, and John Matthew Sherifes, and all the other Aldermen
in Scarlet, with five hundred Horse of the Citizens in violet, received him
reverently at Harnesey, and ryding from thence, accompanied The Kings coming
to London.
him into the City, which he entered the fourth day of May, the first and
last year of his reign.

But the Duke of Gloucester bare him in open sight so reverently to the Prince,
with all semblaunce of lowliness, that from the great obloquie in which he was
so late before, he was suddenly fallen in so great trust, ye at the counsel next
assembled, he was made the only man, chose and thought most meet, to be
Protector of ye King and his Realm, so (that The protector made.
were it destenie, or were it folly) the Lamb was betaken to the Woolfe to
keep. At which Counsel also, the Archbishop of York, Chauncelor of
England, which had delivered up the great Seal to the Queen, was
thereof greatly reproved, and the Seal taken from him, and delivered to
Doctor Russell Bishop of Lincoln, a wise The Bishop of Lincoln made Lord
Chancellor.
man and a good, and of much experience, and one of the best learned men
undoubtedly that England had in his time. Diverse Lords and Knights were
appointed unto diverse roumes. The Lord Chamberlain and some other kept still
their offices that they had before.

Now all were it, so that that the Protector so sore thirsted for the
finishing of that he had begun, that thought every day a year, till it were
atcheeued, yet durst he no further attempt, as long as he had but half his
pray in his hand: well witting, that if he deposed the one brother, all the
Realm would fall to the other, if he either remained in Sanctuary, or
should happily be shortelye conveyed to his fathers liberty. Wherefore,
incontinent at the next meeting of the Lords at the Counsel, he proposed
unto them, that it was a heinous deed of the Queen, The protectours oration.
and proceeding of great malice toward the Kings Counsailours, that she
should keep in Sanctuary the Kings brother from him, whose special pleasure
and comfort were to have his brother with him. And that by her done to none
other intent, but to bring all the Lords in obloquie, and murmr of the
people. As though they were not to be trusted with the Kings brother, that by
the assente of the Nobles of the land, were appointed as the Kings nearest
friends, to the tuition of his own royal person. The prosperity whereof
stands (quoth he) not all in keeping from enemies, or ill vyande, but partly
also in recreation, and moderate pleasure, which he cannot in his tenuer
youth, take in the company of ancient persons, but in the familiar
conversation of those that be neither far under, nor far above his age, and
naythelesse of estate convenient to accompanye his noble Majesty, wherefore,
with whom rather, than with his own brother? And if any man think this
consideration (which I think no man thinks that loves the King) let him
consider, that sometime without small things, greater cannot stand. And
verilye, it redoundeth greatly to the dishonor both of the Kings highness,
and of all us that been about his grace, to have it run in every man's
mouth, not in this realm only, but also in other lands (as evil words walk
far) ye the kings brother should be fain to keep Sa^ctuary. For every man will
ween, ye no man will so do for naught. And such evil opinion once fastened in
men's hearts, hard it is to wraste out, and may grow to more grief tha^ any man
can here divine. Wherefore me thinks it were not worst to send unto y^ Q. for
the redress of this matter, some honorable trusty man, such as both
tendereth the Kings weal, and the honor of his counsel, and is also in
favor and credence with her. For all which considerations, none seems me
more meetely, than our reverend Father here present, my Lord Cardinal, who
may in this matter do most good of any man, if it please him to take the
pain, which I doubt not of his goodness he will not refuse for the Kings sake
and ours, and wealth of the young Duke himself, the kings most honorable
brother, and after my sovereign Lord himself, my most dear nephew,
considered that thereby shall be ceased the slanderous rumor and obloquie now
going, and the hurtes au^yded that thereof might ensue, and much rest and
quiet grow to all the Realm. And if she be percase so obstinate, and so
precisely set upon her own will, that neither his wise and faithful
advertisement, can not move her, nor any man's reason content her: then
shall we by mine advise, by the Kings authority, fetch him out of that
prison, and bring him to his noble presence, in whose continual company he
shall be so well cheerished, and so honorablye entreated, that all the world
shall to our honor and her reproach perceive, that it was only malice,
frowardenesse, or folly, that caused her to keep him there: this is my mind
in this matter for this time, except any of your Lordshippes any thing perceive
to the contrary, for never shall I by Gods grace so wedde my self to mine
own will, but that I shall be ready to change it upon your better aduises.

When the Protectoure had said, all the Counsel affirmed, that the motion
was good and reasonable, and to the King and the Duke his brother, honorable,
and a thing that should cease great murmr in the Realm, if the mother
might be by good means enduced to deliver him. Which thing the Archbishop of
York, whom they all agreed also to be thereto most convenient, took upon him
to move her, and therein to do his uttermost deuoire. Howbeit, if she could be
in no wise entreated with her good will to* deliver him, then thought he, and
such other as were of the Spirituality present, that it were not in any wise to
be attempted to take him out against her will. For it would be Sanctuary.
a thing that should turn to the great grudge of all men, and high
displeasure of God, if the privilege of that holy place should now be
broken, which had so many years been kept, which both Kings and Popes so
good had granted, so many had confirmed, and which holy ground was more than
five hundred years ago by Saint Peter in his own person in spirit
accompanied with great multitude of Angels by night so specially hallowed, and
dedicate to God (for the proof whereof, they have yet in the Abbay S. Peter's
Cope to show) that from that time hitherward, was there never so undevout a
king, that durst that sacred place violate, or so holy a Bishop, that durst it
presume to consecrate. And therefore (quoth the Archbishop of York) God forbid
that any man should for any thing earthly enterprise to break the immunitie
and liberty of the sacred Sanctuary, that has been the safeguard of so many a
good man's life* And I trust (quoth he) with Gods grace, we shall not need
it. But for any manner need, I would not we should do it. I trust that she
shall be with reason contented, and all things in good manner obtained. And if
it happen that I bring it not so to pass, yet shall I toward it so far forth do
my best, that ye shall al well perceive, that no lack of my denoire, but the
mothers dread and womanishe fear, shall be the let. Womanishe fear, nay
womanishe frowardenesse (quoth the Duke of Buckingham,) for I dare take it upon
my soul, she well knows she needs no such thing to fear, either for her
son or for her self. For as for her, here is no man that will be at war
with women. Would God some of the men of her kin, were women too, and then
should all be soon in rest. Howebeit, there is none of her kynne the less
loved, for that they be her kin, but for their own evil deserving. And
nathelesse, if we loved neither her nor her kin, yet were there no cause to
think that we should hate the kings noble brother, to whose Grace, we
ourselves be of kin: whose honor, if she as much desired, as our dishonor,
and as much regard took to his wealth, as to her own will, she would be
as loath to suffer him from the king as any of us be. For, if she have wit,
(as would God she had as good will as she has (...)de wit) she reckneth
her self no wiser, than she thinks some that be here, of whose faithful
mind she nothing doubts, but verily believes and knows, that they would
be as sorry of his harm, as her self, and yet would have him from her, if
she bide there: And we all (I think) content, that both be with her, if she
come thence, and bide in such place, where they may with their honor be.

Now the^, if she refuse in the deliverance of him, to follow y^ counsel of
the^, whose wisdom she knows, whose truth she well trusts: it is ethe to
perceive, y^ frowardnes lets her, and not fear. But go to, suppose y^ she
fear (as who may let her to fear her own shadow) the more she fears to
dely*ner him, the more ought we fear to leave him in her hands. For, if she
cast such fond doubts, that she fear his hurt: then will she fear, that he
shall be fetched thence. For* she will soon think, that if men were set (which
God forbid) upon so great a mischief, the Sanctuary would little let them:
which good men might (as me thinks) without sin, somewhat less regard
than they do.

Now then, if she doubt, least he might be fetched from her, is it not
likely enough that she shall send him some where out of the Realm? Uerily, I
look for none other. And I doubt not, but she now as sore minds it, as we
the let thereof. And if she might happen to bring that to pass, (as it were
no great maistrie, we letting her alone) all the world would say, that we were
a wise sort of Counfailours about a King, that let his brother be cast away
under our noses. And therefore, I ensure you faithfully for my mind, I will
rather maugre her mind, fetch him away, than leave him there, till her
frowardness and fond fear convey him away. And yet will I break no
Sa^ctuarie therefore. For verily, since y^ privileges of that place and other
like, have bin of long continued, I am not he y^ would be about to break
them. And in good faith, if they were now to begin, I would not be he that
should be about to make them.

Yet will I not say nay, but that it is a deed of pity, that such men as
the sea, or their evil dettours have brought in poverty, should have some place
of liberty, to keep their bodies out of the danger of their cruel creditours.

And also, if the Crown happen (as it has done) to come in question, while
either part takes other as Traitors, I will well there be some places of refuge
for both.

But as for thieves, of which, these places be full, and which never fall from
the craft, after they once fall thereto, it is pity the Sanctuary should
serve them. And much more, manquellers, whom God bad to take from the Altar
and kill them, if their murder were wilful. And where it is otherwise, there
need we not the Sanctuaries y^ God appointed in the old law. For if either
necessity, his own defense, or misfortune draws him to that deed, a pardon
serves, which either the law grants of course, or the King of pity may.

Then look me now how few Sanctuary men there be, whom any favorable
necessity compelled to go thither: And then see on the the other side, what a
sort, there be commonly therein of the^, who^ wilful unthriftiness has brought
to naught.

What a rabble of thieves, murderers, and malicious heinous Traitors, and
that in two places specially. The tone at the elbowe of the City, the the other
in the very bowels. VVestminst^^* and Saint Martin^.
I dare well auowe it, weye the good that they do, with the hurt that comes
of them, and ye shall find it much better to lack both, than have both. And
this I say, although they were not abused as they now be, and so long have
been, that I fear me ever they will be, while men be afraid to set their
hands to the mendmente, as though God and Saint Peter, were the patrons of
ungracious living.

Now unthrifts riot, and run in debt, upon the boldness The abuse of
Sanctuaries.
of these places, yea, and rich men run thither with poor men's goods, there
they build, there they spend, and bid their creditours go whistle them.

Men's wives run thither with their husbands plate, and say, they dare not
abide with their husbands for beating.

Thieves bring thither their stolen goods, and there live thereon.

There devise they new robberies, nightlye they steal out, they rob, and
reaue, and kill, and come in again, as though those places gave them not only
a safegarde for the harm they have done, but a license also to do more.
Howbeit, much of this mischief, if wise men would set their hands to it, might
be amended, with great thanks of God, and no breach of the privilege.

The residue, since so long ago I wot near what Pope, and what Prince more
piteous than politic, has granted it, and other men since, of a certain
religious fear, have not broken it, let us take a pain therewyth, and let
it a Gods name stand in force, as far forth as reason will, which is not
fully so far forth, as may serve to let us of the fetching forth of this
noble man, to his honor and wealth, out of that place, in which he neither is,
nor can be a Sanctuary man.

A Sanctuary serves always to defend the body of that man that stands in
danger abroad, not of great hurt only, but also of lawful hurt* for against
unlawful harms, never Pope nor King intended to privilege any one place, for
that privilege has every place: knows any man, any place, wherein it is
lawful one man to do an other wrong?

That no man unlawfully take hurt, that liberty, the K. the law, and very
nature, forbids in every place, and makes to that regard, for every man
every place a Sanctuary.

But where a man is by lawful means in peril, there needs he the tuition
of some special privilege, which is the only ground and cause of all
Sanctuaries: from which necessity, this noble Prince is far, whose love to
his King, nature and kindred proves, whose innocence to all the world, his
tender youth proves, and so Sanctuary, as for him, neither none he needs,
nor also none can have.

Men come not to Sa^ctuarie, as they come to Baptism, to require it by their
Godfathers, he must ask it himself, that must have it, and reason, since no man
has cause to have it, but whose conscience of his own fault makes him feign,
need to require it: what will then has yonder babe? which and if he had
discretion to require it, if need were, I dare say would now be right angry
with them that keep him there: and I would think without any scruple of
conscience, without any breach of privilege, to be somewhat more homely with
them that be there Sanctuary men in deed.

For if one go to Sanctuary with an others man's goods, why should not the
King* leaving his body at liberty, satisfy the party of his goods, even
within the Sanctuary? for neither King nor Pope can give any place such a
privilege, that it shall discharge a man of his debtes, being able to pay: and
with that, diverse of the Clergy that were present, whither they said it for
his pleasure, or as they thought agreed plainly, that by the law of God and of
the Church, the goods of a Sanctuary man should be delivered in payment of
his debtes, and stolen goods to the owner, and only liberty reserved him to
get his living with the labor of his hands, verily (quoth the Duke) I think
you say very truth, and what if a man's wife will take Sanctuary, because she
list to run from her husband? I would ween if she could allege none other
cause, he may lawfully without any displeasure to Saint Peter, take her out of
Saint Peter's Church by the arm. And if no body may be taken out of Sanctuary,
that says he will bide there, then if a child will take Sanctuary, because
he fears to go to Schole, his master must let him alone. And as simple as
that sample is, yet is there less reason in our case than in that, for
therein, though it be a chyldishe fear, yet is there, at the leastwyse some
fear, and herein is there none at all. And verily, I have often heard of
Sanctuary men, but I never heard erst of Sanctuary children. And therefore,
as for the conclusion of my mind, who so may have deserved to need it, if
they think it for their suertie, let them keep it. But he can be no
Sanctuary man, that neither has wisdom to desire it, nor malice to deserve
it, whose life or liberty, can by no lawful process stand in ieoperdie. And
he that takes one out of Sanctuary to do him good, I say plainly, that he
breaks no Sanctuary.

When the Duke had done, the Temporal men whole, and a good part of the
spiritual also, thinkyng no hurt earthly, meant toward the young babe,
condiscended in effect, that if he were not delivered, he should be fetched.
Howbeit, they thought it all best, in the avoiding of all manner of rumor, that
the Lord Cardinal should first assay to get him with her good will. And
therevppon, all the Counsel came unto the Star Chamber at Westminster, and
the Lord Cardinal, leauyng the Protector with the Counsel in the Star
Chamber, departed into the Sanctuary to the Queen, with diverse other Lords
with him, were it for the respect of his honor, or that she should by
presence of so many perceive that this errande was not one man's mind: or were
it, for that the Protector intended not in this matter, to trust any one man
alone, or else, that if she finally were determined to keep him, some of that
company, had happily secret instruction incontinent, maugre her mind, to
take him, and to leave her no respite to convey him, which she was lykely to
mind after this matter broken to her, if her time would in any wise serve her.

When the Queen, and these Lords were come together in presence, the Lord
Cardinal showed unto her, that it was thought unto the Protector, and unto
the whole Counsel, that her keepyng of the Kings brother in that place, was
the thing, which highly sounded, not only to the great rumor of the people
and their obloquie, but also to the importable grief and displeasure of the
Kings royal Majesty, to whose grace it were as singular comfort to have his
natural brother in company, as it was their both dishonor, and all theyrs
and hirs also, to suffer him in Sanctuary, as though the one brother stood in
danger and peril of the other. And he showed her, that the Counsel therefore
had sent him unto her, to require her the delivery of him, that he might be
brought unto the Kings presence at his liberty, out of that place, which they
reckoned as a prison, and there should he be demeaned, according to his
estate, and she in this doing, should both do great good to the Realm,
pleasure to the Counsel, and profit to her self, succor to her friends
that were in distress, and ^uer that (which he wiste well she specially
tendered,) not only great comfort and honor to the King, but also to the
young Duke himself, whose both great wealth it were to be together, as well
for many greater causes, as also for their both disporte, and recreation: which
thing, the Lord esteemed no ^leyght, though it seem light, Protector*
well pondering, that their youth without recreation and play, cannot endure,
nor any stranger, for the conjecture of their both ages and estates, so
meetely in that point for any of them, as either of them for other.

My Lord (quoth the Queen) I say not nay, but y^ it were The Queen^^ aunsvver^.
^ery convenient, y^ this Gentleman whom ye require were in company of the King
his brother: and in good faith, me thinks it were as great commodity to
them both, as for yet a while, to bein the custody of their mother, the tender
age considred of y^ elder of them both, but specially y^ younger, which besides
his infancy, that also needs good looking to, has a while been so sore
diseased, vexed with sikenesse, and is so newlye rather a little amended, than
well recovered, that I dare put no person earthly in trust with his keeping,
but my self only, considering that there is (as Phi^^tions say) and as we
also find, double the peril in the recidiuation, that was in the first
sickness, with which disease, Nature being sore labored, foreweeried and
weakened, wa^eth the less able to bear out and sustain a new surfette. And
albeit there might be found other that would happily do their best unto him,
yet is there none that either knows better how to order him, than I that so
long have kept him: or is more tenderly like to cheryshe him, than his own
mother that bare him. No man denies, good Madame, (quoth the Cardinal) but
that your grace were of all folk most necessary about your children: and so
would all the Counsel not only be content, but glad that ye were, if it might
stand with your pleasure to be in such place as might stand with their honor.
But if you do appoint your self to tarry here, then think they it more
convenient that the Duke of York were with the King honorably at his liberty
to the comfort of them both: than here as a Sanctuary man, to their both
dishonor and obloquie, since there is not always so great necessytie to have the
Child to be with the Mother: but that occasion may sometime be such, y^ it
should be more expedient to keep him elsewhere, which in this well appears,
that at such time as your dearest son then Prince, and now King, should for
his honor, and good order of the Country, keep household in Wales, far out
of your company: your grace was well content there with your self. Not very
well content quoth the Queen: And yet the case is not like, for the one was
then in health, and the other is now sick: In which case, I marvel greatly,
that my Lord Protector is so desirous to have him in his keeping, where if the
child in his sickness miscarrie by nature, yet might he run into sclaunder
and suspicion of fraud. And where they call it a thing so sore against my
childs honor, and theyrs also, that he bydeth in this place: it is all their
honors thereto suffer him bide, where no man doubts he shall be best kept,
and that is here, while I am here, which as yet intend not to come forth,
and ieoperd my self after other of my friends, which would God were rather
here in suertie with me, tha^ I were there in ieoperdie with them. Why Madame
(quoth an other Lord) know you any thing why they should be in ieoperdie? Nay
verily sir quoth she, nor why they should be in prison neither, as they now
be. But it is I trow, no great marvel though I fear, least those that have
not let to put them in duresse without color, will let as little to procure
their destruction without cause. The Cardinal made a countenance to the other
Lord, that he should harp no more upon that string, and then said he to the
Queen, that he nothing doubted, but that those Lords of her honorable kynne,
which as yet remained under arrest, should upon the matter examined, do well
enough: and as toward her noble person, neither was, nor could be any manner
ieoperdie. Whereby should I trust that (quoth the Queen) in that I am
gyltlesse? as though they were guilty, in that I am with their enimyes better
loved than they? when they hate them for my sake, in that I am so ^eere of
kynne to the King? and how far they be of, if that would help, as God send
grace it hu^^ not, and therefore as for me, I purpose not as yet, to depart
hence. And as for this Gentleman my son, I mind that he shall be where I
am, till I see further: for I assure you, for that I see some men so greedy,
without any substantial cause to have him, this makes me much the more
fearder to deliver him. Truly Madame, quoth he, and the fearder that you be to
deliver him, the feader bin other men to suffer you to keep him, least your
causeless fear might cause you farther to convey him: and many be there that
think he can have no privilege in this place, which neither can have will to
ask it, nor malice to deserve it, and therefore, they reckon no privilege
broken, though they fetch him out, which if ye finally refuse to deliver him,
I verily think they will. So much dread has my Lord his Uncle, for the
^ender love he bears him, least your grace should hap to send him away.

A Sir (quoth the Queen) has the Protector so tender The Queen.
zeal, yt he fears nothing but least he should escape him? Thinks he that
I would send him hence, which neither is in the plyght to send out, and in
what place could I reckon him sure, if he be not sure in the Sanctuary?
whereof was there never Tyrant yet so diuellyshe that durst presume to break.
And I trust God is as strong now to withstand his adversaries, as ever he was.
But my son can deserve no Sanctuary, and therefore he can not have it.
Forsooth he has found a goodly gloss, by which that place that may defend a
Thief, may not save an Innocent. But he is in no ieoperdie, nor has no need
thereof: would God he had not. Troth the Protector (I pray God he may prove a
Protector) troweth he that I perceive not where unto his painted process
draws? It is not honorable that the Duke bide here: It were comfortable for
them both, that he were with his brother, because the King lacks a
playfellowe be ye sure. I pray God send them both better playfellowes than him
that makes so high a matter upon such a tryfelyng pretext: As though there
could none be found to play with the King, but if his brother that has no
lust to play for sickness, come out of Sanctuary out of his safegarde to
play with him. As though Princes as young as they he, could not play but ^^rth
their Peers, or children could not play but with their kindred, with whom for
the more part they agree much worse than with strangers. But the child can
not require the privilege: who told him so? He shall hear him ask it, and
he will. Howbeit this is a ga^ matter, suppose he could not ask it, suppose
he would not ask it* suppose he would ask to go out, if I say he shall
not, if I ask the privilege but for my self, I say he that against my will
takes him out, breaks ye Sanctuary. Serves this liberty for my person
only, or for my goods to? Ye may not hence take my horse from me: and may you
take my child fro me? He is also my ward: for as my learned counsel shows
me, sith he has nothing by descent holden by knights service, the law
makes his mother his gardaine. Then may no man I suppose take my ward from me
out of Sanctuary, without the breach of Sanctuary. And if my privilege
could not serve him, nor he ask it for himself, yet since the law commits
to me the custody of him, I may require it for him, except the law give a
child a gardaine only for his goods and lands, discharging him of the ^^e
and safekeeping of his body, for which only both lands and goods serve.

And if examples be sufficient to obtain privilege for This that is here
betvveene this mark and this mark *was not written by him in englith but is
translated out of this History which he wrote in Latten.
my child, I need not far to seek. For in this place in which now be (and
which is now in question whether my child may take benefit of it) mine other
son (now king) was borne, and kept in his cradle, and preserved to a more
prosperous fortune, which I pray God long to continue. And as all you know,
this is not the first time that I have taken Sanctuary. For when my Lord my
husband was banished, and thrust out of his Kingdom, I fled hither, being
great with child, and here I bare the Prince. And when my Lord my husband
returned safe again, and had the victory, then went I hence to welcome him
home, and from hence I brought my babe the Prince unto his father, when he
first took him in his arms. And I pray God that my sons palace may be as
great sauegarde unto him now reigning, as this place was sometime to ye kings
enemy. In which place I inte^d to keep his brother since. etc. *Wherefore here
intend I to keep him, since man's law serves ye gardaine to keep the infant.
The law of nature will ye mother keep her child, Gods law priuiledgeth y^
Sanctuary, and the Sanctuary my son, since I I fear to put him in ye
Protectors hands yt has his brother already, and were (if both failed)
inheritor to ye Crown. The cause of my fear has no man to do to examine.
And yet fear I no farther than ye law fears, which as learned me^ tell me,
forbyddeth every man the custody of them, by whose death he may inherit less
land than a kingdom. I can no more, but whosoever he be ye breaks this holy
Sactuarie, I pray God shortly send him need of Sanctuary, when he may not
come to it. For taken out of Sanctuary would I not my mortal enemy were.

The Lord Cardinal perceiving that the Queen wared ever the longer the
further off, and also that she began to kindle and chafe, and speak more
biting words against the Protector, and such as he neither believed, and was
also loath to hear, he said to her for a final conclusion, that he would no
longer dispute the matter, but if she were content to deliver the Duke to him,
and to the other Lords present, he durst lay his own body and soul both in
pledge, not only for his suertie, but also for his estate. And if she would
give them a resolute answer to the contrary, he would forthwith depart there
with all, and shift who so would with this business afterward, for he never
intended more to move her in that matter, in which she thought that he and al
other also save hirself lacked either wit or truth. Wit, if they were so dull
that they could nothing perceive what the Protector intended: truth, if they
should procure her son to be delivered into his hands, in whom they should
perceive toward the child any evil intended.

The Queen with these words stood a good while in a great study. And
forasmuch as her seemed the Cardinal ready to depart than some of the
remnant, and the Protector himself ready at hand, so that she verily thought
she could not keep him there, but that he should incontinent be taken
thence, and to convey him elsewhere, neither had she time to serve her, nor
place determined, nor persons appointed, all things unready, this message came
on her s^ suddenly, nothing less looking for, than to have him fetched out of
Sanctuary, which she thought to be now beset i^ such places about, y^ he
could not be conveyed out untaken, and partly (as she thought) it might
fortune, her fear to be false, so well she wiste it was either needelesse or
bootlesse^ wherefore, if she should needs go from him, she deemed it best to
deliver him. And over that, of the Cardinals faith she nothing doubted, nor of
some other Lords neither, whom she there saw. Which as she feared least they
might be deceived: so was she well assured they would not be corrupted: the^
thought she it should yet make them ye more warely to look to him, and the
more circumspectly to see to his suertie, if she we her own hands betook him
to the^ of trust. And at ye last she took ye young Duke by the hand, and said
unto the Lords: My Lords (quoth she) and al my Lords, I neither am so unwise to
mistrust your wits, nor so suspicious to mistrust your truths: Of which
thing I purpose to make you such a proof, as if either of both lacked in you,
might turn both me to great sorrow, the Realm to much harm, and you to great
reproach. For lo, here is (quoth she) this Gentleman, whom I dout not but I
could here keep safe, if I would, whatsoever any man say: and I doubt not
also, but there be some abroad so deadly enemies unto my blood, y^ if they wist
where any of it lay in their own body, they would let it out. We have also
experience ye the desire of a kingdom knows no kindred. The brother has been
ye brothers bane: and may y^ nephews be sure of their uncle? Each of these
children is the others defense while they be a sunder, and each of their lives
lies in the others body. Keep one safe and both be sure, and nothing for the^
both more perilous, tha^ to be both in one place. For what wise Merchant
adue^tureth all his goods in one ship? All this notwithstanding, here I deliver
him, and his brother in him, to keep, into your hands, of who^ I shall ask the^
both before god and the world. Faithful ye be ye wot I well, and I know well
you be wise. Power and strength to keep him if you list, neither lack ye of
your self, nor can lack help in this case. And if ye can not else where, then
may you leave him here. But only one thing I beseech you, for the trust which
his father put in you ever, and for the trust ye I put in you now, y^ as far
as ye think y^ I fear too much, be you well ware that you fear not as far
too little. And therwithall the said unto the child, farewell mine own sweet
son* God send you good keeping: let me kiss you yet once ere you go, for God
knows when we shall kiss together again. And therewith she kissed him, and
blessed him, turned her back and wept, and went her way, leaving ye child
weeping as fast. When y^ Lord Cardinal, and those other Lords with him, had
received this young duke, they brought him into y^ star Chamber, where y^
Protector took him in his arms, and kissed him, with these words: now welcome
my Lord even with al my very heart. And he said in y^ of O dissimulation.
likelihood as he thought. Thereupon forthwith they brought him unto the King
his brother, into the Bishops Palace at Paul's, and from thence through the
city honorably into the Tower, out of ye which after y^ day they never came
abroad.

When the Protector had both y^ children in his hands, This that is here
betvveene this mark and this mark *was not written by him in english but is
translated out of this History which he vvrote in Lattin.
he opened himself more boldly, both to certain other men, and also chiefly to
y^ Duke of Buckingha^. Although I know y^ many thought y^ this Duke was privy
to al y^ Protectors counsel, even from the beginning, and some of the
Protectors friends said, y^ the duke was the first mouer of the Protector to
this matter, sending a privy messenger unto him, straight after K. Edwards
death. But other again which knew better the subtle wit of y^ Protector, deny
y^ he ever opened his enterprise to y^ duke, until he had brought to pass y^
things before rehearsed. But when he had imprisoned y^ Queens kinsfolks, and
gotten both her sons into his own hands, then he opened the rest of his
purpose with less fear to them whom he thought meet for y^ matter, and
specially to the Duke, who being won to his purpose, he thought his strength
more than half increased. The matter was broken unto ye duke by subtle folks,
and such as were their crafts masters in the handling of such wicked devises:
who declared unto him that the young king was offended with him for his
kinsfolks sake, and if he were ever able he would revenge them. Who would
prick him forward thereunto if they escaped (for they would remember their
imprisonment) or else if they were put to death, without doubt the young King
would be careful for their deaths, whose imprisonment was grievous unto him.
And that with repenting the Duke should nothing avail, for there was no way
left to redeem his offense by benefits, but he should sooner destroy
himself than save the king, who with his brother and his kinsfolks he saw in
such places imprisoned, as the Protector might with a beck destroy them all:
and that it were no doubt but he would do it in deed, if there were any new
enterprise attempted. And that it was lykely, that as the Protector had
provided privy guard for himself, so had he spyalles for the Duke, and
traynes to catch him, if he should be against him, and that peradventure from
them, whom he least suspected. For the state of things and the dispositions of
me^ were then such, that a man could not well tell whom he might trust, or
whom he might fear.*

These things and such like, being beaten into the Dukes mind, brought him to
that point, that where he had repented the way that he had entered, yet would
he go forth in the same, and since he had once begun, he would stoutely
go through. And therefore to this wicked enterprise which he believed could
not be voyded, he bent himself, and went through and determined, that since
the common mischief could not be amended, he would turn it as much as he
might to his own commodity.

Then it was agreed, that the Protector should have the Dukes aid to make him
King, and that the Protectors only lawful son should marry the Dukes
daughter, and that the Protector should grant him the quiet possession of the
^ledome of Hertford, which he claimed as his inheritance, and could never
obtain it in King Edwardes time. Besides these requests of y^ duke, y^
Protector of his own mind promised him a great quantity of the kings
treasure, and of his household stuff. And when they were thus at a point
between themselves, they went about to prepare for y^ Coronation of the young
king as they would have it seem. And that they might turn both the eyes and
minds of men from perceiving of their drifts other where, the Lords being sent
for from all parts of y^ Realm, came thick to y^ solemnity. But the
Protector, and the duke after that, that they had sent y^ Lord Cardinal, the
Archbishop of York then Lord Chancellor, y^ Bishop of Elie, y^ Lord Stanley,
and the lord Hastings then Lord Chamberlain, with many other noble men* to
common and devise about the coronation in one place, as fast were they in
another place, contriuing the contrary, and to make the Protector King. To
which Counsel, albeit there were adhibited very few, and they were secret: yet
began there here and there about, some manner of muttering among y^ people, as
though all should not long be well, though they neither wist what they feared,
nor wherefore, were it that before such great things men's hearts of a secret
instinct of nature misgiue them. As the sea without wind swells of himself
sometime before a tempest: or were it that some one man happily somewhat
perceiving, filled many men with suspicion, though he showed few men what he
knew. Howbeit somewhat the dealing it self made men to muse on the matter,
though the Council were close. For by little and little, all folk withdrew
from the Tower, and drew to Crosbies in Bishops gate street. where the
Protector kept his household. The Protector had the resort, the King in manner
desolate.

While some for their business made suit to them that had the doing, some were
by their friends secretly warned, that it might happily turn them to no good,
to be too much attendant about the King without the Protectors appointment,
which removed also diverse of the Princes old servant from him, and set new
about him.

Thus many things coming together, partly by chance, partly of purpose,
caused at length not common people only, y^ wound with the wind, but wise men
also, and some Lords eke to mark the matter, and muse thereon, so far forth,
that the Lord Stanley that was after Earl of Darbie, wisely mistrusted it,
and said unto the Lord Hastings, that he much mislyked these two several
Councels. For while we (quoth he) talk of one matter in ye one place, little
wot we whereof they talk in the other place. My Lord (quoth the Lord
Hastings) of my life never doubt you: for while one man is there, which is
never thence, never can there be thing once moved, that should sound amiss
toward me, but it should be in mine ears ere it were well out of their
mouths.

This meant he by Catesby, which was of his near secret Catesbie.
counsel, and whom he very familiarly used, and in his most weighty matters
put no man in so special trust, reckening himself to no man so liefe, sith
he well wyste there was no man so much to him beholden as was this Catesby,
which was a man well learned in the laws of this land, and by the special
favor of the Lord Chamberlain, in good authority, and much rule bare in all
ye County of Leycester, where the Lord Chamberleynes power chiefly lay. But
surely great pity was it, that he had not had either more truth or less wit.
For his dissimulation only, kept all that mischief up. In whom if the Lord
Hastings, had not put so special trust, the Lord Stanley and he had departed
with diverse other Lords, and broken all the dance, for many ill signs that
he saw, which he now construes all to the best. So surely thought he, that
there could be no harm toward him in that Council intended, where Catesby
was.

And of truth the Protector, and the Duke of Buckingham. made very good
semblaunce unto the Lord Hastings, and kept him much in company. And
undoubtedly, the Protector loved him well, and loath was to have lost him,
saving for fear least his life should have quaiied their purpose. For which
cause he moved Catesby to prove with some words cast out a far off, whether
he could think it possible to win the Lord Hastings unto their part. But
Catesby whether he assayed him, or assayed him not, reported unto them, that he
found him so fast, and heard him speak so terrible words, that he durst no
further break.

And of truth the Lord Chamberlayne of very trust showed unto Catesby the
distrust that other began to have in the matter. And therefore he fearing
least their motion might with the Lord Hastings minishe his credence,
whereunto only all the matter leaned, procured the Protector hastily to rid
him. And much the rather, for that he trusted by his death to obtain much of
the rule that the Lord Hastings bare in his Country: the only desire whereof,
was the allectiue that induced him to be partner and one special contriuer of
all this horrible treason.

Whereupon soon after, that is to wit, on the Friday the thirteenth day of
June, many Lords assembled in the Tower, and there sat in Council, devising
the honorable solemnity of the Kings Coronation, of which the time appointed
then so near approached, that the Pageantes and subtiltyes were in making day
and night at Westminster, and much vitayle killed therefore, that afterward was
cast away.

These Lords so sitting together communing of this matter, the Protector came
in amongst them first about. ix. of the clock, saluting them courteously, and
excusing himself that he had been from them so long, saying merrily that he had
been a sleeper that day.

And after a little talkyng with them, he said unto the Bishop of Elie: My
Lord you have very good Strawberies at your Garden in Holborne; I require you
let us have a mess of them. Gladly my Lord (quoth he) would God I had some
better thing as ready to your pleasure as that. And therewith in all the have
he sent his servant for a mess of Strawberies.

The Protector set the Lords fast in communing, and thereupon praying them to
spare him for a little while, departed thence. And soon after one hour,
between x. and xj. he returned into the Chamber among them all, changed with a
wonderful sour angry countenance, knitting ye brows, frowning and fretting,
and gnawing on his lips, and so sat him down in his place, all the Lords
much dismayde and sore maruelling of this manner of sudden change, and what
thing should him aile. Then, when he had sitten still a while, thus he began:
What were they worthy to have that compass and imagine the destruction of me,
being so near of blood unto the King, and Protector of his Royal person and
his Realm? At this question, all the Lords sat sore astonyed, musing much by
whom this question should be meant, of which every man wist himself clear.

Then the Lord Chamberlain, as he that for the love between them thought he
might be boldest with him, answered and said, that they were worthy to be
punished as heinous traitors, whatsoever they were. And all the other affyrmed
the same. That is (quoth he) yonder sorceresse my brothers wife, and other with
her, meaning ye Queen. At these words many of ye other Lords were greatly
abashed, y^ favored her. But ye Lord Hastings was in his mind better content,
y^ it was moved by her, tha^ by any other who^ he loved better: Albeit his heart
somewhat grudged, yt he was not before made of counsel in this matter, as he was
of the taking of her kindred, and of their putting to death, which were by his
assent before, devised to be beheaded at Pomfret this self same day, in which
he was not ware yt it was by other devised, yt himself should be beheaded ye
same day at London. Then said the Protector, ye shall all see in what wise
that sorceresse, and that other Witch of her counsel Shores wife with their
affinity, have by their sorcerie and witchcrafte wasted my body. And therewith
he plucked up his dublet sleeue to his elbow upon his left arm, where he
showed a werish withered arm, and small, as it was never other. And thervpo^
every man's mind sore misgaue them, well perceiving y^ this matter was but a
quarrel. For they well wist y^ the Queen was too wise to go about any such
folly. And also if she would, yet would she of all folk least make Shores wife
of counsel, whom of all women she most hated, as that Concubine whom the King
her husband had most loved. And also, no man was there present but well knew
that his arm was ever such since his birth. Naythelesse the Lord
Chamberlayne (which from the death of King Edward kept Shores wife, on whom he
somewhat doted in the Kings life, saving (as it is said) he, that while
forbear her of reverence toward the K. or else of a certain kind of fidelitic
to his friend) aunsweared and said: certainly my Lord, if they have so
heynously done, they be worthy heinous punishment.

What (quoth the Protector) thou seruest me I ween with iffes and with andes,
I tell thee they have so done, and that I will make good on thy body traitor:
and therewith as in a great anger, he clapped his fyst upon the bourd a great
rappe. At which token given, one cried treason without the Chamber. Therewith a
door clapped, and in come there rushing men in harness, as many as the
Chamber might hold. And anon the Protector said to the Lord Hastings, I
arrest thee Traitor: What me my Lord? (quoth he) yea thee traitor quoth the
Protector. And another let fly at the Lord Stanley, which shrunk at the
stroke, and fell The Lord Sta^ley vvounded.
under ye table, or else his head had been cleft to the teeth: for as shortly
as he shra^ke, yet came the blood about his ears. Then were they al quickly
bestowed in diverse Chambers, except the Lord Chamberlain, whom the Protector
bad speed and shriue him apace, for by Saint Paul (quoth he) I will not to
dinner till I see thy head off.

It booted him not to ask why, but heavily took a Priest at adventure, and
made a short shrift, for a longer would not be suffered, the Protector made so
much have to dinner, which he might not go to, till this were done, for saving
of his oath. So was he brought forth into the green beside the Chapel within
the Tower, and his head laid down upon a long logge of Timber, and there
stricken off, and afterward his body with the head enterred at Windsor beside ye
body of King Edward.

A marvelous case is it to hear either the warnings of that he should have
boyded, or the tokens of that he could not void, for the self night next
before his death, the Lord Stanley sent a trusty secret messenger unto him
at mydnight in all the haste, requiring him to rise and ride away with him,
for he was disposed utterly no longer to bide, he The Lord Stanleys dream.
had so fearful a dream, in which him thought that a Boar with his
tuskes so rased them both by ye heads, that the blood ran about both their
shoulders. And for as much as the Protector gave the Boar for his cognizance,
this dream made so fearful an impression in his heart, that he was thoroughly
determined no longer to tarry, but had his horse ready, if the Lord Hastings
would go with him to ride yet so far the same night, that they should be
out of danger ere day. Ha good Lord (quoth the Lord Hastings to this
messenger) leans my Lord thy master so much to such trifles, and has
such faith in dreams, which either his own fear fantasieth, or do rise in
the nights rest by reason of his day thoughts? Tell him it is plain
witchcraft to believe in such dreams, which if they were tokens of things to
come, why thinks he not y^ we might be as likely to make the^ true by our
going, if we were caught and brought back (as friends fail fleers) for the^
had ye Boar a cause likelye to race us with his Tuskes, as folk y^ fled for
some falsehoode, wherefore either is there no peril, nor none there is in deed:
or if any be, it is rather in going than byding. And if we should needs cost
fall in peril one way or other, yet had I lieffer y^ men should see that it were
by other men's falsehoode, than think it were either by our own fault, or
fainte heart. And therefore go to thy master manne and commend me to him,
and pray him to be merry and have no fear: for I ensure him I am as sure of
the manne that he woteth of, as I am of mine own hand. GOD send grace sir,
quoth the messenger, and went his way.

Certain is it also, that in riding toward the Tower the same morning in
which he was beheaded, his Horse twice or thrice stumbled with him, almost
to the falling, which thing albeit each man wot well daily happens to them
to whom no such mischance is toward, yet has it bin of an old rite and
custom, observed as a token oftentimes notably foregoing some great misfortune.

Now this that follows, was no warning but an enuyous skorne.

The same morning ere he was up, came a Knight unto him, as it were of
courtesy, to accompany him to the Counsel, but of truth sent by the Protector
to have him thitherwardes, with whom he was of secret confederacy in that
purpose, a mean man at that time, and now of great authority.

This Knight when it happened the Lord Chamberlayne by the way to stay his
horse, and commune a while with a Priest whom he met in the Tower street,
brake his tale, and said merrily to him, what my Lord I pray you come on,
whereto talk you so long with that Priest, you have no need of a Priest yet:
and therewith he laughed upon him, as though he would say, ye shall have
soon. But so little wist the the other what he mente, and so little mistrusted,
that he was never merier, nor never so full of good hope in his life, which
self thing is often seen a sign of change. But I shall rather let any thing
pass me, than y^ vain surety of man's mind so near his death.

Upon the very Tower Wharfe, so near the place where his head was off soon
after, there met he with one Hastings a Pursiuaunt of his own name. And of
their meeting in that place, he was put in remembrance of another time, in
which it had happened them before to meet in like manner together in the
same place. At which other time the Lord Chamberlain had bin accused unto King
Edward by the Lord Rivers the Queens brother, in such wise as he was for the
while (but it lasted not long) far fallen into ye Kings indignation, and stood
in great fear of himself. And for as much as he now met this Pursiuaunt in
the same place that ieopardie so well passed, it gave him great pleasure to
talk with him thereof, with whom he had before talked thereof in the same
place, while he was therein. And therefore he said: Ah Hastings art thou
remembered when I met thee here once with an heavy heart? Yea my Lord (quoth
he) that remember I well, and thanked be God, they got no good, nor you no
harm thereby. Thou would say so (quoth he) if thou kn^west as much as I
know, which few know else as yet, and mo shall shortly. That meant he by the
Lords of the Queens kyndred that were taken before and should that day be
beheaded at Ponfraite^ which he well wist, but nothing ware that the Are hung
over his own head. In faith man (quoth he) I was never so sorry, nor never
stood in so great dread in my life, as I did when thou and I met here. And
lo how the world is turned, now stand mine enemies in the danger (as thou
may hap to hear more hereafter) and I never in my life so merry, nor never
in so great surety.

O good God the blindness of our mortal nature, when he most feared, he was
in good surety, when he reckened himself surest, he lost his life, and that
within two hours after.

Thus ended this honorable man, a good Knight and a The description of the
Lord Hastings.
gentle, of great authority with his Prince, of living somewhat dissolute,
plain and open to his enemy, and secret to his friend, easy to beguile, as
he that of good heart and courage forestudied no perilles: a loving man and
passing well beloved: very faithful and trusty enough, trusting too much. Now
flew the fame of this Lords death swiftlye through the City, and so forth
further about like a wind in every man's ear.

But the Protector immediately after dinner, intending to set some color
upon the matter, sent in all have for many substantial men out of the City
into the Tower. And at their coming, himself with the Duke of Buckingham,
stood harnessed in old ill faring Briganders, such as no man should ween
that they would vouchsafe to have put upon their backs, except that some
sudden necessity had constrained them.

And then the Protector showed them, that the Lord Chamberlain and other of
his conspiracy had contrived to have suddenly destroyed him, and the Duke,
there the same day in the Counsel. And what they intended further was as yet
not well known. Of which their Treason he never had knowledge before ten
of the clock the same forenoone, which sudden fear drove them to put on for
their defense such harneys as came next to hand. And so had God helped
them, that the mischief turned upon them that would have done it. And this he
required them to report.

Every man answered him fair, as though no man mistrusted the matter, which
of trothe no man believed. Yet for the further appeasing of the peoples
mind, he sent immediately after dinner in all have, an Herault of arms, with a
Proclamation to be made through the City in the The Protectors proclamation.
Kings name, containing, that the Lord Hastings with diverse other of his
traiterous purpose, had before conspired the same day, to have slain the
Lord Protector, and the Duke of Buckingham, sitting in the Counsel, and
after to have taken upon them to rule the King, and the realm, at their
pleasure, and thereby to pill and spoil whom they list uncontrolled. And much
matter there was in that proclamation, devised to the slander of the Lord
Chamberlayne, as that he was an evil. Counsayler to the Kings father, enticing
him to many things highly redounding to the minishing of his honor, and to
the universal hurt of his Realm by his evil company, sinister procuring,
and ungracious ensample, as well in many other things, as in the dicious living
and inordinate abusion of his body, both with many other, and also specially
with Shores wise, which was one also of his most secret counsel of this
heynons treason, with whom he lay nightlye, and namely the night last past
next before his death, so that it was the less maruayle, if ungracious living
brought him to an unhappy ending, which he was now put unto, by the most
dread commandment of the Kings highness, and of his honorable and faithful
counsel, both for his demerites, being so openly taken in his falslye
conceived treason, and also least the delaying of his execution, might have
encouraged other mischievous persons partners of his conspiracy, to gather and
assemble themselves together, in making some great commotion for his
delyueraunce: whose hope being now by his well deserved death politikely
repressed, al ye realm should by gods grace, rest in good quiet and peace.

Now was this proclamation made within two hours after that he was beheaded,
and it was so curiously indicted, and so fair written in parchment, in so well
a set hand, and therewith of it self so long a process, that every child
might well perceive that it was prepared before. For all ye time between his
death and the proclayming, could skant have sufficed unto the bare writing
alone, all had it been but in Paper, and scribled forth in haste at adventure.
So that upon the proclayming thereof, one that was scholemaster of Paul's, of
chance standing by, and comparing the shortness of the time with the length
of the matter, said unto them that stood about him, here is a gay goodly cast,
foul cast away for haste: and a Merchaunt aunsweared him, that it was written
by prophecy. Now then by and by, as it were for anger, not for couetise, the
Protector sent into the house of Shores wife (for her husband dwelled not
with her) and spoiled her of all that ever she had, above the value of two or
three thousand mark, and sent her body to prison. And when he had a while
laid unto her (for the manner sake) that she went about to bewitch him, and
that she was of counsel with the Lord Cha^berlaine to destroy him: in
conclusion when that no color could fasten upon these matters, then he laid
heynously to her charge, y^ thing that her self could not deny, that all the
world wist was true, and that naythelesse every manne laughed at, to hear it
then so suddenly, so highly taken, that she was naught of her body.

And for this cause (as a good continent Prince, clean and faultlesse of
himself, sent out of heaven into this vicious world for the amendment of men's
manners) he caused the Bishop of London to put her to open penance, going
before the Cross in Procession, upon a Sunday, with a Taper in her hand. In
which she went in countenance and pace demure so womanly, and albeit she were
out of al array save her kyrtle only, yet went she so fair and lovely,
namely while the wondering of the people cast a comely rudde in her cheeks
(of which she before had most miss,) yt her great shame wanne her much praise,
among those that were more amorous of her body, than curious of her soul. And
many good folk also that hated her living, and glad were to see sin
corrected: yet pitied they more her penance, ethan rejoiced therein, when they
considered that the Protector procured it, more of a corrupt intent, than any
virtuous affection.

This woman was borne in London, worshipfullye friended, The description of
Shores wife.
honestly brought up, and very well married, saving somewhat too soon, her
husband an honest Citizen* young and godly, and of good substance. But for as
much as they were coupled ere she were well ripe, she not very fervently loved,
for who^ she never longed, which was happily the thing that ye more easily made
her incline unto the Kings appetite, when he required her. Howbeit the respect
of his royalty, the hope of gay apparel, ease, pleasure, and other wanton
wealth, was able soon to pierce a soft tender heart.

But when the king had abused her, anon her husband (as he was an honest man,
and one y^ could his good, not presuming to touch a Kings Concubine) left her
up to him altogether.

When the King died, the Lord Chamberlain took her, which in the Kings days,
albeit he was sore enamoured upon her, yet he forebare her, either for
reverence, or for a certain friendly faythfulnesse. Proper she was and fair:
nothing in her body that you would have changed, but if you would have
wished her somewhat higher.

Thus say they that knew her in her youth. Albeit some that now see her (for
yet she lives) deem her never to have been well visaged, whose judgment
seems me somewhat like, as though men should guess the beauty of one long
before departed, by her scalpe taken out of the charnel house: for now is she
old, lean, withered, and dried up, nothing left but riueld skin and hard
bone. And yet being even such: who so well advise her visage, might guess and
devise, which parts how filled would make it a fair face. Yet delited not men
so much in her beauty as in her pleasant behavior. For a proper wit had she,
and could both read well and write, merry in company, ready and quick of
answer, neither mute nor full of babble, sometime taunting without
displeasure, and not without disporte.

The King would say that he had three Concubines, which King Edward's three
concubines.
in three diverse properties diversely excelled. One the meriest, another the
wyliest, the third the holiest harlot in his Realm, as one whom no man could
get out of the Church lightly to any place, but it were to his bed. The other
two were somewhat greater personages, and nathelesse of their humility content
to be namelesse, and to forbear the praise of those properties. But ye meriest
was this Shors wife, in who^ the King therefore took special pleasure. For
many he had, but her he loved, whose favor to say the troth (for sin it
were to belie the Devil) she never abused to any ma^s hurt, but to many a
man's comfort and relief: where the King took displeasure she would
mitigate and appease his mind: where men were out of favor she would bring
them in his grace. For many that had highlye offended she obtained pardon.
Of great forfeytures she gat men remission. And finally, in many weighty suits
she stood many men in great stead, either for none or very small rewards,
and those rather gaye than rich: either for that she was content with the
deed self well done, or for that she delyted to be sued unto, and to show
what she was able to do with the King, or for that wanton women and wealthy
be not al ways covetous.

I doubt not some shall think this woman to sleyghte a thing to be written of,
and set among the remembrances of great matters: which they shall specially
think, that happilye shall esteem her only by that they now see her. But me
seems the chance so much the more worthy to be remembered, in how much she
is now in the more beggerlye condition, vnfriended and worn out of
acquaintance, after good substance, after as great favor with the Prince,
after as great suit and seeking to with all those that those days had
business to speed, as many other men were in their times, which be now
famous only by the infamye of their ill deeds. Her doings were not much less
albeit they be much less remembered because they were not so evil. For me^ use
if they have an evil turn, to write it in Marble: and who so does us a good
turn, we write it in duste, which is not worst proved by her: for at this day
she beggeth of many at this day living, y^ at this day had begged if she had
not bin.

Now was it so devised by the Protector and his counsel, that the self day
in which the Lord Chamberlayne was beheaded in the Tower of London, and about
the self same hour, was there (not without his assent) beheaded at Ponfraite,
the foreremembred Lords and Knights that were taken from the King at
Northampton and Stony Stratforde. Which thing was done in the presence, and by
the order of sir Richard Ratcliffe Knight, whose service the Protector Sir
Richard Ratclife.
specially used in that counsel, and in the execution of such lawless
enterprises, as a man that had been long secret with him, having experience of
the world, and a shrewde wit, short and rude in speech, rough and boisterous
of behauyour, bold in mischief, as far from pity as from al fear of God.

This Knight bringing the^ out of ye prison to the scaffold, and showing to the
people about that they were traitors, not suffering them to declare and speak
their innocence, least their words might have inclyned men to pity them and to
The Lord Rivers and other beheaded.
hate the Protector and his part: caused them hastily without judgment,
process, or manner of order, to be beheaded, and without other earthly gilt, but
only that they were good me^, too true to the King, and too nigh to the Queen.

Now when the Lord Chamberlain and these other Lords and Knights were thus
beheaded and rid out of the way: then thought the Protector, that while men
mused what the matter meant, while the Lords of the Realm were about him out of
their own strengthes, while no man wiste what to think, nor whom to trust,
ere ever they should have space to dispute and digest the matter and make
parties, it were best hastily to pursue his purpose, and put himself in
possession of the Crown, ere men could have time to devise any way to resist.

But now was all the study by what mean this matter being of it self so
heinous, might be first broken to the people, in such wise that it might be
well taken.

To this Council they took diverse, such as they thought meetlye to be
trusted, likelye to be induced to that part, and able to stand them in stead
either by power or policy.

Among whom they made of Co^nlaile Edmonde Shaa Edmond Shaa Mayor of London
Knight then Mayor of London, which upon trust of his own advancement,
whereof he was of a proud heart highlye desirous, should frame the City to
their appetite. Of Spiritual men they took such as had wit, and were in
authority among the people for opinion of their learning, and had ^^
scrupulous conscience.

Among these had they John Shaa Clearke, brother to Doctor Shaa, Friar
Penker.
the Mayor, and Friar Penker; pro^inciall of the Augustine Friars, both
Doctors of divinity, both great Preachers, both of more learning than virtue,
of more fame tha^ learning. For they were before greatly esteemed among the
people: but after that never. Of these two the tone had a Sermon in praise of
the Protecte^^ before the coronation, the the other after, both so full of tedious
flattery, that no m^^ ears could abide them.

Penker in his sermon so lost his voice, that he was fain to leave off and come
down in the midst: Doctor Shaa by his sermon lost his honesty, and soon
after his life, for ^erys shame of the world, into which he durst never
after come abroad. But the Friar forced for no shame, and so it harmed him the
less. How be it some doubt and many think, that Penker was not of counsel
of the matter before the coronation, but after the common manner, fell to
flattery after: namely since his Sermon was not incontinent upon it, but at
Saint Marie Hospital at the Easter after. But certain it is, that Doctor Shaa
was of counsel in the beginning, so far forth, that they determined that he
should first break the matter in a. Sermon at Paul's Cross, in which he
should by the authority of his preaching, incline the people to the Protectors
ghostly purpose.

But now was all the labor and study, in the devise of some convenient
pretext, for which the people should be content to depose the Prince, and
accept the Protector for King* In which diverse things they devised. But the
thie^ thing and the weighte of all that invention, rested in this, that they
should allege Bastardie* either in king* Edward himself, or in his children,
or both. So that he should seem disabled to inherit the Crown, by the Dyke
of York, and the prince by him.

To lay Burstardie in King Edward founded openly to the rebuke of the
Protectours own mother, which was mother to them both: for in that point
could be none other color but to protende that his own mother was an
aduoutresse, which notwithstanding, to further this purpose he let not: but
na^ the less, he would that point should be loss and more favorably
handled, not even fully plain and directly, but that the matter should be
touched aslope ^ra^tily, as thou (...) spared in that (...)t to speak all the
troth, for fear of his displeasure.

But the other point concerning the Bastardie that they devised to surmise in
King Edwardes children, that would he should be openly declared, and enforced
to the uttermost. The color and pretext whereof, cannot be well perceived, but
if we first repeat you some things long before done about King Edwards
marriage.

After that King Edward the fourth had deposed King Henry the sixth, and
was in peaceable possession of y^ realm, determining himself to marie, as it
was requisite both for himself and for the Realm, he sent over in Ambassade
the Earl of Warwick, with other noble men in his company unto Spain, to
entreat and conclude a marriage between King Edward and the Kings daughter of
Spain. In which thing the Earl of Warwick found the parties so toward and
willing, that he speedilye according to his instructions without any
difficulty, brought the matter to very good conclusion.

Now happened it, that in the mean season there came to make suit by petition
to the king Dame Elizabeth Gray, which was after his. Queen, at that time a
Widow, borne Dame Elizabeth Gray.
of noble blood, specially by her mother, which was Duchess of Bedforde, ere
she married the Lord Woodfielde her Father. Howbeit this Dame Elizabeth her
self, being in service with Queen Margaret, wife unto King Henry the sixth,
was married unto one John Gray an Esquire, whom King Henry made Knight, upon
the field that he had on Bernet Heath by Saint Albons against King Edward.
And little while enjoyed he that Knighthoode, for he was at the same field
slain.

After which done, and the Earl of Warwick being in his Ambassade about the
before remembered marriage, this peer Lady made humble suit unto ye King, that
she might be restored unto such small lands as her late husband had given her
in ioynture. Whom when the King beheld, and heard her speak, as she was
both fair and of a goodly favor, moderate of stature, well made, and very
wise: he not only pitied her, but also waxed enamoured of her. And taking her
after secretly aside, began to enter in talking more familiarly. Whose
appetite when she perceived, she virtuously denied him. But that did she so
wisely, and with so good manner, and words so well set, that she rather kindled
his desire than quenched it.

And finallye, after many a meeting, much wooyng, and many great promises,
she well espied the Kings affection toward her so greatelye increased, that
she durst somewhat the more boldly say her mind, as to him whose heart she
perceyned more fervently set, than to fall off for a word.

And in conclusion, she showed him plain, that as she wyste her self to
simple to be his wife, so thought she her self too good to be his Concubine.
The King much maruelling at her constancy, as he that had not been wont
else where to be so stiffelye said nay, so much esteemed her continency and
chastitye, that he set her virtue in the stead of possession and riches,
and thus taking Counsel of his desire, determined in all possible haste i^
mary her.

And after he was thus appointed, and had between them twain ensured her:
then asked he Counsel of his other friends, and that in such manner, as
they might then perceive, it booted not greatly to say nay. Notwithstanding the
Duchess of York his mother was so sore moved there with, ye she diswaded the
marriage as much as she possible might, The Kings Mother.
alleging ye it was his honor, profit and surety also, to marie in a noble
progeny out of his Realm, whereupon depended great strength to his estate, by
ye affinity, and great possibility of increase of his possession. And that he
could not well otherwise do, standing that the Earl of Warwick had so far
moved already, which were not likely to take it well, i^ al his voyage were in
such wise frustrate, and his apointments deluded. And she said also, yt it was
not Princely to mary own subject, no great occasion leading thereunto, no
possessions, or other commodity depending thereupon, but only as it were a
rich man that would marie his maid, only for a little wanton votage upon her
person. In which marriage many mo commend the maidens fortune than the masters
wisdom. And yet therein she said there was more honesty than honor in this
marriage. For as much as there is between no Merchaunte and his own maid so
great difference, as between the King and this widow. In whose person, albeit
there was nothing to be mislyked, yet was there (she said) nothing so
excellent but that it might be found in diverse other that were more meetly
(quoth she) for your estate, and maidens also, whereas the only widowhead of
Elizabeth Gray, though she were in all other things convenient for you, should
yet suffice as me seems to refrain you from her marriage, sith it is an
unsitting thing, and a very blemishe and high disparagemente to the sacred
majesty of a Prince, that ought as nigh to approach priesthood in cleanesse
as he does in dignity, to be defouled with Bigamie in his first marriage.

The King when his mother had said, made her answer, The Kings a^svvere to
his mother.
part in earnest, part in play merrily, as he that wyste himself out of her
rule. And albeit he would gladlye that she should take it well, yet was at a
point in his own mind, took she it well or otherwise. Howbeit somewhat to
satisfy her, he said, that albeit marriage being a Spiritual thing, ought
rather to be made for the respect of God, where his grace enclyneth the parties
to love togtiher, as he trusted it was in his, than for the regard of any
Temporal advantage: yet naythelesse, him seemed that this marriage even worldly
considered, was not unprofitable. For he reckened the amity of no earthly
Nation so necessary for him, as the frie^dship of his own, which he thought
likly to bear him so much the more hearty favor, in that he disdayned not
to marie with one of his own land. And yet if outward aliaunce were thought
so requisite, he would find the means to enter thereunto, much better by
other of his kin, where all the parties could be contented, than to marye
himself whom he should happily never love, and for the possibility of more
possessions, lease the fruit and pleasure of this that he had already. For small
pleasure takes a man in all that ever he has beside, if he be wiued against
his appetite. And I doubt not (quoth he) but there be as ye say other, yt be
in every point comparable with her. And therefore I let not the^ that like them
to wedde them. No more is it reason, that it mislike any man, y^ I marry where
it likes me. And I am sure yt my cousin of Warwick neither loves me so
little, to grudge at y^ I love, nor is so unreasonable to look yt I should in
choice of a wife, rather be ruled by his eye, than by mine own: as though I
were a ward y^ were bound to mary by ye appointment of a Gardaine. I would not
bea K. with y^ co^ditio^, to forbear mine own liberty in choice of mine own
marriage. As for possibility of more inheritance by new affinity in strange
lands, is often the occasion of more trouble tha^ profit. And we have already
title by that means, to so much as suffices to get and keep well in one man's
days. That she is a Widow, and has already children, by Gods blessed Lady, I
am a Bacheler and have some to, and so each of us has a proof that nether of
us is like to be barraine. And therefore (Madame) I pray you be content, I
trust in God she shall bring forth a young Prince that shall please you. And as
for the Bigamie, let the Bishop hardly lay it in my way when I come to take
orders. For I understand it is forbidden a Priest, but I never wist it yet, yt
it was forbidden a prince.

The Duchess with these words nothing appeased, and seeing the King so set
thereon, that she could not pull him back, so highly she disdayned it, that
under pretext of her duty to Godwarde, she devised to disturb this marriage,
and rather to help y^ he should marie one Dame Elizabeth Lucy, whom the King
had also not long before gotten with child. Wherefore the Kings mother openly
objected against his marriage, as it were in discharge of her conscience, that
the King was sure to Dame Elizabeth Lucy, and her husband Elizabeth Lucy
before God. By reason of which words, such obstacle was made in the matter,
that either the Bishops durst not, or the K. would not proceed to the
solemnizatio^ of this wedding, til these same were clearly purged, and the troth
well and openly testified. Whereupon dame Eliz. Lucy was sent for.

And albeit that she was by the Kings mother and many other put in good
comfort, to affirm that she was ensured unto the King: yet when she was
solemnly sworn to say the troth, she confessed that they were never ensured.
Howbeit she said his grace spoke so loving words unto her, that she verily
hoped he would have married her. And yt if it had not been for such kind
words, she would never have showed such kindness to him, to let him so kindly
get her with child.

This examination solemnly taken, when it was clearly The kings marriage.
perceived that there was none impedimente: the King with great feast and
honorable solemnity, married dame Elizabeth Gray and her crowned Queen that
was his enemies wife, and many time had prayed full heartilye for his loss, in
which God loved her better than to grant her her bone.

But when the Earl of Warwick understood of this marriage, he took it so
highly that his Ambassade was deluded, that for very anger and disdain, he at
his returning assembled a great puissaunce against the King, and came so fast
upon him or he could be able to resist, that he was feign to void the realm,
and flee into Hollande for succor, where he remained The king fled.
for the space of two years, leaving his new wife in The prince borne.
Westminster in Sanctuary, where she was delivered of Ed. the Prince, of whom
we before have spoken. In which mean time the Earl of Warwick took out of
prison, and set up K. Henry the sixth set up.
again King Henry the sixth, which was before by King Edward deposed, and that
much what by ye power of the Earl of Warwick which was a wise man, and a
courageous warrior, Of the Earl of VVarvvicke.
and of such strength, what for his lands, his alliance, and favor with all
people, that he made Kings, and put down kings almost at his pleasure, and not
impossible to have atteyned it himself, if he had not reckened it a greater
thing to make a King than to be a King. But nothing lasts always: for in
conclusion King Edward returned, and with much less number than he had at
Barnet on the Easterday field, s^ue The Earl of VVarvvicke ^laine.
the Earl of Warwick, with many other great estats of that party, and so
stablie attained the Crown again, that he peaceably enjoyed it until his
dying day: and in such plight left it, that it could not be lost, but by the
discord of his very friends, or falsehoode of his feigned friends. I have
rehearsed this business about this marriage somewhat the more at length,
because it might thereby the better appear upon how slipper a ground the
Protector builded his color, by which he pretended King Edwardes children to
be Bastardes. But that invention simple as it was, it liked them to whom it
sufficed to have somewhat to say, while they were sure to be compelled to no
larger proof than themselves list to make.

Now then (as I began to show you) it was by the Protector Doctor Shaa^ Sermon.
and his counsel concluded, that this Doctor Shaa should in a sermon at
Paul's cross signifye to the people, y^ neither king Edward himself, nor the
Duke of Clarence, were lawfully begotten, nor were not the very children of ye
duke of York, but begotten unlawfully by other persons, by aduoutrie of the
Duchess their mother. And that also dame Elizabeth Lucy was verily the wife of
King Edward, and so the Prince and al his children Bastards, that were begotten
upon the Queen. According to this devise Doctor Shaa y^ Sunday after, at
Paul's Cross in a great audience (as always assembled great number to his
preaching) he took for his Theme Spuria vitulamina non agent radices alt as.
That is to say: Bastard slippes shall never take deep root.

Therevppon when he had showed the great grace that God gives and secretly
infundeth in right generation after y^ laws of matrimony, the^ declared he y^
commonly those children lacked y^ grace, and for ye punishment of their parents
were for ye more part unhappy, which were gotten in base, and specially in
aduoutrie. Of which though some by the ignorance of the world and the truth hid
from knowledge inherited for the season other men's lands, yet God always so
provides, that it continues not in their blood long, but ye truth coming to
light, the rightful inheritors be restored, and the bastard slip pulled up ere
it can be rooted deep. And when he had laid for the proof and confirmation of
this sentence certain ensamples taken out of the old Testament, and other
ancient histories, then began he to descend into the praise of the Lord
Richard late Duke of York, calling him father to the Lord Protector, and
declared the title of his heirs unto the Crown, to whom it was after the
death of King Henry the sixth entayled by authority of Parliament. Then showed
he that his very right heir of his body lawfully begotten was only the Lord
Protector. For he declared then, that King Edward was never lawfully married
unto the Queen, but was before God, husband unto Dame Elizabeth Lucie, and so
his children bastardes. And besides that, neither King Edward himself, nor
the Duke of Clarence, among those that were secret in the household, were
reckened very surely for the children of the noble Duke, as those that by
their favors more resembled other known men than him. From whose virtuous
conditions he said also that King Edward was far off. But the Lord
Protector he said, the very noble Prince, the special pattern of Knightly
prowes, as well in all Princely behavior as in the lineamentes and favor of
his visage, represented the very face of the noble Duke his father. This is,
quoth he, the fathers own figure, this is his own countenance, the very
print of his visage, the sure undoubted Image, the plain express likeness of
that noble Duke.

Now was it before devised, that in the speaking of these words, the Protector
should have come in among the people to the Sermon ward, to the end that
those words meeting with his presence, might have been taken among the hearers,
as though the holy ghost had put them in the preachers mouth, and should have
moved the people even there to cry, King Richard, King Richard, that it
might have been after said, that he was specially chosen by God and in manner
by miracle. But this devise quayled, either by the Protectors negligence or the
Preachers overmuch diligence. For while the Protector found by the way
tarying, least he should prevent those words, and the Doctor fearing that he
should come ere his Sermon could come to these words, hasted his matter
thereto, who was come to them, and paste them, and entered into other matters
ere the Protector came. Whom when he beheld coming, he suddenly left the
matter with which he was in hand, and without any deduction thereunto, out of
al order and out of all frame began to repeat those words again: this is
the very noble Prince, the special patron of Knightly prowes, which as well
in all Princely behavior, as in the li^iamentes and favor of his usage,
represents the very face of the noble Duke of York his father: this is the
fathers own figure, this is his own countenance, the very print of his
visage, the sure undoubted Image, the plain express likeness of the Noble
Duke, whose remembrance can never dye while he lives. While these words were
in speaking, the Protector accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, went
through the people into the place where the Doctors commonly staud in the upper
story, where he stood to hearken the Sermon. But the people were so far
from crying King Richard, that they stood as they had been turned into
stones, for wonder of this shameful Sermon.

After which once ended, the Preacher gat him home, and Preacher.
never after durst look out for shame, but kept him out of sight like an
Owl. And when he once asked one that had been his old friend what the people
talked of him, al were it that his own conscience well showed him that they
talked no good, yet when the other answered him, that there was in every
man's mouth spoken of him much shame, it so struck him to the heart, that
within few days after he withered and consumed away.

Then on the Tuesday following this sermon, there came into the Guild hall in
London the Duke of Buckingham, accompanied with diverse Lords and Knights,
more than happily knew the message that they brought. And there in the East
end of the hall, where ye Mayor keeps the Hustings, the Mayor and all the
Aldermen being assembled about him, all the Commons of the City gathered
before them: after silence commanded upon great pain in the Protectors name:
the Duke stood up, and (as he was neither unlearned, and of nature
maruellously well spoken) he said unto the people with a clear and a loud
voice in this manner of wise.

Friends, for the zeal and hearty favor that we bear The Duke of
Buckinghams Oration.
you, we be come to break unto you, of a matter right great and weighty, and
no less weighty than pleasing to God, and profitable to all the Reame: nor to
no part of the Realm more profitable, than to you the Citizens of this noble
City. For why, that thing that we wot well ye have long time lacked, and sore
longed for, that ye would have given great good for, that ye would have gone
far to fetch, that thing we be come hither to bring you without your labor,
pain, cost, adventure or ieoperdie. What thing is that: Certes the suertie of
your own bodies, the quiet of your wynes and your daughters, the sauegarde of
your goods: of all which things in times paste ye stood ever more in doubt.
For who was there of you all, that would reckon him self Lord of his own
good among so many grens and traps as was set therefore, among so much pilling
and polling, among so many taxes and tallages, of which there was never end,
and oftentimes no need: or if any were, it rather grew of royot, and
unreasonable wast, tha^ any necessary or honorable charge. So yt there was
daily pilled from good me^ and honest, great substance of gods to be lashed out
among unthrifts, so far forth that fiftenes sufficed not, nor any usual
manner of known taxes: but under an easy name of benevolence and good will,
the Commissioners so much of every man took, as no man could with his good
will have given. As though that name of benevolence, had signified that every
man should pay not what himself of his own good will list to grant, but
what the King of his good will list to take. Which never asked little, but
every thing was hau^sed above the measure, amerciaments turned into fines,
fines into raunsoms, small trespasses in misprision, misprision into treason.
Whereof I think no man looks that we should remember you of examples by
name, as though Burdet were forgotten, that was for a word spoken in have
cruelly beheaded, by the misconstruing of the laws of this Realm, for the
Princes pleasure: with no less honor to Markam then chief Justice, that left
his office rather than he would assent to that judgment, than to the
dishonestie of those, that either for fear or flattery gave that judgment.
What Cook your own worshipful neighbor, Alderman and Mayor of this noble
City, who is of you either so negligent that he knows not, or so forgetful
that he remembers not, or so hard hearted that he pitieth not that worshipful
man's loss? what speak we of loss? his utter spoil and vnderserued
destruction, only for that it happened those to favor him whom the Prince
favored not. We need not I suppose to rehearse of these any mo by name, since
there be (I doubt not) many here present, that either in themselves, or in
their nigh friends have known as well their goods as their persons greatly
endaungered, either by feyned quarrels, or small matters agreeued with heinous
names. And also there was no crime so great, of which there could lack a
pretext. For since the King preventing the time of his inheritance attained the
Crown by battle: it sufficed in a rich man for a pretext of treason, to
have been of kindred or aliaunce, near familiarity or longer acquaintance
with any of those that were at any time the Kings enemies, which was at one
time and other, more than half the Realm. Thus were neither your goods in
suertie, and yet they brought your bodies in ieoperdie, beside the common
adventure of open war, which albeit Open war.
that it is ever the will and occasion of much mischief, yet is it never so
mischievous as where any people fall at distaunce among themselves, nor in none
earthly nation so deadly and so pestilent, as when it happens among us: and
among us never so long continued dissension, nor so many battayles in that
season, nor so cruel and so deadly foughte^, as was in that Kings days that
dead is, God forgive it his soul. In whose time, and by whose occasion, what
about the getting of the garland, keeping it, leasing, and winning again, it
has cost more English blood, than has twice the winning of France. In which
inward war among Civil war.
our selves, has been so great effusion of the ancient noble blood of this
Realm, that scarcely the half remains, to the great enfeebling of this
noble land, beside many a good town ransacked and spoiled by them, that has
been going to the field or coming from thence. And peace long after not much
surer than war. So that no time was there, in which rich men for their
money, and great men for their lands, or some other for some fear, or some
displeasure were not out of peril. For whom trusted he that mistrusted his
own brother? who^ spared he that killed his own brother? or who could
perfitly love him, if his own brother could not? What manner of folk he most
favored we shall for his honor spare to speak of, howbeit, this wot you well
all, that who so was best, bare always least rule, and more suit was in his
days unto Shores wife, a vile and an abominable strumpet, than to all the
Lords in England, except unto those that made her their protector: which
simple woman was well named and honest, till the King for his wanton lust and
sinful affection bereft her from her husband, a right honest substantial young
man among you. And in that point, which in good faith I am sorry to speak of,
saving that it is in vain to keep in counsel that thing that all men know,
the Kings greedy appetite was insatiable, and every where over all the Realm
intolerable. For no woman was there any where, young or old, ^iche or poor,
whom he set his eye upon, in whom he any thing liked, either person or favor,
speech, pace, or countenance, but without any fear of God, or respect of his
honor, murmr or grudge of the world, he would importunely pursue his
appetite, and have her, to the great destruction of many a good woman* and
great dolor to their husband and their other friends, which being honest
people of themselves, so much regard the cleanness of their house, the
chastity of their wives, and their children, that them were leauer to lease all that they have beside, than to have such a villainy done the^. And all were it
that with this and other importable dealyngs, the Realm was in every part
annoyed: yet specially ye here the Citizens of this noble City, as well for
that amongst, you is most plenty of all such things as minister matter to
such iniuryes, as for that you were nearest at hand, since that near here
about was commonly his most abiding. And yet be ye the people whom he had as
singular cause well and kindly to entreat, as any part of his Realm, not only
for that the Prince by this noble City, as his especial Chamber, and the
special well renowned City of London the Kings especial Chamber.
his Realm, much honorable fame receives among all other nations: but also
for that ye not without your great cost, and sundry perils and ieoperdies in
all his wars, hare even your special ^auour to his part, which you^ kind
minds borne to the house of York, sith he has nothing worthyly acquitted,
there is of that house that now by Gods grace better shall, which thing to
show you, is the whole sum and effect of this our present errande. It shall
not I wot well, need that I rehearse you again, that ye have already
heard, of him that can better tell it, and of whom I am sure ye will better
believe it. And reason is that it so be. I am not so proud to look therefore
that ye should reckon my words of as great authority as the Preachers of
the word of God, namely a man so cunning and so wise, that no man better
woteth what he should say, and thereto so good and virtuous, that he would
not say the thing which he wist he should not say* in the Pulpet, namely,
into the which no houest man comes to lie, which honorable Preacher ye well
remember substantially declared unto you at Paul's* Crosse^ on Sunday last
passed, the right and title, that the most excellent Prince Richard Duke of
Gloucester, now Protector of this Realm has unto the Crown and Kingdom of
the same. For as the worshipful man groundlye made open unto you, the children
of King Edward the fourth, were never lawfully begotten, for as much as the
King (leaving his very wife Dame Elizabeth Lucie) was never lawfully married
unto the Queen their mother, whose blood saving that he set his voluptuous
pleasure before his honor, was full vmneetly to be matched with his, and the
minglyng of whose blood together, has been the effusion of great part of
the^ noble blood of this Realm. Whereby it may well seem the marriage not well
made, of which there is so much mischief grown. For lack of which lawful
accoupling, and also of other things which the said worshipful Doctor rather
signified* than fully explaned, and which things shall not be spoken ^^r me;
as the thing wherein every man forbeareth to say that he knows ^^ avoiding
displeasure of my noble Lord Protector, bearing as nature requires a filial
^^^^re^^^ to the Duches his mother, for these causes I s^y before remembered*
that is to wit, for lack of other is^^^ lawfullye coming of the late noble
Prince Richard Duke of York, to whose moral blood the Crown of England and
of France ^^ is by the high authority of Parliament entayled, the right and
title of the same, is by the inst course of inheritance according to the
common laws of this Land, deu^lute and commen unto the most excellent Prince
the Lord Protector, as to the very lawfully* ^^^^tten son of the forere
membred noble D^^^ of York. Which thing well considered* and the great
knightly prowes pondered, with manifold virtues which in his noble person
singularly abound, the Nobles and Commons also of this Realm, and specially of
the North part, not willing any bastard blood to have the rule of the land, nor
the abustons before in the same used any longer to continue, have condiscended
and fully determined to make humble petition to the most puissaunt Prince the
Lord Protector, that it may like his grace at our humble request, to take upon
him the guiding and governance of this Realm, to the wealth and increase of
the ^ame* according to his very right and just title. Which thing I wot it
well, he will be loathe to take upon him, as he whose wisdom well perceyueth
the labor and study both of mind and body, that shall come therewith, to
whomsoever so will occupy the room, as I dare say he will if he take it.
Which room I warn you well is no childs ^^^^e. And that the great wise man
well perceived, when he ^ayd^ V^^^g^o cuiu^ rex puer est: Woe is that Realm
that has a child to their King. Wherefore so much the more cause have we to
thank God, that this Noble personage which is so righteously entitled
thereunto, is of so sad age, and thereunto so great wisdom joined with so
great experience, which albeithe will be loath (as I have said) to take it upon
him, yet shall he to our petition in that behalf the more graciously in^l^^^,
if ye the worshipful Citizens of this the chief City of this Realm, join
with us the nobles in our said request. Which for your own weal we doubt not
but ye will: and nathelesse I har^^ly pray you so to do, whereby you shall do
great profit to all this Realm beside, in chosing them so good a King, and
unto your self special commodity, to whom his Majesty shall ever after bear
so much the more tender favor, in how much he shall perceive you the ^^ore
prove and beneu^lently minded toward his election. Wherein dear friends what
mind you have, ^^^ requi^e you plainly to show us.

When the Duke had said, and looked that the people whom he hoped that the
Mayor had framed before, should after this proposition made, have cried King
Richard, King Richard, all was hushed and mute, and not one word answered
thereunto: wherewith the Duke was maruellously abashed, and taking the Mayor
nearer to him, with other that were about him privy to that matter, said
unto them softlye, what means this, that this people be so still? Sir (quoth
the Mayor percase they perceive you not well. That shall we mende (quoth he)
if that will) help.

And by and by somewhat louder he rehearsed them the same matter again in
other order and other words so well and ornately, and naythelesse so
euidentlye and plain, with voice, gesture, and countenance so comely, and so
convenient, that every man much marvelled that heard him, and thought that
they never had in their lives heard so evil a tale so well told.

But were it for wonder or fear, or that each looked that other should speak
first: not one word was there answered of all the people that stood before,
but all was as still as the mydnight, not so much as rowning amongst them, by
which they might seem to commune what was best to do. When the Mayor saw
this, he with other partners of that Council drew about the Duke, and said
that the people had not been accustomed there to be spoken unto, but by the
Recorder, which is the mouth of the City, and happily to him they will
answer. With that the Recorder called Fitz William, a sad manne, and an
honest, Fitz William Recorder.
which was so new come into that office, that he never had spoken to the
people before, and loathe was with that matter to begin, notwithstanding,
thereunto commanded by the Mayor, made rehearsal to the Commons of y^ the
Duke had twice rehearsed them to himself. But the Recorder so tempered his
tale, that he showed every thing as the Dukes words, and no part of his own.
But all this noting, no change made in the people, which always after one,
stood as they had been men amassed, whereupon the Duke rowned unto the Mayor
and said: this is a marvelous obstinate silence, and there with he turned
unto the people again with these words: Dear friends we come to move you
to that thing which peradventure we not so greatly needed, but that the
Lords of this Realm, and the commons of other parties might have sufficed:
saving that we sache love bear you, and so much set by you, that we would
not gladlye do without you, that thing in which to be partners is your weal
and honor, which as it seems, either you see not, or wey not. Wherefore we
require you give us answer one or other whether ye be ininded as al y^
Nobles of the Realm be, to have this Noble Prince now Protector to be your King
or not.

At these words the people began to whisper among themselves secretly, that
the voice was neither loud nor distinct, but as it were the sound of a swarm
of Bees, till at the last in the nether end of the Hall, a bushment of the
Dukes servants and Nashfieldes, and other longing to the Protector, with some
prentises and laddes that thrust into the Hall among the prease, began
suddenly at men's backs to cry out as loud as their throtes would given King
Richard, King Richard, and threw up their cappes in token of joy. And they
that stood before cast back their heads maruelling thereof, but nothing they
said.

And when the Duke and the Mayor saw this manner, they wiselye turned it to
their purpose, and said it was a goodly cry, and a joyful to hear, every
man with one voice, no man saying nay. Wherefore friends (quoth the Duke)
since that we perceive it is all your whole minds to have this Noble man for
your K. whereof we shall make his grace so effectual report, that we doubt not
but it shall redounde unto your great we^ale and commodytie: we require ye
that ye to morrow go with us, and we with you unto his Noble graced, to make our
humble request* unto him in manner before remembered. And there with the Lords
came dow^e, and the company dissolved and departed, the more part all sad; some
with glad femblance that were not very merry, and* some of those that came
thither with the Duke not able to dissemble their sorrow, were feign at his
bark to turn their face to the wall, while the dolor of their heart burst
out of their eyes.

Then on the morrow after, the Mayor with all the Aldermen The Majors coming
to Baynards Castle.
and chief commoners of the city in their best manner apparelled, assembling
themselves together, resorted unto Baynardes Castle where the Protector lay.
To which place repaired also according to their appointment, the Duke of
Buckingham, with diverse Noble men with him, beside many Knights and other
Gentlemen. And therevppon the Duke sent word unto the Lord Protector of the
being there of a great and honorable company; to move a great matter unto his
grace.

Whereupon the Protector made difficulty to come out unto them, but if he
first knew some part of their errand, as though he doubted, and partly
distrusted the coming of a number unto him so suddenly, without any warning or
knowledge whether they came for good or harm. Then the duke when he had showed
this unto the Mayor and other, that they might thereby see how little the
Protector looked for this matter, they sent unto him by the Messenger such
loving message again, and there with so humbly besought him to vouchsafe, that
they might resort to his presence, to purpose their intent, of which they
would unto none other person part disclose, that at the last he came forth of
his Chamber, and yet not down unto them, but stood above in a Gallerie over
them, where they might see him, and speak to him, as though be would not yet
come too near them till he will what they meant.

And there upon the Duke of Buckingha^, first made humble position unto him on
the behalf of them all, that his grace ^ould pardon them, and license them to
purpose unto his ^^^^^ the intent of ^o^^, coming, without his displeasure,
without which pardon obtained, they durst not be bold to move him of that
matter. In which albeit they meant as much honor to his grace, as wealth to
all the Realm beside, yet were they not sure how his grace would take it,
whom they would in no wise offend. Then the Protector (as he was very gentle
of himself, and also longed sore to wit what they meant) gave him leave to
purpose what him lyked, verily trusting for the good mind that he bare them
all, none of them any thing would intend unto him ward, wherewith he ought
to be grieved.

When the Duke had this leave and pardon to speak, then waxed he bold to
show him their intent and purpose, with all the causes moving them thereunto
as ye before have heard, and finally to beseech his grace, that it would like
him of his accustomed goodness and zeal unto the realm now with his eye of
pity, to behold the long continued distress and decay of the same, and to
set his gracious hands to redress and amendment thereof, by taking upon him
the Crown and governance of this Realm, according to his right and title
lawfully descended unto him, and to the laud of God, profit of the Land, and
unto his grace so much the more honor, and less pain, in that that never
Prince raygned upon any people, that were so glad to live under his
obeysaunce, as the people of this Realm under his.

When the Protector had heard the proposition, he looked very straungely
thereat, and answered: that albeit it were ye he partly knew the things by them
alleged to be true, yet such entire love he bare unto King Ed. and his
children, y^ so much more he regarded his honor in other realms, about than
the Crown of any one of which he was never desirous, y^ he could not find
in his heart in this point to enclyne to their desire. For in all other Nations
where the truth were not well known, it should peradventure be thought, that
it were his own ambitious mind and devise, to depose the Prince, and take
himself the Crown, with which infamy he would not have his honor stained
for any Crown, in which he had ever perceived much more labor and pain, than
pleasure to him that would so use it, as he that would not, were not worthy
to have it. Notwithstanding he not only pardoned them the motion that they
made him, but also thanked them for the love and hearty favor they bare him,
praying them for his sake to give and bear the same to the Prince, under whom
he was, and would be content to live, and with his labor and counsel, as
far as should like the King to use him, he would do his uttermost deuoyre to
set the Realm in good state, which was already in this little while of his
Protectorshippe (the praise given to God) well begun, in that the malice of
such as were before occasion of the contrary, and of new intended to be,
were now partly by good policy, partly more by Gods special providence, than
man's provision repressed.

Upon this answer given, the Duke by the Protectours license, a little
rowned, as well with other Noble men about him, as with the Mayor and Recorder
of London. And after that upon like pardon desired and obtained, he showed
aloude unto the Protector, that for a final conclusion, that the Realm was
appointed King Edwardes line should not any longer raygne upon them, both for
that they had so far gone, that it was now no suertie to retreat, as for
that they thought it for the weal universal to take that way, although
they had not yet begone it.

Wherefore if it would like his grace to take the Crown upon him, they would
humbly beseech him thereunto. If he would give them a resolute answer to
the contrary, which they would be loathe to hear, then must they needs seek
and should not fail to find some other noble man that would.

These words much moved the Protector, which else as every man may wit,
would never of likelihood have enclyned thereunto. But when he saw there was
none other way, but that either he must take it, or else he and his both go
from it, he said unto the Lords and Commons: Since we perceive well that all
the Realm is so set, whereof we be very sorry that they will not suffer in
any wise King Edwardes line to govern them, whom no man earthly can govern
against their wylles, and we well also perceive, that no man is there, to whom
the Crown can by just title appertain, as to our self, as very right heir
lawfully begotten of the body of our most dear father Richard late Duke of
York, to which title is now joined your election, the Nobles and Commons of
this Realm, which we of all tytles possible take for most effectual: We be
content and agree favorably to enclyne to your petition and request, and
according to the same, here The Protector takes upon him to be king.
we take upon us the royal estate, preeminence and kingdom of the two noble
Realms, England and France, the one from this day forward, by us and our
heirs to rule, govern, and defend: the other by Gods grace, and your good
help, to get again and subdue, and establishe for ever in due obedience unto
this Realm of England, the advancement whereof we never ask of God longer
to live; than we intend to procure.

With this there was a great shoute, crying King Richard, King Richard. And
then the Lords went up to the King (for so was he from that time called) and
the people departed, talking diuersely of the matter, every man as his fantafie
gave him. But much they talked and marvelled of the manner of this dealing,
that the matter was on both parts made so strange, as though neither had
ever communed with other thereof before, when that them selves wyste there was
no man so dull that heard them, but he perceived well enough, that all the
matter was made between them. Howbeit some excused that again, and said all
must be done in good order? And men must sometime for the manners sake, not
be aknowen what they know. For at the consecration of a Bishop, every man
woteth well by the paying for his Bulls, that he purposes to be one, and
though he pay for nothing else. And yet must he be twyce asked whether he
will be Bishop or no, and he must twice say nay, and at the third time take
it, as compelled thereunto by his own will. And in a stage play, the people
know right well, that he that plays the Sowdaine, is percase a sowter, yet
if one should know so little good, to show out of season what acquaintance he
has with him, and call him by his own name while he stands in his Majesty,
one of his tormentors might hap to break his head, and worthy for marring of
the play. And so they said, that these matters be Kings games, as it were
stage plays, and for the more part, played upon scaffoldes. In which poor men
be but the lookers on. And they y^ wise be will meddle no further. For they
that sometime step up, and play with them, when they cannot play their parts,
they disorder the play, and do themselves no good.

()

King Richard the third


THe next day, the Protector with a great train, went to 1483 Anno reg. 1.
This that is here between this mark and this mark ** was not written by
master Moore in this History written by him in english, but is translated
out of this history which he vvrote in Lat^in.
Westminster Hall, and there when he had placed himself in ye Court of the
Kings Bench, declared to the audience, that he would take upon him the Crown
in that place there, where the King himself sits and ministers ye law,
because he considered that it was the chiefest duty of a King to minister the
laws. Then with as pleasant an Oration as he could, he went about to win unto
him the nobles, the merchants, the artificers, and in conclusion all kind of
men but especially the Lawyers of this Realm. And finally to the intent that
no man should hate him for fear, and that his deceitful clemency might get
him the good will of the people, when he had declared ye discommoditie of
discord, and the commodities of concord and unity, he made an open
proclamation, that he did put out of his mind all enmities, and that he there
did openly pardon all offenses committed against him. And to the intent that he
might show a proof thereof, he commanded that one Fogge, whom he had long
deadlye hated, should be brought then before him, who being brought out of
the Sanctaurie (for thither had h^ fled for fear of him) in the sight of
the people, he took him by the hand. Which thing the Common people rejoiced
at, and praised, but wise men took it for a vanity. In his return homewarde,
whom soever he met, he saluted. For a mind that knows it self guilty, is
in a manner dejected to a servile flattery.

When he had begone his reign in June, after this mockishe election, then was
he Crowned the sixth day of the same month. And that solemnity was furnished
for the most part, with the self same provision that was appointed for the
coronation of his nephew.*

Now fell there mischieues thick. And as the thing evil Sir Thomas More again.
gotten is never well kept, thoroughe all the time of his reign never ceased
their cruel death and slaughter, till his own destruction ended it. But as he
finished his time with the best death and the most righteous, that is to wit,
his own, so began he with the most piteous and wicked, I mean the
lamentable murder of his innocent nephews, the young King and his tender
brother: whose death and final infortune has nathelesse commen so far in
question, that some remain yet in doubt, whether they were in his days
destroyed or no. Not for that only that Perkyn Werbecke Perkyn VVerbecke.
by many folks malice, and more folks folly, so long space abusing the world,
was as well with Princes as the poorer people, reputed and taken for the younger
of these two, but for that also that all things were in late days so covertly
demeaned, one thing pretended, and another me^t, that there was nothing so
plain and openly proved, but that yet for the common custom of close and
covert dealing, men had it ever inwardly suspect: as many well counterfayted
Jewels make the true mistrusted. Howbeit concerning the opinion, with the
occasions moving either party, we shall have place more at large to entreat,
if we hereafter happen to write the time of the late noble Prince of famous
memory King Henry the seventh, or percase that History of Perkin in any
compendious process by it self. But in the mean time for this present
matter, I shall rehearse you the dolorous end of those babes, not after every
way that I have heard but by such men and by such means as me thinks it
were hard, but it should be true.

King Richard after his Coronation, taking his way to Gloucester to visit in
his new honor, the Town of which he bare the name of his old, devised as he
rode, to fulfill the thing which he before had intended. And for as much as his
mind gave him, that his nephews living, me^ would not reckon that he could
have right to the Realm, he thought therefore without delay to rid them, as
though the killing of his kinsmen could amend his cause, and make him a
kindly King. Whereupon, he sent one John Green, whom he specially trusted
unto Sir Robert Brakenburie, Conestable John Green. Robert Brake^burie
Conestable of the Tovver.
of the tower, with a letter and credence also, that the same sir Robert
should in any wise put the two children to death. This John Green did his
errand unto Brakenburie, kneeling before our Lady in the Tower, who plainly
answered, that he would never put them to death to die therefore: with which
aunsweare, John Green returning, recoumpted the same to King Richard at
Warwick yet in his way. Wherewith he took such displeasure and thought,
that the same night he said unto a secreet page of his: Ah whom shall a man
trust? those that I have brought vpmy self, those that I had wened would most
surely serve me, even those fail me, and at my commandment, will do nothing
for me. Sir (quoth his page) there lies one on your pallet without, that I
dare well say, to do your grace pleasure, the thing were right hard that he
would refuse, meaning this by sir James Tirell, which was a man of right goodly
Sir James Tirel*
personage, and for natures gifts worthy to have served a much better Prince,
if he had well served God, and by grace obtained as much troth and good will as
he had strength and wit. The man had an high heart, and sore longed upward,
Authority loves no partners.
not rising yet so fast as he had hoped, being hindered and kept under by the
means of Sir Richard Ratclife, and sir Will. Cates by, which longing for no mo
partiners of the Princes favor, and namely not for him, whose pride they wist
would bear no peer, keepte him by secret driftes out of all secret trust,
which thing, this Page well had marked and known: wherefore this occasion
offered, of very special friendship he took his time to put him forward, and
by such wise to do him good, that all the enemies he had, except the Devil,
could never have done him so much hurt. For upon this pages words King Richard
arose (For this communication had he sitting at the draught, a convenient
Carpet for such a counsel) and came out into a Pallet Chamber, on which he
found in bed sir James and sir Thomas Tirels, of person like and brethen of
blood, but nothing of kin in conditions. Then said the K. merrily to them, what
sirs be ye in bed so soon? and calling up sir James, brake to him secretly
his mind in this mische^ous* matter. In which he found him nothing strange.
Wherefore on the morrow he sent him to Brakenburie with a letter, by which was
commanded to deliver sir James all the Keys of the Tower for one night, to
the end he might there accomplish the Kings pleasure, in such things as he
had given him commandment. After which letter delivered, and the keys
received, sir James appointed the night next ensuing to destroy them, devising
before and preparing the means. The prince as soon as ye protector left ye
name, and took himself as king, had it showed unto him* that he should not
reign, but his uncle should have ye crown. At which word, ye Prince sore
abashed, began to sigh and said: Alas, I would my uncle would let me have my
life yet, though I leese my Kingdom. Then he that told him the tale, used him
with good words, and put him in the best comfort he could. But forthwith
was the Prince and his brother both shut up, and all other removed from them,
only one called Black Will, or William Slaughter except, set to serve them
and see them sure. After which time the prince never tied his points, nor
aught roughte of himself, but with that young babe his brother, lingered with
thought and heaviness, til this traiterous death delivered them of that
wretchedness. For Sir James Tyrell devised y^ they should be murdered in
their beds. To the execution whereof, he appointed Miles Forest, one of the
four that kept them, a fellow fleshed in murder before time. To him he joined
one John Dighton his own horssekeeper, a big, broad* square, strong knave.

Then all the other being removed from them, this Miles The young king and his
brother murdered.
Forest, and John Dighton, about midnight (the selie children lying in their
beds) came into the Chamber, and suddenly lapped them up among the clothes,
so to bewrapped the^ and entangled them, keeping down by force the featherbed
and pillowes hard unto their mouths, that within a while, smothered and
stifled, their breath failing, they gave up to God their innocente souls into
the joys of Heaven, leaning to the tormentors their bodies dead in the bed.
Which after that the wretches perceived, first by the struggling with the
pains of death, and after long lying still, to be thoroughly dead, they
laid their bodies naked out upon the bed, and fetched Sir James to see them,
which upon the sight of them, caused those murderers to bury them at the
staire foot, meetly deep in the ground, under a great heap of stones.

Then rode Sir James in great haste to King Richard, and showed him all the
manner of the murder, who gave him great thanks, and (as some say) there made
him knight* But he allowed not as I have heard, the burying in so vile a
corner, saying, that he would have them buried in a better place, because they
were a Kings sons. Lo the honorable courage of a King. Whereupon they say,
that a Priest of S. Roberte Brakenburie took up the bodies again, and
secretly enteried them in such place, as by the occasion of his death, which
only knew it, could never since come to light. Uerye troth is it, and well
known, that at such time as Sir James Tyrel was in the Tower, for Treason
committed against the most famous Prince King Henry the seventh, both Dighton
and he were examined, and confessed the murder in manner above written, but
whether the bodies were removed, they could nothing tell. And thus as I have
learned of them that much knew, and little cause had to lie were these two
noble princes, these innocente tender children, borne of most royal blood,
brought up in great wealth, likely long to live, reign, and rule in the
Realm, by traiterous tirannie taken, deprived of their estate, shortly shut up
in prison, and privily slain and murdered, their bodies cast God wot where, by
the cruel ambition of their unnatural uncle and his dispiteous tormentors.
Which things on every part well pondered, God never gave this world a more
notable example, neither in what vnsuretie stands this worldly wea^le, or
what mischief works the proud enterprise of an high heart, or finallye,
what wretched end ensues such dispiteous cruelty. For first to begin with
the Ministers, Miles Forest, at Saint Martins peacemeal^ rotted away. Dighton
indeed yef walks on alive in good possibility to be hanged er^ he dye. But
Sir James Tyrell dyed at the Tower Hill beheaded for treason. King Richard
himself, as ye shall hereafter hear, ^laine in the field, hacked and hewed of
his enemies hands; carried on Horsseback dead, his hear in despite torn and
tagged like a cur dog. And the mischief that he took, was within less than
three years of the mischief that he did. And yet all the mean time, spent in
much pain and trouble outward, much fear, anguishe and sorrow within. For I
have heard by credible report of such as were secret with his Chamberlain,
that after this abominable deed done, he never had quiet in his mind. He
never thought himself sure. Where he went abroad, his eyes whirled about, his
body painely fen^ed, his hand ever upon his dag^er* his countenance and
manner like one, always ready to strik^ again, he took ill rest a nyghtes,
lay long waking and musing, so^e wearied with care and watch, rather slumbred
than slept, troubled with fearful dreams, suddenly sometime stert up lept
out of his bed, and ran about the Chamber, so was his restless heart
continually tossed and tumbled with the tedious impression and stormy
remembrance of his abominable deed.

Thomas Norland: William Martin, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Robert Bylisdon H^berdasher; the 28 of October.

Now had he outward no long time in rest. For hereupon, soon after, began
the conspiracy, or rather good confederation, between the Duke of Buckingham,
and many other Gentlemen against him.

The occasion where upon the King and the Duke fell out, is o^ diverse folk
diverse wise pretended.

This Duke (as I have for certain ben informed) as soon as the Duke of
Gloucester, upon the death of King Edward, came to York, and there had
solemn funeral service, for King* Edward, sent thither in the most secret wise
he could, one Persall* his trusty servant, who came to John Ward* a
Chamberer of like secret trust with the Duke of Gloucester, desiring, that in
the most close and covert manner, he might be admitted to the presence and
speech of his master. And the Duke of Gloucester, advertised of his desire,
caused him in the dead of the night* after al other folk avoided, to be brought
unto him in his secret Chamber, whe^^ Persall* after his masters
reco^mendation, showed him, that he had secretly sent to show him in his new
world, he would take such partas he would; and way^e upon him with ^ thousand
good fellows, i^ need were. The messenger sent back with thanks, and some
se^r^ate instruction of the Protectors mind: yet met him again with farther
from the D. his Master, within few days after at Notingha^: whither the
Protector from York, with many Gentlemen of the North Country, to the number
of six hundred horses, was come on his way to London ward, and after secreat
meeting and communication had, ^eftsoone departed. Whence upon at Northampton,
the Duke met with the Protector, himself with three hundred Horses, and from
thence still continued with him partner of all his devises, till y^ after his
Coronation, they departed as it seemed very great friends at Gloucester. From
whence, as soon as the Duke came home, he so lightlye turned from him, and so
highlye conspired against him, that a man would marvel whereof the change
grew. And surely, the occasion of their variance is of diverse men diversely
reported. Some have said I (heard say) yt the Duke a little before the
Coronation, among other things, required of the Protector the Duke of
Hertford^ lands, to the which he pretended himself just inheritor. And
forasmuch as the title which he claymed by inheritance, was somewhat
interlaced with the title to the Crown, by the line of King Henry before
deprived, the Protector conceived such indignation, that he rejected the Dukes
request with many spiteful and minatorie words, which so wounded his heart
with hatred and mistruste, that he never after toulde endure to look a right
on King Richard, but ever feared his own life, so far forth* that when the
Protector rode through London toward his Coronation, he feigned himself
sick, because he would not ride with him. And the other taking it in evil
part, sent him word to rise, and come ride, or he would make him be
carried. Whereupon, he rode on with evil will, and that notwithstanding on the
morrow, rose from the feast; fayning himself sick, and King Richard said, it
was done in hatred and despite of him. And they said, that ever after
continually, ^ch of them lived in such hatred and distrust of other, that ye
Duke v^tily looked to have bin murdered at Gloucester. From which nathelesse, he
in fair manner departed. But surely some right secret at that day deny this:
and many right wise men think it unlikely, (the deep dissembling nature of
those both men considered, and what need in that green world the Protector
had of the Duke* and in what peril the Duke stood, if he fell once in
suspicion of the Tyrant) that either the Protector would give the Duke
occasion of displeasure or the Duke the Protector occasion of mistruste. And
verylye, men think, that if King Richard had any such opinion conceived, he
would never have suffered him to escape his hands. Uery troth it is, the Duke
was an high minded man, and evil could bear the glory of an other, so that I
have heard of some that say they saw it, that the Duke at such time as the
Crown was first set upon the Protectors head, his eye could not abide the
sight thereof, but wryed his head another way. But men say, that he was of
troth not well at ease, and that both to King Richard well known, and not ill
taken, nor any demand of the Dukes discourteously rejected, but he both with
great gifts and high behestes, in most loving and trusty manner, departed at
Gloucester. But soon after his coming home to Brecknocke, having there in
custody by the commandment of King Richard Doctor Morton, Bishop of Ely,
who (as ye before heard) was taken in the Counsel at the tower, waxed with
him familiar: whose wisdom abused his pride to his own deliverance and the
Dukes destruction. The Bishop was a man of great natural wit, very well
learned, and honorable in behavior, lacking no wise ways to win favor. He
had bin fast upon the part of King Henry, while that part was in wealth, and
naythelesse, left it not nor forsook it in woe, but fled the Realm with
the Queen and the Prince, while King* Edward had the King in prison, never
came home, but to the field. After which lost, and that part utterly
subdued, the ^other for his fast faith and wisdom, not only was content to
receive him, but also woed him to come, and had him from thenceforth both in
secreate trust, and very special favor, which he nothing deceived. For he
being (as ye have heard) after King Edwards death first taken by the tyrante,
for his truth to the King, found the mean to set this Duke in his top,
joined Gentlemen together in aid of king Henry, devising first the marriage
between him and King Edwardes daughter, by which his faith, he declared the
good service to both his masters at once, with infinite benefit to the realm by
ye conjunction of those two bloods in one, whose several titles had long
enquieted the land, he fled the realm, went to Rome, never minding more to
meddle wite the world, till the noble Prince King Henry the seventh gate him
home again, made him Archebyshoppe of Canterbury, and Chauncelor of England,
whereunto the Pope joined the honor of Cardinal. Thus, living many days in as
much honor as one man might well wish, ended them so godly, that his death
with Gods mercy well changed his life.

This man therefore, as I was about to tell you, by the long and often
alternate proof, as well of prosperity, as aduers fortune, had gotten by
great experience the very mother and mistress of Wisdom, a deep insighte
in pollitique worldly driftes. Whereby, perceiving now this Duke glad to
commune with him, fed him with fair words, and many pleasant praises. And
perceiving by the process of their communication, the Dukes pride, now and
then balke out a little bredde of envy, toward the glory of the King, and
thereby feeling him easy to fall out if the matter were well handled: he
craftily sought the ways to prick him forward, taking always the occasion
of his coming, and so keeping himself so close within his bounds, that he
rather seemed to follow him, then to lead him. For, when the Duke first
began to praise and boast the king, and show how much profit the Realm
should take by his reign: my Lord Morton answered: Surely my Lord, ^ollie it
were for me to lie, for if I would swear the contrary, your Lordship would
not I ween believe, but that if y^ world would have gone as I would have
wished, K. Henry's son had had the Crown, and not King Ed. But after that God
had ordered him to loose it, and King Edward to reign, I was never so mad
that I would with a dead manne strive against the quick. So was I to King
Edward a faithful Chaplain, and glad would have bin that his child had
succeeded him. Howbeit, if the secret judgment of God have otherwise
provided, I purpose not to spur against a prick, nor labor to set up
that God pulls down. And as for the late Protector and now King. And even
there he left, saying y^ he had already meddled to much with the world, and
would from that day meddle with his Book and his beads, and no further. Then
longed the D. sore to hear what he would have said, because he ended with
the King, and there so suddenly stopped, and exhorted him so familiarly
between them twain, to be bold to say whatsoever he thought, whereof he
faythfullye promised, there should never come hurt, and peradventure more
good than he would ween, and that himself intended to use his faithful
secret advise and counsel, which he said was the only cause for which he
procured of the King to have him in his custody, where he might reckon himself
at home, and else had he bin put in the hands of them with whom he should
not have found the like favor. The Bishop right humblye thanked him, and
said in good faith my Lord, I love not to talk much of Princes, as a thing
not all out of peril, though the word be without fault, for as much as it
shall not be taken as the party mean it, but as it pleases the Prince to
cons^rue it. And ever I think on Esops tale, that when the Lion had
proclaimed, that on pain of death, there should none horned beast abide in
that wood: one that had in his forhead a bunch of flesh, ^led away a great
pace. The Fox that saw him run so fast, asked him whether he made all that
haste? And he answered, In faith I never wot, nor recke, so I were once
hence, because of this proclamation made of horned beasts. What fool quoth the
Fox, thou may abide well enough, the Lion meant not by thee, for it is none
horn that is in thine head. No marry (quoth he) that wot I well enough. But
what and he call it an horn, where am I then? The Duke laughed merrily at the
tale, and said, My L. I warrant you, neither the Lio^ nor the Bore shall pike
any matter at any thing here spoken, for it shall never come to their ears. In
good faith Sir said the Bishop if it did, the thing that I was about to say,
taken as well (as before God, I meant) it could deserve but thanks. And yet
taken as I ween it would, might happen to turn me to little good, and you to
lesser. Then longed the Duke yet much more to wit what it was, whereupon the
Bishop said, in good faith my Lord, as for the late Protector, since he is
now King in possession, I purpose not to dispute his title, but for the weal
of this Realm, whereof his grace has now the governance, and whereof I am my
self one poor member, I was about to wish, that to those good abilities
whereof he has already right many, little needing my praise: it might yet have
pleased God, for the better store, to have given him some of such other
excellent virtues, meet for the rule of a realm, as our Lord has planted in
the person of your grace: and there left again.

The Duke somewhat maruayling at his sudden This that follovveth is abridged
out of Edward Hall.
pauses, said my Lord I note your often breathing and sudden stoppyng in
your communication, so that to my intelligence, your words neither come to
any perfect sentence, whereby either I might have knowledge what your
entente is now toward the King, or what affection you bear toward me. For
the comparison of good qualities ascribed to us both, makes me not a little to
muse thinking y^ you have some other privy imagination, imprinted in your
heart, which you be abashed to disclose, and especially to me, which on my
honor do assure you to be as secret in this case as the deaf and dome. The
Bishop being somewhat bolder, considering the Dukes promise, but most of all
animated, because he knew the Duke desirous to be magnified, and also he
perceived the inward hatred which he bare toward King Richard, he opened
his stomach to the botome, and said, my singular good Lord, since the time of
my capti^itie, which being in your Graces custody, I may rather call it a
liberty, then a straight imprisonment, in au^yding of idleness mother of all
vices, in reading Books and ancient Pamphlets, I have found this sentence
written* that no man is borne free and at liberty of himself only, for one
part of duty he owes to his parents, an other part to his friends and
kinsfolks: but the native country, in the which he first tasted this
pleasant and flattering world, demands a debte not to be forgotten,
which saying causes me to consider in what case this realm my native
country now stands, and in what estate and assurance before this time it
has continued: what governor we now have, and what ruler we might have, for I
plainly perceive (the Realm being in this case) must needs decay, and be
brought to confusion: but one hope I have, that is, when I consider your noble
personage, your justice and indifferency, your fervent zeal and ardent love
toward your natural country, and in like manner the love of your country
toward you, the great learning, pregnant wit, and eloquence, which so much
does abound in your person, I must needs think this realm fortunate,
which has such a Prince in store, meet and apt to be governor. But on the
other side, when I call to memory the good qualities of the late Protector,
and now called King, so violated by tyranny, so altered by usurped authority,
so clouded by blind ambition, I must needs say, that he is neither meet to
be King of so noble a realm, nor so famous a realm meet to be governed by
such a tyrant: Was not his first enterprice to obtain the Crown begun, by
the murder of diverse noble personages? Did he not secondarily proceed against
his own natural mother, declaring her openly to be a woman given to carnal
affection, and dissoulute living, declaring furthermore his two brethren, and
two nephews, to be Bastardes, and to be borne in aduo^trey, yet not contented,
after he had obtained the Garlande he caused the two pore innocents his
nephews committed to him, to be shamefully murdered, the blood of which
little babes daily cry to God, from the earth for vengeance, what sure tie
shall be in this realm to any person, either for life or goods under such a
cruel Prince, which regards not the destruction of his own blood, and then
the less, the loss of other: but now to conclude what* I mean toward your
noble person, I say, and affirm, if you love God, your lineage, or your native
country, you must your self take upon you y^ Crown of this Realm, both for ye
maintenance of the honor of the same, as also for the deliverance of your
natural Countreyme^ from the bondage of such a Tyrante. And if your self will
refuse to take upon you ye Crown of this Realm. The^ I adjure you by the faith
y^ you owe to God, to devise some way how this realm may be brought to some
convenient regiment, under some good governor, when the B* had ended his
saying, the D. sighed, and spoke not of a great while, so y^ night they co^moned
(...)ore. The next day the Duke sent for the B. unto whom he said, my L. of
Ely* I must needs in heart think, and with mouth confess, that you be a sure
friend, a trusty counsaylour and a very lover of your Country. And since at
our last communicatio^, you have disclosed the secrets of your heart, touching
ye new usurper of the Crown, and also have a little touched the ^^auncement of
the two noble families of York and Lancaster, I shall likewise declare unto you
my privy entents and secret cogitations, and to begin, when King Edward*
was deceased; I then began to study and with deliberation to ponder in what
manner this realm should be governed. I persuaded with my self to take part
with the Duke of Gloucester, whom I thought to be as clean without
dissimulation, as tractable without injury, and so by my means he was made
Protector both of the king and realm, which auathoritie being once gotten, he
never ceased printly to require me and other Lords, as well spiritual as
temporal, that he might take upon him the Crown, till the Prince came to the
age of xxiiij. years, and were able to govern the realm as a sufficient
king, which thing, when he saw me somewhat stick at; he then brought in
instruments, autentike Doctors, Proctors, and notaries of the law, with
depositions of diverse witnesses, testifying King Edwardes children to be
bastards, which depositions then I thought to be as true, as now I know them
to be feigned. When the said depositions were before us read and diligently
heard, he stood up bare headed, saying: Well my Lords, even as I and you
would, that my nephews should have no wrong: so I pray you do me nothing but
right, for these witnesses and sayings of famous Doctors be true: for I am
only the vndubitate heir to RICHARD PLANTAGENET Duke of York, adjudged to
be the very heir to the Crown of this realm, by authority of Parliament.
Which things, so by learned men for verity to us declared, caused me and
other to take him for our lawful and undoubted Prince and Sovereign Lord: so
again by my aid, he of a Protector was made a King, but when he was once
crowned King, and in full possession of the realm, he cast away his old
conditions. For, when I my self sued to him for my part of the Earl of
Herefords lands, which his brother King Edward wrongfully detained from me,
and also required to have the office of the high Conestableship of England,
as diverse of my noble ancestors before this time have had, and in long
descent continued, in this my first suit, he did not only first delay me, and
afterward deny me, but gave me such unkind words, as though I had never
furthered him: al which I suffered pacie^tly, but when I was informed of the
death of the two young innocents, O Lord my heart inwardly grudged, in so much
that I abhorred ye sight of him. I took my leave of the Court, and returned to
Brecknocke to you, but in the journey as I returned, I had diverse imaginatio^s
how to deprive this unnatural uncle. Frst I santi^ed y^ if I list to take upon
me the Crown, now was the way made plain, and occasion given. For I saw he
was dysdayned of the Lords temporal, and accursed, of the Lords spiritual.
After diverse cogitations of this matter, As I rode between Worcester and
Bridgenorth* I encountered with the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmonde, now
wife to ye Lord Stanley, which is the very daughter and sole heir, to John
Duke of Somerset my grandfathers elder brother: so that she and her son the
Garle of Richmond, be both between me and the gate, to enter into the Majesty
royal, and getting of the Crown: and when we had a little comoned, concerning
her son; and were departed: I then began to dispute with my self, whether I
were best to take upon me, by the election of the nobility and communaltie or
to take it by power. thus standing in ye wavering ambiguitie, I considered
first, y^ offi^e, duty, and pain of a King, which surely I think that no
mortal men can iustlye, and truly observe, except he ^ee elected by GOD as
King David was: but further I remembered that if I once took on me the
governance of the Realm: the daughters of King Edward and their Allies,
being both for his sake much helpned, and also for the great iniurye done to
them much pytied, would never cease to bark at the one side of me.
Sen^b^abye my coosin the Earl of Richemonde his aids, and kinsfolk, will
surely attempt either to ^yte or to pierse me on the other side, so that my
life and rule should ever hang unquiet in ^pubte of death or deposition. And
if the said two ly^ages of York and Lancaster, should join in one against
me, then were I surely matched. Wherefore I have cleerelye determined
utterly to relinquishe all imaginations concerning the obtaining of the
Crown: For as I told you, the Countess of Richmond, in my return from the
new named King, meeting me in the high way, prayed me first for kindred sake,
secondly for the love I bare to my grandfather Duke Humfrey; which was sworn
brother to her father, to move the King to be good to her son, Hencie Earl of
Richmonde, and to license him with his favor to return again into England,
and if it were his pleasure so to do, she promised that the Earl her son
should marry one of king Edwards daughters at the appointment of the King,
without any thing demanded for the said espousalles, but only the Kings
favor, which request I s^^ne over passed and departed, but after service I
called to memory more of that matter, I am bente, that the Earl of Richmonde
heir of the house of Lancaster, shall take to wife Lady Elizabeth eldest
daughter to K. Edward, by the which marriage both the houses of York and
Lancaster, may be unite in one: when the Duke had said, the Bishop Morton,
which favored ever the house of Lancaster, ^^s wonde^ous joyful, for all his
imagination tended to this effect, and least the Dukes courage should swage
o^ his mind alter, he said to the Duke my Lord of Buckingham, sith by God^
provision, and your incomparable wisdom, this noble conjunction is first
moved, it is necessary to consider what persons we shall first make pri^^e of
this polliticke conclusion, by my troth quoth the Duke, we will begin with my
Lady of Richmonde the Earls mother, which knows where he is in Brytaine,
since you will begin that way (said the Bishop) I have an old friend with
the Countess called Reignalde Bray, for whom I shall send if it be iyoc^^
pleasure* so the Bishop wrode for him to come to Brecke^^^ke, who straight
came back with the messenger* where the Dirke and Bishop declared what they
had devised for the prefermente of the Earl of Richmonde son to his* Lady
land Maistresse: willing her first to compass how to obtain the good will
of Queen Elizabeth, and also of her eldest daughter: and after secretly to
send to her son into Britain to declare what high honor, was prepared for
him, if he would swear to marrye the Lady Elizabeth as soon as he was King of
the Realm. Reynold Bray with a glad heart returned to the Countess his Lady.
When Bray was gone, the Bishop told the Duke that if he were in his Isle of
Elie he could make many friends to further their enterprise. The Duke knew
this to be true, but yet loathe to lose the company of such a counselor, gave
the Bishop fair words, saying he should shortly depart well accompanied
for fear of enemies, but the Bishop or the Dukes company were assembled,
secretly disguised, in a night departed, and came to Elie, where he found
money and friends, and so sailed into Flaunders, where he did the Earl of
Richmond good service, when Reynold Bray, had declared his message to the
Countess no marvel if she were glad, wherefore she devised a means hold to
break this matter to Queen Elazabeth then being in Sanctuary at Westminster,
And having in her family a certain Wel^hman called Jews learned in Physic,
now having opportunity to break her mind unto him, declared that the time
was come that her son should be joined in marriage with Lady Elizabeth
daughter and heir to King Edward: and that King Richard, should out of all
honor and estate be detected: and required him to go to Queen Elizabeth, not
as a messenger, but as one* that came friendly to visit her, and as time and
place should serve, to make her privy of this devise. This Physician with good
diligence repaired to the Queen, and when he saw time convenient, he said unto
her: Madame although my imagination be very simple, yet for the entire
affection I bear to you and to your children, I am so bold to utter unto you
a secret conceit that I have compassed in my brain. When I remember the great
loss that you have sustained by the death of your loving husband, and the
great sorrow that you have suffered by the cruel murder of your innocent
children I can no less do than daily study how to bring your heart to
comfort, and also to revenge the quarrel of you and your children on that
cruel tyrant King Richard. And first consider what battle and what
mischief has risen by the dis^ention between the two houses of York and
Lancaster, which two families if they may be joined in one, I doubt not but y^
your line shall be again restored, to your great joy and comfort. You know
Madame that of the house of Lancaster, the Earl of Richmond is next of blood,
and to the house of York your daughters now are heirs. If ye could invent
the mean how to couple your eldest daughter with the Earl of Richemond in
Matrimony, no doubt but the usurper should be shortly deposed, and your heir
again to her right restored. When the Queen had heard this friendly motion,
she instantly besought him that as he had been the first inuenter of so good
an enterprise, that now he would not desist to follow the same, requrring him
further, that he would resort to the Countesie of Richemond mother to the
Earl Henry, and to declare to her on the Queenee behalf, that all the
friends of King Edward* her husband, should assist and take part with the
Earl of Richemond her son, so that he would take an oath that after the
Kingdom obtained, to espouse the Lady Elizabeth her daughter, etc. After Jews
so spedde his business that he made a final^en^ of this business between the
two mothers: so the Lady Margaret Countess of Richemond brought to a good
hope of the preferment of her son, made Reynold Bray chief solicitor of this
conspiraoie, geuyng him in charge secretly to inuegle such persons of
Nobility to join with her and take her part as he knew to be faithful.

This Reynold Bray within few days brought to his lure, sir Gyles Daubeney,
sir John Ch^nie, Richard Guilford and Thomas Rame Esquiers and others. In the
mean season the Countess of Richemond seat Christopher Vrfwike into Britain
to the Earl of Richmond, to declare to him all agreementes between her and the
Queen agreed: but she rementbring that the Duke of Buckingham, was one of the
first inuentors of this enterprise sent Hugh Conway Esquier into Britain with
a great sum of money to her son, giuyng him in charge to declare to the Earl
the great love that ye most part of the nobility of the Realm bare toward
him, wylling him not to neglect so good an occasion offered, but with all
speed to fettle his mind how to return into England, giving him Counsel to
take land in Wales. When ye Earl had received this joyful message, he brake
to the Duke of Britayne all his secrets, aduertising him that he was entered
into a sure and steadfast hope to obtain the Crown of England, desiring him of
help toward the atchieuing of his enterprise, which the Duke promised and
after performed. Whereupon the Earl sent into England Hugh Conway, and Thomas
Ram, to declare his coming shortly into England. In the mean season the
chief of the conspiracy in England began many enterprises, which being
never so privily handled, yet knowledge thereof came to King Richard, and
because he knew the Duke of Buckingham to be the chief head and aid of
this commination, he thought it most necessary to pluck him from that part,
where upon he adressed his loving letters to the Duke to exhort the Duke to
come to the Court: but the Duke required the King to pardon him, excusing
himself that he was not well. King Richard not content with this excuse,
directed to the Duke other letters with checkyng words commanding him without
delay to repair to his presence. The Duke made to the messenger a determinate
answer, that he would not come to his mortal enemy: and immediatelye
prepared war against him, and by this means, Thomas Marquis Dorset came out
of Sancturie, gathered a great band of men in York shire, sir Edward
Courtney and Peter his brother Bishop of Excester, raised an other army in
Devonshire and Cornwall.

In Kent ^ir Richard Calfortle and other gentlemen rayses a comparrie. But King
Richard in the mean time had gotten together a great strength, with whom he
removed from London toward Salisburie, to the intent he might set on the Dukes
army, the King was starce two days tourney from Salisburie* when the Duke of
Buckingham accompanied with a great power of wild Welchmen which in the end
forsook him. The Duke with his power marched through the forest of Dene
intending to have passed the river of Seuerne at Gloucester, and there to have
joined in army with the Courtneys and other Western men, which if he had done
no doubt but King Richard had been in great ieoperdie: But before he could
attain to Seuerne side, by force of continual rain the river rose so high
that it ouerflowed all the country adjoining, which rage of water lasted. x.
days, by which inundacie, the passages were so closed that neither ye Duke
could come over Seuerne to his accomplices, nor they to him, d^wing which time
the Welchmen lyngering idle and without money or victual, suddenly scaled and
departed. The Duke thus left almost alone, was of necessity compelled to fly,
and conveyed himself into the house of Humfrey Banister his seruaht beside
Shrewesburie, whom he had tenderly brought up, which when it was known to his
adherents, every man shifted for himself and fled. And some of them sailed
into Britain, among the which, were Peter Courtney Bishop of Excester, and sir
Edward Courtney his brother, Thomas Marquis Dorset, John Lord Wells, sir John
Bourchier, sir Edmond Woodvile brother to Queen Elizabeth, sir Robert
Willoughbie, sir Gyles Daubney, sir Thomas Arundale, sir John Cheynie and his
two: brothren, sir William Barkerley, sir William Brando^ and Thomas his
brother, sir Richard Edgecombe, and John Halwell, Edward Pownyngs; etc
Proclamation was made and a thousand pound promised to who so could bring out
the Duke of Buckingham, where upon Humfrey Banister bewrayed his guest and
Humfrey Banister betrayeth his master.
master to John Mitton then Sheriff of Shropshire, which with a strong power
apprehended the Duke in a little grove adjoining to the manors of Humfrey
Banister, and in great haste conveyed him to the City of Salisburie, where
King Richard than kept his household. This Banister after Banister that be
trayed his master miserably plagued, let the like traitors look for the like
or worse to them and theirs, without speedy repentance.
he had betrayed his master, his son and heir waxed mad and dyed in a Bores
stye, his eldest daughter was suddenly stricken with a foul leperie, his
second son maruellously deformed of his lymmes and made lame, his younger
son in a small puddle was drowned, and he himself being of extreme age
arraygned and found guilty of a murder and by his clergy saved. And as for
his thousand pound* King Richard gave him not one farthing, saying that he
which would be untrue to so good a master, would be false to all other.

The Duke after he had confessed all the whole conspiracy Duke of Buckingham
beheaded.
upon the second of November without araignement or judgment was at Salisburie
beheaded.

Whilst these things were thus handled in England, Henry Earl of Richmond
prepared an army of five thousand Britons, and forty well furnished ships.
When al things were prepared, and the day of setting forward was appointed,
which was the. xij. of October, the whole army hoysed up sails and took the
sea, but toward night the wind turned and so huge a tempest arose that the
ships were dispersed a sunder: some driven into Normandy, some again into
Britain. In the morning after when the tempest was assuaged, the Earl
approached to the South part of England, at the mouth of the Haven of Pole in
Dorcet, where he might see all the banks full of men of war, appointed to
defend his arrival, wherefore he gave charge that no man should land, until
such time as the whole Navy were assembled, but after that he perceived none
of his ships to appear, he hoysed up Ankers and away, where he arrived safe in
Normandy, and returned by land into Britain, where he was soon advertised
that the Duke of Buckingham had lost his head, and that the Marquis Dorcet and
a great number of Noble men of England had a little before enquired for him
there.

In the mean season King Richard apprehended in diverse parts of this Realm
certain Gentlemen of ye Earl of Richmondes faction, amongst whom sir George
Brown sir Roger Clifford, and, iiij. other were put to death at London y^ iij.
of December. Sir Thomas Sentlegar which had married the Duches of Excester the
Kings own sister and T. Rame with diverse other were executed at Excester.

The. xxx. of December was a great fire at Leaden hall in Fire at Leaden hall
in London.
London, where through was brent much housing and all the stocks for gunnes and
other like provision belonging to ye city.

After this King Richard called a Parliament, in y^ which 1484
he attainted the Earl of Richemond, and all other persons, which were ^led
out of the Realm for fear, or any other cause as enemies to him and to their
natural country, and all their lands and goods was confiscate to the Kings
use, and yet notwithstanding he laid on the people a great tax. In this
troublesome season, nothing was more marvelled Anno. reg. 2.
at than that the Lord Stanley had not been taken, considering the working of
the Lady Margaret his wife mother* to the Earl of Richemond, but for as much
as the enterprise of a woman was of him reputed of no regard, or estimation,
and that the Lord Stanley, her husband had purged him self to be innocent of
all attemptes by her committed, it was given him in charge to keep her in some
secret place at home, without having any servant or company, so that from
thence forth she should never send letter to her son or to any of his
friends, by the which the King might be molested, which commandment was a
while put in execution.

This year King Richard began the high tower at Westminster, which remains
yet unfinished. Also he caused the K. Henry the sixth removed to VVindso^.
body of King Henry the sixte to be removed from Chertesey Abbey in Surrey and
to be buried at Windsor, where he now rests, on the. xij. of August.

Richard Chester: Thomas Britain the 28. of September. Sherifes.


Ralph Austry the 6. of February.

Tho. Hill Grocer the 28. of October. W. Stocker draper the Majors.
24. of Sep. in anno. 1485. John ward grocer the 29. of Sep.

William Collingborne made a Ryme of. iij. of King Colingborne executed.
Richards Cou^sellers, the Lord Louell, sir Richard Ratclife, and sir William
Catesby which was:

The Ratte the Catte and Louell our dog,
Rule all England under the hog.
For the which he was drawn from Westmin. to the Tower of London and there on
y^ hill hanged, headed and quartered.

King Richard considering y^ a^ities concluded between Princes are the cause
that their Realms are fortified with a double power, that is to say, with
their own strength, and the aid of their friends, practiced a league with
the King of Scots, which not long before had made diverse incursions and roades
into the Realm of England, and therefore sued to have a truce or peace
concluded. Wherefore Commissioners were appointed which met at Notingham, and
there in the end concluded for. iij. years on certain articles. xv. in
number. Truce with Scotland for three years.
This peace thus concluded, King Richard now doubtyng his own people, was
continually vexed with fear of the return of the Earl of Richmond and his
accomplices. Wherefore, nothing was for his purpose more then once again with
price and prayer, to attempt the duke of Britain in whose territory y^ Earl
then abode, to deliver him into his hands, wherefore incontinent he sent
certain Ambassadors to the Duke of Britain, which took upon them that King
Richard should yearly pay and answer the Duke of Britain of all the
revenues, rentes and profits of the lands and possessions as well belonging
to the Earl of Richmond, as to any other noble or gentleman which then were in
the Earls company, if he after that time would keep them in continual prison
and restrain them from liberty. The orators furnished with these and other
instructions arrived in Britain but could not speak with the duke, by reason y^
he being weakened by a long and daily infirmity, began to wax idle of his
remembrance, for which cause Peter Landoyse his chief Treasurer, ruled all
things at his pleasure, unto whom the English Ambassadors moved to him their
message, offering to him the same rewards and lands that they should have
offered the Duke. This Peter faithfully promised to accomplish King Richardes
request, so that he kept promise with him, but fortune was so favorable to the
public Weal of England, that this deadly compact took none effect, for John
Morton Bishop of Elie soiourning then in Flaunders, was of all this crafty
devise certified: wherefore he sent Christopher Vrswike, to declare to the Earl
of Richemond all the deceyt, giving him charge in all have possible with his
company to retire out of Britain into France. When these news came to the
Earl, he incontinent sent to Charles the French king requiring that he and his
might safely pass into France, which desire was granted, and the Earl with
the rest dispatched as privily as might be into France, no man susspecting
their departure. After this, the Earl took his journey to Charles the French
King, to who^ after great thanks given, he disclosed the occasion of his
access to his person. After that he required of him help and succor, to the
intent he might return to the Nobility of his Realm, of who^ he was
generally called to take upon him the Crown. King Charles promised him aid,
and bad him be of good comfort, for he assured him that he would gladly show
to 1485
him his bountiful liberality. Whiles the Earl of Richemond thus attended on
the French Court, John Vere Earl of Oxforde so persuaded James Blonte
Captain of Hames Castle, and sir John Forteskewe Porter of the Town of
Calleis that he him self was not only set at liberty, but they also leaving
their fruitful offices condescended to go with him into France to the Earl
of Richemond.

In the mean season King Richard was credibly advertised what promises and
oaths the Earl and his confederates had made and sworn, and how by the Earls
means, all the English men were passed out of Britain into France. Wherefore
being in manner desperate, imagining how to infringe the Earls purpose by an
other mean, so that by the marriage of Lady Elizabeth his niece, he should
pretend no claim to the Crown, there came to his mind a thing not only
detestable, but much more cruel to be put in execution, for he cleerelye
determined to reconcile to his favor his brother wife Queen Elizabeth, and so
by that means the Earl of Richemond, of the affinity of his Nice should be
utterly defrauded, and if no ingenious remedy could be otherwise invented,
if it should happen Queen Anne his wife to depart out of this world, then
he himself would rather take to wife his cousin and Nice the Lady Elizabeth,
than for lack of that affinity the whole Realm should run to ruin.
Wherefore he sent to the Queen being in Sanctuary, diverse and often
messengers which should excuse him of all things before against her
attempted, and after should so largelye promise promotions, not only to her
but to her son Thomas Marquis Dorset, that they should bring her (if it were
possible) into some wan hope. The Messengers so persuaded the Queen, that she
began somewhat to re^ent, in so much that she faithfully promised to yield
her self to the Kings will and pleasure. And so she first delivered unto King
Richardes hands her five daughters. Afterward she sent letters to the
Marquis her son being then at Paris with the Earl of Richemond, wylling him
in any wise to repair into England, where for him were provided great
honors, assertayning him that all offenses on both parties were forgiven and
forgotten: After that King Richard had thus pleased the mutable mind of
Queen Elizabeth, he caused all her daughters to be conveyed into his Palace
with solemn receiving. Now nothing was contrary to his purpose, ^ut that
his mansion was not void of a wife: and first (...) abstayned both from the
bed and company of his wife: after, he complained to many of the unfortunate
barrenness of his wife. After this, he procured a common rumor to be published
among the common people, that the Queen was dead. When the Queen heard tell
that so horrible a rumor of her death was sprung amongst the communaltie, she
sore suspected the world to be almost at an end with her, and not long after,
howsoever it fortuned, the Queen departed out of this life, and was with due
solemnity buried at Westminster.

The King thus losed out of the bonds of Matrimony, began to cast a fancy to
Lady Elizabeth his Niece, making much suite to have her joined with him in
lawful Matrimony: but because all men, and the Maiden her self most of all
detested this unlawful copulation, he determined to defer the matter till
he were in a more quiet case, for all this season he was oppressed with weighty
affairs on every side, considering that daily part of the Nobility sailed
into France, other privily favored the Earl of Richmond, amongst the noble
men whom he most suspected, these were the principal, Thomas* Lord Stanley,
Sir Wyllyam Stanley his brother, Gilbert Talbot, and six hundred other, of
whose purpose, though King Richard were ignorant, yet he gave no credence to
any one of them, and least of all to the Lord Stanley, because he was joined in
Matrimony with the Lady Margaret, mother to the Earl of Richmond, for when
the said* Lord Stanley would have departed into his Country, the King in no
wise would suffer him to depart, before he had left as in hostage Anno reg.
3.
in the Court George Stanley, Lord Strange, his first begotten son and heir.

While King Richard was thus troubled, sodeynely he heard news that the
Castle of Hames was delivered into the hands of the Earl of Richmonde, by
the means of the Earl of Oxford, and that not only he, but also James Blunt,
Captain of the Castle, were fled into France, to aid the Earl of Richmond.

Henry Earl of Richmond obteyning of King Charles a small crew of men, and
borowing certain sums of money of him, and of diverse other his private
friends, he departed from the French Court, and came to the City of Roane.
While he tarried there, making provision at Harefleete, in the mouth of the
River of Seyne, for all things necessary for his Nauye, tidings were brought
to him, that King Richard being without Children, and a Widdower, intended
shortly to marrye with Lady Elizabeth, his brothers daughter, which news, he
took of no small momente, for this thing only took away from all his
companyous, their hope to obtain an happy enterprise, by reason whereof, he
judged that all his friends in England would shrink from him, yet
notwithstanding, Earl Henry of Richmonde, because he would no longer linger
and weerie his friends, living between hope and fear, determined in all have
convenient to set forward, and carried to his Ships armor, weapons,
vitiayle, and all other ordinances expedient for war, which being done,
only accompanied with two thousand men, and a small number of Ships, weyed
up his Anckers, and in the kalendes of August, he sailed from Harefleete with
so prosperous a wind, that the seventh day after Henry Earl of Richmond,
landed at Milford Haven.
he arrived in Wales in the evening, at a Port called Milford Haven, and
incontinente took land, and came to a place called Dale, and at the Sun
rising, removed to Hereford West, where he was received of the people with
great joy.

From thence, he removed to Cardigan, five mile from Hereford West, whether
came to the Earl Richard Griffith with all his men and power. After him the
same day came John Morgan, with his men. Then the Earl advanced forward,
making no abode in any place, and suddenly he was ascertayned that Sir Walter
Harbert, and Rice appe Thomas, were in harness before him, ready to encounter
with his Army, and to stop their passage, Wherefore he first determined to
set upon them, and either to destroy or to take them into his favor, and
after with all his power to give battle to King Richard. But to the intent
his friends should know with what de^teritie he attempted his enterprise
forward, he sent messengers with letters and instructions to the Lady
Margaret his mother, to the Lord Stanley and his brother, to Talbot and to
other, declaring to them, that he help with the aid of his friends, intended
to pass over the river of Seuerne at Shrewsburie, and so to pass directly to
the City of London, requiring them as his special trust was in the hope of
their fidelity, that they would meet him by the way with all diligent
preparation. When these messengers were departed, he marched forward toward
Shrewsburie, and in his passage there met and saluted him Rice ap Thomas with
a goodly band of Welchmen, which submitted himself whole to his order and
commandment. In the mean time the messengers laden with rewards returned to
him the same day that he entered into Shrewsburie, and made relation to him
that his friends were ready in all points to do all things for him which
they might do. The Earl Henry continued his journey and came to a little
town called Newporte, and pitched his camp on a little hill adjoining,
reposing himself there that night. In the Euenyng of the same day came to him
sir George Talbot with the whole power of the young Earl of Shrewsburie, then
being in ward, which were accounted. ij. thousand men. And thus his power
increasing he arrived at the Town of Stafforde, and there paused. To whom
came sir William Stanley accompanied with a few persons. After that the Earl
departed from thence to Lytchfield and lay without the walls in camp all that
night. The next morning he entered the town and was like a Prince received. A
day or two before the Lord Stanley having in his band almost five thousand
men, lodged in the same town, but hearing ye the Earl of Richemond was
marching thetherward, gave to him place, dislodging him and his, and repaired
to a town called Adrestone, there abiding the coming of ye Earl, and this he
did to avoid all suspicion, being afraid least if he should be seen openly
to be a fawtor or ayder to the Earl his son in law before the day of
batiayle, that King Richard which yet did not utterly put in him mistrust,
would put to some cruel death his son and heir apparent George Lord
Strange, whom King Richard had in hostage. King Richard at this season keeping
his house in the Castle of Notingham was informed that the Earl of Richmond
with such banished men as were fled out of England to him, were arrived in
Wales, and that all things necessary to his enterprise were unpurveyed and
very weak, nothing meet to withstand the power of such as the King had
appointed to resist him, yet notwithstanding he sent to John Duke of Norfolk,
Henry Earl of Northumberlande, Thomas Earl of Surrey, and to other of his
trusty friends, willing them to muster and view all their servants and
tenaunts, and to elect the most courageous and active persons of the whole
number, and with them to repair to his presence with all speed. Also he wrote
to Robert Brakenburie Lieutenaunt of ye Tower, commaundyng him with his power
to come to his army and to bring with him his fellows in arms T. Bouchier,
and sir Walter Hungerford and diverse other Knights and Esquiers in whom he had
cast no small suspicion. While he was thus ordring his affairs, tidings came
that the Earl of Richmond was passed Seuerne, and come to Shrewsburie with out
any detriment or encombraunce. At which message he was sore moved, and cried
out on them that contrary to their oath had deceived him, and in all haste
sent out to view what way his enemies kept and passed: it was declared to the
king, that the Earl was encamped at ye town of Litchfield. Whereof, when he
had perfect knowledge, he having continual repair of his subjects to him, he
inco^tinently made his battayles to set forward toward ye way where his
enemies (as was to him reported,) intended to pass, and keeping his array, he
with great pomp entered y^ town of Leycester after the Sun set. The Earl of
Richmond raised his Camp from Lichfield to Tomworth, and in the midde way
passing, there saluted him Sir Walter Hungerford, and Sir Thomas Bourchier
Knights, and diverse others, which submitted themselves to his pleasure. Diverse
other noble personages likewise resorted to him withal their power. There
happened in this progression to the Earl of Richmond a strange chance, for he
was not a little afraid, because he could not be assured of his father in law
Thomas Lord Stanley, which as yet enclyned to neither party, wherefore the
Earl, accompanied with twenty light horsemen, lingering in his journey behind
his host, in the mean while, the whole army came before the Town of
Tomworth* and when he for darkness could not perceive the steps of them
that passed on before, and had wandered hither and thither seeking after his
company, he abode in a little Uillage, about three miles from his army, where
he tarried all night. The next morning in the dawning, he returned, and by good
fortune came to his Army, excusing himself, not to have gone out of his way
by ignorance, but of purpose: this excuse made, he privily departed again to
the down of Aderstone, where the Lord Stanley, and Sir William his brother,
with their bands, were abiding: then the Earl came to his father in law, in a
little Close, where he saluted him and Sir William his brother, and after
consulted how to give battle to King Richard, if he would abide, whom they
knew, not to be far off with an huge army. In the evening of the same day*
Sir John Savage, Sir Brian San^ord, Sir* Simon Digby, and many other, leaving
King Richard, turned, and came to the Earl of Richmond with an elect company
of men. In the mean season, King Richard marched to a place meet for two
battayles to encounter, Battle at Bosvvorth.
by a Uillage called Bosworth, not far from Leycester, and there he pitched
his field, refreshed his Army, and took his rest. The next day after, King
Richard being furnished with men, and all abiliments of war, bringing all his
men out of their Camp into ye plain, ordered his forewarde in a marvelous
length, in which he appointed both horsemen and footmen, and in the forefront
he placed the Archers.

Over this battle was Captain John Duke of Norffolke, with whom was Thomas
Earl of Surrey his son. After this long vauntgard followed King Richard
with a strong company of approved men of war, having horsemen for wings on
both sides of his battle.

After that the Earl of Richmond was returned from the communication with his
friends, he with all diligence pitched his Field just by the Camp of his
Enemies, and there he lodged that night. In the morning betime* he caused his
men to put on their armor, and apparel themselves to fight and give
battle, and sent to the Lord Stanley, requiring him with his men to
approach near to his army, and to help to set the Souldyers in array: he
answered, the Earl should set his own men in good order, while he would
come to him in time conueniente. The Earl made his fore-warde somewhat single
and slender, according to the small number of his people. In the front he
placed the Archers, of whom he made Captain John Earl of Oxforde. To the
right wing of the Battle he appointed Sir Gilbert Talbot to be the leader. To
the left wing he assigned Sir John Sauedge, and he with the aid of the Lord
Stanley, accompanied with the Earl of Pembrooke, having a good company of
horssemen, and a small number of footemenne, for all his whole number exceeded
not five thousand men, beside the power of the Stanleys, whereof three
thousand were in the field under Sir William Stanley. The Kings number was
double so much, or more. When both these Armies were thus ordered, and all men
ready to set forward, King Richard called his Chiefetaynes together,
perswadyng them to be valiant, etc. But his people were to him unfaithful in
his end, as he was to his Nephews, untrue and unnatural in his beginning.
When the Earl of Richmond knew that the King was so near embattayled, he
rode about his army giuyng comfortable words to all men, after the which he
made to them a pithie Oration, perswadyng them to have the victory, for that
they were to fight in a just quarrel, he had scantlye finished his saying, but
the one army espied the other: between both armies there was a great
marrishe which the Earl left on his right hand, and so doing, he had the
Sun at his back, and in the face of his enemies. When the King saw the
Earls company was passed the marrishe, he commanded with all haste to set
upon them: the terrible shot on both sides passed, the armies joined and came
to hand strokes, at which encounter the Lord Stanley joined with the Earl.

The Earl of Oxforde in the mean season fearing least while his company was
fighting, they should be compassed of the enemies, gave commandment that no
man should go above. x. foot from the Standard, which commandment once
known, they kni^ themselves together and ceased a little from fighting: the
enemies suddenly abashed at the matter and mistrusting some fraud, began also
to pause. The Earl of Oxford bringing all his band together on the one part,
set on his enemies freshly: again the adversaries perceiving that, placed
their men slender and thin before, and thick and broad behind, beginning
again the battle. While the two fore wards thus mortally fought, King
Richard was admonished that the Earl of Richmond accompanied with a small
number of men of arms was not far of, and as he approached to him, he
perfectly knew his personage, and being inflamed with ire, he put his spurs
to his horse and rode out of the side of the range of his battle, leauyng the
vauntgardes fighting, and with ^earein wrest ran toward him. The Earl
perceived well the King furiou^lye coming toward him, and because the whole
hope of his wealth and purpose was to be determined by battle, ^e gladlye
pr^fere^ ^^ encounter with him body to body and man to man, King Richard set
on so sharply at the first brunt, that he overthrew the Earls standard, and
slew sir William Brandon his sta^derdbearer* and matched hand to hand with sir
John Cheny, a man of great force and strength* which would have re^^s^ed him,
and the said John was by him man fully overthrown, and so he making open
passage by dint of sword as he went forward, the Earl of Richmonde
withstoode his violence and kept him at the swords point longer than his
companions thought, which being almost in despair of victory were sodainelye
recomforted by sir William Stanley, which came to succor with 3000. tall men,
at which very instaunt, King Richards men were driven back and fled, and he
himself manfully fighting in the middle of his enemies was flaine. In the
mean season the Earl of Oxforde, with the aid of the Lord Stanley after no
long fight disco^^ited the fore ward of King Richard, whereof a great number
were slain in the chase, but the greatest number yt came to the field never
gave stroke. In this battle died few above the number of a M. persons, and
of the Nobility were flaine John Duke of Norffolke, Walter Lord* Ferrers of
Chartley, sir Richard Ratclife, and Robert Brakenburie, liuetena^t of the
Tower, and not many Gentlemen more, sir William Catesby, learned in the laws of
the Realm, and one of the thief Counselors to the late King, with diverse
other were two days after beheaded at Leicester. Amongst them that ran away
were* Sir Frauncis Vicount Louel and Humfry Stafforde with Thomas Stafford his
brother, which took Sanctuary in Saint John's at Gloucester. On the Earl of
Richmonds part were slain scarce 100. persons, amongst who^ the principal was
sir William Brandon his standardbearer. This battle was fought at Bosworth in
Lecestershire, the 22. of August, in the year of our Lord. 1485. the whole
conflict ^^udured little above two hours. When the Earl had thus obtained the
victory, he rendered thanks to God, and after in his soldiers for their
^^^litie: then the people cried King Henry, King Henry. When the Lord Stanley
sa^^ the good will of the people, he took the Crown of King Richard, which
was found amongst the spoil in the field, and set it on the Earls head,
as though he had been elected King by the voice of the people.

After this, the whole camp removed to the Town of Leicester, where he rested
two days. In the mean season, the dead corpse of King Richard was as
shamefully carried to the town of Leicester, as he gorgeouslye the day before
with pomp departed out of the same town: for his body^ was naked to the
skin, not so much as one clowte about him; and was trussed behind a
Pursiuant of arms, like a hog or calfe, the head and arms hanging on the
one side of the horse, and the legs on the other side, and all sprinkled with
mire and blood, was brought to the Gray Friars Church within the town, and
there homely buried, when he had reigned two years, two months, and one day.

Henry, Earl of Richmonde


HEnry the seventh, borne in Anno reg. 1.
Penbrooke Castle, began his reign the xxij. of Auguste, in the year of our
Lord God. 1485. He was a Prince of marvelous wisdom, policy, justice,
temperaunce, and gravity, and notwithstanding many and great occasions of
trouble and war, he kept his realm in right good order, for the which he was
greatly reverenced of foreign Princes.

On the forenamed xxij. of August, was a great fire Parson of Saint Mildreds
bren^.
in Bred-streete of London, in the which fire, was burnt the Parson of Saint
Mildreds, and one other man in the Parsonage there.

King Henry, before his departure from Leicester, sent sir Robert Willoughbey
knight, to the Manor of Sherenton in York, for Edward Plantagenet Earl of
Warwike, son and heir to George Duke of Clarence, then being of the age of
fifteen years, and sent him up to the Tower of London, where he was put
under sure custody.

In the mean season the King removed toward London, and when he had approached
the City, on the 27. of August, the Mayor, magistrates, and companies, all
clothed in violet, met him at Shoredich* and with great pomp conveyed him
through the City to Saint Paul's Church, where he offered his three
standards, one of Saint George, the second a red Dragon, the third a dun
Cowe^after his prayers said and Te Deum sung, he departed to the Bishops
Pallaice, where he soiourned a season.

The Sweating began the one and twentieth of September, and continued till the
end of October: of ye which sickness, a wonderful number dyed, and in London
besides other, dyed Thomas Mayor, in whose place was chosen William Stocker, who
likewise deceased about seven days after, in which space departed other four
Aldermen, Thomas Ilam, Richard Ramson, Thomas Norland, and John Stocker, and
then was chosen Mayor, John Ward, who continued til the feast of Simon and
Jude.

John Tate: John Swan, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Hugh Brice Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

On the even of Saint Simon and Jude king Henry came from Kenington his
house, unto Lambeth, and there dyned with Thomas Bourcher Archbishop of
Canterbury, Cardinal of Saint Ciria in Thermis. And after dinner with a
goodlye company of the estates of this Realm both spiritual and temporal,
from thence went to the Tower of London by land, and over London bridge, his
nobles riding after the guise of France, upon small Hackneys, two and two upon
a Horse, and at London Bridge end the Mayor of London with his brethren and
the Crafts, met and received the King, and the King proceeded to Grace Church
corner, and so to the Tower. On the morrow being the feast day of Simon and
Jude, King Henry created Thomas Lord Stanley Earl of Darby, Edward Courtney
Earl of Devonshire, and Jasper Earl of Penbroke, was created Duke of
Bedforde, all at one time in the Tower of London.

On the thirtith of October King Henry was Crowned at Westminster, and
ordained a number of chosen Archers, being strong and hardy persons, to give
daily attendaunce on his Parson, whom he named Yeomen of the Guarde.

The seventh of November began a Parliamente at Westmi^ster, for the
establishing of all things, in the which he caused to be proclaimed, that al
men were pardoned of al offenses, and should be restored to their lands and
goods, which would submit themselves to his clemency. After this he began to
remember his especial friends, of whom some he aduannced to honor and
dignity, and some he enriched with possessions and goods: and to begin, the
Lord Chandew of Brytaine, he made Earl of Bath: sir Gyles Dawbeney was made
Lord Dawbeny: sir Robert Willoughby Lord Broke: and Edward Stafford eldest
son to Henry late D. of Buckingham, he restored to his dignity and
possessions. The Parliament being dissolved, the King redeemed the Marquis
Dorset, and sir John Bourcher, whom he had left as pledges at Paris, for money
there before borrowed. And sent also into Flaunders for John Morton Bishop of
Ely.

The eighteenth day of January King Henry married the Lady Elizabeth, eldest
daughter to Edward the fourth, by which means the two families of York and
Lancaster, which had long been at great division, were united and made one.

King Henry sent the Lord Treasurer with Master Bray and other unto the
Lord Mayor of London, requiring 1486 Loan to the King.
him and the Citizens of a Priest of 6000. marks, wherefore the Mayor with his
brethren and Commons granted a pressed of two thousand pound, which was levied
of the companies and not of the wards, which pressed was repaired again in the
year next following. Anno. reg. 2.


Wheat was sold for iij. shillings the Bushel and Bay salt at the like price.

In the month of September Queen Elizabeth was delivered of her first son,
named Arthur, at Winchester.

John Perciuall: Hugh Clopton, the 28. of September.

Sir Henry Collet Mercer, the 28. of October.

The beautiful Cross in Cheap was new builded, toward the building whereof
Thomas Fisher Mercer, gave 600. marks.

Sir Richard Simon, a wily Priest, came to Geralde earl of Kildare, and
Deputy of Irelande, and presented to him a lad his Scholar named Lambert,
whom he fained to be ye son of George, duke of Clarence, lately escaped the
Tower of London. And the child had learned of the Priest, such Princely
behavior, that he lightly moved the Earl, and many Nobles of Irelande,
tendering the blood royal of Richard Plantagenet, and George his son, as
also maligning the advancement of the house of Lancaster in Henry the seventh,
either to think or make the world ween, they thought verily this child to be
Edward Earl of Warwick, the Duke of Clarence lawful son. And although
King Henry more tha^ half marred their sport, in showing the right Earl
through all the streates of London, yet the Lady Margaret Duchess of Burgoigne,
sister to Edward the fourth, John de la Poole her nephewe, the Lord Louell,
sir Thomas Broughton Knight, and other Capitaines of this conspiracy, devised
to abuse the color of this young Earls name for preferring their purpose,
which, if it came to good, they agreed to depose Lambert, and to erecte the
very Earl in deed, now prisoner in the Tower: for whose quarrel, had they
pretended to fight, they deemed it likely, he should have been made away:
wherefore it was blazed in Ireland, that the King, to mock his subjects, had
schooled a boy to take upon him the Earl of Warwickes name, and had showed
him about in London, to blind the eyes of simple folk and to defeat the
lawful inheritor of the Duke of Clarence their Countreyman and Protector
during his life, to whose lynage they also divided a title of the Crown.

In all ye have they assemble at Diueline, and there in Christ's Church, they
crowned this Idol, honoring him with tytles imperial, feasting and
triumphing, rearing mighty showtes and cries, carrying him thence to the Kings
Castle upon tall men's shoulders, that he might be seen and noted, as he was
surely an honorable boy to look upon.

In this mean time, the Earl of Lincoln, and the lord Edward Hall.
Louell, had gotten by the aid of the said Margaret, about 2000. Almaines
with Martin Swart a German, and in martial acts very expert, to be their
Captain, and so sailing into Ireland, and at the City of Diuelin, caused
young Lambert to be proclaimed King of England, and so with a great multitude
of Irishemen, of whom Thomas Gerardine was Captain, they sailed into
England with the new king, and landed at Fowdrey within a little of
Lancaster, trusting there to be aided with money by sir Thomas Broughton, one
of the chiefest of this conspiracy.

King Henry not sleepyng in his matters, when he had gathered his host
together, over the which, the Duke of Bedforde, and the Earl of Oxforde were
chief Capitaines, he went to Couentrie, where he being certified, that the
Earl of Lincoln was landed at Lancaster with his new King, he removed to
Notingham, to whom shortly after came George Talbot Earl of Shrewsburie, the
Lord Strange, sir John Cheyney, with many other.

In this space the Earl of Lincoln being entered into Yorkshire, directed his
way to Newarke upon Trent, and at a little village called Stoke, three or four
miles from Newark, nighe to the King and his army planted his Camp.

The next day following, the king divided his number into three battles,
and after approached nighe the town of Stoke, where both the armies joined and
fought egrelye on both parts: but at the length the Kings forewarde set
upon the adversaries, with such a violence, that they slew many, and put
the rest to flighte. For there their chief Capitaines, the Earl of Lincoln,
and the Lord Louel, s^r Thomas Broughton, Martin Swart, and the lord Grardin,
(or (after Champion) Morise Fitz Thomas) Captain of the Irishemen, were
flaine, and other above four thousand. This battle was fought on the
sixteenth of June: Lambert, and the priest were both taken, to the no small
grief of Margaret Duchess of Burgoine. Anno. reg. 3 Sherifes. Mayor.


John Fenkell: William Remington, the 28. of Septem.

Sir William Horn Salter, the 28. of October.

The xxv. of November, Queen Elizabeth was Crowned at Westminster.

In the month of July was a priest for the King made 1488
in the City of London, of four thousand pound, and shortly after was an
other pressed of two thousand pound, which were both repayde again in the
next year following. These sums of money, and many more were levied to
aid the Archeduke of Burgoigne, against the Duke of Brytaine. Anno reg. 4.
Sherifes. Mayor.


William Isaac: Ralph Tinley, the 28. of September.

Robert Tate Mercer, the 28. of October.

A task of the tenth penny of all men's goods and lands was granted to King
Henry, to aid the Duke of Brytaine against the French King, through which
tax sir John Egremount, and John a Chamber, with the commo^s of ye North, John
Skeleton. 1489
made an insurrection, and slew the Earl of Northumberlande and certain of
his household servants, in a place called Coke-lodge, by Thurske, eighteen
miles from York, on the eighte and twentieth of Apryll. Wherefore John Achamber
was hanged at York upon a Gibbet set upon a four square Gallows, and the
other his accomplices were hanged on the Gallows round about him, but sir
John Egremount fled into Flaunders to the Lady Margaret Duchess of Burgondie.

It was ordained by Parliament, the Mayor of London to Anno reg. 5.
have conservation of the river of Thamis, from the bridge of Stanes, unto the
Waters of Yendale, and Medway.

William Capell: John Brook, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


William White Draper, the 28. of October.

Roger Shaueloke a Taylour, within Ludgate of London, 1420
being a man of great wealth, slew himself, for whose goods was great
business and strife between the Kings Almoner and the Sherifes of London: but
in the end, the Anno. reg. 6
Almoner prevailed, and gave to the widow her goods again, upon condition,
that she should marry with one of his servants named William Flower.

Henry Coote: Robert Revel, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


Hugh Pemberton, the 1. of February.

John Matthew Mercer, the 28. of October. Mayor. 1491


The twelfth of March, Sir Robert Chamberlain knight, was arraigned and
adjudged at Stratforde of the Langthorne, and after beheaded on the Tower hill.

King Henry required a benevolence, which was granted toward his journey into
France. The Citizens of London gave toward this journey. 9682. l. 17. s^. 4. d.
to the which sum many Aldermen gave 200. l. the piece, and some of the
meaner sort 100. l. the rest the common people supplied.

Henry the Kings second son, was borne at Greenwich, Henry the kings son
borne. Anno. reg. 7. Conduite in Grace-streete: Dearth of corn.
the two and twentieth of June.

The Conduite in Grace-streete, was begun to be builded by the executours of
sir Thomas Hill Grocer, late Mayor of London, of his goods.

Wheat was sold at London for twenty pence the bushel, which was accounted a
great dearth.

Thomas Wood: William Brown, the* 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Hugh Clopton Mercer and Bacheler, the 28. of October.

This Hugh Clopton Mayor of London, and of the Staple, a Gentleman, borne at
Clopton village, half a mile from Stratforde upon Auen by north, continued
during his life (...) Bacheler: he builded the great and sumptuous Bridge 1492
(...) Stratforde upon Auen, at the East end of the Town: (...)is Bridge
has fourteen great arches, and a long cawsey, with smaller Arches, all made
of stone, new walled on each side at the west end of the bridge, he builded a
fair large Chapel toward the south end of that town, and near unto the
same a preatye house of Brick and Timber, where he lay, and ended his life.
He glazed the Chancell of the parish Church in that town, and made away of
four miles long, three miles from Alesburie toward London, and one mile
beyond Alesburie,

The sixth day of April the Mayor of London, his brethren the Aldermen, and the
Crafts in their Liueries, assembled in Paul's Church, where Doctor Morton
Chauncelour made to them an Oration, declaring, how the King of Spain had
won the great and rich City and country of Granade from the Turks: for
joy whereof, Te Deum was sung with great solempnitie.

In the month of May following, was holden a great and valiant iusting
within the Kings Palaice of Shine Anno. reg. 8.
now named Richmonde, the which endured by the space of a month, sometime
within the said Palaice, and sometime without, upon the Green before the Gate
of the said Pallaice. In which Justes, sir James Parker Knight, running
against a Gentleman named Hugh Vaughan, by casualtie was so sore hurt and
bruised, that he dyed thereof.

The ninth of September, King Henry took his voyage into France with a great
army to aid the Britons against the French King, where he besieged Bolloine
til a truce was taken.

William Purchase: William Welbecke, the* 28* of Sept: Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Martin Skinner, the 28. of October.

King Henry returned into England the seventeenth of December.

Two Pardoners were set on the Pillorie in Cornehill three market days, for
forging of false pardons, wherewyth they had deceived the people and got
much money: and for that one of them had sayned himself to be a Priest, he
was sent to Newgate, where he dyed: the other was driven out of London with
shame enough.

The ninth of October was a ryo^ made *upon the Easterling^ 149^ Fray against
the Stiliard men. Anno reg. 9.
or Stiliarde men, by Mercers servants, and other of the City of London, for
the which many of them were sore punished.

Robert Fabian: John Winger, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


This Robert Fabian Sheriff aforenamed and Alderma^, made a Chronicle of
England and of France, beginning at the creation of the world, and ending in
the third year of the reign of King Henry the eight, which book is
imprinted to the end of Richard the third.

Sir Ralph Austry Fishemonger, the 28. of October. Mayor.


This sir Ralph Austry rooffed with timber, and covered with Lead the Parish
Church of Saint Martin in the Vintrie of London, and also glazed the same
Church very beautifully, as partly appears.

The two and twentieth of February, were arraigned in the Guild hall of London
four persons, Thomas Bagnall, John Scot, John Heth, and John Kenington, the
which were Sanctuary men of Saint Martins le Grand in London, and latelye
before were taken out of the said Sanctuary, for forging o^ seditio^s bills,
to the sclaunder of the King, and some his Counsel, for the which, three of
them were judged to dye, and the fourth named Bagnall, pleaded to be restored
to Sanctuary: by reason whereof he was repriued to the Tower till the next
Term: and on the six and twentieth of February, the other three with a Fleming
and a Yeoman of the Crown, were all five executed at Tyborne.

The eyghte and twentieth of April Ione Boughton widow, 1494
was brent in Smithfielde, for holding certain opinions of John Wicklife.

Wheat was sold at London at six pence the bushel, Anno reg. 10
Bay Salt for three pence half penny the Bushel, Na^^wiche Salt was sold
for six pence the Bushel, white hearring nine shillings the barrel, red
hearring at three shillings the cade, red sprots six pence the cade, and
Gascoine wine* for six pounds the tun.

Nicholas Alwine: John Warner, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Richard Chawry, Salter, the 28. of October.

Sir Robert Clifford bearing favor to the house of York, had long since sailed
over to the Lady Margaret Duchess of Burgoigne, by whom he was there
persuaded and brought in belief, that one Perken Werbecke, a Fleming born,
was the very son of King Edward the fourth: but afterward, being sent
for by King Henry, and pardon promised him, he returned into England, and
coming to the Kings presence in the Tower of London, he, on his knees most
humblye cr^^ed pardon, which shortly he obtained, and after accused many,
amongst whom he accused sir William Stanley, whom the King had made his
chief Chamberlain, and one of his privy Counsel. The report is, that this
was his offense. When communication was had between him and Sir Robert
Clifforde, as concerning Perken Werbecke, sir William Stanley affirmed there,
y^ he would never fight nor bear armor against the young man, if he know of a
truth, that he was the undoubted son of King Edward the fourth. For this
offense sir William Stanly was apprehended, araigned, and on the xvj. day of
February beheaded on the Tower hill. This sir William Stanley was the chiefest
helper of King Henrye to the Crown at Bosworth field against King Richard
the third. He was a man of great power in his Country, and also of great
wealth, insomuch, as the common fame ran that there was in his Castle of
Hol^e, found in ready coin, plate, and Jewels, to the value of forty
thousand marks or more, and his land and fees extended to three thousand
pounds by year.

In Lent white hearring being good, were sold for. iij. ^ 1495
iiij. ^ the barrel at London. Sir W Capel Alderma^ of London. was condemned
to the king in xxvij. C. and xliij. pound sterling, Cronicl^ of Land.
for the breaking of certain statuts, made before times, for the which he made
his end with the King for. xvj. C. and fifteen pound six shillings eight
pence.

Pierce or Perken Werbecke, which by the counsel of Margaret Duchess of
Burgoigne named himself Richard of York, King Edwards second son, arrived
at Deal in Ke^t, the third day of July, where when he and his company saw
they could have no comfort of the Country, they withdrewe to their ships
again, at which so withdrawyng, the Mayor of Sandwich with certain commons of
the country bickered with the residue that were upon land, and took alive of
them an hundred three score and nine persons, among the which were five
captains, Mountford, Corbert, Anno reg. 11
Whitbelt, Quintine and Gem^^e. And the xij. of July John Peche Esquier, Shriue
of Kent, brought unto London bridge thos^ 169. prisoners, where the Shriues of
London received them and conveyed them in carts and long ropes unto the Tower
of London, and to Newgate, who were shortly after to the number of 150. hanged
in Kent, Essex, Sussex, and Norfolk, the residue were executed at Tiburne and
Wapping, in the Wose besides London.

Thomas Kneisworth, Henry Summer, the. 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Henry Colet Mercer, the. 28. of October.

The. xvj. of November was holden the Serieants feast at the Bishops place of
Ely in Holborne, where dined the King, Queen* and all the chief lords of
England. The new Serieants names were master Mordant, Higham, Kingsmill,
Conisby, Butler, Yakesley, Frowicke, Oxenbridge, and Constable.

In digging for to lay a new foundation in the Church of S. Mary hill in
London, the body of Alice Hackeney, which had been buried in the Church the
space of. 175. years, was ^^^ud whole of skin, and the iointes of her arms
pliable: which corpse was kept above ground four days without anoyance, and
then buried again.

In April was concluded an amity and entrecourse between this land, and the
Country of Flaunders, etc.

In September, the Scots entered England, by the setting on of Perkin Werbecke,
and did much harm to the borders: but when they heard of the Lord Neuels
coming against them, they sped them away.

John Shawe: Richard Haddon, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Tate Mercer, the 28. of October.

This John Tate newly builded and enlarged Saint Anthonies Church in London,
a goodly foundation, with a Frees^hoole, and certain alms houses for poor
men.

Jasper Duke of Bedforde, uncle to King Henry the seventh, dyed the eighteenth
day of December, and was buried at Kensham.

By means of a payment that was granted to the king, 1497
a new commotion was made by the commons of Cornewal, which under the leading
of James Tuchet of Audley, Lord Audley, with Michaell Joseph, a horse farrer
or Blacksmith of Bodman and other, came to Blackeheath, where the King met with
them, and discomfited the rebels, and took their Captains the two and twentieth
of June, where were slain of the rebels about 300. and taken about. 1500. the
King gave to them that took them, their goods. The Lord Audley was beheaded
on the Tower hill the xxviij. of June. The black Smith and Flamoke a lawyer,
were hanged, headed, and quartered at Tiburne.

In July the King sent an army into Scotland, under the guyding of the Earl
of Surrey, and the Lord Neuell, which made sharp war upon the Scots.

At Bartholmewtide, in Bedfordshire, at the Town of Hail stones hightene
inches about.
Saint Needs, fell hail stones that were measured eighteen inches about.

Perkin, or Pierce Werbecke, landed at Whitsondbay, in Anno reg. 13
Cornwall, the seventh of September, having in his company not paste a
hundred and twenty persons, he went to Bodman, where being accompanied with
a three or four thousand rascalles, and almost naked men, he proclaimed
himself King Richard the fourth, second son to Edward the fourth: from
thence he went to Excester, and besieged it, which City was valiantly
defended by the inhabitants, the Earl of Devonshire being their General, who
himself was hurt in the arm with an arrow of the rebels, but many of the
rebels being slain, they wythdrewe them to Taunton: but sir Giles Dawbeney
Lord Chamberlain approaching with an army, the people fled, and Perkin got
him to Beudley, where he took Sanctuary, but upon couenauntes offered, he
came to the King, and was pardoned his life.

Bartholomewe Read: Thomas Windought. 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Purchase Mercer, the 28. of October.

The eight and twentieth of November, Perkin Werbeck Perkin VVerbecke brought
up to London.
was conveyed upon horse back through Cheap and Cornhill unto the Tower of
London, and from thence back again through Candleweeke streate to Westminster,
with many a curse, and much wondering.

The one and twentieth of December, at nine of the Sheene burnt.
clock at night sodaynely began a great fire within the Kings lodgings,
then being at his Manor of Sheene, which continued till Mydnight, by violence
whereof much and a great part of the old building of that place was brent,
with hangings, beds, apparel, plate, and many other Iewelles.

Perkin Werbecke endeavoring to steal secreatlye out 1498 Perkin VVerbecke
taken.
of the land, was taken again by his keepers, and by the Kings commandment
cast in the Tower of London, and after he was showed in Westminster, and in
Cheap, stocked on Anno reg. 14
scaffoldes to the great wonderment of many people.

This year all the Gardens which had been continued time out of mind without
More gate of London, were destroyed, and of them was made a plain field for
Archers to shoot in. The English Merchants were received into Antwarpe, with
general procession, after they had been long absent from thence.

This year was a great drought, by reason whereof a load of Hay which was
before time sold at London for five shillings, was this year sold for ten
shillings or twelve shillings more.

This year one Sebastian Gabato a Genoas son, borne in Bristow, professing
himself to be expert in knowledge of the circute of the world and Islands of
the same, as by his Charts and other reasonable demonstrations he showed,
caused the King to man and victual a ship at Bristow to search for an Island
which he knew to be replenished with rich commodities: in the ship diverse
Merchauntes of London adventured small stocks, and in the company of this
ship, sailed also out of Bristow three or four small ships fraught with
slight and gross wares, as course cloth, Caps, Laces, points, and such other,
sir Humfrey Gilbert knight, in his book entitled a discovery for a new
passage to Cataia, writes thus, Sebastian Gabato, by his personal experience
and travail, has set forth and discribed this passage in his Chartes, which
are yet to be seen in ye queens Majesty's privy Gallerie, at White Hall, who
was sent to make this discovery by King Henry the seventh, and entered the
same fret, affirming, y^ he sailed very far Westward, with a quarter of the
North, on the Northside of Terrade Labrador, the eleventh of June, until he
came to the septentrial latitude of 67 degrees, and finding the seas still open,
said, y^ he might, and would have gone to Cataia, if the iminitie of the
Master and Mariners, had not been.

Thomas Bradburie, Stephen Iennins, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. A
Shoemakers son fained to be the Earleof VVarvvike.


Sir John Perciuall Tailor, the 28. of October.

A Shoemakers son borne in Byshopsgate street of London, was hanged at Saint
Thomas Watrings on Shroue Tuesday, for naming himself to be Edward Earl of
Warwike, son to George Duke of Clarence, which Edward Earl of Warwike was
then (and had bin all the reign of this King) kept se^ret prisoner in the
Tower of London.

The four and twentieth of February, the Kings third 1499 Anno reg. 15
son was Christened within the Friars Church at Greenewich, by the name of
Edward.

The Gasgoyne Wine was sold at London for forty shillings Wine, salt and
wheat cheap.
the Tun, and much left to the Shipmen for freight, the plenty was so great.

A quarter of Wheat four shillings, and bay salt four pence the bushel.

This year was the Brewers house called the Swanne, adjoining to Saint
Antonyes, taken down, for the enlarging of the said Church, which was after
new builded at the costs of Sir John Tate late Mayor.

James Wilford Tailor: Richard Brond, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.
Perkin vverbeck hanged.


Nicholas Alwin Mercer, the 28. of October.

The xvj. of November, was arraigned Perkin Warbecke, and three other, the
which Perkin, and John a Water, Mayor of Corfe, were executed at Tiborne, the
xxiij. of November.

The xxvitj. of November Edward Plantagenet Earl of The Earl of VVarvvike
beheaded.
Warwike, son to George Duke of Clarence, being about the age of xxiitj.
years, was beheaded at Tower hill, and buried at Birsam by his auncesters
Shortly after, Walter Blewet and Thomas Astwoode, were hanged at Tiborne.

In the beginning of May, the King and Queen sailed to 1500 The King and
Queen sailed to Calleis.
Caleis, where they met with the Duke of Burgoigne, they returned again in
June.

In July, the Town of Babram in Norffolke was burnt. Edward the Kings third
son dyed, at a place of the Bishop of Eely, called Hatfield in Hartfordshire,
and was buried at Westminster.

This year was a great death in London, and other parts Anno. reg. 16
of this Realm.

John Hawes: William Stead, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Remington Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

The xxx. day of January, was brought unto the Gray Friars the corpse of the
Lord Denham, Treasurer of England, and was there buried in the South side of
the Queere.

In the month of May, was a royal Tourney of Lords and Knights within the
Tower of London before the King.

The King builded new his Manor at Sheene, and named Arnold. Smart. 1501
Richmond and Baynards Castle. Anno reg. 17.
it Richmond, for that so many notable and rich Jewels were there burnt, and
the same cost no small sums the building new. He also new builded Baynards
Castle in London, and repaired Greenewich.

Edmond de la Poole Duke of Suffolk, and Richard his brother, shipped at
Harwich, and departed secretly into France.

The fourth of October, Katherine, daughter to the King of Spain, landed at
Plimmouth.

Lawrence Ailmer: Henry Head, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Shaw Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

This John Shaw caused his breethren the Aldermen to ride from the Guildhall
unto the water side when he went to Westminster to be presented in y^
Exchequer. He also caused the kitchens and other houses of office to be builded
at y^ Guildhall, where since that time the Majors feasts has The Majors feast
first kept at the Guild hall.
bin kept, which before had bin in y^ Grocers or Tailors hal.

The xiiij of November, Prince Arthur was married in Prince Arthur married.
S. Paul's Church at London, unto Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando King of
Spain, which Arthur the second of April Prince Arthur deceassed. 1502
deceassed at Ludlow, and was buried at Worcester.

About Easter, all the Gray Friars in England changed their habit, for where
of long time before they had used to VVollen cloth two shillings the brodyarde.
wear brown Russet of four shillings, six shillings, and eight shillings
the yard, now they were compelled to wear Russet of two shillings the yard,
and not above, which was brought to pass by the Friars of Greenewich.

This year, the dike called Turnemill brook, with all the Dikes of London
cleansed.
course of Fleet dike, were so scoured down to the Thames, that boats with
fish and fuel were rowed up to Holborne Bridge, as they of old time had bin
accustomed, which was a great commodity to all the inhabitants in that part
of London. Also the Tower near to the black Friars was taken down by the
commandment of the Mayor.

The sixth of May, Sir James Tirell Knight, Lieutenant of Guisnes Castle, and
Sir John Windham Knighte, were beheaded on the Tower hill, and a Shipman was
hanged and quartered at Tiborne, all for ayding Edmond de la Poole Earl of
Suffolk.

This year, were brought unto the King three men taken Men brought from the
new found Islands.
in the new found Islands, by Sebastian Gabato, before named in Anno 1468. these
men were clothed in Beasts Skins, and eat raw Flesh, but spoke such a
language, Anno reg. 18.
as no man could understand them, of the which three men, two of them were
seen in the Kings Court at Westminster two years after, clothed like
Englishmen, and could not be discerned from Englishmen.

Henry Keble: Nicholas Nines, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Bartholmew Read Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

The Chapel of our Lady, above the East end of the high Aultare of
Westminster Church, with a Tavern called King Henry the seauenths Chapel at
Westminster.
the white Rose near adjoining, was taken down* in which place, a most
beautiful Chapel was then forthwyth begone to be builded by King Henrye the
seventh, the charges whereof (as I have been credibly informed) amounted to
the sum of fourteen thousand pounds.

Elizabeth Queen of England, wife to King Henry the Queen Elizabeth deceassed.
seventh, dyed of Childbed in the Tower of London on the twelfth of February,
and was solemnly buried at Westminster.

King Henry the seventh being himself a brother of the Six Kings of England
breethren with the Tailors Company in London, before they were entitled
Merchant Tailors. 1503
Tailors company in London, as diverse other his predecessors Kings before him
had bin (to weete, Richard the third, Edward the fourth, Henry the sixth, Henry
the fifth, Henry the fourth, and Richard the second. Also of Dukes, eleven,
Earls xxviij. and Lords xiviij.) he now gave to them the name and title of
Merchant Tailors, as a name of worship to endure for ever.

This year, about the later end of March, the prior of the Prior of Shene
murdered.
Charterhouse of Shene was murdered in a cell of his own house, by means of
one Goodwine, a Monk of the same Cloister, and his adherents artificers of
London.

On the xxv. of June at the Bishop of Salisburies place in Fleetestreete, was
the noble Prince Henry the second, son of King Henry the seventh, assured in
matrimony to the Lady Katherine, late the wife of that excellent Prince
Arthure.

The fifth of August deceassed Sir Reginald Bray Knight, Treasurer of the Kings
wars, and was buried at Windesore.

The eight of August, the King of Scotts married Margaret, Margaret the Kings
daughter married.
the eldest daughter of King Henry the seventh.

A dry Summer, having no notable rain from Whitsontide, Anno reg. 9.
to the later Lady day in harvest.

Christopher Hawes: Robert Wits, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


Thomas Granger, the 11. of November.

Sir William Capell Draper, the 28. of October. Mayor.


The xiij. of November, was holden within the palace Sergeants feast.
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, at Lambeth, the Sergeants feast, where dined
the King and all his nobles, and upon the same day, Thomas Granger, newly
chosen Sheriff of London, was presented before the Barons of the Kings
Exchequer, there to take his oath, and after went with the Mayor unto the same
feast, which saved him money in his pursse, for if that day that feast had not
bin kept, he must have feasted the Mayor, Aldermen, and others Worshipful of
the City. This Feast was kept at the charge of ten learned men, newly
admitted to be Sergeants to the Kings law, whose names were, Robert Bridnell,
William Greuill, Thomas Marow, George Edgore, John Moore, John Cutler, Thomas
Elyot, Jews Pollard, Guy Palmis, William Fayrefax.

On the xxj. day of November, at night, began a perilous Fire on London
Bridge.
fire at the sign of the Panyer upon London Bridge, near to Saint Magnus
Church, where six tenements were brent ere the same could be quenched.

The seventh of January, were certain houses consumed Fire.
with fire against Saint Butolphes Church in Thamis street.

The xxv of January, began a Parliament at Westminster, Parliament.
of the which was chosen speaker for the commons Master Edmond Dudley.

The xxvij. of March, was an house brent against Saint 1504
Martins le grand in London.

A new Coin was by Parliament appointed, that is New Coin.
to say, Grote, and half Grote, which bare but half faces: the same time also
was coined a Grote, which was in value twelve pence, but of those were but few
coined.

This year, Alume, which many years had bin sold for Alume dear.
six shillings an hundred, and lower, arose to five Nobles an hundred, and
after to four Marks etc.

The forenamed Sir William Capell, Mayor of London, caused in every ward of
London a Cage with a pair of Stocks, Anno reg. 20 Cages and Stocks ordained.
Hunsditch paued. Sherifes. Mayor.
therein to punish vagabonds. Also, he caused all Hunsditch to be ouerpaued,
the which many years before lay full noyously and perilously for all
travelers that way.

Roger Acheley: William Brown, the 28. of September.

John Winger Grocer, the 28. of October.

About Christmas, the more part of the prisoners of the Marshalsey in
Southwarke brake out, and many of them being Prisoners of the Marshalsey brake
out.
shortly after taken, were put to execution, specially those which had layne
for Felouie or Treason.

The xv. of April, a money maker, one of the Coyners of 1505
the Tower, was drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged.

There was great strife in the Guild hall about choosing Anno reg. 21.
of the Sheriff, for the Tailors would have had Master Fitz Williams Tailor,
and the other commons chose Roger Grove Grocer.

Richard Shore: Roger Grove, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Kniesworth Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

This Thomas Kneisworth, of his own goods, builded the Conduit at
Bishopsgate. He gave to the Fishmongers Conduit at Bishopsgate builded.
certain tenements, for the which they be bound to find four Scholars that
study Art, two at Oxford, and two at Cambridge, every of them four pound the
year. They be bound also to give to twelve aged poor people of their
company, to every one of them at Barthelmewtide a winter garment for ever. Also
to give to the prisoners of Ludgate and Newgate, every year forty shillings
etc.

The fifth of January in the night, the Kings Chamber Richmond on fire.
was fiered at Richmond, the which might not be quenched, till many curteyns,
carpets, rich beds, and much other stuff was consumed.

Through great tempest of wind being at y^ Southwest, The King of Castile
landed in England.
which began the xv. of January, and continued till the sire and twenty of y^
same, Phillip King of Castile, and his wife, were weather driven, and landed at
Falmouth in England, as Francis Guicciar.
they were passing on the. xvj. of January out of Flanders toward Spain, who
were honorably received by the Earl of Arundell at y^ Kings appointment, with
three C. horses, all by torch light. This tempest was strange to many me^,
because y^ VVeather cock of Paul's blovvn down.
violence thereof had blown down the Egle of brass from the spire of Paul's
Church in London, and in the falling, the same Egle brake and battered the
black Eagle, which hong for a sign in Paul's Churchyard, that time being but
low houses, where now is the Schole of Paul's.

About the end of March, Edmond de la Poole was taken in Flanders, and conneyed
through the City to the Tower of London, and there left prisoner.

In the beginning of July, a Galory new builded at Galery at Richmont fell.
Anno reg. 22.
Richmond wherein the King and the Prince his son had walked not one hour
before, it fell sodeinly down about midnight, but no christian man perished
thereby.

William Copingar: Thomas Johnson, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes.


These Sheriffs being on the morrow after Michaelmas day by the Mayor and
Aldermen presented before the Barons of the Exchequer, only William Copingar
was admitted and sworn, but Thomas Johnson they would not admit, till they
knew farther of the Kings pleasure. The x. of October, a commandment was
brought from the King to the Lord Mayor, that he should cause an election to
be made for a new Sheriff, at which day, came into the Guild Hall Master
Edmond Dudley, the Kings President, and there showed the Kings letters, that
the commons should name for the Kings pleasure, William Fitz William to be
Sheriff for the year ensuing, which with much difficulty, at length was
granted, which William Fitz Williams kept his feast the sixteenth day of
October.

Richard Haddon Mercer by the Kings commandemente, Mayor.
the 28. of October. On S. Thomas day at night, before Christmas, was a Bakers
house in Warwike Lane brent, with the Mistres of y^ house, ij. women servants,
and iij. other.

In Lent, the King delivered all Prisoners in London 1057 Anno reg. 23.
Sherifes*
which lay for the debt of forty shillings, or under.

William Butler: Thomas Kirkeby Merchant Tailor, the 28. of September.

William Brown Mercer, the 28. of Octo. Who deceassed, Mayor.
and forthwith Sir Lawrence Aylmer Draper was chosen and sworn, and went home
in a gray cloak, with y^ sword borne before him, on the xxvij. day of March.
Item, he took his oath at y^ Tower, and kept no feast. William Capell was put
in suite 1508 William Capel sued by the K. Thomas knesvvorth imprisoned.
by the King for things by him done in his Maioraltie. Also Tho. Kneisworth
that had bin Mayor of London, and his Sheriffs, were sent to the Kings Bench
till they were put to their fine of fourteen hundred pound. In the month of
June, the City of Norwich was sore perished, and near consumed Norwich on
^^re. Anno reg. 24.
with fire, that began in a Frenchmans house named Peter Johnson, a Surgeon, in
the Parish of Saint George.

Thomas Exmew: Richard Smith, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Stephen Genings Merchant Taylour, the 28. of October.

This Stephen Genings Mayor of London, founded a free Grammar Schole at
Wlfrunehampton in Staffordshire, with Freeschoole at VVlfrunehampton.
convenient lodgings for the Master and Usher in the same place where he was
borne. He gave Lands sufficient for the mayntenance, leaving the oversight
thereof to the Merchant Tailors in London, who have hitherto justly dealt in
that matter, and also augmented the building there. Master Nichols, who
married the only daughter and heir of the aforesaid Stephen Genings, gave
Lands to maynteyne the pauements of that Town. Also, John Leneson Esquier,
about Anno 1556. gave Lands, where of four pound should be dealt every year,
on good Friday, to the poor people of Wilfrunehampton, and six and twenty
Shillings eight pence yearly, toward the reparation of the Church there.

Moreover, about Anno 1566. Sir John Lighe a Priest, John Ligh of
VVlfrunehampton, his rare example of Charity.
which had served in that. Church there, the space of threescore years, for
five pounds, six Shillings eight pence the year, without any other
augmentation of his living, who would never take any Benefice, or other
preferment, gave twentye pounds, to purchase twenty Shillings the year Lands,
the same to be given yearly for ever to the poor of Wlfrunehampton upon good
Friday, and twelve pounds thirteen Shillings fourpence, to purchase a Mark a
year Land, the same to be given to the poor of Chifnall, in the County of
Salope, where the said Lighe was borne.

This man lived nigh one hundred years. He bestowed besides his own labor
which was great (in bearing of stone etc.) above twentye pound on the high
ways about that Town of Wlfrunehampton.

This Town of Wlfrunehampton, is now corruptly called (...), for in Anno 996.
in King Etheldreds time, VVlfruneha^pton, corruptly called VVolnerhampton.
who wrote himself Rex Angl^rum and princops Northumbrerum Olimpiade tertia
regni sui, for so he wrote the count of his reign then, which was the
fifteenth year) it was then Ex Carta Regia.
^alled Hampton, as appears by an old Charter written by the Notarie of the
said King Etheldred, which Charter I have seen and read: and for that a noble
woman named Wlfrune a Widow, sometime wife to Althelme Duke of Northampton, did
obtain of the said King to give Lands unto the Church there which she had
founded, the said Town took the addition of the same Wlfrune, for that
Charter so names her Wlfrune, and the Town Hampton.

Sir Lawrence Aylmer and his two Sheriffs were put Sir Lavvrence Aylmer, and
his Sheriffs.
to their fine to the King of a thousand pound.

This year, was finished the goodly Hospital of the Sauoy 1509 Smart.
Hospital of the Sauoy.
near unto Charing Cross, which was a notable foundation for the poor, done
by King Henry the seventh, unto the which he purchased and gave Lands for the
releeuing of one hundred poor people.

This was first named Sauoy place, by Peter Earl of Sauoy, Rec. of Canterbury
Church.
Father to Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, about the nine and twentieth year
of King Henry the third, who made the said Peter Earl of Richmond. This
house belonged since to the Duke of Lancaster, and at this time was converted
to an Hospital, still reteyning the first name of Sauoy.

King Henry also builded three houses of Franciscane Friars, which are called
Obseruants, at Richmond, Greenewich, and Newarke, and three other of that
family of Franciscane Friars which are called conuentuals, at Canterbury,
Newcastell, and Southhampton.

This noble Prince King Henry dyed at Richmond the Smart. Henry the vij.
deceassed.
^^ij. of April, when he had reigned three and twenty years and eight
months, and was buried at Westminster in the (...) Chapel which he had
caused to be builded, on the eleventh of May.

He left issue Henry Prince of Wales, which succeeded in the Kingdom, Lady
Margaret Queen of Scotts, and Lady Mary promised to Charles King of Castile.

The Altar and Sepulture of the same King Henry the Sepulture of Henry the
seventh.
seventh, wherein he now rests, in his new Chapel at Westminster was made
and finished in the year of ours Lord 1519. by one Peter T. a Paynter of the
City of Florence, for the which he received one thousand pound sterling for
the whole stu^^e and workema^ship, at the hands of the Kings exequetors,
Richard Bishop of Winchester, Richard Exequetors to Henry the seventh.
Fitz James, Bishop of London, Thomas Bishop of Duresme, John Bishop of
Rochester, Thomas Duke of Norffolke, Treasurer of England, Edward Earl of
Worcester the Kings Chamberlayne, John F. Knighte, chief Justice of the Kings
Benche, Robert R. Knight, chief Justice of the Common Place etc.

King Henry the eight.


HEnry the eight, at the age Anno. reg. 1.
of eyghteene years, began his reign the xxij. of April, Anno. 15^9. Of
personage he was* tall and mighty, in wit and memory excellent, of such
majesty with humanity, as was comely in such a Prince. The The King married.
The King and Queen crowned.
third of June, he married Lady Katherine his first wife, who had bin late the
wife of Prince Arthur deceassed.

The sixth of June* John Darby ^owyer* John Smith Carpenter, John S^mpson
^ulle^ ^ ^ingleaders of false ^nes^es in London r^de about the City with their
faces to the Horse taytes, and papers on their heads, and were set ^^ the
Pillorie in Cor^ehill* and after brought again to ^awgate, where they dyed all
within seven days after for very shame.

On Midsomer day, the King and Queen were crowned ^^ Westminster.

The nine and twentieth of June, the most noble and verrtuous Princess
Margaret* Countess of Richmond ^ Darbye* mother to King Henry the seventh,
and Grandmother to King Henry the eight, dyed at Westminster, whose noble Acts
and most charitable deeds all her life executed, can not be expressed in a
small volume.

The seventeenth of July, Edmond Dudley was arraigned at the Guild Hall of
London, and after Michaelmas, Sir Richard Empson was arraigned and condemned at
Northhampton, and sent again to the Tower of London.

George Monex, John Doget Mer Tailor* the 28. of Sept. Sherifes.


Thomas Bradbury Mercer, the 28. of October.

Sir William Capell Draper, the 12* of January. Majors.


The one and twentieth of January, began a Parliament at Westminster.

In February was a great fire in Thames street, near unto Wool Key, which
began in a Flax wives house, and did much harine.

The xx. of April, a peace was proclaimed betwixt England and France, during
the ^^ues of Henry the eight King of England, and Jews the French King, but it
lasted not lo^^*

Doctor Colet Deane of Paul's, erected a free School in 1510
Paul's Church yard in London, and committed the oversight thereof to the
Master and Wardens of the Mercers, Paul's School. Anno. reg. 2.
because himself was ^o^^e in * London* and was son to Henry Colet Mercer,
sometime Mayor of London.

On Midsomer ^igh^ the King came pe^^^ly into Cheap in one of the ^oates of
his (...), and on Saint Peter's night, the King and Queen came riding royally
to the Kings head in Cheap, there to behold the watch of the City* o^ Sir
Richard Empson Knight, and Edmond Dudley ^^^uier, Empson and Dudley beheaded.
Edward Hall.
who had bin gr^^^^ C^^^^ay (...) ^^ the late King Henry the seventh, were
beheaded at the Tower hill the seventh of August, Richard Empson was buried
at the White Friars, and Edmonde Dudley at the Black, whose attacheme^^^ ^ was
thought ^^ (...) procured by the malice of the (...) ^h^ ^wyt^ they (...) ^^^e
were offended, or else to shift the noise of the straight execution of penal
Statutes in the late Kings days.

This Edmond Dudley, in the time of his emprisonme^t in the Tower of London,
compiled one notable Book, which he entitled, The Tree of common wealth, a
coppye whereof The tree of common wealth a Book.
I have given to the right honorable Earl of Leycester now living.

The xx^. of September, William Fitz Williams, Mercha^t Election of a Sheriff.
Tailor, was again the second time chosen Sheriff for the year following,
whereof the said William having knowledge, absented himself, and would not
be found, whereupon, the time drawing near that presentation must be made of
the new Sheriffs, they in a full Court of the Mayor and Aldermen, with assent
of the common Counsel being present, in solemn and due form, caused him to
be thrice called, and commanded to appear upon pain that should fall thereof,
but he would in no wise appear, nor any other for him, wherefore in avoiding
the ieoperdie of forfeyture of their liberties if they should not prepare an
hable man of themselves to be Sheriff with that other which the Mayor yearly
chooses, they called a new assemble of the commons, and then chose John Rest
Alderman, New election of a Sheriff.
and Grocer, for the other Sheriff, the which, with John Milborne his fellow
before chosen by the Mayor, was presented before the Barons of the Kings
Exchequer, and there admitted, and shortly after, for so much as the said
William Fitz William would not submit himself to the authority of the City,
he was disfranchised, and dismissed of William Fitz Williams disfranchised.
his Aldermanship, and ^ined at a thousand Marks to be le^yed of his goods
and Cattayles within the City.

John Milborne: John Rest, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Henry Kebell Grocer, the 28. of October.

The eyghtenth of November, was holden the Seriants feast at the Bishop of
Elyes in Oldborne, the new Seriants Seri^ants Feast.
were Master Newport, Newdigate, Fitzherbert, John Brook, Pigote, Cariell,
Brook of Bristow, Palm Senior, and Master Roo.

Henry the Kings first son was borne on New years Prince borne.
day, but dyed on Saint Mathies day next following.

In the months of June and July, the Scotts made sundry 1511 Anno reg. 3.
entryes upon the borderes of England, with Ships well manned and victualled,
who kept the narrow Seas (against the Portingales as they said) whereupon, Sir
Edward Haward Lord Admiral of England, and Lord Thomas Haward, son and heir
to the Earl of Surrey, went to Andrew Barton, a Scottish Pirate.
the Seas by the King of Englands commandment, with certain Ships, who
about the end of July, met with the said Scotts, and gave unto them a
sharp battle, wounded their Captain Andrew Barton, whereof he dyed, slew
many of his men, and took many prisoners, with two Ships, the one called the
Lion, the other a Bark, called Ienny Perwine, which Ships were brought to
Ships taken from the Scots.
Black Wall the second of August, and the Scotts to London, where they were
kept as prisoners in the Bishop of Yorkes Place, and after sent into Scotland.

Nicholas Shelton: Thomas Mirfine, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Roger Acheley Draper, the 28. of October.

The fifteenth of January, began the Parliamente at Westminster, Sir Robert
Sheffeld Knight, sometime Recorder Parliament.
of London, was speaker for the Commons.

During this Parliamente, in the month of March, a Yeoman of the Crown, one
of the Kings Guard, named Nevvbolt hanged.
Newbolt, slew within the Palace of Westminster a sernant of Master
Willoughbyes, for the which offense, the King 1512
commanded to be set up a new pair of Gallows in ye same place where the
said seruante left his life, and upon the same, the said Newbold was hanged,
and there remained on the Gallows by the space of two days.

King Henry sent the Lord Darcy with a goodly company Anno. reg. 4.
of men into Spain, to aid the King his Father in law against the Moors, but
ere he arrived, a peace was concluded between them.

In August, Sir Edward Poynings, accompanied with the Lord C^nton, and diverse
other, was sent into Gelderland with fifteen hundred Archers, to aid the
Prince of Castle, at the request of Margaret, Duchess of Sauoy, and Regent of
Flanders.

Edward Haward Lord Admiral of England, through his too much hardiness, was
slain before Breast, in Britayne, after whom, his brother Thomas Haward was
made Admiral.

About the month of August, the Nauyes of England and France meeting at
Briteine Bay, fought a cruel battle, in the which, the Regent, or Sovereign
of England, and a Carike of Breast in France, being crappeled together, were
burned, and their Captains with their men all drowned, the English Captain
was Sir Thomas Kneuet, who had with him Sir John Carew, and seven hundred men.
In the French Carrike was Sir Piers Morgan, with nine hundred men, which were
all brent or drowned.

Robert Holdernes, Robert Fenrother, the 28 of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


William Copinger Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

Richard Hadden, Mercer.

The Steeple and Lantarne of Bow Church in Cheap, Bovv Steeple builded.
was this year finished.

By Friars this year, a great part of the Kings Palace Kings Palace at
VVestminsier brent. Sca. Tempo.
of Westminster, and the Chapel in the Tower of London, and many other places
in England were brent.

In a Parliament at Westminster, was granted to the king two fifteenes, and
four demies, and head money of every 1513
Duke ten Marks, an Earl five pound, a Lord four pound, a Knight four
Mark, and every man valued at Great subsedie.
eight hundred pound in goods, to pay four Marks, and so after that rate, till
him that was valued at forty shillings, paid twelve pence, and every man that
took forty shillings wages xij. d. and every man and woman at xv. years or
upward 4. d.

In April, the King sent a great Navy of twelve thousand men to the Sea.

On May even, Edmond de la Poole was beheaded on the Tower hill, his brother
Richard was after slain in France.

King Henry having sent over a great and puissant Army King Henry beseegeth
Turvvyne.
into France to beseege the City of Turwine, himself accompanied with many
noble men, and vj. C. Archers of his Guard, all in white gabberdines, took his
Ship at Dover on the last of June in the morning. When the King was shipped and
made Sail, all his army followed, to the number of four hundred Ships, and
the wind was so, that they were brought the same night into Caleis Haven.

On the next morrow, being the first of July, Thomas Lord Howard, Admiral of
England, landed at Whitsandbay, and entered, spoiled, and brent the Town, and
returned to his Ships. The xxj. of July, the King passed out of the Town of
Caleis in goodly array of battle, and took ye field, and notwithstanding that
the fore-ward of the Kings great Army were before Turwine, yet the King of his
own battle made three battayles: the Lord Lisle Marshall of the host, was
Captain of the fore-warde, and under him three thousand men: Sir Richard Carew
with three hundred men, was the right hand wing to the fore-ward, and the Lord
Darcy with three C. men, wing on the left hand. The scourers and fore-riders of
this battle, were the Northumberland men on light geldings. The Earl of
Essex was Lieutenant General of the Spears, and Sir John Pechy was
vicegouernour of the Horsemen. Before the King, went viij. C. Almaynes all in
a plump: after them, came the Standert with the red Dragon, next the Banner
of our Lady, and next of the Trinity, under the which were all the Kings
household. Then went the Banner of the Arms of England, borne by Sir Henry
Guildford, under which Banner was the King himself, with diverse noble men, and
other, to the number of three thousand me^. The Duke of Buckingham, with vj. C.
men; was on ye Kings left hand. On the right hand was Sir Edw. Poynings, with
other vj. C. me^ egall with the Almains. The L. of Burgainie with viij. C. me^, was
wing on the right hand: sir William Compton with the retinue of the Bishop
of Winchester Fox, and Master Thomas Wolsey, afterward Cardinal, of eighte
hundred, was in manner of a rerewarde: sir Anthony Oughtred and sir John Neuell
with the Kings spears that followed, were four hundred, and so the whole
army was eleauen thousand and three hundred men. The Master of the ordinance
set forth the Kings artillery, as Faulcons, Slyngs, Bombards, powder, stones,
bows, arrows, and such other things necessary for the field, the whole
number of the carriages were thirteen hundred, the leaders and driuers of the
same were nineteen hundred men. The King lay the first night betwixt
Calkewell and Freydon: the next night before the Castle of Gwisnes at Bocarde:
the next night he lay beside Arde a good way without the English pale, and
when he was a little beyond Dernome, there came a great host of French men,
that purposed to have set upon him: but the King with his host kept their
ground, and shot their great ordinance, wherewyth the array of the French
men* was broken.

The fourth of August, the King in good order of battle came before the City
of Turwine, and planted his siege in warlike wise.

The eleventh day of August, Maximilian the Emperor came to King Henrye, who
was received with great triumph, between Air and the camp.

The Emperor and all his servants were retained with the King of England in
wages by the day, every person according to his degree, and the Emperor as the
kings souldioure ware a Cross of Saint George with a Rose, and so he and all
his train came to the Kings Camp the thirteenth of August, and there was
received with great magnificence.

The three and twentieth of August the town of Turwine Turvvine yielded to K.
Henry
was given over unto the King of England, with condition, that all men in the
Town might safely pass with horse and harness, and so on the four and
twentieth of Auguste there came out of the town four thou^and men of war
and moewell appointed, whereof six hundred were well horsed, their standards
borne before them.

The six and twentieth of August, the King removed to Singate, and there it was
agreed, that the walls, gates, bulwarks, and towers of Turwine should be
defaced, razed and cast down: of which conclusion, the Emperor Turvviue
raced and brent.
sent word to Saint Omers and to Air. which being joyous of that tidings,
sent thither Pioners, and so they and the English Pioners brake down the
walls, gates, and towers, and filled the ditch, and fiered the town, except the
Cathedral Church and the Palaice, and all the ordinance was by the King
sent to Air to be kept to his use.

After this, it was concluded, that the King in person should lay his siege
to the City of Turney, wherefore he sent forward three goodly battayles:
the first was conducted by the Earl of Shrewsburie: the second battle led
the King himself, with whom was the Emperor: The rerewarde was conducted by
the Lord Harbert, and so the first night they lay in camp beside Air.

The fourteenth of September the King and his army came to Beatwin, and on the
morrow passed forward, and came to a strait, where was a Forde, which with
great difficulty they passed: and the next day they passed a bridge called
Fount Anandiew, etc.

The one and twentieth day of September the King removed his Camp toward
Tourney, and lodged within three miles of the City, the which night came to
him the Emperor and the Palsgraue, the people about King Henry be^ieged Turney.
Tourney were with their goods fled to the City and yet the City had no
men of war to defend it, but with multitude of Inhabitants the City was
well replenished.

The King came in array of battle before Tourney, planted his ordinance round
abonte the City, diverse frenches were cast and rampires made, so that no
Citizens could issue out, nor no aid come to them. Whereupon at length, to
weete, on the nine and twentieth of September the City was yielded.

Then the King appointed the Lord ^isle, the Lord Burgeyny and the Lord
Willoughby to take possession, which with six thousand men entered the
City and took the market place and the walls, and then Master Thomas Wolsey
the Kings Almoner called before him all the Citizens, and swear them to the
King of England, the number of which Citizens were four score thousand.

On the second day of October the King entered the city of Turney, and there
ordained sir Edward Poynings, Knight of the order of the Garter, to be his
Lieuetenaunt, with Captains, horsemen, archers, and artillery convenient: he
made his Almoner Thomas Wolsey Bishop of Tourney, and then returned to
Callaice, and sailed Thomas VVoolsey Bishop of Turney.
from thence to Dover on the four and twentyth of October.

In this mean time James King of Scotts, notwithstanding he was sworn to
keep the peace, invaded this land with a mighty army, but by the good
diligence of the Queen, with the policy and manhood of the Earl of
Surrey, the Kings Lieuetenannt, he himself was slain at Bramstone upon Piperd
hill, with three Bishops, two Abbots, twelve Earls, seventeen Lords,
besides Knights, and Gentlemen, and seauenteene thousand Scotts, and all the
ordinances and stuff taken, the ninth of September: there were slain of the
English men about five thousand.

The dead body of the King of Scotts, was brought up to London, and so
conveyed to Sheene, where I have seen the same lapped in Lead, lie in an old
house unburied.

John Dawes. John Bridges, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


Roger Bafford.

William Brown Mercer, the 28. of October. John Tate Mayor.
Mercer.

On Candlemasse day the King made Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, Duke of
Norffolke: Thomas Lord Howard Earl of Surrey: Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk: Charles Somerset Earl of Worcester, at Lambeth in the Archbishop of
Canterburies palace, and not long after, he maoe sir Edward Stanley Lord
Mountegle.

In March following, Thomas Wolsey the Kings Almoner, 1514 T. Wolsey B. of
Lincoln. Anno reg. 6 Hedges plucked up, and ditches filled.
and Bishop of Tourney was consecrate Bishop of Lincoln, as successor to
William Smith late deceassed.

All the hedges within one mile and more, every way about London were pulled
down, and the ditches filled up in a morning, by a number of young men,
Citizens of London, because those enclosures had bin hinderaunce to their
shooting.

The ninetinth of May was received into London a Cap of Maintenance, and a
sword sent from Pope Iulie the second, which was presented to the King on
the Sunday next with great solempnitie in Saint Paul's Church.

The seventh day of August, a peace was proclaimed betwixt the Kings of
England and of France, during their lives.

In October, a marriage was made between Lewis the twelfth King of France,
and Lady Mary the Kings sister of England.

James Yarford* John Mundy, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


George Monox Draper, the 28. of October.

This George Monox Mayor of London, of his godly disposition reedified the
decayed steeple of the parish Church of Waltham Stowe, in the County of
Essex, adding thereunto a side I Will with a Chapel, where he lies buried. And
on the North side of the Churchyard there, he founded a fair large Almose
house for an Almose Priest or Schoolemaywomenster, and thirteen poor alms
folk, eight men, and five women, appointing to the said alms Priest or
Schoolemayster for his yearly wages, 6. l. 13. s^. 4. d. and to every one of
ye alms folk 7. d. a week, and 5 l. to be bestowed yearly 1515
among them in coals. And ordained, that the said alms Priest should on
Sondayes and festival days be helping and assistant to the Uicar or Curate
there in the celebration of Anno reg. 7.
divine service, and on the week days freely to apply and teach young
children of the said parish, to the number of Free School at Waltham Stow.
thirty in a Schoolehouse, by him there builded for that purpose. Moreover, he
gave to the parish Clearke there for the time being, a yearly stipend of 26.
s^. 8. d. for ever, and a Chamber by the said Alms house, to the intent he
should help the said Schoolemayster to teach the said children. And has given
fair lands and tenements in the City of London, for the perpetual maintenance
of the premises to Gods glory forever. He also for the great commodity of
travelers on ^^^e, made a continual cawsey of Timber over the mar^^^s from
Waltam-stow, to Lock bridge toward London.

The vij. of August, a peace was proclaimed betwixt the Mary sister to King
Henry married to the French King.
Kingdoms of England and of France. And on the ninth day ^^ October, King
Jews of France married the Lady Mary, sister to King Henry the eight, in ye
great Church of Abvile. Richard Hunne hauged in Lovv lards Tovver.


Richard Hunne, a Merchant Tailor of London, dwelling ^^ the Parish of Saint
Margaret in Bridgestreate, who (for de^^ing to give a mortuarie, such as was
demanded by the Parson for his child being buried) had bin put in the Low^^ds
Tower about the end of October last before passed, was ^^we the fifth of
December found hanged with his own ^ir^le of silk, in the said Tower, and
after he was burned ^^ Smithfield.

This year dyed at Rome the Archbishop of York and Cardinal, called Doctor
Banbredge, which was the Kings Ambassador there. And King Henry gave the said
Archbishop^^ke to Thomas Wolsey then Bishop of Lincoln, who ^^rtly after
gate to be Cardinal and Lord Chancellor.

On Newyeares even dyed the French King Jews the 1515
twelfth: and the ninth of April a new peace was concluded between the King
of England, and Francis the new King of Anno reg. 7.
France.

In the month of May, Charles Duke of Suffolk wedded Duke of Suffolk married
he Kings sister.
the Lady Mary the Kings sister, late Queen of France.

And here I think good to set down some part of the proceedings of this so
often named Thomas Wolsey Archbishop, his ascending unto honorious estate, and
sodeiue falling again from the same, as I have bin informed by persons of good
credit.

This Thomas Wolsey was a poor man's son of Ipswich, The ascending of Thomas
Wolsey. 1516
in the County of Suffolk, and there borne, and being but a child, very apt
to be learned, by the means of his parents he was conuayde to the University
of Oxford, where he shortly prospered so in learning, as he was made Batcheler
Anno reg. 8. Batcheler of Art xv. years old.
of Art, when he passed not fifteen years of age, and was called most
commonly through the University the boy Batcheler. Thus prospering in
learning, he was made fellow of Maudelin College, and afterward appointed to
be Schoolemayster of Maudelin School, at which time, the Lord Marquis Dorcet
had three of his sons there a^ School, committing unto him as well their
education, a^ Schoolemayster to the Marquis Dorcets Children.
their instruction. It pleased the said Lord Marquess a*gainst a Christmas
season to send as well for the Schoolemayster, as for his children home to his
house for their re^ creation, in that pleasant and honorable feast. Then
being there, the Lord their father perceiving them to (...) right well
employed in learning for their time, he having a Benefice in his gift, being at
that time void, gave the same to the Schoolemaister in reward of his diligence
at his Thomas Wolsey gate a Benefice.
departure after Christmas to the University, and having the presentation
thereof, repaired to the Ordinary for hy^ induction, and being furnished of
his instruments, mad^ speed to the Benefice to take possession, and being
there for that intent, one Sir James Paulet Knight dwelling there about, took
occasion against him, and set the Schoolemayster Thomas Wolsey set in the
stocks by Sir James Paulet.
by the heels during his pleasure, which after was neither forgotten nor
forgiven: for when the Schoolemayster mounted the dignity to be Chancellor of
England, he sent for Master Paulet, and after many sharp words, enjoined him
to attend until he were dismissed, and not to depart out of London without
license obtained, so that he continued therewith VVolseys imprisonment revenged.
in the middle Temple the space of five or six years, who lay then in the
Gate house next the street, which he reedifyed very sumptuously, garnishing
the same all over Gatehouse of the middle Temple new builded.
the outside with the Cardinals Arms, with his hatte, cognisances, and other
devises in so glorious a sort, that he thought thereby to have appeased his
old displeasure.

Now after the deceasse of the Lord Marquess, this Schoolemayster considering
with himself to be but a simple beneficed man, and to have lost his fellowship
in the College, which was much to his relief, thought not long to be
vnprogided of some other help, and in his travel thereabout, he fell in
acquayntance with one Sir John Naphant, Sir John Naphant Treasurer of Caleis,
Thomas Wolsey his Chaplayne.
a very grave and ancient Knight, who had a great ^^me in Caleis under King
Henry the seventh, this Knight he served, and behaved himself so discretely,
that he obtained the especial favor of his Master, in so much, that he
committed all the charge of his office unto his Chaplayne, and as I understand,
the office was the Treasureship of Caleis, who was in consideration of his
great age discharged of his room, and returned again into England, and
through his instant labor, his Chaplayne Thomas Wolsey was Chapleyne to
Henry the vij*
was promoted to be the Kings Chaplayne, and when he had once cast Ancker in
the port of promotion, how he wrought, I shall somewhat declare. He having
there a ^ust occasion to be in the sight of the King daily, by reason he said
Mass before him in his Closet, and that bee^ng done, he spent not the day in
idleness, but would attend upon those whom he thought to bear most rule in
the Counsel, the which at that time was Doctor Fox, Bishop of Winchester,
Secretary, and Lord of the privy seal: and also Sir Thomas Louell Knight, a
sage Counselor, Master of the Wards, and Connestable of the Tower: these
grave Counselors in process of time perceived this Chapleyne to have a very
fine wit, and thought him a meet person to be preferred to witty affairs.
It chanced at a certain season that the King had an urgent occasion to send an
Ambassador unto the Emperor Maximilian, who lay at that present in the low
Country of Flanders, not far from Caleis. The Bishop of Winchester, and Sir
Thomas Louell, whom the King counseled and debated with upon this Embassage,
saw they had a convenient occasion to prefer the Kings Chapleyne, whose
wit, eloquence, and learning, they highly commended to the King, the King
commanded them to bring his Chapleyne before his presence, with whom, he fell
in communication of great matters, and perceiving his wit to be very fine,
thought him sufficient, commanding him thereupon to prepare himself to his
journey, and having his depeach, took his leave of the King at Richmond about
noone, and so came to London about four of the Clock, where the Barge of
Graves end was ready to launch forth, both with a prosperous Thomas Wolsey
Ambassador to the Emperor.
tide and wind, without any abode he entered the Barge, and so passed forth
with such speed, that he arrived at Graves end within little more than
three hours, where he tarryed no longer than his post Horses were providing,
and then trauayled so speedily, that he came to Dover the next morning,
whereas the passengers were ready under Sail to Caleis, into the which
passenger, without tarrying, he entered, and sailed forth with them, that long
before noone he arrived at Calleis, and having post Horses, departed from
thence with such speed, that he was that night with the Emperor, and
disclosed the whole sum of his Embassage to y^ Emperor, of whom he required
speedy expedition, the which was granted him by the Emperor, so that the next
day he was clearly dispatched with all the Kings requests fully accomplished,
at which time he made no longer delay, but took post Horses that night, and
rode toward Caleis, conducted thither with such persons as the Emperor had
appointed, and at the opening of the Gates of Caleis, he came thither, where
the passengers were as ready to return into England, as they were before at
his journey forward, in so much, that he arrived at Dover by ten of the
clock before noone, and having post Horses, came to the Court at Richmond the
same night, where he taking some rest until the morning, repaired to the King
at his first coming from his bedchamber to this closet, whom, when the King
saw, he checked him, for that he was not on his journey: Sir (quoth he) if it
may please your Highness, I have already bin with the Emperor, and
dispatched your affairs, I trust to your Graces contentation, and with that
presented the King his Letters of credence from the Emperor. The King being
in a great confuse and wonder of his speedy return and proceedings, dissembled
all his wonder, and demanded of him whether he encountered not his Pursiuant the
which he sent unto him, supposing him not to be out of London, with Letters
concerning a very necessary matter neglected in their consultatio^, yes
forsooth quoth the Chaplayne, I met with him yesterday by the way, and having
no understanding by your Graces letters of your pleasure, have not withstanding
bin so bold upon mine own discretion (perceiving that matter to be very
necessary in that behalf) to dispatch the same, and forasmuch as I have
exceeded your Graces commission, I most humbly require your Graces pardon: the
King rejoicing not a little, said, we* do not only pardon you thereof, but also
give you our Princely thanks, both for the proceeding therein, and also for
your good and speedy exployte, commanding him for that time to take his rest,
and repair again after Dinner, for the further relation of his Ambassade. The
Ambassador when he saw time, repaired before the King and Counsel, where he
declared the effect of all his affairs so exactly, with such gravity and
eloquence, that all the Counsel that heard him, commended him, esteeming his
expedition to be almost beyond the capacity of man. The King gave him at that
time the Deanerie of Lincoln. From thence Thomas Wolsey Deane of Lincoln.
forward he grew more and more into estimation and authority, and after, was
promoted by the King to be his Almoner. After the death of King Henry the
seventh, and Thomas Wolsey the Kings Almoner.
in the flourishing youth of King Henry the eight, this Almoner handled
himself so politiquely, that he soon found the means to be made one of the
Kings Counsel, Thomas Wolsey of the privy Counsel with King Henry the
eight.
and to grow in favor with the King, to whom, the King gave an house at
Bridewell in Fleet street, sometime Sir Richard Empsons, where he kept house
for his family, and so daily attended upon the King, and in his especial
favor, who had great suit made unto him. His sentences, and witty persuasions
in the Counsel Chamber, were always so pithie, that the Counsel as occasion
moved them, continually assigned him to be the expositor to the King in all
their proceedings, in whom, the King received such a leaning fantasy, for
that he was most earnest and readyest of all the Counsel to advance the Kings
will and pleasure: the King therefore esteemed him so highly, that all the
other Counsaylors were put from the great favor that they before were in, in
so much, that the King committed all his will unto his disposition, which the
Almoner perceiving, took upon him therefore to discharge the King of the
weighty and troublesome business, per^wading the King that he should not
need to spare any time of his pleasure for any business that should happen in
the Counsel: and whereas the other Counsaylours would diverse times persuade
the King to have sometime recourse into the Counsel Chamber, there to hear
what was done, the Almoner would persuade him to the contrary, which delighted
him much: and thus the Almoner ruled all them that were before him, such did
his policy and wit bring to pass. Who was now in high favor but Master
Almoner? and who ruled all under the King, but Master Almouer? thus he
perseuered in favor, until at last in came presents, gifts, and rewards so
plentifully, that he lacked nothing that might either please his fantasy, or
enrich his coffers. And thus proceeding in fortunes blissfulness, it chanced
the wars between the Realms of England and France to be open, in so much,
as the King being fully persuaded in his most royal person to invade his
foraigne enemies with a puissant Army, wherefore it was necessary that this
royal enterprise should be speedily provided and furnished in every degree
of things apt and conueniente for the same, the expedition whereof, the King
thought no man's wit so meet for policy and paynefull travail, as was his
Almoner, to whom therefore he committed his whole trust therein, and he took
upon him the whole charge of all the business, and brought all things to good
pass in a decent order, as all manner of victualles, provisions, and other
necessaryes conueniente for so noble a voyage and Army.

All things being by him perfected, the King advanced to his royal
enterprise, passed the Seas, and marched forward in good order of battle,
until he came to the strong Town of Turwyne, to the which he laid his
seege, and assailed it very strongly continually with such vehemente assaults,
that within short space it was yielded unto his Majesty, unto the which place,
the Emperor Maximilian repaired unto the King with a great Army like a
mighty Prince, taking of the King his Graces wages, which is a rare thing, and
but seldom seen, an Emperor to fight under a Kings Banner.

Thus after the King, had obtained this puissant Fort, and taken the possession
thereof, and set all things there in due order, for the defense and
preservation thereof to his use, he departed thence, and marched toward the
City of Turney, and there laid his seege in like manner, to the which, he
gave so fierce and sharp assault, that they were constreyned of fine force to
render the Town unto his victorious Majesty, at which time, the King gave the
Almoner the Bishoprike of the same Sea, Thomas Wolsey Bishop of Turney.
toward his pains and diligence sustained in that journey, and when the King
had established all things agreeable to his will and pleasure, and furnished
the same with noble Captains and men of war for the safeguard of the Town,
he returned again into England, taking with him diverse noble personages of
France being prisoners, as the Duke of Longuile, and Uicount Clarimont, with
other, which were taken there in a Skirmishe: after whose return, immediately
the Sea of Lincoln fell void by the death of Doctor Smith late Bishop there,
the which Benefice his Grace gave to his Almoner, late Bishop of Turney elect,
who was not negligent to take possession thereof, and Thomas Wolsey Bishop of
Lincoln.
made all the speed he could for his consecration: the solemnization whereof
ended, he found the means that he gate the possession of all his predecessors
goods into his hands. It was not long after that Doctor Bambridge Archbishop
of York dyed at Rome, being there the Kings Ambassador, unto the which Sea,
the King immediately presented his late and new Bishop of Lincoln, so that he
had three Bishoprics in his hands in one year given him: then prepared he
for his translation from the Sea of Lincoln, unto Thomas Wolsey Archbishop of
York.
the Sea of York, after which solemnization done, he being then an
Archbishop Primas Angliae, thought himself sufficient to compare with
Canterbury, and therevppon erected his Cross in the Court, and every other
place, as well within the precinct and jurisdiction of Canterbury, as in any
other place. And for as much as Canterbury claymeth a superiority over York,
as over all other Bishoprikes within England, and for that cause claymeth as a
knowledge of an aunciente obedience of York, to abate the aduauncing of his
Cross, in presence of the Cross of Canterbury: notwythstanding, York
nothing minding to desiste from bearing thereof in manner as I said before,
caused his Cross to be advanced, as well in the presence of Canterbury as
elsewhere: wherefore Canterbury being moved therewith, gave unto York a
certain check for his presumption, by reason whereof, there engendered some
grudge between York and Caunterburie. York intending to provide some such
means, that he would be rather superior in dignity to Canterbury, than to
be either obedient or equal to him, wherefore he obtained to be made Priest
Cardinal, and Legatus de Latere: unto whom the Pope sent a Cardinals Hat
with Thomas Wolsey Cardinal.
certain Bulls for his authority in that behalf. Yet you shall
understand, that the Pope sent him this worthy Hatte of dignity, as a
Jewel of his honor and authority, the which was conveyed in a varlets
budget, who seemed to all men to be but a person of small estimation.
Wherefore York being advertised of the baseness of this messenger, and of the
peoples opinion, thought it meet for his honor, that this Jewel should not
be conveyed by so simple a person, and therefore caused him to be stopped by
the way immediately after his arriualin England, where he was newly furnished in
all manner of apparel, with all kind of costlye silks, which seemed decent
for such an high Ambassador, and that done, he was encountered upon Black
heath, and there received with a great assemblye of Prelates, and lusty
gallant Gentlemen, and from thence conducted through London with great
triumph. Then was great and speedy preparation made in Westminster Abbey, for
the confirmation and acceptance of this high order and dignity, the which was
executed by all the Bishops and Abbots about or nyghe London, with their
rych Myters and Copes, and other ornaments, which was done in so solemn a
wise, as had not been seen the like, unless it had bin at the Coronation of a
mighty Prince or King obtaining this dignity. He thought himself mee^e to
bear authority among the temporal power, as among the spiritual
jurisdiction: wherefore, remembering as well the tawntes sustained of
Canterbury, as having a respect to the advancement of worldly honor and
promotion, found the means with the King, that he was made Lord Chancelour
Thomas Wolsey lord Cha^celour.
of England, and Canterbury which was Chanceloure dismissed, who had
continued in that room since long before the deceasse of Henry the seventh.
Now being in possession of the Chancelorshippe, and endued with the promotions
of the Archebyshoppe, and Cardinal de Latere, having power to correct
Canterbury, and al other Bishops and spiritual persons, to assemble his
Convocation when he would assign, he took upon him the correction of matters
in all their jurisdictions, and visited all the spiritual houses, having in
every Diocese all manner of Spiritual Ministers, as Commissaries, Scribes,
Apparators, and al other officers to furnish his Courts, and presented by
prevention whom he pleased unto al benefices throughout all this Realm. And to
the aduauncing further of his legantine, jurisdiction and honor, he had
Masters of his Faculties, Masters Ceremontarum, and such other, to the
glorifying of his dignity. Then had he his two great Crosses of Silver, the
one of his Archebyshopricke, the other of his Legacy, borne before him whyther
so ever he went or rode, by two of the tallest Priests that he could get
within the realm: And to increase his gains, he had also the Byshopricke of
Durham, and the Abbey of Saint Albons in commendation: And after, when Doctor
Fox Bishop Thomas Wolsey Bishop of Winchester.
of Winchester dyed, he surrendered Durham into the Ryngs hands, and took to
him Winchester. Then had he in his hand (as it were in Firm) the Bishoprics
of Bathe, Worcester, and Hereforde, sorasmuch as the Incumbents of them were
strangers, and made their abode continually beyond the Seas in their own
Countries, or else at Rome, from whence they were sent in Legation to this
Realm unto the King, and for their reward at their departure, King Henry the
seventh gave those Bishoprics: and they being strangers, thought it more
meet for the assurance to suffer the Cardinal to have their benefices for a
convenient sum of money paid them yearly, where they remained, than either to
be troubled with the charges of the same, or to be yearly burdened with the
conueyance of their revenues unto them, so that all the spiritual and
presentations of these Byshoprickes were fully in his disposition, to prefer
whom he listed. He had also a great number daily attending upon him, both of
Noble men and worthy Gentlemen, with no small number of the tallest Yeomen
that he could get in all the Realm, insomuche, that well was that Nobleman
and Gentleman, that could prefer a tall Yeoman to his service. Ye shall
understand, that he had in his Hall The order of the Cardinalies house.
continually three boordes, kept with three several principal officers, that
is to say, a Steward which was always a Priest: a Treasourer a Knight: and a
Comptroller an Esquier: also a Cofferer being a Doctor: three Marshalles:
three yeomen Ushers in the Hall, besides two grooms, and Almoners. Then in the
Hal Kitchen, two Clearks of the kitchen: a Clearke comptroller: a Surueyor of
the Dressor: a Clearke of the Spicerie, the which together kept also a
continual mess in the Hal. Also in his Hall kitchen he had of Master Cooks
two, and of other Cooks, Laborers, and children of the kitchen, twelve
persons: four yeomen of the Scullerie: and four yeomen of the silver
Scullerie: two yeomen of the Pastry, with two other Pastelers under the yeomen.
Then in his privy Kitchen a Master Cook, who went daily in Ueluet or in
Satin, with a Chain of Gold, with two other yeomen and a groom: In the
Scalding house a yeoman and two grooms: In the Pantery two persons: In the
Buttrey two yeomen, two Grooms, and two Pages: And in the Yewrye likewise: In
the Seller three yeomen and three pages: In his Chaundrey two: In the Wafarie
two: In the Wardrobe of Beds, the Master of the Wardrobe and ^ other
persons: In the Laundry, a yeoman, a groom, thirty pages, two yeomen
purueyors, and one groom: In the Bake house a yeoman and two grooms: In the
Wood yard a yeoman and a groom: In the Barn one: In the Garden a yeoman and
two grooms: Porters at the Gate two yeomen and two grooms: a yeoman of his
Barge: and a master of his horse: a Clearke of the Stable, a yeoman of the
same: the Sadler: the Farrier: a yeoman of his Chariot: a Sumpter man: a yeoman
of his Styrrop: a Muleter: sixeteene grooms of his Stable, every of them kept
four Geldings: In the Almorie a yeoman, and a groom: In Thomas VVolseys
Chapel.
his Chapel he had a Deane, a great Divine, and a man of excellent
learning: a Subdeane: a Repeater of the Quire: a Gospeller: a Pistler: of
singing Priests ten: a master of the Children: Seculars of the Chapel
singing men twelve: singing children ten, with one servant to awaite upon
the children: In the Reuestry a yeoman, and two grooms, over and besides
diverse reteiners, that came thither at principal feasts. For the furniture of
his Chapel, passes my capacity to declare, the number of costly ornaments
and rich jewels that were to be occupied in the same continuallye: there has
been seen in Procession, about the Hall, 44. very rich Coapes of one suit
worn, besides the rich Crosses and Candlestickes, and other ornaments to the
furniture of the same: He had two crossebearers, and two Pillar bearers, in
his great Chamber: and in his privy Chamber these persons: first the chief
Chamberlain, and Uizchamberlaine: of Gentlemen Ushers, besides one in his
privy Chamber, he had twelve daily wayters, and of Gentlemen wayters in his
priuye Chamber he had six, and of Lords nine or ten, who had each of
them two men allowed them to attend upon them, except the Earl of Darby, who
had allowed five men: then had he of Gentlemen, of Cup bearers, Caruers, and
Sewers beth of the privy Chamber, and of the great chamber with Gentlemen
daily wayters there forty persons: Ofyeomen Ushers six, of grooms in his
Chamber eight, of yeomen in his Chamber five and forty daily: he had also
Almose men sometime more in number than other sometime. There was attending on
his board of Doctors and Chapleines, besides them of his Chapel sixeteene
daily: a Clearke of his Closet: Secretaries two: and two Clearkes of his
Signet: and four Counselors learned in the Law: And for as much, as it was
necessary to have diverse officers of the Chauncerie to attend upon him, that
is to say, the Clearke of the Crown: a ryding Clearke: a Clearke of the
Hamper: and a chafer of the Wax: then a Clearke of the Check, as well upon
the Chapleins, as of the Yeomen of his Chamber: he had also four footmen
which were garnished in rich running coats, when so ever he rode in any
journey: then had he an Harraulte of Arms: and a Sergeant of Arms: a
Physician: a Poticarie: four Minstrels: a keeper of his Tents: an Armorer: an
instructor of his wards: two yeomen of his Wardrobe of his Robes: and a keeper
of his Chamber continuallye in the Court: he had also in his house the Surueyor
of York, and a Clearke of the green Cloth. All these were daily attending,
down lying and vprising, and at meals: he kept in his great Chamber a
continual board for the Chamberers and Gentlemen officers, having with them a
mess of the young Lords, and an other of Gentlemen: and besides all these,
there was never an officer, Gentleman, or worthy person, but he was allowed in
the house, some three, some two, and al other one at the least, which grew
to a great number of persons. Thus far^ute of the Checker roll, besides other
officers, servants, ^^teyners, and futers, that most commoulye dyned in the
Hall. Thomas Wolsey twice Ambassador to the Emperor Charles.


After that he was thus furnished, he was sent twice in embassade to the
Emperor Charles the fifth, for diverse urgent causes touching the Kings
Majesty, it was thought, that so noble a Prince (the Cardinal) was most
meet to be sent: wherefore, being ready to take upon him the charge
thereof, was furnished in all degrees and purposes, most like a great Prince:
for first he proceeded forth furnished like a Cardinal: his Gentlemen being
very many in number, were clothed in Lyuerie coats of Crimosin Ueluet of the
best, with chains of Gold about their necks, and his yeomen and mean
officers, in coats of fine Scarlet, guarded with black Ueluet a hand broad.

Thus furnished, he was twice sent into Flaunders to the Emperor then lying
in Bruges, whom he did most highly, entertain discharging al his charges and
his men's. There was no house within the town of Bruges, wherein any Gentleman
of the Cardinals were lodged, or had recourse, but that the owners were
commanded by the Emperoures officers, that they, upon pain of their lives,
should take no money for any thing that the Cardinals servants diode take
of any kind of victual, no although they were disposed to make any costlye
banquets: commanding forthermore their said hosts, to see y^ they lacked no
such things as they honestly required for their honesty and pleasure. Also the
Emperors officers every night went through the town from house to house,
whereas any English Gentlemen did repast or lodged, and served their liueries
for all night, which was done in this manner. First, the Officers brought into
the house a cast of fine Manchet, and of silver two great pots with white wine,
and Sugar to the waighte of a pound: white lights and yellowe lights of Ware:
a boule of silver with a Goblet to drink in, and every night a staff*
torche: This was the order of the liueries every night: and in the morning,
when the same officers came to fetch away their stuff, then would they
account with the hosts for the Gentlemen's costs spent in the day before.

Thus the Emperor entertained the Cardinal and all his train for the time
of his Embassage there. And that done, he returned into England with great
triumph.

Now of his order in going to Westminster hall daily in the Term. First, ere
he came out of his privy Chamber, he heard service in his Closet, and there
said his service with his Chaplain: Then going again to his privy Chamber, he
would demand, if his servants were in a readynesse, and furnished his
Chamber of Presence, and wayghting Chamber, being thereof then aduertized, came
out of his privy Chamber about eighte of the clock, apparelled all in red,
that is to say, his upper garment either of fine Scarlet, or else fine
Crimosin Taffata, but most commonly of fine Crimosin Satin engrayned, his
pillion of fine Scarlet, with a neck set in the inner side with black
Ueluet, and a Tippet of Sables about his neck, holding in his hand an Orange,
whereof the substance within was taken out, and filled up again with the
part of a Sponge, wherein was Uineger and other Confections against the
pestilent airs, the which he most commonly held to his nose when he came
among any preace, or else that he was pestered with many suitors: and before
him was borne first the broad Seal of England, and his Cardinales Hat, by a
Lord, or some Gentlemanne of Worship, right solempnely: and as soon as he
was once entered into his Chamber of Presence, his two great Crosses were there
attending to be borne before him: then cried the Gentlemen Ushers, going before
him bare headed, and said: On before, my Lords and Masters, on before, make
way for my Lords Grace. Thus went he down through the Hall with a Sergeant
of Arms before him, bearing a great Mace of Silver, and two Gentlemen carrying
two great Pillars of Silver, and when he came at the Hall door, there was his
Mule, being trapped all in Crimo^n Ueluet with a Saddle of the same, and guilte
styrrops.

When was there attending vpponhym, when he was mounted, his two
Crosse-bearers: and his Pillar bearers in like case upon great horses,
trapped all in fine Scarlet. Then marched he forward with a train of noble men
and Gentlemen, having his footmen four in number about him, bearing each of
them a guilte Polare in their hands: and thus passed he forth until he came to
Westminster hall door, and there lighted, and went up after this manner into
the Chauncerie, or into the Star Chamber: howbeit, most commonly he would
go into the Chancerie, and stay a while at a bar made for him beneath the
Chancerie on the right hand, and there commune sometime with the Judges, and
some* time with other persons: and that done, he would repair into the
Chancerie, and sitting there until eleauen of the clock, hearing of suits,
and determining of other matters, from thence he would diverse times go into
the Star Chamber as occasion served. There he neither spared high ne low,
but judged every state according to his merits and desert. He used also every
Sunday to resort to the Court, then being for the most part of all the
year at Greenewiche, with his former triumphs, taking his Barge at his own
stayres, furnished with Yeomen standing upon the Bailes, and his Gentlemen
being within about him, and landed again at the three Cranes in the Vintr^e:
and from thence he rode upon his Mule with his Cross, his Pillars, his Hat
and broad Seal carried before him on horseback through Thamis street* until
he came to Billingsgate, and there took his Barge again, and so was rowed to
Greenewiche, where he was received of the Lords and chief officers of the
Kings house, as the Treasurer, Comptroller, and other, and so conuyed unto the
Kings Chamber: then the Court was wonderfully furnished with Noble men and
Gentlemen: and after dinner among the Lords, having some consultation with the
King, or with the Council, he would depart homewarde with the like triumph.

Thus in great honor, triumph, and glory, he reigned a long season ruling all
things within the Realm appertayning unto the King. His house was always
resorted to with noblemen and Gentlemen, feasting and banqueting Ambassadors
diverse times, and al other right nobly: and when it pleased the King for his
recreation, to repair to the Cardinals house, as he did diverse times in
the year: there wanted no preparations, or furniture: Banquets were set
forth with Maskes and Mummeries, in so gorgeous a sort, and costly manner, that
it was an heaven to behold. There wanted no Dames or Damoisels, meet or apt
to dance with the Maskers, or to garnish the place for the time: then was
there all kind of music, and harmony, with fine voices both of men and
children.

One time the King came suddenly thither in a Mask A Mask and a Banquet.
with a dozen Maskers all in garments like Shepherds, made of fine cloth of
Gold, and Crimosin Satin paned, and Cappes of the same, with Uisars of good
visnomy, their hairs and beardes, either of fine Goldewyre silk, or black
silk, having sixeteene Torch-bearers, besides their Drums and other persons
with Uisars, all clothed in Satin of the same color: and before his entering
into the Hall, he came by water to the water gate, without any noise, where
were laid diverse Cha^bers and Guns charged with Shot, and at his landing they
were shot off, which made such a tumble in ye Air, that it was like
thunder: It made all the Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, to ^use
what it should mean, coming so sodainelye, they ^itting quiet at a solemn
banquet, under this sort: First ye shall understand, that the Tables were
set in the Chamber of Presence just covered, and the Lord Cardinal sitting
under the cloth of Estate, there having all his service alone: and then was
there set a Lady with a Nobleman, or a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman throughout
all the Tables in the Chamber on the one side, which were made and joined as it
were but one Table, all which order and device was done by the Lord Sands
then Lord Chamberlain to the King, and by Sir Henry Gilforde Comptroller of
the Kings Majesty's house. Then immediately after the great Chamberlain, and
the said Comptroller, sent to look what it should mean, (as though they
knew nothing of the matter,) they looking out of the Windows into the
Thamis, returned again and showed him, that it seemed they were Noblemen and
Strangers, arrived at his bridge, coming as Embassadoures from some foreign
Prince: with that quoth the Cardinal, I desire you, because you can speak
French* to take the pains to go into the Hall, there to receive them
according to their estates, and to conducte them into this Chamber, where they
shall see us, and all these Noble Personages, being merry at our banquet,
desiring them to sit down with us, and to take part of our fare. Then went
he incontinent down into the Hall, whereas they received them with twenty
new Torches, and conveyed them up into the Chamber, with such a noise of
Drums and flewtes, as seldom had been heard the like. At their entering
into the Chamber two and two together, they went directlye before the
Cardinal where he sat, and saluted him reuerentlye, to whom the Lord
Chamberlain for them said: Sir, for as much as they be Strangers, and can
not speak English, they have desired me to declare unto you, that they having
understanding of this your triumphaunt banquet, where was assembled such a
number of excellent Dames, they could do no less under supporte of your
Grace, but to repair hither, to view as well their incomparable beauty, as
for to accompanye them at Mumme chance, and then to dance with them: and sir,
they require of your Grace license to accomplish the said cause of their
coming. To whom the Cardinal said he was very well content they should so
do.

Then went the Maskers, and first saluted all the Dames, and returned to the
most worthiest, and there opened their great cup of Gold filled with
Crowns, and other pieces of Gold, to whom they set certain pieces of
Gold to cast at.

Thus perusing all the Ladies and Gentlewomen, to some they lost, and of some
they won: and perusing after this manner all the Ladies, they returned to the
Cardinal with great reverence, pouring down all their Gold so left in their
Cup, which was above two hundred crowns: At all (quoth the Cardinal) and so
cast the Dice and wan them, whereat was made a great noise and joy. Thenquoth
the Cardinal to the Lord Chamberlain, I pray you (quoth he) that you would
show them, that me seems there should be a Nobleman amongst them, who is
more meet to occupye this seat and place than I am, to whom I would most
gladly surrender the same according to my duty, if I knew him. Then spoke the
Lord Chamberlain to them in French, and they rownding him in the ear, the
Lord Chamberlain said to my Lord Cardinal: Sir, (quoth he) they confess,
that among them there is such a Noble personage, whom, if your Grace can
appointe him out from the rest, he is content to disclose himself, and to
accept your place: with that the Cardinal taking good aduisement among them, at
the last quoth he, me seems the Gentleman with the black Bearde should be
even he: and with that he arose out of his Chair, and offered the same to the
Gentleman in the black Bearde, with his cap in his hand. The person to whom
he offered the Chair was Sir Edward Neuil, a comely Knight, that much more
resembled the Kings person in that Mask than any other.

The King perceiving the Cardinal so deceived, could not forbear laughing,
but pulled down his visar and Master Neuels also, and dashed out such a
pleasant countenance and cheer, that all the noble estates there assembled
perceiving the King to be there among them, rejoiced very much. The Cardinal
eft soones desired his Highness to take the place of Estate: to whom the King
answered, that he would go first and shifte his apparel, and so departed
into my Lord Cardinals Chamber, and there new apparelled him: in which
time, the dishes of the banquet were clean taken up, and the Tables spread
again with new clean perfumed clothes, every man and woman sitting still,
until the King with all his Maskers came among them again all new
apparelled: then the King took his seat under the cloth of Estate,
commanding every person to sit still as they did before: In came a new
banquet before the King, and to all the rest throughout all the Tables, wherein
were served two hundred diverse dishes, of costly devises and suttilties. Thus
passed they forth the night with banqueting, dancing, and other triumphs, to
the great comfort of the King, and pleasant regard of the Nobility there
assembled. Thus passed this Cardinal his time from day to day, and year to
year, in such great wealth, joy, triumph, and glory, having always on his
side the Kings especial favor, until Fortune envied his prosperous estate, as
is to the world well known, and shall be partly touched hereafter.

This year in the month of May, were sent out of England xij. C. Masons and
Carpenters, and three hundred laborers Castle of Turney builded
to the City of Tourney, to build a Castle there, to chastise the City if
it chanced to rebel, and to diminish the garrison that then lay there to the
Kings great charge.

Henry Worley: Rich. Gray, the 28. of Sep. William Bailey. Sherifes. Mayor. Lady
Mary the Kings daughter borne. 1516


Sir William Butler Grocer, the 28. of October.

Lady Mary King Henry's daughter was borne at Greenewiche on the eleauenth of
February.

Margaret Queen of Scotts, King Henry's eldest sister, who had after the
death of her first husband ( James King of Scots The Queen of Scots fled
into England.
flaine at Bosworth) married Archibald Duglas, Earl of Auguise, fled into
England, and lay at Harbottle, where she was delivered of a child called
Margaret. But shortly after Archibalde Douglas her husband went home again
into Scotland without leave taking: wherefore the King sent for her to
London, where she was roally received and lodged at Baynardes Castle, and
there she tarried a whole year ere she returned.

Thomas Seimer: Rich. Thurstone, Broderer, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.
Great fr^ste. 1517 Anno reg. 9. Evil May day.


John Rest Grocer, the 28. of October.

The Thamis was frozen, that men with horse and Carts might pass betwixt
Westminster and Lambeth.

On May even was an insurrection of young persons and Apprentises of London
against Aliens: for the which fact, ten pair of Gallows were made with
wheels to be removed from street to street, and from door to door, whereupon
diverse young men were hanged, with their Captain John Lincoln a Broker: the
residue, to the number of four hundred men, and eleauen women, tied in ropes al
along one after an other in their shyrtes came to Westminster hall, with
halters about their necks, and were pardoned.

Margaret Queen of Scotts returned into Scotland to the Queen of Scots
returned.
Earl of Anguise her husband.

Thomas Baldry: Richard Simonds, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. 1518
Svveating sickness. Anno reg. 10


Sir Thomas Exmew Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

Many dyed in England of the sweating sickness, in especially about
London, wherefore Trinity Term was one day at Oxforde, and then adiourned to
Westminster.

In the month of July Cardinal Campeius came into England from the Pope, to
exhort king Henry to make war on the Turks.

After long suit made of the French King, and his council, Cardinal Campeius.
it was agreed, that the City of Tourney should be delivered to the French
King, he paying six hundred thousand Crowns for the City, and four hundred
thousand Crowns for the Castle the which the King had builded, (which was
not fully performed) and also he should pay three and twenty thousand pound
Tournois, the which sometime the Citizens of Tourney ought to the King of
England, for their liberties and franchises. It was further agreede, that the
young Dolphin son and heir to the French King, should marry with the Lady
Mary King Henry's daughter of England, if they both so lyked each other when
they came to age. And then the Earl of Worcester, with the Bishop of Ely and
other, were sent into France, to make delyuery of the said City of Tourney,
which was done on the tenth of February.

John Allen: James Spencer, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Mirfin Skinner, the 28. of October.

The sixeteenth of March landed at Calleis sir Nicholas Vaux, sir Edward
Belknape, sir William Sands, Knights of the Garter, Commissioners to over see
the making of a Pallaice before the Castle of Guisnes, wherefore there was
sent the Kings Master Mason, Master Carpenter, and three hundred Masons, and
five hundred Carpenters, one hundred Joyners, many Paynters, Glaziers, Tylours,
Smiths, and other Artificers, both out of England and Flaunders, to the number
in all of two thousand and more. The said Pallaice was begun the nineteenth
of March, for the which, timber was boughte in Holand, which timber was so
long, that the same was bounden together and brought to Calleis without any
ship, for no ship might receive it, the other timber and boorde was
conveyed out of 1519
England. And thus was there builded the goodlyest Pallaice of timber that
ever was wroughte, and so curiously garnished within and without. Then was
provision made in England and in Flaunders for victual, wine, and all other
things necessary for the furniture of feasting and banqueting.

Then came into England, Orleaunce King of Arms in France, made Proclamation
at the Court, that the King of England and the French King, in camp between
Arde and Guisnes with eighteen aids, in June next ensuing, should abide al
comers being Gentlemen, at the tylt, and tourney, and at barriers. And the
like Proclamation was made in the Court ^f France, by Clarencius King of
Arms of England: also in the Court of Burgoigne, in Almaine, and Italy. For
the furnishing of those Justes, there was devised a tylt and all things
necessary for that enterprice, in a goodlye plain between Guisnes and Arde.

King Henry being informed, that his realm of Ireland was out of order,
discharged the Earl of Kyldare of his office of Deputye, and thereunto was
appointed the Earl of Surrey Thomas Howard Lord Admiral: wherefore the said
Earl in the beginning of April, took leave of the King, and the Duke of
Norffolke his father, and passed into Anno reg. 11.
Irelande with diverse Gentlemen or that had been of the garrison of Tourney,
and had with him one hundred Yeomen of the Kings Guarde, and other to the
number of one thousand men, and there he continued two years and more, in
which space he had many battles and skirmishes, with the wild Irishe.

John Wilkinson: Nicholas Partridge, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.
1520 Anno reg. 12.


Sir James Yarforde Mercer, the 28. of October.

As King Henry was at Canterbury with the Queen, in readiness to have
passed the Sea, he heard of the Emperor Charles his coming, who arrived at
Hith in Kent, but landed at Dover on the six and twentieth of May, where he was
met by the Lord Cardinal Wolsey, who conducted him from the shore of
Dover, to the Castle there, where he was lodged: On the next morning King
Henry came riding from Canterbury, to the Castle of Dover, where he saluted
the Emperor. And on Whitsonday early in the morning these two noble Princes
took their horses and rode to the City of Caunterburie, not only to
solempnise the feast of Pentecoste, but also to see the Queen his aunte.

The noble personages of the realm of England, and the Queen with her train
of Ladies received and welcomed the Emperor to Caunterburie, where he remained
till the Thursday next following, which was the last of May: then he took
his leave of the King, and of all the Ladies, and so rode to Sandwich, where he
took his Ships, and sailed into Flaunders.

And the same day the King made sail from the Port of Dover, and landed at
Caleis about eleauen of the clock, and with him the Queen and Ladies, and
many Nobles of the Realm. The number of persons on the King and Queens side
were 4334. and of horses, 1637. besides the persons on the French Queens and
Duke of Suffolk her husbands, and of the Cardinals.

On the fourth of June, the King with all his Nobles, as well the Queen with
her train of Ladies as other, with the whole number of Nobles removed from
Calleis, to Guisnes, into the most noble and royal lodging before seen, for
it was a Pallaice made quadrant, and every quadrant was 328. foot long,
which was in compass 1312. foot about.

The seventh of June, the Kings of England and France met at the camp
between Guisnes and Arde, with both their Swords drawn and borne before
them.

The tenth of June, the King of England dyned with the French Queen in the
town of Arde: and the French King dyned the same day with the Queen of
England, in the new Pallaice made before the Castle of Guisnes, which house was
the most sumptuous and costlye of Riches, that has been^ seen.

And after this, these two Kings met every day after at Camp, with diverse
Lords, and there iusted and turneyed fourteen days: and the two Queens met
at Guisnes and at Arde diverse times.

The four and twentieth of June these two Kings and Queens with their retinues,
met at Camp where the Justs were kept, and there they banqueted and dau^ced
with maskings and disguisings, that the like had not bin lightly seen, almost
all the night following, and then took their leave and departed: and on the
xxv. of June, the King of England and the Queen, and all the Court, removed
from Guisnes to the Town of Caleis, where they rested.

On the tenth of July, the King with a goodly company rode to the Town of
Grauelin in Flanders, and there met with Charles the Emperor, and on the
next morrow, the Emperor, and the Lady Margaret, the Emperors Aunt Duchess
of Sauoy, with many other great Estates, came with the King of England to the
Town of Caleis, whereby all the Lords and states of England were displaced of
their lodgings: and for solace against their coming, was builded Banqueting
house in the Town of Caleis. Richard Turpin.
a Banqueting house eight hundred foot compass, like a Theater, after a
goodly devise, builded in such manner, as I think was never seen, with
sixteen principals made of great Mastes, betwixt every Mast four and twenty
foot, and all the outsides closed with boorde and canuas. Over it, and within
round about by the sides, were made three Scaffolds or loftes one above another
for men and women to stand upon, and in the midst of the same Banqueting house
was set up a great pillar of Timber made of eight great Mastes, bound together
with iron bands, for to hold them together, for it was an hundred and four and
thirty ^ote of length, and cost six pound thirteen shillings four pence to
set it upright. The Banqueting house was covered ^uer with Canuas, fastened with
ropes and iron as fast as might be devised. And within the said house was
painted the Heavens, with Stars, Sun, Moon, and Clouds, with diverse other
things made above over men's heads: and there were great Images of wickers
covered, and made like great men of diverse strange Nations, and diverse reasons
were written by them of the Countries that they were likened to be off, and the
Arms of those Countries hanging by them. Also, there was made as it were many
ships under sail, and Windmilles going, and about the high pillar of timber
that stood upright in the midst, was made Stages of Timber for Organs, and
other instruments to stand on, and men to play on them, and for other
Musitions and Pageants to be playde, when the King of England and the Emperor
should be at their Banquet, but in the morning of the same day, the wind
began to rise, and at night blew off all the Canuas, and all the elements,
with Banqueting house defaced by tempest.
the Stars, Sun, Moon, and Clouds, and the wind blew out above a thousand
Torches, and other lights of wax that were prepared to give light to the
Banquet, and all the Kings seats that were made with great riches, besides all
other things, were all dashed and lost. The same night, the King with fifteen
persons more, were richly apparelled, and in a Mask went to the Emperors
lodging, and in the Chamber of presence daunced and reuelled, and then
departed. On the twelfth of July the Emperor and the Lady Margaret supped with
the King and the Queen at the Checker, where the same night were eight
companyes of Maskers, and every company twelve persons, all in Gold, Silver,
and Ueluet richly apparelled.

The fourteenth of July, the Emperor departed from Caleis toward Grauelin.

The eyghteenth of July, the King of England with the Queen departed from
Caleis toward Calbais.

John Skeuington Mer. Tailor: John Kyeme, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Bruges Draper, the 28. of October.

King Henry kept his Christmas at his Manor of Greenewich, with much
nobleness, and open Court, and the tenth day of February in his own person
iusted with all comers.

In this time Edward* Duke of Buckingham was accused Duke of Buckingham
accused. 1521
of high Treason, wherefore the King directed his letters to the said Duke,
being at his Manor of Thornebury in Glocestershire, that incontinent he
should come to his presence, which commandment the Duke obeyed, and came vpto
Anno reg. 13
London, where he was streightwayes arrested by Sir Henry Merney, Captain of
the Guard, and conuayde to the Tower of London on the sixteenth of April,
before which time, the Dukes Chancellor was taken, which had confessed matter
of high Treason concerning the Kings person. There was also attached a Monk of
the order of the Carthusians being of Henton Priory, and John Delaker the Dukes
Confessor: all these were prisoners in the Tower. Shortly after, the Duke was
arraigned at Westminster, the Duke of Norffolke sitting as chief Judge. There
were brought forth against him witnesses, Sir Gilbert Perke his Chancellor,
John de la Court his confessor, Charles Kneuet Esquire, and a Monk Prior of
Henton, which had diverse times said to the Duke that he should be King of
England. Diverse presumptions were laid to him by Charles Kneuet, which he would
feign have covered, but in the end he was found guilty, and had judgment to
be drawn, hanged, and quartered, and on the seventeenth day of May, about
eleven of the clock, the said Edward Duke of Duke of Buckingham beheaded.
Buckingham; Earl of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, was beheaded on the
Tower hill, and his body buried in the Friars Augustines Church: such is the
end of ambition, the credit of false prophecies, and of evil life.

This Duke had begone a great and sumptuous building at his Manor of
Thornebury, but left the same unfinished. He made a fair Park hard by the
same building, for the which, he took in much fair and fruitful ground.
Also, another Park at East wood, one mile off; he enlarged at two times, to
the compass of six miles, for the which deed, and such like, he had many a
curse of the poor tenants. John Leyland.


The second day of August, Cardinal Wolsey passed Thomas Wolsey Cardinal
went Ambassador.
over from Dover to Caleis, to treat a peace betwixt the French King, and the
Emperor, and returned again to Caleis in the latter end of November, and from
thence took his journey to Blechingly, where the King welcomed him, and gave
him thanks for his great pains.

King Henry wrote a Book against Luther in Germany, King Henry vvrote against
Luther.
and therefore the Bishop of Rome, Leo the tenth, named him defender of the
faith, to which Book, Luther answered very sharply, nothing sparing his
authority or majesty.

This year was a pestilence in this land, especially at Pestilence.
London, and a dearth of Corn, for wheat was at London sold for twenty
Shillings the quarter.

John Britain mercha^t Tailor: Th. Pargiter, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Milborne Draper, the 28. of October.

This Sir John Milborne builded certain alms houses adjoining to the Crossed
Friars in London, wherein he placed thirteen aged poor people, who have their
dwelling ^entfree, and two shillings six pence the piece the first day of
every month for ever.

The sixth of March, the French King attached all Englishmens Frenchmen
attached.
goods at Bordeaux, and deteyned the Kings tribute, and the French Queens
dower. Also, all Frenchmens bodies and goods were attached at London.

This year between Easter and Michaelmas, was made a general proscription of
all the Realm of England^.

The twentieth of May, Cardinal Wolsey rode through London to Dover, there to
meet with the Emperor, being 1522
accompanied with two Earls, six and thirty Knights, an hundred Gentlemen,
eight Bishops, ten Abbots, Anno reg. 14. Cardinal Wolsey.
thirty Chapleins, all in Ueluet and Satin, and 700. yomen.

Charles the fifth, Emperor, came into England, and was honorably received
into London by the Mayor, Aldermen, The Emperor came to London.
and Commons of the City the sixth of June, the King accompanying him: xj.
Pageants were made in the City, and the Cross in Cheap new gilt. From
thence, he went to Windsore, and sat in the Stall of the Garter. After great
feasts, iustes, and honorable entertainment, he departed to Hampton, and
sailed from thence into Spain.

During this time, the Earl of Surrey Lord Admiral, brent Morles in Briteine,
and then returned: not long after, he passed over to Caleis, entered Picardy,
and burnt diverse Towns and Castles. He beseeged Hesding, but because Winter
was near, he raised his seege, and returned.

The Duke of Albany in Scotland began to enter this land John Skeleton*
with a great Army, but hearing that the Earl of Shrewsburie was coming, he
took a truce for six months.

John Rudstone: John Champneis, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Mundy Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

John Champneis was Secretary of the Counter.

The Lord Rosse, and Lord Dacres of the North, burned the Town of Kelsey in
Scotland, with fourscore Uillages, and overthrew eyghteene Towers of stone.

The Emperor Charles, King Henry, and Ferdinando Duke of Austrige, the Pope,
the City of Venice, and diverse other in Italy, were confederate against the
Frenchmen.

The Turks beseeged the Isle of Rhodes, and on Christmas The Turks took the
Rhodes.
day took it, to the great shame and rebuke of all Christendom.

The twentieth of February, the Lady Alice Hungerford Register of the gray
friars. Lady Hungerford hanged.
a Knights wife, for murdering her husband, was led from the Tower of
London to Holburne, and there put in a Cart with one of her servants, and so
carried to Tiburne, and both hanged: she was buried in ye gray Friars Church at
London.

The Earl of Surrey burned xxxvtj. Uillages in Scotland, dispoyled the
Country from ye East marches to the West, and overthrew diverse holds.

Sir Henry Marney was created Baron Marney at Richmond.

The fiftenth of April began a Parliament at the Black 1523
Friars in London, and on the nine and twentieth of April, the Cardinal, with
diverse Lords spiritual and temporal, Parliament at the black^friers. anno reg.
15. A great subsidy*
declared in the common house, that for diverse causes the King required a
Subsidy of 800000. pound, to be raised on goods and Lands, four shillings of
every pound, against the which demand, many objections were made by the commons,
one was, that the King had already by way of loan two shillings of the pound,
which was 400000. pound, and now to demand four shillings the pouud, it should
amount in the whole to 1200000. pound, and the third part There was not then
10000. parishes in England as I have proved by search of Records.
of every man's goods, which in coin could not be had within the Realm etc.
Among other arguments for the King, it was said, that there were in England
more than 40000. parishes, and if every parish should pay such a sum as was
there named, it could be no great matter. But it was by the Commons answered
and proved, that there was not in England thirteen thousand parishes. After
long debating, the Commons granted two shillings of the pound of every man's
goods and lands that were worth twenty pound, or might dispend twenty pound
by year, and so upward, and from forty shillings to twenty pound, twelve
pence of the pound, and under forty shillings of every head sixteen years
and upward four pence to be paid in two years. This Parliament the xxj. of May
was adiourned to Westminster among the black Monks, and ended in the Kings
Palace at Westminster the fourteenth of August, at nine of the clock in the
night.

Christerne King of Denmark, and his Queen, arriving The K. and Qu. of
Denmark arrived in England.
at the Downs besides Dover the xv. of June, came to London on the xxij. of
June, and were lodged in the Bishop of Bathes place. The fifth of July, they
returned again to Caleis.

The Duke of Suffolk with many other Lords and Knights were sent into France
with an army of 10000. men, who passing ye water of Some without battle,
took diverse towns and Castles, destroying the Country before them.

Michaell English: Nicholas Iennings, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


George Monex was chosen Mayor, but would not take Mayor elected.
it upon him, wherefore he was condemned in a thousand Mark for a fine, in
discharge whereof, he gave unto the City a water Mill by the Horse Down in
Southwarke, to grind the corn for the Bridgehouse.

Sir Thomas Baldrie Mercer, the 28. of October. Mayor.


This year, the Kippiers of Rye and other places, sold their fresh fish in
Leaden hall Market at London.

In December, at the City of Couentry, Francis Philip, Conspiracy a^ Couentrie.
School master to the Kings Henxmen, Christopher Pickering Clearke of the
Kings Larder, and Anthony Manuile Gentleman, intended to have taken the Kings
treasure of his Subsedie, as the Collectors of the same came toward London,
therewith to have raised men, and to have taken the Castle of Killingworth,
and then to have made battle against the King, for the which, they were
drawn, hanged, and quartred at Tiburne the eleventh of February: the other of
their conspiracy were executed at Couentry.

The Earl of Surrey brent Iedworth in Scotland, and 1524
took diverse holds. The Duke of Albany beseeged the Castle of Warke, and had
in a readiness a great Army to invade Anno reg. 1^
England, but when he heard the Earl of Surrey was coming, he fled into
Scotland.

The five and twentieth of May, deceassed Sir Thomas Louell, Knight of the
Garter, at Endfield, and the same month deceassed Thomas Lord Howard, Duke of
Norffolke.

The soldiers of Guisnes took a great booty at a fair in the Town of
Morguison, and Sir Robert Iernegan with certain dimilances of Caleis, took
diverse French prisoners.

The first of September, Doctor Hanyball, Master of A golden Rose sent from
Rome. E. Hall.
the Rolls, was received into London as Ambassador from Clement the seventh
Pope, which brought with him a Rose of Gold for a token to the King, which was
presented to him at Windsore. This Tree was forged of fine Gold, and wrought
with branches, leaves, and flowers, resembling Roses, set in a pot of Gold,
which pot had three feet of A^tike fashion, of measure half a pint. In the
uppermost Rose was a fair Sapphire leap pierced the bigness of an Acorne. The
Tree was of height half an English yard, and in breadth a foot.

Ralph Dodmer: William Roche, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Bailey Draper, the 28. of October.

It chanced in the year passed, a grudge to break out between the French
King, and the Duke of Burbon, in so much, that the Duke for the safeguard of his
life, fled out of the French Kings Dominions, whereof the Cardinal Wolsey
having intelligence, comprised in his head, that if the King our sovereign
Lord could obtain him to be his General in the war against the French King,
and considering further that the Duke of Burbon was fled unto the Emperor to
inuit him to a like purpose, wherefore he having this imagination in his head,
thought it good to move A policy of Cardinal Wolsey, that in the end turned
against himself.
the King in the matter, and after the King was once advertised hereof, and
conceyuing the Cardinals invention, at last it came to a consultation among the
Counsel; so that it was concluded that an Embassade should be sent to the
Emperor about the matter, with whom he was, that the King and the Emperor
should join in those wars against the French King, and that the Duke of
Burbon should The Duke of Burbon Champion for the K. of England against the
King of France.
be our Kings Champion and General in the field, who had a great number of
good Soldiers, over and besides the Emperors army, which was not small: and
that the King should pay unto the Duke monthly wages, both for himself, and
his retinue, in so much, as Sir John Russell Sir John Russel.
lay continually beyond the Seas in a secret place, both to receive money of
the King, and to pay the same monthly to the Duke, so that the Duke began the
wars with the French King in his own territory and Dukedom, which the King
had confisked in his own hands, being not perfectly known unto the Dukes
enemies that he had any aid out of England, and thus he wrought the French
King much displeasure, in so much, as the French King was constreyned 1525
to prepare a puissant Army, and in his own person to resist the Dukes power,
and with force the King drove him to take Pauy, a strong Town in Italy, with
his host, for their security, whereas the King encamped him wonderously
strong, intending to enclose the Duke, that he should not issue forth, yet
notwithstanding, the Duke did many times issue forth, and skirmished with the
King.

Now let us return again to the Cardinal Wolsey, who seemed to be sodeinly
altered, and to be more French Anno reg. 17
than Imperial, howsoever it came so to pass: but the French King lying in
his Camp, sent secretly into England a privy person, a very witty man, to
treat a peace betwixt the French King, and our King: this person was named
John Iokin, who was kept as secretly as might be, for he was no Frenchman
borne, but an Italian a man of no great estimation in France, and for his
subtle wit, elected to entreat of such Embassade as the French King had
given him in commission. This Iokin was secretly conuayde unto Richmond, and
there remained, until the Cardinal resorted John Iokin messenger from the
French King.
thither unto him, where after Easter term ended, he kept the feast of
Whitsontide very solemnly, in which season, the Cardinal caused diverse times
this Iokin to dine with him. Thus continued this Iokin in England long after,
until at the last, as it should, he brought to pass the matter that he had in
commission. After this, there was sent out immediately a restreynt to Sir John
Russell, into those parts where he made his abiding beyond the Seas, that he
should reteyne that months wages still in his ^ands, until the Kings
pleasure were to him known, which should have bin paid to the Duke of Burbon,
bee^ng then with his retinue encamped within the Town ^^ ^^^^, for want
whereof, at his day, the Duke and his ^^n were sore dismayde, when they saw
there was not ^^^ey brought as it was wont to be, and being in so dan^^rous a
case, and where victualles began to be s^ant and very dear, they imagined
many ways what should ^^ the let, some said this, and some said that, so
that they mistrusted nothing less than the very cause thereof, in so much as
at the last, what for want of victualles, and other necessaries, the
Souldyoures and Captains began to grudge and mutter, and at last, for lack
of victuals, were like all to perish. The Souldyours being in this extremity,
came before their Captain y^ Duke of Burbon, and said, Sir, we must be of
very force and necessity constreyned to yield us up to our enemies, and
better it were for us so to do, than to sterue like Dogs. When the Duke saw
their extremity, he said unto them with weeping eyes, Sirs (quoth he) ye are
both valiant men, and of noble hearts, who have served me here right
worthelie, and for your necessity (whereof I am perticipant) I do not a
little lament* but I shall desire you, as you are noble in heart and courage,
so to take patience for a day or twain, and if succor come not then from the
King of England, as I doubt nothing that he will deceive us, I will well agree
that we shall all put our selves and our lives unto the mercy of our Lord,
wherewith they were all agreeable: and tarrying the coming of the Kings money
until the term of two days were past, the Duke seeing no remedy, called
his noble Captains and Souldyoures before him, and weeping said: Ye noble
men and Captains, I see no remedy in this necessity, but either we must
yield us unto our enemies, or else ^^mishe, and to yield the Town and our
selves, I know not the mercy of our enemies, as for my part, I pass^ not for
their cruelties, for I know very well that ^ shall suffer death most cruelly
if I come in their hand^^ it is not for my self therefore that I do lamente,
(...) it is for your sakes, it is for your lives, and safegar^ of your
persons, for so that ye might escape the dang^^ of our enemies hands, I
would most gladly (...) death, therefore good companyons, and most noble
Souldyoures, I shall require you all to consider the dangerous misery and
calamity that we stand in, to sell o(...) lives most dearly, rather than to
be murdered lyk^ Beasts: if ye will be agreeable, we will take upon us
this night to give our Enimes an assault, and by that means we may either
escape, or else give them an overthrow, and thus it were better to die in the
Field like men, than live prisoners in captiuitle and misery, to the which
they all agreed, then quoth the Duke, ye perceive that our enemies Camp is
strong, and that there is no way to enter upon them but one, and that is so
planted with Ordinance and strength of men, that it is not possible to atteyne
to our Enemies that ways to fight with them in Camp. And also, now of late
you perceive they have had but small doubt of us, in so much that they have
kept but very slender watch, therefore, my device shall be thus: There
shall issue out of the Town about the dead of the night from us a number of
you that be of the most delyuerest to assault their Camp, and they shall
give the assault right secretly, even directly against the place of the
entry which is very strong and invincible, your fierce and valiant assault
shall be to them of the Camp so doubtful, that they will turn their strength
of the entry that lies over against your assault, to beat you from your
purpose, then will I issue out of the posterne, and come to the place of their
strength newly turned, and there or they be ware will I enter, and fight with
them in their Camp, and win their Ordinance which they have newly burned,
and beat them with their own ^^ces, and then pleased them wondrous well.
Then ^^^pared they all that day for the purposed devise, ^^ kept them secret
and close without any noise, or ^^tte off pieces within the Town, which gave
their Enemies the less ^eare of the assault, but ^^ ^yghte went to their
Tents, and cowched (...), nothing mistrusting that afterward immediately
happened unto them. When the time came that all men were at rest, the
assaylants issued out of the Town, and there according to their appointment,
they gave so cruel and fierce assault, that they in the Camp had as much to do
as was possible to resist them* and even as the Duke declared before to his
Soldiers, they within were compelled to turn their shot that lay at the
entry, against the assaylants. With that issued the Duke, and with him about
fifteen or sixteen thousand men, or more, secretly in the night, his enemies
being not privy of his coming, until he was entered the field, and at his
entry, he took all the Ordinance that lay there, and slew the Gunners, then
he charged the pieces against his enemies, and slew them wonderfully, he
cut down the Tents and Pauilions, and murdered many within them, ere they
were ware of his coming, so that he wanne the field or ever the King French
King taken.
could arise to the rescue, in so much as the King was taken in his lodging or
ever he were harnessed, his Tents were robbed and spoiled which were wondrous
rith: and in the spoil and search of the Kings coffers, the Duke of Burbon
found the league under the great Seal of England, newly made between the King
of England, and the French King, which once perceived by him, began to smell
the impediment of his money which should have come unto him from the King,
having upon due search intelligence that all the matter was devised by the
Cardinal of England. The Duke conceived such an indignation heerevpon
against the Cardinal, that incontinente he went unto Rome, and there
intended to sack the Town, and to have taken the Pope, where at the first
assault of the walls, the Duke was the first man that was stayne, yet
notwithstanding; his Captains continued their assault, and at the sast wanne
the Town, and the Pope fled Rome sacked, the people fled.
unto Castle Saint Angel, where he continued long in calamity. All this
notwithstanding, which ye have hear^* when news was brought into England of
the taking of the French King, great triumph was made for joy thereof on the
ninth of March.

About such time as Cardinal Wolsey was determined Cardinal Wolsey
suppresseth Priories to build his Colleges in Oxford and in Ipsvvich.
to erect his new Colleges in Oxford and Ipswich, he obtained license and
authority of Pope Clement the seventh, to suppress about the number of
forty Monasteries of good same, and bountiful hospitality, wherein the King
bearing with all his doings, neither Bishop, nor temporal Lord in this Realm
durst say any word to the contrary.

In the executing of this business, five persons were his chief instruments,
who on a time made a demand to the Prior and Covent of the Monastery of
Daintrie, for occupying of certain of their grounds, but the Monks refusing
to satisfy their requests, streightway they picked a quarrel against the
house, and gave information to the Cardinal against them, who taking a small
occasion, commanded the house to be dissolved, and to be converted to his
new College, but of this irreligeous robbery, done of no conscience, but to
patch up pride, which private wealth could not furnishe, what punishmente
has since ensued at Gods hand (says mine Author) partly our selves have
seen, for of those five persons, two fell at discord between themselves, and
the one slew the other, for the which, the suruiuor was hanged: the third
drowned himself in a well: the fourth being well known, and valued worth two
hundredth pound, became in three years so poor, that he begged to his dying
day: and the fifth called Doctor Allane, being thief executor of these
doyngs, was cruelly maimed in Irelande, even at such time as he was a Bishop:
the Cardinal falling after into the Kings grievous displeasure, was deposed,
and dyed miserably: the Colleges which he meante to have made so glorious a
building, came never to good effect: and Pope Clement himself, by whose
authority, these houses were thrown down to the ground, was after enclosed
in a dangerous seege within the Castle of Saint Angel in Rome by the
Emperialles, the City of Rome was pitifully sacked, and himself narrowly
escaped with his life.

The Tower at Greenewich was this year builded. Greenevvich tovver builded.


Creations at Bridewell. On the eyghteenth of June, Henry Fitz Roy, which King*
Henry the eight had by Elizabeth, Creations at Bridevvell.
daughter to Sir John Blunt Knight, was created Earl of Notingham, Duke of
Richmond and Somerset, Lieutenant General from Trent Northwards, Warden of the
East, middle, and West marches, fore aneinst Scotland. Henry Earl of
Devonshire, was created Marquess of Exceter. Henry Earl of Lincoln, Thomas
Earl of Rutlande, Henry Earl of Cumberland, were likewise created. Robert
Ratcliffe Lord Fitzwater, created Uicount Egremunt. Thomas Bolleyne Knight,
Treasourer of the Kings house, was created Uicount Rochford.

Great murmuring was in all parts of the Realm for payment of money, and
Suffolk men to the number of four thousand, rose in a tumult, against whom,
was sent the Duke of Norffolke, and other commissioners, by whose wisdom
they were appeased, and diverse executed.

John Caunton: Christopher Askew, the 28. of September.

Sir John Allen Mercer, the 28. of October. Sherifes. Mayor.


The eleventh of February, four Merchants of ye Stilyard did penance at Pawles
Cross, and an Augustine Friar, called Doctor Barnes, bare a Faggot: there was
present the Lord Cardinal, with eleven Bishops, John Fisher, Bishop of
Rochester made the Sermon, which was against Martine Luther of Germany, and his
doctrine.

A truce was taken between England and France for a certain space, and
Ambassadors were sent into Denmark, 1526
for restoring of their King, but the Danes would grant nothing thereunto;
they did so deadly hate him for his cruelty.

The xxviij. of April, came to the Court to Greenewiche Anno reg. 18 Peace
with France.
Mounsire Briond, President of Roane, and John Iokin, which President, before
the King and his Nobles, made in the Latin tongue a solemn Oration, the effect
whereof was, how dreadful the wars had bin between the Realms of England
and France. He declared further of what power the King of England was, and
what conquest he might have made in France, the French King being prisoner,
whereof he humbly thanked him of his pity and compassion that he had on them
in their necessity, that he would consent to peace: to the which Oration, Sir
Thomas Moore, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, made answer, saying: that
it much rejoiced the King, that they first considered, how by his power he
might have oppressed, and how by his pity he had relieved them, wherefore he
would here after, that for kindness they should show him none unkindness,
but inuiolably keep that league which was concluded.

In the month of May, was proclamation made against Proclamation against
unlawful g^^es.
all unlawful games, and commissions awarded into every Shire, for the
execution of the same, so that in all places, Tables, Dice, Cards, and Bowls,
were taken and brent, but when young men were restreyned of these games and
pastimes, some fell to drincking, some to ferretting of other men's Conyes, and
stealing of Dear in Parkes, and other vnthristinesse.

The sixth of September, was proclamation for Gold, Gold ennaunced
the French Crown four shillings six pence, the Angelet seven shillings and
six pence, the Riall xj. s^. iij. d. etc.

Stephen Peacocke: Nicholas Lambart, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Thomas Semer Mercer, the 28. of October.

In the months of November, December, and Januarie, Great raynes and land
waters.
fell such rain, that thereof ensued great fluddes, which destroyde Corn
fields, Pastures, and Beasts, then was it dry till the twelfth of, April* and
from that time it rayned every day and night till the third of June, whereby
Corn failed sore in the year following.

After the delivery of the French King out of the Emperors 1527
bondage, and his sons received in hostage for the Emperors and the King of
Englands security, of all Anno reg. 19.
such demaundes and requests as should be demanded of the French King. The
Cardinal Wolsey lamenting the French Kings calamity, and the Popes great
adversity, who yet remained in the Castle Angel, traveled all that he could
with the King and his Counsel, to take some order for the quietness of them
both. At last, it was thought good that the said Cardinal should take upon
him the Kings commission, to travel beyond the Seas in this matter, Cardinal
sent Ambassador into France.
and by his wit, to compass a perfect peace among those potentates:
whereupon, he was commanded to prepare himself to this journey, which he took
upon him. He had with him the Earl of Darby: the Bishop of London Lord privy
seal: Sir Henry Gilfort, Knight of the Garter, comptroller of the Kings house:
the Lord Sands, Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamberlayne of the Kings house:
Doctor Tailor, Master of the Rolls: Sir Thomas Moore, Knight, Chancellor of
the Duchy of Lancaster* the Bishop of Deuelin: the Lord Mountegle: the Lord
Harrenden: Sir John Dudley Knight: Master Ratclife: Master Willowby: Master
Parker: Master Sturton: Uicounts and Baro^^ sons and heirs, Sir Francis
Brian, Sir Edward Semer* Sir Robert Gernigam, Doctor Stephen Gardener
Secretary, Doctor Peter Vannes Secretary: Of the privy Chamber, Master
Hennege, Master Arundell, Master Kneuet* Master Alford: Physicians, Doctor
Frances, Doctor Smith: Gentlemen Ushers of the privy Chamber, Master
Walgraue, Master Else, Sir Thomas Denis high Chamberlen, Master Sent^lere
Uizchamberlaine: Gentlemen Ushers, M. Wentworth, M. Hansard, M. Pemercy, M.
Constable, M. Werren: Of household, M* Cade Steward, sir Will. Gascoigne
Treasurer, M. Gostike Comptroller, M. Broughton Master of the Horse Doctor
Allen, Doctor Benet, Doctor Duke, Deane of the Chapel, Doctor Capo^ Almoner,
y^ Archdea^^ of Canterbury: the Archedeacon of Carleile: sir John Sent-Iohn,
sir Richard Sands Knights, etc. in all to ye number of 900. horses. Then marched
he forward from his own house at The pompous ryding of the Card^^a^.
Westminster, through London over London bridge, having before him all the
Gentlemen, three in a rank in Ueluet Coats, and the most of them great
chains of Gold about their necks, and all his Yeomen followed him with
Noblemens and Gentlemen's servants, al in Orange tawney coats, with the
Cardinals Hat, and a T. ^. for Thomas Cardinal embrodered upon all the
Coats, as well of his own servants, as of all the rest of Gentlemen's
servants: and his Sumpter Mules which were twenty or more, with all his
carriage of Carts, and other of his train, were passed before. He rode like a
Cardinal very sumptuouslye on his Mule, with his spare Mule and spare horse
trapped in Crimosin Ueluet upon velvet, and stirrops guilt following him: And
before him he had his two great Crosses of silver, his two great Pillars of
silver, the Kings broad Seal of England, and his Cardinals Hat, and a
Gentlemanne carrying his Ualence, otherwise called his Cloak* bag, which was
made of fine Scarlet altogyther embrodered very richly with Gold, having in it
a cloak. Thus passed he forth through London, and all the way every day in
his journey he was thus furnished, having his Harbengers in every place
before, which prepared lodging for his train.

The first journey that he made, was two miles beyond Dertford in Kent, unto
sir Thomas Wiltshires house, and the rest of his train were lodged in
Dertford, and in the country there-aboutes. The next day he marched to
Roches^^^, where he was lodged in the Bishops Pallaice, and the rest of his
train in the City and in Strowde. The third day he rode to Feuersham, and
there was lodged in the Abbey, and his train in the town there, and some in
the Country there-aboutes. The fourth day he rode to Caunterburie, where he
encountered with the worshipful of the town and Country, and lodged in the
Priorie of Christchurch, and all his train in the City, where he continued
three days, in which season there was a great fair in the Town, by reason
it was the feast of Thomas of Canterbury. At which day there was a solemn
Procession, wherein the Cardinal then went apparelled in his Legantine
Ornaments, with his Hat on his head, who commanded the Monks and the Queere
to sing the Letany after this sort, Sancta Maria, or a pro Papa nostra
Clemente, the Cardinal kneeling at a Stool before the Queere door all the
while the Monks and their Queere stood in the body of the church singing the
Letany.

The eleauenth of July the Cardinal arrived at Calleis, who was received with
all the Officers and Counsel of the Town, the Mayor of the Town, and the
Mayor of the Staple in Procession, and in the Lauterne Gate, he kneeled and
made his prayers: that done, they passed on before until he came to Saint
Mary's Church, from whence he repaired with a great number of Noblemen and
Gentlemen, being Peers of the Town unto a place called the Checker, where he
was lodged, and kept his house as long as he abode in the Town. When all his
train and carriage was landed, and every thing prepared for his journey, he
called all his Noblemen and Gentlemen, being servants unto him into his privy
Chamber, where they being al assembled before him he said: I have called you
hither to the intent to declare unto you, that I consider the duty you bear
me, and the good will that I semblably bear to you, seeing your intendment to
further the authority that I have by Commission, which your diligent s^ruice
I will remember hereafter, and therefore I mean to declare the same directly to
the King. Secondly, to show you the nature of the French men: And thirdely,
to instruct you how and with what reverence ye shall use me for the honor of
the Kings Majesty, and then to inform you how ye shall entertain and
accompanye the French men when ye shall meet at any time.

The first point ye shall understand, that the Kings Majesty for certain
weighty affairs, of his Graces has for more advancement of his royal
dignity assigned me to be in this journey his lieuetenant, and what reverence
belongs to the same I will tell you, for my part I must by virtue of my
Commission and Lieuetenantship as^ume and take upon me to be esteemed in all
honor and degrees of service, as to his Highness presence is meet and due,
and that by me nothing to be neglected, that to his royal estate is due and
appertinent. And for my part ye shall see me, that I will not omit one jot
thereof. Therefore because that ye shall not be ignorant of your duty in this
case, as one of the chief causes of this your assembly, willing you as you
will have my favor, and also charge you in the kings name, that ye do not
forget the same in time and place, but that every one of you do observe your
duty unto me accordingly as ye w^^ at your return avoid the kings
^^^^gnation* or obtain and deserve his highness thanks, the which I will
set forth, as each of you shall deserve. Now to the second point, the
nature of the French men is such, that at the first meeting they will be as
familiar with you as they had bin acquainted with you long before, and commune
with you in their French tongue, as though ye understood every word,
therefore use them in like manner, and be as familiar with them as they be with
you. If they speak in their natural tongue, speak you again unto* them in
the English tongue: For, if you understand not them, no more shall they
understand you: and speaking merilye to one of the Gentlemenne there, being a
Welche manne, said, Rice (quoth he) speak you Welche to them: I doubt not
but that thy speech shall be more defuse to him, than his French shall be to
^hee.

And thus quoth he again to them all, let all your entertainment and
behauior be according to the order of all gentleness and humility, that it
may be reported after your departure from thence, that ye be Gentlemen of right
good behavior, and of much gentleness, and that ye are men, who know your
duties to your Sovereign Lord, and to your Master, esteeming much your
great reverence. Thus shall ye not only obtain to your selves great
commendation and praise for the same, but also advance the honor of your
Prince and Country: Now go your ways, being admonished of al these points,
and prepare your selves against to morrow, for then we intend (God willing)
to set forward. The next morrow, being Mary Magdalens day, all things
being furnished, the Cardinal advanced out of Calleis, with such a number of
black Ueluet Coats, as has been seldom seen with an Ambassador, all the
Peers of Calleis and Guisnes, with all other Gentlemen besides his train,
being garnished in black Ueluet Coats and Chains of Gold. Thus passed he
forward with his train of Gentlemen before him three in a rank, which by
supposall endured three quarters of a mile or more in length, having his
Crosses and all other his accustomed and glorious furniture carried before him,
as I have before rehearsed, except the broad Seal, the which he left in
Calleis with Doctor Taylour, then Master of the Rolls, until his return.
Passing thus on his way, and being scantly rydden a mile, it began to rain
so vehemently, as lightly had not been seen the like, which endured until
they came to Boloinge, and ere they came to Sandingfielde, the Cardinal of
Loraine, a goodly young Gentleman, encountered the Cardinal of England, and
received him with great joy and reverence* and so passed forth with the
Cardinal in communication until they came nigh unto the said Sandingfielde,
which was a place of Religion, standing between the Englishe-Frenche, and the
Emperors dominions, being a Newter, holding of neither of them. There awayted
for him Le County Brian, Captain of Pycardie, with a great number of
S^radiates or Albenois, standing in arraye in a great piece of green Oats,
all in harness upon high horses, passing on with the Cardinal in a wing unto
Bolongne, and so after through Picardie* ^^^ the Cardinal doubted somewhat the
Emperor, that he should lay some ambush to betray him, for which cause the
French King commanded them to attend upon him for the assurance of his
person. Thus rode he until he came within one English mile of Bolongne, where
encountered him the Worshipful Citizens of the Town of Bolongne, having a
learned man that made unto him an Oration in Latin, unto the which the
Cardinal semblably made answer: And that done, Monsieur de Bees Captain of
Bolongne with the retinue there of Gentlemen, met with him on horseback, and
then with all this assembly he rode into the town lighting at the Abbey gate,
and from thence conveyed with Procession into the Abbey Church there offered,
then went he into the Abbey to his lodging, and all his train were lodged in
the high and base towns. The next morning after he rode to Mutterell Ser
Lemere, where he was in like case encountered with the Worshipful of the Town
al in one Lyuerie, having a learned man to make an Oration unto the^ in Latin,
whom he answered also again in Latin. And as he entered in at the Gates,
there was a Canapie made ready of silk, embrodered with letters and Hat even
as his men had on their Coats, and when that he was lighted, his footmen had
the same as a Fee due to the office. Now was there made diverse Pageants for
the joy of his coming, who was called in the French tongue there, and in all
other places through the Realm where he rode or came, Le Cardinal Pacifique.
The next day he took his journey toward Abvile, where he was encountered
with diverse Gentlemen of the Town and Country, and so recey^ed into the town
with Pageants, as he rode thorough the town, having a like Canapie borne over
him, but more richer, and so brought to his lodgy^g in this Town, he remained
more than eight days, where resorted to him daily diverse of the French Kings
Counsel sitting with him in counsel every day, and continually feasting him
and other. When the time came of his departing out of the Town, he rode to the
Castle beyond the water of Some, called Le Chanel de Picqiny adjoining to the
said watch upon a Rock, within the which there was a College of Priests,
the situation whereof was much like unto the Castle of Windsore, and there he
was received with solemnne Procession, and lodged that night. The next
morning the Cardinal rode toward Amiens, and passing on his way, he was
encountered with noble personages, who made to him diverse Orations, which he
answered extempore. Afterward the French King with a goodly company met
with the Cardinal, embraced each other: The preace was so thick, that diverse
had their legs hurt with horses. Then the King and the Cardinal on his right
hand rode forth toward Amiens, every English Gentleman accompanied with an
other of France. The train of these two^ Princes endured two long English
miles, they were nobly received into the Town of Amiens with shot of Guns and
costly Pageants, until the King had brought the Cardinal to his lodging, and
then departed for that night, the King being lodged in the Bishops Pallaice.
The next day after dinner the Cardinal rode to the Court to the King, at
which time the king kept his bed: yet nevertheless, the Cardinal came
into his bed*chamber, where, on the one side of the bed sat the Kings mother,
and on the other side the Cardinal of Loraine, accompanied with diverse other
Noblemen of France, and after a short communication, and drinking of a cup
of Wine, he departed to his own lodging. Thus continued the Cardinal and the
king in Amiens, the space of a fortnight and more, consulting and feasting each
other diverse times. Then the King and the Cardinal removed to a City called
Champaine, which was more than. xx. English miles from Amiens, they were both
lodged in the great castle of y^ town, whereof y^ Cardinal had the one half
assigned him for his lodging* and the king the other half. And like wise they
denided a long Gallerie beetween the^, where was made in the midst a strong
wall, with a window and a door. The King and the Cardinal would many times meet
at the same window and talk: and diverse times they would go into the other
at the said door. Then came there to my lord Cardinal y^ Lord Chancellor of
France, with all the kings counselors, where they took great pains daily in
consultation, insomuch that y^ Cardinal of England fell out with the Chancellor
of France, laying to his charge, that he went about to hinder the league which
before his coming was concluded, insomuch, that Madam Regent her self and many
Nobles of France, with much labor and travel could scarcely bring the Cardinal
to his former state of communitation, he was in such a wroth against the
Chancellor: by these means, he brought other things to pass, that before he
could not attain, which was more for fear than for any affection to the
matter, he had the heads of the Counsel so under his gyrdle. The next morning
after this conflict he rose early about four of the clock, and sat him down
to write letters, into England unto the King, commaundyng me of his Chapleines
to prepare him ready to say Mass, insomuch, that the Chaplain stood in his
vestures until four of the clock in the afternoon: al which season the
Cardinal never rose to eat or drink, nor to make water, but continually
wrote, and about the hour of four in the afternoon he made an end,
commanding Christopher Gunner the Kings servant, without delay to ride Post
into England with those letters, whom he dispatched away or ever he drank,
and then went to Mass, and said his service with his Chapleine, and after went
both to dinner and supper all at once.

The next night after the Cardinal made a great Suppe^ for Madam Regent, for
the Queen of Nauar and other ^^^ate estates of Ladies and noble women, and at
the midst of the said banquet* the Kings of France and of Ni^^^^* came so
day ^elye in unlooked for, and took their place in the lowest part of the
banqu^t* The supper and banquet being finished, the Ladies and Gentlemen fell
to dau^cing, and so passed away the most of the night ere they departed.

Shortly after the King caused a wild Bore to be lodged for him in the For
rest of Champaigne, and thither the Cardinal rode with him to see him hunt*
where the Lady Regent with a number of Ladies and Damoisels were standing in
Chariots, looking on the toil on the out side, which was pitched there for
that purpose: among whom stood the Cardinal to regard the hunting in Madam
Regents Chariot, and within the Toil was the King with diverse minion Gentlemen
of France ready furnyshed to this high and dangerous enteprice of the
hunting, the King being in his doublet and hozen all of sheep color cloth,
having in his ^^ippe a brace of great white Greyhoundes, who were armed as the
manner there is: and the rest of the Kings Gentlemen being appointed to hunte
this Bore, were likewise in their doublets and hoss* holdyng each of them in
their hands very sharp Bore spears. Then the King commanded the Keepers to
vncouche the Bore, and that every person being within the Toil should go to
a standing, among whom were diverse Gentlemen and Yeomen of England* and
incontinent the Bore issued out of his den, and followed with an hounde, came
into plain, where being scaled a while, and gazing upon the people, and
incontinent pierced by the hounde, he spyed a little bushe standing behind a
bank over a ditche (under the which lay two French Gentlemen) and thither
fled, trusting there to have defended himself, who thrust his head snuffing
into the same bushe, which caused the two Gentlemen to fly from thence, as
from the danger of death. Then was the Bore by pursuit of Hunters and the
hounde, driven from thence, who ran straighte to one of the Cardinals
foote*men, a very ta^^ young Yeoman, who had in his hands a ^^^^line, with
the which he was feign to defend himself from the Bore a great while, the
Bore continually ^oyning at him with his tuskes, so that he was feign at last
to pitche his Iaueline in the ground between him and the Bore: the which the
Bore brake with the force of his foyning, and with that the yeoman drew his
sword, and stood at defense, and therewith the Hunters came to the rescue, and
put him once again to flight, with that he fled to an other young Gentleman
of England called Master Henry Ratcliffe, who was son and heir to the Lord
Fitz Walter, who had borrowed by chance of a French* Gentleman a very fine and
sharp Bore spear, where with he thruste the Bore in the mouth, and so into the
throat. whereupon the pastime was ended.

The Cardinal passing diverse days in consultation, and in other matters,
expecting the return of Christopher Gunner, at the last he returned with
letters again, upon receite whereof the Cardinal intended to remove: being
then at Mass in his Closet, he consecrated the Chauncelour of France
Cardinal, and put upon him his Habit, his Hatte, and Cap of Scarlet, and
then took his journey, returning again into England, making such necessary
expedition, that he came to Guis^es, where he was nobly received by the Lord
Sands then Captain there, with all the retinue of the same. And from thence
he rode to Calleis, where he tarryed the shipping of his stuff, horses, and
^^aine. And in the mean time, he stablished there a Mart ^or all nations.
These things and other for the weal of the Town and Garrison by him perfect,
he took shipping and ^^^^ued at Dover the xxiiij. of September, from whence he
^^de to the Court, the King being in his Progress at s^^ Henry Wiats house
in Kent, he went immediately to him with whom he had long talk, and
continued two or three days there in the Court, and then returned to his
house at Westminster.

Such scarcity of bread was in London, and al England, that Scarcity of
breads.
many dyed for default thereof: the King of his goodness sent to the City of
his own provision 600. quarters, or else for one week there had bin little
bread. The bread carts coming from Stratford toward London were met at y^
Mile and by the Citizens, so that the Mayor and Sheriffs were forced to go
and rescue the same Eartes, and to fee them brought to the Markets appointed.

Wheat was then at fifteen shillings the quarter: but shortly after the
Merchants of the Stiliarde brought from Danske s^^he store of Wheat and Rye,
that the same was better cheap to be sold in London than in any other part of
the Realm besides.

John Hardy: William Hollis the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir James Spencer, Vintner, the 28. of October

After the beginning of the Term, the Cardinal caused to be assembled in the
Star Chamber, all the Noblemen, Judges and Justices of Peace that were in
Westminster hall at that time present, and there made to them a long Oration,
Cardinal Wolsey in the Star Chamber declares what an honorable peace he
had concluded.
declaring the cause of his Embassade into France, and of his proceedings
there: among the which he said he had concluded such an amity, as never was
heard in the realm before, as well between the Emperor and us, as between the
King our Sovereign and the French King, with a perpetual peace, the which
should be confirmed in writing, sealed in fine Gold: affyrming further, that
the King of England should receive yearly his tribute by that name out of the
Duchy of Normandy, with all the costs which he had sustained in the
wars: And also, where there was a restraint made in France of the French
Queens Dowry, (whom the Duke of Suffolk had married) for diverse years
during the wars, it was concluded, that she should not only receive it
again, but also the arrerages that were ^^payed. This peace thus concluded,
there should be such an amity between the Gentlemen of each realm and
enterco^rse of Merchants, that it should seem to al men both territories to
be but one Monarchy, etc.

The twentieth of October were received into London certain Embassador^ out of
France, about eyghte in number, of the most noble and worthy Gentlemenne in
all France they were lodged in the Bishops Pallaice in Paul's Churchyard* to
whom di^ers Noblemen resorted, and gave them diverse presents, especially the
Mayor of the City of London.

Then they resorted unto the Court, being at Greenewiche, where they were
received by the King. They had Commission to establishe the King in the order
of France, for whom they brought, for that intent, a collar of fine Gold,
with the Michaell hanging thereat, and Robes to the same order appertenant, the
which was of blewe Uel^et richly embrodered. And the King to gratify the
French ^yng with the semblable, he sent a noble man of the order here in
England, with Garter the Harrault into France, to establishe the French King
in the order of the Garter, with ^^emblable collar, with a Garter and Robes
according to the same.

The Ambassadors remaining here until their return, ^^ things being concluded
concerning the perpetual peace upon solemn ceremonies and oaths contained
in certain Instruments touching the same, which was confirmed by receiving of
the Sacrament in Paul's Church of London by the King, and the Graund Master
of France, who represented the King his Master, and there the instruments
were se^led with Gold, and the King put his hand thereunto, and the Graund
Master did the like: between whom the Cardinal divided the Sacrament: And
that done, they de^^rted, the King rode with the Cardinal to Westminster, and
there dyned with all the French men, passing a^ the day after with
consultation of weighty matters touching the conclusion of the said article
of the perpetual peace.

The King then depa^ted again by water to Greenewich, at whose departing it
was concluded by the Kings device, that all the French men should resort to
Richemonde, and hunt in every one of the Parkes there: and from thence to
Hampton Court, and there to hunt, and the Cardinal to make there a supper or
banquet, or both to them. And from thence they should ride to Windsore, and
there to hunt: And after to return to London, and so to Greenewich, and there
to banquet with the King. Then was there made preparation of all things for
this great assemblye at Hampton Court: the Cardinal called before him his
principal Officers, as Steward, Treasorer, Comptroller, and Clearke of his
Kitchen to whom he declared his mind, touching the entertainment of the
French men at Hampton Court: his pleasure to them known, they sent out
Caters, Purueyors and other, the Cooks wrought both night and day in
suttleties, the Yeomen and Grooms of the Wardrobes were busied in hanging of
the Chambers, and furnishing the same with beds of silk and other furniture*
there were provided 280. beds furnished with all manner of furniture to them
belonging.

The day was come to the French men assigned, and 1526
they ready assembled before the hour of their appointment, wherefore the
officers caused them to ride to Ha^* orth, a place and a Park of the Kings
within three miles, there to hunt and spen^ the day until night, at whyth time
they returned again to Hampton Court, and every of them conveyed to their
several Chambers, having in them great ^^ers and wi^e for their comfort,
remaining there until the Supper was ready. The Chambers where they supped and
banqueted, were ordered in this sort: First, the great waiting Chamber was
hanged with rich Arras, as none were A^^oreg. 20
better than other, and furnished with tall yeomen to serve.

There were set Tables round about the Chamber banquet wise covered, a
Cupborde was there garnished with white silver Plate, having also in the same
Chamber to give the more light, four plates of silver set with great
lights, and a great fire of wood and coals. The next Chamber, being the
Chamber of Presence, was hanged with very rich arras, and a sumptuous cloth
of estate furnished with many goodly Gentlemen to serve the Tables ordered in
manner as the other Chamber was, saving that the high Table was removed beneath
the cloth of Estate toward the midst of the Chamber covered. Then was there
a Cupborde, being in length as broad as the Chamber, with six Desks of
haight, garnished with guilt Plate, ^auing with lights one pair of
Candlestickes of Silver and guylte, being curiously wrought, which cost three
hundred Marks, and standing upon the same two lights of Wax burning as byg
as Torches to set it forth. This Cupborde was barred round about, that no man could come nighe it, for there was none of all this Plate touched in
this ba^quet, for there was sufficient besides. The Plates that hong on the
walls to give light were of silver and guilte, having in them great pearchers
of Wax burning, a great fire in the Chimney, and all other things necessary
for the furniture of so noble a feast. Now was all things in a readiness.
The Trumpettes were blown to warn to supper. The Officers discreetely
conducted these Noblemen from their Chambers into the Chamber where they
should sup, and caused them there to set down, and that done, their service
came up in such abundance both costlye and full of suttleties, and with
such a pleasant noise of instruments of Music, that the French men (as it
seemed) were rapte into a heavenly Paradise. The Cardinal was not yet come,
but they were merry and pleasant. Before the second course, the Cardinal came
in booted and spurred, all suddenly amongst them, and bade them Proface, at
whose coming there was great joy, with rising every man from his place. The
Cardinal caused the^ to sit still and keep their roumes, and being in his
apparel as he rode, called for a chair and sat in the midst of the high
Table. Anon came up the second course, with so many dishes, suttleties, and
devises, above a hundred in number, which were of so goodly proportion and
costly, that I think the French men never saw the like, the wonder was no
less than it was worthy indeed. There were Castles with Images, in the same
Paul's Church, for the quantity, as we^ counterfaited, as the Paynter should
have painted it on a cloth or wall. There were beasts birds, and personages,
most likely made and counterfaited, some fightyng with Swords, some with
Gunnes, and Crossebowes, some vaughting and leaping, some dancing with Ladies,
some on horses in complete harness, iustyng with long and sharp Spears, with
many more devises. Among al other was a chesse boorde made of spiced Plate, with
men there of the fame: and for the good proportion, and because the French
meune be very expert in that play, my Lord Cardinal gave the same to a
Gentleman of France, commanding there should be made a goodly case for the
preservation thereof in all haste, that he might convey the same into his
Country. Then took my Lord a bole of Gold filled with Ipocrase, and putting
off his Cappe, said: I drink to the King my Sovereign Lord, and next unto
the King your Master, and therewith drank a good draught: and when he had done,
he desired the Graund Master to pledge him Cup and all, the which was well
worth five hundred Marks, and so caused all the bourdes to pledge these two
royal Princes: then went the Cups so merrily about, that many of the
French men were feign to be led to their beds.

Then rose up the Cardinal, and went into his priui^ Chamber, to pull off his
Boots, and to shifte him, and then went he to supper in his privy Chamber*
and making a very short supper, returned into the Chamber of Presence among
the French men, using them so lovingly and familiarly, that they could not
commend him too much: and whilst they were in communication and other
pastimes, al their Liveries were served to their Cha^bers, every Chamber had
a Basin and an Ewer of silver, a great livery pot of silver, and some guilt,
yea and some chamber had two Lyuerie pots with Wine and Beer: a silver
Candlestick, both white and plain, having in it two cizes, and a staff
torche of Ware, a fine Manchet and a chete loaf. Thus was every Chamber
furnished through all the house: And yet the Cupbords in the two banqueting
Chambers not once touched.

Thus, when it was more than time convenient, they were conveyed to their
lodgings, where they rested that night.

In the morning they dyned with the Cardinal, and so departed to Windsore.
After the return of the strangers from Windsore, which place with the order
thereof they much commended. The day approached that they were by the king
invited to the Court, where first they dyned, and after dau^^ing and other
pastimes by them done, the time of supper came on. Then was the Banqueting
Chamber in the tylte yard at Greenewiche, to the which place these strangers
were conducted by the noblest personages in the court, where they did both
sup and banquet, the strange and wonderful devises of dishes and suttleties
whereof, as far passed the banquet at Hampton Court, as Gold does Silver in
valewe of waighte for weight.

In the midst of this banquet, there was ^ourneying at the barryers with
lusty Gentlemen in complete harness very gorgeous on foot. Then was there
the like on horseback. And after all this was the most goodlyest disguysing
or Enter lude made in Latin, the Players being so rich, and of so strange
devises, that it passes all comparison.

This done, there came such a number of the fairest Ladies and Gentlewomen
that bare any brute of beauty in all the Realm in most richest apparel that
might be devised, with whom the Gentlemen of France daunced, until a
gorgeous Mask came in of Gentlemen, who daunced and masked with these Ladies.
This done, came in a Mask of Ladies: these Ladies took each of them one of
the French men to dance and to mask: these women Maskers spoke good French to
the French men, which delighted them very much.

Thus was this night consumed, from five of the clock until three of the
clock after midnight, and then every man departed to their lodgings. After
all this solempue cheer, at a day appointed, they resorted to the Court to
take their leave of the King and other noblemen: then came they to Westminster
unto the Cardinal, of whom they received the Kings rewards, the which were
these: every man of honor and estimation had Plate, some to the valewe of
three or four hundred pound, and some more and some less, besides other
great gifts received before of the King, as gowns of Ueluet with rich
Furs, great chains of Gold, and goodlye horses, with diverse other gifts,
and the least of them had a sum of crowns of Gold: the worste Page amongst
them had twenty Crowns for his part: and being thus nobly rewarded, they
departed.

A French Craer, of thirty Tun, being manned with eighte and thirty
Feenche men, and a Flemish Craer of seven and twenty Tun, and four and
twenty Flemings, meeting at Margate, the one chaced the other along the river
of Thamis to the Tower Wharffe of London, where sir Edmond Walsingham
Lieuetenaunte of the Tower, stayed them both, and took both their Captains
and men.

The xvij. of June, the Term was adiorned to Mihelmasse, because of the
sweating sickness that then reigned in the City of London, and there was no
such watch at Midsomer, as before time had bin accustomed.

Ralph Waren: John Long, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Legate from
Rome.


Sir John Rudston Draper, the 28. of October.

The seventh of October, came to London a Legate from Rome, called Lawrence
Campaius Cardinal, and by the Kings gift, Bishop of Salisburie, who was lodged
at Bath Place without Temple bar.

A prisoner brake from the Sessions hall at Newgate when A prisoner brake from
the Sessions house.
the Sessions was done, which prisoner was brought down out of Newgate in a
Basket, he seemed so weak, but now in the end of the Sessions he brake through
the people to the Gray Friars Church, and there was kept six or seven days
Register of the Gray Friars.
ere the Sheriffs could speak with him, and then because he would not abjure
and ask a Crowner, with violence they took him thence, and cast him again in
prison, but the law served not to hang him.

Commissioners were sent some to Oxford, some to Cambridge, some to Louayne,
Paris, Orleance, Bonony, Padua, etc. to know the opinions of the learned in
those Uniuersities, concerning the marriage betwixt King Henry and Queen
Katherine sometime his brothers wife, which marriage seemed to them to be
unlawful, as was affirmed under the particular seal of every Uniuersititie.

In the months of April, May, June, and July, Cardinal 1527
Campeius the Legate, with Cardinal Wolsey, sat at the Black Friars in
London, where before them was brought Anno reg. 21
in question the Kings marriage with Queen Katherine, as to be unlawful, where
these two Legates sat as Judges, The Kings marriage with Queen Katherine
called in question at the Black Friars.
before whom, the King and Queen were assited and sommoned to appear. The
Court was platted in tables and benches in manner of a Consistory, one seat
raised higher for the Judges to sit in, then as it were in the midst of the
said Judges al often above them three degrees high, was a cloth of Estate hanged,
with a Chair royal under the same, wherein sat the King, and besides him,
some distance from him sat the Queen, and under the Judges feet sat the
Scribes, and other officers: the chief Scribe was Doctor Stephens, and the
caller of the Court was one Cook of Winchester. Then before the King and the
Judges within the Court sat the Archbishop of Canterbury Warham, and all the
other Bishops. Then stood at both ends within, the Counselors learned in
the Spiritual Laws, as well the Kings as the Queens. The Doctors of Law for
the King, were Doctor Simpson, Doctor Bell, and diverse other, and Proctors on
the same side were Doctor Peter, Doctor Tregon^ll, with others. On the other
side for the Queen, were Doctor Fisher, Doctor Standish, and Doctor Ridley.
Thus was the Court furnished. The Judges commanded silence whilst their
commisson was red, both to the Court, and to the people assembled. That done,
the Scribes commanded the Crier to call the King by the name of King Henry of
England, come into the Court, etc. with that the King answered, and said
here: then called he the Queen by the name of Katherine Queen of England,
come into the Court, etc. who made no answer, but rose out of her Chair, and
because she could not come to the King directly, for the distance severed
between them, she went about by the Court, and came to the King, kneeling
down at his feet, to whom she said in effect as follows: Sir (quoth she)
I desire you to do me justice and right, and take some pity upon me, for I am
a poor woman* and a Stranger, borne out of your Dominion, having here no
indifferent Counsel, and less assurance of Friendship: Alas Sir, what have I
offended you, or what occasion of displeasure have I showed you, intending thus
to put me from you after this sort? I take God to my Judge, I have bin to you
a true and humble wife, ever confirmable to your will and pleasure, that never
contraryed or gaynesayde any thing thereof, and being always contented with
all things wherein you had any delight, whether little or much, without grudge
or displeasure: I loved for your sake all them whom you loved, whether they
were my friends or enemies. I have bin your wife these twentye years and more,
and you have had by me diverse Children, if there be any just cause that you can
allege against me, either of dishonestie, or matter lawful to put me from
you, I am content to depart to my shame and rebuke, and if there be none,
then I pray you to let me have Justice at your hand. The King your father was
in his time of excellent wit, and the King of Spain my Father Ferdinando
was reckned one of the wisest Princes that reigned in Spain many years
before: it is not to be doubted, but that they had gathered as wise
Counselors unto them of every Realm, as to their wisdoms they thought
meet, who thought the marriage between you and me good and lawful, etc.
wherefore, I humblye desire you to spare me, until I may know what council
my friends in Spain will advertise me to take, and if you will not, then
your pleasure be fulfilled: and with that, she arose up, making a low
courtesy to the King, and departed from thence. The King being advertised that
she was ready to go out of the house, commanded the Crier to call her again,
who called her by these words, Katherine Queen of England, come into the
Court, with that quoth Master Griffith, Madame, you be called again, on on
(quoth she) it makes no matter, I will not tarry, go on your ways: and
thus she departed, without any further answer at that time, or any other,
and never would appear after in any Court. The King perceiving she was
departed, said these words in effect:

For as much (quoth he) as the Queen is gone, I will in her absence declare
onto you all. She has been to me as true, as obediente, and as confirmable a
wife, as I would wish or desire, she has all the virtuous qualities that ought
to be in a woman of her dignity, or in any other of a baser estate, she is
also surely a noble woman borne, her conditions will well declare the same:
with that quoth the Cardinal Wolsey, Sir, I most humbly require your
highness, to declare before all this audience, whether I have bin the chief
and first mouer of this matter unto your Majesty or no, for I am greatly
suspected herein. My Lord Cardinal (quoth the King) I can well excuse you in
this matter, mary (quoth he) ye have bin rather against me, in the tempting
hereof, than a setter forward or mouer of the same: the special cause that
moved me unto this matter, was a certain scrupulositie that pricked my
conscience, upon certain words spoken at a time when it was, by the Bishop of
Bayon the French Ambassador, who had bin hither sent upon the debating of a
marriage to be concluded between our daughter the Lady Mary, and the Duke of
Orleance; second son to the King of France, and upon the resolution and
determination of the same, he desired respect to advertise the King his master
thereof, whether our daughter Mary should be legitimate in respect of this my
marriage with this woman, being sometime my brothers wife, which worde^ once
conceived within the secret bottom of my conscience, engendered such a
scrupulous doubt, that my conscience was incontiently accombred, vexed and
disquieted, whereby I thought my self to be greatly in danger of Gods
indignation, which appeared to be (as me seemed) the rather, for that he sent
us no issue male, and all such issues male as my said wife had by me, died
incontient after they came into the world, so that I doubted the great
displeasure of God in that behalf, thus my conscience being tossed in the
waves of a scrupulous conscience, and partly in despair to have any other
issue than I had already by this Lady now my wife, it behooved me further to
consider the state of this Realm, and the danger that it stood in for lack
of a Prince to succeed me, I thought it good in releasse of the weighty
burthou of my ^^ake conscience, and also the quiet estate of this worthy
Realm, to attempt the law therein, whether I may, lawfully take another wi^e
more lawfully by whom God may send me more issue, in case this my first
copulation was not good, without any carnal concupiscen^e, and not for and
displeasure or misliking of the Queens person and age, with whom I would be
as well contented to continue, if our marriage may stand with the Laws of God,
as with any woman alive, in which point* consists all this doubt that we go
about now to try, by the learning, wisdom, and judgment of you our Prelates
and pastoures of all this our Realm and domini^^ now here assembled for that
purpose, to whose conscience (...) learning I have committed the charge and
judgment, according to the which, I will (God willing) be right well content
to submit my (...), and for my part obey the same, wherein, after that I
perceived my ^^^sc^ence so d^^^tfull, I moved it in confession to you ^^^ (...)
^^ (...) then Ghostly Father, and ^^^ as much as ^he^ (...) (...) self were in
some doubt, you ^^ued me to (...) the counsel of all you my Lords, whereupon,
I moved you my Lord of Canterbury, first to have your ^^ence, in as much as you
were Metropolitan, to put this matter in question, and so I of all you my
Lords, to which you granted under your Seals, here to be showed: that is
truth quoth the Archbishop of Canterbury. After that, the King rose up, and the
Court was adiourned until another day. The next Court day, the Cardinals sat
again, at which time, the Counsel on both sides were there (...) to answer:
the Kings Counsel alleged the Matrimony not to be lawful at the beginning,
because of the ^^^nall copulation had between Prince Arthure and the Queen.
This matter being very vehemently touched on that side, and to prove it, they
alleged many reasons and ^^^ilitudes of truth, and being answered negatiuely
again in the other side, it seemed that all their former allegations were
doubtful to be tried, and that no man knew the truth. And thus this Court
passed from Sessions to Sessions, and day to day, that at certain of their
Sessions the King sent the two Cardinals to the Queen (who was then in
Bridewell) to persuade with her by their wisdoms, and to advise her to
surrender the whole matter into the Kings hands by her own consent and will,
which should be much better to her honor, than to stand to the trial of Law,
and thereby to be condemned, which should seem much to her dishonor. The
Cardinals being in the Queens Chamber of presence, the Gentleman Usher
advertised the Queen, that the Cardinals were come to speak with her ^ with
that the rose up, and with a Skeyne of white th^ead about her ^^^ke, came into
her* Chamber of presence, where the Cardinals were attending, at whose
coming, quoth she, what is your pleasure with me: if it please your Grace
(quoth Cardinal Wolsey) to go into your pri^ie Chamber, we will show you the
cause of our coming: my Lord (quoth she) if ye have any thing to say, speak
it openly before all these f^^ke, for I fear nothing that ye can say against
me, but that I would all the world should hear and see it, and therefore
speak your mind. Then began the Cardinal to speak to her in Latin, nay
good my Lord (quoth she) speak to me in English^ fors^th (quoth the Cardinal)
good Madame, if it please you, we come both to know your mind how you are
disposed to do in this matter between the King and you, and also to declare
secretly our opinions and council unto you, which we do only for very zeal
and obedience we bear unto your Grace. My Lord (quoth she) I thank you for
your god will, but to make you answer in your request, I can not so sodeinly,
for I was set among my Maids at work, thinking full little of any such
matter, wherein there needs a longer deliberation, and a better head than
mine to make answer, for I need of council in this case which touches me so
near: and for my council or friendship that I can find in England, they are
not for my profit: what think you my Lords, will any Englishman council me,
or be friendly to me against the Kings pleasure, that is his subject? nay
fors^th, and as for my Counsel in whom I will put my trust, they be not here,
they be in Spain in mine own Country: and my Lords, I am a poor woman
lacking wit to answer to any such noble persons of wisdom as you be, in so
weighty a matter, therefore I pray you be good unto me poor woman, destitute
of friends here in a forrayne region, and your counsel also I will be glad to
hear: and therewith she took the Cardinal by the hand, and le^dde him into
her privy Chamber with the other Cardinal, where they tarried a season
talking with the Queen, which communication ended, they departed to the King,
making to him relation of her talk. Thus this case went forward from Court to
Court, till it came to Judgment, so that every men expected the iu^dgement
would be given the next day, at which day the King came thither, and set him
down in a Chair within a door, in the end of y^ Galery (which opened directly
against the judgment seat) to hear the judgment given, at which time, all
their proceedings were openly red in Lattin. That done, the Kings Counsel at
y^ bar called for judgment, with y^ (quoth Cardinal Campeius) I will not
give judgment till I have made relation to y^ Pope of all our proceedings,
whose council and commandment in this ^^se I will observe: the case is very
doubtful, and also the party defenda^t will make no answer here, but does
rather apeale from us, supposing y^ we be not indifferent, wherefore I will
^^^ourne this Court for this time, according to the order of y^ Court of Rome,
and with y^ the Court was dissolved, and no more done. This protracting of the
conclusion of the matter, ^ Henry took very displeasa^tly. Cardinal Campeius
took his leave of the K. and Nobility, and returned toward Rome. Ralph Rowlet
Goldsmith was chosen Sheriff of London by ^ commons, but y^ King wrote for
him, and he was for y^ year (...)ged, and then was chosen Walter Champion
Draper.

Michael Dorman: Walter Champion, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Raulph Dodmere Mercer, the 28. of October.

The ^^i^ day of October, the Dukes of Suffolk and of Nonffolke come to the
Cardinal then being at Westminster, to whom then declared that the Kings
pleasure was that he should surrender up the great Seal into their hands, and
to depart simply unto Asher, which was an house situate nigh unto Hampton
Court, belonging to the Bishopric of Winchester. The Cardinal demanded of
them their commission that gave them such, authority, who answered again that
they were sufficient commissioners, and had authority to do no less by the
Kings mouth, notwithstanding, he would in no wise agree in that behalf,
without further* knowledge of their authority, saying, that the great Seal
was delivered him by the Kings person, to enjoy the ministration ^hereof, with
the room of the Chancellor, for the term of his life, whereof for his
surety, he had the Kings letters pattents: which matter was greatly debated
between them, with many great words, in so much, that the Dukes were said to
depart again without their purpose, and r^de to Windesore to the King, and
made report accordingly, but the next day they returned again, bringing with
them the Kings letters. Then the Cardinal delivered Cardinal discharged of the
great Seal.
unto them the great Seal, and was content to depart simply, taking with him
nothing but only certain provision for his house ^ and after long talk
between him and the Dukes they departed with the great Seal of England, and
brought the same to the King. Then the Cardinal called al his Officers before
him, and took account of them for all such stuff whereof they had charge, and
in his Galrey were f^^ diverse Tables, whereupon lay a great number of goodly
rich stuff as whole pieces of Silk of all colors, ^el^et, Satin, Damask,
Taffata, Grograine, and other things. Also, there lay a thousand pieces of fine
Holla^d cloth. There was laid on every Table, Books, reporting the contents of
the same, and so was there Inuentories of all things it order against the Kings
coming. He caused to be hanged the walls of the Gallory on the one side, with
cloth of Gold, cloth of Tissue, cloth of Silver, and rich cloth of Bodken of
diverse colors. On the other side were hanged the richest suite of Coapes of
his own provision made for his Colleges of Oxford and Ipswich, that ever was
seen in England. Then had he two Chambers adjoining to the Galerie, the one
most commonly called the gilt Chamber, and the other the Counsel Chamber,
wherein were set up two broad and long Tables upon trestles, whereupon was set
such a number of plate of all sorts, as was almost incredible. In the gilt
Chamber were set out upon the Table nothing but gilt plate, and upon a Cupbord
and in a window was set no plate but Gold, very rich: and in the Counsel
chamber was all white and parcel gilt plate, and under the Table in baskets
was all old broken Silver plate, and Books set by them, purporting every
kind of plate, and every parcel, with the contents of the ounces thereof.
Thus was all things prepared, giving charge of all the said stuff, with all
other remaining in every Office, to be delivered to the King, to make answer
to their charge: for the order was such, that every Officer was charged with ye
receipt of the stuff belonging to his Office by Indenture. To Sir William
Gascoine being his Treasurer, he gave the charge of the delivery of the said
goods, and therewithal, with his train of Gentlemen and yeomen, he took his
Barge at the privy stairs, and so went by water unto Putney, where, when he
was arrived, he took his Moyle, and every man took their Horses, and rode
straight to Ashere, where he and his family continued the space of three or
four weeks, without either beds, sheets, table clothes, or dishes to eat
their meat in, or wherewith to buy any: the Cardinal was forced to borow of
the Bishop of Carelile, plate and dishes etc.

The xxvj. of October, Sir Thomas Moore was made Sir Thomas Moore made
Chancellor.
Chancellor of England.

William Tindall, after he had translated the new Testament into English, he
caused the same to be printed beyond New Testament printed in English.
the Seas.

A peace was agreed between the Emperor, and the Kings of England, France,
Boheme, and Hungary.

In the month of October, the King came to his Place of Bridewell, where he
and his Nobles put on their Robes, and went to the Black Friars, and began
there a Parliament, Parliament at the Black friars.
in ye which, the Cardinal was condemned in the Praemunire.

The eight of December, was created Thomas Uiscount Rochford Earl of Wilshire:
Robert Uiscount Fitz Water Earl of Sussex: and George Lord Hastings, Earl of
Huntington, at York Place by Westminster.

The thirteenth of January, a great fire was in the Uintrie at London.

Cardinal Wolsey after great suite made to the King, was licenced to remove
from Ashere to Richmond, which place, he had a little before repaired with
great costs, for the King had made an exchange thereof with him for Hampton
Court. The Cardinal having license of the King to repair to Richmond, made
have thither, and lodged there in the Lodge of the great Park, which was a
very pretty house, there he lay until the beginning of Lent, then he removed
into the Charterhouse of Richmond, where he lay in a lodging which Doctor
Collet made for himself, until he removed Northward, which was in the Passion
week after, and every day he resorted to the Charterhouse there, and would
sit with one of the most ancient fathers, who persuaded him to despise the
vain glory of the world. Then prepared the Cardinal for his journey into the
North, and sent to London for liuerie clothes for his servants, and so rode
from Richmond to Hendon, from thence, to a place called the Rye, the next day
to Raystone, where he lodged in the Priorie, the next day to Huntingdon, and
there lodged in the Abbey, the next day to Peterborow, and there lodged in the
Abbey, where he abode all the next week, where he kept his Easter, his train
was in number 160. persons: upon Mau^die Thurseday he made his Maundy, there
having 59. pore me^, whose feet he washed, and gave every one xij. d. in
money, iij. else of good Canuas, a pair of shoes, a cast of read hearings,
and iij. white hearings, and one of them had ij. s^. On Thurseday next after
Easter, he removed to Master Fitz Williams, sometime a Merchant Tailor of
London, and then of the Kings Council: the next week he removed to Stamford,
the next day to Grantham, the next day to Newarke, and lodged in the Castle
that night, and the next day also: from thence, he rode to Southwell, where he
continued most part of all that Summer, until the latter end of grass time,
and then he rode to Scroby, where he continued until Michaelmasse, and then to
Cawood Castle, within seven miles of York, whereof we will speak more
hereafter.

The xvj. of May, a man was hanged in chains in Finsburie 1530
field, for murdering Doctor Miles, Uicar of S. Brides. The xxv. of May, K.
Henry commanded the Bishops to call in Anno reg. 22
Tindals translation of the new Testament, and to see another truly translated
to be set forth. K. Henry upon occasion of Suite to the Court of Rome forbidden.
delay made by the Pope in his controversy of diuorcement, and through
displeasure of such reports as he heard had bin made of him to ye Court of
Rome, thirdly, pricked forward by some counselors to follow ye example of ye
Germans, caused proclamation to be made the xix. of September, forbidding al
his subjects to purchase any manner of thing from the Court of Rome. This year,
Ralph Rowlet was again chosen Election of the Sheriff.
Sheriff for ye commons, and he would not take it upon him, but went to Saint
Albons: then on Michaelmasse even, was chosen Robert Amadas Goldsmith, and the
King wrote for him, so that he was excused. On the morrow, which was
Michaelmasse day, was chosen Richard Choppin Tallow Sheriff elected on
Michael* mas day.
Chandler, who was forthwith sworn in the Guild hall, and changed into a Gown
and Cloak of Scarlet, with a theine of Gold about his neck, and a Horse being
prepared for him ready at ye Guild Hall Gate, he rode to Westminster.

William Dauntsey: Richard Choppin, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Thomas Pergeter Salter, the 28. of October.

The iiij. and v. of November, was a great wind y^ blew down many houses and
trees, after the which wind followed so high a tide, that it drowned the
marshes on Essex side and Kent, with the I Will of Thanet, and other places,
destroying much Cattle.

Cardinal Wolsey lying at Cawood, held there an honorable and plentiful
house for all comers, and also built and repaired the Castle, which was
greatly in decay, having artificers and laborers above 300. persons daily in
wages: and at length being thereunto persuaded by ye Doctors of ye Church of
York, he determined to be stauled there at York Minster, the next Monday
after Alhallowen day, against which time due preparation was made for the same,
but not in such sumptuous wise, as his predecessors before him had used. The
day being once known unto the worshipful Gentlemen of the Country, and
other, as Abbots, and Priors, having notice of his staulatio^, they sent in
such provision of victual, that it is almost incredible, all which was
unknown to the Cardinal, for as much as he was prevented and disappoynted of
his purpose, by the reason that he was arrested of high Treason, as ye shall
hereafter hear, so that most part of this former provision that I spoke of,
was sent unto York the same day of his arrest, and the next day following: for
his arrest was kept as close as could be, the order of his arrest was thus. It
was appointed by the King and Counsel, that Sir Walter Walsh Knight, one of
the Kings privy Chamber, should be sent down with a Commission into the
North unto the Earl of Northumberland (who was sometime brought up in house
with the Cardinal) and they twain being jointly in commission to arrest the
Cardinal of high Treason, Master Walsh took his Horse at the Court gate,
about noone, upon Alhallowen day, toward the Earl of Northumberland. And now
have I occasion to declare what happened about the same time, which
peradventure signified the troubles following to the Cardinal. The Cardinal
sitting at Dinner upon Alhallowen day, having at his boordes end diverse
Chaplaynes sitting at dinner, ye shall understand that the Cardinals great
cross stood in a corner at the tables end, leaning against the hanging, and
when the bordes end was taken up, and a convenient time for the Chaplains to
arise, one Doctor Augustine a Venetian, and Physician to the Cardinal, rising
from the table with the other, having upon him a great gown of boysteous
Ueluet, overthrew the Cross, which ^rayling down along the tappet, with the
point of one of the Crosses, brake Doctor Bonars head, that Doctor Bonars head
broke.
the blood ran down, the company there standing, greatly astonished with the
chance. The Cardinal perceiving the same, demanded what the matter meant of
their sodeine amaze, and they showed him of the fall of his Cross upon Doctor
Bonars head: has it (quoth he) drawn any blood, yea forsooth my Lord (quoth
they) with that he cast his head aside, and said shaking his head, Malum omen,
and therewith said Grace, and rose from the Table, and went to his Chamber. Now
mark the signification how the Cardinal expounded this matter at Pomfret after
his fall. First, ye shall understand that the Cross which he bare as
Archbishop of York, signified himself, and Augustine the Physician who
ouerthrewe the Cross, was only he that accused the Cardinal, whereby his
enemies caught an occasion to overthrow him: it fell upon Doctor Bonars head,
who was Master of the Cardinals faculties and spiritual jurisdictions, and
was then damnified by the overthrow of the Cross: yea, and moreover, drawing
blood of him, betokened death, which shortly after did ensue. About which time
of this mischance, the same very day and season Master Walsh took his Horse
at the Court as nigh as could be judged. Now the appointed time drew near of
his staulation, and sitting at Dinner upon the Friday next before the Monday,
on the which day he intended to be stauled at York, the Earl of
Northumberland and Master W^^s^, with a great company of Gentlemen of the
Earls house, and of the Country, whom he had gathered together in the Kings
name, came into ye Hall a^ Cawod, the Officers being at Dinner, and the
Cardinal not fully dined, being then in his fruits. The first thing yt ye
Earl did after he had set order in the hall, he commanded Cardinal a^rested.
the Porter at the Gates to deliver him ye keys thereof, who would in no wise
obey his commandment, although he were roughly threatened, and straightly
commanded in ye Kings name to make delivery of the^ to one of the Earls
servants: Sir (quoth he) seeing that ye do but intend to set one of your
servants in my place to keep the Gates, I know no servant that ye have, but I
am as able as he to do it, and keep the Gates to your purpose (whatsoever it
be) and also the keys were delivered me by my Lord and Master, wherefore I
pray you to pardon me, for whatsoever ye shall command me to do in the
ministratio^ of mine office, I shall do it with good will: with that (quoth the
Earl) hold him a Book, and commanded him to lay his hand thereon: thou shall
^weare (quoth he) that thou shall well and truly keep the Gates to the Kings
use, and to do all such things as we shall command, and that ye shall let
pass neither in nor out at these Gates, but such as ye be commanded by us,
and with this oath he received the keys at the Earls hands. Of all these
doings knew the Cardinal nothing, for they stopped the steire, so that none
went up to the Cardinals Chamber, and they that came down, could no more go up
again: at the last, one escaped, who showed the Cardinal that the Earl was
in the Hall, whereat the Cardinal marvelled, and would not believe him, but
commanded a Gentleman to bring him the truth, who going down the stairs, saw
the Earl of Northumberland, and returned, and said it was very he: then (quoth
the Cardinal) I am for^ that we have dined, for I fear our Officers be not
provided of any store of good fish to make him some honorable cheer, let the
Table stand (quoth he) with that he rose up, and going down y^ stairs, he
encountered the Earl coming up with all his tail, and as soon as the
Cardinal espied y^ Earl, he put off his ^ay, and said, my Lord; ye be most
heartily welcome, and so embraced each other: then the Cardinal took the Earl
by the hand, ^^^ had him up into the Chamber, whom followed all the number of
the Earls se^^ants. From thence, he led him into his bedchamber, and they
being there al alone, the Earl said unto the Cardinal with a soft voice,
laying his hand upon his arm, my Lord, I arrest you of high* Treason: with
which words ye Cardinal being maruellously astonished, standing both still a good
space, at the last (quoth the Cardinal) what authority have you to arrest me:
forsooth my L. (quoth ^ Earl) I have a co^missio^ so to do: where is your
commission (quoth he) that I may see it, nay sir that you may not said the
Earl: well then (quoth the Cardinal) I will not obey your rest. But as they
were debating this matter between them in the Chamber, so busy was M. Walsh
in arresting Doctor Augustine at the door in ye palace, saying unto him, go in
Traitor or I shall make thee. At the last, M. Walsh being entered the Cardinals
Chamber, began to pluck off his hoode, and after kneeled down to the
Cardinal, unto whom the Cardinal said, come hither gentleman and let me speak
with you, Sir, here my Lord of Northumberland has arrested me, but by whose
authority he shows not, if ye be joined with him, I pray you show me Indeed
my Lord (quoth M. Walsh) he shows you the truth: well then (quoth the
Cardinal) I pray you let me see it. Sir, I beseech you (quoth M. Walsh) hold
us excused: there is annexed to our co^missio^ certain instructions, which you
may not see: well (quoth ye Cardinal) I trow ye are one of the Kings privy
Chamber, your name is Walsh, I am content to yield to you, but not to my Lord
of Northumberland without I see his commission: the worst in the Kings privy
Chamber is sufficient to arrest the greatest peer of the Realm by the Kings
commandment, without any commission, therefore put your commission and
authority in execution, spare not, I will obey the Kings will. I take God to
Judge, I never offended the King in word nor deed. Then the Earl called into
the Chamber diverse Gentlemen of his own servants, and after they had taken
the Cardinals keys from him, they put him in custody of the Earls
Gentlemen, and then they went about the house to set all things in an order:
the^ sent they Doctor Augustine* away to London with as much speed as they
could, who was boune unto the Horse like a Traitor, but it was Sunday toward
night ere the Cardinal was conuayd from Cawod, and lodged that night in the
Abbey of Pomfret. The next day he removed toward Daneaster, and was there
lodged at the black) Friars. The next day he was removed to Shefilde Park,
where the Earl of Shrewsburie with his Lady, and a train of Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen received him with much honor, then departed all the great number of
Gentlemen that conducted him thither: and the Cardinal being thus with y^
Earl of Shrewsburie, continued there xviij. days after, upon whom, the Earl
appointed diverse Gentlemen to attend continually, to see that he should lack
nothing, being served in his own Chamber, as honorably as he had in his own
house, and once every day the Earl would repair unto him, and commune with
him. After the Cardinal had thus remained with the Earl of Shrewsburie about
a fortnight, it came to pass at a certain time as he sat at his dinner in
his own chamber, having at his boords end a mess of Gentlemen and Chaplains
to keep him company, toward y^ end of his dinner, when he was come to eating
his fruits, his color was perceived often to change, whereby he was judged*
not to be in good health, where upon, one of The Cardinal ^ickne^^^.
his Gentlemen said, Sir, me seems you are not well at ease, to whom he
answered with a loud voice, forfooth no more I am, for I am (quoth he) taken
sod^inly with a thing about my stomach, that lies there along, as cold as a
whetstone, which is no more but wind, I pray you go to the Po^icarie, and
enquire of him ^^ he have any thing that will break wind upward. Then went he
to the Earl, and showed him what estate the Cardinal was in, and what he
desired: with that, the Earl caused the Poticarie to be called before him, and
demanded of him if he had any thing that would break wind upward in a man's
body, and he answered he had such gear. Then quoth the Earl fetch me some,
the^ y^ Apoticary fetched a white co^fectio^ in a fair paper, and showed and to
y^ earl; who commanded one to give ye assay thereof before him, and then y^ same
to be brought to the Cardinal, who received it up al at once into his mouth:
but immediately after surely, he avoided much wind upward: ^o (quoth he) ye may
see that it was but wind, and now I am well eased, I thank God, and so rose
from the Table, and went to his prayers: and that done, there came on him such
a looseness, that it caused him ^^ go to his stool: and not long after ye
earl of Shrewsburie came into y^ Gallery to him, with whom ye Cardinal met:
and then sitting down upon a bench, ye earl asked him how he did, and he most
lame^tably answered him, and thanked him for his gentle entertainment: Sir
(quoth the earl) if ye remember, ye have often wished to come before the king,
to make your answer* and I have written to ye King in y^ behalf, making him
privy of your lamentation that ye inwardly have received for his displeasure,
who accepts al your doings therein, as friends be accustoin'd to do in such
cases, wherefore I would advise you to pluck up your heart, and be not aghast of
your enemies, I doubt not but this your journey to his highness shall be much to
your advancement. The king has sent for you that worshipful knight Master
Kingston, and with him 24. of your old servants, now of ye Guard, to the intent
ye may safely come to his Majesty: sir (quoth the Cardinal) I trow Master
Kingston is Constable of the Tower, ^ea, what of that quoth y^ earl, I assure
you he is elected by ye king for one of your friends: Well quoth the Cardinal,
as God will, so be it, I am subject to fortune, being a true man, ready to
accept such chances as shall follow, and there an end. I pray you where is Master
Kingston, quoth the earl I will send for him, I pray you so do, ^^^th the
Cardinal, at whose message he came, and as soon as the Cardinal espied him, he
made have to encounter him, and at his coming he kneeled to him, and saluted
him in the kings behalf, who^ ye Cardinal barehaded offered to take up, and
said: I pray you stand up, kneel not to me, I am but a wretch repleat with
misery, not esteeming my self but as a vile ab^ecte, utterly cast away
without desert as God knows. (...) said Master Kingston with humble
reverence, Sir, y^ King has him commonded unto you: I thank his highness quot^
the Cardinal, I trust he be in health, yea quoth Master Kingston, and he
commanded me to say to you, that you should assure your self that he bears
you as much good will as ever he did, and wills you to be of good cheer. And
where report has bin made* y^ ye should commit against him certain heinous
crimes, which he thinks to be untrue, yet he can do no less than to send
for you to your trial, and to take your journey to him at your own pleasure,
commanding me to be attendant upon you* Therefore sir I pray you when it shall
be your own pleasure to take your journey, I shall be ready to gi^e atte^da^ce:
Master Kingston quoth he, I thank you for your news, and sir, if I were as
lusty as I have been but of late* I would ride with you in post, but I am
diseased with a flixe that makes me very weak, but I shall with al speed make
me ready to ride with you to morrow. When night came, the Cardinal waxed very
sick with the laske, the which caused him continually to go to the stool all that night* insomuch, that he had that night 50* stools: therefore in
consideration of his infirmity, they caused him to tarry all that day: and the
next day he took his journey with Master Kingston and them of the Guard, til
he came to an house of the Earl of Shrewsburies called Hardwike hall, where he
lay al night very evil at ease* The next day he rode to Notingham, ^^d there
lodged that night more sick: and the next day he rode to Leicester Abbey,
and by the way waxed so sick, that he was almost fallen from his Mule, so
that it was night before he came to the Abbey of Leicester, where at his
coming in at the Gates, the Abbot with all his cou^nt met him with diverse
Torches light, whom they honorably received and welcomed: To whom the
Cardinal said: Father Abbot, I am come hither to lay my bones among you,
riding so still until he came to the s^ayres of the Chamber, where he alighted
from his Mule, and Master Kingston led him up the stayres, and as soon as
he was in his Chamber he went to bed* This was on the Satterday at night,
and then increased sicker and sicker, until Monday, that all men thought he
would have dyed: So on Tuisday Saint Andrews even, Master Kingston came to
him and bade him good morrow, for it was about ^i^e of the clock, and asked
him how he did: Sir, quoth he, I tarry but the pleasure of God, to render
up my poor soul into his hands: not so ^^r, quoth Master Kingstone, with
the grace of God, ye shall live and do very well, if ye will be of good
cheer: nay in good sooth Master Kingstone, my disease is such, that I can
not live: for I have had some experience in Physic. Thus it is, I have a
flux with a continual Fever, the nature whereof is, that if there be no
alteration of the same within eyghte days, either must ensue excorrition of
the entra^les, or ^ra^sie, or else present death* and the best of them is
death, and as I suppose this is the eyghte day, and if ye see no alteration
in me, there is no remedy, save, though I may live a day or twain after, but
death must ensue: Sir, quoth Master Kingstone, you be in such pensiveness,
doubting that thing, that in good faith ye need not. Well, well, Master
Kingstone quoth the Cardinal, I see the matter how it is framed: but if I
had served God as diligently as I have done the King, he would not have
given me over in my gray hairs: but this is the just reward that I must
receive for the diligent pains and study that I have had to do him service,
not regarding my service to God, but only to satisfy his pleasure: I pray
you have me most humbly commended unto his Royal Majesty, and beseech him
in my behalf to call to his Prince ^^e remembrance, all matters proceeding
between him* and me from the beginning of the world, and the progress of the
same, etc, Master Kingstone farewell, I can no more say, but I wish all
things to have good success, my time draws on fast, and even with that he
began to draw his speech at length, and his tongue to fail, his eyes being
set* whose sight failed him, then did they put him in remembrance of
Christ his Passion, ^^^sed ^he Yeomen of y^ ^^^ard ^o stand by to see him dye,
and to (...) of his wor^^ at his departure: and incontinent the clock stroke
eight, and then he gave up the Ghost, and departed this present life, which
caused some to call to remembrance how he said the day before, that at ^^ght
of the clock they should lose their Master.

Here is the end and fall of Pride and arrogancy of men Example of pride and
arrogancy.
exalted by fortune to dignities: for in his time he was the haughtiest man in
all his proceedings alive, having more respect to the honor of his person,
than he had to his spiritual profession, wherein should be showed all
meekness, (...)* a^^ charity.

The Clergy of England* being judged by the Kings The Clergy condemned in
the Praemunire.
learned Council to be in the praemunire, for maintaining y^ power Legan^ine of
the Cardinal, were called by pro^e^^ into the Kings Bench to aunsweare,
wherefore in their convocation they concluded a submission, where in they
called the King Supreme head of the Church of England, and were contented to
give the King* 100000. pounds, to pardon King Henry supreme head.
their offenses, touching y^ praemunire, by act of Parliament.

The fifth of April one Richard Rose a Cook was boiled 1531 A Cook boiled.
in Smithfielde, for poisoning of diverse persons at the Bishop of Rochesters
place.

King Henry purchased the Hospital of Saint ^ames, ^eere to Charing Cross,
and all the medows to the same adjoining, Anno reg. 23 The Kings house at Saint
James.
gyuing the sisters of the house pencions during their lives, and then builded
thereof a goodly Mansion, with a Park, which he caused to be walle^ about
with Brick.

The (...) of August* Thomas Bilney, a Bacheler T. Bylney burned.
of Law (...) Norwich.

Richard Gresham: (...) Alth^^^^h^ 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Rice
Griffyn executed.


Sir Nicholas Lambard G^^cer, the 28. of October.

The fourth of December, sir Rice Gryffyn was beheaded at the Tower hill, and
buried at the Crossed Friars, and John Hewes* his man (...) to Tybor^^ hanged
and quartered.

The 17. of May deceassed Robert Thorn Bacheler and Merchant Taylour of
London, who gave by his Testament, (his debts first being paid) is to be
distributed in the city Robert Thom his charity in the City of London.
of London 500. l. to pore householders: in the xxv. Wards, 20. l. in every
ward: To relieve prisoners in the Counters 50. l. To pore Maids marriages 50.
l. To the four prisons about London, Newgate, Ludgate, Kings bench,
Marshalsea, 100. l. To Aldermarie Church in London, 10. l.

In the City of Bristow, to the making up of the Free Robert Thorn^ his
charity in the town of Bristovve.
school of Saint Bartholomew 300. l. to be divided in the parishes among the
poor householders 300. l. to the redemption of the free farm of prisage there
200. l. to the Alms houses there 100. l. to Thomas Moffit Master of the
Grammar School 25. l. and to Robert his son 10. l. to the poor prisoners in
Bristowe 50. l. to poor maids Marriages there 50. l. toward making of a place
for Merchants for the street in Bristow 100. l. to the repayring of high
ways from Camer March to Bristow, at the discretion of his executors as need
required, and to the other high ways about Bristow 100. l. to Saint Nicholas
Church in Bristowe 20. l. to the four orders of Friars there, every order 20.
l. more to the prisoners of Bristowe 100. l. to the Chamber of Bristow 300. l.
for the provision of corn and wood: more to the Chamber 500. l. to the relief
of young men that practice Clothing: to the pore people of Bristow 500. l. And
over and besides all this, to be distributed in deeds of Charity, at the
discretion of his executors 1000. l.

Legacies to his sisters children and other kindred amounted to 5142. l. 6. s^.
8. d. His debts forgiven were 83. l. 5. s^. 10. d. The residue of his goods he
gave to his brother Nicholas Thorn.

The 28. of May Friar Forest was put in prison for contrarying Friar Forest.
the Preacher before the King.

The oath which the Clergy had used to make to the Bishop Clergy svvor^e to
the King.
of Rome was made void by statute, and a new oath confirmed, wherein they
confessed the king to be Supreme head.

The fifteenth of May sir Thomas Moore after great suit Si^ Thomas Moore.
made by him, was discharged of the Chancelorship.

The fourth of June the King dubbed Thomas Audeley Lord Audley made Lord
Chauncelour.
Knight, made him keeper of the great Seal, and not long after Lord Chancellor.

The fifteenth of June, five men were hanged and quartred Coyners and Clyppers
executed. Christ's Church suppressed.
at Tower hill, for coining and clypping.

In the Month of July, the King suppressed the Priorie of Christ church in
London, he sent the Chanons of that house to other Priories, and gave their
Church, plate, and lands, to sir Thomas Audley.

The three and twentieth of Auguste, William Warham Archebyshoppe of Canterbury
deceassed.

The King repaired the Tower of London.

The first of September the Lady Anne Bolleine was Marchioness of Penbrooke.
made Marchioness of Pembrooke at Windsore, and then was given her by the
King, one thousand pound by year.

The eleventh of October King Henry landed at Calleis, with the Duke of
Richemonde his bastard son, the Duke of Norffolke Lord Treasurer of England,
the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquess of Excester, the Earls of Darby, Arundale,
Oxforde, Surrey and Rutlande, the Vicount Lisle King Edward the fourth his
bastard son, the Lord Matrauers, the Lord Sands Lord Chamberlain of the
Kings house, the Lord William Hawarde, the Lord Bray, the Lord Montague, the
Lord Cobham, the Lord Mordant, the Lord Dawbney, the Lord Gray, the Lord
Clinton, the Lord Vaux, the Lord Mountegle, the Lord Rocheford, with diverse
other Lords: the Bishops of Winchester, London, Lincoln, and Bathe: sir
William Fitz William treasourer of the kings house, sir William Pawlet
Comptroller, sir William Kingstone Captain of the Guarde, sir John Page, sir
James Boleine, sir Anthony Brown, sir Edward Neuell, sir Thomas Cheyney* sir
John Russell, sir Richard Page, sir Ralph Eldercare, sir Edward Baynton, sir
Edward Santener, sir Griffyth Deene, sir John Dudley, sir John Femer, sir
Henry Long* sir Anthony Hungerforde, sir John Brudges, sir Arthur Hopto^, sir
Anthony Wingfielde, sir William Paston, sir Edmonde Bedingfielde, sir Thomas
Strange, sir William Hawte, sir Edward Wotton, sir William Askewe, sir John
Marleant, sir William Barington, sir William Essex, sir Giles Strangweis, sir
Edward Chamberlain, sir Giles Caple, sir John Sent-Iohn, sir Walter
Hungerforde, sir William Gascoine, sir Lionel Norrice, sir Edward Boloine, sir
Thomas Lisle, sir John Ashton, sir Thomas Palmer, sir William Boloine, sir
William Finche, sir William Pellam, sir Thomas Rotherham, sir John Norton, sir
Richard Sands, sir John Neuell, and thyrtie Esquiers, with many Gentlemenne,
and all their trains.

The town of Calleis had at this season xxiiij. C. beds, and stabling for
two thousand horses, besides the Uillages about.

The xxj. of October, King Henry rode toward Boloigne, and was by the way at
Sandingfielde met by the French King, and many Nobles of France, who rode al
to Boloigne, and were there lodged.

On the xxv. of October King Henry returned again to Calleis, accompanied
with the French King, the King of Navarre, the Cardinal of Loraine, and many
other Dukes, Bishops and great estates of France, Gas^oine, Brytaine, and
Normandy: And the xxviij. of October, King Henry made the King of Navarre
Knight of the Garter: and the next day the French King with the King of
Navarre, and all the great Lords of France, rode again to Boloigne, and
King Henry of England rode with them to Sandingfielde, where he made to the
French King a costlye banquet, and there the three Kings departed like loving
brethren in great amity: and the xiiij. of Noue^ber King Henry landed at
Dover.

Richard Reynold: Nicholas Pinchon, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


John Martin Butcher.

Sir Stephen Pecocke Haberdasher, the 28. of October. Mayor.


King Henry kept his Christmasse at Greenewiche, and after Christmasse sir
Thomas Audeley Lord Keeper of the great Seal, was made Lord Chauncelor of
England, and then began a Parliament, in the which it was enacted, that no
person should appeal for any cause out of this Realm, to the Court of
Rome: and also, that Queen Katherine should from thenceforth be no more
called Queen, but Princess Dowager of Prince Arthur.

The twelfth of April being Easter even, the Lady 1533 Anno reg. 25
Anne Bolleine, who had been privily married to King Henry, went to her
Closet openly as Queen, and was proclaimed Queen of England.

The six and twentieth of April, Arthure Plantagenet son illegitime of King
Edward the fourth, was created Viscount Lisle at Bridewell.

The twelfth of May Pauier, town Clearke of London, hung himself.

The Kings highness addressed his letters to the Mayor and Communaltie of
London, signifying unto them, that his pleasure was to solempnize the
Coronation of his most dear and well-beloved wife Queen Anne at Westminster on
Whitsonday next ensuing, willing them to make preparation as well to fetch her
Grace from Greenewiche to the Tower by water, as to see the City garnished
with Pageants in places accustomed, for the honor of her Grace, when she
should be conveyed from the Tower to Westminster. Whereupon a common Counsel
was called, and commandment given to the Haberdashers, of which Craft the
Mayor was, that they should prepare a Barge for the Bachelors, with a Wafter,
and a Foyste, garnished with Banners, like as they use when the Mayor is
presented at Westminster, on the morrow after the feast of Saint Simon and
Jude. Also all other Crafts were commanded to prepare Barges, and to garnishe
them, not only with their Banners accustomed, but also to deck them with
Targets by the sides of the Barges, and to set up all such seemly Banners
and Bannerets, as they had in their hal^es, or could get to furnishe their
said Barges, and every Barge to have Minstrels, according to which
commandment great preparation was made for all things necessary for such a
noble triumph.

The nine and twentieth day of May being Thurseday* the Mayor and his brethren
all in Scarlet, and such as were knights had collars of Esses, and the
residue having great Chains, and the Counsel of the City assembled with
them at Saint Marie hill. And at one of the clock descended to the new steire
to their Barge, which was garnished with many goodly banners and streamers
and richly covered, in which Barge was Shalmes, Shagebushes* and diverse other
Instruments of Music, which played continually.

After that the Mayor and his brethren were in their barge, seeing, that the
companies to the number of fifty barges were ready to wait upon them* they
gave commandment to the companies, that no barge should row nearer to
another, than twice the length of the barge, and to see the order kept, there
were three Whirries prepared, and in every one of them two officers to call on
them to keep their order.

After which commandment given, they set forth in order, as hereafter is
described. First, before the Majors Barge was a Foiste, for a wafter full of
Ordinance, in which Foyste was a great redd^ Dragon continuallye ^^^^ng and
casting wild fire, and round about the said foiste stood terrible
monstrous and wild men casting fire,* and making hideous noise: next after the
foiste a good distaunce came the Majors Barge: on whose right hand ^^^ the
Bachelors Barge, in the which were Trum(...), and diverse other melodious
Instruments: the (...) of the said Barge and sail yardes and the top
^^^^elles were hanged with rich cloth of Gold and (...): at the Fore-shippe
and the Stern were two great banners rich beaten with the arms of the King
and the Queen: and on the soppe castle also was a long streamer newly beaten
with the said arms: the sides of the Barge was set full of Flagges and
Banners of the devices of the companyes of Haberdashers and Merchaunt
Adventurers, and the lasserers or cords were hanged with innumerable
Penselles, having little Belles at the ends, which made a goodlye noise, and
was a goodlye sight, wavering with the wind: on the out side of the barge
were three dozen Scutcheons in metal, of the Armos of the King and Queen
which were beaten upon square Buckeram divided, so that the right side had
the King* colors, and the left side the Queens, which Scutcheons were
fastened on the clothes of Gold and silver, hauging on the deckes: on the
left hand of the Mayor was an other Foyste, in the which was a mount, and on
the mount stood a white Faulcon crowned upon a root of Gold, environed
with white Roses and read, which was the Queens device: about which mount
sat Uirgins singing and playing melodiouslye: Next after the Mayor followed
his Fellowship the Haberdashers: next after them the Mercers: then the
Grocers, and so every company in his order, and last of all the Majors and
Sheriffs officers, every company having melody in their Barge by them selves,
and goodly garnished with Banne^s, and some covered with Sylke, and some with
Arras or such like, which was a goodly sight to behold: and in thy ^ or ^er
they rowed by Greenewiche to the point beyende Greenwiche, and there they
turned backward in an other order* that is to^ weete, the Majors and Sherifs
officers first, and the meanest Craft next, and so ascencendyng to the upper
most Craft in order, and the Mayor last, as thy go to Paul's at
Christmasse, and in that order they to wed down ward to Greenewiche town*
and there cast ancker, making great melody. At three of the clock, the
Queen apparelled in rich cloth of Gold, entered into her Barge, accompanied
with diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen, and incontinent the Citizens set forward in
their order, their Minstrels continually playing: and y^ Bachelors barge going
on the Queens right hand, which she took great pleasure to behold. About
the Queens barge were many noble men, as the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquis
Dorcet, the Earl of Wiltshire her father, the Earls of Arundale, Darby,
Rutland, Worcester, Huntington, Sussex, Oxforde, and many Bishops and Noble
men, every one in his Barge, which was a goodly sight to behold: she thus
being accompanied rowed toward the Tower: and in the mean way the Ships
which were commanded to lie on the shore for letting of the Barges, shot
diverse peales of Gunnes, and ere she landed, there was a marvelous shot out
of the Tower, I never heard the like: and at her landing, there met with her
the Lord Chamberlain with the officers of Arms, and brought her to the King,
which received her with loving countenance at the Posterne by the water side,
and kissed her, and then she turned back again, and thanked the Mayor and
the Citizens with many goodly words, and so entered into the Tower.

After which entrye the Citizens all this while houered before the Tower,
making great melody, and went not alande, for none were assigned to land but
the Mayor, the Recorder, and two Aldermen: but to speak of the people that
stood on every shore to behold this sight, he that sa^e it not will not
believe it.

On Friday at dinner served the King all such as were appointed by his
Highenesse to be Knights of the Bathe, which after dinner were brought to
their Chambers, and that night were bathed, and shriuen according to the old
usage of Englands, and the next day in the morning the King dubbed them
according to the ceremonies thereto belonging, whose names here after ensue
nineteen in number.

The Marquis Dorcet.

The Earl of Darby.

The Lord Clifford, son and heir to the Earl of Comberland.

The Lord Fitz Walter son and heir to the Earl of Huntington.

The Lord Mountague.

The Lord Vaux.

Sir Henry Parker son and heir to the Lord Merle.

Sir William Winsore son and heir to the Lord Winsore.

Sir John Mordant son and heir to the Lord Mordant.

Sir Frauncis Weston.

Sir Thomas Arondale.

Sir John Hudlestone.

Sir Thomas Poynings.

Sir Henry Sauell.

Sir George Fitz William of Lincolnshire.

Sir John Tindale.

Sir Tomas Ierney.

On Saturday the one and thirtith of May, the Queen The conueying of Queen
Anne through the City to Westminster.
was conveyed through London in order as follows.

To the intent, that the horses should not slide on the pauement, nor that
the people should be hurt by horses, and the high streets, where*throughe
the Queen should pass, were all graueled from the Tower unto Temple bar,
and rayled on each side, within which rail stood the Crafts along in their
order from Grace Church, where the Merchauntes of the Stiliarde stood until
the little Conduite in Cheap, where the Aldermen stood, and on the other side
of the street stood the Conestables of the city, apparelled in Ueluet and
Silk with great staves in their hands, to cause the people to give room,
and keep good order: and when the streets were somewhat ordered, the Mayor in
a gown of Crimosin velvet, and a rich collar of Esses, with two footmen
clothed in white and red damask, rode to the Tower, to give his attendaunce on
the Queen, on whom the Sherifes with their officers did awaite till they came
to the Tower hill, where they taking their leave rode down the high streets,
commanding the Conestables to see room and good order kept, and so went and
stood by the Aldermen in Cheap, and before the Queen with her train should
come, Grace-streete and Cornehill were hanged with fine Scarlet, Crimosin, and
other grayned clothes, and in some places with rich Arras, and the most part
of Cheap was hanged with cloth of Tisshew, Gold, Ueluet, and many rich
hangings which made a goodlye show, and all the windows, were replenished
with Ladies and Gentlewomen, to behold the Queen and her train, as they
should pass by. The first of the Queens company that set forward, were
twelve French men belonging to the French Embassadoure, clothed in contes of
blewe Ueluet, with sleeves of yellow and blew Ueluet, their horses trapped with
close trappers of blewe sarsenet powdered with white Crosses: After them marched
Gentlemen, Esquiers, Knights, two and two: after them the Judges: after them
the Knights of the Bathe in violet gowns with hoods purfled with Miniuer, like
Doctors: after them Abbots: then Barons: after them Bishops: the Earls and
the Marquesses: then the Lord Chanceloure of England: after him, the
Archebyshoppe of York, and the Embassadoure of Venice: after them the
Archebyshoppe of Caunterburie, and the Ambassador of France: after rode two
Esquyers of honor with robes of estate rolled and worn Bauldrike-wise about
their necks, with Cappes of estate, representing the Dukes of Normandy and
Aquitaine: after them rode the Mayor of London with his Mace, and Garter in his
Coat of Arms, which bare also his Mace of Westminster hall: after them rode
the Lord Wyllyam Howarde with the Marshalls rod deputy to his brother the Duke
of Norffolke, Marshall of England, which was Embassadoure then in France,
and on his right hand rode Charles Duke of Suffolk for that day high
Conestable of England, bearing the warder of silver appertayning to the office
of Conestableshippe, and all the Lords for the most part were clothed in
Crimosin Ueluet, and all the Queens servants or officers of Arms in
Scarlet: next before the Queen rode her Chancellor bare headed: the Sergeaunts
and Officers at Arms rode on both the sides of the Lords: then came the Queen
in a white Litter of white cloth of Gold, not covered nor bailled, which was
led by two Palfreys clad in white Damask down to the ground, head and
all, led by her footmen: she had on a Kertle of white cloth of Tissue,
and a Mantle of the same surred with Ermyn, her hair hangyng down: but on her
head, she had a coy^e with a Circlet about it full of rich stones: over
her was borne a Canapie of Cloth of Gold with four guylte staves, and four
silver Belles: for bearyng of the which Canapie, were appointed sixeteene
Knights, four to bear it one space on foot, and four an other space,
according to their own appointment: next after the Queen rode the Lord
Browghe her Chamberlayne: next after him Wyllyam Coffim, master of her horses,
leading a spare horse with a side Saddell, trapped down with cloth of Tissewe:
after him rode seven Ladies in Crimosin Ueluet, turned up with Cloth of
Gold and of Tissewe, and their horses trapped with Gold: after them two
Chariots covered with read cloth of Gold, in the first Chariote were two
Ladies, which were the old Duchess of Norffolke, and the old Marchioness
of Dorcet: in the second Chariot were four Ladies all in Crimosin Ueluet:
after them rode seven Ladies in the same suit, their horses trapped and all:
after them came the third Charyot all in white, with six Ladies in Crimosin
Ueluet: next to them came the fourth Chariot all red with eyghte Ladies also
in Crimosin: after whom followed thirty Gentlewomen all in Ueluet and Sylke,
in the Lyuerie of their Ladies, on whom they gave their attendaunce: after
them followed the Guarde in coats of Goldesmyths work, in which order they
rode forth till they came to Fan-churche, where was made a Pageaunt, all of
children apparelled like Merchantes, which welcomed her to the City, with
two proper propositions both in French and in English: and from thence she
rode unto Grace Church corner, where was a costlye and marvelous cunning
Pageaunt made by the Merchantes of the Stiliarde, therein was the mount
Pernassus with the fountain of Helicon, which was of white Marble, and four
streams without pype did rise an Ell high and met together in a little
cup above the fountain, which fountain ran abundantly with rackte
Reynishe Wine till night, on the mountain sat Apollo, and at his feet sat
Caliope: and on every side of the Mountain sat four Muses playing on
several sweet Instruments, and at their feet Epigrammes and Poesies were
written in golden Letters, in the which every Muse according to her property
praised the Queen.

From thence the Queen with her train passed to Leaden hall, where was a
goodly Pageaunte with a tipe and heavenly Rose, and under the tippe was a
goodly root of Gold, set on a little mountain environed with red Roses and
white, out of the typpe came down a Faulcon all white, and set upon the
root, and incontinent came down an Angel with great melody, and set a
close Crown of Gold on the Faulcons head: and in the same Pageant sat Saint
Anne with all her issue beneath her: and under Mary Cleophe sat her four
children, of the which children, one made a goodlye Oration to the Queen of
the fruitefulnesse of Saint Anne, and of her generation, trusting, that like
fruit should come of her. Then she passed to the Conduite in Cornehill,
where were the three Graces se^te in a Throne, before whom was the spring of
Grace, continually running wine: before the fountain sat a Poet, declaring the
property of every Grace, that done, every Lady by hirself according to her
property, gave to the Queen a several gift of Grace.

That done, she passed by the great Conduite in Cheap, which was newly
painted with arms and devises, out of the which Couduite, by a goodlye
fountain set at the end, ran continually Wine both white and Claret all
that afternoon: and so she rode to the Standarde, which was richely painted
with Images of Kings and Queens, and hanged with banners of Arms, and in the
top was marvelous sweet harmony both of Songs and Instruments.

Then she went forward by the Cross, which was newly guilte, till she came
where the Aldermen stood, and then Master Baker the Recorder, came to her
with low reverence, making a proper and brief proposition, and gave to her,
in the name of the City, a thousand Mark in Gold in a purse of Gold, which
she thankefullye accepted with many good words, and so rode to the little
Conduite, where was a rich Pageaunt full of melody and Songs, in which
Pageaunte were Pallas, Juno, and Venus, and before them stood Mercury, which
in the name of the three Goddesses, gave to her a Ball of Gold divided in
three, signifying three gifts which these three Goddesses gave to her, that is
to say, Wisdom, Riches, and Felicity.

As she entered into Pawles Gate, there was a pretty Pageant, in which sat
three Ladies richly clothed, and in a circle on their head was written Regina
Anna, prosper, proceed, and reign. The Lady in the midst had a Tablet, in the
which was written Veni amica, coronaberis, and under the Table sat an Angel
with a close Crown. And the Lady sitting on the right hand had a Tablet of
Silver, in which was written Domine dirige gressus meos. And the third Lady
had a Tablet of Gold, with letters of Azure written Confido in domino, and
under their feet was written

Regina Anna paris regis de sanguine natam,
Et paries populis aurea saecla tuis.
And these Ladies cast down Wafers, on the which the ^ayd two Uerses were
written.

From thence, she passed to the East end of Pawles Church against the School,
where stood a Scaffolde, and Children well apparelled, which said to her
diverse goodly Uerses of Poets translated into English, to the honor of the King
and her, which she highly commended. And then ^he came to Ludgate, which Gate
was new garnished with Gold and Bise, and on the Leads of Saint Martins Church
stood a goodly Queere of singing men and children, which sang new Ballets made
in praise of her grace.

After that she was past Ludgate, she proceeded toward Fleetestreete, where
the Conduite was newly painted, and all the Arms and angles refreshed, and the
Shalmes melodiously sounding. Upon the Conduite was made a Tower with four
turrets, and in every turret stood one of the cardinal virtues with their
tokens and properties, which had several speeches, promising the Queen never
to leave her, but to be ayding and comforting her: and in the midst of the
Tower closely was such several solemn instruments, that it seemed to be a
heavenly noise, and was much regarded and praised, and besides this, the
Conduite ran Wine, claret and read all the after noone, so she with all her
company, and the Mayor, rode forth to Temple Bar, which was newly painted and
repaired, where stood also diverse singing men and Children, till she came to
Westminster Hall, which was richly hanged with cloth of Arras, and newly
glased, and in the midst of the Hall she was taken out of her Litter, and so
led up to the high Deske under the cloth of estate, on whose left hand was a
Cupbord of ten stages high marvelous rich and beautiful to behold, and
within a little season was brought to the Queen with a solemn service in
great standing spice plates, a void of spice, and sutteltyes, with Ipocrase,
and other Wynes, which she sent down to her Ladies, and when the Ladies had
drunk, she gave hearty thanks to the Lords and Ladies, and to the Mayor, and
other that had given their attendance on her, and so withdrew hirselfe with a
few Ladies, to the White Hall, and so to her Chamber, and there shifted her,
and after went in her Barge secretly to the King to his Manor of
Westminster, where she rested that night.

On Whitsonday, the first of June, the Mayor cladde in Crimson Ueluet, with his
collar, and all the Aldermen Coronation of Queen Anne.
and Sheriffs in Skarlet, and the Counsel of the City, took their Barge at
the Crane by seven of the clock, and came to Westminster, where they were
welcomed, and brought into the Hall by Master Treasurer, and other of the
Kings house, and so gave their attendance, till the Queen should come forth:
between eight and nine of the Clock she came into the Hall, and stood under
the cloth of estate, and then came in the Kings Chapel, and the Monks of
Westminster, all in rich Coapes, and many Bishops and Abbots in Coapes and
Miters, which went into the midst of the Hall, and there stood a season, then
was there a ray cloth spread from the Queens standing in the Hall, through
the Palace and Sanctuary, which was rayled on both sides, to the high Altar
of Westminster, after that the ray cloth was cast, the Officers of Arms
appointed the order accustomed. First went Gentlemen, then Esquires, then
Knights, then Aldermen of London in their Cloakes of Scarlet, cast over their
Gowns of Scarlet. After them, the Judges in their Mantles of Scarlet, and
Coyfes: then followed the Knights of the Bath, being no Lords, every man
having a white lace on his left sleeue: then followed Barons and Uicountes in
their Parliament Roabes of Scarlet: after them, came Earls, Marquesses, and
Dukes in their Roabes of Estate, of Crimson Ueluet, furred with Ermin, poudered
according to their degrees. After them, came the Lord Chancellor in a Roabe of
Scarlet, open before, bordered with Lettice. After him, came the Kings
Chapel, and the Monks solemnly singing, with procession. Then came Abbots
and Bishops mitered, then Sergeants and Officers of Arms, then the Mayor of
London with his Mace, and Garter in his Coat of Arms, then the Marquess
Dorcet in his Roabe of Estate, which bare the Scepter of Gold, and the Earl of
Arundell, which bare the rod of Iuorie with the Dove both together, then
alone the Earl of Oxford, high Chamberlayne of England, which bare the Crown.
After him, the Duke of Suffolk in his Roabe of Estate, for that day being high
Steward of England, having a long white rod in his hand, and the Lord
William Haward with the rod of the Marshalship, and every Knight of the
Garter had on his collar of the order. Then proceeded forth the Queen in a
Circote and Roabe of purple Ueluet, furred with Ermine in her hear, coyfe, and
circlet, as she had the Saturday, and over her was borne the Canapie, by four
of the Cinque Ports, all in Chrimson, with points of blew and red hanging on
their sleeves, and the Bishops of London and Winchester bare up the lappes of
the Queens robe, and her train which was very long, was borne by the old
Duches of Norffolke. After her, followed Ladies being Lords wives, which had
circotes of Scarlet, with narrow sleeves, the breast all Letice, with bars of
powders according to their degrees, and over that, they had mantels of Scarlet
furred, and every mantel had Letice about the neck like a neckerchefe,
likewise poudered, so that by the pouderings, their degrees might be known.
Then followed Ladies being Knights wives, in gowns of Scarlet, with narrow
sleeves without traynes, only edged with Lettice, likewise had all the Queens
Gentlewomen.

When she was thus brought to the high place made in the midst of the Church
between the Queere and the high Altar, she was set in a rich Chair, and
after that she had rested a while, she descended down to the high Altar, and
there prostrated hirselfe, while the Bishop of Canterbury said certain
Collects over her. Then she rose, and the Bishop anointed her on the head and
on the breast, and then she was led up again to her Chair, where after diverse
orisons said, the Archbishop set the Crown of Saint Edward on her head, and
then delivered her the Scepter of gold in her right hand, and the rod of
Yuory with the Dove in yt left hand, and then all the Queere song Te Deum etc*
which done, the Bishop took off the Crown of Saint Edward being heavy, and
set on her head the* Crown made for her, and so went to mass, and when the
offering was begone, she descended down and offered being crowned, and so
ascended up again and sat in her Chair till Agnus, and then she went down,
and kneeled before the high Alter, where she received of the Archbishop the
holy Sacrament, and then went up to the place again. After that Mass was
done, she went to Saint Edwards Shrine, and there offered. After which
offering done, she withdrewe her into a little place made for that purpose on
the one side of the Queere: now in the mean season every Duchess put on her
Bonet a coronell of Gold wrought with flowers, and every Marchioness put on a
demi coronell of Gold, and every Countess a plain circle of Gold without
flowers, and every King at Arms put on a Crown of Copper and gilt, all which
were worn till night.

When the Queen had a little reposed her, the company returned in the same
order that they set forth, and y^ Queen went Crowned, and so did the Ladies
aforesaid: her right hand was sustained by the Earl of Wilshire her father,
and her left hand by the Lord Talbot, Deputy for the Earl of Shrewsburie, and
Lord Furniuall his Father: and when she was out of the Sanctuary within the
Palace, the Trumpets playde marvelous freshly, and so she was brought to
Westminster Hall, and so to her withdrawing Chamber, during which time, the
Lords, Judges, Mayor and Aldermen, put off their robes, mantles, and clokes,
and took their whodes from their necks, and cast them about their shoulders,
and the Lords sat only in their Circotes, and the Judges and Aldermen in
their Gowns, and all the Lords that served that day, served in their Circotes,
and their whodes about their shoulders. Also, diverse officers of the Kings
house being no Lords, had Circotes and whodes of Scarlet, edged with Miniuer,
as Treasurer, Comptroller, and Master of the Jewel house, but their Circotes
were not gilt.

While the Queen was in her Chamber, every Lord The setting at dinner of Qu.
Anne.
and other that ought to do service at the Coronation, did prepare them
according to their duty, as the Duke of Suffolk, high Steward of England,
which was richly apparelled, his Doblet and Jacket set with orient Pearl, his
Gown Chrimson Ueluet embrothered, his Courser trapped with a close trapper,
head and all to the ground of Chrimson Ueluet, set full of letters of Gold of
Goldsmiths work, having a long white rod in his hand. On his left (...) rode
the Lord William, Deputy for his brother, as Earl Marshall with the Marshals
rod, whose Gown was Chrimson Ueluet, and his Horse trapper purple Ueluet,
cut on white Satin, einbrothered with white Lions. The Earl of Oxford was
high Chamberlayne, the Earl of Essex Caruer, the Earl of Sussex Sewer, the
Earl of Arundell chief Butler, on whom, twelve Citizens of London did give
their attendance at the Cupbord: the Earl of Darby Cupbearer, the Uicount
Lisle Panter, the Lord Burgeyny chief Larder, the Lord Bray Almouer for him
and his copartners, and the Mayor of Oxforde kept the Buttrey bar, and
Thomas Wyat was chosen Ewerer for Sir Henry Wyat his Father. When all things
was ready and ordered, the Queen under her Canapye came into the Hall and
washed, and sat down in the midst of the Table under her cloth of Estate.
On the right side of her Chair, stood the Countess of Oxforde Widow, and on
her left hand stood the Countess of Worcester all the dynner season, which
diverse times in the dynner time did hold a fine cloth before the Queens face
when she list to spitte, or do otherwise at her pleasure: and at the Tables
end sat the Archbishop of Canterbury on the right hand of the Queen, and in
the midst, between the Archbishop and the Countess of Oxforde, stood the
Earl of Oxforde, with a white staff all dynner time, and at the Queens feet
under the Table sat two Gentlewomen all Dinner time. When all these things
were thus ordered, came in the Duke of Suffolk, and the Lord William Howarde
on Horssebacke, and the Serieants of Arms before them, and after them the
Sewer, and then the Knights of the Bath, bringing in the first course, which
was eight and twenty dishes, beside sutelties, and Ships made of Wax,
marvelous gorgeous to behold, all which time of service, the Trumpettes
standing in the window, at the nether end of the Hall played. When she was
served of two dishes, then the Archbishops service was set down, whose Sewer
came equal with the third dish of the Queens service on his left hand.
After that the Queen and the Archbishop were served, the Barons of the Ports
began the Table on the right hand next the wall, then at the Table sat the
Masters and Clearks of the Chancerie, and beneath them other Doctors and
Gentlemen. The Table next the wall on the left hand by the Cupbord, was begone
by the Mayor and Aldermen, the Chamberlayne, and Counsel of the City of
London, and beneath them sat substantial Merchantes, and so downward other
Worshipful persons. At the Table on the right hand in the midst of the Hall
sat the Lord Chancellor, and other Temporal Lords: on the right side of the
Table in their Circotes, and on the left side of the same Table sat Bishops
and Abbots in their Parliamente Roabes: beneath them, sat the Judges,
Serieants, and the Kings Counsel: beneath them, the Knights of the Bathe. At
the Table on the left hand in the middle part, sat Dutcheses, Marqueses,
Counteses, Baronesses in their Roabes, and other Ladies in Circotes, and
Gentlewomen in Gowns, all which Gentlewomen and Ladies sat on the left side
of the Table along, and none on the right side, and when all were thus set,
they were incontinent ^er^^d so quickly, that it was marvelous, for the
seruitors gave so good attendance, that meat, nor drink, nor any thing else
needed to be called for, which in so great a multitude was marvel. As touching
the fare, there could be devised no more costly dishes, nor suttelties The
Mayor of London was served with four and thirty dishes at two ^^^rses, and so
were all his breethren* and such as sat a^ his Table. The Queen had at her
second course four and twentye dishes, and thirty at the third course, and
between the last courses, the Kings of Arms Crowned, (...) Officers of Arms
(...) ^arges in three parts ^^ the Hall, and after stood in their place,
which was in the bekens of the Kings ^^n^h: and on the right hand out of the
Clayste^ of Saint Stephons Chapel was made a little close^, in which, the
King with diverse Ambassadors stood to behold the service, the Duke of
Suffolk, and the Lord William, rode oftentimes about ye Hal, cheering the
Lords, Ladies, and Mayor, and his brethren. After they in the Hall had dined,
they had Wafers and Ipocrase, and then they washed; and were commanded to rise
and stand still in their places before the tables or on the forms till the
Queen had washed. When she had taken Wafers and Ipocrase, the Table was taken
up, and the Earl of Rutland brought up the surnape, and laid it at the
boordes end, which immediately was drawn and cast by Master Read, Marshall
of the Hall, and the Queen washed, and after the Archbishop, and after, the
surnape was withdrawn: then she rose, and stood in the midst of the hall
place, to whom, the Earl of Sussex in a goodly spice Plate, brought a void
of spice and co^fections. After him, the Mayor of London brought a standing
cup of Gold, set in a cup of Assay of Gold, and after that she had drunk,
she gave the Mayor the cup, with the cup of Assey, because there was no
cover, according to the claim of the City, thanking him and all his breethren
of their pain. Then she under her Canapie departed to her Chamber, and at the
entry of her Chamber, she gave the Canapie with belles and all to the Barons
of the Ports according to their claim, with great thanks: then the Mayor of
London bearing his cup in his hand, with his breethren, went through the
Hall to their Barge, and so did all other Noblemen and Gentlemen, for it was
sire of the Clock.

On Mondaye, were the Justes at the Tilt before the Iusting.
Kings Gate, where the Mayor and his breethren had a godly standing, but there
were sew Spears broken, by reason the Horses would not coape.

On Wednesday, the King sent for the Mayor and ^^^ breethren to Westminster,
and there he himself gave (...) them hearty thanks, with many* goodly words.

On Midsommer even deceassed Mary the French Queen, Mary King Henry's sister
deceassed.
^^^er to King Henry the eyghte, and wife to Charles Duke of Suffolk, and she
was buried at Saint Edmondsburie.

The fifth of July, Queen Katherine was proclaimed Prince Arthures widow.

The seventh of July two Merchants were murdered on the Thamis by one Woolfe
and his wife.

It was this year enacted, that Butchers should sell Beef and Mutton sold
by vvaighte.
their Beef and Mutton by waighte: Beef for a half penny the younde, and
Mutton for three far things, which being devised for the great commodity of
the realm, (as it was thought) has proved far otherwise, for at that time
fat ^ren were sold for six and twenty shillings and eighte ^^^ce the
piece, fat Weathers for three shillings and four pence the piece, fat
Calves of the like price, a fat Lamb for twelve pence. The Butchers of London
sold penny pieces of Beef for the relief* of the pore, every piece two pound
and a half, sometime three pound for a penny: and thirteen, sometime fourteen
of these pieces for twelve pence: Mutton eight pence the quarter, and an
hundred weight of beef ^^ four shillings and eight pence: what price it has
grown to sense, it needs not to be set down. At this time also, and not
before, were foreign Butchers permitted to ^^ll their flesh in Leaden hall
market of London.

The seventh of September, being Sunday, between Birth of Lady Elizabeth and
her christning.
^^ree and four of the clock at afternoon, the Queen was ^^ly^ered of a
fair Lady, for whose good deliueraunce^ Te (...) was sung incontinently, and
great preparation was ^^de for the Christning. The Mayor and his brethren and
^^^tie of the chief Citizens were commanded to be at the ^hristning the
Wednesday following: Upon which day ^^e Mayor sir Stephen Pecocke in a gown
of Criniosin Uel^^t, with his collar of Esses, and all the Aldermen in Scar^^^
with collars and chains, and all the Counsel of the Ci(...) with them took
their Barge at one of the clock, and the (...) had another Barge, and so rowed
to Greenewiche, where were many Lords Knights, and Gentlemen assembled: all the walls between the Kings palace and the Friars, were hanged with Arras,
and all the way strewed with grieve rushes. The Friars Church was also hanged
with rich Arras: the Font was of silver* and stood in the midst of the
Church three steps high, which was covered with a fine cloth: and diverse
Gentlemen with apro^^^ and towels about their necks gave attendance about
it, that no filth should come to the font: over it hung a square Canapie of
Crimosin Satin friuged with Gold, about it was a rail covered with red Say
between the Queere and body of the Church was a close place with a pan of
fyr^ to make the child ready in: when all these things were ^^dered, the
child was brought to the Hall, and then euery^ man set forward: first the
Citizens two and two, then Gentlemen, Esquiers, and Cha^plaines, next after
them the Aldermen and the Mayor alone, and next the King^^ Council, then the
Kings Chapel in Coapes, then Barons, Bishops, Earls, the Earl of Essex
bearing the covered Basins guilte, after him the Marquess of Excest^^ with a
Taper of Uirgin Ware, next him the Marquess Dercet bearing the Salt, behind
him the Lady Mary of Norffolke, bearing the Criso^e, which was very ^^^he of
Pearl and Stone. The old Duchess of No^ffolke (...) the child in a Mantle
of purple Uel^e^ with a long train surred with Ermin. The D. of Norffolke with
his Marshals rod went on the right hand of the said Duchess, and the Du^^^ of
Suffolk on the left hand* and before them went officers of Arms, ye Countess
of K^^^ bare the long train of y^ childs Mantle, and mean between the
child and the Countess of Kent went the Earl of (...) and the Earl of Darby
on either side, supporting the said train in the midst: over the child was
borne a rich Canapieby the Lord Rochforde, the Lord Husse, the Lord William,
Howard, and the Lord Thomas Howard the elder. After the child followed many^
La^y^s ^ Gentlewome^* When ye child was come to the Church door, the Bishop of
London met it with diverse Bishops and Abbots mytered, and began the
obseruaunces of the Sacrament. The Godfather* was Lord Tho^ Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Godmothers were the old Duchess of Norffolke, and the old
Marchioness of Dorcet widows, and the child was named Elizabeth, and after
that al things were done at the Church door, the child was brought to the Font
and Christened, and that done, Garter chief King of Arms cried aloude, God of
his infinite goodness send prosperous life and long to the high and mighty
Princess of England Elizabeth, and then the Trumpets blewe, then ye child was
brought up to ye Altar, and the Gospel said over it. After that immediately the
Archebyshop of Canterbury confirmed it, the Marchioness of Excester being
Godmother, then the Bishop of Canterbury gave unto the Princess a standing
Cup of Gold, the Duchess of Norffolke gave to her a standing Cup of Gold
fretted with Pearl, ye Marchioness of Dorcet gave 3. guilt bolles pounsed,
with a cover, and the Marchioness of Excester gave 3. standing boules graven
al guilt with a cover. Then was brought in Waffers, Confects, and I pocrase, in
such plenty, y^ every man had as much as he would desire: then they set
forward ye Trumpets before, going in the same order toward the kings palace, as
they did when they came thitherward, saving that ye gifts that ye Godfather and
Godmothers gave, were borne before the child by 4. persons, that is to say,
first sir John Dudley bare the gift of the Lady of Excester, the L. Thomas
Howard the yo^ger, bare the gift of the Lady Dorcet, the Lord Fitz Walter bare
the gift of the Lady of Norffolke, and the Lord of Worcester bare the gift
of the Archebyshop of Canterbury: and all the one side (as they went) was full
of staffe-torches, to the number of five hundredth borne by the Guarde, and
other of the Kings servants: and about the child were many other proper
Torches borne by Gentlemenne. And in this order they brought the Princess to
the Queens Chamber door, and then departed.

The ^aior went to the Kings Chamber, and tarryed there a while with his
breethren the Aldermen, and at the last, the Dukes of Norffolke and Suffolk
came out from the King, and reported to the Mayor and his brethren, that the
King thanked them heartily, and commanded them to give them thanks in his name,
and from thence they were had to the Seller and drank, and so went to their
Barge.

The xxiij. of November being Sunday, on a Scaffolde Holy Maid of Kent.
before the Cross at Paul's, there stood a Nun professed in the Priorie of
Saint Sepulcher in Caunterburie, named Elizabeth Barton, with sundry other
persons, and the Bishop of Bangor, late Abbot of Hyde, there preaching, showed
their offenses, from whence they were committed to the Tower of London.

The xxviij. of Januarye, a great fish was taken at Black wall, called a
Whale, which was brought to Westminster to the King, and so back to Broken
Wharfe, and there cut out.

The first of April, Woolfe and his wife were hanged 1534 Wolf and his
wife hanged.
on two Gibbets, at the turning tree in Lambeth Marshe, for murdering the two
Merchant strangers aforesaid.

The xx. of April Elizabeeh Barton a Nun professed at The holy Maid of Kent
and other hanged and headed.
Saint Sepulchers in Canterbury, Edward Bocking, and John Deering, two Monks
of Christ's Church in Canterbury, Hughe Rich, warden of the Friars Obseruants
in Canterbury, and Richard Risbe and another of his fellows of the same house.
Richard Master Parson of Aldington in Kent, and Henry Gold Pryest, were
drawn from the Tower of London to Tyborne, and there hanged and headed, etc.
for sundry conspiracies in the matter of divorce between the Kings Majesty
and Queen Katherine. At which time were also attainted of misprision by act of
Parliament for the same matter, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and John
Adeson his Chaplain, Tho. Abell Priest, Thomas Gold Gentleman, and Thomas
Laurence, Anno reg. 26
Register to the Archdeacon of Canterbury.

The ninth of July, Lord Dacres of the North was arraigned Lord Dacres of the
North arraigned.
at Westminster, of high treason, where he so wittily confuted his accusers,
that to their great shame he was found not guilty.

The eleauenth of August, was all the places of the Obseruant Friars houses
suppressed.
Friars, as Grenewich, Canterbury, Richmont, Newarke, and Newcastell put
down, and Austen Friars set in their places, and the Obseruants were put in
places of the Gray Friars.

The fourteenth of August was a great fire at Temple Bar Fire at Temple Bar.
and certain persons burned.

The sixeteenth of Auguste, was burned the Kings Stable The Kings Stable brent.
at Charing Cross called the Mewes, wherein was burned many great horses, and
great store of Hay.

The one and twentieth of September, Doctor Taylour Thomas Cro^vvell Master of
the Rolls.
Master of the Rolls, was discharged of that office, and Thomas Cromwell
sworn in his place the ix. of October.

The Earl of Kildare dyed prisoner in the Tower of London, and his son
Thomas Fitz Garet rebelled in Irelande, slew Doctor Allen Bishop of Deueling,
and took the kings Ordinance, wherefore the King sent thither sir William
Skeuington with a company of soldiers.

Nicolas Leueson: William Denham, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. The
Popes authority abrogated.


Sir John Champneis Skinner, the 28. of October.

In November, was held a Parliament at Westminster, wherein the Pope with all
his authority was clean banished this Realm, and order taken, that he
should no more be called Pope but Bishop of Rome, and the King to be reputed
and taken as supreme head of the Church of England, having full authority
to reform all errors, heresies First fruits and tenths given to the King.
1535 Anno reg. 27 Charter house Monks.
and abuses of the same. Also the first fruits and tenths of all spiritual
dignities and promotions, were granted the king, with a subsidy of the laity of
twelve pence in y^ pound, with a fifteenth and a tenth.

The nine and twentieth of April, the Prior in the Charter house at London, the
Prior of Beuall, the Prior of Exham, Reynoldes a brother of Sion, and John
Hail Uicar of Thistleworth, were all condemned of Treason, who were drawn,
hanged and quartered at Tyborne the fourth of May, their heads and quarters set
on the gates of the City al save one quarter which was set on the
Charterhouse at London.

The eighte of May, the King commanded al about his Polled heads. commanded*
Court to poll their heads, and to give them example, he caused his own head
to be polled, and from thence forth his bearde to be notted, and no more
shaven. Hollanders condemned for heretics.


The five and twentieth day of May was in Saint Paul's Church at London
examined nineteen men and six women borne in Holland, whose opinions were,
first, that in Christ is not two natures, God and Man: secondely, that Christ
took neither flesh nor blood of the Uirgin Mary: thirdlye, that children
borne of Infidels shall be saved: fourthly, that baptism of Children is to
none effect: fifthly, that the Sacrament of Christ's body is but bread only:
sixthly, that he who after his Baptism sins wittingly, sins deadly, and
cannot be saved. Fourteen of them were condemned, a man and a woman of them
were burned in Smithfielde, the other twelve were sent to other towns there to
be brent. Charter house Monks executed.


The eighteenth of June, three Monks of the Charterhouse at London, named
Exmew, Middlemore, and Nidigate were drawn to Tyborne and there hanged and
quartred. Bishop of Rochester beheaded.


The two and twentieth of June, Doctor John Fisher Bishop of Rochester was
beheaded on the Tower hill, his head was set on London Bridge, and his body
buried within Barking Curchyard.

The sixte of July, sir Thomas Moore was beheaded on Sir Thomas Moore beheaded.
the Tower hill, for denial of the Kings Supremacy: and then the body of
Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester was taken up and buried with sir Thomas
Moore in the Tower.

Doctor Fox the Kings Almoner was made Bishop of Hereforde: and Hugh
Latimer Bishop of Worcester, the black Friar of Bristowe, was made Bishop
of Rochester.

In August the Lord Thomas Gerard son to the earl of Kildare, was taken in
Ireland, and sent to the Tower of London*

In October the King sent Doctor Lee and other to visit Abbeys* visited.
the Abbeys, Priories and Nunneries in England, who put forth all religious
persons that would go, and all that were under the age of four and twenty
years, and closed up the residue that would remain, and took order, that
no man should come to the houses of women, nor women to the houses of men,
but only to hear their service: all religious men that departed, the Abbot
or Prior to give them for their habit a Priests gown, and forty shyllyngs
of money: the Nuns to have such apparel as Secular women wear, and to go
where they would. He took out of Monasteries and Abbeys, their relics and
chiefest Jewels.

Humfrey Monmouth: John Cotes, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


These Sheriffs in the beginning of their year put away twelve Sergeants and
twelve Yeomen, till they were forced by a Court of common Council to take
them again.

Sir John Allen being one of the Kings Council, was at the Kings request,
chosen Mayor of London.

Sir John Allen Mercer, the 28. of October. Mayor.


This sir John Allen when he deceassed in Anno 1544. Charitable deeds of sir
John Allen.
and had been twice Mayor of London, and of Council with the King, as is
aforesaid, he gave to the City of London a rich collar of Gold, to be worn
by the Mayor, which Collar was first worn by sir William Laxton on Saint
Edwards day, to the election of the new Mayor, who gave to every Ward in
London twenty pound to be distributed to the pore householders, besides to one
hundredth and twenty persons, three score men every of them a gown of broad
cloth, and a black cappe, and threescore women, to every of them a gown of
the like cloth, and a white kerchiefe.

The eleauenth of November, was a great Procession Procession.
at London of all the religious men, three Bishops, and four Abbots mytered,
which was for joy the French King was recovered of his health.

In the month of December, the names of all Chauntries Names of Chauntries.
were taken, and who had the gift of them.

The eighte of Januarie dyed Lady Katherine Dowager Katherine Dovvager de
ceased.
at Kimbalton, and was buried at Peterborowe.

The nine and twentieth of January Queen Anne was delivered of a child before
her time, which was borne dead.

In a Parliament begone in the month of Februarye, Aparliament.
was granted to the King and his heirs al religious houses Small houses
suppressed. 1536 Anno reg. 28
in the Realm of England, of the valewe of two hundred pound and under, with all lands and goods to them belonging: the number of these houses then
suppressed, were 376. the value of their lands then 32000* pound, and more by
year, the mouable goods (as they were sold, Robin Hoods penniworths) 10000.
pound, the religious were turned out to the world more than 10000.

On May day was a great iusting at Greenewich, where were Chalengers, the
Lord Rocheford and other, and Defendors, Iustes at Grenevviche.
Henry Norice and other. From this Iustes King Henry suddenly departed to
Westminster, having only with him six persons, of which sudden departure many
men marvelled.

On the next morrow, the Lord Rocheford, brother to the Queen, and Henry
Norrice, were brought to the Tower of London prisoners. Also the same day,
about five of the clock in the afternoon, Queen Anne Bolleine was brought to
the Tower of London, by sir Thomas Audley Lord Chancelour, the Duke of
Norffolke, Thomas Cromwell Secretary, and sir William Kingston Constable of the
Tower, and when she came to the Tower gate, entering in, she fell on her knees
before the said Lords, beseeching God to help her as she was not guilty of
that whereof she was accused, and then desired the said Lords to beseech the
Kings Grace to be good unto her, and so they left her there prisoner.

On the xv. of May Queen Anne was arraigned in the Tower of London on a
Scaffold for y^ purpose made in y^ kings Hall, before the Duke of Norffolke,
who sat under ye cloth of Estate as high Steward of England, with the Lord
Chancellor on his right hand, the Duke of Suffolk on his left hand, with
Marquesses and Lords, etc. and the Earl of Surrey sat before the Duke of
Norffolke his father, as Earl Marshall of England. The Kings commission being
read, the Connestable of the Tower, and the Lieutenant, brought the Queen to
the bar, where was made a Chair for her to sit down in, and there her
indictment was read, whereunto she made so wise and discrete answers, that she
seemed fully to clear hirselfe of all matters laid to her charge: but being
tried by her Peers, whereof the Duke of Suffolk was chief, she was by them
found guilty, and had judgment pronounced by the Duke of Norffolke: and
immediately, the Lord Rochford the Queens brother was likewise arraigned and
condemned: the Mayor of London, his breetherne the Aldermen, the Wardens, and
four persons more of every the twelve principal companyes being present. The
xvij. of May, the Lord Richford, brother to the Queen, Henry Norris, Mark
Smeton, William Brierton, and Francis Weston, all of the Kings privy Chamber,
about matters touching the Queen, were beheaded on the Tower hill, the Lord
Rochfords body with the head was buried in the Chapel of the Tower, the other
four in the Churchyard there. On the xix. of May Queen Anne was on a Scaffold
(made for that purpose) upon the green within the Tower of London, beheaded
with the sword of Caleis, by the hands of the hangman of that Town: her body
with the head was buried in the Queere of the Chapel in the Tower.

The xx. of May, the King married Lady Jane, daughter King Henry married Lady
Jane.
to Sir John Seymour Knight, which at Whitsontide was openly showed as Queen,
and on Tuesday in the Whitson week, Sir Edward Seymour was created Uicount
Beauchamp, and Sir Walter Hungerford made Lord Hungerford.

The eight of June began a Parliamente, and the Articles of Religion devised
by the King.
Clergy held a Convocation in Paul's Church, where after much disputing, and
debating of matters, they published a Book of Religion, entitled, Articles
devised by the Kings highness. On Saint Peter's night, the King and Queen
stood at the Mercers Hall, and saw the watch.

The xxix. of June, the King held a great iusting and triumph at Westminster,
where were ordained two Lighters made Triumph at Westminster.
like Ships to fight upon the water, one of the which brast in the midst,
whereby one Gates Gentleman, a servant of Master Kneuits, was drowned in his
harneis. In the other, a Gunne brast her Chamber, and maimed two of ye mariners.

Thomas Cromwell, Secretary to the King, and Master of the Rolls, was made
Lord Keeper of the privy Seal.

The ix. of July, the Lord Fitzwaren was created Earl of Bath, and ye morrow
after, Thomas Cromwell was made Lord Cromwell. The xviij. of July, Lord Thomas
Cromwell Thomas Cromwell Lord privy Seal, vicar general.
was made Knight, and high vicar general over the Spiritualty under the King,
and sat diverse times in the Convocation among the Bishops, as head over them.

The xxij. of July, Henry Duke of Richmond and Somerset, Henry Duke of
Richmount.
Earl of Northampton, a Bastard son of King Henry, borne of the Lady
Taileboise, that time called Elizabeth Blunt, dyed at Saint James, and was
buried at Thetford in Norffolke. This month of July, Lord Thomas Howarde, Lord
Thomas Howard sent to the Tovver.
youngest brother to the Duke of Norffolke, was sent to the Tower of London,
for making a privy contract of Matrimony with the Lady Margaret Douglas,
daughter to ye Queen of Scotts, by the Earl of Anguish, and niece to King
Henry of England: the said Lord Thomas was attaint by Parliament, and also the
said Lady Margaret Douglas was after committed to the Tower for the same.

In September, Thomas Cromwell Lord privy Seal, and Uizgerent, sent out
under the Kings Spiritual Seal, certain Injunctions to the Prelates and
Clergy of the Realm, charging Curates to preach and to teach their
parishners, the Pater noster, Aue, and Creed, the Commandments, Pater noster
creed and commandments.
and articles of ye faith in English, with other articles.

In the beginning of October, at a Sise for the Kings Commotion in
Lincolneshire.
Subsidy kept in Lincolneshire, the people made an insurrection, and gathered
nigh twenty thousand persons, who took certain Lords and Gentlemen of the
Country, causing them to be sworn to them upon certain Articles which they
had devised, and such as refused to swear, they kept prisoners, and beheaded
a Priest, who was the Bishop of Lincolnes Chancellor. Against those, the King
did send the Commotion appeased.
Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Shrewshurie, and the Earl of Rutland, with a
strong power, whereof when the Rebels heard, they desired pardon, brake up
their army, and departed home, but their Captains were apprehended and
executed.

The ix. of October, a Priest and a Butcher were hanged A Priest and a Butcher
executed.
at Windsore, for words speaking in the behalf of the Lincolneshiremen, ye
Butcher wished ye good fellows (as he termed them) in Lincolneshire, to have
the flesh on his stall, rather than to sell it at such price as he was offered:
the Priest standing by, likewise wished them to have it, for he said they had
need of it.

The men of Lincolneshire being pacifyed, within six days Commotion in
Yorkshire.
after began an insurrection in Yorkshire for the same causes: there people
gathered to the number of forty thousand, who took the Archbishop of York,
and the Lord Darcy, and caused them to be sworn to their party.

Against those Rebels, the King sent the Duke of Norffolke, the Duke of
Suffolk, the Earl of Shrewshurie, and the Marquess of Excester with a great
Army, with whom a Battle was appointed to have been fought on the even of
Saint Simon and Jude, but as God would, there fell such rain the night
before, that the two Armies could not meet, whereupon, they desired the Duke
of Northfolke to sue unto the Kings Majesty for their pardon, and that they
might have their liberties, etc. which the Duke promised, and rode post to
the King then lying at Windesore, to know his pleasure, and so appeased them.
Sir Robert Ask, Commotion appeased.
that was chief of this Rebellion, came to London, and was not only pardoned,
but rewarded with great gifts.

Sir Ralph Euers kept Skarbrow Castle in the North, being Sir Ralph Euers his
good service in the North.
six weeks beseeged by the Rebels, twentye days whereof, he and all his
company (which were his only friends servants and tenants, and served for
good will to him) were forced to sustain themselves with bread and water, and
yet kept the same safe to the end of the said Rebellion, and so delivered it to
King Henry, who sent him soon after to serve in the bordures against
Scotland, where in great credit he continued his service, keeping the Scotts
without doing hurt to England, and with such obedience of them, as within
twenty miles of the bordures of Scotland fore against him, there was not a
Scotte but at his commandment, and so continued till he was killed in Anno
1545.

Robert Paget Mer. Tailor: William Bowyer, the 28. of Se. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Ralph Warreine Mercer, the 28. of October.

The xij. of November, Sir Thomas Newman Priest, bare a faggot at Pawles
Cross, for singing Mass with good ale. Penance at Paul's cross.


The xiij. of November, Master Robert Pagington a Mercer of London, was slain
with a gunne, as he was going to Robert Pagington murdered.
morrow Mass to Saint Thomas of Akers, now called the Mercers Chapel, but
the murderer was never openly known, till by his own confession made when he
came to the Gallows at Banbery, where he was hanged for felony.

The 22. of December, the Thames being frozen, the king and Queen Jane rode
through London to Greenewich.

The third of February, was Thomas Fitzgarret, son The Barle of Kildare and
fine of his Uncles executed.
and heir to the Earl of Kildare, beheaded, and fi^e of his Unckles drawn,
hanged, and quartered at* Tiborne for Treason. In the same month, Nicholas
Musgraue, Thomas Gilby, and other, stirred a new Rebellion, and beseeged the A
new commotion in Yorkshire. Another conspiracy.
City of Carelile, from whence they were driven, and many of them taken and
put to death. Also the same month, Sir Francis Bigot, Sir Robert Constable,
and other, beganne^ conspiracy, and for the same were attaynted.

The xxix. of March, were twelve men of Lincoln drawn 1537
to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered, five were priests, and sea^en
were lay men, one was an Abbot, a Suffragan, Lincolneshir^ men executed.
Doctor Mackerell, another was the Uicar of Louthe in Lincolneshire, and two
Priests.

In April, through certain commissions sent into Sommersetshire Anno reg. 29
A commotion in Sommersetshire.
to take up Corn, the people began to make an insurrection, which was by
Master Pawlet and other alayed, the beginners to the number of threescore were
condemned, whereof fourteen were hanged and quartered, one of them was a woman.

In June, the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussy, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Thomas
Percy, Sir Francis Bigot, Sir Stephen Hamelton, Sir John Bulmer and his wife,
William Lomley, Nicholas Tempest Esquier, Robert Ask, William Thurst Abbot of
Fountaynes, Adam Sodbury Abbot of Ger^ax, the Abbot of Rivers, William Would
Prior of Birlington, were all put to death: Sir Robert Constable at Hull, over
the gate called Beuerley gate: Ask, hanged in chains on a Tower at York:
Margaret Cheyny, otherwise Lady Boulmer, burned in Smithfield: Lord Darcy
beheaded at Tower hill: Lord Hussy at Lincoln, and the other, six in number,
suffered at Tiborne.

The xxvj. of August, the Lord Cromwell, Lord privy Seal, was made Knight of
the Garter.

The xij. of October, about two of the clock in the morning, Prince Edward
borne.
was borne at Hampton Court Prince Edward, and Queen Jane his mother left her
life the xiiij. of October. The xviij. of October, ye Prince was made Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester.

Edward Seymour Lord Beauchamp, the Queens brother, was made Earl of
Hertford, and Sir William Fitz William Lord Admiral, was made Earl of
Hampton, and Master Pawlet was made Uiztreasurer, Sir John Russell Comptroller
of the kings house, Master Henedge, Master Long, Master Kneuet of the Kings
privy Chamber, Knights, Master Coffin* Master Listar, and Master Seimour
the Queens brother, Knights.

John Gresham: Thomas Lewen, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Richard Gresham Mercer, the 28. of October.

The xviij. of October, Edward Uiscount Beauchamp was created Earl of
Hertford, and Sir William Fitz william States created.
Lord Admiral, was created Earl of Southampton, at Hampton Court. The same
day, and in the same place, were made these Knights, Sir Thomas Hennedge, Sir
Thomas Seymer, Sir Richard Long, Sir William Coffin, Sir Michaell Listar, and
Sir Henry Kneuet.

On Alhallowen even, Lord Thomas Howard, brother to Lord Thomas Howard
deceassed.
the Duke of Norffolke, dyed prisoner in the Tower of London, and was buried at
Thetford, and then the Lady Margaret Douglas was pardoned, and releassed out of
the Tower.

The xij. of November, the corpse of Queen Jane was with great solemnity
conuayde from Hampton Court toward Windsore, and there buried.

The xxiiij. of February, being Sunday, the Roode of Roode of grace shevved at
Povvles.
Boxley in Kent, called the Roode of Grace, made with diverse vices, to move the
eyes and lips, was showed at Powles Cross by the Preacher, which was Bishop
of Rochester, and there it was broken, and plucked in pieces.

The xxv. of February, Sir John Allen Priest, and also an Irish Gentleman of
the Garets, were hanged and quartered at Tiborne.

The second of March, the Image of the Roode called Saint Savior at Bermondsey
Abbey in Southwarke, was taken down Saint Savior in Southvvarke.
by the Kings commandment.

The xxj. of March, Henry Harfam Customer of P^^m^^^^^, and Thomas Ewell, were
hanged and quartered at Tiborne.

The xxij. of May, Friar Forest was hanged by the middle in a chain of Iron,
and then brent in Smithfield, for denying 1538 Anno reg. 30 Friar Forest brent.
the King to be supreme head of the Church etc. with him was brent the Image of
Daruell Gatherine of Wales, and the next night following, the Roode at Saint
Margaret Paitins by Tower street, was broken all to p^eces, with his
Tabernacle that he stood in.

The xxvij. of May, was a great fire in Saint Margaret Fire in R^^d^ Lane.
Patins Parish among the Basketmakers, where were brent and perished in three
hours, above a dozen houses, and nine persons clean brent to death.

Battle Abbey, Martin Abboy, Stra^ford Abbey, Lewis, and Abbeys suppressed.
other, were suppressed to the Kings use.

The Images of our Lady of Walsingham and Ipswich were brought up to London,
with all the Jewels that hung about them, and diverse other Images both in
England and Wales, whereunto any common Pilgrimage was used, for a^oy^ng of
Idolatry, all which were burnt at Chelsey by the Lord privy seal.

The ix. of August, Edmond Conisby, one of the grooms of the Kings Chamber,
was executed at Tiborne, for counterfeting the Kings Seal manuell.

The first of September being Sunday, one Gratnell, Hangman hanged.
Hangman of London, and two other, were hanged at the Wrestling place by
Clarken well, for robbing a Booth in Bartholmew Fair.

The second of September, Edward Clifford Gentleman, was executed at Tiborne,
for counter^etting the Kings privy Signet.

This month of September, Thomas Cromwell Lord privy Seal, Uizgerent to the
Kings highness, sent forth The Bible in every Church to be read.
injunctions to all Bishops and Curats through ye Realm, charging them to see
that in every parish Church, the Bible of the largest volume, printed in
English, were placed, for all men to read on: and that a Book of Register
were also Register book in every Church to be kept.
provided and kept in every parish Church, wherein shall be written every
Wedding, Christning, and Burying within the same parish forever.

Saint Austi^^ Abbey at Canterbury was suppressed, and the Shriue and goods
taken to the Kings it ^easurie* as also the Shrine of Thomas Becket in the
Priory of Christ Church, Thomas Becket ^^ent.
was likewise taken to the Kings use, and his bones scull and all, which was
there found, with a piece broken out by the wound of his death, were all brent
in the same Church by the Lord Cromwell. The Monks there were commanded to
change their habites etc.

The xxj. of October, the Church of Thomas Becket in London called the
Hospital of Saint Thomas of Akers, was suppressed.

William Wilkinson: Nicholas Gibson, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Forman Haberdasher, the 28. of October.

This Nicholas Gibson Grocer, Sheriff of London, builded a free School at
Radcliffe, near unto London, appoynting Free School and Alms houses at
Radcliffe.
to the same for the instruction of threescore poor men's children, a
Schoolemayster and Usher, with a stipend of ten pound by the year to the
Master, and six ^. xiij ^. iiij ^. to the Usher. He also builded there
certain Alms houses for fourteen poor and aged persons, who quarterly*
receive six shillings eight pence the piece for ever.

The fifth of November, were Henry Marquess of Excester Earl of Devonshire,
and Sir Henry Poole Knight, Lord Mo^ntacute, and Sir Edward Neuill, sent to the
Tower, who were endited, for devising to maynteyne promote, and advance one
Reignald Poole late Deane of Excester* enemy to the King, beyond the sea, and
to deprive the King.

The xvj. of November, the black Friars in London was suppressed, the next day
the white Friars, the gray Friars, Friars suppressed.
and the Monks of the Charterhouse, and so all the other immediately.

The xxij. of November, John Lambert was burnt in Lambart brent.
Smithfield.

The xxiiij. of November, the Bishop of Rochester preached at Pawles Cross,
and there showed the blood of Blood of Hales shevved at Pavvles Cross.
Hales, and affirmed the same to be no blood, but Honey clarified, and colored
with Saffrone, as it had bin evidently proved before the King and his Counsel.
Also, ^^ur^ Anabaptists, three men, and one woman, all Dutch, bare
Anabaptists.
^aggots at Paul's Cross the same day.

The xxix. of November, a man and a woman Dutch Anabaptists, were brent in
Smithfield.

The ninth of January, were Henry Marquess of Excester Earl of Devonshire
executed.
Earl of Devonshire, and the Lord Mountacute, and Sir Edward Neuill, beheaded
on the Tower hill. Two Priests, Croftes and Colins, and Holand a Mariner, were
hanged and quartered at Tiborne. Sir Geffrey Poole was pardoned.

On Ash wednesday, were John Ioanes, John Potter, and Execution in Poules
Churchyard.
William Mannering, hanged in Paul's Churchyard, for killing of Roger
Cholmeley Esquier in the same place.

The third of March, Sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington in Sur^ey, Knighte of the
Garter, and master of the Kings Horse, was beheaded at the Tower hill, for
being of counsel with Henry Marquis of Excester, and Henry Poole Lord
Mountacute. The ix. of March, the King created Sir William States created*
Pawlet Knight, Treasurer of household, Lord Saint John* and Sir John Russell
Comptroller of his household, Lord Russell* Sir William Parre, Lord Parre.

The new Abbey of white Monks at the Tower hill, and the Minories, Nuns
without Aldgate, were suppressed, ^n the last of March.

The xxviij. of April, began a Parliamente, in the 1539
which, Margaret Countess of Salisburie, Gertrude, wife to the Marquess of
Excester, Reignold Poole, Sir Adrian Anno reg. 31
Fortescue, and Thomas Dingley, Knight of Saint John's, and diverse other were
attaynted: and all the Religious houses in England suppressed, and not
suppressed, were granted to the King for ever.

The viij. of May, the Citizens of London mustered at the Great muster a^
London.
Miles end all in bright harneys, with coats of white silk, ^^ cloth, and
cheynes of gold, in three great Battayles, the number was fifteen thousand,
beside wyfflers, and other awayters, who in goodly order passed through London
to Westminster, and so through the Sanctuary, and round about the Park of S.
James, and returned home through Holborne.

No watch at Midsomer.

Doctor Shakston Bishop of Salisburie, and Doctor Latimer Bishop of Worcester,
resigned their Bishoprics into the Kings hand the first of July.

The viij. of July, Griffith Clearke, Uicar of Wandsworth, Vickar of
VVandsvvorth and other executed.
with his Chapleine and his servant, and Friar Waire, were all four hanged and
quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings.

The tenth of July, Sir Adrian Fortescue, and Thomas Dingley were beheaded.

The ninth of September, the Nunnery of Clarkenwell Clarkenvvell and other
suppressed.
was suppressed.

The xij. of October, the Nunnery of Halywell, and forthwith the Priorie of
Saint Mary Oueries in Southwarke, and Saint Barthelmewes in Smithfield were
suppressed, and al their lands and goods taken to the Kings use.

The seventh of September, deceassed Doctor Stokesley Bishop of London, and
was buried in Paul's Church.

John Feire: Thomas Huntlow, the 28* of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Thomas
Huntlovv his charity.


Sir William Holleys Mercer, the 28 of October.

This Thomas Huntlow Sheriff, gave to the Haberdashers certain tenementes,
for the which, they be bound to give to ten poor alms people of the same
company, every one of them eight pence every Friday for ever. And also at every
quarter dinner kept by the masters, to be given to every one of those ten
poor people a penny loa^e, a pottell of Ale, a piece of beef worth four pence
in a platter, with porage, and four penc^ in money.

The xiiij. of November, Hugh Ferringdon Abbot of Abbots of Reading and
Glastonb^^y executed.
Reading, and two Priests, named Ruge and Onyon, for denying the Kings
Supremacy, were hanged and quartered at Reading. The same day, was Richard
Whiting Abbot of Glastonburie, hanged and quartered on Torre hill beside his
Monastery, for the same cause.

The first of December, John Beach Abbot of Colchester, was likewise executed.

In December, were appointed to wait on the Kings Pencioners appointed.
highness person, fifty Gentlemen called Pencioners or Speres, unto whom was
appointed fifty pound the piece pearely.

The third of January, was the Lady Anne of Cleeue received King Henry married
Lady Anne of Cleue.
at Black heath, and brought to Greenewich with great triumph: and the sixth
day of ye same month she was married to King Henry.

After Christmas, the Priorie Church of Saint Mary Ouery Saint Mary Oueryes
made a parish Church.
in Southwarke, was purchased of the King by the inhabitants of the Borow,
Doctor Gardener Bishop of Winchester putting to his helping hand: they made
thereof a parish church, and the little Church of Mary Megdalen joining to the
same Priorie, was made all one Church, and Saint Margarets in Southwarke a
parish, was admitted to the same parish.

The xij. of March, Henry Bowrcher Earl of Essex riding Earl of Essex
deceassed.
a young Horse, was cast, and brake his neck, at his Manor in Essex. He was
the eldest Earl in England.

The xix. of March, John Vere Earl of Oxforde, high Earl of Oxford deceassed.
chamberlayne of England, deceassed at his Manor in Essex.

There. of April, Sir William Peterson Priest, late commissarie 1540
of Caleis, and Sir William Richardson, Priest of Saint Maryes in Caleis, were
both there drawn, hanged, Priests at Caleis executed.
and quartered in the Market place for the Supremacy.

The 18. of April, Sir Thomas Cromwell, Lord privy Cromwell Earl of Essex.
Seal, was created Earl of Essex, and high Chamberlayne of England.

Also Gregory his son was made Lord Cromwell.

In a Parliament which began the xviij. of April, was Subsedie and four
fifteenes.
granted to the King a subsedie of two shillings the pound Lands, and twelve
pence goods, and four fifteenes.

The xxiiij. of April, Thomas Lord Audley, and Chancellor Anno reg. 32
of England, with Sir Anthony Brown, Master of the King^ Lord Audley Knight
of the Garter.
Horse, were made Knights of the Garter.

On May day, was a great triumph of Justing at Westminster, which Justes, had
bin proclaimed in France, Flaunders, Iusting of challengers.
Scotland, and Spain, for all comers that would, against the challengers of
England, which were, Sir John Dudley, Sir Thomas Seymer, Sir Thomas Poynings,
Sir George Carew Knights, Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwell Esquiers,
which said challengers came into the listes that day richly apparelled, and
their Horses trapped all in white Ueluet, with certain Knights and Gentlemen
riding before them, apparelled all in white Ueluet, and white Sarsenet, and all
their servants in white dublets, and hozen cut after the Burgonion fashion: and
there came to Just against them the said day, of defendants, xlvj. the Earl
of Surrey being the foremost, Lord William Heyward, Lord Clinton, and Lord
Cromwell, son and heir to Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, and Chamberlayne
of England, with other, which were all richly apparelled. And that day, Sir
John Dudley was overthrown in the field, by mischance of his Horse, by one
Master Breme defendant, nevertheless, he brake diverse Spears valiantly after
that: and after the said Justes were done, the said challengers rode to
Durham place, where they kept open household, and feasted the King and Queen,
with her Ladies, and all the Court.

The second of May, Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwell, were made
Knights at the said place.

The third of May, the said challengers did turney on Tournying.
horssebacke with swords, and against them came xxix. defendants, Sir John
Dudley, and the Earl of Surrey running first, which the first course lost both
their gauntle^s, and that day, Sir Richard Cromwell overthrew Master Palmer in
ye field off his Horse, to the great honor of the challengers.

The v. of May, she said challengers fought on foot at the Barriers, and
against the^, came xxx. defendants, which ^ought Barriers.
valiantly, but Sir Richard Cromwell overthrew that day at the Barriers Master
Culpeper in the field, and the sixth of May, the said chalengers brake up their
household.

The vij. of May, Sir William Weston Knight, Lord Saint John's in Smithfield
suppressed.
Prior of Saint John's without Smithfield, dyed, and the King took all the
Lands that belonged to that order into his hands, to the augmentation of his
Crown, and gave unto every of the Chalengers above written for a reward of
their valiantness, a hundred Marks, and a house to dwell in of yearly
revenues out of the said lands for ever.

The 26. of May, was sent to the Tower Doctor Wilson, and Doctor Sampson
Bishop of Chichester, for releeuing certain prisoners which denied the Kings
Supremacy, for the same offense Richard Farmer Grocer of London a rich Richard
Farmer in the Praemunire.
and wealthy man, was committed to the Marshalsea, and after arraigned, and
attaynted in the Praemunire, and lost all his goods. Also, the keeper of
Newgate was sent to the Marshalsea, for giving liberty to Doctor Powell and
Doctor Abell his prisoners.

The ninth of July, Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Thomas Lord Cromwell
beheaded.
Essex being in the Counsel Chamber, was sodeinly apprehended, and committed
to the Tower of London. The nineteenth, he was attainted by Parliament, of
heresy and high Treason, and ye xxviij. of July, he was beheaded on the Tower
hill with the Lord Walter Hungerford of Heitisburie.

In this month of July, King Henry by authority of King Henry deuorced from
Lady Anne of Cleeue.
Parliament, and Convocation, was deuorced from Lady Anne of Cleeue.

The xxx. of July Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerrard, William Six Priests, three
brent, three hanged.
Jerome Priests, were burned in Smithfield. The same day, Thomas Abell, Edward
Powell, and Richard Fetherstone, all three Doctors, were hanged and
quartered, for denying the Kings supremacy of the Church.

The fourth of August, were drawn to Tiborne six persons, Seven executed at
Tiborne.
and one led, Lawrence Cook, Prior of Dancalfe, William Horn, a lay brother
of the Charterhouse, Giles Horn Gentleman, Clement Philpot, Edmond Bromham
Darby Kenham, Robert Bird, Iaruis Carrow, all put to death for Treason.

The Ditches about London were cleansed.

The eight of August, Lady Katherine Haward, daughter to Edmond Lord Haward,
was showed openly as Queen King Henry married.
at Hampton Court.

The xj. of September, was hanged in Moore field a Stranger, Harlots cause many
murders.
named James Rinatian, who had slain his Master one Capon a Florentine in a
Garden, for his Harlot.

The later end of this year was a great drouth and a Dry summer.
great death of hot burning agues and flixes.

The salt water flowed above London bridge.

William Laxton: Martin Bows, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Roche Draper, the 28. of October.

The xxij. of December, Ralph Egerton, and Thomas Harman, servant to Master
Flightwood, were executed for counterfetting the Kings great Seal in lead,
wherewith they had sealed diverse Patents counterfetted and antidated, making
Strangers Denisons, under the names of diverse Clearkes of the Chancerie, one
Tuckefield being of their faction, robbed the Lord Audlyes Chapel and fled,
who being afterward apprehended at Caleis, which Town he would have
betrayed, he slew himself with a Dagger.

In April, certain persons began a new Rebellion in 1541 Anno reg. 33 A new
commotion in Yorkshire.
Yorkshire, which were shortly after taken, and put to execution in diverse
places, of which, Leigh a Ge^tlema^, Tatarsal a Clothyer, and Thorneton a
yeoman, were put to death at London, Sir John Neuell Knight, a ten persons or
more, were put to death at York.

The seven and twentieth of May, the Countess of Salisburie Countess of
Salisburie beheaded. Damport and Chapman hanged.
was beheaded in the Tower of London.

The ninth of June, Damport and Chapman, two of the Kings Guard, were hanged at
Greenewich for robbery.

The tenth of June, Sir Edmond Kneuet, Knighte, of Norffolke, was arraigned
before the Kings Justices (sitting Sir Edmond Kneue^ arraigned, for striking in
the Court.
in the great Hall at Greenewich) Master Gage, Comptroller of the Kings
household, Master Suthwell, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Anthony Winkefield, Master
Wrisley, and Edmond Pecham, Cofferer of the Kings household, for striking of one
Master Clear of Norffolke, servant with the^ Earl of Surrey, within the Kings
house in ye Tenis Court. There was first chosen to go upon the said Edmond, a
Quest of Gentlemen, and a Quest of Yeomen, to enquire of the said stripe, by
the which inquests, he was found gilty, and had judgment to lose his right
hand, whereupon, was called to do the execution, first the Sergeant Surgeon
with his instruments apperteyning to his Office: the Sergeant of the Woodyard
with the Mallet and a Block whereupon the hand should lie: the Master Cook
for the King with the knife: the Sergeant of the Larder to set the knife right
on the joint: the Sergeant Farrer with his searing irons to sear the veins:
the Serieant of the Poultrey, with a Cock, which Cock should have his head
smitten off upon the same block, and with the same knife: the yeomen of the
Chaundrie with sear clothes: the yeomen of the Skolerie with a pan of fire
to heat the irons: a chafer of water to cool the ends of the irons: and two
forms for all Officers to set their stuff on: the Sergeant of the Celler
with Wine, Ale, and Beer: the yeomen of the Ewrie in the Sergeantes steed who
was absente, with Basin, Ewre, and Towels. Thus every man in his Office ready
to do the execution, there was called forth Sir William Pickering Knight
Marshall, to bring in the said Edmonde Kneuet, and when he was brought to
the Bar, the chief Justice declared to him his trespass, and the said
Kneuet confessing himself to be giltye, humblye submitted him to the Kings
mercy: for this offense he was not only judged to lose his hand, but also his
body to remain in prison, and his Lands and goods at the Kings pleasure.
Then the said Sir Edmund Kneuet desired that the King of his benign grace
would pardon him of his right hand, and take the left, for (quoth he) if my
right hand be spared, I may hereafter do such good service to his grace, as
shall please him to appoint. Of this submission and request, the Justices
forthwith informed the King, who of his goodness, considering the gentle heart
of the said Edmund, and the good report of Lords and Ladies, granted him
pardon, that he should lose neither hand, land, nor goods, but should go free
at liberty.

The Lord Leonard Gray, being endited of certain points of Treason by him
committed, as was alleged against him, during the season that he was the
Kings Lieutenant in Ireland, to wit, for delivering his nephew Girald Fitz
Garard, brother to Thomas Fitz Garard before executed, and also, for that he
caused certain Irishmen to invade the lands of the Kings friends, whom he
favored not: the five and twentieth of June, he was arraigned at Westminster in
the Kings bench, and appointed to be tried by Knights, because he was a Lord
by name, and no Lord of the Parliament, but he discharged the Jurie, and
confessed the enditement, whereupon, he had judgment, and on ye xxvitj. of
June, being S Peter's even, he was beheaded at Tower hill, where he The Lord
Leonard Gray beheaded.
ended his life very quietly and godly.

This noble man, as he was come of high lignage, so was he a right valiant and
hardy personage, having in his time done his Prince and Country good service,
both in Ireland, France, and other places, greatly to his commendation,
although now his hap was thus to lose his head.

The same day that he suffered, there were executed at Saint Thomas Waterings
three Gentlemen, John Mantell, John Frowdes, and George Roydon.

They died for a murder committed in Sussex (as their indictment imported) in
company of Thomas Fines, Lord Dacres of the South. The troth whereof was thus:
the Lord Dacres of the South ar^aigned.
said Lord Dacres, through the lewd persuasion of some of them, as has bin
reported, meaning to bunt in ye Park of Nicholas Pelham Esquier at Laughton,
in the same County of Sussex, being accompanied with the said Mantel,
Frowdes and Roydon, John Cheyney, and Thomas Isley, Gentlemen, and Richard
Middleton, and John Goldwell Yeomen, passed from his house of Hurstmonseux, the
last of April, in the night season, toward the same Park, where they
intended so to hunt, and coming into a place called Pikehay in the parish of
Hillingley, they found one John Busbrigge, James Busbrigge, and Richard
Somener, standing there together: and as it fell out through quarrelling, there
ensued a fray betwixt the said Lord Dacres and his company on the one part,
and the said John and James Busbrig, and Richard Somener on the other, in so
much, that the said John Busbrigge received such hurt, that he dyed thereof the
second of May next ensuing: whereupon as well the said Lord Dacres, as those
that were there with him, and diverse other likewise that were appointed to go
another way to meet them at the said Park, were indicted of murder, and the
seven and twentieth of June, the Lord Dacres himself was arraigned before the
Lord Audley of Walden, then Lord Chauncelor, sitting that day as high Steward
of England, with other Peers of the Realm about him, who then and there
condemned the said Lord Dacres to dye for that transgression, and
afterward, the nine and twentieth of June, being Saint Peter's day, at eleauen
of the clock in the forenoone, the Sheriffs of London, accordingly as they
were appointed, were ready at the Tower to have received the said prisoner,
and him to have led to execution on the Tower hill, but as the prisoner should
come forth of the Tower, on Heir a Gentleman of the Lord Chancelors house
came, and in the Kings name commanded to stay the execution till two of the
clock in the afternoon, which caused many to think, that the King would
have granted his pardon. But nevertheless, at three of the clock in the same
afternoon, he was brought forth of the Tower, and delivered to the Sheriffs,
who led him on foot betwixt them unto Tyborne, where he dyed. His body was
buried in the Church of Saint Sepulchers: he was not paste four and twenty
years of age, when he came thus through great mishappe to his end, for whom
many sore lamented, and likewise for the other three Gentlemen, Mantell,
Frowdes, and Roydon, but for the said young Lord, being a right towardly
Gentleman, and such a one, as many had conceived great hope of better proof,
no small moan and lamentation was made, the more indeed, for that it was
thought he was induced to attempt such follis, which occasioned his death, by
some light heads that were then about him.

The first of July, a Welchman a Minstrell, was hanged and quartred for
singing of songs, which were interpreted to be prophesying against the King.

In the month of August, the King took his Progress Progress to York.
toward York.

About this time Westminster and Bristow were made Bishopric ^.

Rowland Hill* Henry Sucley, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Michaell Dormer Mercer, the 28. of October.

On Christmasse even at seven of the clock at night, began a great fire in
the house of sir Iohu Williams Master of the Kings Jewels, where many of those
Jewelles were brent, and more imbezeled.

The Lady Katherine Haward whom the King had married, for her unchaste living
committed with Thomas Culpeper and Francis Derham, was by Parliament attainted,
Culpeper and Derham were put to death at Tyborne, ye tenth day of December.

The xxiij. of January the King was proclaimed King of King Henry K. of
Irelande. Queen Katherine beheaded.
Irelande.

The 1^. of February the Lady Haward, otherwise called Queen Katherine, and
the Lady Jane Rocheforde, for being of her Council with Thomas Culpeper, were
both beheaded within the Tower of London.

The twel^th of March, John Dudley was created Viscount Lisle, by the right of
his mother Lady Elizabeth sister and heir to sir John Gray, Viscount Lisle,
who was late wife to Arthur Plantagenet Viscount Lisle late deceassed.

The seventeenth of March Margaret Dauy a Maid, was A Maid boiled in
Smithfielde.
boiled in Smithfielde, for poisoning three housholdes that she had dwelled in.

The eight and twentieth of March, the Parliament sitting, 1542
George Feres Burgess for the Town of Plimmouth, was arrested in London upon
a condemnation, whereupon the Sergeant at arms of the Common house, was sent
to the Counter in Bredstrete to fetch him, but the Clearks would not deliver
him, till the Sheriffs came them selves, who in the end delivered him:
howbeit, this matter was so taken in the Common house, that the Sheriffs, the
Clearks, and five officers, with the party plaintiff, were sent to the Tower,
The Sheriffs of London sent to the Tovver. Anno reg. 34
and there lay two days, and were then delivered by ye Speaker and common
house: the Sheriffs were delivered from all charges, except twenty pound
for their fees.

In May the King took a loan of money, of all such as were valued worth
fifty pound or upward.

In the month of August, James Earl of Desmond in Irelande, The Earl of
Desmoude.
came and submitted himself to the King, and so returned.

The first of October, the great Oneale of Irelande was The great Oneale.
created Earl of Tiron, and his base son Matthew Oneale Baron of Donmagan,
for Shane Oneale the only son of his body lawfully begotten, was then
little esteemed.

The Duke of Norffolke entered Scotland the one and twentieth Duke of Norffolke
entered Scotland.
of October, burning and wasting all the Marches, and there tarried without
any battle proffered by the King of Scotts, until the midst of November.

Henry Hoblethorne: Henry Hancots, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Coats Salter, the 28. of October.

After the departure of our army from Scotland, the King of Scotts made a
road into England, and did much harm, but at the last sir Thomas Wharton,
and sir William Scots overthrown.
Musgraue, with a few of the bordurers, met the Scots, where they being in
number 15000. were overthrown, in which conflicte was taken the Lord
Maxwell, the Earls of Glencarne and Sassilles, with all the Capitaines of the
army to the number of one and twenty, and on Saint Thomas even the Apostle,
they were brought to the Tower of London, where they lay that night: the
next day they were by the Kings charge apparelled in silk, and rode through
the City to Westminster, where they were sworn to be true prisoners, and then
were delivered to the custody of diverse noble men, which honorably
entertained them. At Newyeares tide they were sent home again, agreeing to
certain articles.

The 9, of February a proclamation was made, whereby White meat licenced to
be eaten in Lent.
the people were licenced to eat white meats in Lent, but straightly
forbidden the eating of flesh. Whereupon, shortly after the Earl of Surrey
with diverse Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, were imprisoned for eating of flesh
in the same Lent, contrary to the said Proclamation.

The 8. of May one Leche sometime Bailey of Lowth, who 1543 Anno reg. 35
Somerset* an Herault killed.
had killed Somerset one of our Herraults of Arms at Dunbarre in Scotland,
was drawn to Tyborne and there hanged and quartred. And the twelfth of June,
Edward Leche his brother, and with him a Priest, for the same fact, were
likewise executed at Tyborne.

This year the first cast pieces of iron that ever were First iron pieces
cast.
made in England, were made at Buckestede in Sussex, by Ralfe Hoge and Peter
Bawd.

The third of June, the Obrine a Lord in Irelande, and diverse of the wild
Irishe, submitted them to King Henry.

In July the said Obrine was created Earl of Clawricarde.

The 12 of July King Henry married Lady Katherine King Henrye married Lady
Katherine Par.
Parre, late wife to the Lord Latimer, and sister to the Marquess of
Northampton at Hampton Court.

King Henry sent over 6000. men to (...), whether An army sent to Landersey.
also came the Emperou^ with a great army, ^^^ (...) after came down the
French King with a great army and, offered to give battle to the Emperor,
by reason whereof the siege was raised: then the French men victualled the
Town, and on the morrow being ready to give battle, the French men made
great show, but dallyed out the day, and in the night departed.

The eighte and twentieth of July, Anthony Parson, Robert Testwood, and Henry
Filmer were brent at Windsore.

A great death of the pestilence was at London: and therefore Michaelmasse
Term was adiorned to Saint Albons.

John Tolous: Richard Dobbes, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


Sir William Bower Draper, the 28. of October.

Sir Ralfe Warren, the 13. of April. Mayor.


At Alhallowntide, a road was made into Scotland, by the garrison there, who
burned 60. Uillages, and took great prays.

The eighteen of December the Archebyshoppe of Canterburies Pallaice at
Canterbury was brent, and therein was brent his brother in law, and other men.

The four and twentieth of December, William Lord Parre, was created Earl of
Essex, and sir William Parre was created Baron Parre of Horton at Hampton
Court. And on the (...) of January sir Thomas Wriothesley was created Ba^^n of
Wriothesley at Hampton Court.

This year chanced four Eclipses, one of the Su^nne she fourteenth of
Januarie, and three of the Moon. Four Eclypses.


In the beginning of Lent, Lord Edward Seymer Earl of H^reforde; was made
Liuetenaunt of the North, and sent th^ther with an army.

The seventh of March, German Gardner, and German Gardner and others
executed.
Lark Parson of Chelfea were executed at Tyborne, for denying the Kings
Supremacy, with them was executed, for other offenses one Singleton. And
shortelye after, Ashbey was likewise executed for the Supremacy.

The x^j. of Ma^^^sir Io^^ Dudley, Lord Lisle, Lord Ad(...) 1^44.
with a great na^^ de (...) toward Scotland. o^^^ ^^^ The (...) of (...) Gun
poulder house, called the House blovvne up with gunpoulder.
Black (...) in (...) Smithfielde, was blown up and therein burned five men,
a boy, and a woman.

On May even, dyed Lord Thomas Audley* Lord Chacelour of England After whom
succeeded Lord Thomas Wriothesley.

The iij. of May sir John Dudley Vicount Lisle high Admiral An army sent
into Scotland.
of England ^rryued with his fleet of 200. sail in the Frith of Scotland,
where he landed diverse of his men, and took there diverse vessels. The iiij.
of May he landed the residue of his men at Lies, and from thence marched
forward in three great battles, whereof the said Lord Admiral led the
vawarde, the Earl of Shrewsburie the rereward, and Edward Seimer Earl of
Hertforde Lieuetenant General of the battle. Here they found the Scots to the
number of 6000, horsemen besides many footmen ready to stop their passage,
who at the first, made as they would have set on the vawarde, but after
certain shot on both sides, they ^^dainely, leaving their artillery behind
them, fled toward Edenborough, the foremoste in fleeing, was the Cardinal of
Saint Androws, the Earl of Huntley Governor, Murrey and Bothwell, and then
the Englishmen entered the town of (...) Lies taken and spoiled.
where they found such riches, as they thought had not (...) in any town of
Scotland. The nerte day our army went toward Edenborough: and when they
approached near, the Provost of the town with other proffered to have delivered
the same, upon condition, that the people might depart with bag and baggage,
and the town to be safe from fire. Where unto our Lieuetenant answered, that
he was sent thither to take vengeance upon them for their defestable
falshoode, and that unless they would yield up the town simply without
condition, and cause man, woman and child, to depart into the fialdes,
submitting them to his pleasure, he would put them to the sword, and their
town to the fire. The proudst answered, that it were better for them (...) to
their defense, and so departed and forth with the Lord Lie^tenant caused the
vaward to march toward the Town, which they did so courageously, with help
of the English gunners, that then kept the Scots from their Ordinance, and so
entered Canie Ga^^, and there saw a great number of the Scots, Edenborough brent.
and set fire on the town, which continued three (...) after ^arning. Shortly
after came to the lord Lieutena^t by and, William Lord Eurie Warde^ of the East
March of England and governor of Barwike, with his son si^ Raphe Eurie, who
also brought with them 1500. light horsemen, inhabiters of those two Marches,
which after they were come, did such good service, that the army sent away
their ships laden with spoil, and dislodged their camp out of Lies,
setting fire in every house, and returned home by land, spoiling every Uillage
and Fortress as they passed.

The xvj. of May proclamation was made for the enhanring of Gold to xlviij. ^.
and Silver to iiij. s^. the ounce. Also the king caused to be coined base
moneys, which was since Base moneys coined.
that time called down, the fifth year of Edwasde the sixth, and called in
the second of Queen Elizabeth.

On the xx. day of May passed through the City of London in warlike manner, to
the number of 700. Irishmen, having for their (...), Darts, and Hand guns, with
Bag pipes (...) them: and in Saint Iar^es Park besides Westminster, they (...)
before the King.

In the month of June, the Letany or Procession was Procession in English.
^^ forth in English with commandment by the King to be generally used in
Parish Churches.

The thirteenth of July King Henry with a goodlye com(...) passed into France
and encamped on the North fide of King Henrye went to Bol. Ioingne.
(...), after whose coming the Town was so sore bat(...) with Gunne shot,
and certain Towers under(...), and so shaken with Gunne powlder, that after
amoneths siege, the Captain sent word to the King, that (...)e the(...), that
all (...) within might depart ^yth bag and (...) King Henry granted, and
the Bello^ners departed to the (...)r of 4* 454.

The five and (...) of September, the King with his nobility ^^tred into high
B^l^ingne, and after returned from thence, ^^^ded at (...) the first of October.

The ninth of October in the night, the French men came unawares upon the
English men in base Boloigne, and slew of them a great number, howb^it, they
were shortly after chaced from thence, and the base Town holden after in good
quiet.

John Wilford Merchant Taylour: Andrew Iud, the 28. of S. Sherifes. Mayor.
Prises taken.


Sir William Laxton Grocer, the 28. of October.

This year was taken by the Kings Ships of the West Country, and of the
English coast the number of 300 French ships and more, so that the Gray
Friars Church in London was laid full of Wine, the Austen Friars and Black
Friars, were laid full of Hering and other fish that was taken going into
France.

The King demanded a benevolence of al his subjects, A benevolence demanded.
Spiritual and Temporal toward his wars in France and Scotland.

And the twelfth of January the Lord Chauncelour, the Duke of Suffolk, and
other of the Kings Council began to sit at Baynards Castle, where they first
called before them the Mayor and Alderman, etc. And because Richard Read
Alderman would not agree to pay as they set him: he was commanded upon pain
to serve the King in his wars of Scotland, who departed from London the three
and twentieth of January. Also sir William Ro^^^ Alderman, for words ^^
displeasure taken by the Kings Council, was by them sent Sir William Roche
sent to the Fleet.
to the Fleet, where he remained till Passion Sunday.

The six and twentieth of January, there camped on the Weast side of Boloigne
beyond the Haven, an army of French to the number of eighteen thousand, where
they lay ten days, and the sixth of February, were put to flight, by the
Earl of Hartford, and sir John Dudley Lord Admiral, then being Deputy of
Boloigne*

The thirteenth of February, a Priest was set on the Pillorie in Cheap, and
burnt in both cheeks with the letters F and A. and a paper on his head,
wherein was written For false accusing, which judgment was given by the Lord
Chancellor in the Star Chamber, a notable example of Justice: great cause have
I to wish the like, to the like accuser, who never yet repented, but
contrariwise swears and forsweareth that he never did any such act against
his brother.

In the beginning of March a road was made into Scotland toward Gedworth by
the Englishemen, who at the first got great praise, but they were so greedy,
and went so far, that a great army of Scotts beset them with three battles,
where the Englishemen for the most part were slain and taken at Panyer
Howghe, among whom sir Ralph Eure Lord Alderman of London taken prisoner.
Eure, and Warden of the East Marches was slain, and Richard Read Alderman of
London, with other taken prisoners by the Scots.

Trinity Term was adiorned because of the wars. 1545 Anno reg. 37


About the xxv. of June was great tempest of wind in Darbishire, where through
trees were ouer-turned, and diverse Churches, Chapels and houses, were
uncovered. Also in Hailestones f^gured like men^ heads.
Lancashire, there fell hailestones as big as men's fists, which had diverse
printes in them, some like men's faces, some like Gunne holes, etc.

The nineteenth of July, the French kings navy coming Frenchemen arrived in
Susse^.
out of Newhauen and Deep, arrived on the coaste of England in Sussex, before
Bright Hamsteade, where they set certain of their soldiers alande to
burn, but the Beacons were fyted, and the men came down so thick, that the
French men fled and did little hurt.

The xix. of July, by misfortune of shooting a Gun in one of Men brent in the
(...)*
y^ Hedgehogs a ship, before Westminster, a ^irken of gun-poul^^^ fyred and slew
7. men, and the eight leaped into the Thamis, and was drowned.

The xx. of July the king being at Portsmouth, a goodly ship Mary Rose was
drowned.
of England, called the Mary Rose, with sir George Carrowe the Captain, and
many other Gentlemen were drowned in the midst of the Haven, by great
negligence.

The xxj. of July, the French Galleis and nauye came before Frenchmen landed in
the I Will of VVight.
Portsmouth Haven, and landed certain of their army in the I Will of Wight, at
Saint Helens Point, and there burned and encamped about two thousand men, but
they were soon driven away with loss of their Captain and many soldiers.
Within few days after, the whole fleet remoi^ed from the Wight Frenchmen
landed at Nevvhauen in Sussex.
to a place in Sussex, called Newhauen, four miles from Jews, and there landed
many Captains and soldiers, who by the valiantness of the Gentlemen and
Yeomen of Sussex, were slain and drowned in the Haven a great number of them,
and the rest hardly recovered their ships and Galleis.

In the month of August deceassed at Guilforde, Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk; and Lord great Master of the Kings household, who was honorably
buried at Windsore.

In August the Earl of Hereforde was sent into Scotland, Earl of Herford sent
into Scotl.
with an army of 12000. men, where he destroyed diverse Towns, and greatly
enda^uaged the Scotts.

The ninth of September sir John Dudley, Lord Lisle, Lord Admiral brene
Treyport
Lord Adinirall of England landed with 6000. men at Treyport in Normandy,
and there burnt the Town and Abbey with other houses about it, and thir^^e
ships with a Bark that lay in the Haven, with loss of fourteen
Englishmenne, and so re^urned.

The twelfth of September, the Church of Saint Giles S. Giles church brent.
without Criplegate of London was brent.

The eighteenth of October the Procession was first begone in Paul's Church to
be sung in English, and so commanded by Iniunction through the whole realm.

George Barnes: Ralphe Allen, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Martin Bows Goldsmith, the 28. of October.

The xxliij. of November began a Parliament, wherein was granted to the King a
subsedie of two shillings eight Chauntres, Colleges, and hospitals given unto
the King.
pence of the pound in goods, and four shillings of the pound in lands: Also at
Colleges, Chauntries, and Hospitalles, were committed to the Kings order, to
alter and transpose, which he promised to do to the glory of God, and the
common profit of the Realm.

In the latter ends of March, the Stewe in Southwarke was put down by the Kings
commandment. In May the kings 1546 The Stevves put down. Anno reg. 38
William Foxley slepte more than fourteen days, and as many nights. without
waking.
ships took one of ye French Kings Galleis with great riches.

The xxvij. of April, being Tuisday in Easter week William Foxley Pot maker
for the Mint in the Tower of London, fell asleep, and so continued sleeping
and could not be wakened with pricking, cramping or otherwise burning
whatsoever, till the first day of the next Term, which was full fourteen
days, and as many nights or more, for that Easter Term begins not before
seauenteene days after Easter. The cause of his thus sleeping could not be
known, though the same were diligently searched for by the Kings Physicians
and other learned men, yea the King himself examining the said William
Foxley, who was in all points found at his wakening to be as if he had slept
but one night, and is yet living in the Tower of London, this present year of
our Lord God. 1579.

The thirteenth of June being Whitsonday, a peace was proclaimed between the
Kings of England and France, with a general Procession in London.

The seven and twentieth of June Doctor Crome reca^ted at Paul's Cross.

The xvj. of July, were burned in Smithfied for the Sacrament, Anne Askevve and
other brent*
Anne Askew, alias Keime, John Lassels, Nicholas O(...)tle^ Priest, John Adlam
Tailour, and Doctor Shaxton (...)time Bishop of Salisburie preached at the
same fire, and (...)erecanted, persuading them to do the like, but they ^oulde
not.

The xxj. of August came into England Claude de Honne(...) high Admiral of
France, who brought with him the Sacre of Deep, and twelve Galleis, he
landed at the Tower Admiral of France came to London.
Wharffe, where he was honorably received, and brought to the Bishop of
Londons Palaice, where he lodged two nights and then ^ode to Hampton Court
where the King lay. By the way Prince Edward received him with a company of
500. coats of Ueluet with one sleeue of cloth of Gold, and half the coat
embrodered with Gold: there was in all to the number of 800. horses.

In September, the water of Finsburie was brought to ye Condit in Loath bury.
Conduit at London wall, Saint Stephens in Colmanstreete, and Saint Margarets
in Lothburie.

Richard Iaruis. Thomas Curteyse, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Duke
of Norf. folk, and Earl of Surrey sent to the Tovver.


Henry Hobrethorne Merchant Taylour, the 28. of October.

The twelfth of December Thomas Duke of Norffolke, and Henry Earl of Surrey
his son, was sent to the Tower of London, the one by water, the other by land.

The third of Januarye, the Church of the late Gray Friars in London was
opened, and Mass sung there: and that day preached at Paul's Cross the Bishop
of Rochester, who declared the Kings gift to the City of London, for the
releeuing King Henry his gift to the City of London.
of the poor people, which was by Patent under his great Seal. Saint
Bartholomewe Spittle, the Church of the Gray Friars, and two Parish Churches,
the one of S. Nicholas in the Shambles, the other Saint Ewine in Newgate
Market, all to be made one Parish Church of the Gray Friars Church, and in
lands he gave for ye maintenance of the same 500. mark by year for ever, and
this Church to be named Christchurch, founded by King Henry the eight.

Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, was beheaded on the Tower Eatle of Surrey
beheaded.
hill the xix. of Januarie.

The xxviij. of January, king Henry deceased, appointing King Henry deceassed.
his first son Prince Edward ye second Lady Mary his daughter by Queen
Katherine: and the third, Lady Elizabeth ^^ Queen Anne Bolloine. He deceassed
when he had raign^^ 37. years, 9. months, and odd days, and was buried ^^
Windsore.

Edward the sixth.


Edward the sixth began his Anno reg. 1.
reign the eyghte and twentieth of Januarie, Anno 1546. when he was but 9.
years old. King Henry his father by his will had appointed for his privy
council, Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Wriothesly Lord
chance celour, Cuthbert Tonstall Bishop of Durham with other to the number of
sixeteene.

The first of February, the Earl of Hertford was nominate, Earl of Heart forde
made L. Protector.
elected and chosen, by all the executors, to be protector and chief Governor
of the Kings person.

The sixth of February the Earl of Hertford Lord Protector King Edward made
Knight.
in the Tower of London, endued King Edward with the order of Knighthoode, and
then immediately the King standing up, Henry Hoblethorne Lord Mayor of London
was called, who kneeling down, the king took the Sword of the Lord Mayor of
London made Knight.
Lord Protector, and made him Knight, which was the first that ever he made.

The fourteenth of February the corpse of King Henry the eighte, was with great
solempnitie and honor conveyed toward Windsore, and there buried in the
College.

The seventeenth of February sir Edward Seimer Earl Duke and Lords created.
of Hertforde and Lord Protector, was created Duke of Somerset, the Lord
Parre Earl of Essex, was created Marquis of Northampton, sir John Dudley Lord
Lisle, Lord Admiral, was created Earl of Warwike, and Lord Chamberlain of
England, sir Thomas Wriothesley and Lord Chauncelour, was created Earl of
Southampton, sir Thomas Seymer was made Lord of Sudley, and high Admiral,
sir Richard Rich, was made Lord Rich, sir William Willoughbey was made Lord
Willoughbey of Parham, sir Edmond Sheffeld was made Lord Sheffielde of
Buterwike.

King Ed. rode through ye city of London toward Westminster, and as he passed
on the South side of Paul's Churcheyarde, an Argosine came from the Battlements
of the Steeple of Paul's Church upon a Cable, being made fast to an Paul's
steeple lay at ancker.
Ancker by the Deanes gate, lying on his breast, aiding himself neither with
hand nor foot, and after ascended to the midst of the Cable, where he
tumbled and played many preasie toys, where at the King and the nobles had
good pastime. He was crowned at Westminster, on the xx. of February. King
Edward crowned.


The sixth of March, the great Seal of England was taken 1547
from sir Thomas Wriothesley, and on the morrow the same was delivered to the
Lord Sent-Iohn Lord great Master.

The fifteenth of May Doctor Smith recanted at Paul's Doctor Smith recanted.
Cross.

The Lord Protector and the rest of the Council sent Images forbidden
Commissioners into all parts of the realm, willing them to take all Images
out of their Churches, for the avoiding of Idolatry, with them were sent
diverse Preachers to persuade the people from their beads, and such like
ceremonies, and at that time the going in Procession was forbidden Proces^ion
forbidden.
to be used: and the Gospel and Epistle were read in English.

In the month of August, Edward Duke of Somerset, Lord, Protector as
General, and John Dudley Earl of Warwike, Lord Lieuetenant with a noble army
were sent into Scotland, and near to Edenborough, at a place called
Musclboroughe field. Williom Patyn.
Muuscleborough the Englishemenne and Scotts met, where between them the
tenth of Septeptember was fought a cruel battle. The victory whereof fell to
the Englishmen and of the Scotts were slain fourteen thousand, and taken
prisoners, fifteen hundred, whereof many were Gentlemen, and not above three
score Eeglishmen slain.

The xxiiij. of October, Richard Lord Rich was made Lord Rich L. Channcelor.
Lord Chancellor.

Thomas Whit Robert Chersey, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Free
school at Holt.


Sir John Gresham Mercer, the 28. of October.

This sir John Gresham founded a Freeschoole at Holt, a Market town in
Norffolke. Also at his deceasse which was in Anno 1556. on the xxiij. of
October, he gave to every ward in London ten pound to be distributed to the
poor. And to 60. poor men and women, every one of them three yards of broad
cloth of eight or nine shillings ye yard, to be made in gowns ready to their
backs: He gave also to Maids marriages and to the Hospitals in London, above
two hundred pounds in ready money.

The fourth of November, the Parliament began at Hestminster, in the which
was granted to the King al Cha^tries, Chauntries and Chapels given to the
King.
free Chapels, and Brotherhoodes: and an act was made for the receiving of
the Sacrament, in both kinds of Bread and Wine.

There vij* of November was pulled down the Roode in Paul's Church, with Marie
and John, and all other Images in ye Church: then ye li^e was done in all
Churches in England.

Also Easter following began the Communion and confession in English, but no man constrained thereto except Anno reg. 2. 1548
they would: but after Easter began the Service in English in diverse
Parish Churches, and at Whitsontide at Paul's, by the commandment of the
Deane. Barking Chapel nighe the Tower of London, and Saint Martins Le Graund
nigh the Shambles were pulled down. Also the parish Churches, of Saint Nicholas
in the Shambles, and Saint Ewyns within Newgate, were pulled down, and the
Parishioners, appointed to the late dissolved Gray Friars Church, which is
now named Christ's Church, founded by King Henry the eight.

The watch which had been accustomed in London at Midsommer of long time
laid down, was now again used, both on the even of Saint John and of Saint
Peter, in as comely order as it had been accustomed, which watch was greatly
beautified by the number of more than three hundred Dimilaunces and light
horsemen, that were prepared by the Citizens to be sent into Scotland for the
rescue of the Town of Hadington, and other kept by Englishmen in Scotland.

On Saint Peter's even, Monsieur Dassey, Lieuetenant to The siege of Hadington.
the French King, and the Reingraue of France, with the number of x. thousand
French and Almaines besides Scots, besieged the Town of Hadington in
Scotland, defended by the Englishmen, unto whose aid shortly after came from
Barwike iij. E. horsemen, which were 700. men of arms and Dimitances, the
Captains whereof were sir* Robert Bows, and sir Thomas Palmer, which horsemen
not long after by the Frenchmen were enclosed, and the most part either slain
or taken with their Captains before named: nevertheless, our Englishmen
defended the Town, often skirmishing with the French, and putting them to the
worse, until the twentieth day of August, and then came an army out of
England of sixeteene thousand, of the which four thousand were Almaines,
the Kings Lieuetenant was the Earl of Shrewsburie, the General of the Almaines
was Captain Courtney.

At the coming of this army, the Frenchemenne and Scotts in peaceable manner
departed from before Hadington, giving our Captains and Soldiers great
commendation for their service. Francis Earl of S^r^wshurie after he had seen
the Town victualled and stored with fresh Soldiers and munitions, departed
into England, and our me^ kept the Town of Hadington, oftentimes skirmishing
with the Frenchmen and Scotts, till the twentieth day of September, Hadington
rased by English men.
and then came with the Earl of Rutland with three thousand Almaynes, and as
many Borderers, who caused the To^ne to be razed, and so brought their
Ordinance and carriage to Berwike, and returned without battle.

On Saint Peter's day, Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Bishop of
Winchester sent to the Tovver.
preached at Westminster in the Court before the King, for the which Sermon,
he was on the morrow after sent to the Tower of London.

The vij. of July, a Priest was hanged and quartered in A Priest of Cornevvall
executed.
Smithfield, for that he and other in Cornwall had slain Master Body, one of
the Kings Commissioners, the others of his society, were put to death in
diverse other parts of the Realm.

This year, a great mortality by the pestilence, was in Great Pestileuce in
London.
London, wherefore, commandment was given to all Curates and other having to
do therewith, that no corpse should be buried before six of the clock in the
morning, nor after six of the clock at night, and that there should at the
burial of every corpse, be rong one bell at the least, by the space of three
quarters of an hour.

In September, dyed Queen Katherine, late ^^^s to King Queen Katherine dyed.
Henry, and after married to Sir* Thomas Seymer Lord Admiral.

William Lock* John A^li^e, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Henry A^^ots Fishmonger, the 28. of October.

The xvj. of November, Saint Annes Church within Aldersgate Saint Annes Church
brent. Anno reg. 3. Lord Thomas Seymer beheaded.
of London was brent.

The xvj. of January, Thomas Seymer Lord Admiral, and brother to the Lord
Protector, was sent to the Tower of London, and the xx. of March, he was
beheaded on the Tower hill.

The ^^^th o^ (...) Proclamation was made for the 1549
^^^^e to be put down through the whole (...) tenth (...) the ^loysten of
Paul's Church in (...)* ^al^^^ Pardon Churchyard, with the Dance of Death*
commonly called the Dance of Paul's about the Dance of Paul's pulled dovv^^e.
same Cloister, costly and cunningly wrought, and the Chapel in the midst of
the same Churchyard, were all began to be pulled down.

Also* the Chernill house of Paul's, with the Chapel Charnill house of Paul's.
there (after the Tombs and other Monuments of the dead were pulled down, and
the dead men's bones buried in the fields) were converted into dwelling houses
and shoppes.

About the same time, the Steeple, and most part of the Church of Saint John by
Smithfield blovvne up.
Church of Saint John of Jerusalem near unto Smithfield, was undermined, and
overthrown with Gunne powlder, the stone whereof was applied in the building
of the Lord Protectors house at the Strand.

The xxiij. of April* six houses at Broken Wharffe were Fire at Broken
VVharffe.
brent.

In the month of May, by means of a Proclamation for e^^losu^es* the Commons
of Somersetshire and Lincolneshire made a Commotion, and brake up certain
Parkes Commotion in Sommersetshire and Lincolneshire.
of Sir William Herberds* and Lord Sturtons* but Sir William Herberd ^lew and
executed many of those Rebels.

In July, the Commons of Essex and Kent* Su^^^ke, and Norffolke, rose against
enclosures* and pulled down diverse Parkes (...).

Also, the Commons of Cornwall and Devonshire, rose against Commotion in
Cornevvall and Devonshire
the Nobles and Gentlemen, and required not only that the enclosures might be
disparked, bu^^ also to have their old Religion, and Act of six Articles
restored: these ^^see god the City of Excester, which was valiantly defended.
Against these Rebels was sent John Lord Russell, Lord privy Seal, with a
number of Souldyers, who entered the City of Excester the fifth of August,
where they ^lew and ^ooke prisoners of the ^^e^^^s more than four thousand, and
Rebels subdued
after hanged diverse of them in the Town and Country about. The Lord Gray
was also sent with a number of Strangers, horssemen, who in diverse conflictes
s^ew many people, and spoiled the Country.

The last of July, William* Lord Marquis of Northhampton, Commotion at
Norwich. Lord Sheffield slain. Marciall Law.
entered the City of Norwich and on the next morning, the Rebels also entered
the Town, burned part thereof, put the Lord Marquis to flighte, and s^ewe the
Lord Sheffeld.

In this mean time, diverse persons were apprehended as ayders of the foresaid
Rebels, of the which, one was hanged within Aldgate, and another at the Bridge
foot toward Southwarke, both on Mary Magdalens day.

In the beginning of August, the French King determining to take the Isles of
Garnesea and Iersea, did set there sodeinly The French Kings Galleys invaded
Garnesea and Iersea.
upon our Ships with a great number of Galeis, but they were so manfully
encountered by the Kings Navy, that with the loss of a thousand men, and great
spoil of their Galleis, they were forced to retire into France, and de^i^t
from their purpose.

The xvj. of August, a man was hanged without Bishopsgate of London, and one
other sent to Waltham, and there executed, and diverse other in many places.

The viij. of August, the French Ambassadors gave a Frenchmen apprehended.
defiance to the Lord Protector, whereupon, all Frenchmen with their goods
being no Denizens, were apprehended.

The Rebels in Norffolke and Suffolk encamped themselves at Mount Surrey, in a
wood called Saint Nicholas wood, near unto Norwich* against whom* Sir John
Dudley Earl of Warwike went with ^n Army, where both he and a great number of
Gentlemen meeting with the Rebels were in such danger, as they had thought
all to have dyed in that place, but God that confounds the purpose of all
Rebels, brought it so to pass, that as well there as in all other places, they
were partly by power co^streined, partly by promise of their ^ar^^n, persuaded
to submit themselves to their Prince the Earl of Warwike entered the City of
Norwich the xxvij. of August, when he had ^^aine The Earl of VVarvvicke went
against the Rebels at Norwich.
above five thousand of the Rebels, and taken their chief Captain Robert Ket
of Windham ^anner, which might dispend in Lands fifty pound by year, and
was worth in moueables, above a thousand Marks, when he had put to execution
diverse of the Rebels in diverse places about Norwich and returned.

The xxviij. of August, tidings was brought to King Edward Nevvhauen by Boleyne
vvon by the French.
and the Lord Protector, that the Frenchmen had taken Blackness, Hamiltew, and
Newhauen by Boleyne, and had slain all the Englishmen, and taken the Kings
Ordinance and victualles, which was reported to be begun by one Sturton, a
Bastard son of the Lord Sturtons, which had betrayed Newhauen, and went
himself to the French Kings service: here upon, the Captain of Bulleyne
Bark, for fear of the French Army, conuayed all the Ordinance, Uictualles,
goods, and men of that Fort, to the high Town of Bulleyne, and after their
departing, with Gunpowder blew up the Fort.

About this time also, a Commotion began at Semer in Commotion in Yorkshire.
the North riding of Yorkshire, and continued in the East riding, and there
ended: the principal raysers whereof, were William Ombler of Easthes^e^^on
yeoman, Thomas Dale, parish Clarke of Semer, and Steuenson of Semer: being
prevented by the Lord President from rising at Wintringham, they drew to a
place at Semer by the Sea coast, and there by night rode to the beacon at
Stax^o^, and set it on fire, and so gathered a rude route: then they went to
Master Whites house, and took him, and Clopton his wides brother, Savage and
Merchant of York, and Bery, servant to Sir Walter Mildmay, which four they
murdered a mile from Semer, and there left the^ naked: their number increased
to three thousand. On the xxj. of August, the Kings pardon was offered, which
Ombler and other refused, who were shortly after taken, and brought to York,
where Thomas Dale and other Rebels executed at York.
were executed the xxj. of September.

The first of September, Edmond Bonar Bishop of London, preached a Sermon at
Powles Cross, for the which, he was accused unto the Counsel by William
Latimer, Parson of Saint Lawrence Pountney, and John Hoper, sometime a white
Monk, and so conuented before the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other
Commissioners at Lambheath, on the twentieth day of that same month, and sent
to the Marshalsea: on the first of October, he was deprived of his Bishopric,
for disobeying the Kings order in Religion.

Richard Turk: John York, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


The viij. of October, after a common Counsel in the Guild hall at London,
whether all the Lords of the Counsel came, the Lord Chauncellor and other
declared diverse abuses of the Lord Protector, desiring the Citizens to be
ayding and assisting with them, for the preserving of the Kings Majesty's
person, which they greatly feared, being in his adversaries hands. The Lords
dined with Master Proclamation against the Lord Protector.
York, one of the Sheriffs, and in the afternoon, Proclamation was made in
diverse places of the City, with Trompets, Heralts, and Kings at Arms, wherein
was contained diverse Articles, touching the evil government of the Lord
Protector. The tenth of October, by a common Counsel at the Guild hall, was
granted five hundred men of the City (one hundred to be horssemen) to be
ready on the next morrow: and this day, the Lords dined with Master Turk
the other Sheriff.

The xj. of October, the Lords sitting at the Lord great masters, Sir Anthony
Wingfield Captain of the Guard, was sent to the King at Windsore, and severed
the Lord Protector from his person, and caused the Guard to watch him fi^^ the
Lords coming. On the morrow, the Lord Chancellor with the rest of the
Counsel, rode to Windsore to the King, and that night, the Lord Protector
was put in ward into Beau^champs Tower in the Castle of Windsore.

The xiiij. of October in the afternoon, the Duke of Sommerset Lord Protector
brought to the Tovver.
was brought from Windesore, riding through Oldbor^e in at Newga^e* and so to
the Tower of London, accompanied with diverse Lords and Gentlemen with three
hundred horse: the Lord Mayor, Sir Ralph Warren, Sir John Gressham, Master
Recorder, Sir William Lock, and both the Sheriffs, and other Knights,
sitting on their Horses against Soper La^e, with all the Officers with
Halbards, and from Holbur^e bridge to the Tower, certain Aldermen, or their
deputies on Horssebacke in every street, with a number of householders standing
with bills as he passed. There was with him committed to the Tower, Sir
Michaell Stanhope, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir John Thin* Knights, Wolf of the
privy Chamber, and Gray of Reading.

The xvij. of October, King Edward came from Hampton Court to his place in
Southwarke, and there dined, and after King Edward rode through London.
dinner, he made Master York one of the Sheriffs Knight, and then rode
through the City to Westminster.

Sir Rowland Hill Mercer, the 28. of October. Mayor.


This Sir Rowland Hill caused to be made a Causey, Charitable deeds of Sir
Rovvland Hill.
commonly called Ouerlane pauement in the high way from Stone to Nantwich, in
length four miles, for horse and man, with diverse Lanes on both sides the same
Causey.

He caused likewise a Causey to be made from Dunchurch to Bransen in
Warwickeshire, more than two miles of length, and gave twenty pound in money
toward the making of Roytton bridge, three miles from Couentrie.

He made the high way to K^lborne near to London.

He made four Bridges, two of them of stone, containing eyghteene Arches in
them both, the one over the ^i^er of Seuerne, called A^^^^ bridge* the other
Terne bridge, for that the water of Terne runs under it, the other two of
Timber at Stoke, and built a good part of Stoke Church.

He builded one notable Freeschoole at Drayton in Shropshire, Freeschoole at
Drayton in Shropshire.
with Master and ^^^^er, and sufficient stipends for them both, besides
convenient Lodgings for the same.

He also purchased a free* Fair to the said Town, with a free market weekly,
and a free market for Cattle every fourteen days.

He gave to the Hospital of Christ's Church in London in Gift to Christ's
hospital.
his life time five hundred pound in ready money, and a hundred pound at his
deceasse.

The xxix. of November, Robert Kete, and William Kete Robert Kete and William
Kete hanged.
his brother were delivered out of the Tower of London, to Sir Edmond Windham
Knight, and Sheriff of Norffolke, to be conveyed to Norwich, where Robert Kete
was hanged in theynes on the top of Norwich Castle, and William Kete
likewise hanged on the top of Windam Steeple.

In December, the Scotts took Burticragge in Scotland, and Holds in Scotland
lost.
other holds, then possessed by Englishmen, where they slew man, woman, and
child, except Sir John Lutterell the Captain, whom they took prisoner.

The xix. of January, Sir John Russell Lord privy Seal, States created.
was created Earl of Bedford: and Lord Saint John Lord great Master, was
created Earl of Wilshire: and Sir William Paget, Comptroller of the Kings
house, was made Lord Paget.

The same day at night, were murdered by Saint Pulchers Peter Gambo and
another Captain murdered.
Church against the Kings head without Newgate of London two Captains that had
served the King at Boloigne and else* where, the one was Sir Peter Gambo, the
other Filicirga, which murder was committed by Charles Gauaro a Fleming, who
came post from Berwike to do that act: on the morrow, he with three of his
company was taken in Smithfield by the Lord Paget, and sent to Newgate, and
the four and twentieth of January, they were all four, Charles Gauaro and other
hanged.
Gauaro, Balthazar Gauaro, Nicholas Disalueron, and Francis Deualasco, had in a
Cart to Smithfield, and by the way, at the place where the murder was done,
Charles Gauaro had his right hand stricken off on the Cart wheel, and then all
hanged in Smithfield.

The xxij. of January, John Earl of B^^ford* William (...) Paget (...) William
Peter Knight, one of the Kings Secretaries, and Sir John Mason Knight, chief
Cleark^ of the Counsel, were sent into France, Ambassadors to the French King.

The xxvij. of January, Humfrey Arundell Esquier, Thomas Anno reg. 4. Rebels
executed.
Holmes, Winslow, and Bery, Captains of the Rebels in Devonshire, were hanged
and quartered at Tiborne.

On Candlemasse day, William Lord Saint John Earl New Officers.
of Wilshire, Lord great master, and president of the Counsel, was made Lord
Treasurer. John Dudley Earl of Warwike, Lord great Chamberlayne, was made Lord
great master. William Parre, Marquis of Northampton, was made Lord great
Chamberlayne. Lord Wentworth was made Lord Chamberlain of household. Sir Anthony
Wing* field Captain of the Guard, was made Comptroller of the Kings house: and
Sir Thomas Darcy Knight, was made Uizchamberlayne, and Captain of the Guard:
and the Earl of Arundell late Lord Chamberlain, with the Earl of
Southampton, were put off the Council, and commanded to keep their houses in
London.

The vj. of February, the Duke of Somerset was delivered out of the Tower, and
that night he supped at Sir John Duke of Somerset delivered.
Yorkes one of the Sheriffs of London.

The x. of February, one Bell, a Suffolk man, was hanged and quartered at
Tiborne, for moving a new Rebellion in Suffolk and Essex.

The last of March, a general peace was proclaimed between 1550 Peace
proclaimed. The liberties of Southvvarke purchased.
the Kings of England and France, the Emperor, and the Scotts.

This time, the Lord Mayor of London, and the Aldermen, purchased all the
liberties of Southwarke which was in the Kings hands.

The xij. of April, Doctor Nicholas Ridley, late Bishop of Rochester, was
enstalled Bishop of London at Powles. Boloigne yielded to the French.


The xxv. of April, the Town of Boloigne was yielded ^^ the French ^ing.

The second of May, Joan Knell, alias Butcher, or Joan of Joan ^utcher brent.
Kent, was brent in Smithfield for Heresy, that Christ took no flesh of the
virgin Mary.

Richard Lion, Goddard Gorran, and Richard Irelande, Rebels of Kent executed.
were executed the xiiij. of May, for attempting a new Rebellion in Kent.

On Wednesday in Whitson week, at a Court of Aldermen kept at the Guild hall,
Sir John Aliffe Knight, and master Alderman of Southvvarke.
of Backewell hall* was sworn Alderman of the Bridgewarde without, to have the
jurisdiction of the Bourow of Southwarke, and thus was he the first Alderman
that ever was there, who made up the number of xxvj. Aldermen of London,
whereas before that time had bin but xxv.

Trinity Term was adiourned till Michaelmas, for Term adiourned.
that the Gentlemen should keep the Commons from commotion.

The third of June, the Lord Lisle, son and heir to the Earl of Warwike,
was married to the Duke of Somersets A marriage.
^aughter at Sheene, the King Majesty being there present.

The xj. of June, being Saint Barnabyes day, was kept Saint Barnaby kept holy.
holyday all London over, and the same day at night, the high ^^^tare in Paul's
Church was pulled down, and a table High Aultare in Paul's pulled down.
^^^ where the Aultare stood, with a veil drawn beneath the steps; and ^n
the Sunday next, a Communion was (...) at the same table, and shortly after,
all the Aultars in London were taken down, and tables placed in their (...).

This year was no such watch at Midsomer as had bin No vvatch at Midsomer.
(...).

The xxx. of July, Thomas Lord Wriothsley Earl of Earl of Southhampton
deceassed.
^^uth-hampton, Knight of the Garter, and one of the execu(...) to King Henry
the eight, deceassed at Lincoln place in (...)orne, and was buried in Saint
Andrews Church (...).

Augustine Hind: John Lion, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Andrew Iud Skinner, the 28. of October.

This Sir Andrew Iud erected one notable Freeschoole Freeschoole at Tonbridge.
at Tonbridge in Kent, wherein be brought up and nourished in learning, great
store of youth, as well bred in that Shire, as brought from other Countries
adjoining, a noble act, and correspondent to those that have bin done by like
worshipful men and other in old time within the same City of London.

He also builded Alms houses for six poor alms Alms houses.
people, nigh to the parish Church of Saint Helen within Bishopsgate of London,
and gave Lands to the company of the Skinners in the same City, amounting to
the value of threescore pound three Shillings eyghtpence the year, for the
which, they be bound to pay twenty pound to the Schoolemayster, and eight
pound to the Usher of his free School at Tonbridge yearly for ever, and
four Shillings the week to the six poor alms people at Saint Anno reg. 5.
Helens aforesaid, eyghtpence the piece weekly, and five and twenty
Shillings fourpence the year in Coals amongst them for ever.

On Saint Valentines day, at Feuersham in Kente, ^n^ Arden a Gentleman was
murdered by procuremente Arden murdered.
of his own wife, for the which fact, she was the foureteenth of Marth burnt
at Canterbury* Michaell Master Ardens man was hanged in cheynes at Feuersha^,
and a maiden bre^te* Mosby and his sister were hanged in Smithfielde at London*
Green which had fled, came again certain years after, and was hanged in
cheynes in the high way against Feuersham, and Black Will the Ruffian that
was hired to do that act, after his first ^scap^* ^a^ apprehended, an^^^rente
on a Scaffold al Flis^ing i^ Z^la^d.

The fourteenth of February, Stephen Gardener Bishop Bishop of Winchester
deprived.
of Winchester, was deprived of his Bishopric, and committed to the Tower
again: into his place was ^^anslated Doctor Poynet, who before was Bishop of
Rochester.

The fifth April, Sir Thomas Darcey ^i^^ham^ertaine, 155^
and Captain of the ^ard, was created Lord Darcey at Greenewich*

The four and twenty of April, George of Paris a Dutchman An Arian brent.
was brent in Smithfield for an Arian.

The five and twenty of May, about noone, was an Earthquake Earthquake.
at Blechingly, Godstone, T^tser, Rig^te, Croydon, B^n^ng^^^^ Al^erie* and
diverse other places in Sout^ery.

The ninth of July, the base moneys (coined in the time First fall of the base
moneys.
of King Henry the eight, and King Edward the sixth) was proclaimed the
Shilling to go for nine pence, the great for three pence, which took* effect
immediately after the Proclamation was made.

The fifteenth of April, the infections sweating sickness Svveating
sickness.
began at Shrewsburie, which ended not in the North part of England until
the end of September. In this space what number dyed, it can not be well
accounted, but certain it is that in London in few days nine hundred and John
Cai^s.
sixty gave up the ghost: it began in London the ninth of July, and the
twelfth of July it was most vehement, which was so terrible, that people being
in best health, were sodeinly taken, and dead in four and twenty hours, and
twelve, or less, for lack of skill in guiding them in their sweat. And it is
to be noted, that this mortality fell chieflye or rather on men, and those
also of the best age, as between thirty and forty years: also, it followed
Englishmen as well within the Realm, as in strange Countries: wherefore this
Nation was much afeard of it, and for the time began to repent and remember
GOD, but as the disease relented, the devotion decayed. The first week dyed in
London eight hundred persons.

The seventeenth of August, the Shilling which of late Second fall of the base
moneys
was called down to nineyence* was called down to six pence, the grote to
two pence, the half grote to one penny, the penny to an half penny.

John Lambert* John Cowper, the 28* of September. Sheriffs.


The ^^. of October, at Hampton Court, Lord Marquis Duke^ and E^r^es created.
Dorset was created Duke of Suffolk: the Earl of Warwike was created Duke of
Northumberland: the Earl of Wilshire was created Marquis of Winchester: Sir
William Harbert, master of the hor^^e, was made Lord of Karmarden, and
created Earl of Pembroke. He also made William Cicill his Secretary* Knight,
Master John Check, one of his School masters Knight, Master Henry Dudley
Knight, Master Henry Deuell Knight.

The ^^^. of October, Edward Seymer Duke of Somerset, Duke of Somerset brought
to the Tovver.
the Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir Miles
Partridge, Sir Michaell Sta^hope, Sir Thomas Arundell Knights, and diverse
other Gentlemen, were brought to the ^ower of London. The next morrow, the
Duchess of Somerset was also brought to the Tower. The liberties Liberties of
the Stilyard seized. Mayor. New Coin.
of the Stil^ard were seized into the Kings hands.

Sir Richard Dobbes Skinner, the 28. of October*

The xx^. of October, was proclaimed a new coin both of Silver and Gold,
So^e^^^es of thirty Shillings, Angels of ^e^ne Shillings etc.

The vj. of November, the old Queen of Scotts rode through London toward
Scotland with a great company of Queen of Scotts rode through London.
Englishmen way^ing upon hi^, after she had layne four days in the Bishop of
Londons p^^^ace.

The first of December, the Duke of Somerset* was arraigned* Duke of Somerset
arraigned.
at Westminster, and there acquitted of trea^o^* but condemned of ^el^nie* The
vij. of December, was a muster of Horssemen before the King at Saint James. The
xx. of Muster of horssemen.
December, the gre^e Sea^e was taken from the Lord Rich, and ^^^^^ere^ to D.
G^^^^^e^e Bishop of E^ly* Doctor Dunstall Bishop of Durham, was sent ^o y^
Tower of London. The xx^^. of January, Edward Duke of Somerset was beheaded on
Duke of Somerset beheaded.
the Tower h^ct. The ^ame morning early the Constables of every ward in London
(according to a precept directed from the Counsel to the Mayor) st^eightly
^h^^^ged every h^^^^hold of the same ^^^^e not to depart any of them out of
their houses before ten of the clock of that day, meaning thereby to
restreyne the great number of people, that otherwise were like to have bin at
the said execution: notwithstanding by seven a clock the Tower hill was
covered with a great multitude, repayring from all parts of the City, as well
as out of the suburbs, and before eight of the clock the Duke was brought to
the Scaffold, enclosed with the Kings Guard, the Sheriffs Officers, the Warders
of the Tower, and other with halberds: the Duke being ready to have bin
executed, sodeinly the people were driven into a Great fear with small cause.
great fear, few or none knowing the cause, wherefore I think it good to
write what I saw concerning that matter.

The people of a certain Hamlet, which were warned to be there by seven of
the clock to give their attendance on the Lieutenant, now came through the
posterne, and perceiving the Duke to be already on the Scaffold, the for^^st
began to run, crying to their fellows to follow fast after, which ^odelnesse
of these men being weaponed with bills and halber^s thus running, caused the
people which ^^^^^ saw them, to think some power had come to have rescued the
Duke from execution and therefore to cry away away, whereupon the people ran
some one way, some another, many fell into the Tower Ditch, and they which
^arried, thought some pardon had bin brought, some said it thundered, some that
the ground moved, but there was no such matter.

The xvij. of February, on which day was received the Books of the relief of
all the wards of London, toward the new Hospitals, by the Kings
commissioners, the Counsel dined a^ Master Cowpers the Sheriff, and after
dinner, Master Thomas Curteys Alderman came thither to speak with the Lord
Chancellor for a matter he had depending before him in the Chancerie, but for
his misde^^^^o^r in words, and ^^gnes to the Lord Chancellor at that time, the
said Master Curteys was committed to ward in the Fleet.

The six and twentieth of February, Sir Ralph^a Vane, Anno reg. 6. Sir Ralpha
Vane and other executed.
and Sir Miles Partridge, were hanged on the Tower hill, Sir Michaell Stanhope,
with Sir Thomas Arundell, were beheaded there.

The last of April, through negligence of the Gunnepowlder 1552
makers, a certain hou^e near to the Tower of London, with three Last of
Powlder, was blown up and House blovvne up with Gunpovvlder.
brent, the Gunpowlder makers being fifteen in number, were all slain.

The xvj. of May, was a goodly muster of Horssemen made before the King in the
Park at Greenewich*

Under the Kings Banner, his band of Pencioners, in Muster of Horssemen.
number. 15^. every Pencioner two great Horses, and a Gelding, the Lord Bray
their Lieuetenaunt.

The Lord Marquis of Winchester high Treasurer* under his Banner the (...)* one
C* men.

The Duke of North^^berlande, great* master of the Kings honshold, under the
white Lion and the ragged staff, fifty.

The Duke of Suffolk, under the Unicorne in the Star. C. x.

The Earl of ^^^for^^ Lord Pri^ie Seal under the Goat, C.

The Marquis of Northumpton high Chamberlayne, under the Maiden head. C.

The Earl of Warwike master of the Kings horses, under the white* Lion* fifty.

The Earl of Huntington under his Banner, fifty.

The Earl of Ru^la^d under the Peacocke, fifty.

The Earl of Pembroke under the green Dragon, fifty.

The Lord Darcy under the Maidens body, fifty.

The Lord Cobham under the Sarizens head, fifty.

The Lord Clinton Lord Admiral under ye Anchor, fifty.

The Lord W^rden of the five Ports, under the Rose in the Sun b^^^^es. ^*

The xxvj. of July, began the preparing of the Gray Friars Gray Fri^^^ in
London a^ Hospi^all^.
house in London, for the poor father ^esse Children: and also, in the later
end of the same month, began the repayring of Saint Thomas Hospital in
Southwarke, for poor impotent and lame persons.

The i^j. of August, at Middleton, xj. miles from Oxford, a A Monster.
woman brought f^^th achild, which had two perfect bodies from the na^ell
upward, and were so joined together at the na^ell, that when they were laid in
length, the one head and body was Eastward, and the other West: the legs for
both the bodies grew out at the midst where the bodies joined, and had but one
issue for the excrements of both bodies, they lived xvi^j. days, and were
women children.

The vi^j. of August, were taken at Queeneborough i^^. great Great Fishes.
Fishes called Dolphins: and the ^eeke following at Black Wall, were vj. more
taken, and brought to London, the least of them was more than any* Hor^^e. This
month of August, began the great prouiu^on for the poor in London, toward
the which, every man was contributorie, and gave certain money in hand, and
co^enanted to give a certain weekly.

The commons of the City of London being assembled in Four electione for one
Sheriff*
their Guild hall on the first of August, elected John Grimes Clothworker to be
Sheriff for the year following, who refused, and paid his fine of two hundred
pound. The vj. of August, the commons chose Thomas Clayton* Baker, who likewise
refused, and paid his fine. The xv. of August, the commons chose John Brown
Mercer, who also refused, and paid his fine. The xix. of August, the commons
chose John Maynard Mercer, who took the same in good part, and served.

William Garrard: John Maynard, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Great Fishe^
taken.


The seventh of October, were three great Fishes called Whirlepooles taken at
Grauesend, which were drawn up to the Kings Bridge at Westminster.

In this month of October, the King demanded of the Merchant Adue^turers by
way of pressed of every broad cloth then shipped to Bawmes ^art, twenty
Shillings sterling to A pre^t by the Merchant Adventurers.
be paid at Antwarp for certain debt there, and they to have the Kings band
for the repayment thereof, which did at that time amount to more than. xlviiij.
thousand pound.

The xvij. of October, the Sergeants feast was kept at Sergeants feast.
Greys Inn by Oldborne, Master Robert Brook Recorder of London being the
principal of the new Sergeants, and six more besides him, the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen being bidden to the said feast, rode from the Lord Majors house up
Friday street through Cheap, and out at Newga^e, all in their Scarlet Gowns
to the said Greys Inn.

Sir George Barn Habe^ dasher, the 28. of October. Mayor.


This Sir George Barn gave a Wind^^ill in Fins^^r is Charitable deeds of Sir
George Barn.
Field to the Haberdasher^ of London, the profits thereof to be distributed to
the poor Al^es people of the same company. Also, to the par^^^ Church of S.
Barthelmew the little, certain tenements, for the which the Parson and
Churchwardens be bound to distribute to the poor people of the same Parish
xvi^j. pence in bread every Sunday for ever.

The first of November, being the feast of All Saints, Book of common Prayer.
the new Seruise Book called Of common Prayer, begone in Paul's Church, and
the like through the whole City, the Bishop of London Doctor Ridley executing
the service in Paul's Church in the fore^^^ne in his Rochet only, without Coape
or Uestment, preached in the Quire, and at after n^^ne he preached at Paul's
Cross, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Crafts, in their best Liueries being
present, which Sermon, tending to the setting forth the said late made Book
of common Prayer, continued till almost five of the clock at night, so that
the Mayor, Aldermen, and companyes entered not into Paul's Church as had bin
accustomed, but departed home by Torchlight. By this Book of common Prayer,
all Coapes and Uestments were forbidden through England, and Prebendes of
Paul's left off their hoods, the Bishops left their Crosses, etc. as by an Act
of Parliament more at large is set out.

After the feast of all Saints, the upper Queere in Saint Paul's Church in
London where the high A^ltare stood, was broken down, and all the Queere
thereabout: and the table of the Communion was set in the lower Queere, where
the Priests sing.

The three and twentieth of November, the children were First children in
Christ's hospital
taken into ye hospital at the Gray Friars called Christ's Hospital, to the
number of almost four hundred. And also s^eke and pore people into the
Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, in which two places, the children and
pore people should have meat, drink, lodging, and cloth of the alms of the
City.

On Christmasse day in the afternoon, when the Lord First shevve of the
children in Christ's hospital*
Mayor and Aldermen rode to Paul's, all the children of Christ's Hospital,
stood in array from Saint Laurence Lane in Cheap toward Paul's, al in on
Lyuerie of Russet Cotton, the men children with red Caps, the women children
kerchiefs on their heads, all the Masters of the Hospital foremost: next
them the Phi^^tions and four Surgeons, and between every twenty children one
woman keeper, which children were in number 340.

The King kept his Christmasse with open household at Lord of merry disportes.
Greenewiche, George Ferrers Gentleman of Lincolns Inn, being Lord of the
merry disportes all the twelve days, who ^^^pleasantly and wisely behaved
himself, that the King had great delight in his pastimes.

On Monday the fourth of January, the said Lord of The Sherifes ^. of Misrul^.
merry disportes came by water to London and landed at the Tower Wharffe, entered
the Tower, and then rode through Tower street, where he was received by Vawce
Lord of Misrule to John Maina^d one of the Sheriffs of London, and so
conducted through the City with a great company of young Lords and Gentlemen
to the house of sir George Barn Lord Mayor, where he with the chief of his
company dy^ed, and after had a great banquet, and at his departure, the Lord
Mayor gave him a standing Cup with a cover of silver and guilt, of the vale ^^^
of ten pound, for a reward, and also, set a Hog^^^ad of (...), and a Barrel
of Beer at his Gate, for his train that followed* him, the residue of his
Gentlemen and s^rn a^ntes dyned* at other Aldermens houses, and with the
Sheriffs, and so departed to the Tower Wharffe again, and to the Court by
water, to the great commendation of the Mayor and Aldermen, and highly accepted
of the King and Counaell.

In the month of January, the King fell sick of a cough Anno reg. 7.
at Whitehall, which greeuouslye increased, and at the last, ended in a
Consumption of the Lights.

The first of March began a Parliament at Westminster, A Parliament.
and all the Lords Spiritual and temporal assembled that day in the
Whitehall in their Robes* where a Sermon was preached in the Kings Chapel, by
Doctor Ridley Bishop of of London, and his Majesty with diverse Lords
received the Communion* Which being done, the King with the Lords in order,
went into the Kings great Chamber 1553
on the Kings side, which that day was prepared for the Lords house: the King
sitting under his clo^h of Estate, and all the Lords in their degrees, the
Bishop of Ely Doctor Godrike Lord Chauncollor, made a Proposition for the
king, which being ended, the Lords departed. This was done, because the King
was sickly.

The (...) after, the Burgesses sat in the Common house at Westminster, and
chose for their Speaker, Maist^^ Diar* one of the late made Sergeants at the
law.

The ^1. of March, being good Friday, the Parliament brake up, and was
clearly dissolved at the Kings Pallaice of White hall, at seven of the
clock at night.

The third of April* being Monday after Easter day, the children of Christ's
Hospital in London* came from thence thorough the City to the Sermon kept at
Saint Marie Spittle, all clothed in plonket Coats, and red Cappes, and the
maiden children in the same Lyuerie, with kerchefs on their heads, all which
with their matron and other (...) were there placed on a Scaffolde of eight
Stages, and there sat the same time, which was a goodly show.

The tenth of April the Lord Mayor of London was sent Bridevvell given to the
City of London.
for to the Court at White hall, and there at that time, the Kings Majesty
gave to him for to be a w^rk^ house for the ^^re and idle persons of the City
of London* ^^^^ (...) of Bridewel, and seven hundred mark land of the Sauoy
rents, with all the beds and bedding of the Hospital of the Sauoy, toward
the maintenance of the said workhouse of Bridewell.

The eleauenth of April the Lord Mayor was presented to the King in his
Pallaice of White hall at Westminster, and was made knight by his Majesty, and
the same day the king removed in the afternoon to Greenewiche.

In this Month of April, and in May, commissions were Ievvelles and Church
plate called into the Kings hands.
directed through Englandes, for all the Church goods remaining in Cathedral
and parish Churches, that is to say, Jewels of Gold and Silver, Crosses*
Candlestickes, Sen^^^^, Chalices, and all other such like, with their ready
money, to be delivered to the Master of the Kings Jewels in the Tower of
London, all Coapes and Uestmentes of cloth of Gold, cloth of Tissewe, and
Silver, to the Master of the kings Wardrobe in London, the other Coaps,
Uestme^ts, and ornaments to be sold, and the money to be delivered to the
Kings Treasurer, reserving to every Church, one Chalice or Cup, with Table
clothes for the Communion board, at the discretion of the Commissioners.

The twentieth of May, by the encouragement of one Sebastian Voyage to Moscouy.
Cabotte, three great ships well furnished were set ^^^th for the adventure of
the unknown voyage to Musco^^^, and other east parts by the North Seas,
diverse Merchants and other, being free of that voyage, yielded toward the
charges of the some five and twenty pounds apeece. ^^^ George Barnes and (...)
William Garrard being y^ principal (...) there in.

About the same time two other ships were sent seek adventures Southwards.

Whiles King Edward lay dangerously sick, Lord Gilforde Three notable
marriages at D^rham place.
the Duke of Northumberlandes fourth son, married Lady lane the Duke of
Suffolkes daughter, whose mother being then ali^e, was daughter to Mary King
Henry's sister, which was first married to the French King, and after to
Charles Duke of Suffolk. Also the Earl of Pembrookes eldest son married Lady
Katherine, the said Dukes second daughter, and the Earl of Huntingtons son,
called Lord Hastings, married the Dukes youngest daughter.

King Edward being about the age of sixeteene years ended King Edward
deceassed.
his life at Grenewich on the sixth of July, when he had reigned six years
five months, and odd days, and was buried at Westminster. He was in this his
youth a Prince of such towardness, in virtue, learning, and al godly gifts, as
seldom has bin see^^ the like.

The eight of July, the Lord Mayor of London was sent King Edward's death
opened.
for to the Court, then at Greenewich, and to bring with him fi^e Aldermen, as
many Merchaunts of the Staple, an(...) many Merchaunt Adventurers, unto whom
by the Council was se^^da^^y declared the death of King Edward, and also ho^e
he had ordained for the succession of the Crown by his letters Patents, to
the which they were sworn, and charged to keep it secret.

The tenth of July, in the afternoon about three of the Lady Jane proclaimed
Queen
clock, Lady Jane daughter to Frauncis Duchess of Suffolk, ((...) Ian^ was
ma^^^^^ to the Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth ^^nne to the Duke of
Northumberlande) was con^^eyed by water to the Tower of London, and there
received as Queen. After five of the clock the same afternoon, was
proclamation made of the death of King Edward the ^^^th, and how he had
ordained by his letters Patents, bearyng ba^^ the (...) and twentieth of June
last past, that the (...) Jane, (as is before said) should be heir to the
Crown of England, and the heir males of her body, etc.

The eleauenth of July, Gilbert Pot, Drawer to Ninion Gilbert Pot punished
in Cheap.
Saunders Uintner, dwelling at Saint John's head within Ludgate, who was accused
by the said Saunders his Master, was set on the Pillorie in Cheap, with both
his ears nailed, and clean cut off, for words speaking at time of the
proclamation of Lady Jane, at which execution was a Trumpet blown, and a
Harrault read his offense, in presence of one of the Sheriffs, etc.

About five of the clock the same day in the afternoon, Men drowned at Lon.
bridge.
Ninion Saunders, Master to the said Gilbert Pot, and John Owen a Gunner,
coming from the Tower of London by water in a Whirrie, and shooting London
bridge, toward the Black Friars, were drowned at Saint Mary Lock, and the
Whirrie men saved by their Ores.

The twelfth of July, word was brought to the Council, being then in the
Tower with the Lady Jane, that the Lady Marie, eldest daughter to King Henry
the eighte was at Keninghall Castle in Norffolke, and with her, the Earl of
Bathe, sir Thomas Cornwallis and other, and also, that the Earl of Sussex, and
Master Henry Ratcliffe his son were ^^mmyng toward her: whereupon, by
speedy Council it was there concluded, that the Duke of Suffolk with certain
other Noblemen, should go toward the Lady Mary, to ^^^che her up to the Tower:
this was first determined: but by night of the same day, the said voyage of
the Duke of Suffolk was clean dissolved, by the special means of the Lady
Jane his daughter, who taking the matter heavily, with weepyng tears, made
request to the whole Council, that her father might ^arry at home in her
company. Whervppon the Council persuaded with the Duke of Northumberlande, to
take that voyage upon him, saying, that no man (...) so ^^t therefore, because
that he had achieved the victory in Norffolke once already, and was
therefore so feared, (...) none durst once li^^e up their weapon against him:
be(...) that, he was the best man of war in the Realm, as well for the
ordering of his Camps and Souldicures; both in battle and in their tents,
as also by experience, knowledge and wisdom, he could both animate his army
with witty persuasions, and also pacify and alay his ennimyes pride with his
stowte courage, or else to dissuade them if need were from their enterprise*
Finally, said they, this is the short and long, the Queen will in no wise
grant, that her father shall take it upon him: wherefore (quoth they) we
think it good, if it may please your Grace, it lies in you to remedy the
matter. Well quoth the Duke then, since ye think it good, I and mine will go,
not doubting of your fidelity to the Queens Majesty, which now I leave in
your custody: so that night he sent for both Lords, Knights, and other
that should go with him, and caused all things to be prepared accordynglye:
then went the Council in to the Lady Jane, and told her of their
conclusion, who humblye thanked the Duke for reserving her father at home, and
beseeched him to use his diligence, whereto he answered, that he would do
what in him lay.

The morrow following, great preparation was made, the Duke early in the
morning called for his own harness, and saw it made ready at Durham place,
where he appointed all his retinue to meet.

The same day Carts were laden with Munition and Artillery, and field
pieces were set forward.

The same forenoone the Duke moved efte soones the Counsel to send their
powers after him, as it was before determined, the same to meet with him at
New Market, and they promised they would. He said further to some of them:
My Lords, I and these other noble Personages, with the whole army that now
go forth, as well for the behalf of you and yours, as for the establishing of
the Queens highness, shall not only adventure our bodies and lives amongst
the bloody strokes and cruel (...) of our adversaries in the open fields, but
also we do leave the conservation of our selves, children, and families at
home here with you, as altogyther committed to your truth and fidelities,
whom, if we thought ye would through malice, conspyracie, or dissension
leave us your friends in the Briars and betraye us, we could as well sundry
ways foresee and provide for our own safegards, ^^ any of you, by betraying
us, can do for yours. But now upon the only trust and faithfulness of
your honors, whereof we think our selves most assured, we do hazard our
lives, which trust and promise if ye shall violate, hoping thereby of life
and promotion, yet shall not God coumpt you innocent of our bloods, neither
acquit you of the sacred and holy oath of allegeaunce made freely by you to
this virtuous Lady the Queens highness, who by your and our enficement is
rather of force placed there^^, than by her ownseeking and request. Consider
also, that Gods cause, which is the preferment of his word, and ^^a^e of
Papists entrance, has been (as ye have here before always laid) the
original ground whereupon ye ^^en at the first motion granted your goodwils
and con^^^ts thereunto, as by your hands writing appears, and ^^inke not the
contrary, but if ye mean deceyte, thoughs not forthewyth, yet hereafter God
will revenge the same.

I can say no more, but in this trouble some time wysh you to use constant
hearts, abandoning all malice, envy, and private affections: and therewithal
the first course for the Lords came up, wherefore the Duke shut up his talk
with these words, I have not spoken to you in this sort ^ppon any mistruste
I have of your trueth^, of which always I have ever hitherto conceived a
trusty confidence, but I have put you in remembrance thereof what chance of
variance so ever might grow amongst you in mine absence, and this I pray you,
wish me not worse good speed in this journey, than ye would have to your
selves. My Lord, says one of them, if ye mistruste any of us in this matter,
your Grace is far deceived, for which of us can wash his hands clean
thereof? and if we should shrincke from you as from one that were culpable,
which of us can excuse himself to be guiltless? therefore herein your doubt
is too far cast. I pray God it be (quoth the Duke:) let us go to dinner:
and so they sat down. After dinner the Duke went in to the Queen, where his
Commission was by that time sealed, for his Lieutenantshippe of the army, and
then took his leave of her, and so did certain other Lords also.

Then as the Duke came through the Council Chamber, he took his leave of the
Earl of Arundale, who prayed God be with his Grace, saying, he was sorry it
was not his chance to go with him and bear him company, in whose presence he
could find in his heart to spend his blo^de even at his feet: then the
Earl of Arundale took Thomas Louell the Dukes boy by the hand, and said,
farewell gentle Thomas with all my heart. Then the Duke, with the L. Marquis of
Northampton, the Lord Gray, and diverse other, took their Barge, and went to
Dirham place, and t^ White hall, where that night they mustred their men: and
the next day in the morning the Duke departed with the number of 600. men, or
there aboutes. And as they rode thorough Shordi^che, says the Duke to the
Lord Gray, the people preasse to see us, but not one says God speed us.

The same day sir John Gates and other went out a^^^^ the Duke.

By this time word was brought to the Tower, that the Lady Mariae was ^^ed to
Framing^a^ Castle in Suffolk* where the people of the Country almost wholly
resorted to h^^: ^ that ^^^ Edmond Pec^am, sir Edward Hastings, and the Lord
Windsore, with other^; were (...) Queen Marie ^^ B^ckinghamshire, sir John
Williams in Oxfordshire etc.

About this time, six ships well manned, that were a^poynted to lie before
Yarmouth, and to have taken the Lady Mary if she had fled that way, were by
force of weather driven into the Haven, where one Master Iernigham was raising
power on the Lady Mary's behalf, who hearing thereof, came thither,
whereupon the Captains took a boat and went to the Ships, but the
Sailors and soldiers asked Master Iernigham what he would have, and whether
he would have their Captains or no, and he said yea, Mary said they, ye shall
have them or we will throw them into the bottom of the Sea, but the Captains
said forthwith, that they would serve Queen Mary willingly, and so brought
forth their men, and conveyed with them their great ordinance: Of the coming
of these Ships the Lady Mary was wonderful joyous, and afterward doubted
little the Dukes puissaunce: but when news thereof was brought to the Tower,
each manne there began to draw backward, and over that, word of a greater
mischief was brought to the Tower, that is to say, that the Noblemens
tenaunts refused to serve their Lords against Queen Marie.

The Duke thought long for his succoures, and wrote somewhat sharplye to the
council at the Tower, in that behalf, as well for lack of men as of
munition, but a flender aunsweare had he again: And from that time forward,
certain of the Council, to weete, the Earl of Pembrooke, and sir Thomas
Cheyney Lord Warden, and other, sought to get out of the Tower to consulte
in London, but could not yet.

The sixeteenth of July, being Sunday, Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, by
commandment of the Council, prea^hed at Paul's Cross, where he vehementlye
persuaded the people in the title of ye Lady Jane, late proclaimed Queen, and
inueyed earnestly against the title of Lady Mary, etc.

The same sixeteenth of July, the Lord Treasurer was ^^ne out of the Tower to
his house in London at night, and ^^rthwith about seven of the clock the
Gates of the Tower upon a sudden were shut up, and the kayes borne up to the
Lady Jane, which was for fear of some packing in the Lord Treasurer, but he
was fetched again to the Tower, about twelve of the clock in the night.

The xviij. day, the Duke perceiving, that the succors promised came not to
him, and also, receiving from some of the Council Letters of discomforte, he
returned from Bury back again to Cambridge.

The nineteenth of July, the Counsel, partelye moved with the right of the
Lady Mary's cause, partly considering, that the most of the realm, was wholly
bent on her side, changed their minds and assembled themselves at Bainard^
Castle, where they communed with the Earl of Pembrooke, and immediately with
the Mayor of London, certain Aldermen, the Sheriffs, Garter King at Arms,
and a Trumpet, came into Cheap, where they proclaimed the Lady Mary daughter
to King Henry the eight, and Queen Katherine, Queen of England, France and
Irelande Dofendor of the Faith, etc. and the same night the Earl of Arundele
and the Lord Paget rode in post to Queen Mary.

The xx. of July, John D. of Northumberlande, having sure knowledge, y^ the
Lady Mary was by the nobility and others of the Council remaining at London
proclaimed Queen: about five of the clock the same night, he with such
other of the Nobility as were in his company, came to the Market Cross, and
calling for an Harrault, himself proclaimed Queen Mary, and among other he
threw up hy^ own Cap, and within an hour after he had Letters from the
Council (as he said) that he should forthwith dismiss^ his army, and not to
come within ten miles of London* for if he did, they would fight with him,
the rumor where^ was no sooner abroad, but every man departed. And shortly
after, the Duke was arrested in the Kings College (...) one Master Slegge
Sergeant at Arms. At the last, letters were brought from the Council at
London, that al (...) should go each his way: Whereupon the Duke said (...)
them that kept him, ye do me wrong to withdraw my liberty, see you not the
Counsels letters without exception, that all men should go whither they
would. At which words, they that kept him and the other Noblemen, sete them
at liberty, and so continued they for that night, insomuche, that the Earl of
Warwick was ready in the morning to have rode away, but then came the Earl of
Arundel from the Queen to ye Duke into his Chamber, who went out to meet him,
and as soon as he saw the Earl of Arundale, he fell on his knees, and desired
him to be good to him for the love of God, consider (says he) I have done
nothing but by the co^sents of you and all the whole Council: My Lord (quoth
the Earl of Arundale) I am sent hither by the Queens Majesty, and in her
name I do arreast you, and I obey it my Lord (quoth he) I beseech you my
Lord of Arundale (quoth the Duke) use mercy toward me, knowing the case as
it is, my Lord (quoth the Earl) ye should have sought for mercy sooner, I
must do according to my commandment, and therewith he committed the charge
of him, and of other to the Guarde and Gentlemen that stood by.

The xxv. of July, the Duke with other were brought up to the Tower of London,
under the conducte of Henry Earl of Arundale, and thus was the matter ended
without bloodshed, which men feared would have brought the death of many
thousands.

Queen Mary.
portrait of Queen Mary
MAry, the eldest daughter of King Henry the eyghte, began Anno reg. 1.
her reign the sixth of July, in the year 1553. when she dissolved her camp
at Framingham, which was to the number of thyrtie thousand men, the Earl
of Sussex being Liuetenant of the army, victualles were of such plentye,
that a Barrel of Beer was sold for six pence with the Caske, and four
great loaves of bread for a penny.

Afterward, being accompanied with a goodlye band of Noblemenne, Gentlemen
and Commoners, gathered out of all parts of the Realm, she came to London and
entered the City through Aldgate, up to Leaden hall, then down Grass
street, Fenchurche street, Mart Lane, Tower street, and so into the Tower
the third day of Auguste, where Thomas Duke of Norffolke, Doctoure Gardener
late Bishop Prisoners pardoned.
of Winchester, and Edward Courtney son and heir to Henry Marque^ of
Excester* prisoners in the (...), kneeling ^^^ the hill within the sa^^ ^ower*
were pardoned and discharged.

The fifth of August, Edmond Bonner late Bishop of London* prisoner in the
Marshalsea, and Cutbe^t To^^^all the old Bishop of Durham prisoner in the
Kings bench, had their pardons* and were restored to their Seas. Shortelye
after all the Bishops which had bin depryued in the time of king Edward the
sixth, were restored to their Bishoprics, and the other which were placed in
King Edwardes time, removed: Bishops restored and other displaced.
also all beneficed men that were married, or would not forsake their opinion,
were put out of their livings, and other known to be ^^ the contrary part,
were set in y^ same, especially if any were alive* that had of late bin put out
of the same, as Bishop Day of Chichester, Heath of Worcest: etc.

The 9. of August in the afternoon, the Queen held an Obsequie in the Tower
for King Edward, the Dirge being sung in Latin, and on the morrow a Mass of
Requiem, whereal Burial of King Edward.
the Queen with her Ladies offered. The same day the corpse of King Edward was
buried at Westminster, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Pembrooke, and the
Earl of Shrewsburie being chief Mourners, with diverse other Noblemen and
other. Doctor Day* Bishop of Chichester preached at the said burial, and all the service with a Communion was in English.

The 11. of August certain Gentlemen minding to pass Men drovvne^ at London
bridge.
under London bridge in a Whyrrie, were there ouerturned, and seven of them
drowned, one was Master T. Bridges ^onne.

The 13. of Auguste Master Bourne a Chanon of Paul's, preaching at Paul's
Cross* not only prayed for the dead, but also declared, that Doctor Bonner
Bishop of London (late restored, and therein presence) for a Sermon by him
(...) in the same place, upon the same Gospel, was about four years ^^uce,
unjustly cast into the vile prison of the Marshalsea, and there kept during
the reign of King Edward, which saying so offended some of the audience,
that they breaking silence, said the Bishop had preached abomination, other
some cried (meaning of the Preacher) pull him out, pull him out, and some
being near the Pulpit, began to clyme, wherewith the Preacher stepped
back, and one Master Bradforde, a Preacher of King Edwardes time, stepped
into his place, and gentlye persuaded the audience to quietness and obedience,
alleging Saint Paul to the Romans: Let every soul submit himself to
the authority of the higher powers, etc. nevertheless Master Bourne standing
by Master Bradford, one threw a Dagger at him, which hit a side post of the
Pulpit, and A Dagger thrown at the Preacher.
rebounded back again a great way, where upon Master Bradford brake off
his speech, and forced himself with the help of John Rogers, an other
Preacher, to convey Master Bourne out of the audience, which with great
labor they brought into Paul's School.

The xviij. of August John Dudley Duke of Northumberlande, William Parre
Marquis of Northampton, and the Earl of Warwike son and heir to the Duke,
were arraigned at Westminster hall before Thomas Duke of Norffolke, high
Steward of England, where the Duke of Northumberland with great reverence
toward the Judges, protested his faith and allegiance to the Queen, whom he
confessed grievously to have offended, and said, that he meante not to speak
any thing in defense of his tact, but requested to understand the opinion of
the Court in two points: First* whether ^ man doing any act by authority
of the Princes Council, and by warrant of the great Seal of England, and
doing nothing without the same, might be charged with Treason for any thing
which he might do by warrant thereof: Secondly, whether any such persons as
were equally culpable in that crime, and those, by whose letters and
commandments he was directed in all his doyngs, might be his Judges, or
pass upon his trial as his Peers.

Whereunto was aunsweared, that as co^ncerning the first, the great Seat,
(which he laid for his warrant)* was not the Seal of the lawful Queen of
the Realm) nor passed by authority, but the Seal of an Usurper, and
therefore could be no warrant to him. As to the second, it was alleged, that
if any were as deeply to be touched in that case as himself, yet so long as
no atteynder were of record against them, they were never the less persons
able in Law to pass upon any trial, and not to be challenged therefore,
but at the Princes pleasure. After which aunsweare, the Duke used few words,
but confessed the indictment, by whose example* the other prisoners arraigned
with him did the like, and therevppon had judgment.

And when judgment was given* the Duke said, I beseech you my Lords all to be
humble futers to the Queens Majesty, and to grant me four requests,
which are these* ^yr^^^ that I may have that death which Noble (...) have
had in times paste, and not the other* Secondartly, that her Majesty will be
gracious to my children, which may hereafter do good service, consyderyng,
that they went by my commandment, who am their father, and not of their own
tree wills. Thyrdlye, that I may have appointed to me some learned manne for
the instruction and quiet of my conscience. And fourthlye, that she will send
two of the Council, to commune with me, to whom I will declare such
matters as shall be expedient for her, and the common weal: and thus I beseech
you al to pray for me.

On the nineteenth of Auguste were arraigned at Westminster, sir John Gates,
sir Henry Gates, sir Andrew Dudley, and sir Thomas Palmer, where, without any
Quest they pleaded guilty, and submitted themselves to the Queens mercy, and
so had judgment.

There of August Doctdure Watson Chaplain to the Bishop of Winchester preached
at Paul's Cross, by the Queen^ appointment, and for fear of the like
^un^^lie, as had been the Sunday last paste, certain Lords of the Counsel
repaired to the Sermon, as the Lord Treasourer, the Lord privy Seal, ye
Earl of Bedforde the Earl of Pembrooke, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord
Bliche, and sir Honrie Ge^o^g^^ Captain of the Guarde, with two hundred of
the Guarde, which food about the Preacher with Halbert^. Also the Mayor ^^d
warned the Companies of the Cittie^^ Preacher at Paul's Cross guarded.
be present in their Ly^^eries* which was well accepted of the Queens
Counc^^l, and the Sermon* was quietly ended.

The xxij. of August John Duke of Northumberlande was beheaded on the Tower
hill, whose body with the head was buried in the (...)* by the body of
Edward late Duke of Somerset, ^o that there lies before the high Aultare ^w^
Dukes between two Queens, to weere* the Duke of (...), and the Duke of
Northumberlande, between Queen Anne, and Queen Katherine, all four beheaded*
At the same time and place also, was likewise beheaded sir John Gates, Sir John
Gates and sir Thomas Palmer beheaded.
and sir Thomas Palmer, which sir John Gates in that place used few words,
but layd^ down his hea^ without an^^ kerchef, and had the same st^^^en off at
three blows. Sir Thomas Palmer, as loone as he came to the Staffolde, took
every manne by the hand, and desired them to pray for him: then putting off
his gown, he leaned upon the East rail, and said these words in effect: My
Masters (quoth he) God save (...)* it is ^ot (...) ^^^o you wherefore I come
hither, which I have worthilye well defe^^^ed at Gods hands, for I know it
to be h^^ divine ordinance, by this means to call me to his mercy, and to
teach me to know mys^tre, what I am, and whereunto we are all subject: I
thanks his merciful goodness, for he has caused me to learn more in one little
dark corne^ (...) (...)* than ever I learned by any travel in so many places
as I have bin, for there (I say) I have seen God, what he is, and how
unsearchable his wondrous works are, and how infinite his mercies be: I have
seen there my self thoroughly, and what I am, nothing but a lump of sin,
earth, dust, and of all vileness most vilest: I have seen there and know what
the world is, how dayne, deceiptfull, transitory, and short it is, how wicked
and loathsome the works thereof are in the sight of Gods Majesty, how he
neither regards she man^ees of the proud men and mighty ones, neither
despises the humbleness of the poor and lowly which are i^ the same world:
Finally, I have seen there what death is, how near hanging over every man's
head, and yet how uncertain the time, and how unknown to all men, and how
little it is to be feared: and should I fear death? or be sad therefore?
have I not seen two dye before mine eyes? yea, and within the hearing of mine
ears? no, neither the s^rinckling of the blood, or the sheading thereof, nor
the bloody Axe it self shall make me afraid: and now taking my leave to the
same, I pray you all to pray for me: come on good fellow (quoth he) art thou he
that must do the deed? I forgive thee with all my heart, and then kneeled
down, laying his head on the block, said, I will see how meet the (...) is
for my neck, I pray thee strike not yet, for I have a few prayers to say, and
that done, strike on Gods name, good leave have thou: his Prayers ended, and
desiring each man to pray for him, he laid down his head again, and so the
executioner took it from him at one stroke.

The xxiij. of August, the Queen delivered the great New Lord Chancellor.
Seal to Doctor Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and made him Lord Chancellor.

The xxvij. of August, the service began in Latin to be Latin service.
song in Paul's Church in London.

The xxvj. of August in the evening, the notablest Ship Great Harry a Ship
brent*
in England called the great Harry, was brent at Wolwich by negligence of the
Mariners, she was of burden a M. tun.

The ^^ of September, the Queen demanded a pressed of ^ Pressed to the Queen.
City of London of twenty M. pound, to be repayde again within fourteen
days after Michaelmas next following, which sum was levied of the Alderme^,
and 120. co^moners.

The third of September, Edward Courtney was created Earl of Devonshire
created.
Earl of Devonshire at Richmond.

The iiij. of September, was proclaimed certain new coins of gold and silver,
a Sovereign of gold of xxx. s^, the New Coins.
half Sovereign xv. s^, an Angel of x. s^, the half Angel v. s^. Of silner
the grote, half grote, and penny. All base coins to be current as before. Also
the same day by Proclamation, was pardoned the Subsidy of iiij. s^. the pound
Lands, Subsedie pardoned.
and two shillings eyghtpence the pound of mouable goods, granted in the last
Parliament of King Edward the sixth.

The fourteenth and fifteenth of September, Master Latimer and Doctor Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, were sent to the Tower of London.

Thomas Offeley: William Huette, the 28. of September. Sheriffs.


The xxvij. of September, Q. Mary came to the Tower by water, accompanied with
yt Lady Elizabeth her sister, and other Ladies, before whose ariual was shot a
great peale of gu^nes.

The last of September, Queen Mary rode through the City of London toward
Westminster, sitting in a Charryot* Coronation.
of cloth of Tissew, drawn with six Horses, all trapped with the like cloth
of Tissew. She sat in a gown of purple* Ueluet, furred with poweered Grmin,
having on her head a caul of cloth of tinsel, beset with perle and stone, and
above the same upon her head, a round circlet of gold, beset so richly with
precious stones, that the value there of was inestimable, the same caul and
circle being so massy and p^derous, that she was feign to bear up her head
with her hand, and the Canapy was borne over her Charyot. Before her rode a
number of Gentlemen and Knights, then Judges, then Doctors, then Bishops, th
Lords, then ye Counsel; after whom followed y^ Knights of the Bath in their
roabes, the Bishop of Winchester ^. Chancellor, and the Marquis of Winchester
L. high Treasurer, next came ye D. of Norffolke, and after him the Earl of
Oxford, who bare ye sword before her, the Mayor of London in a gown of
Chrimson Ueluet bare the Scepter of gold etc. after ye Queens Chariot, Sir Ed.
Hastings led her horse in his hand: then came another Chariot, having a
covering all of cloth of silver all white, and vj. horses trapped with she
like, therein sat the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lady Anne of Cleue, then Ladies
and Gentlewome^ riding on horses trapped with red velvet, and their gowns and
kirs^es likewise of red velvet: after them followed two other Chariots covered
with red satin, and the horses betrapped with the same, and certain
Gentlewomen between every of the said Chariots riding in Chrimson satin,
their horses betrapped with the same, the number of the Gentlewome^ so riding
were xlvj. besides them in the Chariots. At Fenchurch was a costly Pageant made
by the Genewayes: at Grassechurch corner there was another Pageant made by the
Easterlings. At the upper end of Grassestr^ete there was another Pageant made
by the Florentines very high, on the top whereof there stood iiij. pictures,
and in she midst of them and most highest, there stood an Angel all in green,
with a Trompet in his hand, and when the Trompetter who stood secretly in the
pageant did sound his tromp, the Angel did put his tr^mp to his mouth as though
it had bin the same that had sounded, to the great maruelling of many ignorant
persons: this Pageant was made with iij. thorough faires or gates etc. The
Conduit in Cornehill ran wine, and beneath y^ Conduit a Pageant made at the
charges of the City, and another at the great Conduit in Cheap, and a
fountain by it running wine. The Standard in Cheap new painted, with the
Waytes of the City aloft thereof playing. The Cross in Cheap new washed and
burnished. One other Pageant at the little Conduit in Cheap next to Paul's
made by the City, where the Aldermen stood, and when ye Queen came against
them, the Recorder made a short proposition to her, and then the Cha^berlaine
presented to her in the name of the Mayor and the City, a ^^r^^ of cloth of
gold, and ^ thousand marlies of ^^l^in it: then she rode forth, and in Paul's
Church-yarde against the School, one Master Heywod sat in a Pageant under a
Uine, and made to her an Oration in Latin and English. Then was there one
Peter a Dutchman stood on the weathercocke of Paul's steeple, holding a
streamer in his hand of five yards long, and waning thereof, stood sometime on
the one foot, and shook the other, and then kneeled on his knees, to the
great marvel of all people. He had made two Scaffoldes under him, one above
the cross, having torches and streamers set on it, and one other over the bole
of the cross, likewise set with streamers and torches, which could not burn,
the wind was so great: the said Peter had sixteen pound thirteen shillings
fourpence given him by the City for his costs and pains, and all his stuff.
Then was there a Pageant made against the Deane of Paul's gate, where the
Queresters of Paul's playde on Uials, and song. Ludgate was newly repaired,
painted, and richly hanged, with minstrels, playing and singing there* then was
there another Pageant at the Conduit in Fleetestreete, and the Temple bar was
newly painted and hanged. And thus she passed to White hall at Westminster,
where she took her leave of the Lord Mayor, giving him great thanks sor his
pains, and the City for their cost, On the morrow, which was the first day of
October, the Queen went by water to the old Palace, and there remained till
about eleven of the clock, and then went on foot upon blew cloth, being
rayled on either side, unto Saint Peter's Church, where she was solemnly
crowned and a* noynted by the Bishop of Winchester, which Coronation and other
ceremonies and solemnities then used according to the old custom, was not
fully ended till it was nigh four of the clock at night that she returned
from the Church, before whom was then borne three swords sheathed, and one
naked. The great service that day done in Westminster hall at dinner by diverse
noblemen, would ask long time to write. The Lord Mayor. of London and twelve
Citizens kept the high Cupb^^rd of plate as Butlers, and ye Queen^ gave to the
Mayor for his fee a cup of gold with a cover waying seauenteene ounces.

The fifth of October, the Parliament began at Westminster. Parliament.


The five and twenty day of October, the Barge of Graves end, a Catch running
upon her, was ouerturned, and fourteen Graves end Barge ouerturned.
persons drowned, and sixteen saved by swimming.

Sir Thomas White Merchant Tailor, the 28. of October. Mayor.


This Sir Thomas White, a worthy patron and protector of poor Scholars and
learning, renewed or rather erected a Charitable deeds of Sir Tho. White.
College in Oxford, now called Saint John's College, before Bernard College.
He also erected Schools at Bristow and Reading. Moreover, this worshipful
Citizen in his life time gave to the City of Bristow two thousand pounds of
ready money to purchase lands to the yearly value of 120. pound, for the which
it is decreed, that the Mayor, Burgeses and Communaltye of Bristow, in Anno.
1567. and so yearly during the term of ten years then next ensuing, should
cause to be paid at Bristow, one hundred pound of lawful money. The first 800.
pound to be lent to sixteen poor young men Clothiers, and free men of the same
Town, for the space of ten years, fifty pound the piece of them, putting
sufficient sureties for the same, and at the end of ten years, to be lent to
other sixteen, at the discretion of the Mayor, Aldermen, and four of the
common Counsel of the said City. The other two hundred pound to be employed
in the provision of Corn, for the relief of the poor of the same City, for
their ready money, without gain to be taken. And after the end of ten years
on the feast day of Saint Barthelmew, which shall be in Anno. 1577. at the
Merchant tailors Hall in London, unto the Mayor and communaltie of the City of
York, or to their Attorney aucthorised, an hundred and four pound, to be lent
unto four young men of the said City of York, freemen and inhabitants,
(Clothiers always to be preferred,) viz. to every of them five and twenty pound,
to have and occupy the same for the term of ten years, without paying any
thing for the loan, the four pound overplus of the 104. pound, at the pleasure
of the Mayor and communaltie for their pains to be taken about the rescepts
and paymentes of the said 100. pound. The like order in all points is taken
for the delivery of 104. pound in the year 1578. to the City of Canterbury.
In the year 1579. to Reading 1580. to the company of the Merchant Taylours
1581. to Gloucester 1582. to Worcester, 1583. to Excester, 1584. to Sal^sburie,
1585. to Westchester, 1586. to Norwich, 1587. to South-hampton, 1588. to
Lincoln, 1589. to Winchester, 1590. to Oxford, 1591. to Heriford East 1592. to
Cambridge, 1593. to Shrewsburie, 1594. to Lin, 1595. to Bathe, 1596. to Derby,
1597. to Ipswich, 1598. to Colchester, 1599. to Newcastell. And then to begin
again at Bristow one 140. pound, the next year to the City of York, and so
forth to every of the said Cities and Towns, in the like order as before, and
thus to continue for ever, as in the indentures tripartite, more plainly may
appear.

Cardinal Poole, who had long time bin forth from this Cardinal Poole.
Realm, and now in great estimation in the Court of Rome, was sent for by
Queen Mary to return into his Country of England.

The third of November, the weathercocke of Paul's was set up, which cock
wayed forty pound, his length VVeathercock of Paul's.
from the bill to the tail was four foot, and his breadth over the wings
three foot and a half, the which cock being of copper, was over gilt.

The thirteenth of November, Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Lady Jane
that was before proclaimed Queen, and the Lord Guilford her husband, were
arraigned at the Guild hall of London, and condemned of Treason.

The Parliament was dissolved on the sixth of December. And on the one and
twentieth of December, began Latin service in the Church.
throughout England the Church service to be done in Latin, as was enacted by
the last Parliamente, and as the same had bin left in the last year of King
Henry the eight.

In the beginning of the month of January, the Emperor sent a noble man
called Ecmondane, and certain other Ambassadors into England, to conclude a
marriage between King Phillip his son, and Queen Mary of England.

The fourteenth of January, D. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Lord
Chancellor of England, in the Chamber of presence at Westminster, made to the
Lords, Nobility, and Gentlemen, an Oration very eloquent, wherein he
declared that the Queens Majesty, partly for amity, and other weighty
considerations had, after much suite on the Emperors and Prince of Spaynes
behalf made, determined by the consent of the Counsel and Nobility, to match
her self with the said Prince in most godly and lawful matrimony, and
declared further, that she should have for her ioynter thirty thousand Ducats
by the year, with all the low Country of Flanders, and that the issue (if
there happened any) between them two lawfully begotten, should be heir as
well to the Kingdom of Spain, as also to the said low Country. He said
therefore that they were all bound to thank GOD that so noble, worthy, and
famous a Prince would vouchsafe so to humble himself as in this marriage to
take upon him rather as a Subject, than otherwise, for the Queen and her
Counsel should rule all things as ^^e did before, and that there should be
of the Counsel no Stranger, neither to have the custody of any Fortes or
Castles etc. nor bear any rule or office in ^he Queens house, or elsewhere
in all England, with ^yuers other Articles there by him rehearsed, where^^e
he said the Queens pleasure and request was, ^^at like good Subjects for
her sake, they would most ^^^inglye receive him with reverence, joy, and
honor.

The next day, the Lord Mayor of London, with his breethren the Alderme^, were
sent for to the Court, and to bring with them forty of the head commoners of
the City, unto whom before the Counsel, the Lord Chancellor made the like
Oration, desiring them to behave themselves like good subjects with all
humbleness and rejoicing.

The purpose of this marriage was so grievously taken of diverse men, that for
this and for Religion, they in such Conspiracy.
sort conspired against the Queen, that if the matter had not broken out
before the time by them appointed; men thought it would have brought much
trouble and danger.

The xxv. of January, Sir John Gage, Lord Chamberlayne, certified the Lord
Mayor of London, that Sir Thomas Commotion in Kent by Sir Thomas Wiat
Wyat with certain other Rebels were up in Kent about Maydestone, whereupon,
great watch was kept, and that night the Lord Mayor rode about to peruse the
same, and every night after two Aldermen did the like: in the day time the
gates of the City were warded by substantial Citizens.

The xxvij. of January, the Lord Treasurer came to the Guild hall from the
Counsel, to request the Citizens to prepare five hundred footmen well
harnessed, to go against Wyat, which was granted, and made ready the same
night, and on the morrow were delivered to their Captains, and sent to
Grauesend by water. The xxix. of January, the Duke of Norffolke, with the
Captain of the Guard, and other soldiers, The Duke of Norffolke sent against
Wyatt.
and the Captain and Soldiers that were sent from London, minded to assault
Rochester Castle, where Wyat and his people lay, but before the setting
forward of these Wyatt strengthened with the Queens Ordinance.
men, the Duke sent Master Nory an Herault unto Rochester with the Queens
Proclamation of pardon to all such as would desist from their purpose, who
coming to the bridge, would have gone through into the City, but they that
kept the bridge would not suffer him till that the Captain came, who at the
last granted the same to be read ^^ the City, but holding a Dagge against him,
cried speak^^ softly, or else they would shoot him thorough, so that they
would not suffer the people to hear the Proclamation, which being ended, each
man cried they had done nothing wherefore they should need any pardon, and in
that quarrel which they had taken in hand, they would live and dye:
nevertheless at the last Sir George Harpar received the pardon outwardly, and
being received under the Duke of Norffolkes protection, came on forward
against the Kentishmen, and even as the company were set in a readiness, and
marched forward toward the Bridge, Brette being Captain of the five hundred
Londoners, of which, the more part were in the fore-ward, turned himself
about, and drawing out his sword, said these or like words: Masters, we go
about to fight against our native Countrymen of England and our friends, in a
quarrel unrightful, and partly wicked, for they considering the great and
manyfolde miseries which are like to fall upon us, if we shall be under the
rule of the proud Spaniards, are here assembled to make resistance of their
coming, for the avoiding of so great mischiefs and inconveniences likely to
light, not only upon themselves, but on every of us and the whole Realm,
wherefore I think no English heart ought to say against them, much less by
fighting to withstand them, and therefore I and others (meaning such as were
in that rank with him) will spend our blood in the quarrel of this worthy
Captain Master Wyat, and other Gentlemen here assembled: which words once
pronounced, each man turned their Ordinance against their folowers, and
thereupon cried a Wyat a Wyat, of which sodeyne noise, the Duke, the Captain
of the Guard, and other being abashed, fled forthwith: immediately came in
Master Wyat and his company on horssebacke, rushing in amongst as well the
Guard as the Londoners, and said, so many as will come and tarrye with us,
shall be welcome, and so many as will depart, good leave have they, and so ^ll
the Londoners, part of the Guard, and more than three ^artes of the retinue,
went to the Camp of the Kentishmen, where they still remained. At this
discomfiture, the Duke lost eight pieces of brass, with all other munition and
Ordinance, and himself with few other hardly escaped. The last of January,
Wyat and his company came to Dertforde, and the next day they came full and
whole to Greenewich and Depeford, where they remained Thurseday, Friday, and
the foorenone of Satterday. On the Friday which was Candlemas day, the most
part of the householders of London, with the Mayor and Aldermen were in
harness, yea this day and other days the Justices, Sergeants at the Law, and
other Lawyers, pleaded in harness.

In this mean time, Henry Duke of Suffolk, Father to the Lady Jane, fleeing
into Leycestershire and Warwikeshire with a small company, in diverse places as
he went made Proclamation against the Queens marriage with the Prince of
Spain etc. but the people inclined not to him.

The first of February, Proclamation was made at London, that the Duke of
Suffolk was discomfited, and fled with his two breethren. And also, that Sir
Peter Carow, with his uncle Sir Gawyn Carow and Gibbes, were fled into
France, and further, that the Queen did pardon the whole Camp of the
Kentishmen except Wyat, Harpar, Rudstone, and Iseley, and that who soever could
take Sir Thomas Wyat, except the said four persons, should have an hundred
pound Lands to him and his heirs for ever. The same day in the afternoon
being Candlemas even, the commons of the City assembled in their Liueries at
the Guild hall, whether the Queen with her Lords and Ladies came Queen Mary
came to the Guild hall in London.
riding from Westminster, and there after vehement words against Wyat,
declared that she meant not otherwise to marry, than the Counsel should
think both honorable and commodious to the Realm, and that she could
continue unmarried, as she had done the greatest part of her age, and therefore
willed them truly to assist her in repressing such as contrary to their duties
rebelled. When she had done, understanding that many in London did favor Wyats
part, she appointed Lord William Howard Lieutenant of Lord William Howard
Lieutenant of the City.
the City, and the Earl of Pembroke General of the Field, which both prepared
all things necessary for their purpose.

In the mean season, to weete, the third day of February, Wyatt came into
Southvvarke.
about three of the clock in the after noone, Sir Thomas Wyat and the
Kentishmen marched forward from Depeford toward London with five Ancients,
being by estimation about two thousand, which their coming so soon as it was
perceived, there was shot off out of the white Tower six or eight shot, but
missed them, sometime shooting over, and sometime short. After knowledge
thereof once had in London, forth with the Draw Bridge was cut down, and the
Bridge Gates shut. The Mayor and Sheriffs harnessed, commanded each man to
shut in their shoppes and windows, and to be ready harnessed at their doors,
what chance soever might happen. By this time was Wyat entered into Kentstreete,
and so by Saint Georges Church into Southwarke. Himself and part of his
company came in good array down Barmondsey street, and they were suffered
peaceably to enter Southwarke without repulse, or any stroke stricken, either
by the inhabitants, or of any other: yet was there many men of the Country in
the Innes, raised and brought thither by the Lord William and other, to have
gone against the said Wyat, but they all joined themselves to the Kentishmen,
and the inhabitants with their best enterteyned them. Immediately upon the
said Wyats coming, he made Proclamation that no Souldyour should take any
thing, but that he should pay for it, and that his coming was to resist the
Spanish King. etc.

At the Bridge foot he laid two pieces of Ordinance, and began a great
trenche between the Bridge and him. He laid one other piece of Ordinance of
Saint Georges, and one going into Bermondsey street, and one other toward the
Bishop of Winchesters house.

On Shroue Tuesday the sixth of February, Sir Thomas Wyat removed out of
Southwarke, toward Kingston Bridge, which was done upon this occasion. The
night before his departing out of Southwarke, by chance as one Wyatt removed
out of Southvvarke.
of the Lieutenants men of the Tower named Thomas Menchen rowed with a Sculler
over against the Bishop of Winchesters place, there was a waterman of the Tower
staire, desired the said Lieutenants man to take him in, who did so, which
being espied of Wyats men, seven of them with Harguebusses, called to them to
land again, but they would not, whereupon, each man discharged their piece,
and killed the said waterman, which forthwith falling down dead, the Sculler
with much pain rowed through the Bridge to the Tower wharffe with the
Lieutenants man, and the dead man in his boat, which thing was no sooner
known to the Lieutenant, but that even the same night, and the next morning,
he bent seven great pieces of Ordinance Euluerings, and Demi-Canons, full
against the foot of the Bridge, and against Southwarke, and the two Steeples
of Saint Olives, and Saint Mary Oueryes, besides all the pieces on the white
Tower, one Culuering on Diueling Tower, and three Fauconets over the Water
gate, which so soon as the inhabitants of Southwarke understood, certain
both men and women came to Wyat in most lamentable wise, saying, Sir, we are
all like to be utterly undone and destroyed for your sake, our houses shall by
and by be thrown down upon our heads, to the utter spoil of this Borough,
with the shot of the Tower, all ready bente and charged toward us, for the
love of God therefore take pity upon us: at which words he being partly
abashed, stayde awhile, and then said:

I pray you my friends be content a while, and I will soon ease you of this
mischief, for God forbid that you or the least here should be killed or hurt
in my behalf. And so in most speedye manner he martched away. As he marched
toward Kingstone, he met by chance a Merchant Wiat marched toward Kingstone.
named Christopher Dorell, whom he called, saying, Cosen Dorell I pray you
commend me unto your Citizens the Londoners, and say unto them from me, that
when liberty and freedom was offered them, they would not receive it,
neither would they admit me to enter within their Gates, who for their
freedom, and the disburthening of their greefes, and oppression by Strangers,
would have franckely spente my blond in that their cause and quarrel, but now
well appears their unthankfulness to us their friends which means them
so much good, and therefore they are the less to be moned hereafter, when
the miserable tyranny of Strangers shall oppress them, and so he went
forward. This day by night he came to Kingstone, where the Bridge was
broken, and kept on the other side by two hundredth men, wherefore Wyat caused
a two pieces of Ordinance to be laid on the end of the Bridge, which so
feared them on the other side, that they durst not abide, then caused he three
or four of his Souldyers to leap into the Thamis, and to swim to the other
side, who lewsed the Western Barges which there lay tied, and so brought them
over, and by that means he passed the water: it was wonderful what pains
he took himself coming on foot amongst them, neither did they stay any
whitte all that night, but came almost to Brayneforde or ever they were
discryed by the Queens scoutes, who there by chance meeting Brette and his
company, Brette said to the scoute, back villayne, if thou go farther to
discover any thing here, thou shalt dye out of hand, the scoute returned in
great have.

The same day in the afternoon, were two men hanged Execution in Paul's
Churchyard.
on a Gibbet in Paul's Church yard by Marciall law, the one being servant to
the Duke of Suffolk, and late Sheriff of Leycester, the other a Baker, one of
the white coats sent out of the City against Wyat, and the same day came
tidings that the Duke with his breethren were taken.

The same day toward night, there was laden ten or twelve Carts with
Ordinance, as Bills, Pikes, Spears, bows, arrows, powlder, shot, shouels,
mattockes, baskets, and other munitions, two Cul^erings, one Sacre, three
Fawcons, and a Fawconet, all which stuff stayde in Paul's Church yard. The
same night also about fy^e of the clock, a Trompetter went about, and warned
all horssemen and men of arms to be at Saint James field, and all footmen
also to be there by six of the clock in the next morning.

The Queens scoute upon his return to the Court, declared Wyats being at
Brayneforde, which sodeyne news, made all in the Court wonderfullye afraid,
Drommes went through London at four of the clock, commanding all Soldiers to
armor, and so to Charing cross.

Wyat hearing that the Earl of Pembroke was come into the fields, he stayde at
Knights bridge until day, where his men being very weerie with travel of
that night, and the day before, and also partly feebled and faint, having
received small sustenance since their coming out of Southwarke restless.
There was no small ado in London, and likewise the Tower made great preparation
of defense. By ten of the cloak the Earl of Pembroke had set his troop of
horssemen on the hill in the high way above the new bridge, over against Saint
James: his footmen were set in two battles, somewhat lower, and nearer Charing
Cross, at the lane turning down by the brick wall from Islington ward, where
he had set also certain other horssemen, and he had planted his Ordinance upon
the hill side. In the mean season, Wyat and his company planted his Ordinance
upon Wyatt in Saint James field.
a hill beyond Saint James, almost over against the Park corner, and himself
after a few words spoken to his Souldyers, came down the old lane on foot,
hard by the Court gate at Saint James, with four or five auntients, his men
marching in good array. Cuthbert Vaughan and a two ancients turned down
toward Westminster. The Earl of Pembrokes horssemen houered all this while
without moving, until all was passed by saving the tail, upon which they did
set, and cut off: the other marched forward in array, and never stayed or
returned to the aid of their tail: the great Ordinance shot off freshly on
both sides: Wyats Ordinance ouershotte the troop of Horssemen. The Queens
Ordinance, one piece struck three of Wyats company in a rank upon the heads,
and slaying them, struck through the wall into the Park: more harm was not
done by the great shot of neither party. The Queens whole battle of
footmen standing still, Wyat passed along by the wall toward Charing Cross,
where the said Horssemen that were there, set upon part of them, but was
soon forced back. At Charing Cross there stood Sir John Gage Lord
Chamberlayne with the Guard, and a number of other, being almost a thousand,
the which upon Wyats coming, shot at his company, but at the last fled
to the Court gates, which certain pursued, and forced with shot to shut
the Court gates against them. In this repulse, the said Lord Chamberlayne and
others were so amazed, that many cried Treason in the Court, and had
thought that the Earl of Pembroke, who was assaulting the tail of his
Enemies, had gone to Wyat, taking his part against the Queen: there was
running and trying out of Ladies and Gentlewomen, shutting of doors and
windows, and such a shriking and noise, as was wonderful to hear. Wyat with
his men marched still forward all along to Temple Bar, and so thorough
Fleetestreete, till he came to the Bell Sauadge, an Inn nigh unto Ludgate,
without resistance, his men going not in any good order or array. It is
said, that at Strand, certain of the Lord Treasurers hand, to the number of
three hundredth men, whereof, the Lord Chidioke Powlet his son was Captain,
met them, and so going on the one side, passed by them going on the other side,
without any thing saying to them. Also this is more strange, the said Wyat and
his company passed along by a great company of harnessed men which stood on
both sides the streets, without any withstanding them. And as he marched
forward through Fleetestreete most with their swords drawn, some cried Queen
Mary has granted our request, and given us pardon, other said, the Queen
has pardoned us, thus some of Wyats men came even to Ludgate and knocked,
calling to come in, saying there was Wyat, whom the Queen had granted to
have their requests, but the Lord William Howarde stood at the Gate, and
said auant Traitor, thou shall not come in here. Wyat a while stayde, and
rested him upon a stall over against the Bell Sauadge Gate, and at the last
seeing he could not get in to the City, and being deceived of the aid he
hoped for, returned back again in array toward Charing Cross, and was never
stopped, till he came at Temple bar, where certain Horssemen which came
from the field met them in the face, and then began the fight again,
till Clarensus an Herraulte came and said to Master Wyat, Sir, you were best
by my counsel to yield, you see this day is gone against Wyatt taken.
you, and in resisting, you can get no good, but be the death of all these
your Souldioures, to your great peril of Soul: perchance you may find the
Queen merciful, and the rather, if ye stint so great bloudshead as is like
here to be. Wyat heerewyth being somewhat astonyed (although he saw his
men bente to fight) said well, if I shall needs yield, I will yield me
to a Gentleman, to whom, Sir Mawrice Barkeley came straight, and bade him
leap up behind him, and another took Thomas Cobham and Wyllyam Kneuet, and
so carried them behind them upon their horses to the Court then was taking
of men on all sides. It is said, that in this conflicte one Pikeman setting
his back to the wall at Saint James, kept seauenteene horssemen off him a
great time, and at the last was slain. The whole number on both sides
slain at this battle passed not forty persons, as far as could be
learned by them that viewed the feld, but there were many sore hurt. The noise
of women and children, when the conflicte was at Charing Cross, was so great,
that it was heard to the top of the white Tower, and also the great shot
was well discerned there out of Saint James field, there stood upon the
Leads, the Marquis of Northampton, sir Nicholas Poines, sir Thomas Pope,
Master John Seimer and other.

About five of the clock, Thomas Wiat, William Kneuet, Thomas Cobham, two
brethren name Mantels, and Alexander Wiat sent to the Tovver.
Bret were brought by sir Henry Ierningham by water to the Tower prisoners,
where sir Philip Deny received them at the Bulwark, and as Wiat passed by he
said, go Traitor, there was never such a Traitor in England, to whom sir
Thomas Wiat turned and said, I am no Traitor, I would thou should well
know, thou art more Traitor than I, it is not the point of an honest man to
call me so, and so went forth, when he came to the Tower Gate, sir Thomas
Bridges Lieuetenant took in through the Wicket, first Mantele, and said: Ah
thou Traitor, what have thou and thy company wrought? but he holding down his
head said nothing: Then came Thomas Kneuet, whom Master Chamberlain
Gentleman Porter of the Tower took in: Then came Alexander Bret, whom sir
Thomas Pope took by the bosom saying: oh Traitoure, how could thou find
in thy heart to work such a villainy, as to take wages, and being trusted
over a band of men, to fall to her enimyes, returning against her in battle:
Bret answered yea, I have offended in that case: Then came Thomas Cobham, whom
sir Thomas Poines took in, and said, alas Master Cobham, what wind headed you
to work such treason, and he answered, oh sir I was seduced. Then came in sir
Thomas Wyat, whom sir John Bridges took by the collar and said, oh thou
villain and unhappy traitor, how could thou find in thy heart to work
such detestable treason to the Queens Majesty, who gave thee thy life and
living once already, although thou did before this time bear arms in
the field against her, and now to yield her battle etc. if it were not (says
he) but that the law must pass upon thee, I would stick thee through with
my Dagger, to the which, Wyat holding his arms under his side, and lookyng
greeuouslye with a grimme look upon the Lieutenant, said, it is no maistery
now, and so passed on. Thomas Wyat had on a shyrte of Maile, with sleeves
very fair, thereon a Ueluet Cassocke, and a yellow Lace, with the windlace of
his Dag hanging thereon, and a pair of Boots on his legs, and on his head a
fair Hatte of Ueluet, with broad bone-worke Lace about it. William Kneuet,
Thomas Cobham, and Bret, were the like apparelled.

On the morrow and the next day following, were brought into the Tower
prisoners, George Cobham, sir Wyllyam Cobham, Anthony Kneuet, Hugh Booth,
Thomas Vain, Robert Rudstone, sir George Harper, Edward Wyat, Edward Fogge,
George Moore, and Cutbert Vaughan.

The tenth of February, the Earl of Huntington and other Gentlemenne, and to
the number of three hundred horssemenne, brought into the Tower as prisoner
the Duke of Suffolk, and the Lord John Gray his brother from Couentrie, where
the Duke had remained three days after his taking in the house and custody
of Christopher Warren Alderman there.

The eleauenth day sir Henry Isley who had fled, was brought into the Tower
prisoner in an old Freese coat, and old pair of hosen, all his apparel not
worth four shillings: the same day came in two of the Culpepers, one Cromar,
and Thomas Rampton the Duke of Suffolks secretary.

The twelfth of February, being Monday, about ten of the clock, there went
out of the Tower to the Scaffold on the Tower hill, the Lord Guilforde Dudley,
son to the Duke of Northumberlande, husband to the Lady Jane Gray daughter to
the Duke of Suffolk: and without the Bulwark gate Master Thomas Offley one
of the Sheriffs of London, received him and brought him to the Scaffolde,
where after a small declaration, he kneeled down and said his prayers, then
holdyng up his eyes and hands to Heaven with tears, at the last he desired
the people to pray for him, and after was beheaded: his body being laid in a
Carre, and his head in a cloth, was brought into the Chapel within the Tower,
where the Lady Jane, whose lodging was in Master Partridges house, did see
his dead carcass taken out of the Carre, as well as she did see him before
alive going to his death, a sight to her worse tha^ death. By this time was
there a Scaffolde made upon the Green over against the white Tower, for the
Lady Jane to dye upon, who being nothing at all abashed neither with fear of
her own death, which then approached, neither with the sight of the dead
carcass of her husband when he was brought into the Chapel, came forth, the
Lieuetenaunt leading her, with countenance nothing abashed, neither her eyes any
thing moistened with tears, with a Book in her hand, wherein she prayed
until she came to the said Scaffolde, whereon when she was mounted, she was
beheaded: whose deaths were the more hastened for fear of further troubles and
stir for her Title, like as her father had attempted.

The fourteenth and fifteenth of February, about the number of fifty of Wyats
faction, were hanged, on twenty pair of Gallows made for that purpose in
diverse places about the City*

The xvij. of Februarye, was proclamation made, that all Strangers should
avoid the Realm within xxiiij. days next ensuing, upon pain of their
goods to be confiscate, (al Free denizens, Merchants, and Ambassadors
excepted.)

The xviij. of February, Bright, one of the Captains of the Londoners that
fled to Wiat, and two and twenty persons more of the Kentishmen, were
delivered to the Sheriff of Kent, to be executed in diverse places of Kent, but
for the Kentishmen pardoned.
most part, they were all pardoned.

The xxij. of February, certain of Wiats faction, to the number of four
hundred and more, were led to Westminster, coupled together with halters about
their necks, and there in the Tylt yard, the Queen (who looked forth of her
Gallery) pardoned them. Duke of Suffolk beheaded.


The xxiij. of February, Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk, was beheaded on the
Tower hill.

The xj. of March William Lord Howard Admiral of England, was created Baron
Howard of Effingham, at Westminster. Earl of Devonshire sent to the Tovver.


The xv. of March, the Earl of Devonshire was apprehended and committed to the
Tower for suspicion to have consented to Wiats conspyracie.

The xviij. of March, being Palmsonday, the Lady Elizabeth, the Queens
sister, was by the Lord Treasurer and the Earl of Sussex, conveyed to the
Tower of London, from Parliament.
Westminster by water.

The tj. of April, the Parliament began at Westminster, which was appointed
to have been kept at Oxforde. Barons created.


The v. of April, sir John Williams was created Baron of Tame and Saint James.

The vij. of April, sir Edward North, was created Baron of Chartlege at Saint
James. The viij. of April sir John a Bridges was created Baron Chondoys of
Sudley Saint James. Catte hanged in Cheap.


The same viij. of April, then being Sunday, a Catte with her head shorn, and
the likeness of a Uestment cast over her, with her fore teete tied together,
and a round piece of paper like a singing Cake betwixt them, was hanged on a
Gallows in Cheap, near to the Cross, in the Parish of Saint Matthew, which
Catte being taken down, was carried to the Bishop of London, and he caused
the same to be showed at Paul's Cross, by the preacher Doctor Pendleton.

The x. of April, Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Disputation at
Oxforde.
Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer once Bishop of Worcester,
were conveyed prisoners from the Tower of London to Windsore, and after from
thence to Oxforde, there to dispute with the Divines and learned men of the
contrary opinion.

The xj. of April, sir Thomas Wiat was beheaded on the Thomas Wiat beheaded.
Tower hill, and after quartred, his quarters were set up in diverse places,
and his head on the Gallows at Hay hill near Hyde Park, from whence it was
shortly after stolen and conveyed away.

The xxvtj. of April, Lord Thomas Gray, brother to the late Duke of Suffolk,
was beheaded.

The xiiij. of May, Gerrard Fitz Garret was created Earl of Kyldare, and Baron
of Ophelley for him and his heirs, at Saint James.

William Thomas Gentleman, and other, were apprehended, for conspyring Queen
Mary's death, the same William Thomas for the matter, was drawn to Tyborne,
and hanged and quartred the xviij. of May.

The xix. of May, Lady Elizabeth was conveyed from the Tower of London by
water to Richemonde, from thence to Windsore, and so by the Lord Williams to
Ricot in Oxfordshire, and from thence to Woodstocke.

The xxv. of May, Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire, The Earl of Devonshire
sent to Fodringaye.
was delivered out of the Tower by sir Ralph Chamberlain of Suffolk, and sir
Thomas Tresham Knights, who conveyed him to Fodringay Castle in
Northamptonshire, there to remain under their custody.

The x. of June, Doctoure Pendleton preached at Paul's A Gunne shot at the
preacher.
Cross, at whom a Gunne was shot, the pellet whereof went very near him,
and light on the Church wall. But the shooter could not be found.

The xxtj. of June, was Proclamation made, forbidding the shooting in
handgunnes, and bearing of weapons.

The fifteenth of July, Elizabeth Croft a wenche abo^^^ Anno reg. 2. A Spirit
in a wall.
the age of eighteen years, stood upon a Scaffolde at Paul's Cross all the
Sermon time, where she confessed, that she being moved by diverse lewd persons
thereunto, had upon the foureteenth of March last before passed
counterfaited certain speeches in an house without Aldersgate of London,
thoroughe the which, the people of the whole City were wonderfully molested,
for that all men might hear the voice but not see her person. Some said it
was an Angel and a voice from Heaven, some the holy Ghost, etc. This was
called the Spirit in the Wall: she had lain whistling in a strange whistle
made for that purpose, which was given her by one Drakes: then were there
diverse companions confederate with her, which putting themselves among the
preasse, took upon them to interpret what the Spirit said, expressing
certain seditious words against the Queen, the prince of Spain, the Mass,
and Confession, etc.

The xix. of July, the prince of Spain arrived at Southampton, the fourth day
after he came to Winchester in the evening, and there going to Church was
honorably received of the Bishop, and a great number of Nobles: the next
day he met with the Queen, with whom he had long familiar talk. On Saint
James day, the marriage was solemnized between him and Queen Mary, at
which time the The marriage of King Philip and Queen Mary.
Emperors Ambassador being present, pronounced, that in consideration of the
marriage, the Emperor had given unto his son the Kingdom of Naples. The
solempnitie of this marriage being ended, the King of Harraults proclai^^ed
their Title as follows: Philip and Marie by the grace of The Kings style.
God, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland,
Defendors of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicile, Archdukes of Austrich
Dukes of Millaine, Burgundy and Brabant, Counties of Aspurge, Flaunders, and
Tyrroll: which being ended, the Trumpets blewe, the King and Queen came forth
hand in hand, and two Swords borne before them. Shortly after King Philip and
Queen Marie removed from Winchester to Basing, from thence to Windsore, then
to Richemont, from thence by water to Southwarke, acompanyed with the Noble men
and Ladies, the King in one barge, the Queeni^ an other, and landed at the
Bishop of Winchesters stairs near to S. Mary Oueries Church, and so passed
through that place and park, into Suffolk place, where they rested that
night. And the next day being the xviij. of August, they rode thorough
Southwarke over the Bridge, and so thorough London, where they were with great
provision received of ye A man slyding from Paul's steeple.
citizens, and passing through Paul's Churchyard, a man came ^lydyng, as it
were flying, upon a rope, from Paul's Steeple.

The second of September, sir Anthony Brown Master of the Horse, was put by,
and made Marquis Mountague, for him and his heirs Males, with the gift of xx.
marks the year of Surrey, at Hampton Court.

David Woodroffe: William Chester, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Lion Grocer, the 28. of October.

The xxvj. h^ October, a Spaniard was hanged at Charing Cross, for killing of
an Englishman, there was offered A Spaniard hanged.
for his life by other strangers 500. Crowns, but all that would not stay
Justice.

The xij. of Noue^ber, the parliament began at Westminster.

The xxiiij. of November, Cardinal Poole came out of Brabant into England, and
was received with much honor: he was by Parliament restored to his old
dignity, that he was put from by King Henry, and shortly after came into the
Parliament house, where the King, Queen, and other states were present. Then
he declared the cause of his Legacy, first exhorting them to return to the
Communion of the Church, and restore to the Pope his due authority.
Secondly, he advertised them to give thanks to God that had sent them so
blessed a King and Queen. Finally, he signified, for so much as they had with
great gentleness restored him to his honor and dignity, that he most ernestly
desired to ^ee them restored to the heavenly court, and unity of ye church.

The next day the whole Court of Parliament drew out the form of a
supplication, the sum whereof was, that they greatly repented them of that
Scisme that they had lived in, and therefore desired the King, Queen, and
Cardinal, that by their means they might be restored to the bosom of the
Church, and obedience of the Sea of Rome.

The next day the King, Queen, and Cardinal, being present, the Lord
Chancellor declared what the Parliament had determined concerning the
Cardinals request, and offered to the King and Queen, the Supplication
before mentioned, which being read, the Cardinal in a large Oration, declared
how acceptable Repentance was in the sight of God, etc. And immediately,
making prayer unto God by authority to him committed, absolved them. When all this was done, they went all unto the Chapel, and there singing Te Deum,
with great solempnitie declared the joy, that for this reconciliation was
pretended.

The xxviij. of November, the Lord Mayor of London, The Queen bruted to be
with child.
with the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the Commons in their Liveries, assembled in
Paul's Church at nine of the clock in the forenoone, where Doctoure Chadsey
one of the Prebendes preached in the Queere, in presence of the Bishop of
London, and nine other Bishops, and read a Letter sent from the Queens
Counsel, the tenor whereof was, that the Bishop of London should cause Te
Deum to be sung in all the Churches of his Diocese, with continual prayers
for the Queens Majesty, which was conceived and quick with child: the
Letter being read, he began his Sermon with this Antitheme: Ne timeas Maria,
inuenisti ^nim gratiam apud Deum: His Sermon being ended, Te Deum was sung, and
solemn Procession was made of Salve festa dies, all the circuit of the
Church.

The second of December, Cardinal Poole came from Lambeth by water, and
landed at Paul's Wharffe, and from thence to Paul's Church, with a Cross, two
Pillars, and two Pollaxes of silver borne before him. He was there received by
the Lord Chauncelor with Procession, where he tarryed til the King came from
Westminster by la^d at eleauen of the clock, and then the Lord Chancellor
entered Paul's Cross and preached a Sermon, taking for his Theme these words:
Fratres, scientes quia hora est iam nos de somno surgere, etc. In the which
Sermon he declared, that the King and Queen had restored the Pope to his
supremacy, and the three estates assembled in the Parliament, representing the
whole body of the Realm, had submitted themselves to the same. The sermon
being ended, the king departed toward Westminster, and with him the Lord
Cardinal, with the Cross only borne before him.

The xxvij. of December, Emanuell Philibert Prince of Prince of Piamount.
Piamont, and Duke of Sauoy, with other Lords, were received at Grauesende by
the Lord privy Seal and other, and so conveyed along the river of Thamis
under London bridge to Westminster.

The ninth of Januarye, the Prince of Orange being received at Grauesend, was
conveyed along the River of Thamis, and landed at the Duke of Suffolkes place.

The xij. of January, the said Prince of Orange, with other Prince of Orange.
Lords, was conducted by the Lord Chamberlain to the Tower of London, where
was showed unto him the ordinance, artillery, munitions, and armourie, with
the mint etc. and so was brought into the white Tower, from whence, as he
returned through the long Gallorie, all the prisoners saluted him, unto whom
the Prince said, he was sorry for their captivity, and trusted the King and
Queen would be good unto them: at his departing from the Tower, he gave the
Gunners ten pieces of Flemish Gold at v. s^. the piece, and the warders other
ten pieces, as a reward.

The xviij. of January, the Lord Chancellor, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord
Treasorer, the Earl of Shrewsburie, the Comptroller of the Queens house,
Secretary Bourne, and sir Richard Southwell Master of the Ordinance and
Armorie, came to the Tower of London, and there sitting in commission,
discharged prisoners as follows: the Archbishop of York, sir Ioh. Rogers,
sir James Crofts, sir Nicholas Throck. Prisoners discharged.
morton, sir Nicholas Arnolde, sir Edward Warner, sir George Harper, sir
William Sentlow, sir Andrew Dudley, sir Gawin Carrewe Knights, William Gibs
esquire, Cuthbert Vaughan, Harington, Tremaile and others.

The fourth of February, John Rogers Uicar of Saint Sepulchers, John Rogers
brent.
was brent in Smithfielde.

The seventh of February, the Lord Strange being married Iuogo de Can.
to the Earl of Comberlands daughter at the Court, the same day at night was
a goodly pastime of Iuogo de Can by Cresset light.

The xviij. of February Thomas Thurlebe Bishop of Ely, Ambassadors sent to
Rome. 1558 Earl of Deuonshyre delivered.
and Anthony Lord Montacute with other, took their iorny toward Rome,
Ambassadors from the King and Queen.

Against Easter, the Lord Courtney Earl of Devonshire, came again to the
Court, and about ten days after, the Lady Elizabeth came likewise to the
Queen, both at Hampton Court, where the Queen had taken her Chamber, to be
delivered of child, but all proved contrary, for she neither had child nor
great hope to have any.

On Easter day a Priest sometime a Monk at Biciter William Flovver brent at
Westminster.
named William Branche alias Flower, with a Wood knife wounded an other Priest
as he was ministering the Sacrament to the people in* Saint Margarets Church at
Westminster, for the which fact, the said William Flower the xxiiij. of
April had his right hand smitten off, and for opinions in matters of religion
was burned in the Sanctuary nighe to Saint Margarets Churchyard.

In May, Cardinal Poole, the Lord Chauncellor, the Embassadoures sent over to
Callais.
Earl of Arundale, and the Lord Paget went over Sea to Callais, and near
unto Mark treated with the Emperors and French Kings commisioners, for a
peace to be had between the said Princes, Cardinal Poole being president
there, who returned again into England, about the midst of June, without
any agreement making. The x. of May, William Conestable alias Fetharstone, a
Millars son about the age ^^ eighteen years, who had published King Edward
the sixth A Millers son fained to be K. Edward the ^ixte.
to be alive, and sometime named himself to be King Edward the sixth, was
taken at Eltham in Kent, and conveyed to Hampton Court, where being examined
by the Counsel, he required pardon, and said he wiste not what he did, but as
he was persuaded by many: from thence he was sent to the Marshalsea, and the
xxij. of May he was carried in a Cart thoroughe London to Westminster with a
paper on his head, wherein was written, that he had named himself to be King
Edward. After he had bin carried about Westminster ball before the Judges, he
was whipped about the Pallaice, and then through Westminster into Smithfielde,
and then banished into the North, in which Country he was borne, and had bin
sometime Lackey to sir Peter Mewtas.

The first of Julye, John Bradford was burned in Smithfielde, Bradford brent.
Anno reg. 3.
this Bradford was a man of very sober and honest life, and therefore the
Bishops would gladly have had him recant and abjure his opinions.

The xij. of Auguste, was a terrible fight on the sea between the Dutchmen
and Frenchmen, near to Romney Marsh, whereas xj. ships were brent and suncke.

In this month of August, in Suffolk, at a place by the Sea side, all of
hard stone and pibble, called in those parts a Shelfe, lying between the towns
of Orford and Alborough, where never grew Grass, nor any earth was ever
seen, there chanced in this barraine place, suddenly to spring up without
any tyllage or sowing, great abundaunce of Peason, whereof the poor gathered
(as men judged) above The necessity of the poor by God relieved*
an hundred quarters, yet remained some ripe, and some blossoming, as many as
ever there were before, to the which place rode the Bishop of Norwich, and the
Lord Willoughbey with others in great number, who found nothing but hard
rockey stone the space of three yardes, under the roots of those Peason, which
roots were great and long, and ^erye sweet, etc.

On Bartholomew even, after the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, had
ridden about Saint Bartholomews Disputation at Christ's Hospital, as had been
accustomed at S. Bartholomevvs in Smithfielde.
fair, they came to Christ's Hospital within Newgate, where they heard a
disputation between the Scholars of Paul's School, Saint Anthonies School,
and the Scholars of the said Hospital, for whom was provided three games,
which was three Pens, the best Pen of silver and guilte, valued at v. s^.
won by a Scholar of Saint Anthonies School, and the Master of that School
had vj. s^. viij. d. the second, a Pen of silver parcel guilt, valued at iiij.
s^. won by a Scholar of Paul's School, and his Master had v. s^. in money:
the third a Pen of silver, valued at iij. s^. won by a Scholar of the said
Hospital, and his Master had iiij. s^. and there were two Priests Masters
of Art appointed for Judges, which had each of them a silver Rule for their
pains, valued at vj. s^. viij. d. the piece. The disputation being ended, the
Mayor and Aldermen entered the Hall where the children of the Hospital use to
dyne, and had fruit and wine, and so departed.

King Philip went over seas, and landed at Callais on King Philip went over
into Flaunders.
the fourth of September, where he was honorably received by the Lord Deputy,
and the Mayor of the Staple of Callais, an Alderman of London named sir Andrew
Iudde, who presented his Majesty with a Purse and a M. Marks of Gold in it:
that night the King was lodged in Staple Inn: and on the morrow he departed
from Callais toward Brussels in Brabant, to visit the Emperor his father: he
gave at his departing among the souldyours of the town of Callais, M. crowns of
gold, and there accompanied him in his journey of English Lords, the Earl of
Arundale, Lord Steward of the Queens house, the Earl of Penbrooke, the Earl
of Huntington, and others.

On Michaelmasse even, the prisoners that lay in the New Counter in
VVoodstrete
Counter in Bredstreete, were removed to a new Counter made in Woodstreete of
the Cities purchase and building, the which removing was confirmed by a common
counsel assembled at the Guild hall for that purpose.

On the last of September, by occasion of great wind Great land waters.
and rain that had fallen, was such great floudes, that that morning the
Kings Palaice at Westminster, and Westminster hall was overflowed with water,
unto the Stayre foot, going to the Chauncerie and Kings Benche, so that when
the Lord Mayor of London should come to present the Sheriffs to the Barons of
the Exchequer, all Westminster hall was full of water, and by report there,
that morning, a Whirrie man rowed with his Boat over Westminster Bridge, into
the Pallaice Court, and so through the Staple gate, and all the Wool Staple
into the Kings street: and all the Marshes on Lambeth side, were so
overflowed, that the people from Newington Church could not pass on foot,
but were carried by boat from the said Church to the Pinfold, near to Saint
Georges in Southwarke.

Thomas Leigh: John Machil, the 28. of September. Sheriffs. Ridley and Latimer
brent.


The xvj. of October Doctor Ridley, and Master Latimer were brent at Oxforde.

Sir William Garrard Haberdasher, the 28. of October. Mayor. First fruits and
tenths restored to the Clergy.


In October and November a Parliament was holden, in the which the Queen
yielded up unto the Spiritual men, the first fruits and tenths of all
Bishoprics, Benefices, and Ecclestasticall livings. In this Parliament was
granted A subsedie.
to the King and Queen a subsedie of the Layty from v. l. to x. l. viij. d. of
the pound, from x. l. to xx. l. xij. d. of the pound, and from xx. l. upward
xvj. d. of the pound, and al strangers double, and the Clergy granted vj. s^.
of the pound.

Doctor Story and other were appointed by the Cardinal, to visit every Parish
Church in London and Middlesex, to see their Relics repaired, and the Images
of the Cruci^^^* with Mary and John thereon to be fixed.

Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Chauncellor Doctor Gardner deceassed*
^^ England dyed the ix. of November, and was buried at Winchester.

On Newyeres day the Queen gave the great Seal to Doctor Nitholas Heath
Archebyshoppe of York, and made him Lord Chauncellor, she likewise gave the
privy seal to the Lord Paget, and made him Lord privy Seal, these were
both Londoners borne.

In this month of February, the Lord Mayor of London, and the Aldermen entered
into Bridewell, and took possession thereof, according to the gift of King
Edward, now confirmed by Queen Marie.

The xxvj. of February, William Conestable alias Fetharston, The Millers son
fayning to be King Edw.
was arraigned in the Guild hall of London, who had caused letters to be cast
abroad, that King Edward was alive, and to some he showed himself to be King
Edward, so that many persons both men and women were troubled by him, for the
which sedition the said William had bin onte whipped, and delivered, as is
aforesaid: But now he was condemned, and the thirteenth of March, he was
drawn, hanged and quartred at Tyborne.

A Blazing Star was seen at all times of the night, the sixth, seventh,
eight, ninth, and tenth of March.

The xxj. of March, Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury Doctor Cranmer
brent.
was burned at Oxfolde: and the same day Cardinal Poole sang his first Mass
at Greenewiche in the Friars Church: on Sunday next he was consecrated
Archbishop of Canterbury. The xxv. of March, being the feast of the
Annunciation Cardinal Poole Archebishoppe. 1556 Nevvgate set on fire.
of our Lady* Cardinal Poole received ye Pall with yt then used ceremonies and
solemnities at Bow church in Cheap.

The xxviij. of March, at ten of the clock before noone, a part of Newgate
called Manningshal was brent to the ground, and no prisoners lost. A
conspiracy was made by certain persons, Conspiracy.
whose purpose was to have robbed the Queens Exchequer, called the receipt of
the Exchoquer, in ye which there was of the Queens treasure above 50000. ^.
the save time to the intent they might be able to maintain was against (...)
the Queen. This matter was v^^or^t^ by one of the conspiracy, whereby Vdall,
Throckmorton, Peckham, John Dani (...) fled ^^ into (...) Sir (...) Kingdo^^
was apprehended* and (...) by the way coming toward London.

The xxviij. of April, John Thro^kmorton and Richard Thro^kmorton and other
executed.
V^dall were ^awne to Ty^orne, and there hanged and quartred.

The xix. of May, William Stanton was likewise executed.

The viij. of June, William Rossey, John Redike, and John Bedell were executed
at Tyborne.

The xviij. of June, one Sands a younger son to the Lord Sands hanged for
robbery.
Snnds, was hanged at Saint Thomas of Waterings for a robbery that he and other
had committed on Whitsonday last, of four thousand pound.

The xxvij. of June, thirteen persons were brent at Stratford Thirtene brent
at Stratforde. Anno reg. 4. Daniell and Peckham*
the Bow.

The viij. of July, Henry Peckham and John Daniell were hanged and headed on
the Tower hill, and their bodies buried in Barking Church. Conspiracy.


About this time one Clober, which sometime kept a school at Dys in
Norffolke, with three brethren, whose names were Lincoln, pretended an
insurrection, and would have gathered the people at a marriage, unto the
which the brethren promised either of the^ to bring an hundred horse with men*
at which time by them appointed, the said Clober gave charge to a servant of
his, to watch in a Lane nighe to the Church where they should meet, and as
soon as he saw any horse^a^ coming thitherwarde, to give him warning with
all speed. So it chanced (by the will of God) that certain men ryding through
that Lane, to some other place about their business, came about such an
hour as Clober had appointed, upon fight of which men, his said seruauntre
turned to his Master, and told him that his friends were come: and
immediately the said Clober stood up in the Parish Church of Yaxsle, and
read a traiterous proclamation of purpose prepared, which being ended, and
seeing his part was too weak, for that his mates were not come, began to
flee, but one Master* Shireman pursued and took him at a Town called Eye in
Suffolk, and was kept in prison until the next Sessions at Saint
Edmondsburie, and his three mates being brought to him, were there all
together drawn, hanged and quartred.

In the last year began the hot burning Fevers, Seven Aldermen deceassed
in London.
whereof dyed many old persons, so that in London there dyed seven Aldermen
in the space of ten months, whose names were Henry Herdson, who deceassed
the two and twentieth of December, 1555. sir Richard Dobs late Mayor, sir
William Laxton late Mayor, sir Henry Hoblethorne late Mayor, sir John
Champneis blind, late Mayor, sir John Ayleffe late Sheriff, and sir John
Gresham late Mayor, who deceassed the three and twentieth of October Anno 1556.

William Harper: John White, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Thomas Offeley Merchant Tailor, the 28. of October.

The one and twentieth of November, John Fecknam late Abbot of Westminster.
Deane of Paul's in London, was made Abbot of Westminster, was stalled, and
took possession of the same: and fourteen Monks more received the habit
with him that day of the order of Saint Benet.

The said one and twentieth of November, a man was False accuser set on the
Pillorie and burnt in both cheeks: vvoulde to God all such accusers were so
well marked.
brought from Westminster hall ryding with his face to the horse tail, and a
paper on his head, to the Standarde in Cheap, and there set on the Pillorie,
and then burned with an hot iron on both his cheeks, with two letters F and
A. sor False Accusing one of the Court of the Common place in Westminster at
Treason: the like justice I once wished, to the like accuser of his Master and
eldest brother, but it was aunsweared, that in such case could be no remedy,
though the accuser himself were in the same fact found the principal offender:
where through it follows, the accuser never showed sign of shame (the way
to Repentance) but terribly curses, and blasphemously swears he never
committed any such act, though the same be registered before the honorable,
the Queens Majesty's high Commissioners, and what horrible sla^ders, with threts
of murder he daily bruteth, the knower of all secrets, God I mean, knows,
unto whom I refer the cause, being comforted with this sentence of the Prophet
David: Fret not thy self with these Psalm. ^7.
curssed harmefull men, neither envy angerly these workers of wickedness, for
like grass anon shall they be cut down, and like the green fresh bent of the
flower shall they wither away etc.

The xvj. of December, Gregory Carpenter Smith, and A Stranger would have
murdered the keeper of Nevvgate.
a Frenchman borne, was arraigned for making counterfeite keys, wherewith to
have opened the locks of Newgate, to have slain the keeper, and let forth the
prisoners, at which time of his arraignement, having conuayed a knife into his
sleeue, he thrust it into the side of William Whitrents his fellow prisoner,
who had given witness against him, so that he was in great peril of death
thereby, for the which fact, he was immediately taken from the bar into she
street before the Justice hall, where his hand being first stricken off, he was
hanged on a Gibbet set up for that purpose: the keeper of Newgate was arraigned
and indicted, for that the said prisoner had weapon about him, and his hands
loose which should have bin bound.

The fourth of January, a Ship before Greenewich (the Gunne shot into the
Court at Greenevvich.
Court being there) shot off her Ordinance, one piece being charged with a
bullet of stone, which passed through the walls of the Court, and did no more
hurt.

The xxvij. of February, an Ambassador came to London Ambassador from Muscou^*
from the Emperor of Muskouy and Rusland, who was reteiued at Tottenham by ye
Merchants Adventurers of London, riding in velvet coats, and chains of gold:
the Lord Mountagew with the Queens Pencioners met him at Iseldonne towns
end: and at Smithfield bars, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in Scarlet
received him, and conuayed him through the City unto Master Dimockes house in
Fanchurch street, where he lodged until the twelfth of May, and then returned
to Muscouy.

The Lord Sturton and his men cruelly murdered Master Argile and his
so(...): he caused them to be stricken Lord Sturton executed.
down with clubbes, then their throtes to be cut, and after to be buried in
his own house fifteen foot deep* for the which, he was arraigned and
condemned at Westminster, and after conuayed from the Tower of London through
the City, and so to Salisburie, and there hanged, with four of his men
servants the sixth of March.

King Philip returned into England, and the xxiij. of March King Philip
returned into England.
passed through London with the Queen and Nobles of the Realm.

The xxiiij. of April, Thomas Stafford, and other Englishmen 1557 Thomas
Stafford took Scarborough Castle.
to the number of xxxij* persons, coming out of France, took the Castle of
Scarborough in the Country of York, which they enjoyed two days, and then
were taken by the Earl of Westmerland, and brought to London.

The last of April, Thomas Percy Esquire, was made Baron Percy at Westminster
and on the next morrow which Percy Earl of Northumberlande.
was the first of May, he was created Earl of Northumberland* and the Queen,
gave him all the Lands which had bin his ^uncesters remaynig^ in her hands.

The eight and twentyth day of May, Thomas Stafford was beheaded on the
Towerhill, and on the morrow* three of Thomas Stafford beheaded.
his company, to weete, Straightly or Stretchley, Bradforde, and Proctor, were
drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.

The seventh of June, open war was proclaimed against VVario with France.
the French King.

The sixth of July, the King passed over to Caleis, and so into Flanders, where
he made great* provision for war against Englishmen sent to Saint Quintins.
the French King. The same month, the Queen sent over an Army of one thousand
horssemen, four thousand footmen, and two thousand Pioners, to aid King
Philip, whereof the Earl of Pembroke was General. The Lord Robert Dudley
master of the Ordinance.

The xv. of July, dyed the Lady Anne of Cleeue at Chelsey, and was buried at
Westminster.

The tenth of Augu^^, were taken of France the chiefest Anno reg.
Captains, the Duke of Mou^^^morency Connestable of France, and his son
Monsieur de Merne, the Duke of Monpencier, Noble men ^ France taken prisoners.
the Duke of Long^lile, the Marshall of Saint Andrew, the Reinegr^^e ^^^^uell
of the Al^day^^s, (...), the Cou^^ de Ro^^^foucaust, the (...) of (...), the
Baron of Cur^^^, the Prince of Man^^^, besides many Gentlemen and Captains.

The xvi^. of Augu^^, the Town of Saint Quintins was taken by King Phillip,
with the help of Englishmen; at the seege whereof, the Lord Henry Dudley,
yongest^ son to John late Duke of Northumberland, was slain with a Gunne.

This year before harvest, wheat was sold for sour Dearth and plenty.
Mark the quarter, malt at four and forty shillings y^ quarter, beans and
rye at forty shillings the quarter, and pease at six and forty shillings
eyghtpence, but after harvest, wheat was sold for five shillings the quarter,
malt at six shillings eyghtpence, ^ye at three shillings and four pence, so
that the penny wheat lo^^e that wayde in London the last year but eleven
ounces Troy, wayed now six and fifty ounces Troy. In the Country, wheat was
^olde for four shillings the quarter, of malt ^ou^^ shillings eight pen^^, and
in so me place a ^^shell ^^^ie (...) p^o^nd of Candles which was four pence.

The seventh of September, at seven of the clock at John Caiu^.
night, in a black rayny cloud in the West was ^^ene a Raynebow the Moon in
the East risen one hour before, and ^aire shilling, ^^^ a (...) before.

Richard (...) A^^ham, the 2^. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Thomas (...), the 28. of October.

The thirtith of November, Sir Thomas Tressham knight, received the order of
the Cross, and was made Lord of Saint John's of Jerusalem in England.

The first of (...) the Frenchne ^ ^ame ^^ ^a^^is with a great Army, and within
four days were masters thereof* Caleis lost by the Englishmen.
and shortly after wan all the peece^ ^n that side the Sea, To many it seemed
strange, that such a Town which so many years had bin fortified with all
munitions that could be devised, should now in so short space be taken of our
enemies. The Counsel of England raised great power to have gone to the defense
of that Town, but such tempest of wind arose, as the like in many years had
not bin seen, whereby no Ship could brook the Sea, till it was too late
for that matter.

The xviij. of January, Edward Hastings Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamber
layne to the Queen, was created Baron Hastings of Lowghborough at Westminster.

The xx. of January, began a Parliament at Westminster. A Parliament.


In the month of March, a pressed was granted to the Queen by the Citizens of
London, of twenty thousand A pressed to the Queen.
pound, which was levied of the companyes, for the which sum to be repayde
again, the Queen bound certain 1558
Lands, and also allowed for interest of the money twelve pound of every
hundredth for a year.

The French, King in^aded Flanders, spoiled and burnt Dunke^k^^ before King
Phillip could come to rescue, but before Dunkirke in Flanders brent.
the Frenchmen returned out of Flanders, the Flemings and the English Ships
meeting with them upon the sands between Dunkerke and Grauelin^, slew of them
a great number.

The x^. of July, within a mile of Notingham, was a marvelous Anno reg. 6.
tempest of thunder, which as it came through two Towns, beat* down all the
(...) and Churches, the belles were cast to the out side of the Church yardes,
and some webbes of lead four hundredth f^^te into the field, writhen like a
pair of gloves.

The River of Trent ^^^ing between the two Towns, the water with the mud in
the bottom was carried a quarter of a mile and cast against the trees, the
trees were pulled up by the roots, and cast twelve score off. Also, a child
was taken forth of a man's hands two Spears length hye, and carried a hundred
foot, and then let fall, wherewith his arm was broke, and so dyed. Five or
six men there about were slain, and neither flesh nor skin perished: there
fell some haylestones that were fifteen inches about etc.

This year in harvest time, the quart^rne agues continued in like manner, or
more vehemently, than they had done the last year passed, where through died
many old people, and specially Pri^^^es, so that a great number of parishes
were unserved, and no Curates to be gotten, and much Corn was lost in the
field for lack of workeme^ and laborers.

John Halse: Richard Campion, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Thomas Leigh Mercer, the 28. of October.

In the beginning of this Majors year, Corn rose to fourteen shillings the
quarter, and wood waxed scant in London, and was sold for thirteen and
fourteen shillings the thousand of ^illets, and coals at tenpence the sack,
by reason of the great death and sickness the last Summer for lack of he^lp
and carriage.

King Philip being absent out of the Realm, and Queen Mary being dangerously
sick, ended her life at her Manor of Saint James by Charing cross the xvij.
of November, in the year 1558. when she had reigned five years, four
months, and odd days. The same day, deceassed Cardinal Poole at
Lambheath, and a little before, two of her Physicians, besides diverse Bishops
and noble men. Queen Mary was buried at Westminster, and Cardinal Poole at
Canterbury.

Queen Elizabeth.


ELizabeth our most gracious Anno reg. 1.
and sovereign Lady, second daughter to King Henry the viij. to the great
comfort of England, was with full consent proclaimed Queen of England, France
and Irelande, Defender of the Faith etc. on the xvij. of November, in the year
of our Lord God. 1558. Forthwith, the Ports and Havens were stopped, and
none suffered to pass out of the Realm without license. Proclamation was
made, forbidding all men to Preach, save such as should be appointed: also, to
alter any rytes or Ceremonies used in the Church save as it was in her graces
Chapel.

The xxiij. of November, Queen Elizabeth came from The Queen comes from
Hatfild.
Bishops Hatfield in Hertfordshire, unto the Lord Northes house in the late
Charterhouse of London, the Sheriffs of London meeting her Grace at the
farther end of Barnet Town within the Shere of Middlesex, and so rode before
her, till the came to the Charterhouse Gate next Aldersgate, where her Grace
remained.

On Monday, the eight and twentieth of November, about The Queen ^emoueth to
the Tovver.
two of the clock in the after noone, Queen Elizabeth rode from the Lord
Northes house, along by the Barbycane, in at Creeplegate, then along by the
wall to Bishopsgate, which Gate was richly hanged, where the Waytes of the
City playde, and over against the Kings head Tavern, a Scholar of Paul's
School made a short Oration to her Majesty in Latin Uerses, the company of
the Mercers standing in their rayles next the Scholar, and so all the other
Companyes of the City in order from thence to Mart Lane end, next unto
Barking Church in Tower street, the Lord Mayor of London riding with Master
Garter King at Arms, bearing a Scepter before her Majesty, which Lord Mayor
met her at the Charterhouse Gate next Aldersgate, where Master Recorder
saluted her Grace in the name of the Lord Mayor and the whole City, and so
with Lords, Knights, and Gentlewomen richly apparelled, brought her to the
Tower of London: but when her Grace entered at Mart Lane, a peale of Gunnes
began to be shot off at the Tower, which continued almost half an hour.

The fifth of December, the Queen removed by water from the Tower to Somerset
place near to the Strand.

The xiij. of December, the corpse of Queen Mary was honorably conuayed from
Saint James to the Abbey of Queen Mary buried.
Westminster, and there placed under a rich Hearse decked with penons, banners,
and Schutchions of the Arms of England and France, where she remained that
night, and on the morrow, after the Mass of Requiem, and a Sermon preached by
Doctor White Bishop of Winchester was ended* she was buried in the Chapel of
King Henry the seventh on the North side.

The xxiiij. of December, was solemn obsequie kept in Obsequie for Charles the
Emperor.
the Abbey of Westminster for Charles the fifth late Emperor, which deceassed
in Spain in the month of September last past, Queen Maryes hearse yet
standing, altered with the Arms of the Emperor, and richly hanged with a rich
pall-cloth of gold lying on the hearse, the Emperors Ambassador being chief
mourner, with other Peers and Lords of England assistant with him etc.

The first of January, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen gave in commandment to
every ward in London, that the Procession, Epistle, and Gospel in English.
Parson or Curate in every Parish Church in London, should read the Epistle
and Gospel of the day in the English tongue in the Mass time, and the English
Procession then used in the Queens Chapel, according to a Proclamation sent
from her Majesty and privy Counsel, proclaimed in the City of London the
xxx. of December, which commandment was that day observed in most parish
Churches of the Citis.

The ninth of January in the morning, the Image of Thomas Becket which stood
over the door of the Mercers Image of Thomas Becket thrown down.
Chapel in London toward the street, was found broken and cast down, and a
bill set on the Church door deprauing the setters up thereof.

The xij. of January, the Queens Majesty removed from her place of White hall
to the Tower by water, the Lord Mayor of London, and his breethren the
Aldermen, in their Barge, and all the Crafts of the City in their Barges
richly decked with targets and banners of every mystery. The Batchelers of the
Majors company in their Barge, with a Foyst, having three tops, trimmed and
richly decked to wait on them, which shot off gunnes all the way: all these
awayted on her Majesty, who took her Barge about two of the clock in the
after noone, the Lord Mayor following after, and every company in order, with
great melody of musical instruments, till her grace was through London
bridge, and landed at her privy staire of the Tower Wharffe, and then the
Mayor, after leave taken, and thanks of the Queen, returned through the
Bridge with the flood, and landed at the Three Cranes Wharffe in the Uintrie.

The xiiij. of January, at which time the Londoners had made sumptuous
provision, the Queens Majesty passed through the City of London to her
Palace at Westminster: Coronation.
the next day she was Crowned by Doctor Oglethorp Bishop of Carelile.

The xxv. of January, began a Parliament at Westminster, Parliament.
before the States whereof, Doctor Coxe, late come from beyond the Seas, and
sometime Schoolemayster to King Edward the sixth, made a learned Sermon.

In this Parliament, the first fruits and tenthes were granted to the Crown,
and also the supreme government over the state Ecclesiastical. Likewise, the
Book of common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments in our vulgar
tongue was restored, to be done as in the time of King Edward the sixth.

In the Easter Holidays preached at the Spittle Doctor Bill the Queens
Almoner, Doctor Coxe, and Doctor Horn, the two last came lately from beyond
the seas. On Lowsonday the second of April, Master Sampson made the
rehearsal Sermon at Paul's Cross.

The iij. of April, the Queens Majesty appointed a conference or disputation
to be had at Westminster Church, between 1559
the old Bishops, and certain learned men late A conference at Westminster.
come from beyond the Seas, concerning matters of Religion, but the matter came
to small effect.

The seventh of April was a peace proclaimed betwixt England and France. And
the like between her Majesty, and the King and Queen of Scotland.

The xix. of April, was kept the Serieants feast in the ^^ner Temple, and
nine Serieants were there made, Mai^^er Reignald Chamley Recorder of London
being one of y^ ix.

A Subsidy of ij. s^. viij. d. the pound of moveable goods was Subsidy granted
granted, and the Parliament dissolved the vij. of May.

The second of July, the Citizens of London had a muster The Citizens of
London mustered at Greenevvich.
before the Queens Majesty at Greenewich in the Park of fourteen hundred
men, whereof eight hundred were Pikemen, all in fine Corselets, four hundred
Haquebuts in shirtes of mayle with morians, and two hundred Halberters in
almanriuets, which were furnished and set forth by the companyes of the City
of London: they had to every hundred two wiffelers, richly apparelled, and
twelve wardens of the best companyes riding in coats of black Ueluet to
conduct them with drommes and fifes, and six Ensigns, all in Jerkins of white
Bridges Satin, cut and lined with black Sarsenet, with cappes, hosen, and
skarfes according: the Captains Robert Constable, and Master Saunders,
brought them in battle ray before the Queen, even as they should have fought,
which made a goodly show before her Majesty, the Emperoures and French Kings
Ambassadors being present.

In the month of July, the old Bishops of England then living, were called
and examined by certain of ye Queens Bishops deprived.
Majesty's Counsel, where the Bishops of York, Ely, and London with other to
the number of thirteen or fourteen, for refusing to take the oath touching the
Queens supremacy and other Articles, were deprived from their Bishoprics.
And likewise, were diverse Deanes, Archdeacons, Parsons, and Uicars, deprived
from their Benefices, and some committed to prison in the Tower, Fleet,
Marshalsea, and Kings bench.

Commissioners were likewise appointed for the establishing Commissioners.
of Religion through the whole Realm. For London were appointed Sir Richard
Sackuile Knight, Doctou^ Horn a Divine, Doctor. Huicke a Ciuilian, and
Master Saluage, who called before them diverse persons of every parish, and
swear them to enquire and present upon certain injunctions. Injunctions.


Also, the houses of Religion, erected by Queen Mary, Houses suppressed.
as the Monks of Westminster, Nuns and breethre^ of Sion and Sheene, the
black Friars in Smithfielde, and the Friars of Greenewich were all suppressed.

On the even of Saint Barthelmew, the day and the Church images burned.
merrow after etc. were burned in Paul's Church yard, Cheap, and diverse other
places of the City of London, all the Roodes and other Images of Churches, in
some places the Coapes, Uestments, Alter clothes, Books, Banners, Sepulchers,
and Roode loftes were burned.

The fifth of September about midnight, fell a great tempest at London, in the
end whereof, a great lightning, with a terrible clappe of thunder struck the
Spire (being stone) of the Steeple of Alhallowes Church in Bredstreete,
Churches in London stricken and broken by tempest.
about a ten foot beneath the top, out of the which fell a stone that slew
a Dog, and overthrew a man playing with the same Dog, and the Spire of the
Steeple was so perished, that not long after the same was taken down with
less charges to the Parish, than the repayring would have cost. And at the
same instant, by the same tempest, one of the South doors of Saint Dionise
Church in Fenchurch street, with the door of the Reuestrie of the same
Church, were both stricken thorough and broken.

The eight and ninth of September, a solemn Obsequie Obsequy for the French
King.
was kept in Paul's Church at London, for Henry the French King departed, who
dyed of a wound given by the County Mountgomerie, at a triumph, iusting in the
City of Paris, whereof he dyed about the tenth day of July.

About the last of September, John Duke of Finland, second Ambassador from
Svvethen.
son to Gustabus King of Swethen, was sent by his father to treat a
marriage for his eldest brother Ericus, with the Queens Majesty of England:
he arrived at Harwich in Essex, and was there honorably received and
enterteyned by ye Earl of Oxford, which said Earl, and the Lord Robert
Dudley, with a goodly baude of Gentlemen and yeomen, conveyed him to London,
where he was received of diverse Knights and Gentlemen of the Court, on the
fifth of October, and was with his train of about the number of fifty persons
well horssed, conuayed to the Bishop of Winchesters place in Southwarke, where
he was lodged during his abode here, and removed from thence two days before
Easter homeward, and sped on his message as may appear by that which follows,
taken out of Johannes Lewenclaij comment. de bellis Moscorum.

Ericus King of Sweden, son of Gustabus late King of the said Kingdom,
having committed to prison his brother John Duke of Finlande, whom a little
before he had employed into England on an Embassage to the Queens Majesty,
whom he sued to for marriage, and had his suit rejected, again the second
time solicited her Majesty in the same suite, notwithstanding (to his great
dishonor, and (as it fell out) his just disgrace) he attempted the same matter
with the youngest daughter of Phillip Lantgraue Vanhessen, at whose hand (having
the second time bin rejected of her Majesty here) the matter being known
there, he also not only received a denial, but the Lady was by her Father
bestowed upon Adolfe Duke Van Holst, Uncle Johannes Lewenalaij.
of Frederike King of Denmark, then enemy of the said Erice. Thus far
Johannes Lewenclaij.

Thomas Lodge: Roger Martin, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg. 2.


Sir William Hewet Clothworker, the 28. of October.

About this time, many men of war were conveyed out of France into Scotland,
and there placed in Towns and Fortresses, as in the Town of Leeth, Dunbarre,
Inskith, and other, whereby it was to be suspected that they would sodeynely
invade this Realm, whereupon, the Queens Majesty sent the Duke of Norffolke
toward Duke of Norffolke sent into Scotland.
Scotland as General with an army, who remained at Berwike.

In the month of April, the Lord Gray Wilton entered 1560
Scotland with an army of ten thousand, and beseeged the town of L^th, where
between the French and the English Lord Gray beseeged Lies.
were often skirmishes, and many slain on both sides, for few were taken
prisoners.

In May, a noble man of France, by license of the Queens Majesty, passed
through England into Scotland, to talk with the Queen Dowager and the
Frenchmen, for the appeasing of this matter, who at his return again into
England, obtained of the Queens Majesty to send Sir William Civil Knight,
her Majesty's principal Secretary, with Master Doctor Wootton, to treat
with the Frenchmen, who by their wisdoms; so well ordered the matter, that
they agreed upon a peace, which was concluded in thirteen Articles, the
Frenchmen to depart, to the great quietness and safety both of England and
Scotland, and thereupon, her Majesty revoked her army, after the fortes there
were rased, without any seysure or holding of any piece within Scotland.

The fifth of July, through shooting of a gunne which brake in the house of
one Adrian Arten a Dutchman, in Crooked Lane, and setting fire on a Firken and
Barell of Gunpowder, four houses were blown up, and diverse other Houses blovvn
up.
sore scattered, nine men and women slain, and diverse other sore bruised.

On Michaelmas even before noone, was published by The third fall of the base
money.
Proclamation, that the Testone coined for twelve pence, and in the reign of
King Edward the sixth, called down to six pence, should now forthwith (of the
best sort, marked with the Portculeys) be taken for four pence halfepeny, the
second, marked with the Greyhound, for two pence farthing, the third and
worst sort not market as before, not to be taken for any value: the grote
should be taken for two pence, the two penny piece for a penny etc. And shortly
after, New coin offine silver.
her grace restored to her subjects fine sterling money, for their corrupt and
base coin, calling the same to her Majesty's mintes according to the rate
before mentioned.

Christopher Draper: Thomas Row, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 3.


Sir William Chester Draper, the 28. of October.

The Queens Majesty made great preparation of armor, niunition, and powder,
to be in a readiness to defend her Realm, if need should happen.

The xxj. of March, a notable Grammar School was founded by the Master,
Wardens, and assista^ts of the worshipful The merchant Tailors free School.
company of the Merchant Tailors of London, in the parish of Saint Laurence
Pountney in the same City, the worshipful Emanuell Lucar, Robert Rose,
William Mericke, John Spark, and Robert Duckington then being Master and
Wardens of that company.

The tenth of April, was one William Gefferey whipped 1561
from the Marshal sea in Southwarke, to Bethlem without Bishopsgate of London,
for that he professed one John Moore to be Christ our savior: on his head was
set a paper, wherein was written as follows, William Gefferey a most
blasphemous Heretic, denving Christ our fauiour in Heaven. William Geffrey
vvhipped.
The said Gefferey being stayed at Bethlem gate, John Moore was brought forth,
before whom, William Gefferey was whipped till he confessed Christ to be in
Heaven. Then the said John Moore being examined, and answering ouerthwartly, A
false Christ whipped.
was commanded to put off his coat, dublet, and shirte, which he seemed to do
very willingly, and after being tied to the Cart was whipped an arrows shoot
from Bedlem, where at the last he also confessed Christ to be in Heaven, and
himself to be a sinful man: then was John Moore sent again unto Bedlem, and
William Gefferey to the Marshalsea, where they had layne prisoners nigh a a
year and a half, the one for professing himself to be Christ, the other a
Disciple of the same Christ.

On Wednesday the fourth of June, between four Panles Steeple on fire.
and five of the clock in the after noone, the Steeple of Paul's in London
being fired by lightning, brast forth (as it seemed to the beholders) two or
three yards beneath the foot of the Cross, and from thence, brent down the
Sphere to the stoneworke and belles, so terribly, that within the space of
four hours, the same Steeple, with the roofes of the Church so much as was
timber or otherwise combustible, were consumed, which was a lamentable sight,
and pitiful remembrance to the beholders thereof.

The length of Paul's Church in London is 2690. foot.

The breadth thereof is 1^0. foot.

The height of the Steeple was 520* foot, whereof the stone work is 260.
foot.

And the Spear which now is burnt, was likewise 260. foot.

Alexander Auenon: Humfrey Baskeruild, the 28. of Sep. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir William Harper merchant Tailor, the 28. of October.

This Sir William Harper founded a free School in the Town of Bedford (where
he was borne, and lies buried) Free School at Bedford.
and has given a competent living for a Schoolemayster there to teach and
instruct children in virtue and learning unto the worlds end.

The fifteenth of November, the Queens Majesty published New coins*
a Proclamation, wherein she restored to the Realm diverse small pieces of
Silver money, as the piece of six pence, four pence, three pence, two pence,
and a penny, three half pence, and three farthings. And also, forbadde all
forreyne Coins to be current within the same Realm, as well Gold as Silver,
calling them into her majesty's Mintes, except two sorts of Crowns of Gold,
the one the French Crown, the other the Flemish Crown.

The xxvj. of December, Sir Ambrose Sutton, alias Dudley Knight, called Lord
Ambrose Dudley was created Baron Lisle, and afterward the same day Earl of
Warwike at Westminster.

This year in England were many monstrous birthes. In March, a Mare brought
forth a foale with one body and Anno reg. 4.
two heads, and as it were a long tail growing out between the two heads.
Also, a Sow farowed a Pigge Monstrous birthes.
with four legs like to the arms of a man child, with hands and fingers
etc.

In April, a Sow farrowed a Pigge with two bodies, eight feet, and but one
head, many Calves and Lambs were monstrous, some with collers of skin
growing about their necks, like to the double ruffes of shirtes and
nekercheffes then used.

The xxiiij. of May, a man child was borne at Chichester in Sussex, the hea^*
arms, and legs whereof, were like a Notamy, the breast and belly monstrous
big from the navel, as it were a long string hanging: about the neck a
great collar of flesh and skin growing like to the ruff of a shirt or
nekerchefe, coming up above the ears pleyting and folding etc.

The Queens Majesty in September, addressed a band of her Subjects to the
Town of Newhauen in Normandy: Going to Nevvhauen.
who were embarked at Portesmouth, because that Haven is most apt for
transportation to that place, upon whose arrival, the Townsmen and
inhabitants joyfully surrendered themselves and their Town into the possession
of the Queens majesty, which was kept by Englishmen from September 1562. to
the 29. of July then next following, which was in the year 1563. The governor
of which band was the right honorable the Earl of Warwick, who with the
Captains serving there (which were of great experience) and Souldyers trained
by them to knowledge of service, together with part of the old approved
garrison of Barwike, did at that time both manfully defend the piece, and
valiantly encountered by sundry skirmishes and conflictes with the County
Reingraue and his band, the most part whereof were happily atcheeued, to the
^^^eats over throw of the adversaries part, and singular commendation of ours.

William Allin: Richard Chamberlain, the 28. of Sept. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno
reg. 5. Tempest at Leycester.


Sir Thomas Lodge Grocer, the 28 of October.

On Saturday ye xvj. of January, a great tempest of wind and thunder happened
in the Town of Leycester, which uncovered 411. bays of houses, and
ouerturned many.

The ix. x. and xj. of February, Westminster hall was ouerslowen 1563
with water, and Holland in Lincolneshire was drowned by rage of wind and
water.

When the Frenchemen with huge armies assembled out John Cai^^.
of all parts of France, to recover the place of passage, the stopping
whereof by our power was the double woe of their common wealth there bred
through the season of the year and putrifactio^ of the air, a miserable and
unfortunate plague among our men, which maruellously increased, with the death
of diverse of the best captains and soldiers, where withal there followed a
cruel and quick siege, whereat was present the young King himself, the Queen
his mother, the best tried number of warlike soldiers within the whole
Country, besides an other sort of young and old that cared not for life or
land, so their adventure might win again the cause of their distress: with
this general aid, the marshes were made passable and firm ground, which by
men of great experience was thought impossible: and with common help the
Cannons were placed, the Castle and walls were battered, and sundry breaches
made beyond expectation, howbeit they were rewarded by our Gunners, and made
to taste the bitter fruit of their desperate approach, to their great terror
and annoyaunce, the Earl of Warwike with the remnant of our Capitaines and
soldiers in courageous order standing at the several breaches ready to
defend their assaults, which perceived by the enemy, they caused their
Trumpets to sound the blast of Emparle, that composition of either part might
be made, to avoid the imminent slaughter, and effusion of blood. This offer
seemed not unmeet, both parties concluded, the Town was delivered the nine
and twentieth of July, with condition, that the Englishemen should depart. When
the town in this sort was surrendered to the French, and the greatest part of
our garrison shipped, many sick persons were left behind, impotent and unable
to help themselves The misery whereof Edward Randolfe Esquier high Marshall of
the Town (who was appointed to tarry and see the vttermoste of our
composition accomplished) perceiuyng, moned with natural pity of his
Countrymen relinquished without comfort, caused the said sick persons to
be carried aboorde, not sparing his own shoulders (at that time feeble and
full of the plague) himself and his men still bearing and helping the poor
creatures on Ship-boorde, a rare fact, worthy reward, and no doubt in
remembrance with God, the true recorder of merciful deserts.

As ye have heard, the plague of pestilence being in the Pestilence.
Town of Newhauen, through the number of soldiers that returned into England
the infection thereof spread into diverse parts of this Realm, but especially
the City of London was so infected, that in the same whole year, that is to
say, from the first of January 156^. till the last of December. 1563. there
dyed in the City and Liberties thereof, containing 108. parishes of all
diseases, xx. M. iij. C. lxxij. and of the 108. parishes in London, besides ^^*
in the suburbs
plague, (being part of the number aforesaid) xvij. M. ii^j. C. ii^j.
persons. And in the out parishes adjoining to y^ same City, being xj.
parishes, dyed of al diseases in the whole year itj. M. tj. C. lxxx. and vitj.
persons* and of them, of the plague tj. M. vtj. C. xxxtj. persons, so that the
whole number of all that dyed of all disseases, as well within the City and
Liberties, as in the out parishes, was xxitj. M. vj. C. and and lx. and of
them, there dyed of the plague, xx. M. one hundred thirty and six.

The eight of July in the morning, happened a great tempest Tempest at London.
of lightning and thunder, where through a woman and three kyne were slain in
the Covent* Garden near to Charing Cross: At the same time in Essex a man was
torn to peers as he was carrying hay, his barn was borne down, and his hay
brent, both stones and trees were rent in many places.

The Counsel of King Philip at Bruxels, commanded proclamation to be made in
Antwerpe and other places, that no English ship with any clothes should come
into any places of their low Countries: their color was (as they said) the
danger of the plague which was that time in London, and other places of
England: notwythstanding, they would gladly have gotten our Woolles, but the
Queens Majesty, through suit of our Merchaunt Adventurers, caused the Wool
fleet to be discharged, and our Cloth fleet was sent to Emden in East
Friselande about Easter next following in Anno 1564.

Forsomuche as the plague of Pestilence was so hot in Threefolde plague to the
poor Citizens of London.
the City of London, there was no Term kept at Michaelmasse: to be short,
the poor Citizens of London, were this year plagued with a three fold
plague, pestilence, searcity of money, and dearth of victuals: the misery
whereof, were too long here to write, no doubt the poor remember it, the
rich by flight into the Countries made shifte for themselves, etc.

An Erthquake was in the month of September in diverse Earthquake.
places of this realm, specially in Lincoln and Northamptonshires.

Edward Banks: Rowlande Haywarde, the 28. of Septem. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John White Grocer, the 28. of October.

After the election of this Mayor, by the Counsels letters, the Queens
Majesty's pleasure was signified to Sir Thomas Lodge, then Mayor, that
forsomuche as the plague was to great in the City, the new Mayor elected
should keep no feast at the Guild hall, for doubt, that through bringing
together such a multitude, the infection might increase, for that week there
dyed within the City and out Parishes, more than two thousand: wherefore this
sir John White took his oath at the outermoste Gate of the Tower of London.

From the first day of December, till the twelfth, was Anno reg. 6. Lightning
and* thunder.
sache continual lightning and thunder especially the same twelfth day at
night, that y^ like had not bin seen nor heard by any man then living.

In the month of December, was driven on the ^hore ^^ Grims^^e in
Lincolneshire, a monstrous fish, in length nyneteene yardes, his tail
fifteen foot broad, and six yardes between his eyes, twelve men stood
upright in his mouth to get the oil.

For that the plague was not fullye ceased in London, Term kept at Hertforde.
Hillarye Term was kept at Hertforde Castle besides Waer.

This year an honorable and joyful peace was concluded, 1564
betwixt the Queens Majesty and the French King, their Realms, Dominions
and Subjects, which peace was proclaimed with sound of Trumpet, at her
Castle of Windsore, and* also at London on the thyrteenth day of April.

The plague (thanks be to God) being clean ceased in London, both Easter and
Midsommer Term were kept at Westminster.

Through the earnest suite of the Armourers there was on the vigile of Saint
Peter a Watch in the City of London, Watch on S. Peter's even.
which did only stand in the highest streets* as Cheap, Cornehill, and so
forth to Aldgate, which Watch was to the commons of the City as chargeable,
as when in times past it had been commendably done.

The fifth of Auguste, the Queens Majesty in her Progress Abrah. Hartwell.
The Queens Progress thorough Cambridge.
came to the University of Cambridge, and was of all the Students (being
invested according to their degrees taken in the Schools) honorably and
joyfully received in the Kings College, where she did lie during her
continuance in Cambridge* The days of her abode were passed in Scholasticall
exercises of Philosophy, Physic and Divinity, the nights in Comedies and
Tragedies, set for the partlye by the whole University, and partly by the
Students of the Kings College.

At the breakyng up of the Divinity act, being on Wednesday, the ninth of
Auguste, (on the which day sh^e rode through the Town, and viewed the
Colleges, those goodly and ancient monuments of Kings of England, her Noble
Predecessors) she made within Saint Macies* Church a notable Oration in
Latin, in the presence of the whole learned University, to the Students
great comfort. The ^erte day she went forward on her Pregresse to
Fihchingbrooke by* Huntington.

The thyrtith day of August, was enacted by a common Out crier and Bellman for
the day.
Council of the City of London* that all such Citizens as from thence-forth
should be ^instrained (...) their household ^^u^^e, leafes of houses or such
like, should first cause the same to be cried through the City by a man
with a Bell, and then to be sold by the common out crier appointed for that
purpose, and he to retain one farthing of the shilling for his pains.

The xx. day of September arose great floudes in the riner Great ^^onds in
the Thamis.
of Thamis, where-through the Marshes near adjoining were ouerflowed, and
many Cattle drowned.

The creation of sir Robert Sutton alias Dudley Knight of Creation of a Baron.
the Garter, and Master of the Horse, to the Queens Majesty, who was
created Baron of Denbigh, and after Earl of Leicester on Michaelmasse day at
Saint James, with the gift of the Manor of Killingworth* and other things
there to him and his heirs, to the yearly valewe of four and twenty pound
and better. First, the said Lord attended on the Queens highness, to the
Chapel, and from the Chapel to service, and when he was returned to the
Chamber of Presence, the said Lord with other departed to the Lord
Chamberlaines Chamber, and shifted them, the said Lord Robert in his Surcote
with the Hoode, his mantle borne before him by the Lord Hunsdon, and led by
the Lord Clinton Lord Admiral by the right hand, and the Lord Strange on the
left hand, in their Parliament Robes, Garter bearing the Patent, and before
him the Officers of Arms, and so proceeded into the Chamber of Presence, where
the Queens Highness sat under the cloth of Estate with the Noble men on each
side of her, the Ambassador of France was also present with another stranger
an Italian, and when the fai^^^ Lord with the other came in the Queens sight,
they made their o^^ysaunce three times, the said Lord kneeled (...), after
the which Gatter presented* the Letters pattents to the Lord Chamberlain, and
he presented the same to the Queens Highness, who gave it to sir William
Cecil Secretary, who read the same with a loud voice, and at the words of
Creduimus, the Lord of Hunsdon presented the Mantle to the (...) Majesty, who
put on the same, whereby he was treated Baron of Denbigh for him and his
heirs: then the pattent was read out to the end, after the which he
delivered it to the Queen again, and her Highness gave it to the said Lord,
who gave her Majesty most humble thanks, and he rose up and departed to the
Chamber then came from, the Trumpettes sounding before him. Then be shifted
him of those Robes, and put on the Robes Creation of an Earl.
of Estate of an Earl, and being led by the Earl of Sussex on the right
hand, and the Earl of Huntington, on his left hand, the Earl of Warwike
bearing his Sword the Pomell upward, and the girdle, about the same, al in
their Robes of Estate, the Lord Clinton Lord Admiral in his Parliament
robes, bearing his Cap with ye Coronal, Garter* before him hearing his Patent,
and the other officers of Arms before him, they proceed as before into the
Chamber of Presence, where, after they had made their obeisance, the said
Earl ^neeled down, and Garter delivered his patent to the Lord Chamberlain,
who gave the same to the Queens Majesty, and her highness gave the same to
sir Wiliam Cecil Secretary to read, who read the same, and at the words,
Cincturam Glady the Earl of Warwike presented the Sword to the Queens
Highness, who gyrte the same about the neck of the said new Earl, puttyng
the point under his left army, and after her Majesty put on his Cappe with
the Coronall, then his Patent was read out to the end, and then the said
Secretary delivered it again to the Queen; and her Highness gave it to the
said new Earl of Leicester, who gave her humble thanks for the same, and
then he arose and went into the Council Chamber to dynner, the Trumpets
sounding before, and at dinner he sat in his kyrtle, and there accompanied him
the foresaid Ambassador of France, and the said Italian, with diverse other
Earls and Lords, and after the second course, Garter with the other Officers
of Arms, proclaimed the Queens Majesty's Style, and after, the Style of the
said Earl, for the which they had fifteen pound, to ^eete, for his Baronie
f^ue pound, and for his ^arledoms ten pound, and Garter had his Gown of
black ^elnet guarded with three gardes of the same, laid on with Lace, fined
through with black Taffata, and guarded on the inner side with the same, and
on the sleeves xxxvitj. pair of Aglets of Gold.

Du^resnoble and puissant seigneur Robert Cante de Leycest^e Baron de Denbighe,
Cheualier du tresnoble Order de la Iarretierre, and Grand Esquier de la Royne
nostre Souuereigne.

Edward Iackeman: Leonell Ducket, the 28. of September. Sheriffs. Obsequy for
the Emperor.


The second of October in the afternoon, and the morrow in the forenoone, a
solemn obsequie was holden in Saint Paul's Church at London, for Ferdinando
late Emperor departed.

The seventh of October at eight of the clock at night, Anno reg. 7.
the North parts of the Element seemed to be covered with flames offyre,
proceeding toward the middle of the firmament, where, after it had stayed nigh
one hour, it descended West, and all the same night (being the next after the
change of the Moon) seemed as light as it had bin day.

Sir Richard Mallery Mercer, the 28. of October. Mayor.


The twentieth of November in the morning, through negligence of a Maiden with
a Candle, the snuff falling in an hundred pound waighte of gunne poulder,
three houses in Bucklerslourie; werefore shaken, and the Maid dyed two days
after.

The d^e and twentieth of December begas^e a Fro^e, The Thani^^ ^rosen over.
which ^^^ (...) so extremely, that on Neweyeres even, people went over and
along the Thamis on the Ice from London bridge to Westminister, some played at
foot ball as boldly there, as if it had bin on the dry land, diverse of the
Court being then at Westminster, shot dailye at pricks set upon the Thamis
^, And the people both men and women went on the Thamis in greater number, than
in any street of the City of London: On the third day of January at night
it began to thawe, and on the fifth day was no Ice to be seen between
London bridge and Lambeth, which caused great ^loudes and high waters, that
bare down Bridges and houses, and drowned many people in England, especially
Ovves bridge borne down.
in Yorkshire, Owes bridge was borne away with other.

The third day of February, Henry Stuarte Lord Darlo^^, Henry Stuarte married
the Queen of Scots
about the age of nineteen years, eldest son of Matthew Earl of Leunex,
(who went into Scotland at Whitsontide before) having obtained license of the
Queens Majesty, took his journey toward Scotland, accompanied with ^iue of
his fathers men, where, when he came, was honorablye received, and lodged in
the Kings lodgings, and in the Summer following, married Marie Queen of
Scotland.

About this time for the Queens Majesty were chosen and sent commissioners
to Bruges, the Lord Montacute Knight of the honorable order of the Garter,
Doctor Wotton one of his Majesty's honorable Counsel, Doctor Haddo^on^ ^^ the
Masters of (...) to her highness with other: 1565
Master Doctor Aubrey was for the Merchant Adventurers of England. They came
to Bruges in Lent, Anno. 1565. and continued there till Michaelmasse followyng,
and then was the diet prolonged till March, in 1566: and the Commissioners
returned into England.

The two and twentieth of April, the Lady Margaret Lady Liunex sent to the
Tovver.
Countess of Liunex, was commanded to keep her Chamber at the White hall,
where she remained till the xxtj. of June, and then conveyed by sir Frauncis
Knolles, and the Guard to the Tower of London by water.

On Midsomer day Donell Mac Cartie More, was created Baron of Valencia, and
afterward the same day Earl of Glankerre at White hall.

On S. Peter's even at night, was the like standing watch Watch at Midso^uer.
in London, as had been on the same night twelve months.

The xvj. of July, about nine of the clock at night, began Tempest at
Chel^^forde.
a tempest of lightning and thunder, with showers of hail, which continued
til three of the clock the next morning so terrible, that at Chelmsforde in
Essex 500. acres of corn were destroyed, the Glass windows on the East side
of the Town, and of the Weast and South sides of the church were beaten down,
with also the tiles of their houses, beside diverse Barnes, Chimneys, and the
battlements of the Church which were overthrown. The like harm was done in
many other places, as at Leedes, Cranebrooke, Dover, etc.

Christopher Prince and Margraue of Baden, with Cicelie Margraue and Marquis of
Baden.
his wife sister to the King of Swethlande, after a long and dangerous journey,
wherein they had traveled almost xj. months, sailing from Stokeholme,
crossing the Seas over into Lifeland, from whence by land they came about by
Polland, Pruscy, Pomerland, Meckeburge, Friseland, and so to Ant^arpe in
Brabant, then to Callais; at the last in September (...) at Dover, and the xj.
day of the same they came to London, and were lodged at the Earl of Bedfordes
place, near unto Iuie bridge, where, within four days after, that is to
^aye, the xv. of September, she traveled in child bed, and was delivered of a
man child, which child the last of September was christened in the Queens
Majesty's chapel of White hall at Westminster, the Queens Majesty in (...)
own person being Godmother, the Archebyshoppe of Canterbury, and the Duke of
Norffolke Godfathers: at the c^ri^^^ing the Queen gave the child to name
Edwardus Fortunatus, for that God had so graciously assisted his mother, in so
long and dangerous a journey, and brought her so safe to land in that place
which she most desired, and that in so short time before her deliverance.

John Rivers: James Hawes, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Marriage of
the Earl of VVarvvike.


Sir Richard Champion ^rape^, the 28. of October.

The eleauenth of November, the right honorable Ambrose Earl of Warwike,
married Anne eldest daughter to the Earl of B^dforde: for the honor and
celebration of which noble marriage, a goodlye challenge was made, and observed
a^ ^estminster at the T^^^, with each one six courses* at the Tourney twelve
strokes with the Sword, three pushes with the punchion staste: and twelve
blows with the Sword at Bar^iars, or twenty if any were so disposed.

At ten of the clock the same day, a valiant serui^eable Robert Thomas
slain.
man, called Roberte Thomas, Master Gunner of England, destrous also to
honor the fea^^ and marriage day in consideration the said Earl of Warwike
was General of the Ordinance within her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, made
three trains of great Chambers, which terribly yielded forth the nature of
their voice, to the great astonishment of diverse, who at the fyring of the
second, was vnhappilye stain by a piece of one of the Chambers, to the great
sorrow and lame^^ation of many.

The four and twentieth of December, in the morning Anno reg. 8.
there rose a great storm and tempest of wind, by whose rage the Thames and
Seas overwhelmed many persons, and the great Gates ^^ the Weaste end of
Paul's Church in London, (between the which stands the Brazen Pillar)
Paul's Gate blovven open.
were, through the force of the wind, then in the weasterne part of the
world ^lo^en open.

In January, M^ns^eur Ra^buley ^ Knight of the Order Order of Saint Michaell.
in France, was sent over into England, by the French King Charles the ninth
of that na^^e, with the Order, who ^^ Windsore, was stalled in the behalf of
the said French King with the Knighthoode of the most honorable order of the
Garter: and the four and twentieth of January, in the Cha^pell of her Majesty's
Pallaice of White ^all, the said Monsieur Rambuley invested Thomas Duke of
Norffolke, and Robert Earl of Leicester, with the said order of Saint
M^chaell.

The Mar^u^s of Baden, and the Lady Cecilie his wife, 1566 ^^^ Ma^q^es of
Baden returns.
^^ster to the King of Swethen, who came into this land in the meneth of
September last paste, as before is declared, being then by the Qeenes
especial appointment at their arrival honorably received by the Lord Cobham,
an honorable Baron of this Realm, and the Lady his wife one of the Queens
Majesty's pri^ie Chamber, now in the month of April, Anno. 1569. departed
the same again, the Marquis a few days before his wife, being both cenducted
by a like personage the Lord of Aburgaueny to Dover.

Certain houses in Cornehill, being first purchased by the The Burse in
Cornehill.
Citizens of London, were in the month of February cried by the Bell man, and
afterward sold to such persons as should take them down and carry them
from thence, which was so done in the months of April and May next
following. And then the ground being made plain at the charges also of the
City, po^^ession thereof was by certain Aldermen, in name of the whole
Citizens, given to ye right worshipful sir Tho. Gresham Knight, Agent to the
Queens Highness, there to build a place for Merchantes to assemble in, at his
own proper charges, who on the seventh of June laid the first stone of the
foundation (being Brick) and forthwith the workmen followed upon the same
with such diligence, that by the Month of November, in the year of our Lord
^^67* the same was covered with Slate.

The commissioners before named appointed for the matters of Flaunders, keepyng
their diet at Bruges, agreed to refer the whole matter to the Princes on
both sides, and if they could not agree, then the Merchants to have forty
days to repair home with their merchaundise, and in the mean t^^^, all
things to stand as they were then. Dure C^^^^issioners departed from Bruges
about the xxvj. of June.

The xxxj. of August ye Queens Majesty in her progress The Queens progress
to Oxforde.
came to the Uniuer^^tie of Oxforde, and was of all the Students, which had
looked for her coming thither two years, so honorably and joyfully received,
as either their l^ya^n^^^e toward the Queens Majesty, or the expectation of
their ^^iendes did require. Concerning orders in disputa^^on, and other
Academicall exercises, they agreede much with those, which the University of
Cambridge had used two years before. Comedies also and Tragedies were played in
Christ's Church, where the Queens Highness ^^dged. Among the which, the
Comedy entitled Palemon Misfortune at Oxford.
and Arcet, made by Master Edwards of the Queens Chapel, had such tragical
success as was lamentable: For at that time by the fall of a wall and a pair
of stairs, and great pre^sse of the multitude, three men were slain.

The fifth of September after disputations, the Queen at the humble suit of
certain of her Nobility, and the King of Spa^^es Ambassador, made a brief
Oration in Latin to the University, but so wise and pithie, as England may
rejoice, that it has so learned a Prince, and the University may tri^^ph,
that they have so noble a Patroness.

The vj* of September after dinner, her Grace coming from Christ's Church over
Carfox, and so to Saint Mary's, the Scholars standing in order according to
their degrees, even to the East gate, certain Doctors of the University did
ride before in their Scarlet gowns and hoodes, and Masters of Art in black^
^^wn^ and hood^s. The Mayor also with certain of his drethren did ride before
her in Scarlet to the end of Magdalene ^^^dge, where their liberties ended:
but the Doctors and Masters went forward still to Sho^ouer, a mile and more
out of Oxforde, dicause their Liberties extended so far, and there after
Orations made, her Highne^^^ with thanks to the whols University, dade them
farewell, and rode to Rycote.

Richard Lambert: Ambrose Nicholas, the 28. of September. Sherifes.


John Langley, the 4. of April.

Sir Christopher Draper Iremonger, the 28. of October Mayor. Soldiers
transported into Irelande.


The valiant Captain Edward Randolfe Esquier, lieutenant of the Ordinance,
and Colonel of a thousand footmen, in September last paste, was with his band
embarked at Bristow, and within few days after, landed at Knocfergus in the
North parts of Ireland, and went thence by water to a place called Derry, by
which passes ye river of Longfoile, there the said Colonel in short space
fortified, to the great annoyaunce of John Oneale, and by great foresight and
experience, guarded himself and his charge, till the said Oneale (to hinder
and disturb his abode there) th^^* of Noue^ber arrived with a great army of
Kerne Galawgl^ss^s and horssemen, with whom the said Captain Randolfe
encountered, and him there so discomfited, as after that conflicte he durst
never approach the Queens power, and to his perpetual fame, the said Captain
by reason of his bold and hardy onset that day lost his life.

Charles James, the sixth of that name, son to Henry Young Prince of Scots
christened. Anno reg. 9.
Stuarte Lord of Darnley, and Marie King and Queen of Scots was borne in
Edenberough Castle the nineteenth of June last past: and the eighteenth of
December, this year solemnly Christened at Striueling, whose Godfathers at the
Christning were, Charles King of France, and Philibert Duke of Sauoy, and the
Queens Majesty of England was the Godmother, who gave a Font of Gold
curiously wrought and enameled, weighing 333. ounces, amounting in value to the
sum of 1043. ^. 19. s.

The tenth of February in the morning, Henry Stuarte King of Scotts murdered.
Lord of Darneley before named King of Scots, by Scotts in Scotland, was
shamefully murdered the revenge whereof remains in the mighty hand of God.

The xxij. of February the Lady Margaret Dowglasse countess of Leunex, mother
to the said King of Scotts, was discharged out of the Tower of London. Within
the space of ten months last paste dyed seven Seven Alderme^ deceased in
London.
Aldermen of London, the first Edward Banks deceassed the ninth of July,
Anna 1566. R. Chamberlain late Sheriff, sir Martin Bows, sir R Malory, sir
William Hewet, and sir Thomas White late Majors, then Richard Lambart one of
the Sheriffs for that year, the 4. of April, Anno 1567.

The xxij. of April, by great misfortune of fire in the 1567 The Town of
Ossestry burnt thrice in thyrtie years.
Town of Ossestrie in Wales twelve miles from Shrewsburie, to the number of
200. houses, to say, seven scores within the walls, and three score without
in the Suburbs, beesides cloth, corn, cattle, etc. were consumed, which fire
began at two of the clock in the forenoone, and ended at f^^^, to the great
maruelling of many, that so great a spoil in fo short time should happen. Two
long streets* with great riches of that town were brent in Anno. 1542. And
likewise or worse in Anno. 1544.

The xxiiij. of April, the Sergeants feast was kept at Greis Inn near unto
Holborne, and there were at that time Sergeants feast
made seven new Sergeants of the law.

The xxvij. of May in the town of Milnal in Suffolk eight Milnal in Suffolk
brent.
mile from Newmarket, 37. houses, besides barnes, stables, and such like were
consumed with fire in the space of two hours.

Shane Oneale, who had most traitorously rebelled against Shane Oneale
discomfited. Statuta Regni Hiberniae. Edmond Campion*
the Queens Majesty in Ireland, and had done many great outrages in the
parts of V^ster, was this year* with his great loss manfully repelled from
the siege of Dundalke by the garrison thereof, and afterward through the great
valiancie of sir Henry Sidney Knight of the order, and Lord Deputy of
Irelande, he was so discomfited in sundry conflictes, with the loss of 3500.
of his men, that now foreseeyng his declination to be iminant, he determined
to put a colle^ about his neck, and disguising himself, to repair to the
Lord Deputy, and patiently to require his pardon to have his life* But Neil
Ma^keuer his Secretary, who had incited him to this rebellion, persuaded him
first to try and treat the friendship of certain wild Scots that then say
(...) in Clan Ibon* under the conducting of Alexander Oge, and Mec Gilliam
Buske, whose father and uncle Shane Oneale had lately killed, in an overthrow
given by the Scots: nevertheless, he well liking this persuasion, went to the
said camp the second of June* where after a dissembled entertainment, and
quaffing of Wine, Gilliam Buske* burning with desire of revenge of his fathers
and uncles death, and ministryng Shane Oneale slain.
quarrelling talk, issued out of the Tent, and made a feay upon Oneales* men,
and then gathering together his Scots in a throng, suddenly entered the Tent
again, who there, with their slaughter* Swords, hewed in pieces Shane Oneale,
his Secretary, and all his company, except a very few which escaped by
flight.

The 8. of June sir Thomas Sackuile Knight, was created Baron of Buckhurst, at
Westminster in the Queens Palaice.

On Saint John's even at night, was the like standing Watch at Midsomer.
watch in London, as had been on Saint Peter's even in the year before passed.

The xxix. of July, Charles James the young Prince of Creation in Scotland.
Scotland, after a Sermon made by John Knokes, was crowned King of Scots at
Sterling Church, where were read certain Commissions, with the Queens privy
seal at them for the establishing of the same. The first for her resignation
of the Crown, and government of the young Prince her son. The second, to
aucthorize the Earl of Murrey, to be Regent during his minority. The third,
to give authority and power to seven other, joining with the said Earl of
Murrey, in case he should refuse to exercise the same alone, that is to say,
the Duke of Cha^^leroy, the Earls of Leunex, Argyle, Athelmorto* ^lencarne and
Mar: the commissions being ended, the Bishop of Akelley, with two
Superintendents, proceeded to the Coronation, the Earl Morton and Lord Hume
took ^the for the King, that he should rule in the faith, fear, and love of
God, to maintain the Religion then preached in Scotland, and persecute all
adversaries to the same, etc.

The whole ceremony of the coronation was done in their mother tongue, and at
that time the Queen of Scotts was prisoner at Loughleuen.

Thomas Ramsey: William Bond, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Roger Martin Mercer, the 28. of October.

After a dry Summer followed a sharp Winter, with such a scarcity of Fodder
and Hay, that in diverse places the same was sold by waighte, as in Yorkshire,
and in the Peake, Hay was sold for five pence the stone: there followed also
a great death of cattle, especially of horse and sheep.

In the month of January, the Queens Majesty sent into the narrow seas
three of her ships, named the Antelope, the Swallow, and the Aid, and one
Bark named the Phoenix, the which were manned with v. C. men: and her
Highness appointed the charge of those ships and men, to Master William
Holstoke Esquier, Comptroller of her Highness ships, who had commandment
to stay the subjects of King Philip, and according to his duty and charge*
he used such diligence, that on the eleauenth of March next following, he
met with eleauen sail of Flemishe* Hoyes, upon Bolongne, which came from
Roan^, and in them four hundred and odd Tuunes of Gascoigne and French Wines,
which they intended to have conveyed into Flaunders, but William Holstoke
stayed all the said Hoyes, and sent them to London, where they made their
discharge, and the Flemings disappointed.

Moreover, on the eight and twentieth of March* the said William Holstoke
serving in the Antelope at that present Admiral, in his company being William
Winter the younger, (at that time Uizadmirall) serving in the Aid, and ^.
Basing Captain of the S^^llowe, and Thomas Generley Captain of the Phoenix,
me^te in the narrow Seas with fourteen sail of great H^lkes, which were
come out of Portingale, and bound to Flaunders, their chief lading being
Portingale* Salt, and yet had good store of Spanishe Rialles of Plate, and
also great store of Spices, the which fourteen Hulkes did mainteyne their
fight for the space of two hours, and after that they did perceive that they
could not prevail, the said W. Holstoke and his company took eight of the
same Hulkes, whereof six were sent into the River of Thamis, and the Admiral
and Uizadmirall of the said Hulkes, being two great Ships, which W. Holstoke
himself did take, were conuayed to Harwich, and there discharged.

The xxviij. of March, through vehement rage and tempest Great winds.
of winds, many vessels in the Thamis, with two Tiltebeates before Grauesend
were sunk and drowned.

The xxvj. of June, deceassed Thomas Young Archbishop Archbishop of York
deceassed.
of York, at his manor of Shefield, and was honorably buried at York.

This year, Car^^nall Odet Chastilion flees out of Peter Ram^^.
France into England, where he remained till the year of our Lord 1570* and
then dyed at Canterbury, and was there b^ryed in Christ's Church.

John Oleph: Robert Harding, the 28. of September. Sheriffs.


The xj. of October, were taken in Suffolk at Downam bridge ^eere unto
Ipswich, eyghteene monstrous fishes, some Monstrous fishes.
of them containing xxvij. foot in length, the other xxiiij. or xxj. foot a
piece at the least.

Sir Thomas Roe merchant Tailor, the 28. of October. Mayor. Sheriff.


James Bacon, the 26. of November.

At the costs and charges of the Citizens of London, a new Conduit was builded
at Walbrooke corner, near to New Conduit at VValbroke. Anno reg. 11
Downegate, which was finished in the month of October, the water whereof is
conuayed out of the Thamis.

The xvij. of January, Philip Mestrell a Frenchman, and A Frenchman executed.
two Englishmen, were drawn from Newgate to Tiborne, and there hanged, the
Frenchman quartered, who had coined gold counterfeit, the Englishmen, the one
had clipped silver, the other cast Testons of Tin.

The xxviij. of March, the Pencioners well appointed 1569 Muster of Pe^tioners.
in armor on horssebacke, mustered before the Queens Majesty in Hide Park
beside Westminster.

A great L^tt^m being holden at London in Paul's Churchyard A Lottary at London.
at the We(...)ore, ^^^ ^ego^ to be drawn the eleventh of January, and
continued day and night, till the sixth of May, wherein the said drawing was
fully ended.

Sir Thomas Roe Lord Mayor of London, caused to be enclosed Burial for dead
prepared.
with a wall of brick, nigh one acre of ground, near unto Bedlem without
Bishopsgate, to be a place of burial for the dead, of such parishes in London
as lacked conueniente ground within their said parishes.

A standing watch on Saint John's even at Midsomer, and Sir John White Alderman
rode the circuit, as the Lord Mayor should have done.

The xxvij. of August, Andrew Gregoreuich Sauin, Ambassador from Muscouy,
lauded at the Tower Wharffe, and Ambassador from Muscouy.
was there received by the Lord Mayor of London, the Aldermen, and Sheriffs in
Scarlet, with the merchants adventurers in coats of black velvet all on
horseback, who conuayd him riding through the City to the: Muscouy house in
S^ding Lane there to be lodged.

The plague of pestilence some what reigning in the City Term adiorned.
of London, Michaelmas Term was first adiourned unto the third of November,
and after unto Hillarie Term next following.

Henry Bechar: William Danne, the 28. of September. Sheriffs.


The xj. of October, Thomas Haward Duke of Norffolke, was brought from Burnam
beside Windsore by land to Westminster, Duke of Norffolke sent to the Tovver.
and from thence by water to the Tower of London prisoner, Sir Henry Neuill
being his keeper.

Sir Alexander Auenon Irnemonger, the 28. of October. Mayor. No Majors feast.


This Mayor went by water to Westminster, and there took his oath as has bin
accustomed, but kept no feast at the Guild hall, least through coming together
of so great multitude, infection of the pestilence might have increased. That
week, from the one and twentieth unto the eight and twentieth of October, there
dyed in the City and out parishes of all diseases 152. of the which 51. were
accounted to dye of the plague.

On Monday the fourteenth of November, Thomas Percy The Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland rebelled.
Earl of Northumberland being at Topclife, received the Queens majesty's
letters to repair to the Court, and the same day at night, certain
conspirators perceiving the said Earl to be wavering and unconstant of
promise made to them, caused a seruante of his, called Bekewith, (after he was
laid in his bed) to bustle in, and to knock at his chamber door, willing
him in have to arise and shifte for himself, for that his enemies (whom he
termed to be Sir Osweld Vlstrop, and Master Vaghan) were about the Park,
and had besette him with numbers of men, whereupon he arose, and conuayde
himself away to his keepers house: in the same instant, they caused the Belles
of the Town to be rong backwarde, and so raised as many as they could to that
purpose*

The next night, the Earl departed thence to Branspith, where he met with
Charles Neuill Earl of Westmerland, and other their confederates, after which
time, by sundry Proclamations, they abusing the Queens subjects, commanded
them in her highness name to repair to them in warlike manner, for the
defense and surety of her Maiestles person, sometimes affirming their doyngs
to be with the advice and consent of the Nobility of the Realm, who in deed
were wholly bente (as manyfestly appeared) to spend their lives in dutiful
obedience, against them and all other Traitors, sometimes pretending for
conscience sake to seek to reform Religion, sometimes declaring that they
were driven to take this matter in hand, least otherwise for reign Princes
might take it upon them, to the great peril of this Realm.

The xvj. day, they came to Durham, and forthwith went Rebels rent the Bible.
to the Minster, where they tare the Bible, Communion Books, and other such as
therewere. The same night they went again to Branspith, and on the morrow to
Darington, where they had holywater, but no Mass, for want of vestments. From
thence, they sent their Horssemen to gather together such numbers of men as
they could. The xviij. the Earl of Northumberland went to Richmond, then to
Northalarton, after to Borow bridge, and on Sunday, the twentieth Anno reg. 12
of November, he with his Lady Countess of Northumberland, met again with the
Earl of Westmerland at Ripon, and there had Mass, where (to get the more
credit among the favorers of the old Romish Religion) they had a cross with
a banner of the five wounds borne before them by Richard Norton, and that
night they went to Borow bridge, and on the Monday to Wether^ie, on which day
at night some bands of them entered T^dcaster, and took a two hundred
footmen, chacing their Captains which were leading them toward York to the
Earl of Sussex. On Tuesday, they mustered on Clifford moore, nigh unto Bramham
moore, where they were a sixteen hundred horssemen, and a four thousand
footmen, which was the greatest number that ever they were. From thence, they
intended to have The number of the Rebels.
marched toward York, but their minds being sodeinly altered, by report they
heard that Sir George Bows had mustered within the Bishopric, and
Richmondshire, and leuyed great bands, on the Wednesday they returned again
to Wetherby, on Thurseday to Northalerton, on Friday to Richmond, on Saturday
Westmerland went to Rabyes his own house, on Sunday at night the Earl of
Northumberland came to him there. On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, they
mustered in all Richmondshire and the Bishopric, bestowing their footmen in
bands under Captains leading: and the same day, which was the last of
November, they beseeged Barnard or Barn Castle upon Tese, builded by Bernards
Castle beseeged.
Barnard Bayllioll about Anno domini 1174. which Castle was valiantly defended
by Sir George Bows and Roberte Bows his brother the space of eleven days. In
the mean space, the Earl of Westmerland and his Lady went to Durham with
seven or eight hundred horse, where they remained till the thirteenth of
December, in which space, to weete the seventh day of December, Sir John
Foster, Warden Skirmish with the Rebels.
of the middle marches, accompanied with Sir Henry Percy, did give to the said
Earl a great skirmish. The sixth of December, Sir George Bows put forth of
the Castle two hundred horsemen, whereof two persons were slain, and thirty
taken by the Rebels. The tenth of December, Sir Barnards Castle delivered to
the Rebels.
George Bows delivered the said Castle, under composition to depart with
armor, munition, bag and baggage, and forthwith marched with his garrison
toward York. In this mean time, to weete, on the xxiiij. of November, the
Queens Majesty had caused the said Earls of Northumberland The Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland proclaimed Traitors.
and Westmerland to be proclaimed Traitors, with all their adherents and
favorers, and forthwith prepared an army to be sent out of the South for their
suppression. The Lord Scrope, warden of the West marches, had called unto him
the Earl of Cumberland, and other Gentlemen of the Country, and they kept
the City of Carelile. The Earl of Sussex the Queens majesty's Lieutenant
general The Earl of Sussex the Queens Lieutenant general in the North
against the Rebels.
in the North, had on the xvij. of November there published the like
Proclamation (in effect) as after was published by her* Majesty against the
said Rebels, and also sent out to all such Gentlemen as he knew to be her
Majesty's loving subjects under his rule, who came unto him with such number of
their friends, as he was able in five days to make above five thousand
horsemen and footmen, and so being accompanied with the Earl of Rutlande his
Lieutenant, the Lord Hunsdon general of his horsemen, William Lord Eure, who
had the leading of the rereward of the footmen, and Sir Ralph Sadler
Treasurer, who all came to York with their servants, on Sunday the xj. of
December, they marched from York toward Topclife, the x^j. they tarryed at
Sezay, where Sir George Bows with his power coming from Barnards Castle (as
is a foresaid) met him, and was made Marshall of the Army: then they went
to Northalarton, to S^icto^, to Croftbridge, and so to Actay, on the which day,
the Rebels fled from Durham (having called their company Christopher Neuill
frent Hertlepoole; who were fortifying there) to Exham, where they abode three
days.

The Earl of S^^ssex Lieutenant with his power, went from Actay to Durham,
then to Newcastell, and the twentieth of December to Exham, from whence, the
Rebels were gone the night before to Naworth, where counsayling with Edward
Dacres concerning their own weakness, as also how they were pursued by the
Earl of Sussex and his power of seven thousand, even almost at their
heels: and moreover, that the Earl of Warwike, the The Earl of VVarvvike
sent against the Rebels.
Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral of England, and the Lord Ferrers; Uiscount
Hereford, with afar greater army of twelve thousand out of the South,
whereof the said Earl of Warwike was General, was not far behind them at
Borowbridge.

The next night, the two Earls of Northumberlande and Westmerlande, with
sundry of their principal Gentlemen, The Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland fled.
unknown to their associates, fled to Herlaw in Scotland: the other Rebels
were shortly after taken by the Earl of Sussex and his power, without any
resistance.

The fourth and fifth of January, did suffer at Durham Rebels executed at
Durham.
to the number of threescore and six Constables and other, amongst whom, an
Alderman of the Town, and a Priest called Parson Plom^ree were the most
notable: then ^^^r Gro^^^ Bows Marshall, finding many to be faultors in the
foresaid Rebellion^, did see them executed in every Markette Town and other
places, betwiete Nowcastell and Wetherby, about threescore miles in length, and
forty miles in breadth.

The one and twentieth of January, a Prentise was hanged on a gibbet at the
North end of Finke Lane in London, (to the ensample of other) for that he y^
thirteenth of December had stricken his master with a knife, whereof he dyed.

The two and twentieth of February, Leonard Dacre of Leonard Dacr^ ^^edde into
Scotland.
Harlsey, in the County of York Esquire, having raised a number of people,
the Lord Hunsdon and other setting on him with a company of valiant
Souldyers, flewe many of his people, and forced him to flee into Scotland.

On good Friday the seven and twentieth of March, Simon 1570
Digby of Askewe, John Fulthorp of Isilbecke in the County of York Esquires,
Robert Peneman of Stokesley, Rebels executed at York.
Thomas Bishop the younger of Poklinton in the same County of York Gentlemen,
were drawn from the Castle of York, to the place of execution called
Knauestmire, half a mile without the City of York, and there hanged, headed,
and quartered, their four heads were set on the four principal gates of the
City, with four of their quarters, the other quarters were set in diverse
places of the Country: Oscolph Clesbe was with them drawn to the gallows,
and returned again to the Castle.

William Earl of Pembroke, Baron of Cardiffe, Knighte The Earl of Pembroke
deceassed.
of the Garter, one of the privy Counsel, and Lord Steward of the Queens
majesty's household, deceassed the eyghteenth of April, and was buried in Saint
Paul's Church at London.

The seventeenth of April, the Earl of Sussex Lieutenant The Earl of Sussex
made a journey into Scotland.
general in the North, with the Lord Hunsdon, Lord governor of Barwike, and
Warden of the East Marches, and master William Drewry high Marshall of
Barwike, with all the garrison and power of the fame, began a journey into
Scotland, and the same night came to Warke, twelve miles from Barwike, and so
the next morrow entered into Tiuidale, and marching in warlike order, they
bre^t, overthrew, rased and spoiled all the Castles, Towns, and villages of
their enemies, till they came to the Castle of Moss standing in a strong
marish belonging to the L. of Bucklugh, which likewise was rased, overthrown
and brent, and so marched forward and brent the whole Country before them,
till they came to Craling. The same day, Sir John Foster Warden of the Sir John
Foster with a garrison entered Scotland.
middle marches, with the garrison and force of the same, entered likewise into
Tiuidale upon Expes gate, sixteen mile from Warke, where in like order they
brent, rased, and spoiled the Country before them, till they came to a strong
Castle called Craling, in the possession of the mother of the Lord Ferniherst,
which likewise they overthrew, rased, and brent. There both the Armies met,
and so marched by the River of Tiuite, rasing, burning, and spoiling Castles
and pyles along the River, till they came to Gedworth, where they both lodged,
and were courteously received. The next day the Lord Ses^ord, Warden of the
middle Marches of Scotland, came in with all the principal men of his kindred
to the Lord Lieutenante, and did submit themselves, and were assured, for
that they had not received the English Rebels, ayding or assisting them,
neither had made any invasion into England. The nineteenth, the Army divided
into two parts, the one part whereof passed the River of Teuite, and brent
the Castle of Ferniherst, and all other Castles and Towns belonging to the
Lord of Ferniherst, Huntill and Bedrell, and so passed to Mint, where both the
Armies met again, and so burnt on both sides the River, till they came to
a great Town called Hawicke, where they intended to have lodged, but the
Scotts had vnthatched the houses, and brent the thatch in the streets, and
themselves fled with most part of their goods, but by the industry of the
Englishmen, the timber was also burned with the thatch, saving one little house
of stone of Dunlamrickes, wherein my Lord lay that night. The twentieth day,
the Army marched forwards to a house of the Lord of Bucklugh, which they
overthrew with powder, and then marched Northwarde to the River of Tiuet, where
they burnt and spoiled such Castles, pyles, and Towns, as belonged to the
Lord of Fernihurst and Bucklogh, their kinsmen and adherents, and that night
returned to Gedworth. The one and twentieth day, part of the army went to the
River of Bowbent, under the leading of the said Marshall, where master George
Heron, Reeper of Tiuidale and Ridsdale, with them of that Country, met with
him, and joining together, rode on, burning and spoiling all on both sides of
the River, and the other part marched to the River of Trile, where they wasted
and brent all on both sides the River, and returned to Kilsey, where the Lord
Lieutenant lodged of purpose to beseege Hewme Castle in the night, and the
Lord Governor with his company went to Warke, to bring the ordinance from
thence in the morning, which was disappoynted by the negligence of such as were
put in trust for those matters, who suffered the carriage Horses to return to
Barwike the day before, which should have drawn the same, she lack whereof,
caused the Lord Lieutenant, with the whole army, to return to Barwike the
two and twentieth of April, in all which time, there was never any show by the
Scotts made, to resist or defend their Country.

The Lord Scrope Warden of the West marches, entered The Lord Scrope entered
Scotland.
Scotland the eyghteenth of April, burnt and spoiled those parts almost to
Domfrees, he had diverse conflictes, gave sundry overthrows, took many
prisoners, and returned safely. During all these invasions, the marches of
England in all places were so guarded by the Lord Euers, Sir George Bows,
and other of the Bishopric, as the Scotts durst not once offer to enter into
England, so that not one house was burned, nor one Cow taken out of England.
There were rased, overthrown, and brent in this journey, above fifty strong
Castles and pyles, and above three hundred Towns and Uillages, so that there
be very few in the Country, that either have received our English Rebels, or
invaded England, that either have Castle, ^yle, or house for themselves or
their tenantes, besides the loss of their goods. The xxvj. the Lord
Lieutenant accompanied with the Lord Governor, the Marshall, and diverse lusty
Gentlemen, Captains, and Souldyers, to the number of three thousand, set
forward to Warke, and so to Hewme Castle, which Castle they beseeged till
the same was yielded, the Lord Governor, the Marshall, and diverse other,
took possession for our sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, and expelled
the Scortes that were therein, to the number of 168. persons, in their apparel
on their backs only, without armor, weapon, bag or baggage, among whom
there were two Englishmen, one Hiliard the Earl of Northumberlands man, and a
vagrant person named William Godswher, which both were carried to Barwike
Rebels executed at Barvvike
and there executed the xxtiij. of May. The Lord Lieutenant placed in the
Cast^^l Captain Wood, and Captain Pikeman, with two hundred Souldyers, and so
returned to Barwike the xxix. of April, where he rested very evil at ease,
having in the travail taken overmuch cold, wherewith he was driven into an
extreme ague.

The fourth of May, he sent master Drewry Marshall with the number of two
thousand, to take Faust Castle, which at the first coming was delivered to
the Marshall, who expelled the Scotts in number ten, and placed fourteen of
our Englishmen against all Scotland, it is so strong a place, and so returned
to Barwike. The eleventh of May, the Lord Lieutenant made four Knights, viz.
Sir William Drewry, Knights made by the Earl of Sussex.
Sir Thomas Manners, Sir George Care, sir Robert Constable. And the same day,
Sir William Drewry being General, set forward toward Edenborough with diverse
foot bands with shot armed* p^^es and pieces of great Ordinance, to join
with the Earls of Leunox, Murton, Glencarne, and Mar, and other of the Kings
power of Scotland, in pursuing of the English Rebels, and such of the Scotts
as supported them, as the Duke Hamelton and other, who were in arms at
Lithcoe, twelve miles from, Edenborough, to defend their cause. The ^ort said
new Knights with their bands came to Edenborough the thirteenth of May, and
there rested three nights, and departed from thence to Lithcoe, where the
Regent was slain. The xvij. the footmen marched to Faukirke, six miles from
Sterling, and Sir William Drewry with the horssemen, marched to Sterling to see
the King, whom they found so perfect in all things as age and nature could
permit. The xviij. they departed to the footebands, and so together marched
to Glascoy, where the Lord Hamelton had beseeged a house of the Kings, but
hearing of their coming, he fled with dishonor, and the loss of 29. of his
men. The xix. the general with other horssemen and some shot, passed to
Dunbarton, to view the straytes of the Castle there, being kept by the Lord
Fleming, the Bishop of Saint Andrews, and other his adherents, to the Queen
of Scotts use. Our general sent his Trumpetor to require a parley with
assurance safely to return, whereunto the Lord Fleming subtly consented, and
minding so to wind him into his danger, conveyed certain shot, and armed men
into a secret place, so that our General coming alone to have parlyed, his
Trumpetor not returned, they shot at him, meaning to have slain him, but he
bestowed his Pistolettes as freely at them as they at him, and returned to his
company and so to Glasco, from whence, Sir George Care being maruellously
offended with the subtle dealing of the Lord Fleming, wrote a letter of
challenge to combat with him body for body, which the Lord Fleming by his
letter of answer refused, whereupon Sir George Care wrote a sharp and pithie
reply etc.

The one and twentieth day, our General accompanied with the Gentlemen and
horsemen, went to Dunbritton again to parley with the Lord Fleming, upon his
promise that he ^^oulde meet him three miles from the said Castle, but the
place of parley being viewed, was found to be subject to the shot of the
Castle, and therefore our General required another place, which would not be
granted by the Lord Fleming.

The. xxij. the Lord of Lenox, the Lord Glencarne, and the Lord Simple, with
their friends and tenaunts, came to our General, and mustered before Glasco,
to the number of four thousand horsemen and footmen.

The. xxiij. our General with the whole army marched toward the Castle of
Hamelton, and there had parley with the Captain, whose name was Arthur
Hamelton, but he would not deliver the Castle, whereupon, our Ordinance being
placed, was shot very sor^, but did no great harm, for that they were field
pieces.

The. xxiiij. our General gave sommons to the said Castle which would not
yield, whereupon, he sent to Starling for bigger Ordinance for the battery,
and so went from thence, accompanied with the Earls of Lenox and Mortayne,
with the horsemen and certain shot, marched in the Country to a fair house
of the Abbots of Kelwing near adjoining, whose name was Gawyn Hamelton, which
house they burned, and utterly spoiled, with seauenteene houses more of good
countenance of that name, whereof one was the Lord Lanhappes, which had married
with the sister of James Hamelton of Bedwilhough which slew the Regent. There
was burned seven other fair houses thereaboutes, not of that name, but of
alie: besides those, there were diverse of their kindred and alie, that came in
with humble submission, and assured themselves, promising their obedience to
their King etc.

The. xxv. of May in the morning, was found hanging at the Bishop of Londons
palace gate in Paul's Churchyard, a A Bull from Rome, hanged on the Bishop of
Londons gate.
Bull which lately had bin sent from Rome, containing diverse horrible treasons
against the Queens majesty, for the which, one John Felton was shortly after
apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London.

The. xxvtj. of May, Thomas Norton, and Christopher, of Yorkshire, being both
condemned of high treason, for the late The Nortons ^^ecuted.
Rebellion in the North, were drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and
there hanged, headed, and quartered.

The xxvtj. of May, the Castle of Hamelton was yielded Hamelton in Scotland
yielded to the English.
to Sir William Drewry, general of our Army, and by him presently spoiled and
brent, there was in the house 34. me^.

The xxviij. Sir George Care with the horsemen came to Lithco, where the whole
army met. This day, a very fair house, with the whole Town of Hamelton was
brent. The xxix. they brent an house of the Dukes called Kemyell, and another
at Lithco: the whole Town, and diverse other fair houses was yielded to our
general, who returned to Edenborough and so to Barwike the third day of June.

A conspiracy was made by certain Gentlemen and other Conspiracy in Norffolke.
in the Country of Norffolke, whose purpose was on Midsomer day, at Harlestone
fair, with sound of Trumpet and Drum, to have raised a number, and then to
proclayme their devilish pretense against Strangers and other. This matter was
uttered by Thomas Kete one of the conspiracy, unto John Kensey, who forthwith
sent the same Kete with a Constable to the next Justice, before whom, and
other Justices, he opened the whole matter, whereupon, master Drewgh Drewry
immediately apprehended John Throgmorton, and after him, many Gentlemen of the
City of Norwich, and the County of Norffolke, who were all committed to
prison, and (at the next Sessions of gaile delivery at the Castle of
Norwich, the seventeenth of July, before Sir Robert Ca^^^ Knight, Lord chief
Justice, Gilbert Gerrard the Queens Attorney general, and other Justices)
ten of them were indicted of high Treason, and some others of contempt,
diverse of them were condemned, and had judgment the one and twentieth of
August, and afterward three of them were hanged, bowelled, and quartred, which
were John Throgmorton of Norwich Gentleman, who stood mute at his
arraignement, but at the gallows confessed himself to be the chief
conspiratour, and that none had deserved to dye but he, for that he had
procured them: with him was executed Thomas Brook of Rolsbye Gentleman the
thirtith of August, and George Redman ^^ Cn^^geleford Gentleman was likewise
executed the second of September.

The fourth of August, the Duke of Norffolke was remomoued The Duke of
Norffolke removed.
from the Tower of London to the Charterhouse near unto Smithfield.

The same day was arraigned at the Guild hall of London Felton arraigned.
John Felton, for hanging a B^ll at the gate of the Bishop of Londons palace,
and also two young men for coining and clipping of coin, who all were found
guilty of high Treason, and had judgment to be drawn, hanged, and quartered.

The eight of August, John Felton was drawn from Newgate into Paul's
Churchyard, and there hanged on a gallows Felton and others executed.
new set up that morning before the Bishops palace gate, and being cut down
alive, he was bowelled and quartered. After this, the same morning, the
Sheriffs returned to Newgate, and so to Tiborne with two young men which were
there executed for coining and clipping, as is aforesaid.

The two and twentieth of August, the Earl of Sussex A journey into Scotland by
the Earl of Sussex.
Lord Lieutenant general for the Queens Majesty in the North, and the Lord
Scrope, warden of the West marches, with diverse other, marched from C^relile
with the Queens army, and force of the North, as well of Horsemen as footmen
into Scotland, passing over the Rivers of Eske, Leuin, and Sarke, which River
of Sarke parts England and Scotland, and so to Dornocke wood, belonging to
Edward Vrone the Lord of Bonshow, and then to Anno^na, a strong house of the
Lord Harris, which they rased and overthrew with other there aboutes: from
thence to Hodhim, which they burnt and blew up: from thence to Kennell, a
Town belonging to the Lord ^owhill, which they burnt: from thence to
Domfries, which they sacked and spoiled of such paltrie as the fugitives had
left, and also rased and ouerthrewe a sumptuous house belonging to the Queen
of Scotts, in the keeping of the Lord Harris: then passing the (...) of
Longher, they brent and spoiled Cowhilles and Pow^racke, and returned to
D^m^^^^s, and so to the Town of Bankend* which they burnt, with another house
perteyning to William Maxwell of the Isles, and so to the Castle of
Carlauoracke, standing in a marish just to an arm of the Sea, which parts
Aunerdall and Gallaway, which Castle they blew up, and returned homeward,
transporting their Ordinance over quicksands and bogges, where never the like
was done before, and so came to Darnoke wood.

The eight and twentieth of August, they marched toward Garelile, where by the
way they brent and overthrew two houses, the one being Arthur Greames, alias
Carelile, the other Rich George, two notable Thieves. The same day at night
after the Lords coming to Carlisle, he made Knights, Sir Edward Hastings, Sir
Frances Russell, Sir Knights made by the Earl of Sussex.
Valentine Brown, Sir William Hilton, Sir Robert Stapleton, Sir Henry Curwen,
Sir Simon Musgraue.

Fraunces Bar^ame William Box the 28. of September. Sherifes.


The (...) of On other ^t night, happened a terrible tempest of wind and
rain, both on the Sea and Land, by High waters which drowned many.
means whereof* many Ships and other vessels were drowned, about midnight,
the waters ouerflowing, drowned many meadows, pastures, towns, villages,
cattle, houses, and goods, to the utter undoing of a great number of
subjects of this Realm: besides the loss of many men, women, and children,
some drowned in their beds, some in the ways traveling etc. As you may
read more at large in a Book thereof made by Thomas Knell Minister.

Sir Rowland Haward Clothworker, the 28. of October. Mayor. Anno reg. 13


The xxiij. of January, the Queens Majesty accompanied with her Nobility,
came from her house at the Strand, called Somerset place, and entered* the City
of London by Temple Bar, Fleetestreete, Cheap, and so by the North side of
the Bursse, to Sir Thomas Gresshams in Bishops gate street, where she
dyned. After Dinner, her grace returning through Cornehill, entered the ^^rsse
on the Southside, and after her highness had viewed every part thereof, above
ground, especially the Pawn, which was richly furnished with all sorts of
the finest wares in Royal Exchange.
the City, she caused the same Bursse, by an Heralt and a Trumper to be
proclaimed The Royal Exchange, so to be called from thencefoorth, and not
otherwise.

The seauenteeuth of February, at a place called Kynnaston, A strange kind
p^^arthmouing.
near Marclech hill, in the County of Hereforde, was seen the ground to
open, and certain rocks with a piece of ground, removed and went forward
the space of four days, making at the first a terrible noise as it went on
the earth* it removed it self between six of the ^^o^ke in the evening, and
seven the next morrow forty paces, carrying great trees and Sheepecoates,
some Sheepecoates with threescore Sheep in them, some trees fell into the
chinkes, other that grew on the same ground, grow now as firmly on a hill, and
some that stood East, stand West* and those that stood West stan^ East* The
depth of the hol^ where it first brake^^^, is thirty foot, the breadth of the
breach is eight score yardes, and in length above twenty score yardes. It
overthrew Kinastone Chapel. Also, two high ways be removed nigh one hundred
yardes, with the tr^^^ of the hedge rows. The ground in all is sire and
twenty acres, and where tillage ground was, there is pasture left in place,
and where was pasture, there is tillage ground gone upon it. The ground as it
removed, drove the earth before it, and at the lower part overwhelmed the
ground, so that it is grown to a greathyll of twelve faddome high. It rempued
from Saturday till Monday at night following, and so stayed.

The second of April, a Parliament began at Westminster, 1571
wherein was granted to the Queens majesty* (toward her great charges, in
repressing the late Rebellion Parliament.
in the North, and pursuing the ^a^de* Rebels and their faultors, which were
fled into Scotland) by the Clergy* a subsidy of six shillings in the
pound, and by the Tempora^ties two fifteens, with a subsidy of two shillings
and eight pence in the pound.

The first, second and third of May, was holden at Westminster Iustes at
Westminster.
before y^ Queens Majesty, a solemn Just, at the Tilt, Turney, and Barriars.
The Challengers were Edward Carle of Oxford* Charles Hawarde, sir Henry Lee,
and Christopher Hatton Esquier, who all did very valiantly, but the chief
honor was given to the Earl of Oxforde.

The first of June, John Story a Doctor of the Cannon Doctor Story executed.
Law, who before had been condemned of high treason, was drawn from the
Tower of London to Tyborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartred, his head
set on London bridge, and his quarters on the gates of the City.

The eighteenth of June, in Trinity Term, there A Combat appointed at
Tu^hill.
was a combat appointed to have been fought for a certain Manor and
demaine lands belonging thereunto, in the Isle of Hearty, adjoining to the Isle
of Sheppey in Kent, Simon Low and John Kyme were Plaintifs, and had brought
a Writ of right against Thomas Paramore, who affered to defend his right by
battle, whereupon the Plaintifs aforesaid, accepted to answer his
challenge, offering likewise to defend their right to the same Manor and
lands, and to prove by battle, that Paramore had no right nor good title to
have the same Manor and lands. He^^^ppon the said Thomas Paramore brought
before the Judges of the common pleas at Westminster, one George Thorn, a
big, broad, strong set fellow: and the Plaintifs brought Henry Nailor
Master of Defense, and servant to the right Honorable Earl of Leicester, a
proper slender man, and not so ^all as the other: Thorn cast down a
Gauntlet, which Naylor took up. Upon the Sunday before the battle should
be tried on the next morrow, the matter was stayed, and the parties agreed,
that Paramore being in possession should have the land, and was vounde ^^
500. ^. to consider the Plaintifs, as upon hearing the matter, the Judges
should award. The (...) Majesty was ye The quarrel of combat stayed
taken up of the matter, in this wi^^ It was thought good, y^ for Paramores
assurance, the order should be kept touching ye combat, and that the Plaintifs
Low and Kyme, should make defaulte of appearaunce, but that yet such as were
sureties for Naylor, their Champions appearaunce, should bring him in, and
likewise those that were sureties for Thorn, should bring in the same Thorn,
in discharge of their hand, and that the Court should sit in Tuthil
fields, where was prepared one plot of ground one and twenty yardes square,
double railled for the combat, without the west square, a stage being set
up for the Judges, representing the court of the common pleas. All the compass
without the Lystes, was set with Scaffolds one above another, for people to
stand and behold. There were behind the square where the Judges sat, two
tents, the one for Naylor, the other for Thorn Thorn was there in the
morning timely, Naylor about seven of the clock came through London, ap^^
parelled in a dublet and galeygascoigne breeches, al of Crimosin Satin cut and
raced, a Hat of black Ueluet with a red feather and band, before him Drums
and Fifes playing: the Gantlet yt was cast down by George Thorn, was borne
before the said Naylor upon a swords point, and his Baston (a staff of an elle
long, made Taper wise tip^ with Home,) with his shield of hard Leather, was
borne* after him, by A^kam a Yeoman of the Queen ^ Guarde: he came into the
Pallaice at Westminster, and staying not long before the Hall door, came back
into the Kings street, and so along thorough the Sanctuary, and Tuthil street,
into ye field, where he staid til past ix. of the clock, and the^ sir Jerome
Bows brought him to his tent. Thorn being in the Tent with sir Henry Cheiney
long before. About x. of the clock, ye court of common pleas removed, and came
to the place prepared: when the Lord chief Justice with two other his
associates were set, then Low was called solem^^ly to come in, or else he to
lose his Writ of right. Then after a certain time the sureties of Henry Naylor
were called to bring in the said Naylor, Champion for Simon Low, and shortly
thereupon, sir Jerome Bows leading Nailor by the hand, enters with him the
lystes, bringing him down that square, by which he entered, being on the left
hand of the Judges, and so about til he came to the next square just against
the Judges, and there making curtesi^, first with one leg, and then with the
other, passed forth til be came to the middle of the place, and then made the
like obeisance, and so passing till they came to the Bar, there he made the
like courtesy, and his shield was held up aloft over his head: Nailor put off
his nether stocks, and so bare foot and bare legged, save his silk
S^auilonions to ye ankles, and his dublet sleeves tied up above the elbow, and
bare-headed, came in as is aforesaid. Then were the sureties of George Thorn
called to bring in the same Thorn, and immediately sir Henry Cheyney entering
at the upper end on the right hand of the Judges, used the like order in
coming about by his side, as Naylor had before on that other side, and so
coming to the Bar with like obeisance, held up his shield. Proclamation was
made, that none should touch the Bars, nor presume to come within the same,
except such as were appointed. After all this solemn order was finished, the
L^chiefe Justice rehearsing the manner of bringing the Writ of right by Simon
Low, of the answer made thereunto by Paramore, of the proceeding therein, and
how Paramore had challenged to defend his right to the land by battle, by his
Champion Thomas Thorn, and of the accepting the, trial that was by Low, with
his Champion Henry Naylor, and then for default in appearance in Low, he
adjudged the land to Paramore, and dismissed the Champions, acquitting the
sureties of their band^. He also willed Henry Naylor, to render again to
George Thorn his Gauntlet, whereunto the said Naylor aunsweared, that his
Lordeshyp might command him any thing, but willingly he would not render the
said Ga^tlet to Thorn except he could win it and further he challenged
the said Thorn to play with him half a score blows, to show some pastime
to the Lord chief Justice and the other there assembled, but Thorn
aunsweared, that he came to fight, and would not play. Then the Lordo
chief Justice commending Naylor for his valiant courage, commanded them
both quietly te depart the field, etc.

The sixeteenth of July Rebecca Chamber, late wife to A woman bre^t at
Maydstone.
Thomas Chamber of Herieitesham, was found culpable of poysonyng the said
Thomas Chamber her husband, at the assizes holden at Maidstone in the County
of Kent. For the which far (having well deserved) she was there brent on the
next morrow.

The seventh of September, the Duke of Norffolke was Duke of Norffolke sent to
the Tovver.
removed from the Charterhouse, to the Tower of London prisoner.

The two and twentieth of September deceassed John Jewel Bishop of Salisbury
deceassed.
Bishop of S^lisburie, in his life a most eloquent and diligent Preacher, but
a far more painful and studious Writer, as his works remaining bear
witness, whereby his fame shall never dye.

Henry Milles: John Branch, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. The
Christians victory against the Turks


Sir William Allin Mercer, the 28. of October.

The ninth of November, great rejoicing was made at London with hanquetting and
bonefyres, for joy of the late come news, of a marvelous victory obtained
by the christian army by sea, against the Turks the sixth of October last
passed, wherein were taken and sunk of the Turks Galleis and Brygantines, two
hundred and thyrtie, there were slain of the Turks more than thyrtie
thousand, besides a great number of prisoners taken, and about twelve
thousand Christians* that had bin slaves with the Turks, were set at
liberty. The Christians lost seven Galleys, and Anno reg. 14
were slain about six or seven thousand.

The thyrtith of December Reynolde Gray was by the Earl of Kent.
Queens Majesty restored Earl of Kent.

The thyrteenth of January deceased Sir William Peter Sir William Peter
deceassed
Knight, who for his judgment and pregnant wit, had been Secretary and of
privy Council to four Kings and Queens of this Realm, and seven times
Lord Ambassador abroad in foreign lands: he augmented Exceter College in
Oxforde, with lands to the value of an hundred pound by year: and also
builded ^enne Alms houses in the parish of Ingerstone for twenty pore people,
ten within the house, and ten without the house, having every one two pence
the day, a winter gown, and two load of wood, and among them, feedyng for
six Ky^e Winter and Summer, and a Chaplain to say them service daily.

The sixeteenth of January, the Lord Thomas Hawarde Duke of Norffolke
arraigned*
Duke of Norffolke was arraigned in Westminster hall, before George Lord
Talbot Earl of Shrewsburie, high Steward of England for that day, and there
by his Peers found guyltie of high treason, and had judgment accordynglye.

The eleauenth of February, Kenelme Barney, and Edmonde Mather, Barney and
Roli^ executed.
Mather, were drawn from the Tower of London: and Henry Rolfe from the
Marshalsea in Southwarke, all three to Tyborne, and there hanged, bowelled, and
quartred for treason: Barney and Mather for conspiracy, and Rolfe for
counterfayting the Queens Majesty's hand.

The Queens Majesty hearing credibly by report, that Conueyers of Belles,
Lead and other church goods, are to be punished to the example of their too
many followers.
certain lewd persons, under pretense of executing Commissions for inquiries
to be made, for lands concealed, contrary to her Majesty's meaning chalenging
lands, ^^ocks of money, Plate, etc. letting not also to make pretense to the
Belles, Lead and other such things belonging to Parish Churches or Chapels.
Her Majesty meaning speedily to wythstande such manner of unlawful
practices, commanded, that al Commissions then extant, and not determined* for
inquisition of any manner of concealementes, ^houlde be by Supersidias, out of
her Exchequer revoked. ^^d also appointed speedye remedy to be had against
such (...), as more a^ large app^^^^th by a Proclamation, ^^is(...) (...) ^^
(...) ^^ have some special ^^r^* (...) to the (...), but* also to the
refor^^ng ^^ (...) and injurious attempts, of diverse that of late time by other
color the for her* Majesty's use, had taken away the lead of Churches and
Chapels* yea and Belles also out of Steeples* and other common g^^d^^
belonging to parishes, an example not to be suffered unpunished, nor unreformed.
And so her Majesty e^t^^^^es charge her Justices of her Assise to provide
severe remedy, both for punishment and reformation thereof. Dated at
Westminster the thirteenth day of February, the fourteenth yers of her reign.

The tenth of March deceassed sir William Pawlet knight, Sir William Pavvlet
Lord Treasourer deceassed.
Lord Sent-Iohn Earl of Wiltshire, Marquis of Winchester, Knight of the
Honorable order of the Garter, one of the Queens Majesty's privy Counsel*
and Lord high Treasorer of England, at his Manor of Basing. This worthy man
was borne in the year of our Lord 148^. the first year of King Richard the
third, and lived about the age of 87. years* in six Kings and Queens
days. He served five Kings and Queens, Henry the seventh* Henry the eight,
Edward the sixth, Queens Marie, and Queen Elizabeth. All these he served
faithfully, and of them was greatly favored. Himself did see the chyldr^n of
his children^ children, grown ^o the ^^^ber of ^03. A^^^^ blessing given by
God to men of his ^^^^ing.

The xxv. and xxvj. of March, by the commandment of the Queens Majesty, her
Council* the Citizens of London assembling at their ^^^^^all Halles, the
Masters chose out ^he mo^^e (...) ^^^ (...) persons of every their
companies, to (...)e^ of three thousand, whom they appointed to be Pikemen and
(...)* ^h^ Pikemen were forthwith armed in ^a^^^ ^^r^e^^ and ^^^^r furniture,
according there unto* the Gunners had every of them his Callyuer, with the
furniture, and (...) on their hea^es* To these were appointed diverse valiant
Capitaines, who to ^^aine them up in warlike ^ea^^, (...) them ^^r^ce every
week* sometimes in the Artillery yard, teaching the Gunners to handle their
pieces, sometime at the Miles end* and in Saint Georges field, teaching them
to skyrmishe. In the which skyrmishe with Miles end the tenth of April, one
of the (...) of the Goldsmiths company* was shot in the (...) with a piece of a
scowring stick left in one of the Calyuers whereof he dyed, and was buried
the twelfth of April in S. Paul's, Churcheyarde, all the Gunners marching from
the Miles end in battle ray, shot off their Calyuers at his grave.

On May day they mustred at Grenewich before ye Queens Majesty* where they
showed many warlike feats, but were hindered by the weather, which was all day
showring* they returned that night to London, and were discharged on the next
morrow.

The fourth of May Walter Deueroux, Lord Ferrers of Earls of Essex and
Lincoln created.
Chartley, and Viscount of Her^fonde was created Earl of Essex: And Edward
Fines Lord Clinton, and Say, high Admiral of England, was created Earl of
Lincoln.

The eight of May, the Parliament began at Westminster, Barons made.
and that same day in the Parliament by the Queens Majesty's Writtes, sir
Henry Compton Knight, Lord of Compt^n in the Hole, sir Henry Cheyney Knight,
Lord of Tudington, sir William Pawlet Knight of Basing, and sir Henry Norrice
Knight, Lord of Rycote, were called Barons into the higher house. In this
Parliament, for so much as the whole Realm of England was exceedingly pestred
with Roags, Uagabonds, and sturdy beggars, by means whereof, daily happened
diverse horrible murders, theftes, and other great outrages, it was enacted,
that all persons above the age of fourteen years, being taken begging,
vagrant, and Roags burnt through the ^are.
wandering misorderly, should be apprehended, whipped, and brent through the
gri^^le of the right ear, with a hot iron of one ynch compass for the first
time so taken.

The four and twentieth of May, Martin Bulloke was hanged on a Gibbet by the
Well with two Buckets in Bishops gate street of London, for robbing and most
shamefullye murdering of a Merchaunt named Arthure Hall, in the Personage of
Saint Martine by the said Well. This Martin had procured the said Arthure
Hall* to come to the said Personage, to buy of him certain Plate, but after
the said Arthure had well viewed the same, he said, this is none of your
Plate, it has Doctor Gardeners mark, and I know it to be his: that is true,
said Martin Bullock, but he has appointed me to sell it, etc. After this
talk, whiles the said Arthure was weighing the Plate, the same Martin fetched
out of the Kitchen a thick washing Bee^le, and coming behind him* struck the
said Arthure on the head, that he felled him with the first stroke, and then
struck him again, and after took the said Arthures Dagger, and sticked him,
and with his knyfe cut his throat, and after would have trussed him in a
Danske Cheste, but the same was too short: whereupon he tumbled him down a
pair of stayres, and after thinking to have buried him in the Seller, his
legs being broken with the first fall, and stiff, he could not draw him
down the Seller stairs being wynding, wherefore he cut off his legs with
an Hatchet, and in the end trussed him with Straw in a dry* fat, and saying
it was his apparel and Books, caused the same to be carried to the water
side, and so shipped to Rye.

The six and twentieth of May, the right honorable Earl of Lincoln, departed
from London toward France Ambassador, being accompanied with the Lords
Dacres, the Lord Rich* the Lord Talbot, the Lord Sands, and the Lord Clinton,
sir Arthure Chambernowne, sir Jerome Bows, and sir Edward Hastings* Knights,
with diverse other Gentlemen, who taking ship at Deuer* cut over to Bolongne,
where they were very honorably received, and from thence conveyed by journeys to
Paris, where they were lodged in a house of ye kings named Le Chasteau de
Loure, being attended on by the Kings Officers.

Five days after, they went to the King at a house called Madril, where the
King with his two brethren, the Admiral, and the most part of the Nobles of
France met them a distance from the place, and brought them into the house,
where they dyned, and remained till Sunday followwyng, from whence the King
and his nobles, with the nobles of England, came to Paris, the King, his two
brethren, and our Ambassador ryding in one Coche together, and the Nobles of
England and France being so placed, also in Coches, came to the said Castle
of Loure, and there dyned. After dinner, the King, our Ambassador, with the
Nobibilitie of both Realms, went to a Church named Saint German, where
the French King, his brethren and Nobility heard Euensong, the Noble men of
England, withdrawing them into a Chapel, til Euensong was done, were then
fetched thence by the Nobles of France, to the King and his brethren that
awayted their coming, where was League with France confirmed in France.
confirmed the league, (which had bin concluded at Blois the nineteenth of
April,) deputies being there for the French party, Frauncis Momorencie,
Reignold Virago, Sebastian de Lanbespine, and Paul de Foix. And for the Queen
of England sir Thomas Smith, and Master Walsingham Ambassadors.) This being
done, they departed without the walls of Paris, to a Garden of pleasure, where
they supped, after supper the King departed to his place of Madrill, and the
nobles of England to the Castle of Loure. On Monday the Admiral feasted the
Nobles of England. On Tuisday the Duke of Aniow the Kings brother, and on
Wednesday the Duke of Alanson his younger brother, and so passed in banqueting
and feasting, with rich gifts on both parts.

On Fridaye, the Nobles of England took leave of the King, and on Sunday came
to Saint Dennis, and after to Bolongne, where they took ship, and returned
into England the fourth of July.

The second of June in the morning, between the hours of seven and eight,
Thomas Hawarde Duke of Norffolke, was beheaded on a Scaffolde set upon the
Tower hill. The Duke of Norffolke beheaded.


About the ninth of June, Frauncis Duke of Momorencie, French Ambassadors.
chief Marshall of France, Governor and Lieutenant of the Isle of France,
General to Charles the ninth King of France, and Paul de Foix of the privy
Council to the said King, and Bertrande de Saligners, Lord de la
Mothefenalon, Knights of the order of Saint Michael, Ambassadors for the same
King, arrived at Dover.

The foureteenth day they shot London bridge toward Somerset house at the
Strande, where they were lodged.

The fifteenth day being Sundaye, the said Ambassadors League with France
confirmed at Westminster.
repaired to the White hall, where they were honorablye received of the Queens
Majesty, with her Nobility, and there in her Graces Chapel, about one of
the clock in the afternoon, the Articles of treaty, league or confederacy
and sure friendship (concluded at Blois the nineteenth of April, as is before
showed) betwixt the Queens Maistie, and the French King, being read, the same
was by his Majesty and his Ambassadors confirmed, to be observed and kept,
without innovation or violation, etc. The rest of that day with great part of
the night following was spent in great triumph, with sumptuous banquets.

The eighteenth of June the feast of Saint George was holden at Windsore,
where the French Embassadoures were royally feasted, and Frauncis Duke of
Momorencie, was S Georges feast at Windsor.
stalled Knight of the most honorable order of the Garter.

The eight and twentieth day of June, the before named Embassadoures departed
from London toward France.

The foureteenth of June, Thomas Lord Wharton deceassed in his house of Chanon
Row at Westminster.

The thyrteenth day of July, the Qu(...) Majesty at Lord Treasorer, Lord
privy Seal L. Chamberlain with other officers.
White hall made sir William Cecil Lord o(...) (...)hley, Lord high
Treasorer of England: Lord Willi(...) (...)awarde late Lord Chamberlain,
Lord privy* Seal(...) The Earl of Sussex, Lord Chamberlain: sir Thomas
Smith principal Secretary: and Christopher Hatton Esquier, Captain of the
Guarde, etc.

The two and twentieth of August, Thomas Percie Earl Earl of Northumberland
beheaded.
of Northumberlande, late of Topcliffe, who had been before attainted by
Parliament of high Treason, as being one of the principal conspiratoures in
the late rebellion, and now brought out of Scotland, whether he had
fled, was beheaded at York, about two of the clock in the afternoon, on
a new Scaffolde set up for that purpose in the Market place.

In this month of Auguste, sir Thomas Smith one of the Englismen sent to
Vlstar in Irelande.
Queens Majesty's privy Council, carefully tending the reformation of
Irelande, sent his son Thomas Smith Esquyre thither, with a Colonie of
Englishemen, to inhabit the Ardes in Vlster.

Richard Pipe: Nicholas Woodroffe, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Lionell Ducket Mercer, the 28. of October.

The eyghteenth of November in the morning, was Anno reg. 15 A strange Star
appeared.
seen a Star Northwarde very brighte and clear in the Constellation of
Cassiopeia, at the back of her Chair, which with three chief fixed Stars
of the said Constellation, made a Geometrical figure losinge wise, of the
learned men called Rombus: this Star in bigness at the first appearing
seemed bigger than Jupiter, and not much less than Venus when she seems
greatest: also the said Star never changing his place, was carried about with
the daily motion of Heaven, as all fixed Stars commonly are, and so
continued (by little and little, to the eye appearyng less) for the space of
almost sixeteene Months, at what time it was so small, that rather thought
by exercise of often viewyng might imagine the place, than any eye could judge
the presence of the same: and one thing is herein chieflye to be noted, that by
the learned skill and consent of the best and most expect Mathematicians, which
observed the state, property and other circumstances, belonging to the same
Star) it was found to have bin in place Celestial far above the Moon,
otherwise than ever any Comet has bin seen, or naturally can appear.
Therefore it is supposed, that the signification thereof is directed purposely
and specially to some matter not natural, but celestial or rather
supercelestiall, so strange as from the beginning of the world never was the
like.

The four and twentieth of November, Edward Earl of Earl of Darby deceassed.
Darbie, Lord Stanley, and Strange, of Knocking, Lord and Governor of the Isle
of Man, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of the Queens
Majesty's privy Council, deceassed at his house called Latham in Lancashire.
His life and death deserving commendation, and craving memory to be imitated,
was such as follows. His fidelity unto two Kings, and two Queens in
dangerous times, and great rebellions, in which time, and always, (as cause
served.) He was lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire, and lately offered ten
thousand men to the Queens Majesty of his own charge for the suppression of
the last rebellion. His godly disposition to his tenantes, never forcing any
service at their hands, but due payment of their rent. His liberality to
strangers, and such as showed themselves grateful to him. His famous house
keeping, 220. in checkroll never discontinuing ye space of xlij. year. His
feeding especially of aged persons twice a day lx. and od, besides al co^mers
thrice a week appointed for his dealing days, and every Good Friday these
xxxv. years one with another, 2700. with meat, drink, money, and money worth.
There was never Gentleman or other that waited in his service, but had
allowance from him to have as well wages as otherwise for horse and man. His
yearly portion for the dispenses of his house 4000. l. His cunning in setting
bones dis-ioynted or broke. His delivery of his George and Seal to the Lord
Strange, with exhortation, that he might keep it so unspotted in fidelity
to his Prince as he had, and his joy that he dyed in the Queens favor, his
joyful parting this world, his taking leave of all his servants by shaking of
hands, and his remembrance to the last day.

The eight and twentieth of November, John Hall Gentleman, Hall and Wilkinson
executed
and Oswald Wilkinson, late of York, and Gailour of York Castle, (being
before arraigned and condemned of treason) were drawn from the Tower of London
to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartred.

This year a great and sharp frost almost continuallye Great froste and a
sharp vvinter.
lasted, from before the feast of all Saints, till after the feast of
Epiphany of our Lord, with sometimes great and deep snowes, and sometimes
raines, which freezed as fast as the same fell to the ground, where-through at
Wrotham in Kent, and many other places, the arms and boughs of trees, being
ouer-charged with Ice, brake off, and fell from the stocks of the same trees,
also the wind continued north and east, till after the Ascension day, with
sharp frostes, and snowes, whereby followed a late Spring.

The twelfth of Januarye, William Lord Haward Baron Lord privy Seal
deceassed
of Effingham, Lord privy Seal, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and
one of the privy Council, deceassed at Hampton Court.

The eyghteenth of January, William Lord Somerset, Earl of Worcester sent
into France.
Earl of Worcester, began his journey toward France, to the christning of
the Kings daughter there, in stead of the Queens Majesty of England, who
sent with him a Font of Gold for that purpose, weyghing 326. ounces.

The said Earl with many of his company were robbed Earl of Worcester
robbed on the Sea.
upon the Sea by Pirates, of much of their baggage, and three or four of their
men slain.

In France he and his train were honorablye received.

At the christning he gave the child to name Elizabeth, and returned into
England the seven and twentieth of Februarye.

In the Month of February, through sundry heinous co^plaintes brought to the
Queens Majesty and her Counsel of Pirates that kept the narrow seas, doing
many robberies, as also the robbing of the Earl of Worcester, (as is
aforesaid) her Highness, by the advice of her honorable counsel, took order
with the Lord Admiral of England, that he should send to the Seas ships
and men to scowre the narrow Seas, and to apprehende so many Pirates ships, as
might be met with: and for the better doing thereof, it pleased her Majesty
to send one of her own ships named the Swallowe, to be the Admiral, under
the charge of William Holstocke of London Esquyre, Comptroller of her Highness
ships, who had with him the Gyllian, the Bark Garet, and the Bark of
Yarmouth, and 360. able marriuers, gunners and soldiers in the said three
ships, and and one Bark which scowred the narrow seas, from the North
Forelande as far Weastwardes as Falmouth in Pirates on the VVeast Seat.
Cornwall, and took twenty ships and Barks of sundry nations, viz.
English, French and Flemings, (but all Pirates) and in fashion of war. He
apprehended in those ships and Barks to the number of 900. men of all
nations, and sent them to ward to Sandwiche, Dover, Wighte and Portesmouth,
(whereof three of them that robbed the Earl of Worcester, were shortly after
executed at Wight) also the said Pirates executed
William Holstocke, did rescue and take from the abouesaide Pirates ships
fifteen other Merchant ships, laden with Merchandise, that were their
prises, being of sundry nations, and set at liberty the said fifteen
Merchaunt ships and goods, which done, he returned to Portsmouth, and there
ended his voyage in March.

Peter Ramus in his Commentaries of the wars of France, Peter Ramus.
writes thus. The Earl of Worcester passing into France, certain Frenchemen
and Flemings set upon him, took from him one of his ships and killed certain
of his men, whereupon the Queen of England taking displeasure, sent the
Lord Admiral (says he) wherein he mistook the matter, for Master William
Holstocke was sent (as is aforesaid) who set upon all the ships French and
Flemings, took and carried away what so came to hand, so that xx. of
Mongomeries ships were lost, who was going to Rochell, with the number of
fifty ships well furnished out of England, with money there borrowed, (but
never repayed:) thus his navy being diminished of those twenty ships, when
he saw the kings navy near to Rochel, he directed his course an other way,
landed at Bell Isle, and took both the Isle and Castle.

The fourth of March, a man was hanged in chains in A man hanged in Saint
Georges field.
Saint Georges field beyond Southwarke of London, for murdethe the Gaylour of
Horsham in the same field.

The seventeenth of March deceassed Reinolde Gray of Earl of Kent deceassed.
Ruthen, Earl of Kent, at Hernesey, and was buried at Saint Giles without
Creeplegate.

About the same time dyed Edmonde Lord Chandos.

The five and twentieth of March, being Wednesday in 1573 George Sau^ders
murdered at Shooters hill.
Easter week, and the feast of the A^n^^ciation of our Lady, George Brown
cruelly murdered two honest men near unto Shooters hill in Kent, the one of
them was a wealthy Merchant of London, named George Saunders, the other John
Bean of Wolwich, which murder was committed in manner as follows.

On Tuisdaye in Easter week (the four and twentieth of March) the said
George Brown receiving secreate intelligence by letter from Maistresse Anne
Drewrie, that master Saunders should lodge the same night at the house of one
Master Barnes in Woolwiche, and from thence go on foot to Saint Mary Cray
the next morning, lay in wait for him by the way, a little from Shooters
hill, and there slew both him and John Bean, servant to Master Barnes^: but
John Bean having senne or eleauen wounds, and being left for dead, by Gods
providence revived again, and creeping away on all four, was found by an
old manne and his maiden, and conveyed to Woolwiche, where he gave evident
marks of the murderer.

Immediatelye upon the deed doing, Brown sent Maistresse Drewrie word
thereof by Roger Clement, (among them called Trusty Roger) he himself
repaired forthwith to the Court at Greenewiche, and anon after him came
thither the report of the murder also. Then departed he thence unto London,
and came to the house of Maistresse Drewrie, where, though he spoke not
personallye with her, after conference had with her servant Trusty Roger,
she provided him twenty pound that same day, for the which she laid
certain Plate of her own, and of Maistresse Saunders to guage. On the next
morrow being Thurseday (having intelligence, that Brown was sought for) they
sent him six pounds more by the same Roger, warnyng him to shift for himself
by flight, which thing he forflowed not to do: nevertheless the Lords of
the Queens Majesty's Council, caused speedy and narrow search to be made
for him, that upon the eight and twentieth of the same month, he was
apprehended in a man's house of his own name at Rochester, and being brought
back again to the Court, was examined by the Council, to whom he confessed
the deed as you have heard, and that he had often times before pretended and
sought to do the same, by the instigation of the said Maistresse Drewrie, who
had promised to make a marriage between him and Maistresse Saunders, (whom he
seemed to love excessiuely) nevertheless he protested (though untruly) that
Maistresse Saunders was not privy nor consenting thereunto. Upon his
confession he was arraigned at y^ Kings Bench in Westminster hall the xviij. of
April, where he acknowledged himself guilty, and was condemned as
principal of the murder, according to which sentence, he was excuted in
Smithfield on Monday the xx. of April, at which time also untruly (as she her
self confessed afterward) he labored George Brown hanged in Smith field.
by all means to clear Maistresse Saunders of committing evil of her body
with him, and then flung himself besides the Ladder: he was after hanged up in
chains near unto the place where he had done the fact.

In the mean time mistress Drewry and her man being examined, as well by
their own confessions, as by falling out of the matter, (and also by Browns
appeachment thought culpable) were committed to ward. And after mistress
Saunders being delivered of child, and churched (for at the time of her
husbands death she looked presently to lie down) was upon mistress Drewryes
man's confession, and other great likelyhoodes, likewise committed to the Tower,
and on Wednesday the sixth of May, arraigned with mistress Drewry at the Guild
hall, the effect of whose enditeme^t was, that they by a letter written, had
bin procurers of the said murder, and knowing the murder done, had by money
and otherwise relieved the murderer, whereunto they pleaded not guilty,
howbeit, they were both condemned as accessaries to Master Saunders death, and
executed in Anne Sanders, Anne Drevvry, and trusty Roger hanged.
Smithfield the thirteenth of May, being Wednesday in the Whitson week, at
which time they both confessed themselves guilty of the fact. Trusty Roger,
mistress Drewryes man was arraigned on Friday the eight of May, and being
there condemned as accessarie, was executed with his mistress, at the time and
place aforesaid. Not long after, Anthony Brown hanged at York.
Anthony Brown, brother to y^ forenamed George Brown, was for notable
felonies conuayed from Newgate to York, and there hanged.

The tenth of April, seven Pirates, which (among other) had bin taken on the
North Seas, were led from Pirates hanged at VVapping.
Southwarke to Wapping, and five of them were there hanged, the other two had
their pardon at the gallows.

The seventeenth of April, a Chandlers wife without Aldreds gate of London,
who had practiced her husbands death Four women on the Pillorie.
by poisoning and other ways, was set on the Pillory in Cheap, with three
other women, who had bin of her counsel, two of them were with her there
whipped.

This year, the Queens majesty of England being moved Aid sent into
Scotland against the Castle of Edenborough.
by the Regent of Scotland, in the behalf of the young King of Scotts her
Cosen, sent a power of 1500. Englishmen, to the seege of Edenborough Castle,
Sir William Drewry Knight, Marshall of Barwike* to be General of her forces
there, with Captains as follows, Sir Francis Russell Knight, Captain Read
of Barwike, as these following also, Captain Yaxley, Captain Wood, Captain
Brickwell, Captain Pikeman, Captain Gamme, Captain Case, Captain Carew,
Captain Erington Provost Marshall, Captain Astoll, Captain Sterlee Captain
of the Pioners, and Captain Barton also of the Pioners. Diverse other Gentlemen
also went thither to serve of their own free wills, as Sir George Carry
Knight, Sir Henry Lee Knighte, Master Thomas Cecil, Master Michaell Carry,
Master Henry Carry, Master William Knolles, Master Thomas Sutton, Master
Cotton, Master Kelway, Master Dier, Master Tilney, Master William
Killigrew, Master Wlliam Selby, and other. Sir William Drewry with the
Captains, Gentlemen, and number of soldiers before mentioned, passed from
Barwike to Lies, from whence, on the xxv. day of April, they marched on to
Edenborough, entered ye town, and the same day sommoned* y^ Castle in form as
follows: Tho. Churchyard.


Sir William Kirkandie, sometime of Graunge Knighte, for as much as the Queens
Majesty my sovereign Lady, upon the earnest request of her dear coosin y^
King of Sots, your soueraign Lord, made to her highness by his regent
nobility, and states of this realm, after al good means used to have reduced
you to dutiful obedience of his authority by treaty, which hither to you have
not duly hearkened unto, to the only hinderaunce of the universal peace in
this realm, by withholding that his highness Castle, meaning as it seems,
to reserve the same for a receptacle of foreign forces, to the manifest
dangers both of this realm, and of my soueraignesse, and therefore necessary
to remove so perilous a danger to both the realms, for which consideration
her Majesty has sent her aid and succors of men, ordinance and munition,
under my charge and leading, for the repugnation and recovery of the said
Castle, to the said Kings use and behalf, and therefore according to her
Majesty's commandment and commission, this shall be in due manner to warn,
require and summon you, that you render and deliver the said Cascell, with the
whole ordinance, artillery, munitions, Jewels, household stuff and such
other implements within the same, to me and the use and behalf of the King
your sovereign, and his regent in his name, immediately after this my letter
of Summons, or knowledge of the same, shall come to you, which if you obey, as
of duty you ought, then shall I in her Majesty's name enterpone my self to
travail with the regent, counsel, and nobility here, for ye safety of your
lives etc. Otherwise if you continue in your former obstinacy, abiding the
Canon, then no further to look for grace or favor, but you and the rest
within that Castle to be pursued to the uttermost, and holden as enemies to
her majesty, your own sovereign and Country* Given at Edinburgh by me sir
William Drurie Knighte, general of her Majesty's forces now in Scotland, this
xxv. of April. 1573.

The Lord Grange Captain of ye Castle, notwithstanding this somona^ce, refused
utterly to yield y^ Castle, who thervpo^ received such answer from ye general,
as stood not to his contentation. Hereupon were the Pioners set in hand to
cast trenches, and to raise mounts in places convenient, to pla^t the
ordinance upon. And then began the siege of the Castle in five places, where
were erected 5. mounts. The first was for the regent called the King mount. The
second for sir William Drurie general there. The third was governed by sir
George Carry. The fourth by sir Henry Lee. The fifth by Master Thomas Sutton
Master of the ordinance in the North part of England. There was at this
siege as is reported 1500. Englishmen* and of Scotts five hundred, there was
also one with another pieces of Artillery 30. six Canons, nine half Canous,
ix Culuerings, six Sakers. They within spared not to bestow such as they had,
as well at ye pioners as soldiers, in so much ye diverse were hurt, and some
s^ayne, before the trenches and mountes might be brought to perfection, but
they within escaped not free, especially after that the trenches and mountes
were brought in state to defend the assaylants, who watching and warding in
the trenches, answered them within the Castle very roughly. On the xvij. of
May, began the battery of the Castle, so that there were xxx. Canons shot
off against the same, and so well bestowed at David's Tower, that by the ruins
thereof then and after, the force of the English Canons were east to be seen.
The xviij. xix. and xx. of May, the Canons and Demi Canons were not idle, but
the xxj. the whole battery began on each side the Castle, from the trenches
and mounts very hotly, and still they within ceased not to make answer again
with their artillery, killing and hurting diverse both English and Scotts, but
such was the diligence of the English Gunners, that they displaced the
Ordinance in the Castle, and stroke one of their chief Canons just in the
mouth, whereby the same was broken in pieces. The xxvj. of May, the assault was
given at scauen of the clock in the morning to the Spur, which by the hardy
manhood of the assaylants was won, and was no sooner entered by the
Englishmen, but that the Generals Ensign was showed, and spread upon the front
and top thereof, to the great discomfort of them within the Castle. In the
mean time, whilst these were appointed to give the assault thus to the
Spur, there were certain Englishmen and Scotts commanded to make a
countenance of an assault at the West side of the Castle, whereby those that
assaulted the Spur, might the more easily obtain their purpose, but they
rashly aduenturing farther than they had in commandment, were beaten back and
repulsed, with xxviij. or xxx. of their company slain and hurt. The same day
toward night, they within the Castle by a Drum demanded parley, which
being granted, with assurance of all hostility from that hour unto the
xxviij. of May, the Lord Peterroc was let down by a rope from the Castle, and
afterward the Lord Graunge himself Captain of the Castle, and Robert Meluin
came likewise down to talk with the General, and such other as were
appointed to accompany him: hereupon at length, to weete the said xxviij day of
May, the Castle was surrendered into the hands of Sir William Edenborough
Castle yielded to the Englishmen.
Drewry, and so it rested in his possession for the time, and his Ensign was
set up and spread during the same time, in sundry places of the Castle, and
afterward to the great honor of England, by him it was delivered unto the use
of the King of Scotts, and part of the spoil of the Castle was given to the
Souldyers, the Canons and Artillery, with certain other instruments, left to
the King. If the Englishmen by force had taken it, it was decreed that they
should have had the whole spoil except the Artillery, and so should have
enjoyed it by the space of three days.

Causes of delivery of the Castle were these:

1 Lack of water: the well within the Castle was stopped and defiled by the
ruins of the Castle: the other well without the Castle could not serve them,
for that there was a mount made to hinder them. Another water there was which
was unknown to them which were without, and was taken from them when the
Spur of the Castle was taken, out of the which they were wont to have a pint
a day for every Soldier. 2 Diverse sick. 3 Diverse hurt. 4 Not many to
maynteyne ye Castle, which had no space to take any test, they were so plied
and ouerweeryed. 5 Diverse divided in opinion. 6 Some were no Souldyers. 7 No
aid was to be looked for.
The xvi. of June, the prisoners were delivered by the said Sir William Drewry,
in presence of sundry Scotts and Englishmen, unto the Regent, and that done,
the same day, the said Sir William Drewry with his power departed toward
Barwike. The names of the prisoners were these, Sir William Kerkandie Larde of
Graunge, and Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh. The Lord Hume. The Lord
Ledington Secretary. The Lord of Peterroe Conestable of the castle. The
Countess of Arguile. The Lady of Ledington. The Lady of Graunge, with others.

The vij. of June between the hours of one and two of Hail in
Northamptonshire.
the clock in the afternoon, a great tempest of hayle and rain happened at
Tocester in Northamptonshire, where-throughe six houses in that Town were
borne down, and xiiij. more sore perished with the waters which rose of that
tempest, the hail stones were square and six inches about: one child was
there drowned, and many sheep and other cattle, which when the Water was
fallen, many of them were lying on the high hedges, where the waters had left
them.

The xvj. of June Thomas Woodhouse, a priest of Lincolneshire, Tho. VVoodhouse.
who had lain long prisoner in the Fleet, was arraigned in the Guilde Hall of
London, and there condemned of high treason, who had judgment to be hanged
and quartered, and was executed at Tiborne the nineteenth of June.

The xvj. of August, Walter Earl of Essex, accompanied Earl of Essex and the
L. Rich with other sailed into Ireland.
with the Lord Rich, and diverse other gentlemen, embarked themselves in
several ships at Leirpoole, and the wind sitting very well, took their
voyage toward Ireland. The Earl after many and great dangers on the sea, at
length wanne Copemans Islands, from whence in a Pinise of captain Perces he was
brought safe to Knock fergus. The Lord Rich with the like dangers landed at
Castle Kilclife, where being met by Captain Malby, Master Smith, and
Master Moore Pentioners, was conducted to Inche Abbey Master Malbis house,
where he had in a readiness on the morrow morning a hundred and fifty
horssemen for their safeguarde to Knockefergus, beside fifty Kernes which
went a foot through the Wooddes: there was amongst these a thirty bows with
a Baggepipe, the rest had Darts. Sir Brian Makephelin had prayed the Country,
and taken away what was to be carried or driven, but on the sixth of September
he came to Knockefergus to the Earl of Essex, and there made his submission:
the number of Kyne were esteemed thirty thousand, beside sheep and swine.

After him Ferdoroughe Macgillastike, the blind Scotts son, Roze, Oge,
Macwilline did the like, and diverse other sent their messengers to the Earl,
to signify that they were at his Lordships disposition, as the Barron of
Dongarrow, Condenel, Odonel, and the Captain of Kylulto. The Earl of Essex
having the Country of Clanyboy and other.

The Queens Majesty of England directed her letters to Earl of Essex captain
general of Vlstar in Ireland.
the Lord deputy of Ireland, willing him to make by commission the Earl of
Essex Captain general of the Irishe nation in the province of Vlster, and to
divide the country won, Clenyboy and elsewhere etc.

James Haruy: Thomas Pullison* the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


John Rivers Grocer, the 28. of October.

The xj. of October Peter Burchet Gentlemanne (of the middle Temple) with his
dagger, suddenly assailed, cruelly wounded, and meant to have murdered a
seruisable Gentleman named John Hawkins Esquire, as he with sir William Peter
Boucher vvou^ded master Havvkens.
Winter, and another gentleman, rode toward Westminster, in the high streate
near to the Strande, beyond the Temple bar of London, for which fact the
said Burchet being apprehended and committed to the Tower, was after examined
concerning the fact, who answered that he took the said Master Hawkins for
another Gentleman, and being further examined, he was found to hold certain
erroneous Peter Burchet found to be an Heretic.
opinions, for the which he was sent to the Lollardes Tower, from thence being
called into ye consistory of Paul's Church, before ye right reverend father
Edwin B. of London, and other, and by them examined, he stood in his opinions,
till ye sentence of death, as an heretic was ready to have bin pronounced
against him on the fourth of November, but through the earnest persuasions of
diverse learned men, who took great pains in that matter, he renounced,
forswore, and abiured his opinions for erroneous and damnable, promising never
to return to them, and also willingly Peter Burchet abiured his heresy, and
submitted himself to do penance.
to do and perform all such penance as the Bishop his ordinary should enjoin
him. The ix. of November the said Peter Burchet was removed from the Lowlards
Tower to the Tower of London, where on the next morrow about noone, whilst
one that had kept him company was gone down, and locked the door after him,
leaving another with him called Hugh Longworth, who stood at the window
reading in the Bible, the said Burchet walking up and down in the chamber,
took a billets end out of the fire, and knocked the said Longworth on the
head, and left not till he had Peter Burchet kills his keeper.
stricken him stark dead, for the which on the next morrow, he was arraigned
and condemned at Westminster, and then returned to Somerset house, where he
remained that night, and on the next morrow, being the twelfth of November, he
was brought to the gibbet, where after his right hand being stricken off, and
nailed to the gibbet, he was hanged Peter Burchet hanged.
nigh the place where he wounded master Hawkins.

This year about Lammas, wheat was sold at London Anno reg. 16
for three shillings the bushel, but shortly after it was raised to four
shillings, five shillings, six shillings, and before Christmas to a noble and
seven shillings, which so continued long after: beef was sold for twenty
pence, and two Dearth without scarcity.
and twenty pence the stone, and all other flesh and white meats at an
excessive price, all kind of salt fish very dear, as five hearings two pence
etc. yet great plentye of fresh fish, and often times the same very cheap:
pease at four Shillings the bushel, otemeale at four Shillings eight pence:
bay salt at three Shillings the bushel etc. All this dearth notwithstanding
(thanks be given to God) there was no want of any thing to him that wanted not
money.

The fourth of April being Palm Sunday, there was 1574
taken saying of Mass in the Lord Morleis house within Aldgate of London, one
Albon Dolman Priest, and the Lady Priests saying Mass apprehended.
Morley with her children and diverse others, were also taken hearing of the
said Mass. There was also taken the same day and hour for saying Mass at
the Lady Gilfordes in Trinity Lane, one Oliver Heywood Priest, and for hearing
of the said Mass, the said Lady Gilford, with diverse other Gentlewomen. There
was also taken at the same instant in the Lady Brownes house in Cow Lane for
saying Mass, one Thomas Heywood Priest, and one John Couper Priest, with the
Lady Brown: and diverse other, were likewise taken, being hearers of the said
Mass. All which persons were for the same offenses indicted, convicted, and
had the law according to the Statute in that case provided. There was also
found in their several Chapels, diverse latin Books, Beads, Images, Palms,
Challices, Crosses, Uestments, Pires, Pares, and such like.

County Mongomery was taken in Normandy in the Peter Ramus*
Castle of Donfro, on the xxvij. of May.

The ix. of July, at six of the clock at night, in the Jste of Thanet besides
Ramesgate in the Parish of Saint Peter under the Clift, a monstrous fish or
Whale of the Sea did A monstrous fish, but not so monstrous as some reported,
for his eyes being great, were in his head, and not in his baeke
shoot himself on shore, where for want of water, beating himself on the
sands, he dyed about six of the clock in the next morning, before which time
he roared, and was heard more than a mile on the land. The length of this Fish
was two and twenty yards, the nether iaw twelve foot the opening, one of his
eyes being taken out of his head, was more than six horse in a cart could
draw, a man stood upright in the place from whence the eye was taken, the
thickness from the back whereon he lay, to the top of his belly (which was
upward) was fourteen foot, his tail of the same breadth, between his eyes
twelve foot, three me^ stood upright in his mouth, some of the ribs were
xvj. foot long, his tongue was xv. foot long, his liver two cart load, into
his nostrels any man might have crept: the oil being boiled out of the head
was Parmasitie, the oil of his body was whitishe, and sweet of taste.

The seventh of August, a solemn Obsequie was kept Obsequie at Paul's for
the French King. Peter Ramus.
in Saint Paul's Church at London for Charles the ninth King of France, who
being poisoned, deceassed on the thyrtith of May last before passed.

The fifteenth of August, being Sunday, Agnes Bridges Agnis Bridges and Rachell
Pinder at Paul's Cross for counterfayting to be possessed.
a maid about the age of xx. years, and Rachell Pinder a wench about the age
of xj. or xij* years old, who both of them had counterfaited to be possessed
by the devil (whereby they had not only maruellouslye deluded many people,
both men and women, but also diverse such persons, as otherwise seemed to be
of good wit and understanding) stood before the Preacher at Paul's Cross,
where they acknowledged their hypocritical counterfayting, with penitent
behauioures, requyring forgiveness of God and the world, and the people to
pray for them. Also their several examinations and confessions were there
openly read by the Preacher, and afterward published in Print, for the further
posterity hereafter to beware of the like deceivers.

The fourth of September in the afternoon, such a storm A lad of 1^. years
old drowned in a Channel at London.
of rain happened at London, as the like of long time could not be remembered,
where-through the Channels of the City sodainelye rising, ran with such
forcible course toward the common shores, that a lad of the age of eighteen
years, minding to have leapte over the Channel near unto Downgate, was borne
over with the stream, and by the same carried from the Conduit there, toward
the Thamis, with such a swiftness, that no man with staves or other ways
could stay him, till he came against a Cart wheel that stood in the water
gate, before which time he was drowned and stark dead.

Thomas Blanke: Anthony Gammage, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


James Hawes Clothworker, the 28. of October.

This Mayor went by water to Westminster, and there took his oath, as has
bin accustomed: he kept no feast at No Majors feast at Guild hall.
the Guyld hall, although great provision had been made for that purpose,
but dyned at his own house, with his brethren the Aldermen: the Companies
dined at their several Halles. This was done by appointment of the Queens
Majesty's Council, to avoid infection of the plague, like to have increased
by coming together of such a multitude. This week from the two and twentieth
to the eighte and twentieth of October, deceassed in the City and Liberties
containing 108. parishes of al disseases 166. of the which number 75. were
accounted to dye of the plague.

Michaelmasse Term, which had been adiourned Term adiorned.
by Proclamation, began at Westminster on the sixth of November. The same sixth
day in the morning, there happened two great Tides at London in the Thamis, the
first by Two tides in one hour.
course, the other within one hour after, which ouerflowed the Marshes, with
many vaults and sellers near adjoining.

The foureteenth of November, being Sundaye, about midnight following, diverse
strange impressions of fire and smoke were seen in the air, to proceed
forth of a black Cloud in the North toward the South, which so continued
till the next morning that it was day light. The next night following, the
Heavens from all parts did seem to burn marvelous ragingly, and over our
heads, the flames from the Horizon round about rising did meet, and there
double and roll one in an other, as if it had been in a clear Furnace.

The eighteenth day at night were very stormy and tempestuous Anno reg. 17
of winds out of the South (I have not known the like out of that quarter)
especially after midnight, till the next morning that it was day light. These
are to be received as tokens of Gods wrath ready bente against the world for
sin now aboundyng, and also of his great mercy, who does but only show
the rod wherewith we daily deserve to be beaten.

This year at London after harvest, the price of Wheat began by little and
little to fall, from seven Shillings to three Shillings the bushel, at which
price it stayed (little or nothing rising or falling) all the year after, but
bay salt was raised from three shillings to four shillings, five shillings,
Bay salt dear.
and six shillings the bushel, the like whereof had never bin seen or heard
within this Realm.

The four and twentieth of February, the feast of Saint Mathie, Flies in
February, the number strange.
on which day, the fair was kept at Tewkesburie, a strange thing happened
there, for after a flood, which was not great, but such as thereby the meadows
near adjoining were covered with water, in the afternoon there came down the
River of Seuerne great numbers of flies and beetels, such as in Summer
euenings use to strike men in the face, in great heaps, a foot thick above
the water, so that to credible men's judgment, there were seen within a pair
of butte lengths of those flies above a hundred quarters. The milles
thereaboutes were damned up with them for the space of four days after, and
then were cleansed by digging them out with shouels: from whence they came is
yet unknown, but the day was cold and a hard frost.

The xxvj. of February, between four and six of the Earthquake.
clock in the afternoon, great Earthquakes happened in the Cities of York,
Woorcester, Gloucester, Bristow, Hereford and in the Countries about, which
caused the people to run out of their houses, for fear they should have
fallen on their heads. In Tewkesburie, Bredon, and other places, the dishes
fell from the cupbords, and the Books in men's studyes from the shelues. In
Norton Chapel, the people being on their knees at evening prayer, the ground
moving, caused them to run away, in great fear that the dead bodies would
have risen, or the Chapel to have fallen: part of Rythen Castle fell down,
with certain brick chimneys in Gentlemen's houses. The bell in the Shiere hall
of Denbigh was caused to toll twice by shaking of the hall etc.

On Easter day, which was the third of April, about ix. of the clock in the
forenoone, was disclosed a congregation 1575
of Anabaptists Dutchmen, in a house without the bars of Aldgate at London,
whereof xxvij* were taken and sent to Annabaptistes bare faggots at Paul's
Cross.
prison, and four of them bearing faggots recanted at Paul's Cross on the xv*
day of May in form as follows.

WHereas I. I. T. R. H. being seduced by the Devil the spirit of error, and
by false teachers his Ministers, have fallen into certain most detestable and
damnable heresies, namely:

1 That Christ took not flesh of the substance of the blessed virgin Mary.

2 That infants of the faithful ought not to be baptized.

3 That a Christian man may not be a Magistrate, or bear the sword or office
of authority.

4 That it is not lawful for a Christian to take an oath.

Now by the grace of God, and through conference with good and learned
Ministers of Christ his Church, I do understand and acknowledge the same to be
most damnable, and detestable heresies, and do ask God, here before his
Church, mercy for my said former errors, and do forsake them, recant and
renounce them, and abjure them from the bottom of my heart, professing that I
certaynely believe

1 That Christ took flesh of the substance of the blessed virgin Mary.

2 That infants of the faithful ought to be baptized.

3 That a Christian man may be a Magistrate, or bear the sword and office of
authority.

4 That it is lawful for a Christian to take an oath.

And further I confess, that the whole Doctrine and Religion established and
published in this Realm of England, as also that which is received and
preached in the Dutch Church here in this City, is sound, true, and according
to the word of God, whereunto in all things I submit my self, and will most
gladly be a member of the said Dutch church, from henceforth utterly abandoning
and forsaking all and every Anabaptisticall error.

This is my faith now in the which I do purpose and trust to stand firm, and
steadfast unto the end, and that I may so do, I beseech you all to pray with me
and for me, to God the heavenly father in the name of his son our savior
Jesus Christ.

The like recantation was made by them afterward in the Dutch Church.

The xvij. day of May, about midnight following, y^ right Archbishop of
Canterbury deceased.
reverend Father in God Matthew Parker, Doctor of divinity, Archbishop of
Canterbury deceased at Lambeth, and was there honorablye buried, on whose
Tomb being of black Marble, is written this Epitaph, made by Doctor Walter
Haddon.

Sobrius and prudens, studiis excultus and vsu,
Integer and verae religionis amans, Walter Haddon.

Matthaeus vixit Parkerus, fouerat illum,
Aula virum (...)nem, fouit and aula senem.
Ordine r^^ g^ss^^, recti defensor and ^^^^.
Vixerat ille ^^ mortuus ille re^ est.
This reverend Father examined thoroughly the English translation of the holy
Bibles, wherein he partlye used the help of his brethren Bishops, and other
Doctors, and caused the same to be newly printed* in the largest volume, for
the furniture of many churches then wanting. Also making diligent search for
the antiquities of the Brytons, and English Saxons, to the end those monuments
might be carefully kept, he caused them to be well bound and trimlye covered,
and such whereof he knew very few examples to be extant (among the which was
Matthew Paris, Matthew Florilegus and Thomas Wallingham) he caused to be
printed. The famous Palace of his sea at Canterbury by long continuance
decayed and consumed with fire, he renewed, builded, and fully restored with
the charges of more tha^ xiiij* C. li.

He founded a Grammar schole in Rachdale in the Cou^tie of Lancaster.

To Corpus Christi College in Cambridge he procured 13 Schollerships, and bare
the charges in making and furnishing two Chambers for scholars, and the inward
Library of the same College.

Item he gave to y^ outward and inward Library of y^ said College a goodly
company of printed books, and a great number of written books of great
antiquity and much value.

Item he procured to y^ said College, y^ patronage of S. Marie Abchurch in
London. Item he has founded two felowships in ye said College, and procured
one Charter of Mortmaine to the sum of C. li. by year^. Item he has given to
y^ same College of silver plate double guilte 309. ounces 3 quarters, and
surrendered to them a lease with the improuement of xiiij. pound viij.
shillings yearly for xvij. years.

Item 100. l. to y^ maintenance of a fire in y^ Hall from Halamas to Candlemas,
and by his last will and testament 500. l.

Item to diverse scholars cha^bers within y^ said college, diverse bedsteeds,
with sufficient bedding and books to remain for ever. Item he has founded for
ever v. Sermons to be preached in diverse places of Norffolke every year in
rogation week, and xl. shillings to be divided at Norwich to y^ poor and
other. Item to the City of Norwich one Basin and Ewre of silver and double
guilt. 175. ounces.

Item to y^ town of Ma^sal in Norffolke for ever an anuitie of 50. shillings to
be divided to the poor, with a Sermon in Rogation week.

Item to Gu^^^ and Caius Coledge an^ scholership, with a standing ^up and a pot
of silver double guilt 55. ounces three quarters, and one nest of goblets with
a cover silver and gilt, with a number of good books to their Library.

Item to Trinity Hall one scholership, a standing cup and a pot of silver and
guilt, 53. ounces, a neast of goblets silver and gilt with a cover, and books
to their library.

Item to the University library fifty old ancient written books, and
fifty printed books.

The xxj. of May being Whitsoneuen, one man and ten Annabaptistes banished.
women Anabaptists Dutch, were in the consistory of Paul's condemned to be
brent in Smithfield, but after great pains taking with them, only one woman
was converted, the other were banished the land. On the first of June, the nine
women being led by the Sheriffs officers, the man was tied to a Cart and
whipped, and so all conveyed from Newgate to the waters side, where they were
shipped away never to return again.

The xij. of June, stood at Paul's Cross five persons Englishmen, Five
persons of the family of love stood at Paul's Cross.
of the sect termed The family of love, who there confessed themselves utterly
to detest as well the aucthour of that sect H. N. as all his damnable errors
and Heresies.

The xxij. of July, two Dutchmen Anabaptists, were brent in Smithfield, who
dyed in great horror with rearing Annabaptistes brent.
and crying.

The xxx. of July in the afternoon was a great tempest Thunder and hayle.
of lightening and thunder, where through both men and beasts in diverse places
were stricken* dead. Also* at that time sell great abundance of hayle, whereof
the stones in many places were found to be six or seven inches about.

The fourth of September, being Sunday about seven of the clock in the
morning, a certain Glass house which The glass house brent.
sometime had ^^^ the Crossed friars hall, near to the Tower of London, brast
out on a terrible fire, whereunto, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs with
all expedition repaired, and practiced there all means possible, by water,
buckets, hooks, and otherwise to have quenched it, all which notwithstanding,
whereas the same house in a small time before had consumed great quantity of
wood by making of fine drinking glasses, now it self having within it near
forty thousand billets of wood was all consumed to the stone walls, which
walls greatly defended the fire from spreading farther, and doing any more
harm.

The xxvj. of September, a Pulters wife in the parish of Four children at one
burden.
Christ's church within Newgate of London, was delivered and brought to bed of
iiij. children at one burden, al females, or maiden children, which were
Christened by the names Elizabeth, Mary, Margaret, and Dorothy, and the same day
Month the mother was buried, but all the four children living and in good
liking were borne to church after her.

Edward Osburne, Wolston Dixsey, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Ambrose Nicholas Salter, the 28. of October.

This Mayor went by water to Westminster and there took his oath as has
been accustomed, he kept no feast in the Gild-hall, but dyned at his own
house with his brethren the Aldermen and other. The Companyes dyned at their
several Halles, etc. This was done as in the year last before passed, to
avoid the infection of the plague, which might have increased by coming
together of greater number. That week from the two and twentieth unto the eight
and twentieth of October, deceassed in the City and Liberties, of al diseases
132. of the which number 36. were accounted to dye of the plague. The next
week following ending the third of November (thanks be given to God
therefore) there deceassed of all disseases but 110. and of the^ of the plague
but 26.

The eleauenth of February, Anne Aueries widow, forswearing Anno reg. 18 God
punishes perjury.
hirselfe for a little money that she should have paid for six pound of Towe,
at a shop in Woodstreete of London, fell immediately down speechless, casting
up at her mouth in great abundance, and with horrible stink, the same matter,
which by natures course should have bin voided downwardes, til she dyed: a
terrible example of Gods just judgment upon such as make no conscience of
swearing against their brother.

The fifteenth of February, Edmond Grindale sometime Archbishop elected.
Bishop of London, late Archbishop of York, was in the Charterhouse of Saint
Paul's Church at London, elected. Archbyshoppe of Canterbury.

The ^^^h of March in the night, through a great ^^^^ T^^^^e boa^e drowned.
of wind, then in the Northweaste, a Ty^re ^^^^^ with about the number of one
and thirty persons, men and women coming from Grauesend toward London,
were all drowned, one boy excepted.

The xxx. of May, Tho. Green Goldsmith was drawn from Newgate of London to
Tyborne, and there hanged, he^ded, 1576 Green hanged.
and quartered, for clypping of eoyne both gold and silver.

The fifteenth of June Martin Frobisher, being furnished of Adventurers, with
two small Barks and one Pinnesse Frobishers first voyage for the discovery
of Cataya.
departed from Black wall, upon his voyage for the bescone^e of a passage to
Cataya, by the Northweast Seas.

Upon the first of July he had sight (as he judged) of Freeslande, but
durst not approach the same, by reason of the great Ice that lay alongest the
coaste: not far from thence, he lost his Pinnesse, and one of his Barks, who
mistrusting the danger of tempests, returned home, with report, that thoyr
General Martin Probisher was cast away, which worthy Captain
notwithstanding continued his course North weast beyond any manne that has
heretoford discovered, and the twentieth of Julye had sight of a high land,
which he named Queen Elizabeth's Forelande, and after that another Forelande
with a great passage, dividing (as it were) the two maine lands asunder, 8
(...)*
this place he named Frabishers Straites. After he had passed sixty leagues
further, he went ashoare, found the same to be in habited with savage people
caughte one of them into his Bark, and returning, arrived in England in the
month of Auguste following: one of his company brought from thence a piece of
a black stone, much like to a Sea cole in color, which being brought to
certain Goldfiners in London, to make a say thereof, found it to hold Gold,
and that very richely for the quantity.

The xix. of July, a woman was burnt at Tunbridge in Kent, for poysonyng of
her husband: And two days before, a man named Oxley, was hanged at Maidstone
for being accessarie to the same fact.

The tenth of August, a strange piece of work, and almost incredible, was
brought to pass by an Englishman, born within the City of London* and a
Clearke of the Charcerie, named Peter Bales, who by his industry and practice
of his pen co^triued and writ within the compass of a penny, in Latin, the
Lords prayer, the Creed, the ten Comma^dements, a prayer to God, a prayer for
the Queen, his Post, his name, y^ day of the month, the year of our Lord,
and the reign of the Queen: And upon the seventeenth of Auguste next
following at Hampton Court he presented the same to the Queens Majesty in the
head of a King of Gold, covered with a Crystal, and presented therewith an
excellent Spectacle by him devised for the easier reading thereof, wherewith
her Majesty read all that was written therein, with great admiration, and
commended the same to the Lords of the Council, and the Ambassadors, and did
wear the same many times upon her finger.

The month of August, many complaints being brought to the Queens Majesty
and her Council upon the Flushingers for great spoils and robberies by them
daily committed upon her highness Subjects, her Majesty gave order to put
four good Ships, and two Barks of her own to the Seas, under the charge of
Master William Holstocke Esquier, Comptroller of all her highness ships, with
eleauen hundred men, victualled for six weeks, in which time was by them
taken eighte Flushingers. Ships, and Barks, prices, and two hundred and
twenty Sea rouers in them, who were sent alande to sundry prisons.

Walter Deueroux, Earl of Essex, and Earl Marshall of Irelande, Knight of the
order of the Garter, falling sick of a Laske on the one and twentieth of
Auguste was greeuouslye formented by the space of two and twenty days, and
deceassed on the twelfth of September at Diuelin in Ireland.

William Kempton: George Barn, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir John Langley, the 28. of October.

The x. of November, in ye City of Worcester, a cruel and unnatural brother
(as an other Caine) murdered his own Murderer of his brother hanged.
natural and loving brother, (...) out his wames with an axe, then cut his
throat, and after buried him under the Harth of a Chimney, thinking thereby
(though wrongfully) yet quietly to have enjoyed his brothers goods, long
before in his possession, but not long after this secreate murder coming to
light, the murderer was rewarded according to his deserts.

The seventeenth of March, through a strange tempest Anno reg. 19
which happened in the North near to a town called Richmonde, not only
Cotages, Trees, Barnes, and Haystackes, Patricke Brumton ouerturned.
but also the most part of a Church called Patrike Brumton, was overthrown,
with most strange fightes in the air both terrible and tearefull.

The six and twentieth of March, the new Conduit near unto Oldborne, and a
Standart with one C^^^e at Oldborne 1577 Charitable acts of Master La^b*
Oldborne Conduit builded.
bridge, were begone to be founded by William Lamb, sometime Gentleman of the
Chapel to King Henry the eight, now Citizen and Clothworker of London* the
water whereof is conveyed in Pipes of Lead from diverse springs to one head* and
from thence to the said Conduit and Standarte more than two thousand yardes
in length, all which of his own costs and charges, amounting to the sum of
fifteen hundred pound, was fully finished the four and twe^tith of Auguste in
the same year.

Moreover, the said William Lamb has given to the worshipful Company of the
Stationers in London, a legacy of six pound thyrteene shillings and four
pence the year for ever, to the end, that those Stationers shall in the
Parish Church of Saint Faith under Paul's Church, distribute to twelve pore
people every Friday twelve pence in money, and twelve pence in bread, which
has bin truly put in bre these seauenteene or eighteen years before this
present year. 1580.

Item, to Christ's Hospital in London, yearly for ever after his deceasse
six pound, and one C. pound in money to purchase lands for the said
Hospital, besides many other costlye deeds there done as may appear.

Item to Saint Thomas Hospital in Southwarke four pound yearly after his
deceasse.

Item, to the Hospital called the Sauoy, sounded by King Henry the seventh,
he minded to have given one hundred pound in money, to purchase lands for the
same Hospital, but because such agreementes could not be concluded upon as he
reasonablye required, his contribution that way ceased, sore against his will,
as manifestly appears by his charitable gifts to the said Hospital sometime
ten pound at once to buy bedding with.

Item, to the Company of Clothworkers in London, four pounds the year for ever.
Also more to the same Clothworkers, he has given his own dwelling house with
other lands and tenements to the value of thyrtie pound the year, to the
intent they shall hyre a Minister to say divine service every Sundaye,
Wednesdaye, and Friday, and that four Sermons every year after his deceasse
be preached in the Chapel or Church to the said house beelongyng, called
Saint James in the Wall by Criplegate, and also to give to twelve poor men
yearly, on the first of October, to every one a gown of good Frize ready
made, a shyrte of good Locoram, and a pair of strong shoes, and twelve poor
women twelve Gowns of the like Freese, twelve smockes, and twelve pair of
shoes for ever.

Item, he has erected a Freeschoole and six Alms houses Freeschole and Alms
houses at Sutton in Kent.
adjoining at Sutton Valence in Kent, where he was borne, and has appointed
for the Master twenty pound, and ye Usher, ten pound yearly for ever, and to
the six alms houses ten pound yearelye, with an Orcharde and Gardens.

Item, toward the maintainaunce of a Free-schoole at Maidstone in Kent, tenn^
pound yearelye, after his deceasse.

Item, to set poor Clothiers aworke in the County of Suffolk, one hundred
pound in ready money.

Item, to the Towns of Ludlow and Bridgenorth, to each of them one hundred
pound in ready money to set poor men on work.

In the month of April, the decayed stone house, called Tovver on London
bridge taken down.
the Tower upon London bridge, was begone to be taken down, and the heads
of Traitors being removed thence, were set on the Gate at the Bridge foot,
toward Southwarke.

The seventeenth of May, Richard Robinson Goldsmith, Robinson hanged
was drawn from the Tower of London to Tyborne, and there hanged for clipping
of Gold.

The one and thyrtith of May, Martin Frobisher with one Second voyage to
Cataya.
ship and two Barks furnished for that purpose, sailed from Harwiche in Essex,
toward Cataya by the Northweast Seas, and entered his straites, beyond Queen
Elizabeth's Forlande, about thyrtie leagues, where he went on shore, and
fyndyng store of Gold Ore, fraught his Ship and Bark, caught a man, woman,
and child of that Country, and then on the four and twentieth of August
returning from thence, arrived at M^forde Haven in Wales, on the twentieth of
September next following

The twentieth of June, William Lumley a poor man in Necessity of the poor
relieved.
the parish of Elmeley in the County of Worcester, being kept in prison by a
wealthy Widow, he having a Mare of xxij. years old with foale, within three
days after his Mare did foale a Mare colte, the which immediately had an Udder,
out of the which was milked that same day a pint of Milk, and every day after
gave above three Pintes, to the great sustentation of the said pore man's wife
and children, the which Colte continued in that sort long time after, as has
bin seen of many thousands.

The 4. 5. and 6. days of July, was the Assizes holden at Strange sickness at
Oxforde.
Oxforde, where were arraigned and condemned one Rowlande Ienkes, for his
seditious tongue, at which time there arose amidst the people such a dampe,
that almost all were smothered, very few escaped that were not taken at that
instant: the Jurors dyed presently. Shortly after dyed sir Robert Bell Lord
chief Baron, sir Robert de Olie, sir William Babington, Master Weneman,
Master de Olie high Sheriff, Master Dauers, Master Harcurt, Master Kirle,
Master Pheteplace, Master Greenewoode, Master Foster, Master Nashe,
Sergeant Baram, Master Steuens, etc. there died in Oxforde 300. persons, and
sickned there, but dyed in other places 200. and odd, from the 6. of July to
the 12. of August, after which day dyed not one of that sickness, for one of
the^ infected not another, nor any one woman or child died thereof.

On Sunday the 4. of August between ye hours of 9. and 10. Tempest in
Norffolke.
of the clock in the forenoone, whilst the Minister was reading of the second
lesson in the parish Church of Bliborough, a town in Suffolk, a strange and
terrible tempest of lightning and thunder struck through the wall of the same
church into the ground almost a yard deep, drove down all the people on that
side, above xx. persons, then renting the wall up to the Reuestrie, cleft ye
door, and returning to the Steeple, rent the Timber, brake the Chimes, and fled
toward Bongey 6. miles off. The people that were stricken down, were found
groueling more than half an hour after, whereof a man more than xl. years,
and a boy of xv. years old were found stark dead, the other were scorched. The
like flashe of lightning and crackes of thunder, rent the parish Church of
Bongey 9. miles from Norwich, wroong in sunder the wyers and wheels of the
clock, slew two men which sat in the Belfrey when other were at Procession,
and scorched an other which hardly escaped.

The Tower upon London bridge, being taken down, and The tovver on London
bridge nevve builded.
a new foundation drawn, sir John Langley, Lord Mayor of the City of London
laid the first stone the xxviij. of Auguste, in presence of the sheriffs of
London, and the two Bridge Masters, Thomas Battes, and Robert Ask.

Nicholas Backhouse: Frauncis Bowyer, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor.


Sir Thomas Ramsey Grocer, the 28. of October.

The nineteenth of November, the new Sergeantes at Anno reg. 20 Sergeants
feast
the Law, seven in number, held their feast in the Temple at London.

The thyrtith of November, Cuthbert Maine was drawn, Cutbert Maine executed.
hanged, and quartered at Lawnceston in Cornwall, for preferring Roman power.

The seventeenth of Januarye, one Simon Pembrooke Example of Sorcerers.
dwelling in Saint Georges parish in Southwarke, being vehementlye suspected
to be a Coniurer, by commandment of the ordinary Judge for those parts,
appeared in the parish Church of Saint Savior, at a Court holden there,
which Simon being busied in entertainyng a Proctor, and having money in his
hand, leaned his head upon a Pewe, wherein the Proctor stood: which after
he had done a certain space, the Proctor began to lift up his head, to
see what he ayled, and found him departing out of life, and straightway the
said Simon fell down, rattling a little in the throat, and never spoke word
after: this was done even as the Judge came into the Church, who said it was
the just judgment of God toward those that used Sorcerie, and a great
example to admonish other to fear the justice of God. After his clothes being
opened, there were found about him five diuelishe Books of Coniuration and
most abominable practices, with a picture of Tin of a man having three
Dice in his hand, with this writing, Chance Dice fortunately, and diverse
papers of such like matters, as he had dealt in for men, such as are mentioned
in Leuiticus the twentieth Chapter and sixth verse: If any soul turn himself
after such as work with spirits, and after soothsayers, to go a whoring
after them (says the Lord) I will put my face against that soul, and will
cut him off from among my people.

The third of February, early in the morning John Nelson, Nelson executed.
for denying the Queens Supremacy, and such other traiterous words against
her Majesty, was drawn from Newgate to Tyborne, and there hanged, bowelled
and quartred.

The seventh of February, one named Sherewood was Sherevvood executed.
drawn from the Tower of London to Tyborne, and there haged, bowelled and
quartered for the like treason.

The ninth of March, seven Pirates were hanged at Pirates hanged.
Wapping.

The fifteenth of February, John de Ley a Frenchman, and five English
Gentlemen, were conveyed from the Tower of London toward Norwiche, there to be
araigned and executed, for coining of money counterfaite.

The tenth of March deceassed the Lady Margaret Countess 1578
of Leunex, and was buried at Westminster the third of April.

The one and thyrtith of May, Martin Frobisher with Frobishers third voyage.
fifteen sail of good Ships, manned, victualled, and other ways well
appointed, departed from Harwich in Essex, on his third voyage toward Cataya.

The one and thyrtith of July, after many attempts, and sundry times being
put back by Islands of Ice in his straights, he recovered his long wished
Port, and came to Ancker in the Islands, newly by her Majesty named Meta
Incognita, where (as in the year before) they fraughte their ships with
Gold Ore out of the Mines, and then on the last of Auguste returning thence,
arrived safely in England about the first of October.

George Bond: Thomas Starkie, the 28. of September. Sherifes. Mayor. Anno reg.
21 Cassimere received.


Sir Richard Pipe Draper, the 28. of October.

The two and twentieth of Januarie, about seven of the clock at night, John
Cassimere Count Palatine of Rhene, Duke of Bauare, landing at the Tower of
London, was there by diverse Noblemen and others honorably received, and
conveyed by Cresset light and Torche light to sir Thomas Greshams house in
Bishops gate street, where he was feasted and lodged till Sunday next that he
was by the Nobility fetched to the Court at Westminster, and after lodged in
Somerset house.

On the eight of February, he was made Knight of the Garter, and on the
foureteenth of February, departed from London homewardes, with great rewards
given by the Queens Majesty, the Nobility, men of honor, the Mayor of London
and the Citizens.

The fourth of February, and in the night following, fell Deep Snow.
such abundance of Snow, that on the fifth in the morning, the same was found
at London to lie two foot deep in the shallowest, and otherwise, being driven
by the wind, very boisterous in the Northeast, on Banks, an ell, or yard and
half deep, in the which drifts of Snow in the Countries, many cattle, and
some men and women were overwhelmed and lost, it snowed till the eight day,
and freezed till the tenth. Then followed a thawe with continual rain a long
time after, which caused such high floods, that the Great land water
floudes.
Marshes and low grounds being drowned for the time, y^ water rose so high in
Westminster hall, that after the fall thereof, some fishes were found there to
remain.

The seventeenth of February, a young man was hanged One hanged at Miles end.
in chains, on the miles end by London, for murdering of a man in a Garden of
Spep^n heath parish.

The twentieth of February, deceassed sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper deceassed.
Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, who was honorably buried under a
sumptuous Monument or Tomb, (by him in his life time erected) in Paul's
Church of London the ix. of March. He also in his life time gave for six
Scholars, to be found in Benet College at Cambridge, to each of them three
pound six shillings and eight pence the year for ever.

The four and twentieth of April, fell such a snow betwixt 1579
the hours of four of the clock in the morning, and nine of the clock
before noone, that at London some was found to lie almost one foot deep.

The five and twentieth of April, sir Thomas Bromley Knight, was made Lord
Chauncelor of England.

Matthew Hamont of Hetherset, by his trade a Plough Wright, three miles from
Norwiche, was conuented before An Heretic brent at Norvviche.
the Bishop of Norwiche, for that he denied Christ ^^t the time of his
appearaunce it was objected, that he had published these Heresies followyng.

That the new Testament and Gospel of Christ are but mere foolishness, a
story of men, or rathera mere fable.

Item, that man is restored to grace by the mere mercy of God, without the
mean of Christ's blood, death, and passion.

Item, that Christ is not God, nor the Savior of the world, but a mere man,
a sinful man, and an abominable Idol.

Item, that al they that worship him are abominable Idolaters: And, that
Christ did not rise again from death to life by the power of his Godhead,
neither, that he did ascend into Heaven.

Item, that the holy Ghost is not God, neither, that there is any such holy
Ghost.

Item, that Baptism is not necessary in the Church of God, neither the use
of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.

For the which heresies, he was condemned in the Consistory, and sentence was
read against him by the Bishop of Norwich, the foureteenth of April, and
therevppon delivered to the Sheriffs of Norwich, and because he spoke words
of blasphemy against the Queens Majesty, and others of her Counsel, he was
by the Recorder Master Sergeant Windham, and the Mayor sir Robert Wood of
Norwich, condemned to lose both his ears, which were cut off the
thyrteenth of May in the market place of Norwiche. And afterward, the
twentieth of May he was brent in the Castle ditche of Norwiche.

This year in the month of May, Mark Scaliot Black A lock, and ka^y,
vveyghed but one wheat corn.
smith, Citizen of London, borne in the parish of Saint Clements without
Temple Bar, for ^yall of Workemanshippe, made one hanging Lock of Iron,
Steel, and Brass, of eleauen several pieces, a pipe Kay, fyled three square,
with a Pot upon the shot and the bow with two Esses, all clean wrought,
which weighed but one Grain of Gold, or Wheat corn: he also at the same time
made a Chain of Gold of 43. Linckes, to the which Chain the Lock and Kay
being fastened, and put about a Flies neck, she drew the same with ease, all
which Lock and Kay, Chain and Fly weighed but one Grain and half, a thing
almost incredible, but that my self amongst other have seen it.

The first of June, deceassed Robert Horn Doctoure of Bishop of VVin chester
deceased
Divinity, Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the most honorable order of
the Garter, at Winchester place in Southwarke, and was buried at Winchester.

The seventeenth day of July, the Queens most excellent Traiterous fact of
T. Appletree.
Majesty, being on y^ river of Thamis, betwixt her Highness Manor of
Greenewiche and Detteforde, in her privy Barge, accompanied with Mounsier
Schemere the French Ambassador, the Earl of Lincoln, and Master
Uizchamberlaine, etc. with whom she entered discourse about weighty affairs:
it chanced, that one Thomas Appletree a young man and servant to Master Henry
Carry, with two or three children of her Majesty's Chapel, and one other
named Barnard Acton, being in a Boat on the Thamis, rowing up and down
betwixt the places before named, the foresaid Thomas Appletree had a Caly^er
or Harquebuze, which he had three or four times discharged with Bullet,
shooting at randone very rashly, who by great misfortune shot one of the
Watermen, being the second man next unto the Bales of the said Barge,
laboring with his Oar, (which sat within six foot of her Highness)
clean through both his arms: the blows was so great and greenous, that it
moved him out of his place, and forced him to cry and scrit^he out
piteouslye, supposing himself to be slain, and saying, he was shot thorough
the body. The man bleeding abundantly, as though he had had 100. Daggers thrust
into him, the Queens Majesty showed such noble courage as is most wonderful
to be heard and spoken of, for beholding him so maimed, and bleeding in such
sort, she never bashed thereat, but showed effectually a prudent and
magnanimous heart, and most curteouslye comforting the poor man, she had him
be of good cheer, and said, he should want nothing that might be for his
ease, commanding him to be covered till such time as he came to the shore,
till which time he lay bathing in his own blood, which might have bin an
occasion to have terrified the eyes of the beholders. But such, and so great
was the courage and magnanimity of our dread and sovereign Lady, that it
never quayled. To be short, Thomas Appletree and the rest were apprehended and
brought before her honorable Counsel, who with great gravity and wisdom
employed their times very carefully, and with great diligence examined the
said Appletree and his companions, and finding the case most heinous and
wicked, iustlye pronounced against him the sentence of Death, and commit
Thomas Appletree should have suffered death on the 21 of July.
him to the Marshalsea in Southwarke, from whence the Tuisday following he was
brought through the City with the Knight Marshalles men, led up to the
Tower Hill, and so to Radcliffe up to Black wall, and so down to the water
side, where was a Gibet: set up, directly placed beetwixte Dertforde and
Greenewiche, for the execution of this male factour, who in deed very
pitifully bewailed the offense he had committed, and as well in prison as by
the way prepared himself very penitently and willingly to offer his body to
the death.

Thus very godly he purposed to finishe his miserable and wretched life, and
so prepared himself to ascend and go up the Ladder, and being on the same,
he turned himself, and spoke to the people as follows: Good people, I am
come hither to die, but God is my judge, I never in my life intended hurt to
the Queens most excellent Majesty, nor meant the harm of any creature, but
I pray to God with all my heart, long to prosper and keep her Highness in
health, who bless and defend her from all perilles and dangers, who prosper
her in all her affairs, and bless her most Honorable Counsel, gyuing them
grace to do all things to the glory of God, and the benefit of this realm:
But of all things, I am most sorry for my offense, and woefully bewail the
same: and more, I am penitent and sorry for my good Master, Master Henry
Carry, who has been so grieved for my fault, suffering rebuke for the same:
I would to god I had never bin borne that have so greeuouslye offended him.
And with that the tears gusht out of his eyes very fast. This said, he
persuaded all men to serve God, and to take an example by him, and every night
and morning moved them devoutly to say the Lords prayer. And as the executioner
had put the roape about his neck, the people cried, stay, stay, stay, and with
that came the right Honorable sir Christopher Hatton Uizchamberlaine to her
highness, who enquired what he had confessed, and being certified, as is
before expressed, he vayled his bonet, and declared, that the Queens Majesty
had sent him thither both to make the cause open to them how heinous and
grievous the offense of the said Thomas Appletree was, and further to signify
to him her gracious pleasure: and so continued his message, as ye may read it
printed by it self, and annexed to this discourse. Which, when he had
declared, the Hangman was commanded to take the roape from his neck. Appletree
being come down from the Ladder, received his pardon, and gave God and the
Prince praise, for so great a benefit as he had by her most gracious bounty
received. This done, Master Uizchamberlaine said: Good people pray for the
Queens Majesty, and then was this prayer said, which is usually read (for
the preservation of her Majesty) in the Church: O Almighty and everliving
God, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, which do from thy throne
behold all the dwellers of the earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy
favor to behold our most gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, etc.
Whereunto all the people joyfully accorded to say, Amen, trying. God save the
Queen, casting up their Cappes.

Thus was the dead man restored to life, and brought back to the Marshalsea
again, even as he was led thence to the place of execution, where he by the
way most ioyfullye prayed for the security of the Queens Majesty.

The merciful message of the Queen's Majesty, sent by the right Honorable Sir
Christopher Hatton, to the place where Thomas Appletree should have suffered
for his traytour-like action, set down word for word so near as could be
gathered.
Master Carry, her most excellent Majesty is pleased to send me to deliver
her commandment The people doubted of a pardon at his first speech.
to you touching this man now here presently to dye. And first, I think it
not out of purpose to notify his offense to these good people, whereby he is
not only worthy this punishment: but in judgment of foreign nations, and by
censure of foreign laws, should be delivered to the tormentors, to endure
such torture, as the quality of his offense in so high a case by good
pollieie should condignely deserve.

And to speak of this fact, such it was, and so fearful, The people
marvelous atte^^ tiue to hear.
as my heart quaketh, and my eyes can not refrain tears, to repeat it again
amongst you. (God for his mercies sake shield and defend her most excellent
Majesty, that most mightily has digested the notable danger.) And so I
will tell you of this tragedy in course as it fell out.

It liked her Highness, in respect of the great heat, to take the air of
the water, where in grave and weighty negotiation, she passed the time in
discourse with the French Ambassador by y^ space of an hour or two. In her
return it The cause is declared why her Majesty took water.
pleased her to take diverse pauses, and the rather, because she earnestly read
a Book, wherein it seemed for recreations sake she took some delight. By
means whereof, (even as it pleased God with his holy hand, as it were, to
direct her safety) she commanded the Bargemen to slack their labor, Only
Gods providence in saving her Majesty from the shot.
and slowly to pass on, where, if they had hasted but two strokes more, they
had brought her Royal person to the shot it self.

These words were scarcely spoken out by her Majesty, but this Caitiue most
unhappily (I must say most diuelishly) discharged his Arquebuze, strongly
charged with Bullet, into the Barge where her Majesty was. (God that has
defended her, thou most mighty God ever vouchsafe to keep her.) With this
blow the second man to the bayles of the A strange and horrible terror never
heard nor seen the like in England before
Barge, within six foot of her Royal person, was stricken down from his
seat, and wounded through both his arms, which her Majesty beheld, and
kingly handled this cause, as even straight I will tell you.

My Lords of her Majesty's Counsel dispersed abroad The sudden great fear
of the Lords of the Counsel at the hearing of these ^errible nevves.
in their affairs, hearing of this most perilous aceidente, returned to
Court, with such speed, as the weight of such a cause might move them to do,
and there with fearful and loving applausure toward her Majesty, did most
holily thank our God for his singular help in the preservation of our most
dear and righteous Sovereign.

That done according, with their loves, and duties of service to God, her
Majesty, and this whole estate: after deliberate and most grave consultation
of the cause, they al most humbly on their knees besoughte the Queen, that
The Counsel most desious to punish this fact
this slave might suffer, not this death, but ten thousand deaths, (if so
it were possible in nature to do) for his so rash and fearful offense.
Such, in deed, might the offense have bin, which God for his mercies sake
has most favorably forbidden, that it might hane rought up to Heaven, and
should most miserably not only have plagued this her own land, but all the
true servants of God dyspersed It was strange to see the people staring in M.
Vischamberlaines face, some weeping, some trembling at the speaking of these
words.
through Christendom: our Religion, and true faith in Jesus Christ, which
we enjoy with unspeakable comfort of free conscience, might hereby have
suffered confusion, and persecution of blood, and vengeance amongst us. Our
peace, and secure estates, increased with exceeding wealths, and nourished
with most sweet quietness of life by this her most happy government, and
raygne of twenty years, might hereby have bin turned to blouty wars, the
fruits whereof is burning and spoiling of houses and goods, rauishing and
destroying of wives and children. And what vengeance soever the world can
bring forth, the same should have fallen on us, I say on us, then the most
miserable men in the world. And therefore hear me I pray you* Let us
acknowledge before God with all humble Here they lift up both hands and eyes
to heaven, saying: God bless her Majesty, God bless her Majesty. etc.
thankfulness these unspeakable benefits, which we have enjoyed, and still
shall do, while God vpholdeth her blessed life and state amongst us: The
loss and lack of whom, can not but bring on us all these calamities, and ten
thousand more; which I cannot foresee. If then by these, and al other
benefits, which you possess, feel, and taste of, you Here the people with
tears shevved themsesues most sorrovvful of these tragical speeches.
find how inestimable and precious a Jewel this our dear Sovereign is for
us, and amongst us, what plague, forment, or punishment, could suffice you for
revenge on him, that by any means should deprive you of such heavenly and
worldly felicities, as daily by her holy hand are ministered amongst you? But
I will meddle no further with these matters. I know you thank God for them,
and with true and faithful obedient hearts, will ever serve her most
excellent Majesty, whom he has made his Minister to distribute al these
blessyngs into your bosoms.

And now, if it please you, you may with marvel hear This sudden strange
pardon amazed the people.
the Message I come of. I bring mercy to this manne, the gracious pardon of
our most dear Soneraigne, who with her merciful eye, beholding the
clearenesse of this man's heart, free from evil thought, and consequentlye
from prepension of any malicious fact against her persto^, vouchsaseth The
greatness of her Majesty's mercy seemed such, as the people betvveene joys
and sorrovves were a^^^sed.
to put him from the Gall^wes. A notable action of compassion proceeding from a
heavenly mind, and so far different from the common nature of man, forced
into a fearful jealousy of lisse of life, as has never been read nor heard
of.

If casually a man suffer hurt in the fields by an arrowe shot by chance at
rouing marks, how reuengefully y^ party A true description of man's frail
nature in seeking revenge, confirmed with examples.
offended will follow his process of felony, I have often seen, and the law
does well allow it. If in the Court the meanest s^ruing man strike his fellow
with his fist so that he bleed, he is to loose the same hand. Many other
examples may be given you, both touching the casualitie in this man's fact, and
touching the place, and presence, wherein it chanced to be done.

But our Queen looks neither on her prerogative, on the power of her laws,
nor on the peril of her person, but Here he notes the heavenly disposition of
her Majesty, far different from the nature of man, in pardoning so great an
offense against law and nature.
with the nobility of her heart, the danger only done to her self, does as
you hear, freely pardon it. And in the sacred word of her kingly estate I
protest it unto you, she has firmly auowed that she had rather have suffered,
the wounds the Bargeman now has, ten fold, than the meanest of us all, or of
any subjects, should suffer the slander of so tyranous or traiterous a fact,
yea* or of the prepension, or forethought of so horrible a treason toward hit,
though it were in fact See the exceeding love of a prince tovvarde her
subjects, in excusing all accidents without any suspicion of ill meaning.
Here all the people shouted out Amen, Amen.
never executed.

Wherein to all our singular comfortes, it pleased her with most princely
affection and earnestness, graciouslye to affirm, that never Prince had
better, nor more kind true subieas. God for his mercy direct us ever to be
so, and with our due gratefulness to sacrifice at her kinglye feet our
blood and lives for her service sake, when occasion shall call us thereto. M.
Carry was master to this ^ude Appletree, and Knight Marshal for that day
appointed.


One other thing I find her Majesty troubled with, y^ is, the sorrow this
noble young Gentleman, M. Henry Carry has suffered in continual grieft of his
heart for the offense of his man, who through the vain jealousy of some evil
disposed persons, has likewise borne some slander of the cause. But it
suffiseth to clear him, that no intent of malice, nor forethought of this
fact* is found in the party himself. M. Caries commendation.
His conversation besides with exceeding faith and diligence in her highness
service, will ever deliver him, as a most acceptable Gentleman free from this
and al other evil in the sight of her Majesty and all the world. I shall not
need therefore to speak of him, for his cause needs none excuse.

Here may you behold the rare goodness of our great and He recites the
Queens virtues, and most vvorthsly commends her rare courage in such a
perilous chance.
gracious Mistress, full of religion and piety, Justice and mercy,
Temperance and magnanimity (and that I cannot but tell you) of the most
constant and noble courage that ever lived: the proof whereof (the cause heard,
whereat I was present) I leave to your judgments.

Her Majesty taking prospecte out of the vales of her Behold her princely
stoutnesse nothing dismayed at their sudden terror, but with such care to this
pore vvounded man, and with such countenance to the Ambassador, that she
seemed a mother to the one, and a Queen to the other.
Barge, at the very instant did see the man stricken, and beheld his fall, and
heard as it were, his deadly scr^tch, who^ she immediately commanded to be
taken up, and then beholding him all embrued with blood, commanded his
wounds to be lapped up with a scarffe of her own, and so with her most
constante and amiable countenance, continued her entertaynement of the
Ambassadoure, as though there had been no such matter. Afterward the man
began to fainte, her highness then commanded a cloak to be put on his body,
with other such necessary reliefes as^ were there presentlye to be had,
without alteration of countenance.

Behold this kinglye heart, and courage of rar^ magnanimity, Her highness
magnanimity mingled with mercy, the one most comfortable to her subjects,
and the other most terrible to her foes*
seeing, as it were, the present death of the next to her, neither feared her
own life, nor was dismayed with this treasonable chance. An action more than
marvelous in her sex. Hereof how much we may rejoice, I want wit to
tell you. But in one word, her highness, that with her singular wisdom and
policy has preserved her Empire these twenty years in most joyful peace,
with this courage and magnanimity will (no doubt) as mightily defend us in
the most cruel wars. God therefore ever bless her, and let us with our
hands stretched up to Heaven, and our eyes fixed on the seat of God, pray
for her long life, and most prosperous reign over us. Thomas An earnest
exhortation to pray.
Appletree* receive thy life from her most excellent Majesty, and pray to God
on thy knees for her all thy days to come. Here Master Vizcha^berlaine
kneeled on his knees with all the people, pray sing God for her Majesty's safe
delivery.
And so the people being moved to prayer for her Majesty's most happy escape,
and for the blessing of God to lengthen her days for many any many years, he
fell on his knees with great devotion amongst them, and so departed with
exceeding joy to the people, and a thousand blessings on him self.

A Ship called the three half Moons, manned with xxxviij. men, and well
fenced with munitions, set from John Fox delivered 269. Christians ou^e of
captivity of the Turks.
Portesmouth, toward Civil a City in Spain, but falling into the
streightes, were taken by the Turks, put in their Galleys, their clothes
torn from their backs, and then set to the Ores* where their fare was scant
of bread, unwholesome water, and plenty of stripes. Nigh to the City of
Alexandr^a* being a Haven Town, under the dominion of the Turks, there is a
Ro^^e very fencible, where into the Turks do customably bring their Galleis
on shore every year in the Winter, and there do trim them against the Spring
time. In which road there is a prison, wherein the Captives and such
prisoners as serve in the Galleis are put for all that time, until the Seas
be calm and passable for the Galleis, every prisoner laden with yrons on their
legs. Into which prison these Christians were put, and fast warded all the
Winter season, but ere it was long, the Master and the owner, by means
offriendes were redeemed: the rest abiding while they were all through their
ill usage and worse fare: myserablye starued, saving one John Fox, who being
somewhat skillful in the Craft of a Barber, by reason thereof made great shift
in helping his fare now and then with a good meal, till at the last God sent
him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison, so that he had leave to go
in and out to the Road at his pleasure, paying a tertayne stipend unto the
keeper, and wearing a lock about his leg, which liberty likewise six more
had upon like sufferance, who, not being suspected to start aside, had liberty
to go in and out at the said Road, and to return again at night.

In the year of our Lord 1577. in the Winter season, the Galleis coming to
their accustomed harborough, and being discharged of all their Mastes, Sails,
and other such furnitures, and all the masters and mariners of them being
lodged in their own homes, there remained in the prison of the said Road 268.
Christian prisoners, who had bin taken by the Turks force, and were of
sixteen sundry Nations, among the which, there were three Englishmen, whereof,
one was named John Fox of Wodbridge, another William Wickney of Portesmouth,
and the third Robert Moore of Harwich, which John Fox having bin thirteen or
fourteen years under their gentle intreatance, minding his escape, took good
heart unto him. Not far from the Road, at one side of the City, there was a
certain victualling house which one Peter Vnticaro a Spanyard had hired, this
Peter had been prisoner above 30. years, and never practiced any means to
escape, but kept himself quiet, until now that this John Fox using much
thither, brake one to another their minds concerning the restreynt of their
liberty, so that this John Fox opening unto this Vnticaro the device which he
minded to practice, made privy one more to their intent, which three debated
of this matter at such time as they could meet together, in so much, that at
seven weeks end they had concluded how the matter should be done, who making
five more privy to their devise, determined in three nights after to
accomplish their purpose, whereupon the same John Fox, and Peter Vnticaro, and
the other six, appointed to met altogether in the prison the last day of
Dece^ber, where this I. Fox certified the rest of the prisoners of their
intent, and delivered unto them a sort of files, which he had gathered for
that purpose, charging them to be ready discharged of their prons by eight of
the clock on the next day at night. On the next day at night this Fox and his
other six companions came al to the house of Peter Vnticaro, and when it was
time to put in practice their device, sent the said Peter to the Master of the
Road* in the name of one of the masters of ye City, who desired him to meet
him there, promising him, that he could bring him back again, whereupon the
keeper agreed to go with him, willing the warders not to bar the gate, saying
he would turn again with all speed. In the mean season the other seven had
provided them of such weapons as they could. The keeper now being come unto
the house, and perceiving no light, nor hearing any noise, suspected the matter
and returned backwarde, but Fox standing behind a corner of the house, stepped
forth to him: who perceiving it to be I. Fox (said ^ Fox) what have I deserved
of thee, that thou should seek my death? thou villain (quoth Fox) have bin
a succor of many Christians blood, and therewith he lift up his sword and
stroke him so main a blow, as therewithal he claue his head, so that he
fell dead to the ground: then Peter and the rest came forth, and went toward
the road, wherinto they entered softly: where were six warder^ whom one of
them asked, who was there, quoth. Fox and his company all friends, which when
they were within, fell on the six men and dispatched the^ quickly. They Fox
barred the gate, and planted a Canon against it, and entering into the Gaylers
lodge, they found the Keys of the prison by his beds side, and there they had
better wepons than before. In this Chamber was a Chest, wherein was much
treasure all in Ducats, which Peter and two more opening, stuffed themselves
so full as they could, between their shirts and their skin, which Fox would
not touch, but said he sought for his and their liberty, and not for money.
Now these eight being armed with such weapons as they liked, and coming to the
prison, Fox opened the gates and doors and called forth all the prisoners, whom
he set, some to ramming up the gate, some to the dressing up of a Galley, the
best in the road, called the Captain of Alexandria* where into some carried
mastes, Sails, Ores and other furniture. At the prison were certain warders,
who^ Fox and his company slew, in the killing of whom, there were eight Turks,
which got the^ to the top of the prison, unto whom Fox and his company were
fain to ascend by ladders, where they found a hot skirmishe, for some of them
were slain and some wounded: Peter Vnticaro and the other two that had armed
the^ with the Ducats were slain, as not able to welde themselves, being
pestered with the weight of the treasure. Amongst the Turks was one thrust
through, who fell of from the top of ye prison wall, and made such a noise, yt
the inhabitants there about, came and dawed him, so yt they understood y^
case, how the prisoners were occupied, wherewith they raised both Alexandria,
which lay on the West side of the road, and a Castle which was at the
Cities end next the road, and also one other fortress which lay on the
North side, so y^ now they had no way to escape but one* which by man's reason
might seem impossible to be a way for them. But to be short, the said Galley
being trimmed up, whereinto every man leaped, they hoyste up sails and yield
themselves to ye mercy of God, in whose hand is both wind and weather: and
now being on flote and out of y^ safety of y^ road, the two Castles have full
power upon the same, but such was the work of God for their deliverance, y^
no one of them was touched we xlv. shot which came thu^dring about their ears,
and thus sailing are soon out of the Canons reach, the Turks having no
Gallyes trimmed to make after them. When the Christians were safe out of the
enemies coast, John Fox willed them all to be thankful unto almighty God for
their delivery, and most humblye to fall upon their knees, be^eeching him to
aid them unto their friends land, etc. After which prayers made to God, they
felt to labor with the oar, striving to come to some Christian land, but the
winds were diverse* and victuals failed them, so that eight of them dyed by
famine, to the astonishment of all the rest: but it fell out that upon the xxix.
day after they set from Alexandri^, they fell on the Il^ of Canadie, and landed
at Gallipoly, where they were well cherished by the Abbot and Monks there, who
caused them to stay while they were well refreshed and eased. When they thought
good, having leave to depart from thence, they sailed along the coast till they
arrived at Tanento, where they sold their Galley, and divided the price, ^uery
man having a part thereof. The Turks pursued the Christians, and scoured the
Seas where they could imagine that they bent their course, and the Christians
had departed from thence on the one day in the morning, when seven Galleis of
the Turks came thither that night, as it was certified by those who f^llowed
Fox and his company fearing least they should have bin met with. And then they
came a foot to Naples, where they departed asunder, every man taking him to his
next way home, from whence Fox took his journey unto Rome, where he was well
entertained of an Englisheman, who presented his worthy deed to the Pope who
rewarded him liberally, and gave him letters to the King of Spain, where he
was well entertained of him, who for his worthy enterprise, gave him in fee
twenty pence a day: from whence being desirous to come into his own
Country, he came thither at such time as he conveniently could which was in
the year of our Lord. 1579. and being come into England, went unto the
Court, and showed all his travail unto the Counsel: who considering that he
had spent a great part of his youth in shraldome and bondage, ex^e^ded to him
their liberality to maintayn him in his age, to their great honors, and
encouragement of all true hearted Christians.

This year in the month of September was finished ye Tovver on London bridge
finished.
new and most beautiful Tower on London bridge, the foundation whereof was
laid in the month of August, Anno. 1577. as more at large is showed.

In the month of September and October, fell great winds ^ouds.
and raging floudes in sundry places of this Realm, where through many men,
cattle and houses we drowned. In ye town of Newport the cotages were borne
down, the corn lost, pasture ground overwhelmed, and cattayle drowned. In
the town of Bedford the water came up to the Market place, where Cupbords,
Chestes, stools and forme^ swam about the houses, their fuel, corn and hey
was wrackt and borne away. Also the town of Saint Edes in Huntingtonshire was
overflowed suddenly in the night, when al men were at rest, ye waters brake in
with such a force, yt the town was almost al defased, the swans swam down the
Market place, and all the town about the boats did floate. Gormanchester was
suddenly suppressed, their houses flowen full of water when men were at their
rest, their cattaile were distroyed about the 14. of October. The sea did
swell, the Mercha^ts lost their goods, many were drowned, which were after
found both on sand and land in great numbers.

Martin Caltrope: John Heart Sherifes.
the, 28. of September.

Sir Nicholas Woodroofe Habardasher, the 28. of October. Mayor.


On Saturday the 21. of November, Anno reg. 20 Sir T, Gresham deueased.
sir T. Gresham knight Agent to the Q. highness (who had in his life time
builded the Royal Exchange in London, as is before showed) deceased at his house
in Bishops Gate street of London, and was buried in the Parish Church of Saint
Elen the*

On the xxviij. day of March, one Francis, alias Marmaduke 1580 One hanged in
Cheap for murdering of Serieant Grace.
Glo^^r was hanged on a gibbet set up for that purpose by the Sta^^^rd in
Cheap, for wilfully murdering Seriea^t Grace, after he was by him arrested.
Also on the next morrow being the nine and twe^tith day of March, one Richard
Tod, that should have be^e hanged in Eastsmithfielde by the Tower, for
murdering of Mistress Skinner a widow there, was hanged at Tiborne.

The sixth of April being Wednesdays in Easter week Earthquake.
about six of ye clock toward evening, a sudden Earthquake happening in London,
and almost generally through out England, caused such amazedness of the
people as was wonderful for the time, and caused them to make their earnest
prayers unto Almighty God. The great clock bell in the Palaice at Westminster
stroke of it self against the hammer with shaking, as diverse clockes and
Bells in the City and elsewhere did the like the Gentlemen of the Temple being
at Supper, ran from the Tables and out of their Hal with their knives in
their hands, a piece of the Temple Church fell down, some stones fell from
Paul's Church. And at Christ's Church in the Sermon while a stone fell from
the top of the Church which killed out of hand one Thomas Gray an
Apprentice, and an other stone also bruised his fellow servant named Mabel
Eueret, so that she lived but four days after: diverse other were sore hurt
with running out of the Church: diverse chimneyes in the City part of them
fell down the houses were so shaken. This Earthquake continued in or about
London not passing one minute of an hour, and was no more felt: but Eastwarde
in Kent and on the sea coast it was felt three times. As at Sandwich at six of
the clock, the land not only quaked, but the sea so foamed, that the ships
tottered. At Dover also at the same hour was the like, so that a piece of the
Cliffe fell into the sea with also a piece of the Castle wall there. A piece of
Saltwood Castle in Kent fell down, and in the Church of Hide the Bells were
hard to sound. A piece of Sutton Church in Kent fell down, the Earthquake
being there both hear^ and felt. And in all these places and other in East
Kent, the same was felt three times to move, to wit at vj. at ix. ^ xj. of the
clock.

The nineteenth of April, the Ferrye at Lambeth was Fe^ry at Lambeth drowned.
drowned, with five men and four horses, other two men and five horses swam
to land and were saved.

The first day of May, after xij. of the clock in the night, Earthquake i^
Kent.
was an Earthquake felt in diverse places of Kent, namely at Ashforde, Great
Chart, etc. which made the people there, to rise out of their beds, and ru^ to
the Churches, where they called upon God, oy earnest prayers to be merciful
unto them.

The xviij. day of May about one hour before Sun setting diverse Gentlemen of
worship, and good credit, riding from Castles and Ships seen in the air
Bodman in Cornewal toward Foy, there appeared to their seeming in y^
Northeast, a very great mistor fog, much like unto the sea: and the form of a
cloud in the fashion of some great Castle, with flags, and streams thereon, as
it were standing in the Sea, which presentlye vanished away. In whose steed,
and in near the same place, appeared another cloud which altered into the
likeness of a great Argosie, furnished with Mastes, and other necessaries, and
her sails seeming full of wind, made her way on the Southweast of the Castle,
having streamers and flags very warlike, with two boats at either stern.
There incontinent appeared again the form of a Castle, and behind the same
came following on the Southweast side, another great Argosie, furnished as the
first. This being past, there appeared three or four Galeis with their Mastes
and flags in warlike sort, having boats at their sternes, and thereby appeared
other small clouds to the number of xij. which altered into the proportion of
the said Castles, and one following another, as soon as any of them vanished
other came in their rooms, and this continued the space of an hour. Shortly
after the sightes T. Churchyard. Wonders in Wilsthire, and Somersetshire.
in ye air aforesaid a worthy Gentleman in the Country writ to a right good
gentleman in ye Court, y^ there was seen upon a down called Brodwels Down, in
Somersetshire, lx. personages all clothed in black, a furlong in distance from
those ye beheld them, and after their appearing, and a little while tarying,
they vanished away, but immediately, another strange company in like manner
color and number appeared in the self same place, and they encountered one
another, and so vanished away. And the third time, appeared that number again
all in bright armor and encountered one another. and so vanished away: iiij.
honest me^ which saw it, reporting ye same abroad, were examined thereof, before
sir George Norto^, to whom they (...), that those things they had seen were
true, as here before is rehearsed: Moreover it is credibly told of many honest
men, that five miles from Blonsdon in Wiltshire, a cry of hounds was heard
in the air, the self same day that the ^^^ste Earthquake was, and the noise
was so great that was ^^de, that they seemed three or four score couple, where
^^ (...) ^se ^^ke the^^ Greyhoundes, thinking some gentlemen had b^n hunting in
the chase, and thought to court: yet so^^ of ^^ose that went out of their
houses, seeing nothing below abroad, looked upwards to the skies, and there
espied in the air five or six hounds perfectlye to be diserned: Now (says
mine author) I doubt not but thousands hold this newe^ for ^^bles innented for
pleasure, but I protest before God and man, I can believe a great deal more
stranger matter than this, in this strange world: for the people so estraunge
themselves from God by using many strange fashions, and clapping on new
conditions and natures, ye except he show some miracles, his godhead would
quickly be forgotten on Earth, and men would believe there were no other world
but this. Thus far Thomas Churchyard.

The xiij. of June about six of the clock in the morning at Shipwesh, within
Bothel Barony in Northumberland, there happened a tempest of lightning and
thunder, after the which, of a sudden came a great shoure of hayle stones,
amongst ye which were stones of diverse shapes, marvelous to behold.

The xvij. day of June last past, in the parish of Blamsdon, in Yorkshire,
after a great tempest of lightning and thunder, a woman of four stoure years
old named Ales Perin, was A monstrous child.
delivered of a strange and hideous Monster, whose head was like unto a (...)
or head piece, the face like unto a man's face except (...) which was found
and small, like to the mo^th of a (...), the ^orepa^t of the body like unto a man, having ^ight legs, not one like unto an other, and a tail half a
yard long. Which Monster brought into the world no other news, but an
admiration of the divine works of God.

The xxij. of September, at Fennestanton in Huntingtonshire, Child monsterous.
one Agnes wife to William Linsey, was delivered of an ugly and strange
Monster, which had a face all black, the neck red, the mouth and eyes like a
Lion, over the forehead a roll of flesh, which might be turned up with ones
finger, on the hinder part of the head a lump of flesh proportioned like a
feather and hollow, with one ear growing upon the lowest part of the cheek,
the belly big and hard, the arms big, having five fingers and a thumb on
either hand, and in place of toes on the left foot, five fingers and a thumb,
on the right foot a thumb and seven fingers, in the place of the priuities
the shape both of male and female, etc.

Ralph Woodcocke: John Alat, the 28. of September. Sheriffs. Blasing Star.


On the x. of October (some says on ye seventh) appeared a blasing Star in the
South, bushing toward the East, which was nightlye seen deminishing of his
brightness until the one and twentieth of the same month.

The xvij. day of October were made 8. Serieante at law, Serieants feast*
to wit first William Fleetewood Recorder of London, ye second Edward
Flowerdew, the third Thomas Snagge, ye fourth W. Peryam, the fifth Robert
Halton, ye sixth John Clench, ye seventh John Puckering, ye eight Thomas
Warmesley, master Snag was sick, and therefore had a writ directed to two
masters of the Chauncerie to take his oath, and so was sworn in his Chamber
at Greys Jane, the other seven were sworn at Westminster, and held their feast
in the new Temple at London.

The Queens Majesty being informed that in sundry Proclamation against the
family of Love.
places of the realm, certain persons secreetly teach damnable heresies,
contrary to diverse principal Articles of our belief and Christian faith,
who to color their sect, name themselves The family of Love, and then as many
as shall be allowed by them to be of that family, to be elect and saved, and
all others of what Church soever they be, to be rejected and damned: And for
that upon conuenting of some of them before the Bishops and ordinaries, it is
found y^ the ground of their sect is mayntayned by certain leude, Heritical,
and seditious books, first made in the Dutche tongue, and lastly translated
into English, and printed beyond the Seas, and secretly brought over into the
Realm, the author whereof they name H. N. etc. And considering also it is
found, that these sectaries hold opinion, that they may before any Magistrate
ecclesiastical or Temporal, or any other person not being professed to be of
their sect, by oath or otherwise deny any thing for their advantage, so as
though many of the^ are well known to be teachers and spreaders abroad of
these dangerous and damnable sects, yet by their own confession they cannot be
condemned. Therefore her Majesty being very sorry to see so great an evil by
malice of the Devil, to be brought into this her realm, and by her Bishops
and ordinaries, she understands it very requisite, not only to have these
dangerous Heretics and sectaries to be severely punished, but that also all
other means be used by her Majesty's royal authority, which is given her of
God to defend Christ's Church, to root the^ out from further infecting of her
realm, she has thought meet and conueniente, and so by her proclamation,
commands that all her officers and ministers Temporal, shall in all their
several vocations, assist the Bishops of her Realm, and all other persons
ecclesiastical, to search out all persons duly suspected to be either
teachers, or professors of the foresaid damnable sects, and by all good
means to proceed senerelye against them, being found culpable, by order of
the laws either ecclesiastical or Temporal, and that also search be made in
all places suspected, for the books and writings mayntayning the sayds
Heresies and sects, and them to distroye and bu^rne, etc. as more at large
appears by the said proclamation, given at Richmond the third of October, and
proclaimed at London on the ninteenth of October.

John Branche Draper, the 28. of October. Mayor. The conclusion.


Thus good reder, I have colected these my Chronicles of England from the first
coming of Brute into this Islande, of whom it took the name of Brytaine,
until this present year of Christ our sovereign. 1580. and the. 23. year
of our sovereign Lady Flizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England France
and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. whom I pray God long and many years
to prosper over us to his glory, and desire the to take these my travel in
good part, like as I have painefully (to my great costs and charges) out of
many old hidden Histories and Records of antiquity, brought the same to
light, and freely for thy great commodity bestowed them upon thee.

The seven ages of the World.
THe first age from the creation of Adam to the flood of Noe, which continued
years 1659 2 The second from Noe to Abraham. 292 3 The third from the birth of
Abraham till the departing of Israel out of Aegipt. 503 4 The fourth from the
departing of Israel out of Aegipt, till the building of the Temple. 482 5 The
fifth from the building of the Temple til the Captivity of Babylon. 414 6 The
sixth from the captivity of Babylon, till the birth of our Savior Jesus
Christ. 614 7 The seventh beginning at the birth of our Savior Jesus Christ,
has continued till this present year of our Lord 1580, and shall last to the
worlds end.
The age of the World at the birth of our Savior Christ was 3962. The age of
the world this present year of our Lord. 1580. is 5542.

Of the universities in England, and Colleges in the same, with the founders,
and principal benefactours.
I Have before time rejoiced (says Erasmus Roterdam) that England was so well
furnished with so many men of excellent learning, but now I begin to envy her
felicity, for that she so florisheth with all kind of literature, that by
taking the commendation thereof from the other Regions, she does as it were
maruellously obscure them. And yet this comme^dation is not as now first due to
England, in the which (it is well known) have been of long time, men of
great learning. The universities prove this to be true, which have for their
antiquities and worthynesse, contended with the most ancient, and worthy
universities in the world.

Cambridge (as some learned writers do affirm) was Cambridge.
first frequented with Philosophers and Astronomers, procured from Athens by
Cantaber a Spaniarde, in the time of Gurguntius, who was King of Brytaine,
before the birth of Christ, years. 375

Peter College was erected of two auntiente Hostelles Peter College.
(sometime belonging unto the Brethern de paenitentia Jesus Christi) by Hughe
Balesame, sometime Pryor of Elye. Anno. 1256

This Hugh was afterward the tenth Bishop of Elye, and finished this College
in Anno. 1284

Clare Hall, was first builded by Richard Badowe then Clare Hall.
Chancellor of the students there, and the same was called University Hall.
1326

It was since that enlarged by Gualter Thacsteede Master of the said Hall, who
with consent of the said Richard Badow, resigned the foundation thereof to
Elizabeth Lady of Clare, third daughter of Gilbert, and sister and one of the
heirs of the last Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, who was first
married to John Burgh Earl of Vlster in Ireland, after to Theobald of Verdon,
and thyrdly, to sir Roger Damarie, and had issue by them all, she I say
named it Clare Hall.

Pembrooke hall was founded by Marie of Valentia, daughter Pembrooke hall
to Guydo Earl of Saint Paul in France, wife to Adomare de Valentia, Earl of
Pembrooke, she obtained of King Edward the third, whose cousin she was, to
found this College in her own ground, with purchasing two or three tenements
there by, and named it Aulade Valence Mariae. Anno. 1343.

Corpus Christi College was first begun to be builded Corpus Christi
College.
by the Alderman and brethren of Corpus Christi Guild.

This College was brought so far forth, the rather by the help of Saint
Mary's Guilde and fraternity, newly adjoined to the other Guilde. 1344.

In the year 1353. they did elect Henry Earl of Darby and Lancaster, who
should obtain them favor for the purchasing of Mortmaine, for such lands
and tenementes, as after many did sell them. This Earl of Darby in the eyghte
and twentieth year of Edward the third, was created the first Duke of
Lancaster, and then they elected him their Alderman, who recognized their
statutes, not by the Dukes Seal, but by the Seal of the Aldermen of that
Guilde.

Trinity hall, was first an Hostell, purchased by John Cranden Trinity hall,
sometime Prior of Ely, who procured it for his brethren the Monks of that
house, to be Students there, in y^ time of Edward the third, which Hostell
was afterward purchased by William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, who builded
this College of Trinity hall upon the said ground being the first Founder
thereof, he deceassed in the year of Christ. 1354.

Gunuile and Caius College, was first founded by Edmund Gunuile and Caius
College*
Gunuile, sometime Parson of Terington in Norffolke, he gave it to name Gunuile
hall, as appears by his statute. 1348.

At his deceasse, he leaving a good mass of money, commended the further
finishing of the same Hall to William Bateman Bishop of Norwiche, who with
the assent of the Aldermen and brethren of the Guildes of Corpus Christi and
our Lady, changed with them the said house, with their house called the Stone
hall, where now Gunuile and Caius College stands. 1353.

John Caius Doctoure in Physic, sometime fellow, and late Master of the
said College, has enlarged the house, and now made a second foundation,
with gyuing certain Manours and lands to the same. 1557.

Kings College was first founded by King Henry the sixth, Kings College
in the year of Christ. 1441.

The same King altered the form of his first foundation in the year of
Christ. 1443.

Edward the fourth, in displeasure of the first foundation, wythdrewe from
the College so much land as the first Founder had given them, but
afterward he restored them to the inheritance of five hundredth marks. ^^^

After him Henry the seventh finished that notable Chapel, begone by
Henry the sixth, to the glazing, stalles, and pauing with Marble, which was
done by king Henry the eight. Queens College.


Queens College was begone by Lady Margaret, wife to King Henry the sixth.
1446.

She procured Mortmaine of an hundred pound by year. Anno. 1448.

At the intercession of Andrew Ducket, sometime principal of Barnarde Hostell,
(which Hostell he gave to the said College.) He was Parson of Saint
Buttolphs in Cambridge, who by his own money and help of others, purchased
certain tenementes, and builded his College, being the first President of the
same, who gave as well by his life, as by his Testament diverse sums and
parcels of land, and also procured certain gifts of the Duke of Clarence, of
Cicelie Duchess of York, of Richard Duke of Gloucester, of Anne Duchess
of the same, of Edward Earl of Salisburie, Maude Countess of Oxforde, and
Marmaduke Lumley Bishop of Lincoln, with diverse other. Elizabeth wife to King
Edward the fourth finished that which Queen Margaret had begone in the
year 1465.

Katherine hall was founded by Robert Woodlarke Doctor Katherine hall.
of Divinity, and Provost of the Kings College, and Chancellor to the
University, as is testified by the Charter of K. Henry the sixth, bearing
date the 37. year of his reign, which was the year of Christ 1459.

Jesus College was founded by John Alcocke, the 29. Bishop Jesus College.
of Ely, who did convert the Monastery of Saint Ra^^gond, (the Abbess living a
dissolute life, the Monastery then destitute of government, the edyfices
fallen in ruin, and in conclusion the Nuns, departing thence leaving it
desolate) into a College of Chaplains and Scholars, the year of Christ 1446.

This John Alcocke was borne in Kingstone upon Hull, and therefore builded
there a Freeschoole.

The rentes of Jesus College has bin more amplified by sir Robert Read
Knight, Doctor Eleston, Doctor Royston and Doctor Fuller.

Christ's College was founded by King Henry the sixth, Christ's college
who named it Gods House, as it was sometime a great Hostell so called: King
Henry the seventh granted his Charter to Lady Margaret his mother, Countess
of Richemont and Darby, to increase the Students there, translating it at her
disposition, so that from thenceforth it should be called Christ's College.
1505.

Saint John's College, being first an Hostell of religious Chanons, was
erected by Nigellus the second Bishop of Ely, Treasourer to King Henry the
first, the year of Christ 1134.

Those Chanons lived by the name of the Hospital and brethren of Saint John,
until the year of Christ 1510. though at that time so far decayed, that there
was but a Prior, and two brethren, and by the dilapidations of their goods
moveable and immovable, they abased their revenues within the space of ten
years last paste, from the sum of an hundred and forty pound, to thirty
pound, etc. Whereupon King Henry the eight, Richard Bishop of Winchester,
John Bishop of Rochester, Charles Somerset Lord of Herbert, Thomas Louell,
Henry Marne, and John Sent-Iohn Knights, Henry Horneby and Hugh Ashton Clearks,
executors of ye testament of Lady Margaret Countess of Richmont and Darby,
grandmother to King Henry the eight, and mother to King Henry the seventh, upon
the suppressio^ of the said priorie, she being prevented by death, leaving
behind her sufficient goods, and committing the same to those her friends
and executors, they erected the said College.

Magalene College was first an Hostell or Hall inhabited Magdalene College.
by diverse Monks of sundry Monasteries: Edward Duke of Buckingham translated
the same to a College, naming it Buckingham College, who builded up the Hall
in the year of Christ. 1519.

After him Thomas Audley of Walden sometime Chauncellor of England, took on
him to be Founder of the said College, and going about to establishe the
same, was prevented by death, so that what he had begone, he left imperfect,
and altogether unfinished.

Trinity College was founded by King Henry the eighte, Trinity College.
in the year of Christ. 1546.

This College was builded in the plot where sometime Edward the third builded
his house, called the Kings hall, in the year of Christ. 1334.

There was joined unto this Hall a College called Michael house, with an
Hostell called Physic Hostell, and after the building there (being made of
three) King Henry the eight named it Trinity College.

Michael house was first founded by Harnious de Stanton Priest, Chauncellor of
the Exchequer to Edward the second, of whom he obtained license to erect the
said College in the year of our savior Christ 1324.

And thus far of the University of Cambridge, with the Colleges and Halles
in the same.
The University of Oxford was instituted by King Alfred a Saxon, after the
birth of Christ. 873. years: And has Colleges.
University College, founded in the time of King University College.
Alfred, by sir William Archdeacon of Duresme in the year* 873.

The University Church, alias Saint Marie Church, was begun to be reedified in
ye time of Doctor Fitz-Iames after Bishop of London: he procured much money
toward the building of it. The battlements of it were full of Pinacles, but
by tempest were most of the^ thrown down in one night. Balioll college


Baliol Clledge was founded in the time of Edward the first, by John Balioll
K. of Scotland in the year of Christ. 1263.

Merton College was founded in the time of Edward the Merton College.
first, by Walter Merton Bishop of Rochester, the year of Christ 1276.

Excester College, was founded in the time of Edward the Excester College.
second, by Walter Stapleton Bishop of Excester. 1316.

And augmented in the time of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by sir William
Peter Knight, in the year of Christ Anno. 156^.

Oriall College, was founded in the time of Edward the Oriall College
second, by sir Adam Brown, Almoner of the said King, the year of Christ
13^3.

Queens College was founded in the time of Edward the Queens College.
third, by Robert Eglishfielde, in his own ground, and by him called the
Queens hall, he was Chapleine to the Lady Philip, wife to the same Edward, the
year of Christ* 1340.

New College, was founded in the time of King Richard New College
the second, by William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, the year of Christ
1375.

Lincoln College was founded in y^ time of Henry the fifth, Lincoln College.
by Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincoln 1430. and augmented in Richard the
thirds time, by Thomas Rotheram Bishop of Lincoln in the year 1479.

Alsoule College was founded in the time of King Henry y^ Alsoule College.
sixth, by Henry ^iche^y Archbi. of Canterbury in y^ year 1437. He also
founded Barnard College in Oxford, since suppressed by K. Henry the eight, and
now reedified by sir Thomas White, and by him called Saint John's College.

Divinity School was founded in the time of King Henry Divinity school.
the sixth, by Humfrey Duke of Gloucester. 1447.

Magdalen College was founded in the time of king Henry Magdalen College.
the sixth, by William Wainflet Bish. of Winchester. 1459. He builded a good
part of Eaton College, begone by Henry y^ sixth: he builded a Freeschoole at
Wamflet.

Brazen nose College was founded in y^ reign of King Henry Brase nose
College.
the seventh, by Will. Smith B. of Lincoln, in the year 1513.

The same William Smith sometime Bishop of Lichfielde, ordained an Hospital
there for pore folks, and a Gramer School for pore folks children: Also at
Farneworth, where he and his parents had their original, he bestowed x. pound
the year forever, to one that should teach a Gramer school.

Corpus Christi College was founded in the reign of Henry Corpus Christi
College.
the seventh, by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, himself being a Fellow in
Pembrooke hall in Cambridge: he endowed the same College with 40. ^ 8. s^. 11.
d. of yearly rent for ever, the year 1516.

Christ's Church was founded in the time of Henry the Christ's church.
eight, by Thomas Wolsey Cardinal, and Archbishop of York, in the year of
Christ 1539.

And finished by the same K. Henry ye eight, in ye year 1546.

Trinity College was founded in the time of Queen Mary, Trinity College.
by sir Thomas Pope Knight. 1556.

Saint John Baptists College was founded in the time of Saint John's College.
Queen Mary, by sir Thomas White Knight, late Mayor of London in the year of
Christ 1557.

Oxford has Halles.
Brodegate hall, Heart Hall, Magdalen hall, Alborne hall. Saint Marie hall,
White hall, Walter Stap^ton. William VVainflet.
New Inn, Edmond hall.
IN the Uniuersities of England (says Erasmus Roterodame) there be certain
Colleges, in the which there is so much Religion, so straight discipline, in
such integrity of life, that if you did see it, you would neglecte in
comparison of them, all Monkish rules and orders.

All the Cities in England, many Market Towns, and some Uillages, have free
Gramer Schools erected in them for the further increase of learning and
virtue. Uertuous men have to the perpetual registring of their good names done
these good deeds, learned men have not bin all the dooers. Some therefore for
the supply in other, of that which wanted in themselves, have done wisely, al
to this purpose, that virtue and learning united and knit together, might in
this our age make a learned virtuous world, have done godly. It were much
(they are so many) in a small room to comprehend them, but the chief and
worthy patrones of the rest are.

Eaton School, Henry the the sixth 1443. Westminster. Queen Elizabeth.
Winchester. William Wickham Bish. of Win. Paul's School in London. John Collet
1510. Saint Anthonies in London by John Tat. Merchant Tailors School in
London, by the Merchant Taylours 1560.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this Chronicle.
ABbot of Westminster put to his shifts. Page 256 Abbot of Glastenburie
commitied a filthy act. Page 165 Abbot of Saint Albons his policy. Page 152
Abbayes visited. Page 1005. suppressed. Page 1013 Aberconway builded. Page 301
Abingdon spoiled. Page 464 Acres of land in England numbered. Page 165 Aduoultry
punished by death amongst the Infidels. Page 103 Adrian an Englishman Pope.
Page 207 Adam Tarleton Bishop of Hereford accused of treason and deprived of
his temporalties. Page 346. his sophistical letter Page 357. made Bysh. of
Worcester. Page 359. Bishop of Winchester. Page 367. dyed. Page 393 Admiral of
France came to London. Page 1034 Albon first Martire. Page 65 Albertus
Emperor. Page 66 Albons Church founded. Page 105 Almesburie builded. Page 134
Alfred King of West Saxons. Page 122 Albe first King of South Saxons. Page 94
Aldermen in London. Page 268 Alice Perce. Page 467 Ales Hackney being long
buried was taken up again. Page 869 Alms houses founded at the Crossed
Friars. Page 930 Alderman of London sent into Scotland taken prisoner. Page
1031. Alderman of Southwarke first. Page 2047 Ambassadors sent to Rome. Page
1096. to Caleis. Page 1069. from Sweden. Page 1113. from Muscouie. Page 1103
Amphabel Martire. Page 65 Antonius Gordianus. Page 64 Antonius Emperor. Page
64 Antonius Philosophus. Page 54 Androgius King. Page 30 Andrews Church in
Rochester founded. Page 92 Andreds Cester. Page 94 Andreds walde. Page 117. in
Sussex and Hamshiere. Page 125 Anger a Castle in Essex founded. Page 212
Anthonies Church in London builded. Page 870 Agnes Dayntie on the Pillorie.
Page 745 Anabaptists bare Faggots. Page 1015. Anabaptists brent. ibid.
Anabaptists bare faggottes at Paul's cross. Page 1181. banished. Page 1184.
brent. ibi. Anne of Cleave died at Chelsey. Page 1104 Anne Marchioness of
Pembroke. Page 980 Answer of a Pope. Page 395 Anthonies Church in London
built. Page 870 Anne Sanders, Anne Drurie, and trusty Roger hanged. Page 1169
Anth. Broune Knight of the Garter. Page 1018 Annes Church in London brent. Page
1039 Anne Askew with others brent. Page 1033 Apollos Temple at Delphos. Page 25
Apuldore in Kent. Page 125 Apostata brent. Page 255 Apparel appointed to
Harlots. Page 427 Archbishops of London. Page 56 Archemalus King. Page 5^
Archegallo King deprived. Page 29 Archeflamins. iij. Page 27 Archbishop of
London reproves Vortiger and is by him slain. Page 81 Arthur King. Page 84
Archbishop of York with his Cross cast out of the Kings Chaple. Page 184
Archbishop of York plucked from his seat, thrown to the ground and beaten.
Page 211 Archbishop of York drawn from the Alter to prison. Page 220
Archbishop of York covetous. Page 264 Archbishop of Canterbury beats and
wounds the Prior and Chanons of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfielde. Page. 272
Archebishoppe of York George Neuil emprisoned at Hames, and his goods
confiscate. Page 733 An army sent to Landersey. Page 1027 Archbishoppes
Pallaice at Canterbury brent. Page 1027 Articles of religion devised by the
king. Page. 1007 Arden murdered. Page 1048 An Arian brent. Page 1049 An army
sent into Scotland. Page 1028 Arthure first son to King Henry the seventh
borne. Page 861 An army sent into Scotland. Page 870 Archbishop of Canterbury
deceassed. Page. 1182. Archbishop newly elected of Canterbury. Page 1185
Arthure of Britain murdered. Page 233 Asclepiodatus. Page 67 Aurelius Probus.
Page 64 Aurelianus. Page 64 Austine the Monk came into Britain. Page. 91
Austins Church at Canterbury founded. Page 91 Ancient laws of England
remain in Kent only. ^52 Austins in Bristowe builded. Page 213 Augustine
Friars Church in London. Page. 430 Aubrey de Ver created Earl of Oxford.
Page. 515 Audley made Lord Chancellor Page 980 Knight of the Garter. Page
1058 Aid sent into Scotland against Edemborough Castle. Page 1169
B.
BAse moneys coined. Page 1029 Bayliffes of London. Page 219 Bathe Abbey
founded. Page 105 Bachiler Mayor of London. Page 865 Bath a Bishops sea. Page
172 Barons created. Page 1090 Basianus Emperor. Page 64 Basing. Page 121
Bastard brother disheriteth the lawful, and after murdereth him. Page 462
Bamburgh builded. Page 20 Bangor builded. Page 23 Bathe builded. Page 22 Barons
of the Britains murdered. Page 82 Britons state miserable. Page 83 Banqueting
house built in Callais. Page 927 defaced by tempest. Page 928 Barnardes Castle
builded by Barnard Bayllioll. Page 209 besieged. Page 1138 Baynard Lord of
Dunmow builded Baynards Castle in London. Page 178. thrown down. Page 242.
new builded. Page 874 Barons in armor against King John. Page 245
excommunicate by the Pope. Page 246. Page 248 they sent for Lodowike. Page 248
Barons in armor against King Henry the third. Page 278 against King Edward
the second. Page 341 Bathe burned. Page 189 Battle of the Danes at Ashendune.
Page 120 Battle at Hasting. Page 147. against the Welche. Page 188. of the
Standard. Page 190. at Jews in Sussex. Page 283. at Eusham. Page 287. at
Fankirke in Scotl. Page 306. at Striueling. Page 333. at Morleys. Page 390. of
Crecie. Page 396. on the sea. Page 417. at Poyters. Page 444. on the sea. Page
465. at Shresburie. Page 553. at Bramham Moore Page 570. of Agencourt Page 593.
at Vernole in Perch. Page 621. at S. Albons. Page 674. at Northampton. Page
699 Wakefield. Page 707. at Mortimers cross. Page 708. at Towton. Page 712. at
Barnet. Page 727. at Thewkesburie. Page 728. at Stoke. Page 863. at
Blackeheath. Page 870 Battle Abbey builded. Page 166 Battle of Gnats. Page 509
^arwike won by Edward the first. Page 306. betrayed. Page 339. delivered to
the Scots. Page 712. won by the Earl of Warwick* Page 715. won by the
Scotts and recovered again by the Earl of Northumberland. Page 477. and 497
Barbican of London. Page 373 Bay salt dear. Page 1180 Bedford town. Page 105.
Page 114. besieged. Page 189 Bedforde Castle besieged. Page 259 Benet a Monk
brought glasing into this land. Page 111 Beda famous. Page 111 Bewly builte.
Page 251 Beaufleete in Essex. Page 125 Beuerley brent. Page 215 Beranbridge.
Page 114 Bewmarise Castle builded. Page 307 Beggars murdered. Page 310 Biefe
and Mutton first sold by weighte. Page. 999 Berking in Essex founded. Page 100
Belins gate in London. Page 27 Belinus and Brennus king. Page 24 Beston Castle
builded. Page 254 Bermonsey founded. Page 165 Bensinto^. Page 114 Bishoprics
in England. Page 2 Bishoprics in Wales. Page 11 Bishop of Excester drawn
out of his Church. Page 279 Bishop of Chichester murdered. Page 651 Bishop of
Salisburie murdered. Page 664 Bishop of Durham murdered. Page 164 Bishop of Ely
put to his shifts. Page 222 Bishops gate of London builded. Page 746 Bishop of
Rochester beheaded. Page 1004 Bishops deprived. Page 1112 Bishop of
Winchester sent to the Tower. Page 1039. deprived. Page 1048 Bishops restored
and other displaced. Page 1067 Bible commanded to be had in every Church in
English. Page 1013 Bilney burned. Page 978 Bladud king. Page 22 Blasing
stars. Page 116. Page 179. blasing star. Page 179 285. 297. 636. 550. 3679.
1100. Black Heath field. Page 688* 870 Black Friars in Holborne. Page 273 in
London. Page 298 Blanke charters burned. Page 546 Blasing star. Page 182
Bledgabredus king. Page 31 Blewbeard hanged. Page 651 Blood rayned Page 23.
Page 117. Page 211. sprang out of the Earth. Page 174. blood of Hales. Page
1014 Boniface his Epistle to Ethelbald. Page 102 Bones of men monstrous. Page
167 Bones of Arthur found. Page 221 Bosten spoiled and brent. Page 302 Bow
Church suspended. Page 302 Bow steeple builded. Page 897 Book written against
Luther by King Henry the eight. Page 930 Book of Common prayer set forth.
Page. 1054 Bokeland. Page 297 Boloigne yielded to the French. Page 1046 Bonars
head broken. Page 271 Bridge at London. Page 3 Brute arrived in Brytaine. Page
17 Brutaine so named of Brute. Page 17 Brutaine divided into three. Page 18
Brother slew brother. Page 24 Brytaine tributarie to the Brutaines. Page 34
Brytaines barbarous. Page 34 Brazen Image of Cadwaline cast down* Page. 118
Brakenburie Conestable of the Tower. Page. 826 Bridge of London new made. Page
204 Bridge of stone begun at London. Page 211 finished. Page 238 Bridge at
Stratford upon Auen. Page 865 Bridges borne down* Page 299 Brimsburie with the
bridge builded. Page. 130 Bristow Castle built. Page 181. besieged. Page 189
Brytains house in Holland. Page 37 Brytains bodies painted. Page 59 Brentford.
Page 137 Bretan received the Faith. Page 55 Brute Greneshilde King. Page 20
Bradford brent. Page 1097 Bridwel given to the City of London. Page. 1057
Brown hanged in Smithfield. Page 1168 Bursse begun in Cornehill. Page 1129
Burton upon Trent. Page 135 Burgondie invaded by the English. Page. 457
Boundwica a woman of Britain. Page 40. 41. 42. 43. Britains had all things
common. Page 41 Bury Abbey spoiled and brent. Page 353 Burial forbidden to W.
Conqueror. Page 167 Buckingham Castle builded. Page 129 Bull hanged on the
Bishops of Londons gate. Page 1146 Burdet beheaded. Page 747 Burial of King
Edward the sixth. Page 1067 P. Burchet wounded Master Hawkins Page 1175.
found an Heretic. ibid. kylleth his keeper. Page 1176. hanged. ibid.
C.
CArliele builded. Page 21 Caratacus. Page 38 Caligula his expedition into
Britain. Page 36 Caius. Page 65 Canterbury builded. Page 21. Castle builded.
Page 34 Canterbury defaced by fire. Page 270 Canterbury province divided into
Parishes. Page 92 Canterbury brent. Page 209 Canterbury ouerflowed, by
breaking out of bornes. Page 294 Caporus King. Page 31 Cassibelanus King. Page
34 Cambridge builded. Page 29 Cairleon upon Vske builded. Page 27 Capenus King.
Page 31 Carausius usurped Britain. Page 65 Careticus King. Page 88 Cadwalin
King. Page 88 Cadwalader King. Page 89 Cadwine king. Page 88 Catellus King hung
up oppressors. Page 3^ Castles at Notingham, York and Lincoln builded. Page
161 Cardife Castle builded. Page 181 Carliele repaired and the Castle builded.
Page 172 Carlisle a Bishops Sea. Page 185 Canutus the Dane King of England. Page
139 King of four kingdoms. Page 140 Cardinals robbed. Page 337 Cambridge sore
perished by fire. Page 306 Cane in Normandy spoiled by. E. Page 3. 394 Carliele
consumed by fire. Page 303 Caleice besieged by E. Page 3. Page 398. described
and builded. Page 400. yielded. Page 402 Caleice like to have been betrayed.
Page 410 Caleice besieged by the Duke of B. Page 639 Caleice lost by the
Englishmen. Page 1106 Castle at Ethelingey builded. Page 123. Monastery
builded. Page 127 Carcason in France burned by the English. Page 438 Caple
Alderman of London. Page 868 Cardinal Wolsey the story of his life and
vprising described. Page 904 Cardinal Campeius came into Eng. Page 923 Cardinal
Poole came into England. Page 1093 Castle at Tourney built. Page 922 Catte
hanged in Cheap. Page 1090 Cecilius King. Page 28 Caesar Julius his first
voyage into Brytain Page 31. his second and third voyage. Page 32. subdued
Brytaine. Page 33. slain. Page 34. London yielded to Caesar. Page 33 Cerdike
first King of the West Saxons. Page 113 Cerdikes Shore. Page 113 Cerdikes
Forde. Page 113 Chester a City. Page 21 Chesse a game devised. Page 23
Chartsey in Surrey founded. Page 100 Chartley Castle builded. Page 254
Christians first in Brytaine. Page 5^ Chester repaired. Page 129 Churchyardes
appointed to Bury. Page 117 Chastity before beauty to be preferred Page. 121
Charing Cross. Page 305 Children were eaten of their parents. Page. 336
Chichester brent. Page 182 Christ's Church in London founded. Page 180 Children
of King Henry drowned. Page 183 Chester Abbey. Page 172 Christ was borne. Page
35 Children of Englishmen sold in common markets. Page 107 Chipenham. Page 121
Chichester builded. Page 34. and. 94 Chipingham in Wilshire. Page 123
Chichester brent. Page 214 Chrisanthus deputy in Brytaine. Page 77 Chirinus
King. Page 30 Chester repaired. Page 54 Christ counterfaite. Page 255
Charterhouse of London founded. Page 406 Chicheley his testament. Page 612
Church service altered. Page 587 Chest in the Guild Hal of London. Page 464
Chapel at Westminster for Henry the seventh. Page 875 Christ Church
suppressed. Page 908 Charterhouse Monks executed. Page 1003. 1004. Charitable
deeds of sir John Allen. Page 1005 Charity of Thomas Huntlowe. Page 1016
Churches pulled down. Page 1038 Church of Saint John by Smithfielde blown
up. Page 1040 Charnel house of Paul's converted to dwellings. Page 1040
Charitable deeds of sir Rowland Hill. Page. 1044 Charitable deeds of George
Barnes. Page 1054 Charitable deeds of sir Thomas White. Page. 1075 Church
Images brent. Page 1113 Churches in London stricken and broken by Tempest. Page
1113 Charitable acts of Master William Lamb. Page 1188 Cilicester a City.
Page 84 Cicester brent. Page 88 Cirencester. Page 114 Citizens of Canterbury
against the Monks of Christ's Church. Page 354 Citizens of Norwich against the
Prior. Page. 647 Claudius a Roman. Page 37. 39 Clearkenwel. Page 177 Clearkes
of Oxford banished. Page 281. discord betwixt the Clearkes and lay men. Page
307 Cleargies lands required. Page 499 Clopton Mayor of London. Page 865
Clergy condemned in praemunire. Page 978 Clergy sworn to the King. Page 979
Counties or shieres in England. Page 1 Cornewal described. Page 12 Cordila
Queen. Page 22 Crown of gold first worn in Eng. Page 24 Conspiracy in
Ireland against King Herie the sixth. Page 862 Coronation of Q. Anne Bulleine.
Page 916 Coilus King. Page 30 Coilus King. Page 54 Colchester builded. Page 54.
besieged and spoiled, repaired again. Page 129. besieged. Page 248 Comodus
Emperor. Page 57 Coil King. Page 67 Constantius Emperor. Page 67. dyed at
York. Page 68 Constantine the great. Page 68 Constantinus Emperor. Page 69
Constance. Page 70 Constantius. Page 70 Constantine King. Page 86 Comet
appeared. Page 135. 180 Couentrie privileged. Page 146 Comen Earl of
Northumberland slain. Page. 161 Conspiracy against William Conqueror. Page.
165 Cogshall in Essex. Page 199 Conestable of Colchester lost his own life, to
save the Kings life. Page 205 College at Lambeth. Page 229 Corn full of
vermin. Page 264 Corn dear. Page 234. 276. 300. 641 Corn cheap. Page 867
Constantine hanged. Page 257 Coin bace. Page 271 Conuerts their house founded.
Page 863 College of Saint Laurence Poultney founded. Page 364 Commodities of
peace. Page 404 Cobham College. Page 460 Counselors bannished the Court. Page
506 Counsel of Constance. Page 5 College and Hospital at Higham Ferres. Page
630 Conspiracy disclosed. Page 588 Conspiracy of Abingdon. Page 634. at
Couentrie. Page 933 College at Tateshal. Page 640 Cook Mayor of London. Page
720 Coin enhaunced. Page 716. new. Page 717. 877. Colingborne beheaded. Page
847 Combat for the kingdom. Page 138 Combat at Reading. Page 204. between two
Dukes. Page 528. at Westminster. Page 479 Combat fought at Westminster betwixt
John de Viscount born at Cipres and Thomas Delamarch bastard son to Philip
king of France, before king Edward the third. Page 428 Combat. Page 496. in
Smithfielde. Page 633. 643. at Tothil. Page 644. in Smithfield. Page 647. and
649. at Tothill. Page 1151 A Cook boiled in Smithfielde. Page 978 Coyners and
clyppers executed. Page 980 Conduite in Lothburie. Page 1034 Commotion in
Somerset and Lincoln shires. Page 1040. in Cornwall and Devonshire. Page
1040. in Yorkshire. Page 1042 in Somersetshire and other places. Page 1009.
1110. and. 1111. Coronation of Queen Marie. Page 1072 Counter removed into
Woodstreete first. Page 1098 Coronation of Queen Elizabeth. Page 1111
Conference of religion at Westminster. Page. 1111 Creda first King of Mertians.
Page 101 Criklade a town. Page 128 Criples gate of London. Page 166 Crockard
and Pollard false moneys. Page 310 Creation of Dukes and Earls. Page 500. 527.
degraded. Page 543 Crosby Sheriff of London, his gift to the City. Page 725
Criples gate of London builded. Page 749 Cross in Cheap builded. Page 862
Creations at Bridewel. Page 940. of the Earl of Leicester. Page 1123 Croomewell
master of the Rolls. beheaded. Page 1003 1019 Cranmer brent. Page 1100
Cunobelinus King. Page 35 Cups of brass by the high ways. Page 109 Custos of
London Conestable of the Tower. Page 303. 305 Conduit in Cheap builded. Page
302 Conduite in Cornehill builded. Page 550 Conduite in Cheap builded. Page
748 Conduite in Fleetestreete builded. Page 640 Conduite in Grassestreete
builded. Page 865 Conduit at Bishops gate builded. Page 878
D.
Dance of Paul's. Page 567 Daunsey in Essex. Page 99 Danes arrived in
England. Page 117. at Lindsfarne. Page 118. Portland an I Will. Page 117 Danes
spoiled London. Page 119 Danes spoiled Winchester. Page 120 Danes had a
victory at Reading. Page 120 Danes in England murdered. Page 135 Danes
destroyed Canterbury and murdered their Archbishop. Page 135. their tyranny.
Page 136 Danes possess all England. Page 139 Dane gilte. Page 142 Danes
Church without Temple bar. Page 142 Darkness in Paul's Church. Page 262 David
king of Scots taken. Page 399 Dampot and Chapman two of the Guarde hanged. Page
1020 Dakers of the North arraigned. Page 1022 Dance of Paul's pulled down.
Page 1040 Dagger thrown at a Preacher. Page 1060 Denmark contributorie to
Brytayne. Page. 27. 28 Dedantius king. Page 30 Detonus king. Page 30 Decius.
Page 64 Deorham. Page 114 Dearth in England that men's flesh was eaten. Page 162
Delacrase Abbey. Page 254 Delapoole Duke of Suffolk murdered. Page. 651 Death
in London. Page 874 Dearth without scarcity. Page 1176 Disputation at Christ's
Hospital. Page 1098 Disputation at Oxford. Page 1091 Description of England.
Page 1 Dinellus king. Page 31 Ditch about London. Page 137. Page 244. cleansed
Page. 875 Ditche about the Tower of London. Page. 220 Dissension at Oxforde,
the Citizens indicted. Page 430. 505. 510 Devil in likeness of a Friar. Page
550 Domitianus Emperor. Page 54 Doncaster. Page 19 Dover Castle builded. Page
34. besieged. Page 250 spoiled by Frenchmen. Page 307 Dorchester a Bishop Sea.
Page 114 Donemouth. Page 117 Downmowin Essex. Page 178 Donwich spoiled. Page
300. by Tempest. Page 302. Dogs flesh good meat. Page 336 Dragons seen.
Page 263. 297 Durham a Bishops Sea. Page 135 Ducket hanged in Bow Church. Page
301 Dukes banished. Page 529 Duke of Burgoigne enamored on the Countess of
Salisburie. Page 622 Dry Summer. Page 1020 Duke of Buckingham accused of
Treason. Page 928. beheaded. Page 929 Duke of Norffolke sent into Scotland.
Page. 1114 Duke of Norffolke and Earl of Surrey sent to the Tower. Page 1034
Duke of Somerset brought to the Tower Page 1044 arained. Page 1050. beheded.
Page 1052 Duke of Northumberlande and others beheaded. Page 1070 Duke of
Suffolk beheaded. Page 1090 Duke of Norffolke sent to the Tower, Page 1154.
araigned, Page 1155. beheaded. Page 1162
E.
EBranke king. Page 19 East Saxons. Page 88. 98 East Angles. Page 84. 96
Earthquake. Page 133. 165. 169. 180. 182. 185. 202. 205. 212. 214. 270. 271.
274. 297. 491. 497. 630. 1049. 1121. 1210. Earl Waren excommunicate for
aduoutry, Page 337 Earl of Northumberland slain by the commons there. Page
864 Earl of Devonshire created. Page 1072 Earl of Warwicks marriage. Page 1128
Earl of Warwick sent against the Rebels. Page 1140 Earls of Northumberlande
and Westmerland fled. Page 1140 Earl of Devonshire executed. Page 1015 Earl
of Surrey beheaded. Page 1034 Earl of Hertforde made Lord Protector. Page 1035
Earl of Devonshire to the Tower. sent to Fodringay. Page 1090 1071 Earl of
Kent restored. Page 1154 Earl of Darby deceased. Page 1164 Earl of
Northumberland beheaded. Page 1165 Earl of Worcester sent into France and
robbed on the Sea. Page 1163 Earl of Essex with others sailed into Ireland.
Page 1174. Captain general. Page 1175 Ebb Abbess of Coldingham. Page 121
Edenbourgh builded. Page 20. yielded to the Englishmen. Page 1173. brent. Page
1029. Edmond King of Eastangles martired by the Danes. Page 97 Edmond Ironside
king. Page 137 Edrike of Statun the Traitor. Page 137. 138 Edwine of the West
Saxons a vicious king deprived. Page 132 Edgar K. crowned at Bath. Page 132.
restored Monasteries. Page 133. eyghte kings rowed him. Page 133 Edward son
to Edgar murdered by his stepmother. Page 134 Edmonds Bury builded. Page 140
Edward Confessor. Page 142 Edmonds Bury brent. Page 245 Edward the first
king. Page 296 Edward the second king. Page 325. imprisoned Page 349. deposed.
Page 350. murdered. Page 357. Edwardle Bruise beheaded. Page 338 Edward the third
king. Page 352. elected King of Almaine. Page 404. dyed. Page 469 Edward the
second bruted to be alive. Page. 359 Edendon founded. Page 393 Edward Earl of
March. Page 711. crowned. Page 712 martired. Page 715. taken prisoner. Page
723. escaped. ibid. fled. Page 724. returned. Page 726. made knights at
London. Page 735. banqueted the Mayor of London. Page 749. ended his life. Page
750. his description. Page 752. Oration at his death. Page 758. his Concubines.
Page 799 Edward Lord Gray made Earl of Kent. Page. 713 Edward the sixth borne.
Page 1011. began to reign. Page 1035. made knight. ibid. decesed. Page 1058
Eguesham. Page 114 Egelburge. Page 114 Egbrightstone. Page 123 Elanius king.
Page 28 Elidurus king. Page 29 Eldrea king. Page 30 Eliud king. Page 30 Elye
minster founded. Page 97. Page 111. a Bishops sea. Page 180 Elder brother
seeks favor of the yo^ger brother, but it would not be obtained. Page 179
Elsing spittle founded. Page 366 Elianor Cobham apprehended. Page 644. indicted
of treason. Page 645. did penance. Page 646 Elizabeth now Queen of England her
birth, Page 999. her christning. Page 1000 Lady Elizabeth sent to the tower.
Page 1090 Emerianus king. Page 30 Emperor came to London. Page 930 England
first so called. Page 118 Ensign of the Danes. Page 123 Englishmen besieged
the Castle of Argilla in Barbary. Page 128 England divided. Page 138 England
conquered by wooden bows. Page 46 England interdicted. Page 236. released.
244 English ships overcome by Spaniar. Page 475 Intercourse with Flaunders.
Page 870 Englishmen sent to Saint Quint. Page 1104 Englishmen sent to Vlstar in
Ireland. Page 1163 Epistle of Elutherius. Page 55 Epistle of Boniface to king
Ethelbald. Page 102 Erchenwine first king of East Saxons. Page 98. Essendune in
Essexe. Page 138 Exchequer at Northampton. Page 237 Exchequer at York. Page
306 Exchequer at York. Page 340 Ethelbert king of Kent. Page 90. christened.
Page 91 Ethelburge poisoned her husband Butricus king of West Saxons. Page 118.
her miserable end. ibid. Ethelingey, the noble Island. Page 123 Etheldred king
of West Saxons, Page 134 Euesham founded. Page 102 Excester builded. Page 34
Excester the Danes wintered there. Page 122 Excester a Bishops Sea. Page 135
Excester besieged. Page 160. and. 188 Execution in Paul's churchyard. Page 1015.
1083
F.
FAmine. Page 166. 172 Falls accuser of his elder brother hanged. Page 227
Farendon founded. Page 251 Fat Cow. xvj. pence. Page 420 Fall of money. Page
1049. second fall of money. ibid. and. Page 1115 False Christ whipped. Page
1116* Faelix Bishop of Donwich. Page 96* Fernehame in Southsex. Page 125
Feuersham in Kent founded. Page 195 Feet and hands of many me^ cut of. Page
257 Feast of Saint George at Winds^r. Page 415 Free School at Bedford founded.
Page 1117 Felton arraigned and executed. Page 1148 Fire-light forbidden to the
English. Page 153 Fish like a man. Page 214. like armed knights Page 245.
monstrous. Page 268 Fikets field. Page 585 Fire at Baynardes Castle. Page 652
Fitz Water drowned. Page 636 Fire nigh Ludgate of London. Page 674 Fire at
Leaden Hal. Page 846. in Breadstreete Page 859. in Roode lane. Page 1013. at
Temple bar. Page 1003. at Broken wharfe. Page 1040 Friste fruits and tenthes
given to the King. Page 1003. restored to the Clergy. Page. 1099 First show
of children in Christ's Hospital. Page 1055 Fifteenes granted at a Parliament.
Page 1017 Five persons of the family of love stood at Paul's Cross. Page 1184
Flies venomous. Page 23 Florianus. Page 64 Flauius. Page 64 Flemmings sent into
Wales. Page 180 Floudes of water. Page 269. 272. 274. 1123. 276 Flint Castle
builded. Page 297. rased to the ground. Page 299 Fleet dike at London which
sometime bare ships sore decayed. Page 322 Florences of Gold. Page 388
Flemmings robbed by the ke^tishmen. Page. 724 Ferrex and Porrex kings. Page 24
Forest in Hampshire. Page 166 Fodringhey College founded. Page 574 Four
Eclipses. Page 1027 Foxley of the Tower Potmaker slept. Page 14. days and as
many nights without waking. Page 10^3 Frawe a river. Page 122 Frost great.
Page 172. Page 234. Page 293. Page 299. Page 194. Page 638. Page. 923 Free
School and alms houses at Ratcliffe. Page 1014 Friar Forest brent. Page 1012
Free School at Drayton in Shropshire. Page. 1032 Free Schole at Tonbridge.
Page 1048 Frenchmen landed in the I Will of Wight. Page 1032. at Newhauen in
Sussex. ibid Frenchmen attached. Page 930 Frenchmen arrived in Sussex. Page
1031 Friars houses suppressed. Page 1003. again. Page. 1014 Free Schole at
Walthamstow. Page 903 Fray in Saint Dunstans Church of London. Page 568 Friar
tormented to death. Page 494 Friars of the sack. Page 316 French navy taken.
Page 501 Fray against the stilyarde men. Page 867 Fire at the star in
Breadstreete. Page 643. on London bridge. Page 877 Friar Randulph slain. Page
632 French men land in Wales. Page 565 France. Page 390 Friar Randulph sent to
the Tower. Page 604 Fray at Wrestling. Page 673 Fulgen king. Page 30 Fullenham
or Fulham. Page 124 Four children borne at one burden. Page 1183 Flies in
February in great number. Page. 1180 Frobishers first voyage to Cataya. Page
1186 Frost and a sharp winter. Page 1165
G.
GAlley halfepence forbidden. Page 597 Gardener hrent. Page 640 Gascoigne wine
sold for forty shillings the tun. Page 873 Garnodo won from the Turk. Page
866 Gardins about Londo stroyed to make Rome for Archers. Page 872 Gatehouse of
the middle Temple new built. Page 905 Gambo and another Captain murdedered.
Page 1045 Germany took the name. Page 20 Gernucius king. Page 30 Germanus and
Lupus Bishops. Page 77 Gerend on ^ourded. Page 206 Geffrey Chaucer. Page 548
George Plontagenet made Duke of Clarence. ^13 Geffrey whipped for heresy. Page
1116 Gifford Angolisme created Earl of Huntington. Page 471 Gilbert Pot
punished in Cheap. Page 1059 Glamorgan. Page 23 Glastenburie. Page 58
Gloucester founded. Page 102 Gloucester. Page 114. brent. Page 177. burned. Page
183 Gloucester Castle take by the Baros Page 279 Gloucester Church brent Page 310
Gloucester besieged. Page 282 Glamorgan and Morganocke won. Page 170
Glastenburie builded. Page 116 Glastenburie brent. Page 213 Gorbodug king. Page
24 Gorbomanus king. Page 29 Gorbonian king. Page 30 Gospel preached in
England. Page 57 Godwin Sands. Page 173 Good Parliament. Page 467. evil
Parliament Page 519. lay man's Parliament. Page 559 Golden Rose sent from Rome.
Page 933 Gold enhaunsed. Page 941 Grantham builded. Page 29 Grantbridge or
Cambridge Page 122 Gray Friars in England. Page 259 Grifithe of Wales brake his
neck out of the Tower of London. Page 269 Grauesend Bishop of London. Page 315
Groates and half groates coined. Page 420 Gray Friars in London an Hospital
Page 1053 Great and wonderful tempests. Page 1106 Gardner made Lord
Chancellor. Page 1071 deceased. Page 1099 Great Hary a slip brent. Page 1071
Great seal taken from the Lord Rich. page, Page 1050 Greenewich Town
builded. Page 240 Giles Church brent. Page 1032 Great floods. Page 1099 Great
fishes. Page 1053 Great muster in London. Page 1015 Gwindolen Queen. Page 19
Gurgustus king. Page 23 Gurgustius King. Page 28 Guinthelinus king. Page 28
Gurguinus king. Page 30 Guinouer wife to Arthur. Page 81 Gurmondchester
builded. Page 88 Guy Earl of Warwick slew Colbronde. Page. 131 Guisnes gotten
by the English. Page 421 Gunnes muented. Page 480 Guilde Hall in London
builded. Page 573 Gunne shot at the Preacher. Page 1091
H.
HAdrianus a Roman. Page 54 Hadley in Essex. Page 124 Harold a Dane King.
Page 141 Hardicanutus king. Page 142 Harold king. Page 146. slain. Page 147
Hearts leapt into the Sea. Page 240 Hales Owen reedified. Page 251 Halfepence
and farthings round. Page 299 Hands of men cut of for rescuing of a prisoner.
Page 306 Hastings brent* Page 472 Harlow Castle won. Page 721 Hayle stones.
Page 18. inches about. Page 870 Hayle in Northamptonshire did much harm. Page
1174 Hailestones figured like me^ heads. Page 103 Hangman hanged Page 1013
Helius king. Page 31 Helen mother to Constantine. Page 69 Hengest Saxon. Page
80. king of Kent. Page 83 Hengest first king of Kent. Page 190 Hereforde
Bishops Sea founded. Page 106 Hereford brent. Page 164 Hen^ie the first. Page
176 Hereford brent. Page 189 Henry the second king Page 200, wenteagainst the
Welchmen. Page 201 Hergelius Patriarch. Page 214 Hedges burned. Page 237 Henry
the third King. Page 252 Herdesmen go toward Jerusalem. Page 340 Hugh Spencer
executed. Page 349, 350 Henry Percy created Earl of Northumberland. Page 471
Henry bastard of Spain. Page 475 Herfleete besieged. Page 589 Henry son to
John of Gaunt created Duke of Hereforde. Page 527* accufeth the Duke of
Norffolke Page 528, banished Page 529 returns into England Page 532. chosen
king. Page 540 crowned ^42 conspiracy against him. Page 544. enters
Scotland. Page 547. in great danger. Page 549, marieth the duchess of
Brytaine Page 553. conspiracy against him. Page 563. writes to the Pope. Page
571. ended his life. Page 576 Henry Beauchamp created duke of Warwick. Page
648 Henry Lord Bourcher made Earl of Essex. Page 713 Henry son to Henry the
seventh borne Page. 865 Henry son to Henry the fourth made prince of
Wales. Page 541. his demean of at his fathers death. Page 576. crowned king
Page 583. enters Normandy. Page 588. Page 599. returns home Page 597.
deceased. Page 614 Henry the sixth borne at Windsor. Page 612 King of England
and of France. Page 618 crowned. Page 633. at Paris. Page 635. fled into
Scotland Page 712. disherited. Page 713 taken Page 717 ^estored. Page 725.
sent to the Tower prisoner. Page 727. murdered. Page 729. his commendation.
Page 730 his College. Page 731. his death. Page 756. buried at Windsor. Page
84^ Edward Prince borne in Sanctuary: Page 726 Page 807. King of England.
Page 7^^. his answer to his mother* Page 805 murdered. Page. 828 Henry Earl
of Richmonde landed at Mylford haven. Page 851. proclaimed king Page 858,
drowned Page 861. besieged Buloigne Page 866* builded a Chapple at Westminster.
Page 875. Hospital of the Sauoy. Page 891. deceased ibidem. his sepulcher.
Page 892 Hingwer the Dane slain. Page 123 Honorius Emperor. Page 73
Hokenorton a town. Page 129 Houndsdich. Page 139 Hofen a pair for a king
three shillings Page. 168 Howses blown down in Cheap. Page 170 Hospital of
Saint Leonard at York founded. Page 175 Hospital of Saint Giles. Page 183
Hospital of Saint Cross builded. Page 185 Hospital of s. Thomas in Southwark.
Page 244 Hospital at Oxford. Page 263 Hospital of Saint Marie at London. Page
265 Hospital at Lecester founded. Page 365 Hogs in Normandy brent by Edward
the third. Page 394 Hospital at Kingston founded. Page 461 Housekeeping of the
Earl of Warwike Page. 722 House at London bridge fell into the Thames. Page
748 Humber a River. Page 18 Humfrey Duke of Gloucester chalengeth to co^bat with
Philip D. of Burgoign Page 625. marieth Elianor Cobham. Page 631. dyed at Bury.
Page 650. debate between the D. of Glo. and the By. of Winchester. Page 627
I.
I Ago King. Page 23 Saint James in Bristowe builded. Page 181 James Church at
Garlike Hithe builded. Page 349 Iaqueline Duchess of Henalt. Page 623 married
to the Duke of Gloucester. Page 624 James son to the King of Scotts taken.
Page 567. released of his imprisonment. Page 629 Jack Cade a rebel. Page 652.
Page 653 entered London. Page 659. pardoned. Page 661. beheaded. Page. 663 James
house purchased by the king Page 798 Ida first King of the Northumbers. Page
107 Jewels hanged and left in the high ways not touched but of the owners.
Page 127 Jews robbed. Page 220. imprisoned. Page 238. spoiled. Page 246. their
Synagogue. Page 262 Jews borne in England. Page 273. hanged Page. 275 Jew
drowned. Page 277. Jews spoiled. Page 278 Jews executed. Page 298. their
Synagogues destroyed. Page 301. banished. Page 304 Jews and Leapers poisoned
waters. Page 341 Iedworth in Scotland brent. Page 933 Jewels and Church Plate
called into the Kings hand. Page 10^7 Joseph of Aramath. ^7 John the Kings
son made Lord of Irelande. Page 294 John the Kings brother rebelled. Page
221. 223 John King. Page 230. divorced. Page 231. sommoned to the French
Court. Page 232. resigned the Crown and absolved. Page 243. crossed to
Jerusalem. Page 245. fled. Page 249. his treasure drowned. Page 250 John Eure
held lands in Scotland. Page 319 John Kirby hanged. Page 480 John Ball
hanged. Page 489 John Wraw hanged. Page 491 John Philpots worthiness^ Page 476.
Page 479. deceassed. Page 495 Murder in Westminster Church. Page 477 John
Northamptons sedition. Page 493 John Holand created Earl of Huntingto^. Page.
507 John Duke of Lancaster enters Spain. Page 500. made Duke of Aquitaine.
Page 510 marryeth Katherine Swinford. Page 518. dies. Page 530 John Gower.
Page 548 Sir I. Oldeastel co^uict. Page 584. executed Page 599 John Beaufort
made Duke of Somerset. Page. 647 John Dauy lost his hand in Cheap. Page. 713
John Duke of Bedford regent of France married Anne daughter to the Duke of
Burgoigne. Page 619 Saint John's in Smithfielde suppressed. Page. 1019 Ione
Butcher brent. Page 1047 I Will of Shepey. Page 115 I Will of Wight first christened.
Page 115 I Will of Ely besieged. Page 247 Ipswiche besieged. Page 198 Iron gunnes
first cast. Page 1026 Irelande inhabited. Page 28 Issue of William Conqueror
Page 167 Istleworth by the Thamis. Page 279 Isabel the Queen sent into France
returned and made an army against the King her husband. Page 348. she
besieged Bristow. Page 347 Ithancester, a City in East Sax. Page 99 Iuall
King. Page 30 Julius Frontinus a Roman. Page 45 Julius Agricola a Roman.
Page 45 Julius Seuerus a Roman. Page 54 Julius Amilianus. Page 64 Julius
Maximus. Page 64 Julius Philippus. Page 64 Iulianus Apostata. Page 71 Justices
punished. Page 304 Iustes at Lincoln. Page 405. at Windsore. Page 408. at
Woodstocke. Page 431. in Smithfielde. Page 459 Iustes in Smithfielde. Page 718.
at Richmont. Page 866. in the Tower of London. Page 874 Iur^rs on the Pillerie.
Page 718 Iusting of Chalengers. Page 1018 Iustes at Greenewich. Page 1006
Iustes at Westminster. Page 1151 Justices condemned. Page 507 Insurrection in
the North. Page 864 Ill May day. Page 923 Iuogo de Can a pastime at Court. Page
1096 Images brent at Chersie. Page 1013 Images forbidden. Page 1036 Image of
Thomas Becket defaced etc. Page 1110
K.
KInimacus king. Page 23 Kymarus king. Page 28 Kingdom of Northumberland. Page
87 Kentish Saxons. Page 89 Kings evil healed. Page 145 Kensham builded. Page
181 Kenelworth Priorie and Castle built. Page 181 Kenelworth Castle besieged.
Page 290. yielded. Page 291 Knighten guilde. Page 102 Knarisborow. Page 251
Kenington or Kingston Castle. Page 283 King of Man. Page 387 Kings a Prince and
other. Page 455 King Castle. Page 465 King and Queen of Denmark arrived in
England. Page 932 King Henry's marriage with Queen Katherine called in
question. Page 959 King Henry supreme head of the church Page. 978 King Henry
the eighte besieged Turwine. Page 898 Kings stable brent. Page 1003 King Henry
married Lady Jane. Page 1007 King Henry his gift to the City of London. Page
1034 Sir Edmund Kneuet araigned for striking one in the Court. Page 1021 King
Henry married Lady Anne of Cleave. Page 1017 King Henry Page 8. went to
Boloigne. Page 1029 Knights made by the Earl of Sussex. Page. 1144
L.
LAncaster builded. Page 28 Lanthony founded. Page 178 Late harvest. Page 364
Labastie in France brent by the Eng. Page 425 Lambert brent. Page 1014 Lambeth
Ferry drowned. Page 1010 Leil King. Page 21 Legion of the Romans. Page 21
Lecester built. Page 22. repaired. Page 130. Monastery. Page 206 Legetoun or
Lutone in Hertfordshire. Page. 129 Leedes Castle in Kent built. Page 163.
besieged Page. 342 Jews in Sussex. Page 172 Lesnes in Kent founded. Page 212
Jews arrived in England. Page 249. returned into France. Page 253 Legate put
to his shifts. Page 266 Leaden Hall builded. Page 649 Jews de Bruges Lord
Grantehuse made Earl of Winchester. Page 738 Legate from Rome. Page 959
Letanie in English. Page 1029 Llhanpatren Vaier Castle builded. Page 298
Licinius Valerianus. Page 64 Licinius Gallicinus. Page 64 Lichfielde an
Archbish. Sea. Page 105. 110. 130 Lincoln Minster founded. Page 109. a Bishops
Sea. Page 166. burned. Page 183. besieged. Page. 191 Lincoln College in
Oxford. Page 1217 Library at York. Page 112 Liganburge. Page 114 Limen a
River. Page 124 Lies taken and spoiled. Page 1028. besieged Page. 1115
Lincolneshire men executed. Page 1011 Liberties in Southwark purchased. Page
1046 Liberties of the Stilyarde seized. Page 1050 Lightning and thunder. Page
1121 London builded. Page 18. took name of Lud. Page 31. repaired and made
habitable. Page 124 empaired by fire. Page 134. brent. Page 166. Page 185. Page
187. bridge brent. Page 241 Liberties of London seized. Page 274. taken and
held by the Earl of Gloucester. Page 292. discourteous to the King. Page 512
Liberties seized. Page 513 London the Kings especial Chamber* Page. 814
Locrine King. Page 18 Lollius Vrbicus a Roman. Page 54 Lombards goods
confiscate. Page 376 Lord Cassels slain. Page 557* Love to King Henry the vij.
Page 861. 864 Lord Dacres of the North arraigned* Page. 1003 Lone of money to
the King. Page 861. 864 Lord of merry disportes. Page 1055 Lord of misrule.
Page 1055 Lock and key weyed but one wheat corn. Page 1195 Lud King repaired
London. Page 31 Ludgate builded. Page 31 Lucius King. Page 54. baptized. Page
55 Ludlow Castle taken. Page 285. town spoiled. Page 691
M.
MAdan King devoured. Page 19 Marcus Antonius. Page 64 Macrinus Emperor. Page
64 Maximius a Roman. Page 66 Maximus Emperor. Page 71 Malgo King. Page 87
Maldune in Estsex. Page 99. 129 Martins Church at Dover founded. Page 93. by
Ludgate. Page 88 Malmesbury builded. Page 115 Marius King. Page 58. ^^ew
Roderike King of Pictes. Page 54 Manchester repaired. Page 130 Mayor of London
repaireth to Paul's wherefore. Page 158. Page 219. yearly chosen. Page 237*
rowed to Westminster. Page 674. conseruer of the Thamis and Medway two Rivers.
Page 864. feast kept at the Guild hall. Page 874 Mawde the Empress. Page 190.
obtained the crown. Page 191. fled. Page 192. beseeged. Page 194. flies. Page
194. Walingford beseeged. Page 190. Page 195 Marleborough Castle beseeged.
Page 224* Mart at Westminster. Page 271 Mad Parliament. Page 276. at the new
Temple. Page 277 Martins Church in the Vintrey new builded. Page 309*
Margaret daughter to Edward the fourth married to the Duke of Burgoigne* Page.
719 Martin Swart. Page 863 Merchants of England received with procession. Page
872 Merchant Tailors. Page 876 Maltot. Page 490 Maid boiled in Smithfield. Page
102 Margraue and Marquess of Baden landed at Dover. Page 1127. returns out
of England. Page 1129 Memprisius King devoured. Page 19 Merianus King. Page 31
Mercians or middle* England. Page 88* 100 Medeshamsted now Peterborough. Page
101 Medway a River. Page 124. dry. Page 181 Measures reformed. Page 176 Men
brought from new found Islands. Page. 875 Men drowned at London bridge. Page
1059. again. Page 1067 Mercers Chapel in London. Page 292 Midleton or Milton
in Kent. Page 125 Min^s or coining places. Page 130. in Ireland. Page. 239
Michelney. Page 131 Minories without Aldgate founded. Page 306 Middleton in
Dorsetshire brent. Page 330 Michaels Church in Crooked lane builded. Page 462
Morgen King. Page 22 Mortality. Page 23. Page 336. more of kine. Page 340
Mother slew her son. Page 24 Morindus King devoured by a mo^ster. Page 28
Morgan King. Page 30 Mordred the Traitor slain. Page 86. his children slain.
Page 87 Monks. Page 1200. slain. Page 108 Monastery at Winchester founded.
Page 127 Monster. Page 235. 270 Monsters appear. Page 553. Monster. Page 1053
Monstrous birthes. Page 1117 Montgomery Castle founded. Page 258 Monasteries
rifled. Page 162. 307 Monmouth Castle rased. Page 286 Mortimer escaped out of
the tower. Page 346 Mortimer beheaded. Page 362 Maiden of God. Page 633. brent.
Page 634 Moving of the earth. Page 1150 Monks goods confiscate. Page 376
Mooregate of London builded. Page 587 Mercers prentises of London against the
Page 8^* strangers. Page 679 ^. Monox his alms deeds. Page 902 Mulmucius
King. Page 24 Muster of horssemen. Page 1050. again. Page 1052 Muster at
Greenewich by Londoners. Page. 1112 Merchant Tailors freeschoole founded. Page.
1116 Mary Rose a Ship drowned. Page 1032 Men brent in the Hedgehog a Ship.
Page 1031 Matthew Hamont an Heretic brent. Page 1195 Marmaduke Glouer hanged in
Cheap. Page. 1209 Monstrous child. Page 1212. 1213 Magdalen college in
Cambridge. Page 1220 Merton College in Oxford. Page 1221 Magdalen College in
Oxford. Page 1217 Magdalen Hall in Oxford. Page 1223 Mary Hall in Oxford. Page
1223 Michaell house in Cambridge. Page 1220
N.
NOble men that came with William Conqueror. Page 153 Names of Chantries
taken. Page 1006 Nero a Roman. Page 3^ Newcastell upon Tine founded. Page
172. the town drowned. Page 378 New Abbey by the Tower of London founded. Page
407 Newgate of London builded. Page 619. on fire. Page 1100 New Testament first
printed in english. Page. 967 Newman priest bare a faggot at Paul's Cross for
singing Mass with good Ale. Page 1010 New Coin. Page 1072* again. Page 1115.
again. Page. 1117 Newhauen by Bolleine won by the French. Page 1042
Nightwalkers in London did murder all they met. Page 209 Night as light as
the day. Page 1125 Norwich a Bishops see. Page 173. brent. Page 208. Page 294.
city walled. Page 315. steeple brent. Page 715. brent. Page 890 Notingham
brent. Page 191. beseeged. Page 198 Nonne Eaten founded. Page 206 Northampton
beseeged. Page 282 Noble of gold. Page 574 Newelme hospital. Page 652 Nuns
burnt in their Abbey. Page 121 Nelson executed. Page 1192 Newport town
ouerflowed. Page 1209 New College in Oxford. Page 1217 New Inn in Oxford.
Page 1223
O.
OCT auius Augustus a Roman. Page 34 Order of the Garter founded at Windsore.
Page 415 Ocation made by the D. of Buckingha^. Page 811. the same Duke of
Buckingham beheaded. Page 845 Otto of Bromswike chalengeth combat with John
Duke of Lancaster. Page 426 Owen Glendouerdew. Page 551. Page 557. his son
taken. Page 563 Owen Tewther brake out of Newgate. Page 640. beheaded. Page 709
Oxford builded. Page 20. an University. Page 127. Castle builded. Page 163.
forsaken. Page 237. Orial College in Oxforde. Page 1221 Out^rier and Bell man
for the day. Page 1123 Owes bridge borne down. Page 1126
P.
PArkes. Page 4 Policletus a Roman. Page 43 P^te a river in Eastsex. Page 99
Parliament at Winchester. Page 288. at Marleborow. Page 293. at Westminster.
Page 297. at Barwicke. Page 306. at Stepen^eth. Page 309. at Carelile. Page
319. at Northampton. Page 326. at York. Page 343. at Northampton. Page 358. at
Salisburie. Page 359. at Winchester. Page 360. at Notingham. Page 361. at
York. Page 367. at Northampton. Page 370. at London. Page 372* Page 374. at
Westminster. Page 381. at London. Page 386. at Westminster. Page 387. Page 420.
Page 427. Page 431. Page 458. Page 611. at London. Page 619. Page 624. of
Battes at Leycester. Page 629. at Westminster. Page 631. Page 636. at Bury.
Page 650. at Westminster. Page 664. at London. Page 679. at Couentrie. Page
691. at Westminster. Page 700. Page 713. Page 718. Page 738. Page 861. Page
86^* ^^t the Blackefriers. Page 932. 968 Paul's Church in London founded. Page
92. brent. Page 166. repaired ibidem, new work. Page 276. Page 335.
weathercocke blown down Page 878. new Schole. Page 894. steeple brent. Page
1116. gates blown open. Page 1128. Parson of Saint Mildreds brent. Page 859
Poultery prised. Page 310 Pageants new made in London. Page 930 Parishes in
England. Page 932. in London. Page. 1120 Paginton slain with a gonne. Page
1016 Palace at Westminster brent. Page 897 Patrike-Brumpton ouerturned. Page
1188 Penisellus King. Page 31 Petronius a Romayne. Page 44 Pertinax Emperor.
Page 58 Peter's Church in Cornehill a Bishops see. Page 56 Pellagius a Britayne.
Page 73. an heretic. Page 7^* confuted. Page 78 Peterborow founded. Page 101
Peterpence paid to Rome. Page 116 Pestilence great in England. Page 405
Pestilence. Page 568 Saint Petro^us at Bodmin in Cornwall. Page 131
Pestilence. Page 271. Page 478. Page 510. Page 747. Page 166. Page 172
Peterborow burned. Page 182 Peter of Pomfret. Page 241. hanged. Page 243 Peter
College. Page 1216 Pierce Plowman his visions. Page 387 Peterpence forbidden
to be paid. Page 461 Penbroke hall. Page 1217 Pecocke Bishop of Chichester
abiured. Page. 682 Perkin Werbecke. Page 825. Page 868. Page 869. Page 871.
hanged. Page 873 Philip king of Castile landed in England. Page 878 Pictes
first inhabit the marches. Page 28 Pickering builded. Page 30 Pirthus king.
Page 31 Pilton priorie. Page 131 Piked shoes forbidden. Page 717 Pirates
hanged. Page 271 Privileges unto Saint Edmondsbury. Page. 131 Priests married
removed. Page 163 Priest at Mass slain with thunder. Page 208 Priests became
thieves. Page 460 Prisoners in Newgate and Ludgate dyed. Page. 586 Porchester
builded. Page 28 Porrex king. Page 30 Portgreues of London. Page 218 Porter of
the Tower headed. Page 586 Posterne by the Tower of London fell. Page. 642
Prodigious signs. Page 31 Portesmouth. Page 84 Popes authority abrogated.
Page 1003 Powled heads commanded. Page 1004 Prouosts of London. Page 218
Provincial counsel at Oxford. Page 255 Proclamation against the family of
love. Page 1213 Prince of Wales the kings eldest son. Page 311 Privilege to
Clothworkers. Page 373 Priorie and hospital of Saint Bartholmew in Smithfield
founded. Page 178 Printing first. Page 687 Preached at Paul's Cross Doctor
Goddard. Page 724 Prisoners of the Marshalsea brake out. Page 877 Priests
saying Mass apprehended. Page 1177 Priories suppressed by Cardinal Wolsey.
Page 939 Prince Arthur married. Page 874. deceassed. ibidem. Prisoner brake
from the sessio^s house. Page 959 Prince of Piamont came into England. Page.
1095 Prince of Orange conducted to the Tower of London. Page 1095 Publicans
whipped. Page 203 Publicans with their bloody procession. Page 409 Plimmouth
spoiled. Page 556
Q.
QVatbridge or Catwarbridge in Essex. Page 126 Quaffing and drunkenness
punished. Page 133 Queeneheth in London. Page 270 Queens Attorney slain.
Page 685 Queeneborough Castle builded. Page 461 Queen took Sanctuary. Page
724. 767 Queen of England chased. Page 279 Queens College in Cambridge. Page
1217 Queens College in Oxford. Page 1221
R.
RAmsey founded. Page 133 Rampire builded at Caleis. Page 401 Ralph Stafford
slain. Page 498 Redargius King. Page 31 Rebellion in Kent and Essex. Page 480
Recorder of London Fitz William. Page 817 Register book in every Church to be
kept. Page 113 Religious houses granted to the king. Page. 1015 Rimo King.
Page 30 Richborough. Page 36 Riot and evil life the destruction of the
Britains. Page 79 Ripendun or Ripon. Page 122 Richard the first King. Page
216. took his voyage to Jerusalem. Page 220. taken prisoner. Page 222.
builded the walls of Vienna. Page 223 Riot in London. Page 292 Risebanke
Castle builded. Page 403 Rye spoiled. Page 471 Richard Scrope Archbishop of
York rebelleth. Page 563 beheaded. Page 564 Richard the second made prince of
Wales. Page 468. crowned King. Page 470. married. Page 489. Page 518. enters
Scotland. Page 497. Page 498. arriueth in Ireland. Page 517. Page 530.
returns again. Page 533. betrayed and taken. Page 537. brought to the Tower.
Page 539. murdered ^^6. buried. Page 584 Richard Which brent. Page 642 Richard
D. of York wrote to Henry the sixth. Page 666. sworn to H. the Page 6. Page
672. attainted. Page 691. his articles. Page 693. slain. Page 707 Richard
Plantagenet made Duke of Gloucester. Page 713 Richard Duke of Gloucester
described. Page 755. made Protector. Page 770. his oration. Page 771. his
proclamation. Page 796. takes on him to be King. Page 822. crowned. Page 825.
slain at Bosworth field. Page 857. buried at Leycester. Page 858 Riuallo King.
Page 23 Ripendune a Town. Page 105 Richmond builded. Page 874 Rodianus King.
Page 31 Rochester Castle builded. Page 34. beseeged. Page 124. brent. Page
185. Page 188. Page 212. beseeged. Page 246 Page 283. bridge of stone builded.
Page 569 Rome builded. Page 23. spoiled by the Goths 76. sacked. Page 938
Round table. Page 81 Robert Duke of Normandy went to Jerusalem. Page 173. had
tribute of King Henry. Page 177 Rosamond concubine to Henry the second. Page
212 Robert Fitz Stephen entered Irelande. Page 206 ransomed. Page 224. wounded
to death. Page 229 Robert hoode. Page 217 Robert Fitz Water valiant. Page 242
Roger Bacon. Page 263 Robert Grosted. Page 270. 275 Rotte of Sheep. Page 297
Round table at Killingworth. Page 298 Robert Fitz Water Baner bearer of London.
Page 311 Roades won by the Christians. Page 332 Round table at Windesore.
Page 389 Robert Knolles. Page 425. 456. 464 Robert Vere created Duke of
Ireland. Page 501. flies. Page 504. buried. Page 518 Sir Robert Knolles dies.
Page 568 Roane beseeged. Page 600 Roger Bolingbroke abiured at Paul's Cross.
Page 644. endited of treason. Page 645. executed. Page 646 Rose of gold. Page
650 Robin of Ridsdale. Page 722 Roger Shaueloke slew himself. Page 865 Roode
of Grace showed at Paul's. Page 1012 Royalexchange when so first named. Page
1150 John Rogers brent. Page 1096 Rudhudibras King. Page 21 Runcorne town and
Castle builded. Page 130
S.
SAmulius King. Page 31 Saxons sent for by the Britons. Page 80. described.
Page 147 Salisburie the old builded. Page 34. Page 114. the new Town and
Church. Page 262. bre^t. Page 264 Sanctuary me^ fet out of Saint Martins,
Sanctuary men frayed with the Londoners. Page 674. by the Sheriffs of London.
Page 643 Sandwich spoiled. Page 682 Sermons at Saint Mary Spittle, the Mayor of
London with his breethrea placed there. Page 746 Serieants feast. Page 716.
Page 869. Page 876. Page 895. Page 1054. Page 1192. Page 1213 Sanctuary abused.
Page 776. Sanctuary men executed. Page 867 Sanders murdered. Page 1167
Scotland described. Page 4 School of Englishmen at Rome. Page 119 Scholars of
Oxford did penance. Page 266. against the burgesses. Page 281. went to
Stamford. Page 369 Scholars of Cambridge against the townsmen. Page 272
Scotts did homage. Page 170. Page 177. Page 231. Page 367. deliver Scotland to
King Edward the first. Page 305. brent the suburbs of York. Page 340. resigned
the crown of Scotland to King Edward the third. Page 365. enter
Northumberland. Page 492. Page 499. Page 508. Page 551. overthrown. Page 1026.
their King murdered. Page 1131 Scarcity of bread. Page 952 Seuerne a River.
Page 19 Seuerus Emperor. Page 58. died in Britain. Page 60 Seuerus Alexander.
Page 64 Selbey a Bishops see. Page 95 Sebba of a King became a Monk in Paul's
Church, and was there buried. Page. 100 Serpent with two heads. Page 409
Seuenoke Mayor of London a fondling. Page 602 Sebastion Gabbato his voyage.
Page 872. brought men from the new lla^ds. Page 875 Shaftesburie builded. Page
21. Monastery founded. Page 127 Shrewsbury repaired. Page 130 Shepherds
assembled. Page 274 Sheep transposed. Page 717 Shores wife her description.
Page 798 Shaw Mayor of London, and his brother a Doctor. Page 801. his sermon.
Page 808 Shine brent. Page 871. builded. Page 874. brent. Page 878. Gallery
fell. Page 879 Sheriffs of London sent to the Tower. Page 1025 Siluius King.
Page 31 Seege of Hadington. Page 1038 Small houses suppressed. Page 1006 South
Saxons. Page 84. 93 Sons appeared five in number. Page 263 Southampton. Page
36. sacked and burnt by the french. Page 376 Stamford builded. Page 22. an
University. Page 22. beseeged. Page 198 Somerset an Herald killed. Page 1026
Stafford repaired. Page 130 Stephen King. Page 187. taken. Page 191. delivered.
Page 193. fled. Page 194 Standard in Cheap. Page 635 Stephen Langton. Page 236
Stortford Castle overthrown. Page 239 Story executed. Page 1151 Strangers
drowned. Page 247. robbed. Page 271. lodged within English hosts. Page 624.
and. Page 642 Strange Star appeared. Page 1163. blasing Star. Page 1213
Statutes of Marton. Page 266 States crea. Page 1012. 1015. 1036. 1045. 1050
Streets of London cheyned. Page 279 Steeeple of Bow in Cheap fell down.
Page. 294 Stocks market in London. Page 300 Stoneheng. Page 84 Steeple at
Waltham brent. Page 647 Steeple of Paul's in London, of Baldoke in
Hartfordshire, and of Walden in Essex, and Kingsto^ in Surrey on sire. Page 648
Strumpets set on the Pillorie. Page 641. banished. Page 738 Stoke field. Page
863 Stews in Southwarke put down. Page. 1033 Suetonius a Roman. Page 39
Sudbury in Suffolk. Page 125 Swanescoupe or Swanescombe in Kent. Page. 150
Survey of all England. Page 388 Subsidy. Page 465. 624. 631 Sweating
sickness. Page 860. 923. 1049 Saint Germans in Cornwall a Bishops see. Page
131. 132 Saint Nicholas at Excester founded. Page. 166 Saint Martins le graund
founded. Page 166 Saint John's in Colchester founded. Page. 179 Saint Andrew in
Northampton founded. Page 179 Saint John's in Smithfield. Page 177 Saint
Stephens Chapel at Westminster. Page 428 Saint Nicholas Mount kept by the
Earl of Oxford. Page 738 Souldyers transported into Irelande. Page. 1131
Sprite in a wall. Page 1092 Saint John's College in Oxforde. Page. 1223
Spanyard hanged. Page 1093 Snow deep. Page 1194 Stranger would have murdered
the keeper of Newgate. Page 1103 Saint Mary Hall in Oxford. Page 1223 Ship
chased to the Tower Wharffe of London. Sherewood executed. Page 1193 Suite to
the Court of Rome forbidden. Page 969
T.
TAcitus. Page 64 Tamworth repaired. Page 130 Tax great. Page 165. 478. 480.
557 Tax of the tenth penny granted to the King. Page 864 Tanners son
claymed the Crown. Page. 336 Tenthes given too the Church. Page. 119 Templers
Knights. Page 183 Temple new in London. Page 214 Templers apprehended. Page
326. condemned. Page 330. brent. Page 331 Term kept at Harford. Page 1122
Thamis a River described. Page 3. dried. Page 181. Page 202. frozen. Page 1126
Theomantius King. Page 34 Theodotius Emperor. Page 76 Thewkesbury founded.
Page 102 Thilwall built. Page 130 Thetford a Bishops see. Page 166 Thomas
Becket Chancellor. Page 201. took his oath to the King, and was made
Chancellor. Page 203 fled. Page 204. murdered. Page 207 Thieves in prison
devoured one the other. Page 336 Thieves like unto friars. Page 338 Thomas
Earl of Lancaster beheaded. Page 343 Thomas of Woodstoke created Earl of
Buckingham. Page 471 Thomas the bastard. Page 729. beheaded. Page 736. Thomas
Wolsey Bacheler of Art at fiftene years of age. Page 904. Scholemaister to the
Marquis Dorsets children. ibid. gat a benefice. ibid. set in the stocks by Sir
James Paulet. Page 905. revenged his imprisonmente. ibid. Chaplen to Sir John
Naphant. ibid. Chaplen to King Henry the vij. ibid. Ambassadoure to the
Emperor. Page 906. Deane of Lincoln. Page 908. Kings Almoner. ibid. of the
privy Counsel to King Henry the etght. ibid. Bishop of Turney. Page 901.
Bishop of Lincoln. ibid. Archbishop of York. ibid. Cardinal. Page 911. Lord
Chancellor. Page 912. Bishop of Winchester. ibid. Ambassador the second
time. Page 916. rides to meet the Emperor. Page 390. suppressed priorys to
build his Colleges in Oxford and in Ipswich. Page 939. sent Ambassadoure the
third time. Page 929. his pompous riding. Page 943. declares in the Star
Chamber what honorable peace he had concluded. Page 932. discharged of the
great Seal Page 966. arrested. Page 972. sickneth. Page 974. deceaseth at
Leicester. Page 978 S. Thomas Moore made Chancellor. Page 967 discharged of
the Chancellership. Page 980 beheaded. Page 1004 R. Thorn his charity in
London. Page 979. in the town of Bristoll. ibid. Thomas Mowbrey created Earl
of Notingham. Page 471 Thomas Mawbrey created Duke of Norffolke. Page 527.
banished. Page 529. dies. Page 544. Threfold plague to the citizens of L. Page
1121 Tilbery in Essex. Page 99 Title of Edw. the third to France. Page 358
Tower of London built. Page 27. Page 34. fortified Page 267. bulwarks fell
down. Page 268. yielded to the Mayor of London. Page 725 Toceter repaired. Page
129 Toades devour a man. Page 213 Tower on London Bridge. Page 630. fell. Page
640 Tourney within the tower of London. Page 874 Trebonianus. Page 64 Trent a
River. Page 122. dried up. Page 180 Triumph at London for the victory against
the Scotts. Page 309 Traitor to his master miserably ended. Page. 845 Tree of
common wealth a book, by whom compyled. Page 895 Traiterous fact of Tho.
Apeltree. Page 1196 Tweede a River. Page 4. 5 Teukesbury builded. Page 165
Tun in Cornehill. Page 300. 309 Turnebull challenges the combat. Page 365.
and is overcome. Page 266 Turneame^t at Dertford, and in Cheap of London. Page
363 Turwin yielded to King Henry the viij. Page 899. raced and burnt. Page 900
Turney beseeged by K. H. the viij. Page 900 Thomas Gressham Knight deceassed.
Page. 1209 Trinity Hall in Cambridge. Page 1217. College. Page 1220
V.
VIgenius and Peridurus kings. Page 30 Vrianus king. Page 30 Vespatian a
Roman. Page 37. 45 Vectius Volanus a Roman. Page 44 Valerius. Page 65
Verolamium a City. Page 65 Valerius Maximus. Page 66 Valentinian Emperor*
Page 71 Vrsula the Virgin. Page 72 Vortiger king. Page 77 Viher Pondragon
king. Page 84 Vortiporus king. Page 87 Vffa first king of Eastangles. Page 96
Vulfrune Hampton in Staffordshiere. Page 128 Vale royal founded. Page 301
Victuals prised. Page 335 Vicar of Wandsworth and others executed. Page 1016
Voyage to Muscouie. Page 1056
W.
WAles discribed. Page 16 Ways four begone Page 24. finished. Page 27 Warwick
builded. Page 28. repaired. Page 130. Warwike town, Castle, College. Page 183
Castle new builded. Page 206 Walebrooke. Page 67 Walls about Colchester
builded. Page 69 Walls about London builded. Page 69. repaired. Page 246.
276. 746. Wall of Adrine. Page 54. of turfe. Page 59, Page 75. of stone. Page
76 Walls of Vienna built by King Richard the first. Page 223 Wales invaded by
William Rufus. Page 173. Waltham in Essex. Page 147 Watrisburie repaired. Page
130 Warham Castle. Page 122 Warwel builded. Page 134 Ware in Hartfordshire
builded by the Danes. Page 126 Water Dome. Page 210 Warren and Toll free to the
Citizens of London. Page 250 Walter Stapleton Bishop of Excester beheaded. Page
349 Wards in London discharged of fifteens. Page 630. 722 Water fludde. Page
166. 306. 370 Watch at Midsomer again used. Page 1038. on Saint Peter's even.
Page 1122 Warwike Earl went against the Rebels at Norwich. Page 1042 War
with France. Page 1104 Westminster founded. Page 98. reedified. Page 254
enlarged. Page 270. Church and Palace brent. Page 309 Worcester a Bishops
Sea. Page 102 Westminster Hall builded. Page 174. repaired. Page 527.
ouerflowed with water. Page 1119 Westminster and Bristol made Bishopprickes.
Page 1024 West Saxons. Page 113 West Cheap in London brent. Page 285 Welchmen
rebel. Page 547 Wels a College founded. Page 116. Cathedral Church builded.
Page 117 Whitington a place so called. Page 121 Winburne. Page 121 Wheat at
twelve pence a quarter. Page 302 Wheat forbidden to be made in malte. Page.
337 Whit meats allowed to be eaten in Lent. Page. 1026 Whot Summer, corn
cheap. Page 303 Winchester builded. Page 21 Wilfride Bishop. Page 94
Winchelcombe founded. Page 106 Wibandune. Page 114 Winchester a Bishops Sea.
Page 115. College builded. Page 561 Wigmore repaired. Page 129 Wilton in
Wiltshire. Page 122 Wily a river. Page 122 Witham in Essex. Page 129 Winchester
brent. Page 177. 192 William Rufus king. Page 168. slain. Page 174. Winchelsey
drowned. Page 273 William Bishop of London. Page 159 Wight taken Page 471.
invaded. Page 557 William with the beard. Page 226 William Searle executed.
Page 558 Waters ouerflowe. Page 560 Wines prised. Page 231. 501 William Wikham
Bishop of Winchester. Page. 561 Wiclife. Page 469 William Fitz. Will. being
elected Sheriff of London and absenting himself disfranchised. Page 895 William
Stafford made Earl of Deuonshiere. Page 713 Will Herbert made Earl of Pe^broke.
Page 713 Wiats commotion in Kent. Page 1078. came into Southwarke. Page 1081.
removed out of Southwark. Page 1082. taken. Page 1086. sent to the Tower. Page
1087. beheaded. Page 1071 W. Wales of Scotland brought to London, and executed
to death. Page 316 Winds great. Page 641 Which of Ey brent. Page 645
Wlfrunhampton. Page 890 Worcester restored. Page 133. brent. Page 181 Worcester
defaced by fire. Page 185. Page 190. befieged. Page 196. and. Page 282
Woodnesfielde in Staffordshire. Page 128 Wolves destroyed in England. Page 133
Wolf and his wife hanged. Page 1002 Wool staple at Sandwich. Page 305 Wool
forbidden to be conveyed over the Seas. Page 373 Wool staple in England. Page
428. 463 Wool staple at Calaice. Page 459 Woman burnt at Maydstone for
poisoning her husband. Page 1154 Wonders in Wiltshire. Page 1211 Wrestling at
London. Page 256
Y.
York builded. Page 20. Minster founded. Page. 109 York taken by the Danes
and Normans. Page 125. brent. Page 161 York sore perished by fire. Page 188.
brent. Page. 212 York Minster brent. Page 715 Younger brother beguileth the
elder. Page 178 Younger brother imprisoneth the elder and puts out his eyes.
Page 179 Younger brother falsely accuses his elder brother. Page 227
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing*
Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. 18 11 of a vertidian vert a Diana 18 12
fichule fechel 18 13 Archiuis Architremio 20 16. 17 now called omit (now) 20 23
namely now ^6 6 Brutus Brennus 32 30 Saeua Scaua 32 35 Saeua Scaua 35 9
filthyly fealty 36 9 Monrigus Menrigus 56 30 Clauus Eluanus 56 32 Erwydes
Drewydes 64 36 stangled strangled 98 33 Eucius Lucius 102 23 Verche Vtriche 255
3 Oswards Oswalds 272 21 at Wales in Wales 280 14 Winchester Worcester 371 28
Biphingdon Biphingdon 406 37 Nicholas Michaell 490 36 ordained as ordained
Cha^cellor as 515 21 Albeit Aubrey 515 26 Euers Deuerois 540 35 Diamonde
demand 562 10 wards wooddes 604 4 Wellam Pellam 633 6 nineteen nine 636 19
long buried long since buried 640 7 Friars Quier 734 14 xi. xl. 749 32 Capriex
Captiet 817 33 them to to them 859 16 Sherenton Sherehuttun 860 13 Thomas Mayor
Thomas Hill Mayor 865 14 Stratford of y^ La^gthorne Stratford Langthorne 867 22
and some his and some of his 867 25 repriued repried 932 8 Seretarie Secondarie
935 21 should, he should seem, he 937 28 burned* turned. 1033 15 as many xv.
1090 28 Sudley Saint Sudley at Saint 1^99 30 Relianes Rodeloftes 1185 35
Charterhouse Chapterhouse 110^ 7 Redike Dedike 1188 19 now sense 1101 18 Clober
Cleber 1215 1 sovereign savior


