An Assertion For true and Christian Church-Policie.

Wherein certain politic objections made against the planting of Pastors and
Elders in every Con gregation, are sufficiently answered. And wherein also
sundry projectes are set down, how the Discipline by Pastors and Elders may
be planted, without any derogation to the Kings Royal prerogative, any
indignity to the three Estates in Parleament, or any greater alteration of the
laudable Laws, Statutes, or Customs of the Realm, then may well be made
without damage to the people.

1604.

An assertion for true and Christian Church-Policie: Wherein certain politic
objections made against the pla^ting of Pastors and Elders in every
Congregation, are sufficiently answered. And wherein also sundry proiectes
are set down, how the Discipline by Pastors and Elders may be planted,
without any derogation to the Kings Royal prerogative, etc.
Admonition.
THe reason that moves us, not to like, of this platform of Page 77.
government, is, that when we, on the one part, consider the things that are
required to be redressed; and on the other, the state of our country people,
and common weal, we see evidently that to plant those things in this Church,
will draw with it so many and so great alterations, of the state of government,
and of the laws, as the atte^pting thereof, might bring rather the overthrow of
the Gospel among us, then the end that is desired.

Assertion.
The benefit of all exceptions, and advantages, to the invalidity, uncertainty,
imperfections, and infufficie^cy, of this admonitory bill, and matters therein
contained, always saved; for answer to so much as concerns this clause,
and every other clause, and article, of the bill hereafter following, and
without that, that there is any matter, or thing, in the same bill, or
admonition material, to be answered unto, and not herein, or hereby
sufficiently answered, confessed, and avoided, traversed and deemed is true, in
such manner and form, as in the same is set forth, and declared; the defendant
is ready to aver, maintain, and prove his answer, as shall please the King,
to award, and to command. And therefore he most humbly beseeches the King,
if it please the King, and that he have found favor in his sight, that his
exceptions may be admitted, and read, and that his counsel, learned in the
law, may be heard, and suffered to speak.

This platform of government, intended Book of com. pray. tit. commination.
Homil. 2. part. of the right use of the Church. Admo. page whitgift page 654.
M. Nowell in his cathe. M. Calvin. M. Iunius. look Petic. to her excellent
May. page 11.
by the admonitor, not to be liked of in this place, is that platform of
Church government, by Pastors and Elders which the book of common Prayer,
the doctrine of the Church of England do highly command, and which he him
self Mr. D. Whitgift, now Lord Archbishop of Canturbury, and very many other
c reverend Divines of our age, do publickely confess in their writings, to
have been practiced by the Apostles, and primitive Church. From whence it
follows that the government of the church, by Archbishops, Bishops,
Suffraganes, Archdeacons, Deacons, Chancelours, Commissaries and Officialls,
now already planted and liked of, was not practiced by the Apostles, and
primitive Church. And therefore for my part, I can not, but marvel, that a
disciple of the Apostles doctrine, and a successor in the Apostles Chair,
should be drawn by humane reasons, not to like of the Apostles government, nor
to tread in the steps of the primitive church. For seeing the same is
acknowledged by himself to be the first way, to be the old and ancient way,
as being the Apostles way, why should we not Iere. 6. 16.
walk therein, as in the only good and perfect way? The reverend Bishops
will not deny, that the Apostles, and primitive Church for their manner of
government, had the mind of Christ, and that we should follow the Apostles, as
having them for examples, because they were the followers of Christ. Again
they can not but grant, that the manner of government, practiced by the
Apostles and primitive church, is written within the book of the covenants of
grace. All which notwithstanding we see in this place that from the new
Testament, from the articles of grace, from the law, from the testimony, from
the example of the Apostles, and from the mind of Christ, we are addressed and
turned over to our state of government, to our country, to our people, to our
common weal, and to our laws. But this turning of devises shall it not be
esteemed, as the potters Isaiah. 29 16.
clay?

But (says he) to plant those things in this church, which are required to be
redressed, might bring rather the overthrow of the Gospel, then the end, that
is desired. Indeed (say I) if this might be as soon proved, as it was soon
said, the case might have gone well with him. But this parable is so dark,
that (unless it be opened) there is no light at all to be seen in it. For he
well knew, that in steed of the government practiced by the Apostles and
primitive church, the jurisdiction of Archbishops, Bishops, Suffraganes,
Deacons, Archdeacons, Chancelours, Commissaries and Officials, is already
planted in this church: And he was not ignorant also that the same jurisdiction
only, and none other, is required to be redressed. Now then if request be
made, that this manner of government be redressed, how can it evidently be
seen that to plant that manner of government, might bring rather the overthrow
of the Gospel, then the end that is desired? But it may be that he meant more
lightsomely then he spoke. Yea let it be, that he intended thus: viz. to
vnplant that, which is now planted, and to plant those things, which are yet
unplanted (by reason of many and great alterations) might bring rather an
overthrow of the Gospel, then the end that is desired; well (I say) be it so,
that he thus meant. How is this thing evidently seen, or how can it evidently
be proved? The best sight, that the servant of Christ can have, is faith. For
Faith is an evidence of things which are not seen. Heb. 11.
This overthrow then of the Gospel, not being seen with his bodily eyes, must
needs be intended to have been seen with the eyes of his faith. But where is
that word of Christ, whereupon the eyes of his faith were fixed? If then he
hold no word of faith, then of necessity was his evident sight, but an evident
fancy. And in deed what else could it be? For what other thing is there
desired, to be planted in this church, but only the Apostolical government
of Christ? And what other Gospel could he evidently see, that might be
overthrown by holding forth this scepter, but only the Apostolical doctrine
of Christ? A merveylous strange and unkind sight, (I trow) to be seen, that
the Apostolical government could no sooner be planted, but that the
Apostolical doctrine must needs be rooted up. That Christ by his own scepter,
were not able to maintain his own grace, by his own order, should weaken his
own oath, or by his own sword, should cut from the people of God, his own
word. But seeing it was his purpose to persuade the people unto a dislike of
the Apostolical government, by arguments and reasons drawn from humane
policy, rather then to confirm them in a good opinion of the prelaticall
government, by proofs taken from the authority of holy Scripture, we will
follow him in this his vein. Yea, and by the help of God, we will try of
what efficacy, such his politic and humane reasons may be, as wherewith he
did assaye, to dissuade the people from consenting unto any other manner of
Church gouerme^t, then is already settled among us. The general effect of all
which, both here and else where spoken of, by him briefly gathered, is this:
Such things may not be planted in the Church of England, as by attempting, the
planting wherrof, there is an evident sight, that the Gospel among us, may be
overthrown.

But there is an evident sight, that the Gospel among us, may be ouerthrown,
by attempting, to plant that gouerme^t in the church of England, which was
practiced by the Apostles and primitive Church, therefore that manner of
government may not be planted.

The assumption of which sillogisme, he endeavors to confirm thus,
whatsoever will draw with it, many, and great alterations of the state of
government, and of the laws, the same may bring rather the overthrow of the
Gospel, then the end that is desired: but the planting of the government
practiced by the Apostles and primitive church, will draw with it, many and
great alterations, of the state of government and of the laws.

Therefore the planting of this manner of government may rather bring an
overthrow of the Gospel, etc.



If any shall object that by thus gathering his argument, I had in this place
falsified his argument, by adding more, then is here expressly uttered by him:
let such one understand, that this charge is but a mere and needless cavil.
For sithence both here, and throughout his book, his intent was to dispute for
the government already received, against the government, which is required, to be
planted, in the Church: And for so much also, as none other government, is
required to be planted, but that only government, which was practiced, by the
Apostles and primitive Church, it must necessarily follow, that the arrows,
which he shot against the government, required to be planted, were shot only
against the government which was practiced by the Apostles, and primitive
Church. And therefore there can be no just charge of any falsification, used
in the gathering of his arguments. Against which I argue as follows:
Whatsoever will draw with it no alterations of the state of government, and but
few, or small alterations of the laws, the same may rather bring the end, that
is desired, viz: a godly peace, and Christian unity both in Church and common
weal, then the overthrow of the Gospel among us.

But the planting of the gouerme^t practiced by the Apostles and primitive
Church, will draw with it no alteration, of the state of government, and but few
or small alterations of the laws.

Therefore the planting of the government practiced by the Apostles, and
primitive Church, may rather bring the end that is desired, viz: a godly peace
and christian unity, both in church and common weal, then the overthrow of
the Gospel among us.



The truth of which argument will the^ appear, when the Admonitors argument
shall be convinced of error: for the disproofe of the one, is the proof of the
other, and if his fall, then can not this but follow. And touching the
invalidity of the first proposition, of his second sillogisme, we affirm, that
the alterations, of the state of government, and of the laws (be they never so
many and never so great) can never bring any overthrow of the Gospel, if the
same alterations, be made, for the planting of the Gospel. For the laws once
altered, can overthrow naught, because they are then no more laws. And to say,
that the Gospel once planted by authority of new laws, ca^ be overthrown by
the same laws, is more absurd. For the new laws give life to the enterteyning
of the Gospel, by means whereof, the Gospel, can not discontinue, so long as
those laws continue. And herevpo^ also it follows, that no alteration of
laws, for sweeping, and clensing of the Church, for casting, and whippyng
buiers and sellers, and choppers of churches, out of the Church, can overthrow
the Gospel. For if all dross, filth, and corruption, be cast out; if all
lets, and impediments, be done a way, it can not be but that the Gospel, must
needs have a freer, and larger passage, as whereunto, a wider door can not be,
but opened, for the bringing in of a more plentiful harvest. And if the Church
be beautiful as Tyrsa, and comely as Jerusalem, if she Solo. Song 6. 3. 4.
look as the morning, If she be fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, and
terrible as an army, then is she set as a seal on the Lords heart, and as a
signet upon his arm, and then shall the coals of his ^elouzie be as fiery
coals, and as a vehement flame, that much water shall never quench it, nor any
floods ever drown ^t. But if he should rather mean, that ^he alterations of
the state of government, would be so many and so great, as that thereupon he
did strongly imagine, ^uidentlie to see the overthrow of the Gospel, then we
say that no state of government, can ever undergo, either many, or few, either
small, or great alterations, unless by alteration of laws made by the same
state of gouerme^t, the same (...) of government be altered. Now (...) if our
politic state of government, (whereof he must needs speak, for otherwise his
speech were to no purpose) to amend and reform abuses in it self, may justly
put it self under the yoke of a new law, (as it has done and daily does
unto many new laws) and so in this respect, after a sort, in some part alter
it self (for every reformation is a kind of alteration) without any damage,
hazard, or prejudice to it self, if (I say) this may well be so, what a silly
skarr crow, is there here, brought into the field, to fray our politic state
of gouuerment, from attempting a reformation in the Church? Belike he knew some
to feign, that our state of gouerme^t, must necessarily fancy, whatsoever they
fancy. And namely that a reformation of the Church, can not but infer a
desolation of the State: or that the State can not be well ordered, except it
suffer the Church to be disordered, or that the Church could not be fair,
well favored, and in good plight, but the state of our country, people, and
common weal, must be foul, ill favored and out of heart; or lastly that the
State can not lance, bind, draw, and heal up the sores, wounds, and
contagions of the church, but it must with all fester, infect, and poison it
self. All which how unsavory and void of all sense it is, I leave to the
judgment, both of the state, and of the Church. For who sees not, but that
the state of politic government, may wholly alter the state of church
government, and not so much as alter one least jot, of the politic state of
government it self? Besides, since our state of politic government, has in
our days, and before our eyes, repealed very many old laws, and disavowed
sundry ancient customs, to enterteyne, and harbor the Gospel, must our state
of politic government, no sooner now attempt, to repair certain breaches,
made into the vineyarde, but it must straight ways, root up, that which it
has planted, and pull down that, which it has builded? He that diggeth
about, and dungeth, he that spreads and pru^eth the root^ and branches of a
tree, does he not rather quicken, then kill the root? and does he not rather
cause the boughs, to sprought, then the body to wither? Can seven times
trying, and fining of gold, breed a canker in gold: or may a river be dreyned
dry, by one, who shuts not, but opens the springs? The body of a
corpulent, and diseased man, the more it is purged, the more full of health it
is, and of better constitution. And how then can it be concluded, that the
Gospel, the life and soul of the Church, can la^guish, and give up the goast,
when the Church; for the better preservatio^ of her health, shall receive by
some new and wholesome law, some new and wholesome purgative receite?
Moreover, for so much as here is mention made, how the publishers of this
book, did consider on the one part, of things that were required to be
redressed, and on the other side, of things required to be planted, together
with the state of our country, people, and common weal; it is plain, that
their resolution was rather still to continue things amiss, in the Church
vnredressed, then to plant the things required, to be planted. And alas what a
resolution was that among pillars and Fathers (for so they will be counted) of
the church? Especially, when as the things required to be redressed, were
required to be redressed at the hands of the whole state of government, that is
at the hands of the Queen, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and commons in
open Parliament assembled. And could any damage (I pray you) have ensued to the
state of government, to the state of the Queen, to the state of our country,
people, common weal, and laws, or to the state of the Gospel, if things
amiss in the Church, had been redressed, and things wanting in the Church,
had been planted, by so high, and supreme a power? I trow not. Nay seeing our
country, people, and common weal, not only once, and twice, and thrice, but
many times, have humbly and earnestly prayed, and solicited in open
Parleame^t, a redress of things amiss in the church, is it not most evide^t,
that things were not considered a right but amiss by these fathers of the
church? and that the co^siderers by keeping things vnpla^ted, rather aimed at
their own profit, honor, and dignity, the^ that our country, people, and
common weal, should fare the better, by having things amiss, to be redressed?
The co^siderers then being them selves parties, yea and such parties as by whom
things were carried amiss, in the Church, and whose defects only were required
to be redressed: no marveyle (I say) if they used all kind of artificial
advisement and consideration, to keep things still unplanted, by the planting
whereof their own vnfatherlie miscariadges, must have been reformed.

On the other side, if things required to be planted, might in deed be once
planted, how soever happily our former Church Officers, might be somewhat
mal-co^tented, and discouraged, to have their superfluities pared, and the edge
of their swords abated, yet is there no least cause at all, for our country,
people, and common weal, to fear any trouble, or hurly burly among us. For if
the hand of God be in Judah, so that he give the 2 Chronicles. 30. 12.
people one heart, to do the commandment of the King, and of the Rulers,
according to the word of the Lord, and if the King, the Nobles and commons
shall condescend and agree in one, and if their voices shall be all, but as the
voice of one man, to allow and approve that, which does touch and concern
them all, then shall neither the Nobles have any occasion to disdain the
commons, nor the commons any reason to envy the Nobles. Much less can the
Nobles be at variance with the Nobles, nor the commons be at defiance with the
Commons. For they be all of them so prudent, and so provident, as that they
will not bite one another, least they should be devoured one of the other. And
in deed, why should any of our Cleargy-Maisters be so void of judgment, as to
deny the Nobles and Commons, after four and forty years experience, of a
most prosperous peace, weighting upon the Gospel, to be now grown so
uncircumspect and simple vvitted, as that a reformation of disorders to be made
by their consents in others, should bring forth a confusion in them selves?
What? will they bicker one with the other, will they beat, and buffet one
another, when there is no cause of disagreement, or variance between them? For
they shall be sure to loose neither liberty, nor dignity; they shall endanger
neither honor, nor profit. Our Nobles shall be tres-noble still, they shall be
Princes and Captains over our people: They shall be Deputies and Presidentes in
our public Weal: They shall be Peers, and Ancients of the Kingdom: their
Privileges, Prerogatives, Prehemine^ces, styles, ensigns, and titles of
prowess, and honor, shall not be raced, defaced, or diminished. But they shall
(as they may and ought) remain and continue whole, and vnviolable, both to
them, and their posterities, throughout their generations. Our Judges,
Justices, and Lawiers, shall have and enjoy their authorities, credites, and
reputations, as in ancient times. They shall be Recorders of our Cities, Towns,
and Boroughes: They shall be Stewardes of the Kings Leates and law-dayes. Our
Knights, Esquiers and Gentlemen, shall still be Burgeses in Parleaments, and
Conservators of the Kings peace: they shall be assistants to examine and
repress, theftes, rapines, murders, roberies, riots, routs, and such like
insolences. Yea they shall be our Spokes-men, and our days men, to arbitrate
and compose, strifes and debates between neighbor and neighbor. Our common
people, they without disturbance, shall quietly and peaceably, retain and
enjoy (as in former ages) their immunities, franchises and liberties, as well
abroad as at home, as well in their houses, as in their fields. They shall
possess their tenancies without ciectio^, they shall be inheritors without
expulsion, as well to the laws, liberties and customs, as to the lands and
possessions of their Ancestors. They shall not be compelled to go to warefare
upon their own costs: they shall not be tried, arraigned, or condemned, by
foreign power, or by foreign laws. There shall no husbandry, no clothing, no
handicraft, no mariner, no marcha^dize, no laws of the land, no manner of good
learning whatsoever, in School, College, or University, be decreased, or
laid aside. Wherefore the Admonitor toying never so much; how so ever he has
made his flourish, and cast about with his May bees, his, I fear, his I pray
God, his, yfes, and his andes, howsoever (I say) it pleased him to trifle with
these gew gawes; yet shall none ever be able, to prove by any proofs drawn
from the holy Scripture, or humane reason, that any hinderance in dignity, or
encumbrance can ever betide our Nobles, our Commons, the state of our Country,
people, laws, or common Weal, if the state of church-gouerme^t, were
translated from Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Chancelours, Co^missaries,
and Officialls (which are officers in the house of God, only according to the
commandments and traditions of men) unto the government practiced by the
Apostles and primitive Church, which they can not deny, but must confess to
have been according to the holy pleasure of God. Nay our Nobles, and our
commons, are most assured to be so far from being endamaged, or loosing ought
hereby, as herby they shall purchase that unto them selves, which never yet any
oppugner of so good and holy a cause, could attain unto. Namely, they shall
seal up unto their own souls, infallible testimonies of good and sincere
consciences: testimonies (I say) of their fidelities unto God, testimonies of
their allegiance unto him, by whom they have been redeemed, and testimonies of
love, and compassion unto the whole church of God. Nay further our commons,
shall be so far from bringing any damage upon them selves, as they shall
marvelouslie benefit them selves. First by purchasing unto themselves, a large
immunitie from many foul and great greeuances, and exactions of money imposed
and levied upon them, by officers and deputies of Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, etc. Secondly by having the Lord Christ, whose cause they
undertake, and whose glory they advance, to be a friend unto their friends,
and an enemy unto their enemies. And if our Nobles, and our Commons, be all
hushed, if they be all at sleep, at peace and at rest, we may cast away all
fear, and be past all doubt, that the King can not, but holily recreate and
solace him self, and that his gray hairs, when soever they shall come, shall
never be brought to the grave, in sorrow, but in a good and perfect age, and
peace.

But happily it may be replied, that Page ^9.
some of our Nobles, and most of our commons, be so backwardlie affected Page
79.
to the truth of Religion, as that rather they would turn head upon the
Gospel, then brook an alteration of Archiepiscopall, Episcopal, and
Archidiaconall Church government. In deed if a reformation of the state of the
Clergy were attempted by any other means, then by public tractation and
consent of Parleame^t, I could not but lean unto this opinion, that the
attempting thereof, might bring an overthrow to the attempters. Because the
same attempt, should be dishonorable to the name of God, as being contrary to
the form of doctrine received. But since things amiss are required to be
redressed by the King and Parleament alone, this objection is altogether vain
and frivolous, and is already sufficiently convinced, by that peaceable
agreement between Nobles and Commons, before remembered. But let us wade a
little deeper, and search a little more narrowly into every vain, creek, and
corner of this supposition. And let us see, by what manner of persons this
pretensed overthrow of the Gospel, might be wrought.

All carnal, sensual, and earthly men, No fe^re that profane men will
overthrow the Gospel.
either whose belly is their god, or whose god is this world, all such men (I
say) as in every age, be of Domingoes religion, namely, just and iumpe, of that
religion, which the King and State profess, they are so far from attempting
ought, to overthrow the Gospel, as under the shadow of the name thereof, they
will evermore croude, and cover their carnalitie and prophanes. For they being
evermore of every religion, and so in deed of no religion, and passing not
whether our Savior Christ, or Beliall be their God, sing as the Poet sings;
Ais? Aio. Negas? Nego: beck and bow, cap and knee, to whatsoever the state and
law commandes. If the King be a Gospeller, the Gospel, the Gospel, and
naught else, but the Gospel shall be found to roll in their mouths. But let the
Crown once turn, by and by, they have turned their coats, and as wether
cocks, with every puff of wind, are huffed about. Whatsoever order, or manner
of government be planted, or displanted in the Church, the same shall be no
corosiue to them. It shall never stick in these men's stomachs, neither will
they lay it to their hearts. The King and Counsel is wise enough, and know
what they have to do well enough. They will not be more forward, nor wiser
the^ the Prince, they will not check and control the whole Realm. They can
not brook these busy bodies, and medlers in matters above their reach. They
will be none of these new fangled and precise fools; they will not be backward,
and come behind the law, as the Papists do; neither will they be to forward,
and run before the law, as the Puritans do. But they will behave themselves
in all things, and at all seasons, as discrete and politic Protestants ought
to do, co^forming and submitting themselves always to all order and
authority of the Queens book, and laws settled. Yea and though they be not
book learned, nor any pen clerks, yet they believe well. And therefore they
will go to the Church, and say a few prayers, yea and they will receive the
Sacrament at Easter, as devoutly as the best precisian of them all. All these
Atheistes and godless men, being neither hot nor cold, neither fish nor flesh,
nor good red hering, plant what plants you will, and sow what seeds you list,
yea make what ditch, hedge, pale, wall, or fence you please, they set cock
upon hoope, and pass not a button for it; every season, be it wet, or be it
dry; every kind of la^d, be it clay, or be it sand; every furrow, be it broad,
or be it narrow, be it deep, or be it shallow, pleases and co^tenteth these
medley coats alike. They are like unto Jacobs ^wes, which having straked and
party colored rods, laid before them in the gutters, at a ramming time,
brought forth none other but party colored lambs. And therefore they will
never stir hand nor foot, nor once step over a straw to work any least
anoyance to the Gospel. It is good sleeping always, for these men, in a whole
skin: And not much unlike to these party colored slepers, are the
admoni^orie protestants. For they, as the duty of faithful subjects do bind
them, li^ing in a state of a Church reformed, and having liberty in external
gouerme^t, and other outward orders, to choose such as they think, in wisdom
and godliness, to be most convenient for the state of their country, and
disposition Admonitorie Protestants by their own doctrine, ought not to bind
the Church, to a perpetual government of prelacie.
of the people; and having the consent of their godly Magistrates, to that out
ward form of jurisdiction, and deciding of Ecclesiastical causes, these kind
of protestants, (I say) always blowing out the trumpet of obedience, and
crying an alarm of loyalty to every ordinance of man, and gravely, wisely,
and stoutly demeaning them selves against all the giddy heads, and fanaticall
scismatikes, and wrangling spirits of our age, dare not (I trow) slip the
collar, nor cast of the yoke, dare not push with the horn, nor wince with the
heel against the Gospel; If so be by the authority of our Christian King,
with the consent of his Parleame^t; the platform of government (as he says)
devised by some of our neighbor Churches, but (as we and they the^ selves
confess) practiced by the Apostles and primitive Church, might be received
and established, to be the best and fittest order of government, for the Church
of England, as well as it has been a long time, and yet is of Scotland, and
of most of all other Christian Churches. For if it be to great a bridle of
christian liberty (as they say) in things external, to cast upon the Church
of Christ, a perpetual commandment, and if the church have free liberty to
make choice of what government soever, she thinks convenient, then is she
neither restrained at her pleasure, to forsake that, which by long experience
she has found to be inconvenient, neither is she tied still to retain
Archiepiscopall, Episcopal, and Archidiaconall government, though for a long
season the same have been used. For that in deed might well and justly be
said, to be too great a bridle of christian liberty, when by necessity there
is cast upon the Church, such a perpetual regiment of prelacie, as may not be
removed. Wherefore if our continued prelaticall discipline, whereby the
liberty of the church is taken away, by public authority of the King and
States might be discontinued, and liberty granted to the Church, to use the
Apostolical discipline, either our Admonitorie Protestants must yield, stoup,
and obey, or else be found to be a wayward, a contentious and a from^ple
generation.

And if these two former kinds of our people (which the land being divided
into five parts make three at the least) shall every way be supporters of
unity, and conformity, to the Gospel, and no way disturbers of the peace,
liberty and tranquillity of the Church, what overthrow, or what damage may the
Gospel sustain by the other parts? Yea though they should unite, link and
confederate themselves in one. For are they not weaker in power, poorer in
purse, and of far less reputation then the former? And yet nevertheless,
these parts are at such deadly feude one against the other, and at such an
irreconciliable enimitie between them selves, that the case stands now
between them, as sometimes it stood between Caesar and Pompey; not whether of
them, should reign, but whether of them should live. And how then can these
parts thus divided, possibly agree together, against the other parts, so
surely combined?

Besides, the first sort of these two sorts, Puritan Protestants, can never
othrowe the Gospel.
whom it pleases our Protestants, the Admonishers, for difference sake, to
dubb with the Knights Hood of Precisians, or precise and puritan Protestants.
Why? They are the only and principal spokes-men and petitioners for the
Apostolical Discipline, required to be planted. Nay these men, out of the
holy Scriptures, so resolutelie are persuaded, of the truth of God, contained
therein, as without which, they know perfectly that the doctrine of the Gospel
can never powerfullie flourish, or be enterteyned with so high a majesty in the
hearts of men, as it ought to be. And as The Gospel has ouerthrown the papist,
therefore he can never overthrow the Gospel.
for the other sort, (the Papists I mean) alas that poor ratt, what
overthrow can he work to the Gospel, whose bane the Gospel has wrought so
long since? Alas this faint goast is so far spent; his disease grown so
desperate, and his sickness, now at such an hay-now-hay, as all the physic
of all the Physicians in the world, ca^ not recover his health, or once take
away his hed-ach. This silly snake, then, having hissed out all his sting, spit
out all his venime, and vngorged him self of all his poison, how can his skin,
or how should his tail anoy the Gospel? If therefore it might please the
Admonishers, upon a reuew of our State, our country, and our people, to cast
such men, as be open enemies to the Gospel, into squadrons, causing them to
march rank, by rank, and troop, by troop, and delivering unto the King, a
muster roll, of all the names, qualities and conditions of the principal
popish recusants within the Realm (for none but such only can be suspected
openly to band them selves against the Gospel) it is not to be doubted, but
the least part of all the other four parts would be as great in number, as
these. And what the^ should the King and state fear the multitudes of
recusantes, when one standing on the Kings side, should be able to withstand
ten; and ten an hundredth; and an hundredth a thousand; and a thousand ten
thousand papists. King Asa crying unto the Lord his God, that it was nothing
with him, to help with many, or with no power, and resting upon the 2 Cron. 14.
Lord, overcame ten hundredth thousand, and three hundredth chariots, of the
Ethiopians, and Labimes. For the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to show
him self strong with them, that are of a perfect heart toward him: And when
King Ioash remembered not the kindness which Iehoiada the Priest had done unto 2
Chro: 24.
him, but slew Zechariah his son, the Lord delivered the King, and a very
great army, into the hands of a small company of the host of the King of
Aram, who gave sentence against the King, slew all the Princes of Judah from
among the people, and carried the spoil of them unto Damascus. And thus much
concerning the Admonitors proposition, viz: Whatsoever will draw with it many
and great alterations of the state of government, and of the laws, the same
may bring rather the overthrow of the Gospel, then the end that is desired;
All which speech of his, I affirm to be but a vain and trifling ridle, as the
whole strenght whereof rests only upon a may be. Whereunto if I should
only have spoken thus, and no more, viz: that many and great alterations,
etc. might rather not bring an overthrow of the Gospel, etc. I suppose, and
that upon good ground, that such (may might not be) might every way be as
forcible, to disprove the one, as his (may be) can any way be pregnant to prove
the other.

And touching his assumption viz: but the planting of the government, practiced
by the Apostles and primitive Church, will draw with it many and great
alterations, of the state of government and of the laws: If in this place he
understood, the state of Church government, and of the laws Ecclesiastical now
in use, then is the proposition true. And yet notwithstanding we avow, the
Gospel to be so far from incurring any overthrow by such an alteration, as
thereby it is certain, that the same shall more and more flourish, and be
perpetually established: by reason that this alteration should be made from
that which by long experience, is known to be corrupt, unto that, which is
known by the holy Scriptures, to be pure and sincere. From a government (I say)
and laws authorized, by tradition, and commandments of man alone, to a policy
and laws founded and descended, by and from God him self.

But if the Admonitor, by the assumption meant to inform us, that the planting
of the Apostolical government will draw with it many and great alterations, of
the temporal state of government, and of the temporal laws, statutes, or
customs of the kingdom: then as before to his first, so now also to his
second, I answer negatiuely: and affirm, that the The planting of the
Apostolical gouerme^t will draw no alteration of the laws of the realm with
it.
planting of the said Apostolical government, will not draw with it any least
alteration, of any part, of that temporal state of government, nor almost of
any one common statute, or customarie law of the Land, which may not rather
be altered, the^ retained. For this platform of government, we are able by the
help of God, to defend the same generally, and for the most part, to be most
agreeable, and correspondent, to the nature, quality, disposition, and estate
of our country, people, common weal, and laws, as in our particular
answers, to his particular reasons shall more at large appear. In all new,
and extraordinary alterations, it is not only requisite to abolish al bad
opinions, out of the minds of those that know not the drift of the
enterprisers, but it is also necessary, that the defense of such alterations
be made forcible against the opposition of all gaynesayers: We will descend to
the particulars, and join issue with the Admonitor. And upon allegations,
exceptions, witnesses, and records to be made, sworn, examined, and produced
out of the holy Scriptures, and laws of the Land already settled, on the
behalf of our cause, before our Sovereign Lord the King, his Nobles, and
commons in Parleament, we shall submit our selves and our cause to the Kings
Royal, and most Christian Judgment. In the mean time, we (...) that not
only the former clause of this admonitorie Bill, but that al other clauses
following in the same bill, for the invaliditie, insufficiency, indignity,
and nullitie of them, are to be thrown out and dismissed from the Kings Court,
especially for that the particulars opened by the Admonitor, can not serve for
any reasonable warning, to induce the common people, to rely themselves upon
his, I am of opinion to the which we plead at bar as follows.

Admonition.
First (says he) the whole State of Page 77.
the Laws of this Realm will be altered. For the Canon Law must be utterly
taken away, with all Offices to the same belonging; which to supply with other
laws and functions, without many inconveniences, would be very hard: the use
and study of the civil law, will be utterly overthrown.

Assertion.
When by a common acceptance and use of speech, these words (whole state of the
laws of the Realm) are understood of the common and statute laws of the
Realm, that is to say of the Kings temporal laws, and not of Canon or civil
laws, it cannot follow, that the whole state of the laws of the Realm
should Canon and civil laws no part of the laws of the Realm, but only by
sufferance.
be altered, though the Canon and civil laws, with all Offices to the same
belonging, should be utterly taken away and be wholly overthrown. For no more
could the Admonitor prove, the canon or civil law, at any time heretofore, to
have bin any part of the laws of this Realm, (otherwise then only by 2. 25. H
8. C 21. in ye preamble.
sufferance of our Kings; acceptance, long use and custom of our people) then
can any man prove a parsly-bed, a rosemary-twigge, or an ivie-branch, to be any
part of the site of the Castle of Farnham: And therefore he might as well have
concluded thus, the whole site of the Castle of Farnham wilbee transposed: for
the Boxetrees, the heythorn arboures, and the quick set hedges planted within
the Castle-garden must be removed and cast away: which were but a proof
proouelesse, and a reason reasonlesse. If then by the abrogation of the canon
or civil law, scarce any one part of the laws of this Realm should be
changed, what reason have we to think that the whole state of the laws of the
Realm must be altered? Besides, to conclude the whole, by an argument drawn
ab enumeratione partium, and yet not to number the tenth part, (of such parts
as were to be numbered) is, I am sure, neither good logike nor good law.
Moreover, if all the canon law, (I mean all the papal and foreign canon
law, devised and ordained at Rome, or else where without the Realm, and
consequently all the Offices and functions to the same belonging) be already
utterly taken away, what hope of reward can Civilians expect from the use of
such things, as are within the compass of that law? or of what efficacy is
this argument, to prove an alteration, of any part of the laws of this
Realm, or that the study of the Civil Law should be utterly overthrown? For
the whole state of the laws, properly called the laws of the Realm, has
stood, and continued many years since the same Papal and canon law was
abolished. And as touching the Civilians, for them to seek after prefermentes,
by An imbaseme^t for Civilia^s to have preferment by offices of ye canon law.
offices, and functions of the canon law, is an embasement of their honorable
profession, especially since far greater rewards, might very easily be
provided for them, if once they would put to their helping hands, for the
only establishment and practice of the civil law, in the principal causes now
handled by them in the Courts called Ecclesiastical. The canon law be
abolished out of the Realm and ought not to be used.


But how may it be proved, that the Papal and foreign canon law, is already
taken away, and ought not to be used in England? For my part, I heartily wish,
that some learned men in the common law, would vouchsafe to show unto the King
and Parleament, their clear knowledge in this point. In the mean season, I
shall not be negligent, to gather and set down, what (in mine understanding)
the Statut-law has determined thereof. By the statute of submission 25. H. 8.
revived 1. Eliz. (as the very words and letter of the petition and submission
of the Clergy, of the body of the law, and of the provisoes do import) the
very true meaning and intent of the King and Parleament, is evident and
apparent to be thus as follows, and none other, Viz. That such Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances Synodall, or Provincial, which before that time
were devised and ordained, or which from thencefoorth should be devised or
ordained by the Clergy of the Realm, being not contrariant or repugnant,
etc. should only, and alonelie be authorized, and to be put in ure, and
execution. And consequently, that all canons, constitutions, and ordinances
papal, and made by foreign power without the Realm, should wholly and utterly
be abrogated, adnulled, abolited, and made of no value. The words touching the
petition, and submission, mentioned in that statute, in substance, are these:
Where the Kings humble and obedient subjects the Clergy, etc. have submitted
them selves, and promised in verbo Sacerdotij, that they will never from hence
forth presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure, No Canons
provincial or other to be put in ure, therefore no papal canons in force.
any canons, constitutions, ordinances provincial or other; or enact,
promulge or execute any new canons, etc. And where also diverse constitutions,
ordinances, and canons Provincial or Synodal, which heretofore have bin
enacted, and beethought, not only to be much prejudicial Canons provincial,
heretofore enacted, being prejudicial, are to be abrogated.
to the Kings prerogative Royal, etc: the Clergy has most humbly besought
the Kings Highness, that the said constitutions, and canons, may be committed,
to the examination and judgment of his Highness, and of two and thirty persons
of his subjects, etc: and that such of the said canons and constitutions, as
shall be thought and determined by the said 32 persons, or the more part of
them, worthy to be abrogated, and adnulled, shall be abolite, and of no value:
and such other of the same constitutions, and canons, as by the said 32
persons: etc. shall be approved to stand with the laws of God, and consonant to
the laws of this Realm, shall stand in their full strength and power, etc.
These are the words of the Petition and Submission, etc. the letter of the
body of the statute in effect is this: Be it therefore enacted, etc. That
they, nor any of them, from hence forth shall presume to attempt, allege,
claim, or put in ure, any constitutions, or ordinances provincial, No
co^stitutions or ordinances Provincial or other canons to be alleged,
therefore once they were all abolited.
or Synodall, or any other canons. And for as much as such canons,
constitutions, etc. as heretofore have been made by the Clergy of this
Realm, can not, etc. by reason of the shortness, etc: be it therefore enacted,
etc: that the Kings Highness, etc: shall have power, etc: and that the said 32
persons, etc: shall The King and 32. persons have no power to examine papal
canons; therefore papal canons intended to be wholly abolished.
have power and authority to view, search and examine the said canons,
constitutions, etc: Provincial and Sinodall heretofore made, and such of them
as the Kings Highness, etc. shall deem and adiudge worthy to be continued and
kept, shall be from hence forth kept, etc. and the residue of the said canons,
constitutions and ordinances provincial, which the Kings Highness, etc: shall
never be put in execution within this Realm. These are the words of the
body of the law: the words of the Proviso are these: Provided that such
canons, constitutions, Canons provincial already made only onauthorised by
the proviso, therefore no papal can^^ in force.
ordinances, and Sinodals Provincial, being already made, which be not
contrariant, etc: shall now still be used and executed, as they were before
the making of this Act, till such time as they be viewed, searched, etc: by
which words of the petition, body of the statute, and proviso, three things
seem principally to be meant and intended. First an utter and absolute
abolition of all canons, constitutions, ordinances, and synodals before that
time made by the Clergy within the Realm, or by any foreign power without the
Realm whatsoever: Secondly, a view, search and examination of all canons,
constitutions and ordinances provincial or synodall before that time made by
the Clergy within the Realm: And lastly, because the Church should not utterly
be destitute of al canons, etc: (Provincial or Sinodall) a reestablishment, or
reauthorisement of all such of the said canons Provincial or Synodall, as were
not onerous to the people, contrariant or repugnant to the laws, statutes, or
customs of the Realm, nor prejudicial to the Kings prerogative Royal, was
agreed upon, till the said Provincial Canons, etc: were viewed, searched, and
examined.

All papal and foreign canon law then, before that time made without the
Realm, being once inhibited, to be attempted, alleged, claymed, or put in
ure, and by consequence adnihilated, abolited and made void: unless the same
be again revived and reestablished, remain frustrate and adnulled still, and
therefore ought not to be attempted, alleged, claymed, or put in ure. Besides,
it is plain, that foreign and papal canon law was never intended to be
reauthorized, because the same law was never committed to the view, search and
examination of the King and 32. persons. The King therefore and 32 persons, by
virtue of this act, not having any authority to view, search, and examine any
foreign canon law, though he and they, had deemed and adjudged any part of
the same law, worthy to have been continued, kept and obeyed, yet nevertheles
had not the same been of any force or validity. For only such canons,
constitutions and ordinances Provincial or Synodal (being not co^trariant,
onerous or prei^diciall to the King, to the laws, or to the people) were
reestablished, as were committed. Besides, whereas about twenty years passed,
diverse canons, co^stitutions and ordinances, as well papal as provincial, were
alleged by him that collected an Abstract, against an unlearned ministry,
against dispensations for many benefices, against excommunication, and against
civil jurisdiction in ecclesiastical persons: the aunswerer, in the behalf
and maintenance of those Tit. page (...). and 2. The answerer unto the
Abstract, proves by his reasons the P^pall canon law now used to be abolished
abuses, challenged the Author for not having proved his intent by law in
force: affirming that the canons and laws by him alleged, were but pretended
necessary and disused laws; that they were not inspired with the life of
laws; that such were fathered for laws, as be not laws; and that it remained
by him to be discussed how many of them were to be called in truth, her
Majesty's laws. The reason of all which his exceptions, he yields to be
this: namely, that the Author ought to have proved them, not to have been
repugnant to the customs of the Realm, but to have bin in use and practice
before the making of that act of submission. For he must prove (says the
Answerer) that they are not repugnant to the customs of this Realm, and show
us how they have bin used and executed here, before the making of the statute:
yea he can say, that they are by law established among us. Which points (says
he) because we learn by law, quod facta no^ presumantur, matters in fact, are
not intended to be done, until they be proved so: we must still put him to
his proofs, and in the mean time say, that he has gaped wide to say nothing
to the purpose, and that in his whole book, he has talked, but not reasoned.
All which asseveration of this Answerer, if the same be true, and, if this plea
be a good averme^t to bar the Author from having proved a learned ministry
to be commanded by the law; dispensations for many benefices to be unlawful;
excommunication by one alone to be forbidden; and civil gouverment to be
unlawful in ecclesiastical persons, then much more forcibly may this argument
be retorted, upon all such as claim, allege and put in ure any portion of the
foreign canon law. For sithence it has never yet been proved, that the
foreign canon law, used and executed at this day, was accustomed and used
25. H. 8. then because we learn by law (as he says) quod facta non
presumantur, we must still put him, and his clients to their proof, and in
the mean while tell them, that their Advocat has twisted for them but a bad
thread, when by his reason he has untwined all their laws, and broken a
sunder the bands of their gouverment. Moreover because it is not yet proved,
that the foreign and papal canon law is not contrariant nor repugnant to the
laws, statutes or customs of the Realm, nor derogatorie to the prerogatives
of the regal Crown; nay because the contradictorie hereof is affirmed, and
this denied: and because we learn by law (as he says) that matters in fact,
are not intented to be done ^ill they be proved so, we must still put the
vpholders and executioners of this law, to their proof, and in the mean while
tell them that the foreign and papal law, is but a pretended necessary and
disused law; that it is not inspired with the life of law, and that it is
fathered by them to be such a law, as is an hedlesse, a fetherlesse and a
nocklesse arrow which is not fit to be drawn, or shot against any subject of
the King. And from this voydance, abolition and nullitie of foreign and
papal canon law (because sublato principali, tolluntur accessoria) it
follows that all offices and functions of papal Archbishops, papal Bishops,
papal Suffraganes, papal Archdeacons, papal Deanes and Chapters, papal
Priests, papal Deacons, papal Subdeacons, papal Chancelors, papal Vicars
general, papal Commissaries, and papal Officials, merely depending upon the
authority, and drawn from the rules and grounds of that law, are likewise
adnihilated, and of no value. Howbeit forso By the opinion of the Civilia^s,
the papal canon law seems to be in force.
much as by the opinion of some learned Civilians, there seems unto them a
necessary continuance of the same foreign and papal law, by reason that
Archbb. and Bishops do now lawfully Apology of certain proceedings in courts
Ecclesiastical.
(as they say) use ordinary Archiepiscopall and Episcopal jurisdiction, which
they could not (as they think) do, if the same common law were vrterly
abolished: and for so much also, as some learned in the canon laws, do
mainteyne, that since the statut of 1. Eliz. c. 1. the Archbb. and Bb. cannot
lawfully claim any ordinary spiritual jurisdiction at all, but that the
spiritual jurisdiction, to be exercised by them, ought to be delegated unto
them from the King, by a commission under the great Seal: Forasmuch (I say) as
there are these differences of opinions, it seems expedient to be considered,
by what law, and by what authority, Archbb. and Bb. exercise Archiepiscopal,
and Episcopal power in the church: And to the end this question may fully be
known, and no scruple nor ambiguitie be left, what power spiritual may be
intended to be exercised by them: We distinguish spiritual power, into a power
properly called spiritual; and into a power improperlie Power properly, and
improperly called spiritual.
or abusivelie called spiritual. The power properly called spiritual, is that
spiritual power, which consists, and is conversant in preaching the Word;
administering the Sacraments; ordeyning and deposing Ministers; excommunicating
or absolving; and if there be any other spiritual power of the like property
and nature. Now that this power properly called spiritual, could have bin
drawn from the person of our late Sovereign Lady the Queen unto Power
properly called spiritual, was never in ye Queens person.
Archbb. and Bishops, we deny. For the Queens Royal person, being never
capable of any part of this spiritual power, how could the same be derived
from her person unto them? Nemo potest plus iuris in alium transforre, quam
ipse habet. Archiepiscopall and Episcopal power therefore, exercised in, and
about these mysteries of our holy Religion, ordinarily and necessarily must
belong unto the Archbb. and Bb. by the canon of the holy Scriptures; otherwise
they have no power (properly called spiritual, touching these things at all.
The power which improperlie is called spiritual, Power improperly called
spiritual, is indeed but a temporal power.
is such a power, as respects no^ the exercise of any pastoral or
ministerial church, to the internal begetting of faith, or reforming of
manners in the soul of man; but is such a power, as whereby public peace,
equity and justice is preserved, and mainteigned in external things,
peculiarly appropried, and apperteyning unto the persons, or affairs of the
church; which power indeed is properly a temporal or civil power, and is to
be exercised only by the authority of temporal and civil Magistrates. Now
then to return to the state of the point in question touching this later
power, improperly called spiritual, by what law, or by what authority the
Archbishops and Bishops do exercise this kind of power in the church: I answer
that they cannot have the same, from any foreign canon law, because the same
law, with all the powers and dependa^ces thereof is adnulled: And therefore
that this their power, must and ought to be derived unto the^ from Bb. where,
From whence then is their power derived? Hereunto we answer, that (before the
making of that act) spiritual jurisdiction did apperteyne unto Bishops, and
that Bishops were ordinaries, as well by custom of the Realm, canons,
constitutions and ordinances provincial and synodall, as by foreign canon
law. And Bishops remain ordinaries by custom, provincial ca^o^s, and statute
law, though papal canon law be abolished.
that therefore these canons, constitutions and ordinances provincial or
synodall, according to the true intent of that act, could not still have been
used and executed as they were before, if the Bishops had not still remained
ordinaries. Moreover, it is clear by two statutes, that the Archbishops and
Bishops ought 25. H. 8. c. 20. 25. H. 8. c, 16.
to be obeyed in all manner of things, according to the name, title, degree and
dignity, that they shall be chosen, or presented unto, and that they may do
and execute, minister, use, and exercise all and every thing and things,
touching or perteyning to the office or order of an Archbishop or Bishop, with
all ensigns, tokens and ceremonies thereunto lawfully belonging, as any
Archbishop or Bishop might at any time heretofore do, without offending of the
prorogatiue Royal of the Crown, and the laws and customs of this Realm. Let
it be then that by custom, canons provintiall and statute law, Bishops be and
do remain ordinaries; yet as well upon those words of the statute 25. H. 8.
without offending of the prerogative Royal, as upon the statute of 1. Eliz. c.
1. there remains a scruple and ambiguitie, whether it be not hurtful, or
derogatorie unto the Kings prerogative Royal, that Ordinaries should use and
exercise their ordinary power (improperly called spiritual) without a
commission under the great Seal, or that such their power should be as
immoderate, and excessive now, as in times past it was by the papal canon law?
Concerning the first, by the statut of 1. Eliz. c. 1. and by the statute of 8.
Eliz. c. 1. the Queen was recognized to be in effect the Ordinary The Queen
was supreme ordinary of ordinaries.
of Ordinaries, that is, the chief, supreme and Souveraigne ordinary over all
persons, in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as temporal. Where it seems
to follow, that all the branches, and streams, as well of that power which
improperlie is called spiritual, as of that power which properly is called
temporal, should have been derived originally unto the Bishop from her Highness
person, as from the only head and fountain of all the same spiritual power
within her Kingdoms, in such manner and from, and by such commission under the
great Seal, as her H. temporal Officers, Iusticers and Judges, had their
authorities committed unto them. And to this opinion Master D. Bilson seems
to accord. For all power Page 348
(says he) is not only committed to the sword, which God has authorized, but
is wholly closed in the sword. Against the head, that it shall not be head, to
rule and guide the feet, can be no prescription; by reason Gods ordinance, for
the head to govern the body, is a perpetual and eternal law: and the
usurpation of the members against it, is no prescription but a confusion, and
the subversion of that order, which the God of heaven has immutably decreed
and settled. Besides, there rests (says the Remonstrance) Page 114. and 130.
unto the Bishops of this Realm, none other but subordinate, and delegate
authority: and that the matter and heads wherein their jurisdiction is
occupied, are by, and from the Christian Magistrates authority: In whom, as
supreme Governor, all jurisdiction, within her dominions, as well
ecclesiastical as civil, by Gods and man's law is invested, and their
authority ecclesiastical is but subordinat under God and the Prince, derived
for the most part from the Prince. From which two statutes and judgments of
the 1. Eliza. c. 1 and 8. Eliz. c. 1
Governors of the Church contained in these two books (for these two books
were seen and allowed by the Governors of the church) I leave it to be
considered, if the Bishop did exercise the same improper and abusive spiritual
power and jurisdiction ecclesiastical only and alonelie, in their own
names, styles and dignities, and under their own seals of office, and that
also by authority of foreign and papal laws; if (I say the Bishop did
these things, after this and this manner, I leave it then to be considered,
whether their exercise of such power were derogatorie and prejudicial in a
very high degree, to the prerogatives of the Royal Crown or not. For my part
because I find by the foreign canon law, that papal Bishops be the Popes
sons, and are privileged to carry the the print and image of the Pope their
father, namely that they have plenitudinen potestatis within their diocesses,
as the Ex de Mayor: and o^^.
Pope pretends to have power over the whole world: For quilibet ordinarius
says the same law in sua diocaesi est mayor quolibet principe, and because
also (not withstanding what socuer the Bb. have written, that they were the
Queens Bb. and had their authority derived unto M. Bilson page 330.
them from the Queen) they did in her life time, put the same papal law in
execution, and by the same law did take upon them, plenitudinem potestatis,
within their Diocesses: I for my part (I say) can not as yet otherwise
conceive, but that exceedingly they did intrude them selves into the Royal
preheminences, privileges, and prerogatives of the Queen. For by what other
authority, then by a certain plenarie power, did they in their own names, for
the government of the The Bb. by a plenarie power devised and promulged new
canons, with out the Queens assent.
several Churches within their several Diocesses, from time to time, make,
promulge, and by virtue of men's corporal oaths put in execution, what new
Canons, Injunctions, and articles soever seemed good unto them, without any
license, or confirmation from the Queen, first had and obtained thereunto? By
which pretensed plenarie power, it seems that the statute made to bring the
Clergy in submission to the King, was covertlie deluded, and our late
Sovereign Lady the Queen, cunningly bereaved of that regal authority, over
every partieular Diocesan, or Ordinary, which notwithstanding, by the
Parleament was given unto her Highness, over the whole body and state of the
Clergy. For if once there be no necessity of the Kings license, assent, or
confirmation to such articles, canons, or injunctions, as every ordinary
shall make within his jurisdiction, then must it be intended, that the statute
of submission has covertlie permitred, several members, severally to do, and
to execute those things which apparently, and in express terms, the whole
convocation was commanded, and with the same, in verbo sacerdotij, had
promised, not to do: then the which what can seem more unreasonable and
absurd? For then might all the Ordinaries join hand in hand, and agree all
together in one, never in any of their convocations assembled, by the Kings
writ, to devise, make, or promulge, any canons Ecclesiastical at all. And
what assent, license, or confirmation from the King, could then be needful?
Or how then was the Clergy, brought in submission to the King? For then,
should it not be with them, as it is in the proverb; A threefold coard is not
easily broken: but then should it be with them, contrary to the proverb; for
they being all fast knit and bound together unto the Kings authority, by a
coard of 24 threads, might easily be broken; but being severed and pluct a
sunder, into 24. Bishops, can make no law without leave. And yet every Bb:
does make many laws
24 parts, one from the other, the King with all his regal power, might not
be^ able so much as to break one of the least threedes, wherewithal one of
their cords was twisted. If the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, Aldermen, and
whole communaltie of the City of London, should promise unto the King upon
their fidelities, not to set any price upon Wines or other victualles, by
their common Council, within the said City, unless the King, under his
privy signett, should first authorize the^ so to do, were it not a mere
collusion of the Kings meaning, if every particular Alderma^, should set
prices of such things in every particular Ward? But against the collection made
from the Statutes. 1. and 8. Eliza: and the judgment of the diuinies
aforesaid, the A collection made against the former reason by an Apology for
sundry proced by iurisdi. Eccl. page 5.
author of an Apology, to his understanding, reckons the same collection to
be a very simple collection, and against the same, he answers and reasons
in effect thus. If (as is collected) all power spiritual, by a commission
under the great Seal, must be derived from the Queen, to warrant the
execution of it unto him, that is, to exercise it; then must the like warrant
be procured, for every temporal office, to execute his temporal office.

But every temporal officer, must not procure like warrant to execute his
temporal office.

Therefore a commission under the great Seal must not be procured to warrant
the execution, of the said spiritual power.



The consequence of his mayor proposition being false, he labors
notwithstanding to make the same good, and in effect for the same argues thus:
All temporal authority, as absolutely and as really, is revested in the person
of the Queen, as is the said spiritual authority.

Therefore as all spiritual officers, for the execution of the said spiritual
power; must have their authority, derived unto the^ from the person of the
Queen under the great Seal, so likewise must all temporal officers, for the
execution of their temporal offices, have the like commission.



The consequence of which enthimeme follows not, though the antecedent be
true. For although as well all te^porall, as all the said spiritual authority
improperlie so called, was reallie and absolutely in the person of the Queen;
yet hereupon it follows not, that by one and the self same means alone, and
namely, by a commission under the great Seal, all temporal, and the said
spiritual power, in every part and branch thereof, should be drawn alike,
from the Queens person. For there be diverse and sundry means, to derive
temporal authority, whereas there seems to be but one only means to
derive the said spiritual authority, and then mark the substance of the
Authors argument. Some temporal Officers, as Stewards of Leetes, Constables,
and sundry other Officers, must not draw their temporal authority from the
Queen by a commission under the great Seal.

Therefore no spiritual officers, as Archbishops, Bb: Archdeacons, and s^de
vacant, Deanes and Chapiters must draw any of their spiritual authority
from the Queen by a commission, etc.



Which argument drawn from a particular affirmative, unto a general negative,
what weakness it has, every young Logician can discern. And as for Stewardes af
Leetes, though they have no Though all temporal officers draw not their power
from the King, by the great Seal, yet by one means or other wtdrawe it from
the King.
commission under the great Seal, yet for the execution fo their Stewarships
they have a commission under the Seal of the Exchequer, Constables, Decennary,
or Tythingmen, and Thirdboroughes, have their authorities derived unto the from
the Kings person, by the very original institution of their offices, Sherifs
of Countries, Coroners, Escheators, and Verderors, have their offices and their
^uthorities warranted unto them, by the Kings writts out of the Chancerie. But
(...) was not the mind of the Lawmakers says the Author) that the Ordinaries,
by a commission under the great Seal, should draw their said spiritual power
from the Queen. What the minds of the Lawmakers were, touching this poinct,
it mattereth little or nothing at all. Neither is it to purpose, whether a
commission under the great Seal, be necessarily required, or not required by
virtue of that statut 1. Eliz. c. 1. to warrant the said spiritual power unto
Ordinaries. Only it suffices, that the Queen having all power, improperly
called spiritual, invested in her Royal person, and being really and actually
seysed of all the said supreme spiritual authority, could not have any part
of the same spiritual power drawn from her, but by some one lawful and
ordinary means or other. For if this rule be true in every common person,
quod meum est, sine mea voluntate a me auferri non potest; how much more does
the same rule hold, in the Royal prerogatives, rightes, privileges,
dignities, and supremities of a King! Wherefore to say that all supreme and
ordinary power (improperly called) spiritual, was really and actually
inherers in the Royal person of the Queen, and to say also, that some of the
same inferior, and ordinary power, not derived from the Queen, was
nevertheless in the persons of inferior ordinaries, is as much to say, that
some branches of a tree, may receive nourishment from ells-where then from the
root; that some members of the body, are not guided by the head; and that
some streams, flow nor from their fountains. And now to conclude this part,
against the canon law, and their Offices and functions thereof, I dispute thus:
The foreign and papal canon law, with all the accessories, dependances,
Offices, and functions thereof, is utterly abolited out of the Realm:

Therefore the same law is no part of the laws of the Realm; and therefore
also it is evident, that there will not follow any alteration of the laws of
the Realm, by the taking of it away.



Which canon law also, with other laws and functions, how easily the same
without any inconveniences, may be supplied, shall (God willing) be presently
made apparent, if first we shall answer to that challenge, which the state of
Prelacie may seem to make for the continuance of their Lordly primacie,
Challenge for Lordly primacy, out of the great Charter, an^vered.
out of the words of the great Charter. Concerning which challenge, namely,
that by the great Charter, Lordly Archiepiscopal, and Episcopal primacie or
jurisdiction belonging to the state of Prelacie, is belonging unto them: I
demand unto what Church this great Charter was granted? And whether it were
not granted unto the Church of God in England? The words of the Charter are
these: Concessimus Deo, and hac presenti Charta nostra confirmavimus, pro nobis
Mag. Charta. c. 1.
and haeredibus nostris, in perpetuum, quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and
habeat omnia iura sua integra, and libertates suas illaesas. We have granted
unto God, and by this our present writing have confirmed for us, and for our
heirs for ever, that the church of England be free, and that she have all her
rights, and liberties whole and unhurt. Now by this Charter, if the same be
co^strued aright, there is provision made; first, that such honor and worship
be yielded by the King and his subictes, his and their successors and
posterity unto God, as truly, and in deed belongs unto him: Secondly, that
not only such rightes and liberties, as the King and his progenitors, but also
that such as God had endowed the Church of England with, should inviolably be
preserved. And in very deed, to speak truly and properly, such rights and
liberties only, are to be called, the rightes and liberties of the church of
England, which God him self has given by his law unto his universal Church,
and not which the Kings of England, by their Charter, have bequeathed to the
particular church of England. When therefore question is made, that by the
great Charter, the Kings of England are bound to maintain the rights and
liberties of the Church of England, we are to enquire and search what rights
and liberties, God in his holy word, has granted unto his universal Church;
and so by consequence unto the Church of England, one part of the Catholic
church. And this questionless was the cause, that moved the victorious Prince
Henry the eight, so effectually and powerfully to bend him self against the
Popes supremacy, usurped at that time over the Church of England. For (says
the King) we will with hazard of our life, and loss of our Crown, uphold
and defend in our Realms whatsoever we shall know to be the will of God. The
church of God then in England, not being free, nay having her rights and
liberties according to the great Charter, whole and unhurt, but being in
bondage and servitude to the Sea of Rome, contrary to the law of God; the
King judged it to stand highly with his honor, and with his oath (according
to the measure of knoweledge, which then was given unto him) to reform,
redress, and amend the abuses of the same Sea. If then it might please our
gracious Sovereign Lord King JAMES, that now is (treading in the godly steps
of his renoumed great Uncle) to vouchsafe an abolishment of all lordly
primacie, executed by Archiepiscopal, and Episcopal authority, over the
Ministers of Christ; His Highness in so doing, could no more rightly be
charged with the violation of the great Charter, then might King HENRY the
eight with the banishment of the Popes supremacy; or then our late Sovereign
Lady the Queen could be justly burdened with the breach of her oath, by the
establishment of the Gospel. Nay if the Kings of England, by reason of their
oath, had bin so straightly tied to the words of the great Charter, that they
might not in any sort, have disannulled any supposed rightes, and liberties of
the church then used, and confirmed by the great Charter, unto the church that
the^ was supposed, to be the Church of God in England; then (belike) King
Henry the eight, might be atteinted to have gone against the great Charter,
and against his oath, when by the overthrow of Abbayes and Monasteries, he
took away the rightes, and liberties of the Abbotts and Priors. For by
express words of the great Charter, Abbotts and Priors, had as ample and as
large a Patent, for their rightes and liberties, as our Archb. and Bb. can at
this day challenge for their primacies. If then the rightes and liberties of the
one, as being against the law of God, be duly and lawfully taken away,
notwithstanding any matter, clause, or sentence, contained in the great
Charter; the other have but little reason, by color of the great Charter, to
stand upon their pantofles, and to contend for their painted sheathes. For this
is a rule and maxim in all good laws, that in omni iuramento, semper
excipitur authoritas maioris: unless then they be able to justify by the holy
scriptures, that such rightes and liberties, as they pretend for their
spiritual primacie over the Ministers of Christ, to be granted unto them by
the great Charter, be in deed and truth likewise confirmed unto them by the
holy law of God: I suppose the Kings Highness, as a successor to King Henry
the third, and as a most just inheritour to the Crown of England, by the words
of the great Charter, and by his oath (if once the same were taken) to be bound
utterly to abolish all Lordly primacie, as hitherto vpheld and defended,
partly by ignorance, and partly by an unreasonable and evil custom.

Admonition.
The use and study of the civil law will be utterly overthrown; for the
Civilians in this Realm, live not by the use of the civil law, but by the
offices of the canon law, and such things as are within the compass thereof.
And if you take those offices, and functions away, and those matters, wherein
they deal in the canon law, you must needs take away the hope of reward,
and by that means their whole study.

Assertion.
This collection depends upon his former Reason, and is borrowed to prove a
necessary continuance of canon law, and concludes in effect thus: The taking
away of the reward and maintenance of Civilians, wilbee the overthrowe of the
use and study of the civil law:

But the taking away of the canon law, the offices, and functions thereof, and
such things as are within the compass of the same, wilbee the taking away of
the reward and maintenance of Civilians;

Therefore the taking away of the canon law, will be the overthrowe of the use
and study of the civil law.



But we deny the assumption, and affirm The maintenance of Civilia^s,
depends not upon the functions of the canon law.
that Civilians might have far better reward and maintenance then now they
have, if the offices and functions of the canon law, and such things as are
contained within the same, were simply and absolutely taken away. And further
we say, if there were none other use, nor end of the study of the civil law,
then hope of reward, and maintenance by some office and function of the canon
law, that then Civilians should in vain seek for knowledge in the civil
law, because without the knowledge thereof, and by the only knowledge of such
things, as are within the compass of the canon law, they might reap that
reward and maintenance. Nay, since by experience we have known that some,
who never vnclapsed the institutions of Justinian, out of the same to learn
the definition of civil justice, have bin and yet are authorized, to exercise
the offices and functions of the canon law; how should the study of the civil
law, be furthered by these offices and functions, when as without any
knowledge of the civil law, these offices and functions have bin and yet are
daily undertaken, and executed to the full? And what man then (if there were
none other reward for Civilians) would ten or twelve years together, beat
his brain, and trouble his wits, in the study of the civil law, when every
silly canonist might be able and learned enough, to sit in the Bishops throne,
and to be judge in his consistory? Besides, if the Admonitor speak sooth,
viz: that Civilians in this Realm, live not by the use of the civil law, to
what end then should he fear an overthrow of the study thereof? For if there
be no use of it in this Realm, for the maintenance of this life, to what use
then should men study the same in this Realm? As for the use of it among
strangers, and foreign nations without the Realm; the same (as I suppose) is
no greater then such as 3. or 4. Civilians may be able well enough, fully to
deliver the law, touching all matters of controversy, that may grow to
question during the whole space of a Kings reign. If no man lived in this
Realm by the trade of brewing Beer, but that all Brewers did live by the
trade of brewing Ale, what should we need to fear the decay of
Beere-brewers, or what use were there of them? In like sort, if men live only
by the use, offices and functions of the canon law, and that men live not (as
he says) by the use of the civil law within the Realm, what folly were it
to study the one, whereas without the knowledge thereof, he might live by the
other? And therefore it seems that the Admonitor by his own weapon, as much
as in him lay, has given the whole study of the civil law, a most desperate
and deadly wound. And to the end we may understand what reward and maintenance,
Civilians by the offices and functions of the canon law, do receyve yearly
for their service and attendance, in the Bishops and Archdeacons their Courts;
We will examine what fees Doctors of the civil law, being Chancelors,
Commissaries or Officials, have usually, and ordinarily allowed unto them, by
their Lords and Masters. Fees for probat of Testaments, granting of
administrations, Fees for probat of testaments let to farm.
with their appendances, of late years in some places (whether in all or how
many I know not) have bin demised unto farm for an annual rent; out of which,
either a small or no portion at all, has bin allowed unto the Chancellor or
Official, for his service in this behalf. Whereupon (as I conjecture) it has
fallen out, rather then that those Officers would work, keep courts, and
travail for little, or naught, there have bin exacted greater fees, for the
dispatch of these things, then by law ought to have bin paid. Perquisits of
courts, arising upon suits, commenced between party and party, it must be a
plentiful harvest, and there must be multi amici curiae in a Bb. consistory,
if ordinarily (communibus annis) they amou^r in the whole to twenty pounds by
the year: and yet these perquisits, belong not wholly to the Chancellor, but are
to be divided between him and the Register. And touching Fees for
excommunication, and absolution, fees for institution and induction, licenses
to preach, licenses for Curates and Readers. For testimonial of subscription,
or licenses to marry without banes; fees for co^mutation of penance, and fees
for relaxation of sequestrations: touching these manner of Fees, if the same be
fees no way warantable, how are not then such Fees every way dishonorable for
a Doctor of the civil law, Fees due for the execution of the functions of the
canon law, dishonorable for a Doctor of the civil law
to take, either of Ministers or people? There must be therefore some other
hope of better reward and maintenance, to incite and encourage scholars, to
the study of the civil law, the^ are these beggarly and unlawful fees,
depending upon the functions, and exacted by the officers of the canon law: or
else the use of the civil law (as the Admonitor says) must necessarily in
short time be overthrovven. For if Fees for probat of Testaments, and granting
of administrations with their appendices, shall still be let to farm; and if
also, many unlawful Fees were quite inhibited, there would remain (I trow)
but a very poor pittance for Civilians out of the functions of the canon law,
to maintain their Doctoralities withal. But what better reward can there be
for Civilians, then has already bin mentioned? If the Admonitor had not
willingly put a hoodwincke Civilians (...) England live not only, by the
functio^s of cano^ law
before his eyes, he might have seen that the civilians live not wholly and
altogether by the practice of the canon law; but partly also, and that most
honorably by the use of the civil law. If a Doctor of the civil law, be
Judge or Advocate, in the Court of Admiraltie; if he be Judge or Advocate in
the prerogative Court, so far as the same Court handles only matters of
Legacies, Testaments and Codicills, to what use can the cano^ law serve him, or
what advantage can the same law bring him in? Besides, to what use serves the
canon law unto a Doctor of the civil law, if he shall find favor in the Kings
sight, and if it please the King to make him one of the Masters of his
Requests, or one of the twelve Masters of his high Court of Chancerie, or to
be the Master of his Roles; or to be his Highness Ambassador unto forreyne
Nations, of to be one of his H. most honorable privy Council, or to be one of
his principal Secretaries. It follows not therefore (as the Admo,
pretends) that either the Civilians in this Realm, live not by the use of
the civil law, but by the offices, and functions of the canon law, and such
things as are within the compass thereof; or that the hope of reward, and by
that means, the whole study of the civil law must be taken away, if once the
canon law should be abolished. Neither would it be any hard matter for the
King (if the Civilians might find grace in his sight) to appoint Courts,
offices, and all manner of process and proceedings in judgment for Doctors of
the civil law, to hear and determine in the Kings name, all causes being now
within the compass of any civil, or ecclesiastical law within this Realm.
And although a little candle can give but a little light, and a small Spring can
send^^ forth but a small stream, yet because great fires are kindled sometimes
by (...)tle sparkles, and small streams (...) together, may in time grow into
great rivers; I shall desire the great Civilians with their floods and lamps of
learning to help forward such a law, as where^^ the study of the civil law,
may be vpholden, the reward and maintenance of Civilians, without any function
from the Canon law, may be enlarged, many controversies, and disorders in the
church, may be pacified, and the Kings prerogative Royal be duly advanced.
Which things if it might please them rightly to consider, then let them humbly
and seriously beseech our Sovereine Lord the King, and States in Parleament,
to give their consentes to such a law, as the project ensuing, may warrant
the^, the same not to be dangerous to the overthrowe of their civil studies.

The Project of an Act for the explanation, and amplifying of one branch of a
statute, made in the first year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, entitled,
An Act restoringe to the Crown, the ancient jurisdiction, over the state
Ecclesiastical, and also for the declaring, and reviving of a statute made in
the first year of King Edward the sixth, entitled An Act, what seals and
styles Bishops and other spiritual persons exercising jurisdiction
ecclesiastical, shall use.
FOr as much as by one branch of an Act made in the first year of our late
Sovereign Lady, of blessed memory, Queen Elizabeth (entitled an Act,
restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign power repugnant to the same) it
was established and enacted, That such jurisdictions, privileges,
superiorities, and preheminences spiritual and ecclesiastical, as by any
spiritual, or ecclesiastical power, or authority, has heretofore bin, or
may lawfully be exercised, or used, for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical
state and persons, and for reformation, order and correction of the same, and
of all manner errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and
enormities, should for ever, by authority of that present Parleament, be
united and annexed, to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, by means whereof,
it may now be made a question, whether any Archbishops or other Ecclesiastical
persons, having since that time used or exercised any such spiritual or
ecclesiastical jurisdiction in their own right, or names, might lawfully have
done, or hereafter may lawfully do the same, without special warrant, and
authority derived immediately from your Highness, by and under your H. letters
patents: And whereas also by a statute made in the first year of King Edward
the sixth, entitled an act what seals and style, Bishops, or other spiritual
persons shall use, it was ordained, that all and singular Archbishops and
Bishops, and others exercising ecclesiastical jurisdiction, should in their
process use the Kings name and style, and not their own: and also that their
Seals should be graved with the Kings arms: And forasmuch also, as it must
be highly derogatorie to the Imperial Crown of this your Highness Realm,
that any cause whatsoever ecclesiastical or temporal, within these your H.
Dominions, should be heard or adjudged, without warrant or commission from your
Highness, your heirs and successors, or not in the name, style, and dignity of
your Highness, your heirs and successors; or that any seals should be annexed
to any promise, but only your Kingly seal and arms: May it therefore
please the King, at the humble supplication of his Commons, to have it enacted,
That the aforesaid branch of the aforesaid Act made in the first year of
Queen Elizabeth her reign, and every part thereof may still remain, and for
ever be in force. And to the end, the true intent and meaning of the said
statute, made in the first year of King Edward the sixth, may be declared and
revived, that likewise by the authority aforesaid, it may be ordained, and
enacted, that all and singular Ecclesiastical Courts and Consistories,
belonging to any Archb. Bb. Suffraganes, Colege, Deane and Chapter,
Prebendarie, or to any Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever, and which
have heretofore bin commonly called, reputed, taken or known to be Courts or
Consistories, for causes of instance, or wherein any suite, complaint or
action, between party and party, for any matter or cause wherein judgment of
law civil or canon, has bin, or is required, shall and may for ever hereafter
be reputed, taken, and adjudged to be Courts, and iudgmentseats merely civil,
secular and temporal, and not hence forth Ecclesiastical or spiritual; and
as of right belonging and apperteyning to the Royal Crown and dignity of our
Sovereign Lord King James that now is, his heirs and successors for ever.
And that all causes of instance, and controversies, between party and party,
at this day determinable in any of the said Courts, heretofore taken and
reputed ecclesiastical, shall for ever hereafter be taken, reputed, and
adjudged to be causes merely civil, secular and temporal, as in truth they
ought to be, and of right are belonging and appertayning to the jurisdiction of
the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And further, that your H. liege people,
may be the better kept in awe, by some authorized to be your H. Officers and
Ministers to execute justice in your Highness name, and under your H. style and
title of King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defendor of the faith,
etc. in the said Courts and Constories, and in the said causes and
controversies: Be it therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all
the right, title, and interest, of, in, and to the said Courts and
Consistories, and in and to the causes and controversies aforesaid, by any
power, jurisdiction, or authority heretofore reputed Ecclesiastical (but by
this Act adjudged civil, secular, and temporal) shall for ever hereafter,
actually and reallie, be invested and appropried in and to the Royal person of
our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, his heirs and successors, Kings and
Queens of this Realm. And that it shall and may be lawful to and for our
said Sovereign Lord and King, his heirs and successors, in all and every
Shire and Shires, Diocese and Diocesses, within his H. Dominions and
Countries, by his and their letters patents under the great Seal of England,
from time to time, and at all times to nominat and appoint, one, or more able
and sufficient, Doctor or Doctors learned in the civil law, to be his and
their civil, secular and temporal Officer, and Officers, Minister, and
Ministers, of Justice in the same civil, secular, and temporal Courts and
Consistories, which in and over his, and their royal name, style, and
dignity, shall, as Judge, and Judges, do perform, and execute, all and every
such act, and acts, thing and things whatsoever, in and about the execution of
justice and equity in those Courts, according to the course and order of the
civil law, or the Ecclesiastical canons, and constitutions of the Realm, as
heretofore has bin used and accustomed to be done, by, for, or in the name of
any Archbb. Bb: College, Cathedral Church, Deane, Archdeacon, Prebendary, or
any other Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever: And that all, and every
such civil, secular and temporal Officer, and Officers, Minister, and
Ministers, Judge, and Judges, in his and their process shall use one manner of
Seal only and none other, having graued decently therein your Kingly arms
with certain characters for the knowledge of the Diocese or Shire; And
further be it enacted, etc: That it shall and may be lawful, by the
authority aforesaid, for our said Sovereign L. the King, his heirs and
succerssors, from time to time and at all times, to nominat and appoint, by his
and their Highness letters patents, vndee the great Seal of England, for every
Shire and Shires, Diocese and Diocesses within his or their H. Dominions, one
or more, able and sufficient persons, learned in the civil law, to be his and
their Notarie and Notaries, Register and Registers, by him and them selves, or
by his or their lawful Deputy or Deputies, to do, perform, and execute all
and every such act and acts, thing and things, as heretofore in the Courts and
Consistories Ecclesiastical aforesaid, has bin, and now are incident and
apperteyning, to the office of any Register or Notarie. And further, at the
humble suite of the Commons, etc. it may please the King, to have it enacted,
That all and singular matters of Wills and Testaments, with all and every
their appendices, that all and singular matters of Spousalls and Marriages, with
their accessories, that all and singular matters of diffamation heereto fore
determinable in the ecclesiastical Courts (and if there be any other causes
of the like mere civil nature) shall be heard, examined, and determined by
the said civil and secular Officers and Judges in the said civil and secular
Courts, according to the due course of the civil law, or statutes of the
Realm in that behalf provided. And that all matters of Tithes, Dilapidations,
repair of churches, and if there be any other of like nature, with their
accessories, and appendices, shall be heard, examined, and determined, by the
saido civil and secular Officers and Judges, in the said civil and secular
Courts, according to the Kings ecclesiastical laws, statutes, and customs
of the Realm, in that behalf heretofore used, or hereafter by the King and
Parleament, to be established. And at the humble suite of the Commons, may it
please the King to have it further enacted, That all manner of fees heretofore
lawful, or hereafter by the King and Parleament to be made lawful, for, or
concerning the probat of Wills; administration of the goods of the intestat;
letters of tuition; receyving or making of accounts inductions to
Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, Dearries, Parochiall-churches, or other
spiritual promotions, and all other feees what soever heretofore lawful, or
hereafter to be made lawful, for any travail or pain to be taken in or about
the expedition and execution of any of these causes, shall for ever hereafter
be fees, and allowances appropriated to the Judges, and principal Registers of
the said Courts, equally to be divided between them, as heretofore has bin
accustomed; and that the said Judges and Ministers, within their several
charges, shall be Collectors of the Kings tenthes and subsidies, granted and due
by the Clergy, taking for their travayle and pain, in and about the same
collection, such fees as heretofore have bin accustomed. Provided always, that
none of the said civil and temporal Officers and Ministers, nor any of them,
for any offense, contempt or abuse, to be committed by any person, or persons,
in any wise incident to any of the said Courts and Consistories, suspend,
excommunicate, or interdict any person or persons, but shall and lawfully may
by authority of this present Act, proceed against every offender, and
offenders, by such ordinary process, out of the said Register or Notaries
office, as is used upon a sub-paena out of the high Court of Chancerie, and
there upon default, or contempt, to proceed to attachment, proclamation of
rebellion, and in prisonment of the party offending, as in the said high Court
of Cha^cerie is used. Provided also, that all appeals, hereafter to be made,
from all and every Court, and Courts in the Shyres and Diocesses of the
Country, shall be made to the higher Courts, as heretofore has bin accustomed,
only with an alteration, and addition of the names, styles and dignities of
Archb. Bb. and other Ordinaries, unto the name. style and dignity of our
Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors. And that upon the appeals,
so to be made, it shall and may be lawful, for the Judges and Ministers of
Justice, of and in the said higher Courts, to make out all manner of process,
and processes, and to do, and execute all and every act and acts, thing and
things, for the furtherance of Justice, in the causes before said, as to them
shall by the law seem equal, right, meet, and convenient; any law, statute,
privilege, dispensation, prescriptio^, use or customs, heretofore to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided also that all and every such
Judge and Minister, that shall execute any thing by virtue of this act, shall
from time to time obey the Kings write, and writs of prohibition, of
attachment, upon prohibition and indicavit, and not to proceed contrary to
the tenor of such write or writes, in such and the same manner and form, and
condition, as they have or ought to have done before the making of this act,
any thing in this act to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided also that this
act or any thing therein conteigned, shall not extend or be interpreted to give
any authority to the said Judges and Ossicers, or any of them, to put in
execution any civil or Ecclesiastical law, repugnant or contrariant to the
laws, statutes, or customs of the Realm, or hurtful to the Kings prerogative
Royal.

And thus it may seem to be but a small labor, a little cost, and an easy
matter, for the King, his Nobles and Wise men of the Realm, to devise forms
of judgment, and manner of process, and proceedings, without any offices or
functions of the canon law, whereby the use and study of the civil law, and
the reward and maintenance for Civilians, might be furthered and increased,
and not utterly overthrown and taken away; as the Admonitor vncivily bears
us in hand. As for the alteration of the censure of excommunication for
contumacie mentioned in this project, we have the consent of the reverende
Bishops in Page 138.
this admonition, that the same may be altered. For the Admonitor their
Prolocutor speaks on this wise, Viz. As for Excommunication for contumacie by
the Admonitors judgment, may be taken away without offense, and with the good
liking of the Bishops.
the excommunication practiced in our ecclesiastical Courts for contumacie, in
not appearing, or not satisfying the judgment of the Court, if it had pleased
the Prince, etc. to have altered the same at the beginning, and set some other
order of process in place thereof; I am persuaded (says he) that the Bishops
and Clergy of the Realm would have bin very well contented therewith. And
speakinge of a certain manner of civil discomoning used in the Church of
Tigure, he further adds, viz. Which, or the like good order devised by some
godly persons, if it might be by authority placed in this Church etc: I think
it would be gladly received, to shun the offense, that is taken at the other.

Admonition.
And matters of Tithes, Testaments, and Matrimony; matters also of adultery,
slander, etc. are in these men's judgments, mere temporal, etc. therefore to be
dealt in by the temporal Magistrate only, which as yet have either none at
all, or very few laws touching those things, therefore the common law of the
Realm, must by that occasion, receive also a very great alteration. For it
will be no small matter, to apply these things, to the temporal law, and to
appoint Courts, Officers and manner of process and proceedings in judgment
for the same.

Assertion.
In deed we hold, that all these matters whereof mention is here made, and all
Matters of tithes and other causes of like nature perteine to civil Justice.
others of the like nature, are merely civil and temporal, and by the
temporal Magistrate alone, to be dealt in, and to be discussed, if we
consider the administration of external and civil justice. And this we
think will be granted of all, and not be denied of any unless they be too to
popishly addicted. In regard whereof we have drawn (as before is mentioned) a
project, how Courts and manner of process and proceedinges in judgment, by
Doctors of the civil law may be appointed by the King, and his high Court of
Parleame^t, without that, that the common law of the Realm, by the occasion of
any such courts, officer, or manner of process and proceedings, must receave
any alteration at al, muchlesse a very great alteration. Howbeit if it should
not please the King, and that the Civilians could not find favor in his
sight, by courts, offices, and manner of process and proceedings in judgment
before specified, or by the like to have the study of the civil law advanced,
yet we think it convenient once again to ^owe matters of Tithes, etc. may be
dealt in by the Kings Judges.
be examined how these matters may be dealt in, according to the rules and
grou^d^ of the common law, before the Kings Judges, and Justices of the Kings
bench, and common pleas.

By a statute of 32. H. 8. c. 7. it is clear, that all tithes, oblations etc.
and other ecclesiastical or spiritual profits, by the law or statutes of the
Realm, may be made temporal, as being admitted to be, abide, and go to, and
in, temporal hands, lay uses, and profits. From the reason (...) which
statute it is clear, that those law^^ likewise, may be reckoned amongst (...)
for temporal laws, which by the law^^ and statutes of the Realm, may be
executed by temporal and lay persons, and which are conversant about temporal
and lay causes. If then the execution of the laws, touching these matters may
lawfully remain, and abide in the hands of Doctors of the civil law, being
temporal and lay persons (as already under the Bishops they do); it can not
be denied but that the Kings Judges, and Ius^icers of both Benches, may be as
competible Judges, to put in execution the laws concerning these matters, as
Doctors of the civil law, or other laymen be. But the causes are not reputed
and called temporal, and lay causes amongst us. What for that? if in their
own nature simply considered, these causes be merely lay and temporal
causes, such causes (I mean) as whereof the King, a ^ay, civil and temporal
Magistrate, by his lay, civil and temporal Magistracy, ^erived unto him
immediately from the holy law of God, may, and ought to take ^ogniza^ce, and
thervpo^, either in his own Royal person, or by the person of any of his
inferior Officers, may give abso^te and peremptory judgment: If (I say) ^hese
things be so, what booteth it, or that wisdom is it contend, that these causes
and matters, have bin, and are still adjudged to be therefore ecclesiastical,
and no temporal causes, because through an abusive speech, or through a vain
and evil custom, they have bin so called and accounted in times past? And
what if it has pleased the Kings Progenitors, by sufferance to tolerate the
execution of such laws, as concern these things, to be in the hands and power
of Ecclesiastical persons; yet here upon it follows not that in very deed
and truth, the Magistracy of the said ecclesiastical persons, was an
ecclesiastical Magistracy, or that they were ecclesiastical Magistrates; but
their Magistracy was, and remained still a temporal magistracy, and they
were and aboade temporal Magistrates. For not more can the quality of the
person, alter the nature of the cause, then can the quality of the cause,
alter the nature of the person. And, if it be true, that matters determinable
(in times past) by a Magistracy abusivelie called ecclesiastical, be
notwithstanding properly tempora^^ matters, and that the same Magistracy
also, be a temporal and no spiritual Magistracy, what a childish and poor
conceit is it, to challenge and threp upon the te^porall Magistrate, that he
has none, or very few temporal laws, touching those matters? And that
therefore the people should not solicit an alteration of abuses in
Church-goverment, least for want of temporal laws, the people should be
without ecclesiastical discipline? It will be no small matter (says he) to
apply these things to the temporal law; yea and so say I to. But what of
that? The question is not how hardly these things may be applied to the
temporal law, but how small a matter it were to apply the temporal law unto
these things. For it is not said in any law, that, casus ex iuribus, but it is
said in all laws, that The temporal law may easily be applied to causes now
reputed ecclesiastical.
ex casibus ^ura nascuntur. And in deed the Physician applies not the disease
to his physic, but he prepares his physic for the disease. The husbandman
he measures not his ground by the seed, but his seed by the ground. The
Draper, he meateth not his yard by the cloth, but his cloth by the yard. If
in like manner the temporal laws, and the grounds and rules thereof, were
applied to these matters of tithes, marriages, etc. whereof he speaks, what
more alteration could there be of the temporal law by such an application,
then there is an alteration of the plu^met, by laying it to the stone, or then
there is an alteration of the rule or yard, by laying them to the timber and
cloth? Besides, he that rightly and after an exact, and equal proportion, can
apply one rule or maxim of the te^porall law, to many more cases, then
wherevn to it has bin usually in former times applied, he may rather be
reputed an additioner, then an alterer of the law. But how may the temporal
law be applied to those matters? How? even so, and so, as follows. By the
statute 32. How Tithes may be recovered in the Kings te^porall Courts.
H. 8. c. 7. it is declared, that tithes, oblations, etc. and other
ecclesiastical or spiritual profitts, etc. bein^g in lay men's hands, to lay
uses, be no more ecclesiastical, but temporal goods, and profittes; and that
if any person were disseysed, deforced, wronged, or otherwise kept, or put from
his lawful inheritance, estate, seysin, etc. of, in, or to the same, by any
person, clayming, or pretending to have interest, or title, in, or to the same,
that then, in all and every such case, the person so disseysed, deforced, or
wrongfullie kept from his right or possession, shall and may have his remedy
in the Kings temporal Courts, as the case shall require, for the recouvery of
such inheritance by writ original, etc. to be devised and granted out of the
Kings Court of Chancerie, in like manner, etc. It is there likewise provided,
that that Act shall not extend, nor be expounded, to give any remedy, cause of
action or suite, in the Courts temporal, against any person, which shall
refuse to set out his Tithes, or which shall deteigne, etc. his Tithes and
offerings. But that in all such cases, the party, etc. having cause to demand,
or have the same tithes, shall have his action for the same, in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, according to the ordenance, in the first part of that
act mentioned, and none otherwise.

Now then sit hence every person, whether he be lay or Ecclesiastical, having
^^ght to demand tithes and offeringes, has the party from whom those tithes
(...) due, bound and obliged unto him: and thence also, the party not
dividinge, yielding or paying his tithes, does actuallie and reallie deteigne
the same, and thereby does unjustly wrong the party to whom they be due:
contrary to justice, and the Kings laws; sithence (I say) these things be so,
what alteration, or disadvantage could befall or ensue to the common law, or
the Professors thereof; if so be it might please the King, with his
Parleament, to have the last part of this Act so to be explaned, extended, and
enlarged, as that the same might give remedy in the Kings temporal Courts, by
writ original, to be devised and granted out of the Cha^cerie, against any
person deteigning his tithes and offerings^ the Hospital of St Leonards in
York, of the Kings foundation and Patronage, Hospital of S. Leonard 1. 2. H.
6. c 2
endowed of a thrave of corn, to be taken yearly, of every plou^gh earing,
with in the Counties of York, Comberlande, Westmerland and Lancaster, having
no sufficient, or covenable remedy, at the common law, against such as
withheld the same thraves, it was ordeigned by the King in Parleament, that the
Master of the said Hospital, and his successors, might have actions by writ,
or plaintes of debt, or detinue at their pleasure, against all and every of
them that deteyned the same thraves, for to recover the same thraves with their
damages. And by a statute 32. H. 8. c. 44. it is enacted, That the Parsons and
Curates of five parish churches, whereinto the Town of Roysen did extend it
self, and every of them, and the successors of every of them, shall have
their remedy, by authority of that Act, to sue, demand, ask, and recover in
the Kings Court of Chancerie, the Tithes of corn, hay, wool, lamb and calfe,
subtracted or denied to be paid by any person or persons. Again, Vicars,
Parsons, or Improprietaries, do implead any man, in the ecclesiastical Court,
for tithes of wood, being of the age of 20. years, or above, for tyth-hay out
of a meadow, for the which time out of mind and memory of man, there has only
some Meade-silver bin paid: or if a debate hang in a spiritual Court for the
right of tithes, having his original, from the right of Patronage, and the
^ua^tite of the same tithes, do pass the ^urth part of the value of the
benefice, prohibition in all these, and sundry other cases does lie, and the
matters are to be tried, and examined in the Kings Courts, according to the
course of the common law, unless upon just cause there be granted a
consultation. And if in these cases, in maintenance of the common law, the
defendants have relief in the Kings Courts; I think it more meet to leave it
to the consideration rather of common, then to the judgment of canon Lawiers,
to determine, what alteration the common law could sustain, in case all
Plaintiffes, as well as some defendants, might pray the Kings aid, for the
recovery of tithes; especially seeing at this day, the manner of paying tithes
in England, for the most part, is now limited by the common and statute laws
of the Realm, and not by any foreign canon law. may be. I have perused many
libels; made and exhibited, before the ecclesiastical What facts touching the
witholding of tithes are examinable in the ecclesiastical Courts.
Judges, yea and I have read them over and over, and yet for ground of
complaint, did I never perceave any other material and principal kind of
fact, 'examinable in those Courts, but only such as follow. First, that the
party agent, is either Rector, Vicar, Proprieiarie, or Possessor, of such a
Parish Church, and of the Rectorie, Vicarage, farm, possession, or dominion of
the same, and by virtue thereof has right unto all Tithes, oblations, etc.
apparteyning to the same Church, and growing with on the same Parish, bounds,
limitts, or places tythable of the same.

Secondly, that his predecessors, Rectors, Vicars, etc. time out of mind and
memory of man, have quietly and peaceably, received and had, all and singular
Tithes, oblations, etc: increasing, growing, and renewing within the Parish,
etc. and that they and he have bin, and are in peaceable possession, of having,
and receaving Tithes, oblations, etc.

Thirdly, that the party defendant, has had and received in such a year, etc.
of so many sheep, feeding and couching within the said Parish, etc. so many
fleeces of woll; and of so many ewes, so many lambs, etc.

Fourthly, that the defendant has not set out, yealded or paid, the Tyth of
the wool, and lamb; and that every Tyth fleece of the said wool, by common
estimation, is worth so much; and that every Tyth lamb, by common estimation,
is likewise worth so much, etc.

Fifthly that the defendant, is subject to the jurisdiction of that Court,
whereunto he is sommoned.

Lastly, that the defendant does hitherto deny, or delay to pay his Tithes,
notwithstanding he has bin requested there unto.



These and such like are the chief matters The Kings Justices are as able to
judge of exceptions against tithes, as the ecclesiastical Judges.
of fact, whereupon in the ecclesiastical Courts, proofs by witnesses, or
records rest to be made for the recoverie of tithes. And who knows not, but
that these facts, upon proofs made, before the Kings Justices, may as well be
decided by them, as by any of the reverende Bishops or venerable Archdeacons,
their Chancelors, or Officials. If there be ame exception alleged by the
defendant, as of composition, prescription, or privilege, the Kings Justices
are as able to judge of the validity, of these, as they are now able to
determine customs de modo decimandi, or of the use of high ways, of making
and repayring of bridges, of commons of pasture, pawnage, estovers, or such
like. Truth it is, that of legacies and bequestes of Legacies how they may be
recovered at the common law.
goods, the reverend Bishops by sufferance of our Kings and consent of our
people, have accustomablie used, to take cognyzance, and to hold plea, in their
spiritual Courts. Notwithstanding if the legacy be of lands, where lands be
divisible by Testament, the judgment thereof, has been always used, and
holden by the Kings writ, and never in any ecclesiastical Court. Wherefore if
it shall please the King, to enlardge the authority of his Courts temporal,
by commandinge matters of legacies and bequestes of goods, as well as of lands,
to be heard, and determined in the same, it were not much to be feared, but
that the Kings Justices, the Kings learned Counsel, and others learned in the
law of the Realm, without any alteration of the same law, would speedily find
means, to apply the grounds thereof, as well to all cases of legacies, and
bequests of goods, as of lands. For if there be no goods divisible by will,
but the same are grau^table, and confirmable, by deed of gift, could not the
Kings Justices, as well judge of the gift, and of the thing given by will, as of
the grant, and of the thing granted by deed of gift? or can they not
determine of a legacy of goods, as well as of a bequest of lands? If it should
come in debate before them, whether the Testator, at the time of making his
will, were of good and perfect memory, upon profes, and other circumstances to
be opened, and made of the Testators memory by livelie testimonies, either
the Admonitor must condemn the Kings learned and discreet Justices to be
(...) mentis and insanae memoriae, or else it must be confessed, that they be as
well able to judge of the distraction of wits and unsoundness of memory, in a
person deceased, as they be to determine the question of Lunacie, madness, or
idiocie, in a man living.

If any question should arise upon the revocation of a former will of the
ademptio^ of a legacy, or of a legacy given upon condition, or in diem, it
would be (...) matter, for the learned Judges; upon sight of the Will, and
proofs to be made, to define, which is the first, and which is the last will;
whether the legacy remain, or whether it be revoked, whether it be legatum
per rerum or (...), whether condicionall or without condition: And if it be
condicional whether the same be possible or impossible; honest, or dishonest;
and if it be (...), whether the day be past, or to come. But there lies no
action at the common law, for a legatorie, against the executor to recover his
legacy. I grant. But a creditor to recover his d^^t, due by the testator upon
specialtie, may bring an action, at the common law, against the executor. And
then what is the cause, that a creditor, may recover his debt, and that a
legatorie can not recover his legacy, in the Kings Court, but only, for that
remedy could not be given unto legatories complaynantes by any writ out of
the Chancerie. And therefore that such plaintifes, might not be deferred of
their right, and 21. Ed. 1. statute upon the writ of consultation
remedy in such cases, to their great damage, it has pleased the Kings, by
sufferance, to tolerate the Church officers, to determine these cases.
Wherefore if it might please the King, to cause Writtes to be made out of his
Court of Chancerie, for the recoverie of Legacies, it were clear by the common
law of the Realm (as from the statute may be gathered) that the cognizance of
these cases, did not appertain any more, to the spiritual Court. For then
might the legatorie, by that Writ, bring an actio^ against the executor, to
obtain his Legacy. But how should that action be tried? How? even as other
actions of debt, detinue, or trover be tried, namely (as the case should
require) either by the country, or by the Judges upon a moratur in lege.

As Testamentes with their adherences, so likewise matters of Spousalles,
Matters of marriages, more meet to be decided by the Kings, then by the Bb.
officers.
Marriages, divorces, etc. together their accessories, by common right, of the
Imperial Crown, did in ancient times properly apperteyne to the
examinations, and sentences of the Emperors them selves, and to their
Provostes, Deputies, and Presidentes, of Cities and Provinces, as by the
several titles, de Testamentis, Legatis, Fidei commissis, Nuptijs, repudijs,
divortio, dote, etc. in the books of the civil law appears. By the Law of
England also, the King has the mariadge of an heir being within age, and in
his ward. Widows also that hold of the King in chief, must not marie them
selves without the Kings license. And by an Act made 4. and 5. Phil. and Mary,
there is a straight punishment provided against all such, as shall take away
Maidens, that be inheritors, being within the age of sixteen years; or marie
them without consent of their Parents. And what reason lets them, that the
King, might not as well have the care, and cognoyzance of all the co^tractes of
marriage, especially of the marriage of all children and Widows, in his
temporal Courts, as he has of some parties, to be contracted, of the Dower,
of the ioynture, of the dis aragment, of the age, of the (...) way, of the
deflouring, and of manage without parents consent in some cases? or what a
very great alteration of the common Law, could ensue, in case the Kings
temporal Justices, did examine, and determine whether the contract were a
pefect and simple, or condicionall contract yea or no? For if upon the statute
made by Phi. and Mary, that Maidens and Women, children of Noble men, and
Gentlemen, etc. being heirs apparent, etc. and being left within age of xvj.
years, should not marie against the will or unknowing, of, or to the Father,
or against, etc. If I say upon the publishing of this Act, there has no
alteration of the common law hitherto followed, it is but a mere superstitious
error, to feign, that a change of the common law must follow, if so be this
statute were extended, to all children, both Sons and Daughters, of what
parentage, sex, estate, or age so ever. For if the King in his temporal
Courts, had the definition of all, as well as of some contractes, made by
children, without consent of parents, then should a multitude of lewd and
ungodly contractes, made by flattery, trifling gifts, fair and goodly
promises, of many unthrifty, and light personages thereunto won, by entreaty
of persons of lewd demeanoure, be pronounced void, and of no efficacy, yea
and on the other side, a number of honest, lawful, and godly contractes,
should be confirmed, and remain in their full strenght, and force; which now
upon certain frivolous, and trifeling quiddities, and nicities of Much a do
in the ecclesiastical Courts, about accipio, and accipiam.
words and sillabes are pronounced in the ecclesiastical Courts, to be no
contracts. And in good earnest, is there now a days, any soundnes of reason at
all, to be heard amongst the Doctors and proctors of those courts, where they
inform out of the canon law in these cases? For does not their whole dispute
and information rest principally, whether the contract be made by words of
the present, or of the future tence? whether it be made with an oath, or
without an oath? yea and do they not exceedingly besweate, and besmyre them
selves, by turning, and returning, by folding, and unfolding, their great and
hydeous volumes, for proof, and reprofe, of accipio, and accipiam? yea and
sometimes of letters, and accentes? If the yong-man and maid, having both of
them their parents consent, shall answer only in the future tence: I will
have thee, or, I will take thee; or I am content to take thee, or I will have
none other but thee, or if ever I marie, I will marie thee; and do not answer
directly, I do take thee to mine husband, or I do take thee to my wife: oh!
it is a world to see, and a wonderment to behold, what canvasing, heaving, and
shoving, what a stir, quoyle, and garboyle, the Canonistes make, about the
lifting, and removing of these feathers. And whatsoever the holy Scriptures
have determined of the necessity of parents consent, or of what necessity
likewise so ever the Institu. de ^up.. 1.
civil law, hold the consent of parents to be, yet in the ecclesiastical
Courts, the papal canon law must needs take place, because by the same law,
consent of parents, is not de necessitate, but de honestate tantum, and
because also matrimonia debent esse libera, and non pendere ex alieno arbitrio.
Wherein the reverend Bishops, (under their favorable patience) The canon law
preferred by the revere^d Bb. before the law of God and the civil law.
can not clearly excuse them selves, of much oversight, in so slender managing,
of a matter, of so great, and high a consequence. The holy law of God, by
public authority, has been commanded within this Realm, to be sincerely,
and purelie taught, received and embraced. The civil law, has not had her free
course, in this case hindered, by any law of the Realm. And how then comes
it to pass, that the canon law, being in this point repugnant to both these
laws, should notwithstanding, be preferred, bear sway and take place, in
this Realm, before and above both these laws, especially the same in this
point, as being against the law of God, being utterly taken away. The abuses
past, and marriages past, under color and pretext of this law, may and ought
to be bewailed, and repented of: yea and that no such marriages, in time to
come, may be made, I leave it to be considered, whether it Certain special
points to be provided about marriages.
might not tend to the advancement of the law of God, be honorable for the
King, and commodious for the common weal, providentlie to provide, these
things following: viz. First, that no matrimony secretly contracted, against
the will, or unknowing of, or to the Father, or him, or her, that has the
keeping, educatio^, or government, of the party to be married, before he, or
thee come to a certain age, should in any sorts, be good or avaylable to make
the pos^^tie of those, who shall be so married, legitimate, or inheritable.

Secondly, that every contract of marriage concluded, with consent of Parents,
Tutor, Governor, or Guardian, should be forcible, and effectual, to bind both
parties irrevocablie: whether the same contract (with an intent to conclude a
marriage) be made by words of the present, or future tence, it skilleth not.
Thirdly, that every man stealing away, contracting, and marying a maid, under
the age of certain years, without consent of Father, Tutor, Governor, or
Guardian, should be a felon, and for such his felonious act, suffer the pains
of death. And lastly, that all lice^ces to marie without banes asking,
according to the intendement of the book of common prayer, be forbidden and
unlawful for ever. Which things if they might be observed, it is very
likely, that men's inheritances (as now many times they do) should not hang in
suspense, upon question of legitimation, or illegitimation of their children,
to be allowed, or disallowed, by the canon law. There should not any such long,
and tedious s^^tes and variances hereafter fall out, between the posterities
and children of one man, for the right, and interest of their Ancestors
Complaint heretofore made upon stealing away and marying men's daughters, how
they may cease.
Lands. Neither should Sir Thomas Lucie, nor Sir Edmund Ludlow, nor the Lady
Norton, nor Master Cook the Kings Attorney general, nor many more Knights,
Esquiers, and Gentlemen, complain and bewail, the stealing away, and marriages
of any their daughters, Neeces, nere Kinswome^, or Wards. Neither could it
be possible, that one Woman might procure four, or five several licenses for
the marriage of four or five several husbands, all of them being alive
together, and not one of them dead. Neither should there any License of
marriage be granted out of an Ecclesiastical Court, to any man or woman with
a blanck, whereby the party lice^sed was enabled to have married an other man's
wife, or his own, or his wyves sister. Neither should any couples married, and
livinge together, four, six, or more years, as man and wife, upon a new, and
suddayne dislike, or discontentement, and upon a surmised precontract, to be
pretensedlie proved, by two suborned witnesses, be adjudged (by virtue of the
canon law) to be no husband, and to be no wife. Neither should any man (being
solemnly married to a wife, and afterward by reason of a precontract, solemnly
divorced from the same his wife, and by censures of the Church compelled to
marie her for whom sentence of preco^tract was adjudged) be reauthorized by the
same Consistory, about ten, or twelve years after the divorce, to resommon,
recall, and rechalenge his first wife: especially she having a testimonial
out of the same Consistory, of her lawful divorce, and being again solemnly
married to an other husband. Wherefore to conclude these matters of Tithes,
Testaments, and Marriages (if the King should not be pleased, to have the study
of the civil law advanced, by some such law, as whereof the former project
makes mention) I dispute for the enlargement of the common law, thus: If it
stand with reason, with the grounds and rules of the common law, and with the
Kings Royal prerogative, that in cases of Tithes, Testaments, and Marriages,
the King (if it may please him so to provide by Parleament) may give remedy
unto complaynants, by writts out of the Chancerie, and that complaints in such
cases, may effectually be redressed upon such writts, in the Kings Courts: And
if also sundry matters of Tithes, Testaments, and Marriages, be already
handled, in the Kings Courts: if these things (I say) be so, and so may be;
then with little reason, did the Admonitor warn us, that a very great
alteration, of the common law must follow, and that it will be no small matter,
to apply these things, to the temporal law.

But the antecedent is true, as has been already showed.

Therefore the consequent is true.



Admonition.
Judgments also of adultery, slander, etc. are in these men's judgments
Page 78.
mere temporal, and therefore to be dealt in by the temporal Magistrate only.

Assertion.
We are in deed of this judgment, that in regard of the Kings Royal Office,
these judgments of adultrie, and other criminal causes comprised within this
clause, etc. ought no more to be exempted, from the Kings temporal Courts,
then matters of theft, murder, treason, and such like ought to be. And for the
mayntenance of our judgments, we affirm, that there is no crime, or offense
of what nature or quality soever, respecting any commandment, contained
within either of the two tables, of the holy law of God, if the same be now
corrigible by spiritual power, but that some fault and contempt, one, or
other, of the like nature, and quality, as comprised under the same
commandment, has been evermore, and is now punishable, by the Kings Regal,
and temporal jurisdiction.

For, adultery, as the same is to be censured, by penance in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, so is ravishment also, buggerie and sodomie, to be
punished in the Kings Court, by pain of death. And, as has been accustomed,
that Ordinaries, by ce^sures of the Church, may correct fornicators, so
fornication also, (as in some books written of the common law, is reported)
has been in times passed, presented, and punished in leetes, and Lawdayes, in
diverse places of the Realm, by the name of Letherwhyte, which is, as the
book says, an ancient Saxon term. And the Lord of the Leete (where it has
been presented) has ever had a fine, for the same offense. By the statute of
those, that be borne beyond the Seas, 25. Ed 3.
it appears, that the King has cognizance, of foam bastardie. And now in
most cases of bastardie, if not in all, by the statute of Eliza. the reputed
father, of a bastard borne, is liable to be punished at the discretion of the
Justices of peace.

Touching perjury, if a man loose his action, by a false verdict, in plea of
land, Perjury if punishable, temporallie in some cases, why not in all.
he shall have an attaynt, in the Kings Court, to punish the perjury, and to
reform the falsitie. And by diverse statutes it appears, that the Kings
te^porall Officers, may punish perjury committed in the Kings temporal
Courts. And though it be true, that such perjury as has risen, upon causes
reputed spiritual, have been in times past, punished only by ecclesiastical
power and censures of the Church; yet hereupon it follows not, that the
perjury it self, is a mere spiritual, and not a temporal crime or matter,
or that the same might not to be civillie punished.

By a statute of Westminster 25. Ed. 3. it was accorded, that the King, and his
Usury.
heirs shall have the cognizance of the usurers dead; and that the Ordinaries
have cognizance of usurers on life, to make compulsion, by censures of the
Church for sin, and to make restitution of the vsuries taken, against the
laws of holy church. And by another statute, it is provided, that vsuries
shall 20. H. 3. c. 5.
not turn against any being within age, after the time of the death of his
Auncestoure, until his full age. But the usury, with the principal debt,
which was before the death of his Auncestor, did remain, and turn against the
heir. And because all usury being forbidden by the law of God, is sin, and
detestable, 13. Eliz. c. 8.
it was enacted, that all usury, lone, and forbearing of money, etc. giving
days, etc. shall be punished, according to the form of that Act. And that
every such offender shall also be punished, and corrected, according to the
Eccle. laws, before that time made against usury. By all which statutes, it
seems that the cognizance, and reformation of usury, by the laws of the
Realm, partayneth only to the King, unless the King by his law, permit the
Church, to correct the same, by the censures of the church, as a sin
committed against the holy law of God.

Touching heresies, and schisms, albeit the Bishops, by their Episcopal,
Heresies and schisms are punishable by the Kings laws.
and ordinary spiritual power, grounded upon canon law, or an evil custom,
have used by definitive sentence pronounced in their Consistories, to condemn
men for heretics and schismatickes; and afterward being condemned, to deliver
them to the seculer power, to suffer the pains of death, as though the King
being custos vtriusque tabulae, had not power by his Kingly office, to enquire
of heresy, to condemn an heretic, and to put him to death, unless he were
first condemned, and delivered into his hands by their spiritual power,
although this has been (I say) the use in England, yet by the statutes of
Richard the second, and Henry the fifth, it was lawful for the Kings Judges,
and Justices, to enquire of heresies and Lollardes, in Leetes, Sherifes turns,
and in Lawdayes, and also in Sessions of the peace. Yea the King, by the common
law of the Realm, revived 25. H. 5. c. 14.
by an Act of Parleament, which before by the Statute of Henry the fourth, was
altered, may pardon a man condemned for heresy: yea and if it should come to
pass, that any heresies, or schisms should arise in the Church of England,
the King by the laws of the Realm, and by his Supreme and Sovereign power,
with his Parleament, may correct, redress, and reform, all such defaultes and
enormities. Yea further, the King and his Parleament, with consent of the
Clergy, in their Convocation, 1. Eliz. ca. (...)
has power to determine what is heresy, and what is not heresy. If then it
might please the King, to have it enacted by Parleament, that they which
opiniativelie, and obstinately, hold, defend, 1 Eliz (...). 1.
and publish, any opinions which according to an Act of Parleament, already
made, have been, or may be ordered, or adjudged to be heresies, should be
heretics, and felons, and their heresies, If it please the King, heretics
may be adjudged felons, and here^ies felonies.
to be felonies, and that the same heretics and felons, for the same their
heresies, and felonies, being araigned, convicted, and adjudged by the course
of the common law, as other felons are, should for the same their heresies, and
felonies, suffer the pains of death: there is no doubt, but the King, by
virtue of his Sovereign, and Regal Laws, might powerfullie enough, reform
heresies, without any such ceremonial form, papal observance, or
superstitious solemnity, as by the order of the canon law, pretends to be
still in force, has been accustomed.

And as these offenses before mentioned, be punishable partly by temporal,
and partly by ecclesiastical authority, so drunkenness; absence from divine
service, and prayer; fighting, quareling, and brawling in church and church
yeard; diffamatorie words and libels; violent laying on of hands upon a
Clarke, etc. may not only be handled, and punished in a Court ecclesiastical,
but they may also be handled and punished by the King, in his temporal Courts.
By all which it is evident, that the Clergy has had the correction of these
crimes, rather by a custom, and by sufferance of Princes, the^ for that they
be mere spiritual, or that they had authority, by the immediate law of God.
And if all these, as well as some of these crimes, by sufferance of Princes,
The cognizance of all crimes as well as of some crimes by the law of God,
belong to the King.
and by a custom may be handled and punished spirituallie, then also if it
please the King, may all these, as well as some of these crimes, without a
custom, be handled, and punished temporallie. For by custom, and sufferance
only, some of these crimes be exempted from the cognizance of the King, and
therefore by the immediate law of God, the cognizance as well of all, as of
some of these crimes, properly apperteineth unto the King. And then the
judgment, of those men, who defend judgments of adultery, slander, etc. to
be more temporal, and by the temporal Magistrate, only to be dealt in,
seems every way, to be a sincere, and sound judgment. Howbeit, they do not
hereby intend, that the party offending, in any of these things, and by the
Kings law punishable, should therefore wholly be exempted and freed from all
censures of the Church. Nay we judge it most requisite, and necessary, No
offender freed from the censures of the Church.
for the bringing the party which offends, to repentance, and amendment of
life (if presently upon sentence of death, he be not executed) that besides
his temporal punishment, the censures of the Church, according to the
quality of the offense, may be used, and executed against against him: yea
and we think, that the King, by the holy law of God, is bound by his regal
power, to command the church, duly and rightly, to use the same censures, not
only against every adulterer, defamer, usurer, etc. but also against every
thief, every manslayer, every traitor, and every other offender: For not
only sins, reputed with us ecclesiastical, but al sins, of what kind
soever, ought to be repented of, and co^sequentlie against all sins, the
ecclesiastical censures ought to be used. And by whom should the same be
exercised, but by the church? Why then belike, where an offendour is punished
in the Kings Court, he shall again be punished in the Ecclesiastical Court,
and so for one offense, be twice punished, which were unreasonable.

To this we answer, that it is not against reason, that one man, for one For
a man to be punished twice for one fault in two respects is not unreasonable.
fault, should be punished both temporallie and spirituallie. First he
consists of two parts: viz. of a body, and of a soul, in both which parts
he has offended. Secondly he has offended, aginst two laws, the law of God,
and the law of the King. For the execution of which two laws, there be two
kinds of officers, of two several natures, the King for the one law, and the
Officers of the Church for the other law; and both these kinds of officers,
have power given them, immediately from God, to execute the one, Kingly and
temporal; the other Pastoral and spiritual power. And therefore we say, it
stands with great reason, that the soul causing the body to sin, should no
more escape that punishment which is appointed for the soul, by the law of
God, then the body should escape that punishment which is appointed for the
body, by the law of the King: why then the Officers of the Church, may meddle
with matters apperteyning to the Kings law, and what an indignity to the King
were that? To this we answer, that the Officers of the church, in a several
respect, and to a several end, dealing in one, and the self same matter,
wherein the King deals, may no more be charged with dealing in matters
apperteyning to the Crown, by the exercise of their spiritual sword, then can
the King be charged, with meddling in the same matters, to meddle with matters
perteining to the soul, by the exercise of his temporal sword. So that the
spiritual power of the officers of our Savior Christ, (which consists
only in binding and loosing of the souls of men) can not possibly, by any
reason or good ^ntendement, be construed, now to be any more prejudicial, to
the Kings prerogative, or contrariant to the laws of the Realm, then it has
bin heretofore: Because usury, incontinencie, and diverse other crimes
ecclesiastical have not bin punished only by ecclesiastical correction, but
also by te^porall pain. And therefore to take away this frivolous objection, we
instantly pray, that the laws of the Realm may still keep their due and
ordinary course, and that the Kings Scepter, may reteyne, that ancient and
Royal estimation, which belongs unto it: and that it may be ordered, by an
irrevocable law as follows. Potestas and iurisdictio actionum quarumcunque
civilium; punitio, and castigatio externa, omnium maleficiorum quorumcunque
famam, facultates, seu personas tangentium, non penes Pastores, and Seniores
Ecclesiae; sed penes vnum solumque Principem, and civilem Magistratum sunto,
and quicunque ijs non acquieverunt, capitali poena punivnto.



Whereupon also falls to the ground, that cavillous and odious slander
following in the Admonition: viz. that the laws mainteyning the Queens
Supremacy, in governing of the church, and her prerogative in matters
ecclesiastical, as well elections, as others, must be also abrogated. The
contrary whereof, being avouched throughout this whole Assertion, it shall be
needless, to spend any time, in the refutation of so gross an untruth.

Admonition.
Those laws likewise, must be taken Page 79.
away, whereby impropriations and patronages stand, as men's lawful possession,
and heritage.

Assertion.
By a statute 15 R. 2. c. 6. because diverse damages, and diseases oftentimes
had happened, and daily did happen, to the parochians of diverse places, by the
appropriation of benefices, of the same places, it was agreed and assented,
that in every license, from thence forth to be made in the Chancerie of
appropriation of any parish church, it should be expreslie contained and
comprised, that the diocesan of the place, upon the appropriation of such
churches, should ordeine according to the value of such Churches, a convenient
sum of money, to be paid and distributed yerelie of the fruits, and profits
of the same churches, by those that shall have the same churches in proper use,
and by their successors, to the poor parochia^s of the same churches, in aid
of their living, and sustentation for ever; and also that the Vicar be well and
sufficiently endowed. By which statute, it appears, that every
impropriatio^, ought to be made by license out of the Chancerie, that it ought
to be made, to the use of ecclesiastical persons only, and not to the use of
temporal persons, or patrones. Now then, all such parish churches, as without
license of the King, in his Chancerie, have bin appropried, to any
ecclesiastical person; and again all such parish churches, as by license of
the King in his Chancerie, have been appropried, to the use of lay persons,
they are not to be accounted, men's lawful possessions, and heritages. Besides
this, as many impropriations, as whereupon the Diocesan of the place, has not
ordained, according to the value of such churches, a convenient sum of money,
to be paid, and distributed yearlie of the fruits of the same churches, etc. to
the poor Parochians of the same churches, in aid of their living and
sustentation for ever; yea and every church also appropried, as whereunto a
perpetual Vicare is not ordained, canonically to be instituted, and inducted
in the same, and which is not convenably endowed, to do divine service, and to
inform the people, and to keep hospitality there, all and every such
church, and churches (I say) otherwise then thus appropried, by the law of the
Realm (as it seems) are not men's lawful possessions and inheritances: For
by a statute of King Henry the fourth, every church, after the 15. year of
King Richard the second, 4 H. 4. c. 12
appropried by license of the King, against the form of the said statute, of R.
2. if the same were not duly reformed, after the effect of the same statute,
within a certain time appointed, then the same appropriation and license
thereof made, presently (the parish Church of Hadenham, only excepted) was
adjudged to be void, and utterly repealed, and adnulled for ever. And therefore
I leave it to the inquisition of our Sovereign Lord the King, whether the
impropriatio^ of the parish church of B^lgraue in the County of Leycester,
whereunto two Chapples are annexed, and other Churches appropried to the Bishop
of Leycester, since the statutes of Richard the second, and Henry the fourth,
be the lawful or unlawful possession and heritage of the same Bishop, yea or
no. And if it be lawfully appropried and so a lawful possession, and
heritage, then I leave it again to the inquisition of the King, what sum of
money, out of the fontes of the same church ought yearlie to be distributed, to
the poor Parochia^s; what the endowment, of a Vicare canonicallie to be
instituted, and inducted, in the same church, should be: what house is
appointed for the same Vicar to keep his hospitality in, and whether any
Vicare, for the space of these many years passed, has bin Canonicallie
instituted, and inducted in the same church, to possess that endowment, to
inhabit that same house, and inform that people. For if by the appropriation
it self, or by the abuse thereof, the poor Parochians, have bin defrauded of
their yearly distribution, or if no Vicares have been Canonicallie instituted
and inducted in the same, or if being inducted, they have their indowments so
small, or so covetouslie kept back from them, as that they can not
sufficiently maintain the^ selves, much less keep hospitality: the^ (as
the Admonitor confesses,) there must needs be a lamentable abuse of
impropriations; and that therefore it is greatly to be wished, that by some
good statute, it might be remedied.

And as those churches which are unlawfully appropried, are not the lawful
possession and heritage, of the proprietaries, so on the other side we a^^irme,
that those impropriations, which were made and reformed, according to the
statutes of Ri. 2. and He. 4. may well stand, as men's lawful possessions and
heritages, even with those things, which are required to be planted and brought
into the Church, whatsoever the Admonitor has written to the contrary. For
we do not hold that maintenance, must only and necessarily be provided for
every Minister, by the payment of tithes, oblations and other ecclesiastical
profits, belonging to churches appropried, or disappropried. For there being
no direct proof, to be made out of the law of God, that Ministers of the
Gospel, must only live upon tithes; the King and Parleament, may well and
competentlie enough, appoint covenable endowments for every Minister, without
disapproprying of any church appropried. And therefore little cause had the
Admonitor, to insinuate the ruin of impropriations, upon the bringing in, the
discipline of our Savior Christ, because the same may be well planted, and yet
to other not unplanted. But what need we to argue against his insinuation,
considering he him self, before he came to the end of this page, by his own
disclayme, contradicted his insinuation. For if the form of finding Ministers
by tithes, must with the canon law (as he says) be abolished, and if there
must be some other order for this devised, because this may seem papisticall
and Antichristian, what should any man fear the taking away of those laws,
whereby impropriations do stand? For if such as heretofore have spoken or
written against them, because (as he insinuates) the form of finding
Ministers by tithes, seemed to be unlawfully taken away, and as he would also
insinuate by their judgment, ought again to be restored, and not to stand
any longer as men's lawful possessions and heritages. How (I say) does it
follow that they which desire impropriations, to be restored to their
pristinate state, should withal require, to have the findinge of Ministers by
tithes, to be abolished? It seems therefore, that the Admonitor, so he might
be talking, passed but a ^itle what he talked. For what a double talk is
here? or to what purpose was this talk? Was it because some men do think,
that the Ministers, ought not to receive tithes, for their relief, and pains
in the Ministry? Why then, let all men know, that we disclayme such some
men's opinions. For we account all things, perteyning to this life, directly,
or by consequence, not commanded, nor prohibited, by the holy and sacred
Scriptures, to be things indifferent, and that therefore we may use them, or
not use them, as the commodity, or incommoditie of the Church shall require.
And therefore as we do not affirm, that the maintenance of the Ministers, must
only, and necessarily be levied out of tithes, oblations, and such like, so
also we do not deny, but that the tenth part of the increase of all our
goods, by the authority of the King, and his laws, may be allotted for their
possession and h^ritage: especially in our country, the same manner of
payment being so ancient, and so agreeable to the manners, vsages, and
disposition of our State and people, Nay since the payment of tithes, for
service accomplished in the spiritual Sanctuary, is correspo^dent in the
nature thereof, to the equity of the Law of Moses, for the Levites
attendance about the earthly Tabernacle; and since also we be bound by the
commandment of the Apostle, to make him that teaches us in the word, to be
partaker of all our goods, I see not (so Jewish and popish ceremony, and
superstition be avoided) but that this duty, may as christianlie be
performed, by the payment of the trenth part of the increase of our corn, hay,
wool, lamb, etc. as by the eight, twelfeth, twentieth, or any other part of
our money, and coin. By payment also of which tithes, the Ministers at every
season, with every kind of necessary provisio^ toward hospitality, might
thoroughlie be furnished, which many times they shall want, by reason of men's
backwardnes, when collections of money are to be made. But to speak no more of
this matter of tithes, we will return to the objection made against the
Apostolical government, drawn from taking away impropriations. And herein we
will not handle, whether the laws whereby impropriations do stand, as men's
lawful possession, and heritage must (as he says) be taken away: but
whether impropriations, now divided from the Ministry, and dispersed into
many several men's hands, and employed to many uses in the common weal, may
not in tract of time by some whole some law, be reduced, either wholly, or in
part, to be the only lawful possessions and inheritances for the Ministers of
the Gospel, yea and that without any prejudice or damage unto Prince, or
people.

It is evident in the eyes of all, thatthe Churches now appropried, do stand
and remain, as the lawful possessions and inheritances, either of the King,
or of the Nobles, or of the Knights, Esquyres, Gentlemen, and other temporal
persons: or of Archbb. Bb. Archdeacons, Deanes, Prebendaries, and other
ecclesiastical persons, or of the Universities, of the Colleges in the
Universities, of collegiate and Cathedral Churches, of Schools, Hospitalls,
Fraternities, and other bodies Politic, and Corporate. Wherefore to the end
our meaning may the better be understood, and that we may proceed orderly, we
think it good, to examine first, by how many several ways, some of these
impropriations may be wholly and thoroughly reduced: secondly, by how many
several means, other some in part, may be brought to the use of the
Ministry. To reduce some of them wholly may be done by restitution,
Impropriations may be reduced to the ministry by four means.
commutation, redemption, and contribution. And first that I prejudice not the
Lords spiritual, and Churchmen of their ancient privileges, from being
placed in the first rank, reason is, that (they teaching the people, not to
possess other men's goods wrongfully) we speak first of restitution to be
made by them. In declaration whereof, we think it not fit, in this place to
show, to Porochiall Churches to what use they were founded.
what end the state of the Clergy was first founded into a state of prelacie,
by the King, Earls, Barons, and other great men (because the same comes
afterward to be handled more at large) but it shall suffice at this present,
for the purpose whereof we now entreat, to let the Reverend Bb. understand,
that the small Parochial churches, were founded, and endowed, with glebe
Lands tithes; and other fruits by the Lords of Manors, This may be proved
by 15. R. 2. and 4. H. 4. c. 2. and is confessed by M. Bilson in his perpet.
government Page 365. 366.
to the end that the Lords tenantes within the same manors, should be informed
of the law of God, and that Hospitalities might be kept, and the poor of the
same Parishes be relieved. And besides the reverend Bishops, we hope, will
grant, that the great Cathedral, and Collegiat Churches, were not founded by
the Kings progenitors, Nobles, and great men of the Realm, to the end, that
those great Churches (as great hawks pray upon little fowls) with their great
steeples, should care and devour the little steeples; or that with their great
Quiers, they should overthrow, and iustle down the small pulpittes. And
therefore we most humbly pray aid from the King, for the casting of new
clappes to be erected in the little pulpittes, that be would be pleased, to
grant restit^^ones in integrum, to all the little churches, and that all
impropriations, of all Parochial churches and benefices, now by spoliation,
parcel of the revenues, of Archbb. Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
Prebendaries, and other ecclesiastical persons, restantes within those great
churches, may be wholly restored to their ancient, and original use,
according to the minds and intentes of the first Donours, and Patrones of the
same Parochial and little Churches. For if (as Master Bilson says) it be
true, that the Lords of Villadges, having erected churches, and allotted out
portions for divine service, either by Gods or man's law, by their later
graunts could not have their former rights, unto their patronages overthrowen;
and if the allowance given at the first, to the Ministers of each Parish, by the
Lord of the soil, were matter enough, in the judgment of Christ's Church, to
establish the right of patrones, that they alone should present Clerckes,
because they alone provided for them, if (I say) this be true, then have the
Ministers of those Villadges, and of that soil, just cause to require, at the
Dioc^sans hands, a r^stitution of such allowances, as were first given and
provided for them, by the patrones: Especially the Diocesans by their own act
now enioyning, and converting the same allowances, to their own use. If it be
answered, that this can not well and convenientlie be brought to pass,
because the same impropriations, by the Archbishops, Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical persons, for diverse sums of money, are now lawfully demised
to farm, for many years yet to come: hereunto we answer, that these leases
should hinder nothing at all, the restitution of the right and interest in
reversion, or remainder of those impropriations. Only (if the impropriations
have been made according to the laws of the Realm, and the leases duly
granted) these leases for a time, may hinder the incumbent Ministers, from the
present possession of the Tithes, Fruits and glebe Land belonging to the same
impropriations. And yet may not the incumbent Ministers, be hindered in the
mean while, from receyving the re^tes reserved upon such Leases, and which by
the same Leases are now payable to the Archbishops, Bishops and other
ecclesiaasticall persons. Neither after the determination of the same Leases,
should the incumbent Ministers, be any more let, to enjoy and receyve, the
whole profits in right of their churches, then other Ministers be now let
to enjoy theirs. If any shall say, that many of these impropriations, are
annexed, and appropried, as Prebendes for the provision, of some of the
Prebendaries, of the same great churches, and that the same Prebendaries, in
the right of their prebe^ds, be the lawful Rectors of the churches appropried,
and have cura^ animaru^ in the same parishes; then we must instantly again
pray the King, that those Prebendaries, by some wholesome law may be
constreyned, to reside, and to incumbe upon their said prebendes, and
parochial churches, and that by continual preaching of wholesome doctrine,
they may endevoure to cure the souls of the people, over who^, by the order of
those great churches, they be set, and over whom they have taken charge. And
withal that they may no more be suffered, to lie and to live idlelie in their
Cloisters, in their caves, and in their dens, sometimes at Worcester,
sometimes at Hereforde, sometimes at Gloucester, sometimes at Salisburie,
sometimes at Westminster, sometimes at Soutwell, sometimes at Windsore,
sometimes at Paul's, sometimes at Oxforde, and sometimes at Cambridge. When in
the mean while both seldom, and very slenderly, they feed other sheep,
whose fleeces they take in, and about London, Winchester, Tewkesburie, Reading,
and other places of the Country. Besides we pray that these prebendes, after
the determination of leases now in being, may never any more be let to farm, so
that the fruits thereof may serve for those Prebendaries, or other succeeding
Ministers, to make Hospitalities, Alms, and other works of charity. If it be
alleged that the King now having first fruits, Tenthes and Subsidies, out of
the impropriatio^s of those great churches, as being all comprised, under a
gross sum of the Tenthes payable for the whole revenues of the same
churches, should loose the first fruits, Tents and subsidies, of the same
impropriations, if hereafter they become, either donative, or presentative; to
this the answer is readily made, viz. that Tenthes, first fruits, and
Subsidies, might as well be paid then, as now. And that the King might then
as well have right to the donation of the benefice disappropried, as the Bishop
now has the gift of the prebend appropried.

In the next rank comes commutation to be spoken of. Wherein, because the
impropriations of Parochial churches apperteyning now to the King, Nobles,
Commons, Colleges, Schools, Bodies politic, etc. were at the first
appropried one lie by the discretion of the Diocesans, Predecessors, to the
reverend Bishops that now are, unto Abbottes, Prioures, Nuns, Friars, etc.
and because the Successors of those Diocesans be bound in the same band of
iniquity with their predecessors, unless by all good means they labor that
things may be brought to their first, and pristinate state, it seems equal,
and just, that this commutation, should likewise proceed and be drawn from
the Diocesans, and great Churches before specified. The reasons whereof may be
such as follow.

The Lands and possessions given by the Kings progenitors, the Earls, Barons,
and other great men of the Realm, to Bishoprics, were not given (as Master
Bilson affirms) to unburden the people of the support, and chardges of
Perpetu. power. Page 367.
their Bb. but they were given, (as the law of our land teaches us) first to
inform the people in the law of God, in those churches; Secondly, to keep
Hospitalities, alms, and other works of charity; And thirdly, for the
souls of the founders, their heirs, and of all christian. Now then, if some
of these conditions be such as for the impiety thereof ought not to be
performed, and if other some also, being good and godly, be not performed, and
so the things are to return to their first nature, as in the same statute is
alleged; then is it reason, that the King and Nobles, who are the just
inheritors and successors, to those who were firsT Donoures, and Founders of
those Churches, should have as free a disposition, and donation of those lands
and possessions now, as his, and their progenitors and ancestors ever had.
And seeing it is manifest, that the lands and possessions of Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, do not, for the most part, now a days serve
for those good uses, for the which they were first granted, namely to inform
the people in the law of God, to keep Hospitalities, Alms, and other works
of charity, but partly for the use of chaunting, and singing in the Quyers;
and partly to vain, idle, superfluous, and pompous uses, the King, can not do
a better, and more charitable deed, then to convert parcel of the same lands
and possessions (thus by defect of the conditions not performed, returning to
their first nature) to and for the necessary and perpetual provision of
learned, able, and preaching Ministers, to be planted in Parochial churches,
now destitute of sufficient Pastoures, for want of sufficient maintenance,
nay sit hence Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, and other Prelacies, by the
very express letter of the statute, are said to be founded to supersticious
uses: viz. for the souls of the founders, their heirs, and of all christian,
the same reason which led King Henry the eight, his Nobles, and
Parleamentes, to dissolve Abbayes and Monasteries, and the same reason also,
which moved King Edward the sixth, with his Nobles, and Parleament, to dissolve
Colleges, free Chapels and Chauntries, the same reason, may be a sufficient
reason, to persuade our Sovereign Lord King JAMES that now is, with his Nobles
and Parleament, to dissolve Archbishoprickes, Bishoprikes, Deanries, etc First
to the end these Prelacies and Dignities may never in any succeding ages,
serve to any such superstitious uses, as whereunto they were at the first
erected. Secondly, that the King having them al in his own hands, and free
disposition, may be the only Foundor and Donour of so many new Bishoprics as
might please him to erect, and endowe with such liberal, and covenable
endowmentes, as might serve for learned Evangelicall Bishops to inform the
people in the holy Evangill of Christ, to keep hospitalities, alms, and to
do other works of charity, rather then to be expended, as now for a great
part they are, upon the keeping of great horses, coroches, and troops of
serving idlers. The commutation then whereof we speak, and which we most
humbly commend, to the consideration of the King, is, viz: That parcel of the
temporal Lands and possessions of Archbb and Bishops, together with all the
lands and possessions, serving to the mainrenance of idle Ministers, and idle
Songsters, in Cathedral and Collegiat churches (the Collegiat churches of
Eaton and Winchester, and the Cathedral and Collegiat churches in Oxford and
Cambridge excepted) by an equal and reasonable proportion. may be made, with
such impropriations, as belong to the King, the Nobles, Commons, Colleges,
Hospitals, Schools, etc. Provided as before has bin said, that there may be a
liberal and couvenable endowment, for the learned Bishops or Pastors, to be
continued and placed in all the chief and principal towns and cities of the
Realm. And that the impropriations of Parochial churches may for ever, be
livings for the Ministers of the same churches. And therefore in the just
defense of the innocence of all such as require a godly and religious
reformation, we say, that they ought not, to have been traduced before the
King, as robbers and ransackers of the church. And that some of the plotters
for the Prelacie, more honestly might have employed both their Latin and
their labor, then lately they did. When by drawing letters (as they
pretended) congratulatorie to the King, only in the name of preaching
Ministers, they procured notwithstanding ignorant, and unpreaching Ministers,
to join in the action, and to affix their hands and names. That such letters
have been made and signed, is sufficiently to be proved, but whether they
have been presented to the Kings hands, is not yet known. Only if they shall
hereafter come, then may they be known by these words: Nos Concionatores, etc.
ab omni domestica capacitate eorum, qui pretextu religionis, ecclesiae
insidiantur. My Lord the King is wise, according to the wisdom 2 Sa^. 14. 24
of an Angel of God, to understand all things whereof he is informed.

The third means to reduce impropriations, unto the possession of the
Ministry Public redemption of impropriations.
is by way of public redemption or purchase. For the accomplishment whereof
it is necessary, that not only a common treasure be provided, but also that
the price of impropriations, by a public consent be valued, at a reasonable
rate to make, which rate will be a matter of small weight, whether they be
valued, to be bought and sold, at their old and ancient, or at their new and
improved rentes. To provide a common treasure, though to some it may seem a
matter intricate, and troublesome, yet seeing the same possibly, and
convenienlie may be done, there is no cause, that men should feint, before they
fight, or be at an end, before they begin. It is written that the cause when
King Solomon 1 K. 9. 15.
raised the tribute, to wit, was to build the house of the Lord, his own
house and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem. After that wicked Athaliah and 2.
Cron. 24
her children, had broken up the house of God, and had bestowed all the things,
that were dedicate for the house of the Lord, upon Baalim, King Ioash
commanded the Priests and Levites, to go unto the Cities of Judah, and to
gather of al Israel money to repair the house of God, from year to year,
and they made a chest, and made Proclamation to bring the tax of Moses, and the
Princes rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest. And when there was
much silver, they emptied the chest, and carried it, to his place again, and
thus day by day, they gathered silver in abundance. If the^ toward the
building of an earthly house, the Princes and people of Judah and Israel,
willingly with joy of their hearts, from year to year, and from day to day,
threw silver in abundance into the chest, how much more were it praise worthy,
if Christian people, did encourage them selves, to pay a small tribute toward
the provision of a competent maintenance, for their spiritual Pastors, by
whose labors, as livelie stones, they might be builded up into a spiritual
temple in the Lord? That many and great taxes and tributes of late years have
been made for many uses, and to many purposes, there is no man ignorant
thereof. And therefore though there be little reason, that the people standing,
already burdened, with great charge, should be again recharged, especially
when without any extraordinary burden, there is an ordinary means (if the
same were accordingly bestowed) by the people yielded, to relieve the Ministers
in all places, with a decent and comely portion; yet notwithstanding, to be
eased, from those public payments, and annual greevances, imposed by the
ecclesiastical Courts, upon the people, it is not to be doubted, but the
Parishioners in all places would willingly pay, any reasonable tax or tribute,
to be demanded of them for this purpose.

An other means to raise this public treasure, may be a dissolution of all
free The dissolution of Chapels may be a good mean to raise a tribute.
Chapples, and Chapples of ease in the Country, together with an union of two
or more churches into one, especially in Cities and great Towns. For as in
these Cities and Towns, the poorest, and meanest livings be provided, so
generally for the most part, are they fitted, with the poorest and meanest
Curates, as by most lamentable experience is to be seen, in all the Episcopal
cities of the Realm, excepting London. Nay the chief and Metropolitan city
of Canterbury is not to be excepted. For in that City there being about 12.
or 13. Parish churches, there has not been ordinarily of late years above 3.
or 4. able Preachers, placed in the same Churches.

The Chapples to be dissolved, and the Churches to be consolidated by two, and
two into one, and one, can be no fewer in number then one thousand at the
least. All which if they might be sold, the money to be raised upon their
sale, could be no less then twenty thousand pounds, if they were soulde
only for twenty pounds a piece. But if they be well worth, double or treble
so much, then would the treasure also be doubled or trebled. This dissolution
of Chapples, and union of Churches, is no new devise, nor strange innovation:
But has been heretofore thought upon, and in some part confirmed already by
our Kings in their Parleaments. Touching the dissolution of Chapples, the most
Dissolution of Chapels noe new devise.
revere^d Father Thomas Crammer, Archbishop of Camterburie, with the residue of
the Kings Commissioners, appointed for the reformation of Ecclesiastical laws
allows of the same. And for the union of Churches, there was an act made 27.
H. 8. so they exceeded not the value of six pounds. And by a statute Titu. de
eccles. guard. fol. 54.
r. Ed. 6. it was lawful for the Mayor and Recorder of the City of York, and
the Ordinary or his Deputy, and six Justices Lawful for the Mayor of York,
etc. to unite Churches in the City of York.
of the peace in the same City, to unite and knit together, so many of the
poor Parishes of the same City and suburbs of the same, as to the^ should be
thought convenient, to be a living for one honest incumbent. And it was lawful
for the said Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, to pull down the Churches, which
they should think superflous in the said city, and suburbs of the same, and
to bestow the same, toward the reparation and enlargement of other Churches,
of the Bridges in the City, and to the relief of the poor people. The
considerations which moved the King and Parleament, What reasons moved K. Ed 6.
to unite churches in York may move King James to unite Churches in Canterbury,
etc.
to ordeyne this act, were these, viz. The former incompete^cie of honest
livings, the former necessity of taking very unlearned and ignorant Curates
not able to do any part of their duties; the former replenishing of the City,
with blind guides and Pastors; the former keeping of the people, as well in
ignorance of their duties to God, as also toward the King, and common weal;
and lastly the former danger of the souls of the Citizens. If then in these
days it might please the King to apply, like playsters, to the like sorcs, to
provide remedies, for the like mischieves, and for the like diseases, to
minister like medicines, it would come to pass no doubt, in few years, that
the lame and the blind, and the broken, with a number of unhallowed and
unclean beasts, should be swept, and cast forth of all the Parochial
churches, within Canterbury, Winchest, Chichester, Lichfield, Oxford, and
other great Cities of the Realm. For these Chapples, and smaler churches,
being the very Chapples, the seminaries of hyrelings.
Seminaries, of all hyrelinges, and idol Sheapheards, a benefice can no sooner
become void, but the poor, and hungry Chapleynes, weary of their thynne
diet, and long leaping after a bean, presently trudge to the patron,
offering, or accepting any conditions to be presented by him. And not only
should the Church by this means, be rid of these vermin, but also the
learned and preaching Minister, without further aid or co^tribution, in those
places, might have more liberal maintenance, then erst they have had. For then
should they be no more constreyned, to deduct out of their livings, by reason
of Chapples yet standing, and as it were annexed to their Parish churches, some
10. lb. some 20. lb. some 30. lb. by the year, for the wages of these
hyrelings. Besides this, a singular and apparent benefit, By y^ dissolution of
Chapels many suites in law should be avoided.
could not but redound to the common weal, by the dissolution of these
Chapples, when as many, long, tedious, and changeable, and uncharitable suits,
heretofore had and commenced, should hereafter be extinguished, between the
Parochians of the mother Churches and the inhabitants of Hamblets, for and
concerning the repair, and reedifying of the said Churches, and Chapples, and
for other rights, and duties challenged to belong from one unto the other.

A third means to leavie a treasure, Sequestration of the fruits of the
Churches of pluralists may further the treasure for the redemption of
impropriations.
for the redemption of impropriations, may be a sequestration of the fruits of
the Churches of non Residentes, and commendames, with the fruits of the
Churches of the pluralistes, and perinde valeres, from the which the same
plurisied persons are to depart; the said sequestration no longer to endure,
then some able Ministers may be provided and placed in the same Churches.

A fourth mean to raise this treasure, if it please the King, and that the
church have found favor in his sight, may be the money due unto the King upon
such penal laws, as for the benefit of the common weal, are necessarily to
be put in execution, and especially upon the law of provision and praemunire,
not pardoued by the Queen. And albeit happily the King, upon a most worthy
and christian zeal, be well pleased hereafter not to urge upon the popish
recusantes, the payment of their forfeytures, for absence from divine service,
yet because they be able, and do daily contribute to seminaries abroad, and be
favorers, and abettours of popish Priests and Jesuits, lurking at home, the
most treasonable and dangerous enemies, that can be to the Kings Person and
State, in consideration hereof (I say) if it may please the King, it seems
not unreasonable, (the law standing still in force, and unrepealed) that the
popish recusants be urged to the payment of such sums of money, as are
already forfeyted; the same by the commandment, and free gift of the King to
be employed upon the redemption of such impropriatio^s, as are within the
parishes of their abodes. To the end that learned, and preaching Ministers,
being placed in the same, they, their wyves, children, servaunts, tenants, and
dependantes, by the powerful preaching of the word, might be converted unto
the Gospel.

It follows now in order, that we speak of contributio^, the fourth means
By what co^tributio^ impropriations may be brought to the use of ye ministry.
whereby some impropriations may be reduced wholly to the use of the
Ministry. Wherein there can not any certain rule, or direction be
prescribed: because it must proceed only from those, whose hearts God shall
touch, stir up, and encourage, willingly to bring a free offering, unto the
Lord, for the building up of his spiritual house. For of every one (says the
Lord) whose heart offers Exodus 25. 2
it freely, ye shall take an offeringe for me. And every one whose heart
encouraged him, and whose Spirit made him willing, and men, and women, as
many as were free-hearted, came and Exodus 35.
brought, taches, and earings, and ringes, and bracelettes, all were jewels of
gold, and blewe silk, and purple, and skarlett, and fine linen, and goats
hair, and Rams skins, and Badgees skins, and silver, and brass, and
Shittim wood, and Onix stones, and Spice, and Oil: Every man, and woman, (I
say) whose hearts moved them willingly to bring for all the work, which the
Lord had Exodus 36. 5.
commanded, brought a free offering. yea and the people brought too much, and
more the^ enough, for the use of the work of the Lord. King Solomon, having 2.
King. 8.
all the Elders, the heads, the chief Fathers, and all the men of Israel, and
the Priests, and Levites, to bring up the Arck, and Tabernacle of the Lord,
offered Beeves, and sheep which could not be numbered for multitude. Yea and
after these offeringes were made, and after the King had prayed, that their
heart might be perfect with the Lord their God, to walk in his statutes, and
to keep his commandments, as at that day; the King again offered a
sacrifice of two and twenty thousand beeves, one hundred and twenty
thousand sheep, and so was the house dedicated. After the return of the
people out of captivity, certain of the chief Fathers, when they came to the
house of the Lord, which was in Jerusalem, they gave after their ability,
unto the treasure of the work, even one and three score thousand drammes of
gold, and five thousand pieces of silver, and an hundred priests garments:
they gave money also, E^^ 2. 2, 68 etc.
to the Masons, and to the workmen, and meat, and drink, and oil. Yea at the
exhortation of Nehemiah, the Priests, the great men, the people, and the women,
Nehe. 2. (...)
that they might be no more a reproach, set their minds to the building of
the Walls, and at their own charges, builded some, one gate, some another;
some one door, some another; some one tower, some another: some one portion of
the Wall, some an other. Wherefore, seeing we have not an Ester, to succeed our
Deborah, but a Solomon rather, to succeed a David; yea such a Solomon, as
whose heart the Lord has filled with an excellent spirit of wisdom, of
understanding, and of knowledge, to find out, and to dissolve hard and curious
parables, and has put in his heart, to teach and to guide others; we rest
persuaded in our hearts, that the King for his part, treading in the steps of
the godly Kings, Princes, and Governors of Judah, will go in, and out,
before his people, as they did before theirs. And that he will rather not eat
of the bread, nor drink of the wine, of the governoures Nehe. 5.
that were before him, then that he will not remitt the provisions the
seasements the fynes, the impositions, and the amerciamentes, that have been
exacted. Yea also that he will feed from his own table, an hundred and fifty
Prophets, and prepare for them oxen, and sheep, and birds, and wine in all
abundance, because they are come unto him, from among the prelatistes that were
about the^, because their bondage has been grievous unto them. Yea further
also, we are 2 Chro. 11.
persuaded, that he will shake out of his Lapp every serva^t of his, that
shall bear rule over his people. And thus much of the means whereby some
impropriations, may wholly be reduced to the use of the Ministry. It
follows to show by what means other some impropriations, may be converted
in part, to the maintenance of Ministers to be planted in Parochial Churches,
now destitute of able Pastoures, in case the said impropriations by none of
the former means, can be reduced wholly to their first and ancient
institution. Wherein these two things come principally to be considered.

First, whether it were not convenient, How impropriatio^, may be in part,
reduced to the Ministry.
by some wholesome law, to have it ordained, that the Heads, Governors,
Rulers, and Masters of the Universities, Colleges, Cities, Towns,
Hospitalls, free Schools, and other bodies politic and Corporate, should not
from henceforth demise or set to farm their, or any of their impropriations,
or any of the glebe Land, tithes, or other fruits belonging to the same,
until such time as all leases heretofore made, be fully ended, or otherwise
determined.

Secondly, whether it were not convenient, to have it enacted, by the same
law, that all and every impropried Church and Churches, with their glebes,
tithes, and other fruits, after the determination of the Leases now in being,
should be demised and set to farm, only to the inco^bent Ministers of the
same Churches, for term of their natural lyves, if so long they did continue
reseant, and faithfully preach in the same Churches, the doctrine of the
Gospel, according to the articles of Religion, concerning Faith and
Sacraments, by public authority, now established in the Church of England.
And because by likelihood the Vicares will not be able to pay fynes or incomes
unto the Colleges, Hospitalls, and other places; and because also it seems
reasonable, that the Colleges, Hospitalles, and other places, by some other
means, should be recompensed, we leave it again to be considered, whether it
were not convenient that the Vicars, in consideration of non payment of fynes,
should yield in money, corn, or other provision, to the double, or treble
value, of the anicient and vnimproved rentes. For m^n experienced in these
affairs of this life, know, that the profits arising out of churches
appropried, unto the farmours thereof, are commonly six, eight, or ten
times more worth by just estimation, the^ are the old rentes, payable unto
Colleges, Hospitalles, and other like places. And thus we see how together
with the bringing in of these things, which are required to be planted in the
Church, imp^opriations may stand, as men's lawful possessions, and heritages,
or otherwise how without damage or hurt to the King, or Realm, they may be
converted to the use and provision of the Ministers, what soever has been
insinuated by the Admonitor to the contrary. And yet do I not in any of these
things, or of any other thing, first or last spoken, or to be spoken, desire
mine own advyse and judgment so to be respected, as though I should arrogate
unto my self more knowledge then all others, which labor in the cause of
reformation: but only I submit these my private meditations with their
reasons, to the censures of all wise, godly, and learned men. Hu^blie praying
them so to bestir their own wits, and so to bestow their own cunning, and
learning, that a better and more easier way, by their ingenuousnes, may be
found out, and procured to take place. And in the mean season, that these
motions tendered to their vewes, may not altogether be neglected but duly
weyed, and considered. Especially for that I have not tendered any other thing
to be performed, by any of these means, unto any other, then such as whereunto
I my self, to my power, yea and beyond my power, as far as in me lies, shall
be ready to yield.

And howsoever the Bishops and other great Clergy Masters, with their
stately favorites, may pretend some part of this devyse, to be an hinderance
of learning, and other some part, not to be for the Kings profit; yet to the
first we answer briefly, that learning is not so much furthered, by a few
great rewards, provided for a few great learned men, as it is by many good
rewards, appointed for many good learned men, as hereafter more at large, in a
more convenient place is declared. Touching the Kings profit, we affirm,
that it is not only most profitable, but also most honorable for the King, to
have a multitude of loyal, virtuous, and godly subjects. And that such
manner of subjects, can by no means better be procured, then by a continual
preaching Ministry of the word, to be planted in every parish, of the
Kings Realms. And because no man better, knows the reciprocal duties,
between a Christian King, and christian Counselors, we leave the discerning
of the spirits of these profit preachers, to the trial and judgment of our
most Christian King; whom if he shall find, either by flattery, to fawn upon
the Kings profit, or by laboring to keep the King in a good opinion of
things amiss, we most hu^blie beseech the King, to accept them, and reward
them for such, as could wish in their hearts, the King should rather be
impoverished by having many bad, and unprofitable subjects, then that them
selves would not be enriched, by enjoying many good and profitable
impropriaons. As for the Laws whereby Patronages do stand, as men's lawful
possessions, and inheritances, which (as the Admonitor says) must also be
taken away, how the same laws may still endure, or by consent of Patrones, be
altered, without their damage (if God permit) when we come to speak, of the
election of Ministers, wherein, the reformers are charged with the hurling, and
thrusting out of patrones, shall be declared.

Admonition.
The laws of England to this day have stood by the authority of the Page 78.
three estates, which to alter now by leaving out the one, may happily seem a
matter of more weight, then all men do judge it.

Assertion.
Not to stand upon terms with the Admonitor, that the laws usually called the
common laws of the land, being mere customary laws, did never yet stand by
the authority of the three Estates, I will take his meaning to be, that the
statute laws of England, to this day have stood by authority of the three
Estates; which to alter now by leaving out the one, etc. and then thereunto, I
answer, that not any one of the three The bringing in of ye discipline by
pastors and elders is not the leaving out of Parleament any one of of the
three Estates.
Estates should be left out, or barred, from having authority in making and
promulging statute laws, though the government of the Church, by Pastors and
Elders were brought in. For we which so much cry (as he says) for this manner
of government, to be planted, are so far from exempting, or excluding any one
of the three Estates, from their ancient power, privilege, and pre-eminence,
in the making of statute laws, as that we pronounce him to be guilty of high
treason, to the King, and to the Realm, that avoweth the contrary. And we
affirm directly, and confess plainly, that it belongs only, wholly, and
altogether to the three Estates, as well to root out, and to pull up,
whatsoever government, is not justifiable, by the holy law of God: as also to
plant and to setle, whatsoever discipline is warrantable by the same law. And
to speak as the thing is, how were it possible to have the discipline by
Pastors and Elders planted by authority of the three Estates, if one of the
three Estates should be left out? Or can it be imagined, that any one of the
three Estates, would ever consent, to the bringing in of such a government of
the Church, as whereby (the same government being once brought in) the same
estate, should ever afterward cease, to be any more an estate? Besides we
acknowledge that all powers are of God, and therefore every one of the three
Estates, being a power, we grant that the same has his stateship, by the
authority of God. And if all the three Estates, be lawful by the holy law of
God; how can it be verified against us, that we, which urge the same holy law,
for the bringing in of the discipline by Pastors and Elders, should
notwithstanding contrary to the same law, intend the leaving out, or altering
of any one of the three Estates? But which of the three Estates was it that he
meant, should be left out? I trow, there The state of the Prelacie is not one of
the three estates in Parleament.
is none of the state of Prelacie, so ill advised, as to take upon him the
proof of this position: viz. That the Lords spiritual by them selves alone,
do make one of the three Estates, or that the statutes of England, to this day
have stood by their authorities, as by the authority of those, who alone by
themselves, are to be accounted, one of the three Estates. For if that were so,
how much more the^, might the great Peers, Nobles, and temporal Lords,
challenge to make by them selves an other estate? And without contradiction, to
this day, the Commons summoned by the Kings writ, have ever been reckoned a
third Estate. Now then if statutes have hitherto stood, by authority of the
Lords spiritual, as of the first Estate, by authority of the Lords temporal,
as of the second Estate, and by authority of the Commons, as of the third
Estate, I would gladly be resolved, what accoumpt the Admonitor made of the
Kings Estate. It had not been liegnes, nor loyalty (I am sure) howsoever he
spoke much of the Lords spirituals duty and fidelity in the execution of our
late Queens laws, to have set her Royal person, authority and State, behind
the lobby, at the Parliament door. Either the Kings Royal person then, as
not comprised within the compass, and circumscription of the three Estates, by
his meaning (which had been but a very bad meaning) must be thought to have
been hitherto secluded, from authorizing the statute laws, made in Parliament.
Or it is a most clear case, that the Lords spiritual them selves alone, do not
make any one of the three Estates. And what matter then of more weight, may it
happily seem to be, to alter the authority of the Lords spiritual, and to
leave them out of the Parliament, when as notwithstanding, they being left out,
the statutes of England, may remain, and continue by authority of the three
Estates? And it were not amiss for the Lords spiritual, to consider, that the
body and state of the weal public, both now is, and ever has been, a
perfect, entire and complete body, and State, without the body and state of
Prelacie: And that the King, the Nobles, and Commons of the Realm, without
Prelates, Bishops, or Clerckes, do make up all the members, and parts of this
body, and of this state; and may therefore ordain, promulge, and execute, all
manner of laws, without any consent, approbation, or authority yielded unto
the same, Anno 36 H 8. fo. 58. b. and Anno (...). j. fo. 93. 2
by the Bishops spiritual, or any of the Clergy. And thus much our Divines,
Histories, and Laws do justify. Sir James Dier, Lord chief Justice of the
common pleas, in his reports, tells us, that the state and body of a
Parliament in England, consists first of the King, as of the head and chief
part of the body; secondly of the Lords, as principal members; and lastly
of the Commons as inferior members of that body.

By a Statute of provisoes, it appears, 25. Ed. 3. holy church founded in the
state of Prelacie by the King.
That the holy Church of England, was founded into the state of Prelacie within
the realm of England, by the grandfather of King Edward the third, and his
progenitors, and the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, of the Realm, and
their Ancestors, for them to inform the people, of the law of God, and These
uses are changed to the keeping of great horses, great troops of idlers with
long hair, and great chains of gold.
to make Hospitalities, and alms, and other works of Charity, in the places
where the churches were founded. From whence it follows: First that the
Archbishoppes and Bishops only and alone, do not make of themselves any
state of Prelacie: but that the whole holy church of England, was founded, into
a state of Prelacie. Secondly, it is plain, that the 6. Eliz. c. ^.
Kings of England, before they, and the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and
great men had founded the holy church of England, into a State of Prelacie,
ought and were bounden, by the accord The King bound to do laws made without
assent of Prelates to be kept as laws of the realm.
of their people, in their Parleaments, to reform and correct whatsoever was
offensive, to the laws, and rightes of the Crown, and to make remedy, and
law in avoiding the mischieves, damages, oppression, and greevances of their
people, yea and that the Kings were bound by their oaths, to do the same
laws so made, to be kept, as laws of the Realm, though that thorough
sufferance, and negligence, any thing should at any time be attempted to the
contrary. For whereas before the statute of Caerlile the Bishop of Rome, had
usurped the Seignories, of such possessions and benefices, as whereof the
Kings of the Realm, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, as Lords and Avowes
ought to have the custody, presentements, and collations. King Edward the
first, by the assent of the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and of all the
communaltie, at their instancies and requests, and without mention of any
assent of the state of prelacie, in the said Parleament holden at Caerlile,
ordained that the oppressions, greevances, and damage sustained by the Bb. of
Romes usurpation, should not from thenceforth, be suffered in any manner. And
for as much as the greevances and mischieves mentioned in the said Act of
Caerlill, did afterward in the time of K. Edward the third, daily abound to
greater damage and destruction of the 31. Ed. 5 sta. of heering. 36. Ed. 3. c.
8.
Realm, more then ever before, and that by procurement of Clerks, and
purchasers of graces from Rome, the said King Edward the third, by assent and
accord, of all the great men, and commons of his Realm, and without mention of
any assent of Prelates, or Lords spiritual, having regard to the said Act of
Caerlile, and to the causes contained in the same to the honor of God, and
profit of the Church of England, and of all this Realm, ordained and
established, that the free elections of Archbishopps, Bishops, and all other
dignities, and benefices elective in England, should hold from thenceforth,
in the manner as they were granted by the Kings progenitors, and founded by
the Ancestors of other Lords. And in diverse other statutes, made by King. Ed.
the third, it is said, that our Sovereign Lord the King by the assent of the
great men, and all the commons has ordained remedy, etc. That it was accorded
by our Sovereigne Lord the King, the great men, and all the commons, that the
King chiefly 8. Edw. 3. (...) statute of. Provisours
desiring to sustain his people in tranquillity and peace, and to govern
according to the laws, vsages, and franchises of his land, by the assent and
express will and accord of the Dukes, Earls, Barons, and the commons of his
Realm, and of all other whom these things touched, ordained that all they,
etc. By which desire of the King, and words of the Act, we learn, that our
Sovereigne Lord King JAMES, may sustain his people, in tranquillity and
peace, and govern according to the laws, vsages, and fra^chises of his
kingdom, though the assent, and accord of Prelates be never required to the
enacting of any statute in Parleament. Nay such has been and yet is the power
of The king with the assent of the Nobles and commons, may repeal Statutes
without consent of Prelates. 15. Ed. 3.
the King, that with the assent and accord of the Nobles, and commons, he has
authority to adnull, and make void, even those Acts which in favor of
Prelacie, and assent of Prelates, have been enacted in Parleament. As by an
Act made in the time of King Edward the third, is plainly to be seen. For
whereas the King by assent of the Prelates, Earls, etc. had willed and
granted for him, and for his heirs, certain articles firmly to be kept,
and holden for ever, namely, that the Ministers of holy Church for money
taken for redemption of corporal penance, nor for proof, and account of
Testaments, nor for solemnity of Marriage, etc. should not be impeched, etc.
before the Kings Justices; nevertheles the same King, in the same year, with
assent of the Earls, Barons, and other wise men of the Realm, and without
assent of Prelates, revoked and adnulled the same articles again.

Again King Richard the second hearing the complaints of his faithful liege 3
Ric. 2. cap. 3.
people, and by their clamor in diverse Parleamentes of diverse abuses crept in
against the solemn, and devour ordinations of Churches, etc. at the request,
and 7 Ric. 2. cap. 12.
complaint of the Commons, by the advice and common assent of the Lords
temporal (without mention of any Lords spiritual) is said to have ordained,
That none of the Kings liege people, etc. should take or receive within the
Realm of England, any procuracie, etc. And in the eleventh year of of the same
same Kings reign, it is specially provided, that the appeals, pursuits, etc.
made and given in the same Parleament, be approved, affirmed and stablished, as
a thing duly made, for the weal and profit of the King, and of all the Realm,
notwithstanding that Act and Mo. Rich. 2.
the Lords spiritual, and their Procurators, did by protestation, absent them
out of the Parleament, at the time of the said judgment given. And the like
protestation being made by the Prelates, and Clergy, at a Parleament, holden
the third year of the same King, it was replied for the King, that neither
for their said protestation, or other words in that behalf, The King bound by
his oath, to do his laws to be made though prelates protest against him.
the King would not stay to grant to his Justices in that case, and all other
cases, as was used to be done in times past, and as he was bound, by virtue of
his oath at his Coronation. By all which premises it is as clear, as the sun
shining at noone day, that the Lords spiritual be so far from making any one
of the three Estates, as that (if it please the King) they may not be so much,
as any member, or part of any of the three Estates at all. If in the time of
King Henry the eight, the Lords spiritual (being then more in The Lords
spiritual no principal members of the Parleament otherwise then as ye King
pleases.
number then the Lords temporal) had been but such principal members of the
high Estate of Parleament, as without who^, neither law could have bin made,
Monastery nor Priorie might have been dissolved; what could the King have done
as Head, and the Commons have done as feet, and the Nobles have done as the
Heart, the Liver and the Longes, to the dislording and discloystering of the
Abbots, and Priours, the Monks, and the Friars of those days. In case the
Prelates with their arms, and with their shoulders, with their hands, and
with their horns, had heaved and shouved, had pushed, and thrusted to the
contrary. But to come nearer unto our own times, and remembrances, if it can
not be proved, that any one Lord spiritual No Lords spiritual present in
parleament, 1 Eliza.
was present in Parleament, or gave any assent to the enacting of statutes,
made in the first year of the Queens Majesty's reign deceased, but that it be
a clear case, that the ancient jurisdiction, preheminences, rightes, and
privileges of the Kings Crown, were restored, that popery and superstition
was banished, and the doctrine of the holy Gospel harbored only by the
Queen, the Lords temporal, and commons, what more plain evidence or better
proof can there be, that the Lords spiritual, by any necessity be neither
principalls, nor accessaries, neither branches, nor buddes, neither hanginges
nor sealings, nor any furniture for the house of Parleament. And of this
opinion are the soundest Historians, and sincerest Divines of our age.

In the fifteenth year of King Edward Act. and Mo. fol. 320.
the third (says Master Fox) diverse petitions being put up in Parleament
against provisions coming from Rome, the Kings answer and agreement was made
in form following: viz: It is agreed by the King, Earls, Barons, Justices,
and other wise men of the Realm, That the petitions aforesaid, be made in
sufficient form of law. Where it is to be noted (says he) that at the grant
hereof, the consent of the Bishops is neither named nor expressed, with the
Lords of Parleament, and yet the Parleament stands in his full force
notwithstanding. At an other Parleament (says he) William Wicham, Bishop of
Winchester, Act. and Mo. 525.
for a slanderous report, savouring of a contumelious lie, and proceeding of a
subtle zeal, meaning falsehoode, was so by the Duke of Lancaster pursued,
that by act of Parleament, he was condemned, and deprived of all his temporal
goods. And this seems to have bin done (says Master Fox) without assent,
and against the wills of the Lords spiritual; for afterward at an other
Parleament, great suit was made by the Clergy, for deliverance of the said
Bishop: and being asked a subsidy in the Kings behalf, with great
lamentation they complained, for lack of their fellow and brother of
Winchester, and denied to join them selves in any tractation of any such
matter. And in another Parleame^t holden at York, in the sixth year of King
Edward the third, all Act. and Mo. 519.
such laws, as then passed, and were concluded by the King, Barons, and
Commons, were good, notwithstanding the absence, or malice of the Lords
spiritual. For it is recorded (says he) that only the Archb. of York, the
Bishop of Lincoln, and the Abbottes of York and Silby were there present.

In a book entitled the burninge of Paul's church in London 1561. and in the
fifth question moved by a papist, it is said, that this manner of ministration of
Sacraments, set forth in the book of common prayers, was never allowed, nor
agreed upon, etc. no not by the Clergy of England at the last Parleament, but
only it was agreed upon, by the Laity, which had nothing a do with
spiritual matters, or causes of religion. Whereunto the Reverend Father
Master Pilkington M. Pilkingto^ Bishop of Duresme.
Bishop of Duresme aunswering: was there not (says he) a disputation for
Religion, appointed by the Queens Majesty, wherein your Clergy was afraid,
to utter their foolishnes, in defending their superstition, least they had
taken more shame in answering, the^ they did in holding their peace.? I think
the Universities with so many places of the Realm, receiving religion, and
these other disputing for it, may be counted to be some part of the Clergy of
the Realm. And so it was not received without consent of the Clergy: But
these were not of the Parleament, What then? But as Ioash, Iosaphat, Ezekias,
and Josias, did not make a new religion, but restored that which was defaced
and had long lien buried, so our Parleament, did not set forth a new religion,
but restore that, which was godly begane under the good King Edward, confirmed
by the Parleament, and Clergy then, etc. But nothing can be concluded, as a
law by Parleament, (say they) without consent of the Clergy there present.
But this havinge not their consent, can not be counted a law, as they think. I
had rather (says Master Pilkington) leave this to be answered by the
Lawiers, then otherwise. Yet that the world may see, that some thing may be
said in it, we grant him, not this to be true, that no law at all can be made
without consent of Bishops. Look your old statutes of Parleament, when Bb.
were highest, before Edward the third, and ye shall read, that they passed by
the consent of the Lords temporal and commons without any mention of the Lords
spiritual, which statutes many of them stand in strenght at this day. Then it
may well be gathered, that the consent of the Clergy was not always so
necessary as they think it. The Lawyers, Judges, and Iustice^s put in
practice and execute these laws, therefore their doings, may be a sufficient
reason, to lead the unlearned, what opinion they have of these statutes. For
Religion (except Justice Raftall) first executing that, and afterward running
away, may condemn the rest, which I trust he may not; I think they would not
execute them, except they had the strength and nature of laws. If they do
contrary to their knowledge and opinion, they can not be able to answer
their doings, but I think no wise men are of this opinion. Only these corner
creepers, that dare not show their face, and would deceive the people, go
about to deface all good and godly order, that displeases them. In the days of
King Edward, they had the like fond opinion, that the King could not make
laws in his minority, until he came unto full age, and to make the people to
disobey their Prince. Hitherto Master Pilkington Lord Bishop of Duresme; with
whom the most worthy and learned Master Jewel, late Bishop of Salisburie, M.
Jewel B. of Salisbury
agrees in every point.

The wise and learned (says he) could have told you that in the Parleaments of
England, matters have evermore used to pass, not of necessity by the special
consent of the Archbishops and Bishops, as if without them no statute might
lawfully be enacted, but only by the more part of voices, yea although the
Archb. and Bishops were never so earnestly bent against it. And statutes so
passing in Parleaments, only by the voices of the Lords temporal, without the
consent, and agreement of the Lords spiritual, have nevertheles bin always
confirmed, and ratified by the Royal assent of the Prince, and have been
enacted, and published, under the names of the Lords spiritual and temporal
Read (says he) the statutes of K Edward the first, there shall ye find, that
in a Parliament holden at St Edmondsbury, the Archbishops and Bishops were
quite shut forth, and yet the Parleament held on and good, and profitable
laws, were there enacted, the departing, or absence, or malice of the Bishops
spiritual notwithstanding. In the records thereof it is written thus: Habito
Rex cum suis Baronibus Parliamento, and Clero excluso statutum est: The King
keeping a Parleament, with his Barons, the Clergy, that is to say the
Archbishops and Bishops being shut forth, it was enacted, etc. In provisione
de matrona in the time of King Edward the third, whereas matter was moved of
bastardy touching the legitimation of bastards, borne before marriage, the
statute passed wholly, with the Lords temporal, whether the Lords spiritual
would or no. And that contrary to the express decrees and canons of the church
of Rome. And thus much the most reverend and godly Father Master Jewel Bishop
of Salisbury, wherefore to conclude this point against the Admonitors position,
I dispute thus: All those persons, who by any necessity, are none of the three
estates, and by whose authorities, the statutes of England, to this day, have
not stood, to leave out the same persons, may happily seem a matter of less
weight, then all men do judge it:

But the Archb: and Bb. are such persons, as by necessity are none of the
three estates, and by whose consents, the statutes of England to this day,
have not stood,

Therefore to leave out the Archb: and Bb. may happily seem a matter of less
weight then all men do judge it.



If our Evangelicall Bishops be of that opinion, of which the Popish Bishops
were, viz, that the house of Parleament is an unfit, and an unmeet place, to
have the holy cause of the religion of God, debated and concluded upon, and
that the Layitie without the Clergy ought not to conclude any thing in
religion, and that in respect hereof, their presences, their voices, and their
assents are necessary in the Parleament: If our Evangelicall Prelates (I say)
make this objection: then besides that hereby they unseemly, unmannerly, and
unchristianly, accuse the whole land of ignorance and blindness in religion,
supposing neither King, nor Nobles, nor Commons, to be able to discern between
night and day, besides this (I say) so shameful an abuse, of a whole Christian
nation, I would pray them to remember what the most reverend Fathers, Master
Pilkington and Master Jewel have answered, to such cavillous slanders. For
what else intended they by many examples, and proofs brought for the
Parleamentes of England, consisting of the King, the Nobles, and the Commons to
be lawful Parleaments, and to have right to establish religion, but to
justify against Popish scoffers, that religion might be received, and
established in Parleament, notwithstanding the absence or exclusion of the
Clergy? Besides, since our laws do uphold the state and authority of the
Convocation Matters of religion not concluded in Parleament, before the same
be consulted of in convocation.
house, for the examination of all causes of Religion, surely it can not be
truly averred, that it is necessary for Evangelicall Bishops, to be members
of the Parleament house, least controversy of religion, should be handled, and
discussed without them. For how should any matter of religion be concluded
without them in Parleament, when first of all, the same is to be argued among
them selves in convocation? or let them hardely (if they can) show any one
instance, of any change, or alteration, either from religion to superstition,
or from superstition to religion, to have bin made in Parleament, unless the
same freely, and at large have been first agreed upon in their Synodes and
Convocations? And what booteth it, then to have a double or treble
consultation, and consent of Archbishops and Bishops in Parleament? Is the holy
cause of God, any whit bettered, by their Bishops riding from Paul's to
Westminster? Or can it receive any more strength, by their walking from
Westminster Church, to Westminster Palace? Nay it has been oftentimes so far
from being promoted by their Bishops, as not only in their convocations, but
also in the Queens Parleaments, the same has been shamefully entreated, and
taken the foil: as may witness the bill for the better observation of the
Sabbath 27. Eliz. which being passed by both houses of Parleament, was
notwithstanding gainesaid and withstood, by none so much as by certain
Evangelicall Bishops, and which (as there all men generally conceaved) was
only stayed from being made a law, by the Queen, upon their counsel, and
persuasion.

Admonition.
It has been always dangerous to pick quarrels against laws settled. Page 78.


Assertion.
And is it not morbus hereditarius in Steven Gardeners argument, and the
Admonitors argument in effect one.
Prelates to pick quarrels against reformation of errors? For even this did
Steven Gardener reason against the Lord Protector. That in no case (says
Steven Gardener) is to be attempted, of the Lord Protector which may bring
both danger to him, and trouble to the whole Realm.

But innovation of Religion, from that state wherein King Henry left it, may
be and is like to be dangerous, to the Lord protector, and to breed troubles
to the whole Realm:

Therefore innovation of Religion from the state that King Henry left it, is in
no wise to be attempted.



And even of this sta^pe, and of this streyne is the argument of picking
quarrelles against laws settled: for thus in effect he argues: That
Discipline in no case is to be brought into the Church by the King and
Parleament, which may be dangerous to laws settled:

But to bring into the Church, the Apostolical discipline may be dangerous to
laws settled.

Therefore the Apostolical Discipline, in no case is to be brought into the
Church by the King and Parleament.



But forasmuch as that noble and religious Lord Protector (notwithstanding
Steven Gardiners sophistry) continued constant, and courageous in the
abolishment of Popery, and superstition which King Henry left, and did
without dangerous alterations of laws then settled, innovate religion: How
much more now may the Kings Majesty, the Less danger to reform the Church by
new laws, then to continue corruption by old laws.
Lords and Commons in Parleament, attempt with effect, an innovation of that
state of Ecclesiastical government, wherein the Queen left the Church? And if
it can not be denied, but it had been far more dangerous, for the Realm,
and for the Lord protector, not to have settled the holy doctrine, of the
everlasting Gospel, by new laws, then to have mainteyned, and continued
antichristianitie by old laws: how should it be less danger, for the King,
in these days to continue corruptions in the Church, by tolleration of old
laws, then to have the same corruptions reformed by establishment of new
laws? But unto who^, or unto what, has it been dangerous, to pick
quarrelles against laws settled? What? Has it been dangerous to laws settled?
No. For how should laws settled be endangered by quarelers? sithence quarellers
are evermore in danger of laws settled. Or has it been always dangerous for
a King, for a State, for a people, or for a Country, to pick quarelles
against laws settled? No. For what man is he, or what face carries he, that
dare vpbrayde a Country, a people, a State, or a King, minding to vnsetle,
evil laws, and evil customs, to be quarelers against laws settled? Let it
then only be dangerous for private persons, upon private malecontentment, to
pick quarelles against good laws, well, and rightly settled; and let it not be
hurtful or dangerous for supreme Kings, powers, and Principalities, by
public edicts, to alter evil laws, evilly settled. For to what other end
should evil laws evilly settled, be continued, but to continue evil? And what
a thing were that? This argument then for laws settled, being the sophisme of
that Fox Steven Gardener, is but a quarelsome, and wrangling argument.

Admonition.
If this government whereof they Page 7^.
speak, be (as they say) necessary in all places, then must they have of
necessity, in every particular parish, one Pastor, a company of Seniors, and
a Deacon, or two, at the least, and al those to be found of the parish, because
they must leave their occupations to attend upon the matters of the Church.
But there are a number of Parishes in England, not able to find one tolerable
Minister, much less to find such a company.

Assertion.
This argument seems to be drawn from kitchen profit, and is but a
bugbegger to scarr covetous men from submitting their necks unto the yoke of
that holy Discipline, which our Savior Christ has prescribed, and which the
Admonitor himself confesses, to have been practiced by the Apostles, and
primitive Church. And yet because this argument seems to lay a very heavy
burden on men's shoulders, such as is impossible to be borne, it is an argument
That Seniours and Deacons should be found at the charge of ye Parish is absurd.
worthy to be examined, though in it self, the same be very untrue and
absurd. For who did ever fancy that a Pastor, a company of Seniours, and a
Deacon, or two at the least, should be men of occupations, or that they should
be all found of the parish, because they must leave their occupations, to
attend upon the matters of the Church? Why? there be many hu^dreths of parishes
in England, wherein there dwells not one man, of an occupation. And what
reason then or likelihood of reason was there, to father such an absurd
necessity upon the Church? As for the necessity of having one Pastor in
every particular parish, and of his finding by the parish, because it is his
duty, to attend upon reading, exhortation, and doctrine, although he be no man
of occupation, this (I say) is agreeable and consonant, to the government of the
church practiced by the Bishops. And therefore in the finding, and having of
one Pastor in every parish, they, and we differ not. But that men of
occupations only should be chosen Seniours and Deacons in every parish; or
if Seniours and Deacons, were men of occupations in any parish, that they
should be all found of the parish, we utterly disclayme as an absurdity of
absurdities. And yet we deny not, but in Cities and great Towns wherein for
the most part, men of trade, do inhabit, that Seniours and Deacons must of
necessity be men of occupations. Unless then an occupation must of necessity
hinder men, from being faithful, religious, and godly men, there is no reason
to enforce, that me^ of occupations in Cities, and great towns, should not be
chosen Seniors, and Deacons. And as for Country parishes, What kind of me^
ought to be chosen Seniours and Deacons.
wherein either very few, or no men of occupations do reside, this objection
is altogether idle. In which parishes also we affirm, that men of greatest
gravitie, integrity, wisdom, faith and godliness, ought to be chosen
Seniours, and Deacons. And we doubt not, but all such men as whom we intend,
ought to be chosen Seniours, and Deacons, whether dwelling in Cities and
Towns, or in the Country, would be as ready, as willing, and as watchful,
prudentlie to employ them selves hereafter, in matters of the Church, as now
either them selves, or their equalles, are busied in matters of their
corporations, or common weal, without any manner of contribution, to be
yielded toward their finding.

When the people of Israel were commanded to pay their tithes, first fruits,
and other oblations unto the Priests and Levites, for their attendance and
service in the Sa^ctuarie, we do not read in the whole book of God, that
they were enjoined to be helpers and co^tributors to the relief and
sustentation of the Captains over thousands, of the Captains over hundreds,
nor of the Elders and Governors, placed City by City, for the affairs of
the King. And therefore sithence we have neither precept nor president, that
all the officers of the church should be found at the costs of the Church;
and sithence also as well in Country parishes, as in Cities, and towns (to
the praise and glory of God be it spoken) we have many able, wealthy, and
substantial persons, who have given their names unto Christ, what necessity
is there that any such Seniours, and Deacons should be elected, as have need to
be relieved, and supported by a common purse? And had the Admonitor well and
advisedlie po^dered that our Church Church wardens and side men are not found
at the chardges of the parishes.
Wardens, and side men (who carry a semblance of governing Seniours) that our
collectors also for the poor (who iustle out the Deacons) being all of them
men of occupations, poor husbandmen, or day laborers, and being not found of
the parish, are notwithstanding oftentimes in the year, troubled and
turmoyled, from one end of the Diocese unto the other, and that which is more,
from attendance upon their day labor husbandry and occupations, to weight,
and to attend not upon matters of the church, but upon money matters,
perteyning to the officers of the Bb. Consistory: Had he (I say) wisely and
sincerely considered these things, he would certeinlie not once have mentioned
this so silly and simple a suggestion. But quite and clean to cut of at one
blow all the skirtes of the coat of this silly bulbegger, that the very
buttockes of it may be bare, and that the church may see, there is no such
burdensome charge, to be laid upon her, as is feyned; the grave and godly
judgment, and policy of King Edward The judgment of King Ed. ye sixth
commisioners touching Elders and Deacons.
the sixth his Commissioners, authorized to compile a book, for the reformation
of laws ecclesiastical, according to an Act of Parleament, in that behalf
provided, shall rise up for us, and plead the truth and equity of this our
sayings. The Commissioners names were these: viz. The most reverend Father
Thomas Crammer, Archbishop of Canterbury. Thomas Bishop of Ely, Richard
Cox, the Kings Almoner: Peter Martyr, professor of Divinity, William May,
Rowland Tailor, Doctors of the Law, Sir John Cheek, John Lucas, Richard
Goddericke, Master Hadon, and others. All Titul. de diuiois officijs cap. 10.
fol. 45.
which reverend, learned, and religious men, as with one voice and accord speak
one thing: so thus and thus they speak: Evening prayer being finished,
whereunto all shall be atte^dant, after sermon in their own Churches, the chief
minister whom they call Parochies, and the Deacon, if happily they shall be
present, or they being absent, let the Ministers, Vicars and Elders, (lo the
Archb. of of Ca^terburie, afterward a godly Martyr, and Bishops can skill
of the name of Deacon and Elders) with the people conferr about the money put
apart to godly uses how the same may be best employed; And let the Discipline
(lo these sage Counselors were all Disciplinarians) be reserved until that
time. For they whose frowardnes has been public, and tending to the common
offense of the Church, let such be recalled to the acknowledgement of their
faults, and let them publicly for the same be censured, that the Church by
their wholesome coertion, may be brought in good frame. Afterward, let the
Minister going apart, with some of the Elders, take counsel, how the others
(whose manners are said to be lewd, and whose life is said to be full of
mischief) may first according to the commandment of Christ in the Gospel,
come together, and be communed with, by sober and discreet men, and with a
certain kind of brotherly love. By whose admonition if they shall reform
themselves, thanks are diligently to be given unto God. But if they shall
proceed forth in their wickedness, they are to be bound with that sharp pain,
which by the Gospel we know to be prepared for contumacie. And when the
force and vehemency of excommunication shall be shaken, first let the Bishop
be sought unto, who if he shall consent, and oppose his authority, let the
form of excommunication be dispatched, before the whole church that we may
bring in as much as may be the ancient Discipline.

Thus much have these most Christian Disciplinarians, and renewers of the
ancient Discipline, by Pastors, Elders, and Deacons both written and spoken.
And yet have they sounded never a word, to the finding of Elders and Deacons by
the Parish, nor by having men of occupatio^s to leave their business, to attend
upon matters of the Church. For men thus meeting together once only in the
week, and that upon the Lords day, and that only within their own parishes,
and without payment of any fees, may very well notwithstanding these
attendances, give themselves wholly all the week following, to their ordinary
vocations. And therefore against his not able to find one tolerable Minister,
much less to find a company, etc. I conclude thus: No Parish in England
shallbe burdened to find so much as one Seniour or Deacon:

Therefore much less shall every Parish be burdened to find a company of
Seniours, etc.



Where the Admonitor complayneth, Tolerable and intolerable Ministers.
that many parishes are not able to find one tolerable Minister, we would
gladly learn, by what brand tolerable Ministers, are known from
intolerable Ministers, according as the Lords spiritual judge, or judge not,
of tolerable, and intolerable Ministers. For if all reading Ministers (as
needs with them they must be) or else why do they tolerate them, be
tolerable Ministers, what a vain, and idle distinction, has he coined
touching the scarcity of maintenance, for tolerable Ministers? Considering
all Ministers by intendement of law, be able to read: and considering also a
very small maintenance, is esteemed to be a tolerable maintenance, for
reading ministers. For else why do the great Bishops, in their great
Churches of Co^mendames, and the rich Doctors in their rich Churches of non
residencies, make so small allowances to their reading and stipendarie Curates?
And where then is that parish in England, that is not able to mainteyne a
tolerable Minister?

The next argument, that the people might not choose their Pastors, Elders
Page 78.
and Deacons, as is required, is drawn partly from a fear, that the same
will be a matter of schism, discord, and dissension in many places: partly from
affection and want of right judgment of the people, partly from the unruliness
of the parishes, and partly from the broyle and trouble which may follow.

Assertion.
Unto this objection if I should answer nothing at all, but only should The
objection of fear etc. answered.
deny, that any fear, or any other inconvenience at all, pretended in this
place, is to be feared to ensue, my simple negation were more to be tolerated,
then his simple affirmation: for by the canon law, non inficienti, sed
ponenti, incumbit onus probandi. And yet because the Lord has spoken unto
Joshua, and in him unto Doct. in c. 6 cui. depreb. Lib. 2.
us all, that we should not fear, nor be discouraged to observe, and to do
all, that is written in the law, for then (says the Lord) shall thou make thy
way prosperous, and then shall thou have good success, therefore in the word
of the Lord (I say) that none of all this fear, broyle, trouble, or turmoyle,
is to be feared at al. Nay that it is most assuredly, and without all doubt,
to be hoped, and looked for, that he would so bless, the attempt of putting
his order in execution, as that the peoples approbation, and allowance of their
Ministers, should be a matter of all peace, quietness, unity, concord, good
success and prosperity to the whole Church of God in England.

For what an heathnish incredulity, were it for us to reply upon the
erroneous conceyte of a timorous, and suspicious fancy, that fear, and I wot
not what unruliness, and unquietness shall follow, when we (receyving the laws
of peace from the Prince of peace) have his most stable truth, that his peace
shall rest upon us, and that all fear and evil success shall cease and
vanish away. No busy headded body therefore, shall be able to lead any man
away, to disquiet either Church or common Wealth, (otherwise then as the Church
in all ages by the malice of Satan and his instruments has evermore been
disquieted) if once the holy law of the Gospel touching this point were
observed and put in ure. And if it be feared, that the choice to be made by the
people of God, and which is allowed unto them, by the holy laws of God would
prove to be a matter of schism, discord, and dissension; how much more reason
have we to fear, that the fire of schism, discord, and dissension, being
blown already, should not break out, and flame among us, if still one man
alone, be suffered to thrust upon the people of God, not tolerable Ministers,
according to Gods heart, but intolerable ministers, according to man's
tradition. The Admonitor has insinuated unto us often in this admonition, that
it is dangerous to innovate. And so I say too, unless there be evident M. de
co^stitu. prim. L. 2
utility of innovation. For (says the Emperor) in rebus novis constituendis
evidens esse vtilitas debet, vt ab eo iure recedatur, quod diu aequum visum
est. But is it not as perilous, yea sometimes much Dangerous to innouate
unless there be evident vtility of innovation.
more perilous not to innovate? for proof whereof, it shall suffice, to take
witness of our own times and of our own experiences. It seemed equal a long
time, and for many years, that the sacrifice of the Mass with all the pelf
and trumperie thereof, should not once be spoken against. But we all know, that
the abandoning thereof, has not yet brought any perilous subversion, upon any
nation, that purely and soundly in place thereof, has embraced the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. It seems also to be equal for many ages past
that the Bishop of Rome might have supreme and absolute power over all
persons, states, and causes, not only in Rome, Italy, Spaigne, Germany, and
other foreign Kingdoms, but also in England and Scotland. But as yet to the
view of all the world, it has not proved perilous for the King, and Queen of
England and Scotland, to establish new laws, for the alteration of that
ancient abuse. And why has it not been dangerous so to do? Why? forsooth
because there was evident utility in doing of it. But how could an evident
utility appear before it was done? How? Forsooth because the holy law of God
had warranted an alteration. For faith having eyes to see the wisdom, the
power, and the truth of God in his word, discerned a far of that the
institution of the Lords Supper, was long before the sacrifice of the mass.
And therefore our Kings by abandoning popery out of the Realm, did not
institute any new religion, but only they restored the old. Now then if the
same holy law of God, do condemn the choice, and thrusting of a Pastor upon
the people by one man alone; and again if the same law, do impugn the
primacie of one Pastor over all Pastors, as well in a Diocese, or Province,
as in the whole West part of Christendom, what danger can it be, not to
disfra^chise the one, sithence without any manner of danger, we have abolished
the other? or what peril can it be, not to countenance the sons, sithence
without peril we have discountenanced the father? Especially seeing in this
place of the admonition we have a plain confession, that the common manner of
election of Pastors, Elders and Deacons in the old Churches was made by the
people. For if the examples of schism, discord Common manner of elections in
ye old churches was by the people.
and contention, did commonly appear in the old churches, while that manner of
election did continue, then by his own mouth that manner of election was
common, and did continue in the old churches. Besides, this inconvenience
(says he) caused Princes and Bishops so much to entermedle in this matter.
From whence it necessarily again follows, that by the holy Scriptures, and
law of God, Princes and Bishops, did not entermedle with that matter at all.
For had it bin simply lawful for the^, to have Bb. meddle not with election of
Pastors by the holy Scriptures.
dealt in those causes by the word of God, the^ as well before schism,
discord, and dissension, as afterward, yea rather much more before then
afterward. For then by their own right, might Princes and Bishops have
prevented all occasion of schism, and contention, and have so preserved the
Church, that no tumult, or disorder, should once have bin raised or begun
therein. Again if by the law of God, Princes and Bishops, had meddled in these
matters, and had not entermedled by humane devise, then lawfully by their
authority alone, might they have chosen Pastors, Elders and Deacons in the
old Churches: which thing in this place by necessary inference he denies.
For schism (says he) caused the^ to entermedle. So as by his confession, they
were but entermedlers, and entercommoners, by reason of schism, and not
co^moners, and medlers by virtue of Gods word. And yet now a days our reverend
Bishops in this case, are no more entercommoners, with Princes and with the
people, they are no more entermedlers as in old times they were; but they have
now so far encroched upon the prerogatives of the Prince, and privileges of
the people, that neither Prince Bishops encroch upon the right of prince and
people.
nor people, have any commons in the election of Pastors, Elders and Deacons
with them at all. Besides if schism, and contention among the people were the
reason, why Bishops first entermedled in the choice of Pastors, we now having
no schism nor contention about the choice of Pastors, by the people, and so
the cause ceasing, why should not the effect likewise cease? But this effect,
is therefore still to be continued, because otherwise the cause would a new
sprout out, and spring up again. Nay rather inasmuch, as for these many
years, we have had schism, discord and dissension, because the Bishops wholly
and altogether have meddled in the choice of Pastors, and have thrust upon the
people, whatsoever Pastors please not the people, but pleased themselves, and
have not suffered the people to meddle, no not so much as once to entermedle in
these matters; in as much (I say) as these things be so: it seems most
expedient, requisite, and necessary, for the appeasing, and pacifying of this
discord, and the taking away of this schism, to have that manner of election,
which was in the old Churches, restored to the people; and this wherein the
Bishops have entermedled, without authority from the word, to be abolished:
that so again the cause of schism and strife, which is now among us ceasing,
the effect might likewise cease.

After I had ended this tract, in this manner, touching this point, there came
into mine hands a book entitled The perpetual government of Christ's church
written by Thomas Bilson, Warden of Winchester College: in the fifteenth
chapter of which book is handled this question, viz: to whom the election of
Bishops and Presbiters does rightly belong, and whether by Gods law the
people must elect their Pastors or no. In which Chapter also the matter of
schism, strife, and contention is handled. The final scope and conclusion
whereof, is as the proposition imports, two fold: First, concerning Bishops,
then concerning Pastors. The quarrel taken against Bishops does not so much
touch (says he) the office, and functions of Bishops, as it does the Princes
prerogative. When you rather think the Prince may not name her Bishops
without the consent and election of the people, you impugn nor us, but
directly call the Princes fact, and her laws in question. As touching this
point of the proposition, because the people by any law, or custom; never
challenged any right, or interest in the choice of the Kings Bishops, we have
nothing to meddle or to make about the choice, of any of his Kingly Bishops.
The King only has power without the people to nominate his Kingly Bb.
Nay we confess, as his Highness progenitors Kings of England, have bin the
Sovereign Donours, Founders, Lords and Avowes of all the Bishoprics in
England without aid of the people; that so likewise it is a right, and interest
invested into his Imperial Crown, that he only, his heirs and successors,
without consent of the people, ought to have the free nomination, appointment,
collation, investiture, and confirmation of all Bishops from time to time to
be placed in any of those Bishoprics; yea and we say further, that the King
alone, has not power only to nominate, collate and confirm, but also to
translate, yea and if it please him to depose all his Kingly Bishops without
any consent of his people at all. For (say we) eius est destruere, cuius est
construere; eius est tollere, cuius est condere: Neither will we dislike, but
rather content our selves, that our late Queens Bishops (if they shall find
favor in the Kings eyes) should be also the Kings Bishops, condicionallie
they submit them selves to the laws, and prerogatives of the Kings Crown,
content themselves with the only name of Kingly and Princely Bishops, and
not challenge any more the titles of Godly and Christian Bishops, as though
without injury to the law of God, and Gospel of our Savior Christ, they could
not be dispossessed of their Lordly Bishoprics. And therefore our most
humble prayer to the King is, that his Majesty would be pleased, that such his
Kingly Bishops may not henceforth overcrow, and iustle our Gods Bishops: nor
have any primacie over Gods Bishops. And withal that the King him self would
vouchsafe, to hearken to the doctrine of such as are in deed Gods Bishops,
rather the^ to the Counsel of those who lately were the Queens Bishops.

As touching the second part, viz. whether May. Bilson confirms the peoples
election of their Pastor. Page 339.
the people by Gods law, must elect their Pastors, or no; Master Bilson by
reasons, and profes brought for the first use of it, rather confirms then
impugneth the same. For (says he) Well may the peoples interest stand upon
the grounds of reason and nature, and be derived from the rules of Christian
equity and society: That each Church and people stand free by Gods law, to
admit, mainteyne, or obey no man, as their Pastor without their likinge,
unless by law, custom, or consent, they have restreyned them selves: That the
people 360.
had as much right to choose their Pastor, as the Clergy that had more skill
to judge: That the Apostles left elections indifferenthe to the people and
Clergy at Jerusalem: That the Apostles in the Acts, when they willed the
Church at Jerusalem to chose the seven, did not make any remembrance or
distinction of the seventy Disciples from the rest: And lastly, against the
cursing, and fighsting of the late Bishops of Rome, till 359.
excluding both Prince and people, from yielding his consent, or making their
request, they had reduced the election wholly to the Clergy, he tells them
by their leave, it was not so from the beginning. From all which sayings of
Master 339.
Bilson, I conclude thus: Whatsoever is right, lawful, and free by the law of
God: whatsoever stands upon the grounds of reason and nature: whatsoever is
derived from Christian equity and society: whatsoever is from the beginning,
and was left by the Apostles to the Church at Jerusalem, the same ought still
to remain, and must be kept inviolable in the Church.

But the peoples interest to choose their Pastore, is right; is lawful; is
free by the law of God; stands upon the grounds of reason, and nature; is
aeriued from Christian equity and society; is from the beginning, and was left
by the Apostles to the church at Jerusalem:

Therefore the peoples interest to choose their Pastoure ought still to
remain, and must be kept inviolable in the Church.



The whole proposition and every part thereof, together with the assumpt, and
every part thereof, is drawn from Mr Bilsons own confession. Only to the
proposition he has annexed certain conditions or exceptions, viz. Unless by
law, custom, or consent, the people have restreyned themselves, or
transferred, or altered their right, or else by their default, or abuse, the
canons, counsels, superior powers, princely, or public laws, have abridged,
altered, or abrogated the same. Now then it remains to know, whether any
consent, default, abuse, custom, canons, counsels, superior powers, public
or Princely Edicts, may be a good and sure warrant, to abridge, transferr, or
abrogate, the peoples interest, from having to do, in the choice of their
Pastors.

Our Savior Christ, when he came in the flesh, he came to reform the abuse
crept in of the Law, and to improve the corruptions of doctrine taught by the
Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of the law, but he took not away any least
title of the law, ne abolished any jot of true, and sound doctrine in the
Church. The Gospel teaches us to order our judgments aright, to bridle the
unruliness of our affections, and to moderate our inordinate appetites. But yet,
does not the same command us, to empty our souls of all judgment, to bury
our affections in our bellies, and to become as dead as stones, without all
sense, or appetite. In like sort we grant, that custom, consent, Canons,
Cou^cills, Superior powers, public, and princely Laws, Canons and cou^sells,
etc. may bridle disordered electio^s, but not disannul elections of the people
altogether.
may reform, reprove restreyne, direct, moderate, and bridle the disordered
unruliness, and contentious brawlinges of the people, in, and about their
elections; yea and we grant further, that they may alter, abridge, or enlarge
the form and manner of elections. All this we grant: but that Christian
Kings or any Superior powers, may take this right into their own hands (as
he says) from the people; or that the people by any law, custom, consent,
canon, or cou^cill, may transfer or abolite their right, freedom, and
interest given and deduced unto them, by these rules and by these grounds, I
do not yet perceive any good ground or reason for the same. For in so doing,
how should the holy wisdom and providence of God, who has imprinted in our
nature, these rules and these grounds, this equity and this freedom, be so
holily regarded, and so highly reverenced, as it ought to be. For has he made
us free men, and can we without contempt of this grace become bondmen? Has he
given us leave and liberty to choose, and shall we with profane Esau, set
little by this our birthright, and post our liberty unto others, for less then
a mess of wort pottage? And albeit in some cases, that may be well said,
quod volenti non fit iniuria, and that quilibet potest recedere (...) suo iure;
yet the cases must be such, as a man's willingness, and readiness to forgo his
right, be not tied to him with so strong a band, as is the band of the
grounds of reason and nature, of the rules of Christian equity, and of the
freedom of the law of God. It is free, I grant, for a man to eat or not to
eat, to drink, or not to drink, but for a man not to eat at all, or not to
drink at all, and so with hunger and thirst to sterue him self, is not free:
and in this case volenti sit iniuria. Every man that has a wife, that has
sons and daughters, that has men-servantes, and mayd-servantes; as by the
very instinct of nature, and by the equity of the law of Christ, he has
freedom to provide for them, so must he carefully use this his freedom. And
therefore he may not wholly and altogether put from him self, and expose at
haphazard, the provision, education, instruction, dieting, appareling, and
lodging of his wife, his sons, his daughters and his servaunts unto
strangers: neither may Husbands, Fathers, nor Masters give their consent, to
the making of any law, or the bringing in of any custom, whereby their
freedoms, should be restreyned, adnihiled, or made void in this behalf. For
by thus violating the rules, and grounds, and by thus treading, as it were,
under foot, the equity of Christ, and the freedom they have by the law of
God: should they not most prophanelie, and impiouslie despite God, and, as it
were, over turn the whole order he has set in nature? And if the people may
not cast off these rules, and these grounds, this equity, and this freedom
in things apperteyning to this frail, bodily, transitory, and earthly life:
how much less may they, cast them off, or set little by them, in things
apperteyning to the salvation of their souls, and to a durable, spiritual,
everlasting and heavenly life?

But the peoples right to choose their Objection, that the peoples right did
never depend upon the express commandment of God
Bishops, did never depend upon the express commandment of God: neither
can the people chalendge by Gods law, the right to chose their Bishops: I
mean (says he) no such thing is expressed, and contained in the Scriptures.
What then? if it do depend, or be contained under the general grounds, and
rules of reason, nature, christian equity, christian society, principles of
humane fellowshippes, the law of God, the practice of the Apostles, and that
which was from the beginning: Is it not sufficient? Though it be not expressed
in these terms, viz: That the people must chose, or that the people have right
to choose their Bishops? It is not expressed and contained in the scriptures,
that every man must choose his own wife; or that every woman must choose her
own husband. And yet by the doctrine expressed, or contained in the scriptures,
is it true that no man has right either to choose an other man's wife, or to
choose an other woman's husband. And that every man has right to chose his
own wife, and every woman right to choose her own husband. Again, it is not
expressed and contained in the scriptures, that infantes must be baptized:
Neither is it expressed and contained in the scriptures that the Bishopp of
Lichfield must have but one wife. Yet because it is contained in the
scriptures, that God in the beginning, brought but one woman unto one man, and
gave to one woman but one husband. I assure my self it will not be denied, but
that the Bishops must and does content him self with one wife, and that every
Christian ought to bring their children to be Baptized. Besides if Master
Bilson distinguish Bishops in England from Pastors in England, and Archbishops
in England, and Pastors in England, two several orders and degrees of
Ministers in the Church of England, then I grant that it is neither expressed
nor contained in the Scriptures that the people must choose their Bishops in
England. And why? but because the Scriptures (having put no difference between
Bishops and Pastors) know no such Bishops as we have in Bishopps in England
are only Bishops by ye Kings grace, and not by divine institution.
England. And therefore Bishops in England, being Bishops only by the Kings
grace, and not by divine institution and ordination, as Pastors in England
be, hence is it, that the Kings of England, by their prerogative Royal, and
not the people, by the rule of Scriptures, have chosen their Bishops in
England. And for this cause also was it, that King Henry the eight, with
advise of the Parleament, did reassume, the nomination, appointment,
investiture, and confirmation, of his Kingly Bishops from the Pope. As for the
nomination of Pastoures, having cure of souls in parishes (otherwise Pastors
in parochial Churches were never placed by the King; as Bb. are in their
Bishoprics.
then all patrones by right of patronage, do give presentmentes) their choice,
institution, translation, or deprivation, the Kings of Enland by their regal
power, never yet hitherto took the same upon them. And if the Kings of
England by any fact, or by any law, did never take away the right, interest,
and freedom from the people, in choosing their Pastors; what right, other,
then by usurpation, can the Bishops have, to impose, or thrust upon the people
Pastors without their liking? But by custom and consent the people have
restreyned them selves. Hereunto (if it were not already sufficiently answered,
that the people could not lawfully restreine them selves) yet Master Bilson
him self answers: That the late Bb. of The people lost their consent by
cursing and fighting of the Popes.
Rome never left cursing and fighting, till they had excluded both Prince, and
people, and reduced the election wholly to the Clergy. By cursing, and fighting
then have the people been overruled, and excluded, and not by custom or
consent, have they restreyned them selves. Yea and by virtue of this cursed
fight only, do the Bishops of England at this day, exclude both Prince and
people, from meddling in the choice of Pastoures. For by authority of the canon
law, made by those late cursing and fighting Bishopps of Rome, the Bishops of
England have the sole ordination, and placinge of Pastors over the people. And
from hence also is it plain, that the peoples right, was not by their default,
or abuse, relinquished, and forfeyted. For then then late Bishops of Rome,
needed not to have cursed, and fought for it. And now whether it be not meet,
that the Lord Bb. professing them selves to be Christian Bishops, should
still reteyne in their hands, and not restore unto Christian people, the
possession of their Christian equity, and freedom, extorted from them, by the
cursings and fightinges of antichristian Bb. I leave it to the consideration of
the reverende Bishops them selves.

Touching the mischieves and inconveniences of schism, troubles, strifes, and
contentions so often inculcated, and so much urged, and excepted against the
election of the people, there is no man able (as I think) to produce any one
pregnant proof, out of any ancient, or late History, that any King or
Sovereign power, has interposed any supreme authority, to appease any
discord or dissentio^, ensuing or raised, upon the bare choice, made of any
mere Parochial Pastor, by any faithful and Christian people. The schisms,
strifes, and factions, that were raised in the old Schisms and contentions
spring from schismatic and proud clergy masters.
Churches, sprang out, and flowed only from the heads, and fountaynes of those
schisms, strifes and factions: and namely from proud, ambitious, and
heretical Bishops, and great Clergy masters. For they being infected, and
poisoned with the contagion of schism, and heresy, and having sowred the
minds of their Disciples, with the leaven of their heretical doctrines, no
merveile if the people became followers of the evil manners of their teachers,
and no merveile if they verified the proverb, Like Master, like Man; like
Priest, like People. Eustatius Bishop of Antioch being a Sabellian heretic,
Socr. lib. cap ^8.
was deposed by the Counsel of Antioch: after whose deposition, a fiery flame
of sedition was kindled in Antioch: because one sort of the common people
sought to translate Eusebius Pamphilus from Caesarea to Antioch; some other
would bring again Eustatius. Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis Bishop
of Nice, being both Arians, with their co^federates, raised skirmishes Socr.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
and tumults against Athanasius. After the death of Alexander, Bishop op
Constantinople about the election of a Bishop, there was greater stir then
ever before time, and the Church was more greevously turmoyled: The people were
divided into two parts: the one egerlie set with the heresy of Arius, claue to
Macedonius; the other cleaved very co^stantlie Socr. lib. 2 cap. 4.
to the decrees of the Nicene Counsel, and choose Paulus to be their Bishop.
The cause of division among the Citizens of Emisa, about the election of
Eusebius Emisenus, was, for that he was Socr. lib. 2. cap. 6
charged with the study of the Mathematickes, and accused of the heresy of
Sabellius. After the death of Eusebius, when the people of Constantinople, had
brought again Paulus, to be their Bishop, the Arians chose Macedonius. The
authors and chief doers, in that stir were certain Arian Bishops, who
before aided Eusebius, that turned up Socr. lib. cap. 9.
side down the whole state of the church. These and sundry such like sturres,
discords, factions, and dissentions, are found to have bin raised, and pursued
by schismatic, and heretical Bishops, their favorites and followers, in the
old Churches; but that these or the like mischieves, and inconveniences can be
proved, to have fallen out, by the election of parochial Pastors in the old
churches, we deny. And why then should not the interest, and freedom of
faithful, and Christian people, wrested from them by cursings and fightings,
of faithless, and antichristian Popes, be restored to them again? And the
cause ceasing, why should not the effect likewise cease? And therefore we
humbly entreat the Lords Bishops, that against the grounds of reason and
nature; against Christian equity A request to the reverend Bishops.
and society; against the right and freedom of the law of God; against the
principles of human fellowshippes; against that which was in the beginning;
and against that which the Apostles left in the Churches, by color of laws
brought into the Church, by the cursings and fightings of the late Roman
Bishops, they would not henceforth, bar and seclude the Kings Christian and
faithful people, from giving their consents unto their Pastors. Yea and we
further beseech their Lordships, that as scholars unto the Apostles, and as
servants unto the old way, of reason, of nature, of the law of God, of the
equity of Christ, and of humane society, they would hereafter embrace that
way, which was from the beginning; which is the old way, and the best way, and
not any longer persist, in a cursed and quareling way, which is the new way,
and the worst way. But if the Lords spiritual A supplication to be King by
the Lords and commo^s for the restitution of their right in the choice of their
Pastors
of their own accord, shall not readily voutchsafe to yield unto us this our
right, at our entreaty: then for my part, I will briefly show mine opinion,
what were expedient, for the Lords and commons, in open Parleament dutifully to
pray, and to supplicate at the Kings Maiestes hand. Namely:

At the humble petitions and supplications, of all his Lords temporal, and
Commons in Parleament assembled, his Majesty would be well pleased, to give
his Royal assent to an Act: to be entitled: An Act, for the restitution of
the ancient right, and freedom which the people of God in the old Churches
had, and which the people in England ought to have, in, to, or about the
election of their Pastors, and abolishing all papal power repugnant to the
same. For if (as it is plainly confessed) the people of all Churches, have
right, and freedom by the law of God, by the equity of Christ, by the grounds
of reason, and nature, by the principles of humane fellowshipps, and by that
which was from the beginning, to elect their Pastors: and if also the same
right, and freedom being left to the old churches, and especially to the
Church at Jerusalem by the Apostles, have been taken away by the cursings, and
fightings of the late Bishops of Rome: then can not the people without
violatio^ of those laws, rules, and grounds, by any Episcopal power, be any
more excluded from their said right, and freedom; then could, or might the
ancient jurisdiction of the Crown of England, have been still usurped by the
Pope from the Kings of England.

Admonition.
But alas the common people of England, thorough affection and want of right
judgment, are more easily wrought by ambitious persons, to give their consent
to unworthy men, as may appear in all those offices of gain or dignity, that
at this day remain in the choice of the multitude.

Assertion.
The Admonitor in one place of his admonition, tells us, that he must not put
all that he thinks in writing, and yet he writes in this place, that thing,
which might far better have been utterly unthought, then once written: For
could he think, to win the common people of England, to a continual good
liking, of high and stately Prelacie, by vpbrayding and charging them to their
faces, in a book dedicated unto them, with affection, and wantinge of right
judgment? Was this the way to procure grace, favor, and benevolence at their
hands? And albeit this slander deserved rather to have been censured by the
Commons in Parleament, then by confutation to have been answered, yet for the
better clearing of the right judgment, of the common people, givinge their
consents, to most worthy men, in all offices of gain, or dignity, remaining
in their hands, I think it necessary to show the indignity of this
contumely.

There be (I confess) in London, York, Lincoln, Bristow, Exceter, Norwich,
Coventry, and other principal Cities, and Towns, corporate, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Stewardes, Recorders, Baylifes, Cha^berlaynes, Bridge-maisters,
Clerks, Swordbearers, Knights, Burgeses, and such like offices, some of
dignity, and some of gain, but that the officers, of these, or any other
places, whether of dignity, or gain, be chosen by the multitude of those
places, is utterly untrue: for only according to their ancient customs,
privileges, and Charters, by the chief Citizens, Townsmen, and
Borough-maisters, are those officers chosen. The number also of which Electors
in all places is not alike. In London the Aldermen, choose the Lord Mayor.

In other Cities and Towns, sometimes eight and forty, sometimes fourteen,
sometimes twelfe, sometimes only such as have born office, as Mayors, Sherifes,
or Baylifes in the same places, nominate and elect their new Mayor, Sherifes,
and Baylifes. But that the Aldermen, principal Townsmen, Boroughmaisters, and
men having borne chief offices in those Cities, Towns, and Boroughes, have
easily been wrought by ambitious persons, to give their consents unto
unworthy men, though it have pleased the Ll. Bb. (with seen and allowed) to
have spread and published this saying, yet that the same saying is wholly
unworthy, of any credit to be given unto it, or to be regarded of any wise
and indifferent man, let the sober and peaceable elections made of the worthies
of the land hereafter mentioned, be witnesses; And to leave to speak of the
election of the Lord The officers in Cities and Towns corporate chosen without
contention and ambitious working of unworthy men.
Mayor of the City of London, Sherifes, Aldermen, Wardens of companies,
Cha^berlaynes, Bridge-maisters, and other annual officers, of honor and
dignity, let us consider whether the Citizens of London have been wrought by
ambitious persons to choose Master Wilbraham, Master Onslie, Mr Bromly, to
be their Recorders all three afterward the Queens sollicitors, and Master
Bromly Lord Chancelour of England: and let us consider whether the same
Citizens, as men of affection, and want of ^ight judgment, did elect to be
Recorders of the same City May. Serieant Fleetwood, Master Serieant Fleming,
Master Serieant Drue, and now Master Crook, a man wise, learned, and
religious, and a Cou^seler and Iusticer within the Principality of Wales. The
Recorder of the Town of Bedford, is the right honorable, the lord St John's of
Bletsoe. The Recorder of Bristoll was a long time Master Poppam, now Lord
chief Justice of England. The Recorder of Northampton, before he came to be
Judge in the Kings bench, was Master Serieant Yelverton, a favourer of the
truth, and an upright Iusticer: The Recorder of Warwick, was Master Serieant
Puckering, afterward Lord Keeper of the great seal: And of the same Town the
Recorder now is, a worthy Knight, descended from a noble house, Sir Foulke
Grevile: The Recorder of Cove^trie, is Sir John Harrington Knight, a man
zealous for the true fear of God: The Recorder of Chichester, was May.
Serieant Lewkner, now chief Justice in the principality of Wales. The Recorder
of Norwich was Master Cook, the Kings Attorney general. And who soever shall
enquire, after the names, and after the manner of election of all the Recorders,
in all other Cities and Boroughes of the land, I doubt not but he shall find
them all, to have been far from any least show, of ambitious working, the
Citiezens, and Townsmen to nominate, and elect the^. Moreover, as these Noble
persons, these sage, grave, learned, and christian Gentlemen, quietly, and in
all peaceable manner, with upright, and good affection and judgment, and
without ambition, have been chosen by the Citizens, Townsmen, and
Borough-masters, to the offices of Recordershippes. So likewise many, and
sundry honorable Cou^selors, Honorable Counselors chosen high stewardes,
without ambitious working.
have been, and as occasion is ministered, are daily elected by Citizens, and
Townsmen to be their high Stewards. Sir Francis Knolles, an honorable
Counsailour, and one, whose faith was famous among the churches, as well
abroad, as at home, by the election of the Citizens of Oxford, remained until
he died, high Steward of the City of Oxford. The right honorable Sir Francis
Walsingam, by the common Counsel of Ipswich, was made high Steward of the
same Town: after whose decease, the same common counsel, by their election,
surrogated into the same place, the right honorable the L. Hunsdon, late L.
Chamberlain: the right honorable Sir Christopher Hatto^, L. Chancelour of
England, by the Townsmen of Ca^bridg: was chosen to be high steward for the
town of Ca^bridge. The right honorable the old Earl of Arundell; and after him
the right honorable Earl of Lincoln; and after his death, the right
honorable, the Lord High Admiral of England, now Earl of Notingham, by the
Borough-maisters of the Town of Gildforde, was elected to be high steward of
the Town of Gildeford; Of all which honorable persons, and of all other their
Peers, chosen in other places of the Kingdom, by the same means, to the like
offices, there is great reason, and just cause for the reverend Bb. to carry a
more reverend estimation toward the^, then to burden them as ambitious
persons, to have sought their places, at the hands of men affected, and wanting
right judgment. As for any other offices of credit, dignity, charge, and
government in the common weal, now remaining in the choice of the commons: it
may easily be proved, that the common people in sundry places, have bent, and
opposed the^ selves, against ambitious persons, who by sinister, and indirect
means, have hunted for preferrement at their hands.

And what if it can not be gayne-said, but that some public officers chosen
by public applause of the people, have corruptly behaved themselves, in their
charges, and have not so equally, and indifferently distributed justice, to all
degrees, as it became them: yet this their misdemeanor can no more justly be
laid as a fault, nor any more disgrace, or discountenance the ancient and
commendable form, and manner of election, then the hypocrisy, or counterfeyt
zeal, of an evil man ordained by the Bishop to be a Minister, can be imputed
unto his letters of orders or manner of ordination. Besides if none be able to
prove, that the choice of the Knights Knights of the Shires and other officers
chosen by the people without trouble to the state.
of our Shires, Coroners of the Counties, Verderers of the Kings forests,
resting in the free voices, and consents of the freeholders; that the
nomination of the high Constables being in the disposition of the Justices of
peace, at their quarter sessions; that the choice of our peti-Conestables,
third Boroughes, Tything men, Church wardens, Wardens for the high ways,
overseers for the poor, side men and such like, remaining altogether in the
free election of the suitors to courts, leets and law days, and of the
inhabitants, and Parishioners of every Village, Hamlet, or Tything, have been
troublesome to the Lievetenants of the Shires, to the Stewards of our Courts,
to the Lords of our liberties, nor to the Ordinaries of the Diocesses: If (I
say) there be not any one man able to bring forth some few persons, for many
years passed, by whom the Officers and Magistrates of the Queens peace, have
been sued unto, and importuned, for the pacification of any strife, contention,
or debate, of any busy head, or ambitious person, raised among the people,
about the choice of any one of these Officers; then (I say) it is meet, and it
imports the Lords Bishops very deeply, that for ever hereafter they be
silent, and never any more utter so vile a slander, against so Noble a people,
as are the people of England: viz. that upon affection, and want of right
judgment, they will easily be led by ambitious persons to prefer unworthy
persons unto all Offices of gain or dignity. Or that this nation Page 8.
of England, upon light causes, is more inclined to broile, and trouble then
any other.

And to speak the truth (as daily experience teaches us) what fear of
trouble No fear of trouble about the choice of an ecclesiastical Officer.
is there likely any way to ensue by reason of dissentio^, and ambition among
the people in the choice of an ecclesiastical Officer, when most of the
people, shall rather shune and eschew, then long or desire to bear any
ecclesiastical office? The common people among whom I dwell use oftentimes
many delays, yea they procure what favor and friendship they can, not to be
appointed, to any the inferior offices before specified: And why do they so,
but because those offices be full of bodily care, and trouble? And is there
then any Christian, knowing, how the whole soul, mind, and spirit of a man
is altogether to be employed in the dischardge of a spiritual function, that
will dissentiously and ambitiously seek to be chosen an Elder?

The Admonitor tells us, that men Page 79.
by experience know that many parishes upon some private respect, do send their
letters of earnest commendation for very unfit, and unable persons,
insinuating thereby what an inconvenience might follow, if Parishes had the
whole direction, and order to sound out, who were fit and able persons. But as
this fancy was never yet by any of sound judgment on our behalf, so much as
once thought, much less insisted upon: so may it please the reverend Bishops
to be advertized, that the meanest and simplest Parishioner, among a thousand,
can quickly retort this reason against their Lo. viz. that no parishes by
letters of commendacion, can commend unto any Bishop, any person, as an able
and fit man, unto any particular parish or special charge: unless the same,
or some other Bishop have formerly ordained him, and approved him to be a fit
and able person for every place. And how then were it possible if the choice of
having one, to be their Pastor, were wholly in the hands of a parish, that the
same parish could choose any worse men, any more ignorant, and unlearned men,
then their Ll. have commended unto us. For have they not chosen, sent, and
commended such unto us as know not a be from a batle door, as uneath know to
read English, and as know not the Lords prayer from the Articles of faith: Of
which sort of Ministers, Ministers sent unto the people, which know not a b.
from a batle door.
the Parson of Haskam now living a Chaplin in Winton-diocesse may be produced
for a witness omni exceptione mayor. For thus much is to be proved from the
report of a good and religious Knight dwelling within that Diocese, that upon
a time in the presence, and at the instant request of the said Knight, when a
protestant Bishop of the same The person of Haskams answer to the Bishopp of
Wincester
Diocese deceassed, had demanded of the new Parson of Haskam, which was the
first Petition of the Lords prayer, the said Parson, after he had a pretty
space paused and gased toward heaven, at length made this answer, viz: I
believe in God the Father Almighty, at which answer the Knight merely
smoyling, I told you my Lord, quoth the Knight, what a profound Clerk your
Lordship should find this fellow. Well how vnclerkly, and how vnprofoundly
soever this Clercke then answered, and albeit at that present, he could not
obtain the institution, which he came for, to that benefice (for the good
Bishop hated such gross ignorance), yet this Clerk afterward, by the
corruption of the same Bishops Chancelour, was instituted into the same
benefice, and to this day possesses it quietly, though he can hardly read
English to the understanding of his people. I could have informed him also of
many other such Clerks resiant and beneficed in that Diocese: and namely of
the Vicar of W: who upon an holy day, in steed of preaching the Word Fables
read in the church
which he could not, or in reading of Homilies w h he would not, (to terrify
his Parishioners with the judgments of God, and to move them unto repentance)
solemly read and published a contrefaict fable out of a little Pamphlet,
entitled, Strange news out of Calabria; pretended to be prognosticated by M.
John D^leta. Of these and of a number of such able and skilful Clerks and
Chaplins; my Lords of the Clergy may be informed. And therefore on the behoof,
and in the defense If the people had choice of their Pastors, they would
provide better then the Bishopps send them.
of the common people of England, I am to testify and to protest unto their
Lordships, that by the mercifulnes and goodness of our God, we are not yet
become so ignorant, rude, and barbarous, as that we would admit such manner of
Clerks and Chaplins, to have the cure of our souls, in case, it laid in our
power to choose, and refuse out own Pastors. No, no, our souls, and the
souls of our wives, children and families should be more dear, and more
precious in our eyes, then that carelessly we would hazard, all our
birthrights, upon the skill and ability of such a mess of hirelings, and
idoll-sheapheards. And surely me thinks it stands greatly with the charity
of our Lord Bishops to conceave the commons, to have so much natural
understanding, as not to choose a cobbler, when they want a carpenter; nor to
retain a loyterer in lieu of a labourer; nor to hire a sleeper, in steed of a
watchman. But (alas) be it, that the poor commons of England, were thus
wretched Though the common people be not able to discern of Pastors, yet the
Nobles are able.
and thus bewitched; yea be it, that they were thus desperate and besides
themselves: should therefore the Nobles and Peers of the Realm, be as profane,
as impious, and as heathenish as they? Are the great men also unworthy, unable,
and unfit to discern between night and day, between light and darkness? Can
they also put no difference between good and evil, between a blind guide,
and him that has his eyesight? or have they no better stomach, then to cast
up Methridat, and to digest hemlocke? will they also choose them Capteines from
among Corvysers? and will they call sheepheards from among swineheards? or will
they take them Pastors from among Pedlers? or will my Lords of the Clergy
charge them to be those ambitious persons, to work the Commons, (for their
private respect) to the choice of unworthy men? or will they (being them
selves under his Majesty, the worthies of the land) and chief guydes and
leaders of men in peace and in war upon earth, choose the scumme, the refuse,
and the baggage of the land, to guide their own souls to hell? For to heaven
by the labor and industry of such idol ministers (as whose lips preserve
no knowledge) they can never be brought. A great part of the common people
(says he) are backwardlie affected toward The common people accused to be
backwardly affected to religion.
the truth of Religion: from which backwardnes he draws an argument against
the allowance of the Pastors by the people. But (alas) is there any merveyle,
that the common people (for the most part) be backwardlie affected? For how is
it possible, that they should stepp The backwardnes of the people proceeds
from the ba^kwardnesse of their guides.
one foot forward, when either their guides stand still, or go not at all, or
at least run fromward? or can the common people become good scholars in the
school of Christ, and learn to know the truth of his religion, when their
Masters and Tutours (whom my Ll. of the Clergy have begotten, provided, and
thrust upon them) be unlearned and irreligious dullardes? What? Can truth
spring from error? or can light arise out of darkness? Do men pluck, or pull
corn, from a dead stalk, or a full ear from a dead root? Can a Vintener
draw wine out of an empty casque? Or does a Baker power meal out of a
bottomless bag? If then the common people be foolish and ignorant, if they
do err, and be irreligious, they may justly challeng the Lords spiritual of
unkindness, and want of love: not because they have sent Ambassadors unto
them as the Gibeonites sent unto Joshua, with old sackes, and old botles, with
old shoes and old raiment; with provision of bread dried, and mouled: but
because they have sent the^ such Embassadoures, as have had no sackes, no
bottles, no shoes, no raiment, yea and no manner of bread at all. All which
notwithstanding, the Admonitor (by the backwardnes of the people) labors
Page 116.
mightily to acquit the Lord Bb. laying to the peoples charge, that this
fault has not happened for want of teaching by the Ministers, but for want of
profiting by the people. The scripture (says he) in no place teaches us, that
the offenses and faults of the Ministers, are always the only cause, why the
word of God does not take place in men's hearts. It is commonly, and almost
always imputed to the waywardnes, unthankfulness, and obstinacy of the people
that hear it. But (alas) who ever fancied that the faults of the Ministers of
God, were the only cause, why the word of God, preached by the^, did not enter
into the hearts of men? Where the Minister sincerely preaches the Word of
God, if there the people do not worthily embrace the same, the people are
only in blame and not the Minister, no, though he may have many faults: for
when they teach the truth, the people are bound to do as they say, Mat. 23.
2. 3
and not to do as they do, because they say and do not. But the complaint
that has been, and is still made, is this: namely, that the people generally
in most places of the Land, and for the most part, have no seed at all sown,
for want of husba^dmen; that the people can not be hearvested, for lack of
laborers; that the people could bring forth no fruit, because they were not
ered and plowed; and that the people could not hear. What? for want of their
own ears? no, but for want of the Priests lips, which should have preserved
and taught knowledge. and therefore this general backwardnes and unfruitfulness
of the people in religion, must still light upon such as have been the occasion
that there have bin so few drivers to hayte them on, and to whistle them
forward. No? why this Realm of England (as says the Admo.) never had so many
learned men, nor of Page 140.
so excellent gifts, in delivering the word of God; it is the greatest
ornament, that ever this Church had; for my part (says he) surely I do
reverence, and merveile at the singular gifts of God, that I see in many. And
do my Lords of the Clergy merveyle in deed of so great a number Men of
excellent gifts and men of no gifts, are unequally marched in the ministry
of the Gospel.
of excellent men, and of so singular gifts in them? And should not then also
the people merveyle beyond merveyle, that some of the Lords spiritual, for
small matters, and of so little importance, should put to silence, many of the
chiefest of many excellent and learned men? Nay may not the people be
astonished at the little love of some of the Bishops, when as upon displeasure
conceaved against many excellent and learned men, their Lordshippes suffer, the
people to sterue, and famish for want of food, rather then those learned and
excellent men should break unto them, the bread of life? But be it granted
that many excellent men's mouths be not yet stopped, or if they have been
stopped, they are now opened again; what is this to that, that they have no
more learned me^, The use of an hireling.
or that, they have any hirelings at all? For to what use serves an hireling,
but first to rob, to spoil, and to kill, and afterward to trust to his
heels, to trudge, and to run away? As for that, that many learned and
excellent men, in many places of the land do still feed the The number of
excellent Ministers in the ministry, is small, in comparison of unlearned
Ministers.
people, they may be said (in respect of the people vn^ed) to be an hand-full,
to an house-full or as an inch to an elle. Besides how are the people fed in
many places by some of these many learned men? is not one of them allotted (by
a license in a box) to break bread unto twenty or forty thousand people?
What? by them selves in one place sitting round and close together? Nay but in
a 1000. and more Parishes distant far and wide a sunder, and that at sundry
times, one time long after an other: and what a strange and new kind of feeding
call ye that? Is it not as if a victualler, should provide one meals meat for
a company at London, and another meals meat for a company at Lincoln, and
another meals meat for a company at Exceter, and another meals meat for a
company at Bristoll, to feed his guestes until he had ridden from coast to
coast The manner of diet set before the people, by such Ministers as wander from
place to place.
to provide new viand? And yet this is the common manner of Diet, and the common
manner of food prepared and set before the souls of the people. For many of
these learned Preachers, galloppe from place to place, and trott from Parish to
Parish, and give unto the people at one time bread, half baked, at another
time, beer half brued; sometimes either meat twice sodden, or half raw; and
many times drink, both dead, sower, and wallowish. And how then is it possible,
that the souls of the people should prosper, wax strong, and be pliable in
going forward in the truth of Religion, they being so thinlie dieted, and
enterteigned with so small cost. But to let these gallopers pass, we will
conclude this point: and thus we say, that the backwardnes of the people in
the truth of religion (how backward so ever they be, and how soever the same
backwardnes may happen) ca^ be no good plea in bar to take from the people of
God, their right, interest, and freedom, from the allowance and approbation of
their Pastor. As for that vain and ridiculous gibe, whether Answer to the
abstract.
all (hand over head) men and boys, women and girls, young and old, etc.
should give their consentes, to this fond gibe, I answer, that there is no
such vanity of vanities intended. For when we say, that the people of every
Parish, ought to choose and elect their Pastor, we mean not that the election
should soly be committed to the multitude, but we intend only that the chief
Fathers, Ancientes, and Governors of the Parish in the name of the whole
should approove the choice made by the holy Ministry: wherein we follow the
example of the ancient people of God, whose affairs were committed to the
chief Fathers sitting in the gate.

Where the Admonitour has pretended Page 80.
that it is impossible to be brought to pass, which (as he says) is most of
all pretended for the common manner of election, that the people may know their
The people may know a man to be a fit minister though he be not brought up
among them.
Minister, and thereby have the better liking of him, unless every Parish
shall have within it self, a School or College, where those should be brought
up that shall be preferred to the ministry amongst them: This (I say) is an
other vanity of vanities, and a vexation of spirit without all mean or
measure, yea it is an asseveration void of all sense and sobernes. For is it
not possible for a Lord Bishop, to know the equities, condition, and behavior
of a man fit to be retained for his Secretary or Gentleman-usher, unless the
same party be brought up, in some School or College within his own house? Or
is it impossible for his Lordship to know the education, life, learning, gifts
of utterance, and aptness to teach, of a man, and so to have the better liking
of him, to make him a Minister, unless within his Parish, there be a School
or College, wherein such as are to be preferred, to the ministry be brought
up? If then without having any School or College, within his own house, or
within his own Parish, for the bringing up, of such as are received, by a Lord
Bishop either to his private service, or to the public ministry; his
Lordship may know, and so have the better liking of them, whom he would
prefer. How then follows it, to be impossible, that the people should know
their Minister, and so have the better liking of him, unless every Parish had
in it self a School or College, where those should be brought up that should
be preferred to the Ministry amongst them? What? is one tongue, of one man
alone able to enquire and learn the manners of many men to be ordained and
placed Ministers in many places, and are many tongues, of many men not able to
enquire and learn the co^versation of one man to be placed in one place? or
have the eyes and ears of one man, sight quick enough, and hearing good
enough, to hear and to see into the educatio^ and life of all the Ministers,
within all the parishes of one whole diocese? and are all the ears and eyes
of many men, deaf and dim to hear and to (...), into the life and education,
of one Minister, in one Parish? If the Parish of Mary's in Cambrige, or the
Parish of All-hollowes in Oxford, were destitute of an able, and preaching
Minister, might not the people of the first know Master Doctor Overall, and
have the better liking of him; and might not the people of the second, know
Master Doctor Reynolds, and have the better liking of him to be their Pastor,
unless Corpus Christi College in Oxford stood in All-hollowes Parish, or
Katherin Herle in Cambrige stand in Mary's Parish? or did the Deane and
Chapter, the Clerks and people of Lincoln and Wincester, therefore know H.
C. and thereby had they the better liking of him to choose him first Bishop of
Lincoln, and secondly Bishop of Wincester, because he was brought up in some
School or College in any of the Parishes of Lincoln and Wincester? I trow,
him self, if he were now living, would not so affirm: and what then should
eale the Gentlemen of the Temple, or the people of the Parish of Bow in London,
that they may not know, and thereby have the better liking of M. Travers, and
M. Barber to be their Ministers, albeit neither of the twain, were brought up
in any School or College, in, or about the Temple, or Parish of Bow? For who
knows not, that there be means enough, and enough to know a man within and
without, and to have a good opinion and liking of him, though the same man be
not brought up in any School or College amongst them? Wherefore his argument
of (cannot possibly be brought to pass) may pass, and repasse as the only
stream of an humorous passion. Neither may the people in this The people would
not do, as the Ordinaries use to do, first choose Ministers and the^ set them
to schole.
case do as the Ordinaries use to do. For the Ordinaries first ordeyne
Ministers; secondly, they set them to schole, and give them their tasques,
that by their Archdeacons they may know, how they profit; and lastly they have
the better liking of them because they be bra^ded with their own stamp. But
the people (I say) may not, ne yet would they, thus vngainly set the cart,
before the horse. But they would use all good and circumspect care and
diligence, first to know them, secondly upon just and equal cause, to like
them, and lastly, upon their liking, to allow and approve them. For how should
a man allow any thing, before he like it, or how should he like it before he
know it, or how should he know it, before he had seen, heard, or enquired
after it? And heerevpon also his two asseveratio^s next ensuing, fall to Page
^0. If the people were admitted, to the election of their Minister they should
be better acquainted with him, then now they be
the ground. For albeit he affirm, that if this manner of election were
admitted, the people (nevertheless) should have as little acquaintance with
their Ministers as now they have: albeit (I say) he thus thought, yet
nevertheless his (ipse opinatus sum) I am of opinion, is no (ipse dixit) unto
me. No, I aver and hold the contrary to be true, and therefore his opinion
(in this case) to be erroneous. For this can not be denied, that there is not
any one man, or woman amongst forty, in any one Parish amongst forty, that
can tell, that ever he, or she, did see, or hear, of the Minister appointed,
and sent by the ordinary, to be Pa^son or Vicar of the Parish Church vacant,
before such time, as he did hear, or see, the Parish Clerk to trudge with the
Churchdore keys, to let in the Sextin, to ring the bell, for the said Parson,
or Vicars induction, and real possession.

And if the people of every Parish had their consents in the choice and
approbation of their Minister, were it possible to have less acquaintance with
him then this? For we avow that the people ought not to give their consents
unto any Pastor, before they have seen him, before they have heard him devide
the word, before they have procured a good testimony of his gifts, from those
who by the word have interest to approove him; and lastly before they have
gotten sufficient notice of his condition, estate, conversation, birth,
education and life. Wherefore these things being carefully and diligently
searched into, not by one, but by many; not for a fee, but of duty; not for
reward, but for conscience; not for one day, but for many days; I trust it
will not still be holden for an oracle, that the people should have as little
acquaintance with their Ministers as now they have.

As for the second point, that far No partial suits ca^ follow the election
of Ministers by the people.
greater occasions of partial suits should follow this manner of common
election, whereof we speak, then now there is: this is also (I say) not true;
nay that far l^sse occasion of partial suites, should follow, then now there
is, this (I say) is true. For by this means all partial suites now
happening, may either be extinguished, or with less charges, pursued, then
now they be. For there can be no suites, much less can there be any
partial suites, when neither Plaintiff, nor defendant may be found, and where
also there can lie no writ, nor any action be commenced. For who be the parties
between whom these partial suites should arise? Be there many Ministers, who
for one place, and at one time, are found meet for the same? And do they sue
and contend one against another, which of them should possess the place? or
should these so many partial suites, consist between the inhabitants of one
Parish; one part leaning to one side, and another part cleaving to the other
side? Touching the Ministers, we affirm that none may or ought to sue or
solicit any man's voice, directly or indirectly, much less to labor for a
place of Ministry. And therefore, we desire by an irrevocable law (according
to the manner of the Medes and Persians) to have it enacted, That as well every
procurer, and labourer for a voice, as also every suitor, and solicitor for a
place of Ministry, be adjudged ipso facto, incapable for ever of the same
place. For the second, touching partial suits to arise between the No occasion
of partial suits about election, between parishioners.
Parishioners, about the election of their Pastor, these suits, for ought I
yet conceive, (wherein I grant I may err and conceave too little) may easelier
be dispatched, then be once begun. Parishioners ordinarily in the Country,
sue not, ne molest one the other for pleasure, but for profit; they are not so
lavish of their purses, nor so careless of their thrifts, as to iangle in
vain, when before hand, they know there is no hope of gain. And in deed what
advantage, or what pleasure should Ancientes divided against Ancientes, and
chief men distracted against chief men in a Parish, about the election of a
Minister, reap by such a division, and distraction? Besides, by our daily
experience, we have learned, that very rarely, or not at all about elections,
made by the people of any officers, either in the Country or in Cities and
Towns, any variance or partial suites have been stirred, between the
Electors. For though some times perhaps they vary in their judgments one
from another, yet rest they more wise and provident, then to empaire their own
estate, to advance an other man's reputation. And if in former times there has
no occasion of partial suits (touching public Officers in the common weal) No
partial suites can be among parishioners, when one only is propounded to be
chosen by them.
fallen out between the people, when out of a multitude they have chosen one:
much less can there be any occasion of partial suits, if only there remain
but one, to be chosen to be a Church Officer. For if all the ancients agree to
choose that one, then is all the suite (about him) ended: and if the greater
part disagree, yet this their disagreement can be no occasion to breed and
nourish suite and contention. And why? first because no other cause by the
greater part ought to be alleged, to withdraw their consent, but only such a
cause as the law should precisely allow, in the same case, to be a just cause:
Secondly because this just cause before the day of election, ought to be made
known unto the Magistrate, and by him to be approved; so that if the greater
part upon the day of election shall dissent, not having before hand,
alleged, and provided a just cause of their dislike, the voices of the lesser
part (as being supposed the better part) shall prevail, confirm and make good
the election. Oh! here is much (said my Lords) spoken of a choice, and
election to be made by the Ministers and people, by proofs to be made before
the Magistrate, but here is not any one word spoken, or any mention made of the
Patron, of the Bishop, or of the Archdeacon; of presentation, institution, or
induction. And what an alteration, and innovation would that be, and what a
dangerous attempt were it, to alter laws settled; and that Patrones should be
curbed, and that Bishops and Archdeacons should not meddle in these businesses
any more? Well then to wipe away as much as in me lies, this cavillous
reproach, and obloquie from the servants of God, who are challenged to be
newfangled, giddie-headed, and fanaticall spirits, strange innovators, and
desirers of perilous alterations: to wipe away (I say) this slander, If it may
please the King, with his The form of Church policy now in practice by the
Bishops, and the platform of Church policy. desired to be planted by
Pastors, compared together.
Princely wisdom to confer, the form of policy now in use, and practice,
touching ordinations, presentations, institutions, and inductions, by Bb.
Patrones and Archdeacons, with the manner of that platform of Discipline
(concerning the substance of these things) which is propounded. And if the
Propounders prefer but the commandment of God, before the traditions of
men; but the Kings Crown, before the Bishops Myters; but a feast of fat
things, yea of fatt things full of marrow, before lean spits and empty
platters; but a feast of wines, yea of wines fined and purified, before sower
and untoothsome whey: I hope his Majesty will graciously vouchsafe so to
protect the propou^ders (being his faithful, loving and obedient subjects) as
that hereafter they shall not be charged with any more so unjust and scandalous
imputations.

The practice and policy then now in use, is after this and this manner: The
Bishop oftentimes at his pleasure, (beside the law, nay rather against the
express letter of the law, and public Canons of the Church) not only
ordeyneth Ministers alone, without assistantes of such number of Ministers, as
is required; but he also ordeyneth them (for the most part) when there is no
place of ministration Inconveniences of Bishoplie ordination are these,
pestering of the churches with unlearned Ministers. Unlawful gain for letters
of orders the breach of many good laws.
void. Now the budds, which (to the grief of many godly men, and to the
obloquie of the Professors of the gospel) have sprung from this manner of
ordination, have been these, viz: The public breach of many good laws; the
pestering of the Church with multitudes of unable Ministers, together with much
unlawful gain (by immeasurable exaction of money) for letters of orders. For
it can not be denied, but the Bishopes Secretary, Gentl.-usher, grome of his
chamber, Butler, Pantler, Porter, and other the Bb. menialls, (besides his own
and his Registers fees, and his Clerk for expedition) do usually (all, or
most of them) challenge and receive fees, (some more, some less) before the
poor Minister with his box of orders can be suffered to pass by the Porters
lodge: these are the fruits of the Bb. sole ordination. The suites which have
grown and daily do grow, by the Patrones presentation Suites between the
Patron and the Bishop.
to the Bb. have bin and are these, Sometime contention and suite in law,
between the Patron and Bishopp, for disallowing the Patrones Clerk, for non
ability, or as being criminous. Sometime, if two Patrones pretend right of
patronage, if one of their Clerks be instituted, and the other rejected (as
necessarily it must Suites between Clerk and Clerk.
come to pass, for one wife can have but one husband) then follows suite at
law, between the Clerk refused, and the Clerk admitted, wherein also the B.
is made a party by a writ of quare impedit: Suites between the Bishop and the
Clerk.
sometime suite falls out between the Clerk presented, and the Bb. when the
Clerk calls the Bb. (by a double quarrel) before the Archb. for not
grau^ting institution: and sometime also likewise debate is moved, and law
attempted, between the Clerk instituted, and the Suites between the Clerk
and Archdeacon
Archdeacon, who (knowing the church not to be vacant) refuses to execute the
Bb. inductorie mandat. For many times upon pretense that the Church stands
void (being in deed full) the Patron, upon suggestion grants a presentation,
and the Bb. also institution; which if the Archdeacon refuse to execute, then
(besides the discord between the Bb. and the Archdeacon, for contempt of the
Bishops mandat) he, who pretends title by vacancie, Suites between the Bishop
and the Archdeacon.
thinking to have right, though a real incombent be in possession, brings
their two titles to be tried in the ecclesiastical Court: but before the
matter ca^ be finally sente^ced by that Court; many foul riotts, breaches of
the Kings peace, and unlawful assemblies, upon entries Riots and breaches of
the Kings Peace.
and keeping possessions do ensue: as was well enough lately known in the
case between Rogers, and Baker, for the title to the Parsonage of Barby in the
County of Northampton.

Howbeit, let it be supposed that none of these variances in law fall out
between the Bb. and the Patron, between the Bb. and the Clerk, between the B.
and the Archd. between the Clerk and the Archd. and between Clerk and Clerk:
the exaction (notwithstanding) of unlawful gain, for fees of letters of
institution, and fees usually payable to the Bb. his Officers, as aforesaid;
for fees of the Archd. induction; his Register; his Clerk, and his Apparators
fees: the unconscionable exactio^ Unlawful fees for letters of institution,
etc.
(I say) of these unreasonable fees, may seem to be a conscionable motive, to
cause better things the^ these, without danger, to be attempted, and
innovated. And yet these are uot all the bad eventes that happen, and fall out
upon the presentation, institution, and inductio^ now used. But by the interest
whereby the Bb. challenges to be custos Ecclesiarum, there happen as badd, if
not worse then these. For there is no sooner a Church void, but a post is sent
in all haste, with Unlawful fees for letters of sequestration.
letters of sequestration, to sequester the fruits, to the use of the next
incumbent. Which next incu^bent, for the great care taken to preserve the
fruits to his use, (before he can obtain to be put in real possession) must
pay x. shill. or a mark, or more, for those letters of sequestration, with as
much more also for letters (so called) of relaxation; besides ij. pe^ce, iij.
pen. or iiij. pe^ce a mile for portage to the Somner. And from hence is the
Patron (as I take it) very much iniuried. For he being (as it appears) by
the statut of 25. of King. E. 3. Lord and Avower of the benefice, ought to have
the custody and possession thereof during the vacancie. Besides many times
wilful periuries are committed by the Clerk, and Perjury by the Clerk, and
robbery by the Patron.
many times sacrilegious robberies are perpetrated by the Patron. The Clerk
(when he swears that neither directly, nor indirectly, any compact, promise,
band, or agreement has bin made or passed by him, for him, or in his name to
the Patron); many times for swears him self. And if the Clerk be presented
to a Vicarage, then the Bishop (if he Every Vicar swears or ought to swear
to be resident.
be faithful to the law) swears him to be resident upon the same Church:
Which oath (notwithstanding) is afterward broken; when as the same Vicar,
accepting an other benefice (and retaining withal the former by purchase of a
dispensation) betaketh him self to be resident upon his second benefice, and
so by nonresidence from his first Vicarage, commits perjury. Touching the
Patrons robbery, thus it is, and thus Patrones robbery.
many times has it fallen out. The Patron, when (at the hands of two, three,
or more such perjured Clerks) he has (time out of mind) possessed, the
mansion house, or gleebe-lande of the Parsonage; finally (in time) spoiled the
Church both of the house, and glebe-lande: the glebe-land being often
intermingled with his own enclosed grounds, he possesses the^ as his own
inheritance; and in steed of the Parsonage house, either he builds an other
new, or else hireth some cottage or farm-house for the Parson and his
successors to inhabit in. These abuses (we see) are many, and yet besides
these continuing at this day in the government established, there remains
Chopping of benefices despensations, etc.
others, as foul, and as gross as any of the rest: which is the too too
inordinate, and licentious chopping and changing of churches from Minister to
Minister; for dispensations, co^mend^mes, perinde vares, pluralities, and non
residencies: wherein not the people to be taught, but their own backs and
bellies to be clothed and fed, is wholly respected. Now the^ that this manner
of government, wherein the before specified, and the like disco^modities daily
fall out, under color of not diminishing the Kings prerogative, of not
altering laws settled, of not attempting dangerous innovations, and of the
preserving of the right of Patrones, Bb. and Archd. should still be continued
without any mention or remembrance to be once had, of their discontinuance,
especially in the time of peace, and under a Christian Magistrate, and in a
state (as he says) reformed; we humbly leave to the wise, and mature
deliberation of our most Christian King, and State in Parleament. And we most
humbly beseech the King and State, that indifferently, freely, and largely,
it may be argued, Supplication to the King and State in Parleament.
heard, and examined; whether it be possible, that the tenth part of these, or
any other the like disorders, corruptions, and grievances, can possibly fall
out in the church, by that platform of Discipline, which is required to be
planted. And to the end that the Kings Majesty, and the State, might rightly
and perfectly, be Petition, ordinatio^, etc. of Ministers or Pastors, how
the same may be made without Bb. or Archdeaco^s, not disagree able to diverse
laws already settled.
informed and resolved of those points, whereof we now speak, viz: of the
petition, ordination, election, presentation and admittance of every Parochial
Pastor, to any church with cure of souls; how the same may stand, and not be
disagreeable to diverse laws already settled, and in force; it is requisite
that the substance of these things, in this place be entreated of. wherein
against the base office, and mean person of the Archdeacon, we oppose the
Royal office, and most excellent person of the King: against the immoderate
office, and stately person of one lordly Bishop; we oppose the meek and
te^perate carriage of a Senate, or Presbytery, of many wise, learned, and grave
Ministers, together with a Reverend assembly of the Ancientes, and chief
Fathers of every Church destitute of a Pastor. As for the Patrones right, we
are so far from diminishing any iotte of the true right which by laws settled he
ought to have, as that he shall quietly possess his interest, and that with
less trouble and expense, yea and with greater privilege then he did before.
Thus therefore touching the office and person of the King, the duty of the
Presbiterie and people, the right of the Patron, and the person of the Minister
to be ordained, thus and thus we say, and thus and thus (as we think) may our
sayings well stand with laws settled.

By an Act primo Eliz. c. 1. the King has full power and authority, by letters
pate^tes under the great seal of England, when, and as often as need shall
require, as he shall think meet and co^venient, and for such and so long time
as shall please his H. to assign, name, and authorize, such person, or
persons, being natural born subjects, as his Majesty shall think meet, to
exercise, use, occupy, and exequut, under his H. all manner of jurisdictions,
privileges, and preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning any
spiritual, or ecclesiastical jurisdiction, within this Realm of England.
Again, by the book of ordeyning Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, it is
prescribed, that the Bishop with their The Bb. and Priests must lay on their
hands.
Priests, shall lay their hands severally upon the heads of every one that
receaveth Orders; that every one to be made a Minister, must be of virtuous
conversation, and without crime, sufficiently instructed in the holy
Scriptures; a man meet to exercise his ministry duly; that he must be
called, tried, and examined; that he must be presented by the Archd. and be
made openly in the face of the Church, with prayer to God, and exhortation to
the people. And in a statute made 21. of King H. 8 it is affirmed, That a
Bishop must have six The Bishops must use six Chapleines at giving of orders.
Chapleines, at giving of orders. Besides, by an ancient and lowable custom,
the Parishes and Parish Churches, within every Archdeaconrie, remain unto this
day, distributed into certain Deanries; Every Archdeacon divided into
Deanries.
among the Ministers of which Deanries, the Parson or Vicar of the auncientest
Church, commonly called the Mother Church of the Deanrie, (unless by consent
some other be chosen by the Ministers them selves) has the first place, and is
the chief director, and moderator of whatsoever things are propounded in their
Synodall meeting; which Minister also is called Archipresbiter or Decanus
curalis, according to the appellation of the chief Minister, of the mother, or
chief church of that Diocese, who is called Archipresbiter or Decanus
cathedarlis: so that unto this day these Ministers meeting at the Archdeaco^s
visitations once in a year at the least, there remains in the Church of
England, a certain image or shadow of the true, ancient, and Apostolical
conferences, and meetings. Wherefore from these laws, and from this ancient
manner of the meetinges of Ministers, and of having one principal and chief
moderator amongst them; according to the Apostolical practice, and usage of
the primative church, thus already settled in the church of England, we humbly
leave it to be considered by the Kings Majesty.

First, whether it were not meet and convenient for his Highness by his letters
patentes under the great Seal of A Minister to be ordained by the Bishops, and
a company of Ministers at the Kings commandment.
England, to assign, name, and authorize, the Bishops and six or more Ministers
within every Deanerie continually resiant upon their benefices, and
diligently teaching in their charge, to use and execute all manner of
jurisdiction, privilege, and pre-eminence, concerning any spiritual
ordination, election, or institution of Ministers to be placed in the
Parochial Churches, or other places with cure of souls, within.

Secondly, when any Parish Church or other place with cure of souls shall be
void, whether it were not meet and convenient, that the auncientes and chief
Fathers of that place, within a time to be limited for that purpose, should
intimate the same vacancie unto the office Vacancie of a benefice to be
intimated to the kings office.
of the Kings civil Officer appointed for that Shire or Diocese: to the end
the same Officer by authority from the King, might command in the Kings name,
the Bishop and other Ministers, to elect, and ordeine, and the people of the
same place to approve and allow of some able and godly person, to succ^ede in
the Church.

Thirdly, the Patron, (if the same be A lay patron, instead of varying his
Clerck may present, two Clerks at one time.
a common and lay person having now liberty to vary his Clerk, if he be found
unable) whether it were not meet and convenient, (to avoid all manner of
varying) that, within the time prefixed, he should nominate at one time two
Clerks to be taken out of the Universities or other Schools, and Nurseries or
of the Prophets, and that the same nomination be made unto the Bishop and the
said six Ministers, to the end that both the Clerks being tried and examined
by them, the abler of the two might be preferred to that charge. And of this
manner of presenting two Clerks by the Patron, we have a president not much
unlike, in the statute for nomination of Suffraganes. By which act every
Archbishop and Bishop, desiring to have a Suffragane, has liberty to name,
and present unto the King two honest and discrete spiritual persons, etc.
that the King may give to one such of the said two spiritual persons, as
shall please his Majesty, the title, name, style and dignity of a Suffragane.

Fourthly, the Bb. and Presbiters having thus, upon trial and examination, A
minister found able for gifts, is to be sent to the parish, yt his life may be
examined and to have the consent of the people.
found one of the Patrones Clercks, to be a fit and able man, to take upon
him the execution of the ministry in that Church; whether it were not then
meet and convenient, that by them he should forthwith be sent to the same
Church, as well to acquaint the people with their judgment and approbation, of
his gifts and ability to teach, as also that, for a time, he should co^uerse
and abide amongst them, to the end his life, manners, and behavior, might be
seen into, and enquired after, by their careful endeavors?

Fiftlie, (the people within a time to be perfixed, not making and proving
before the Magistrate, any just exception against his life, manners and
conversations), whether it were not then meet, and convenient, that the Bishop
with six other Ministers or more of the same Deanrie, authorized by the King,
as aforesaid, A man allowed for gifts and conversation, is to be ordained,
with prayer fasting and laying on of hands.
under some pain, and within a certain time, should be bound (in the presence
of the Elders and people, and in the same Church, with fasting, prayer, and
laying on of hands) to ordeyne and dedicate him to the Ministry, and
Pastoral charge of that Church.

Lastly, these things being thus finished, whether it were not then meet and
A Minister, to be inducted, into the Church, by the Kings writ.
convenient that the Bishops with the other Ministers, and some of the chief
of the people, should give the party ordained, a testimonial under their
hands, or under some authentical seal, to certify the Kings officer of the
execution of his writ; and that the Patron also should present the same person
to the Kings officer, humbly praying the same officer, by authority to be
derived from the King, to cause him by some other writ, to be confirmed, and
really inducted, into the possession of the same Church, and into the
mansion house, glebe-land, and other profits Ecclesiastical to the same
apperteyning.

Oh! but this were a strange kind of innovation, and a dangerous attempt to To
execute the premises no dangerous attempt.
alter laws settled, especially in a settled estate of the Church. Well, well,
let my Lords of the Clergy sing this song, and pipe this melody at their
pleasure. How be it for as much as this platform, in some part thereof has
already been agreed upon by diverse Committees in Parleament; in other some
part thereof, by laws already settled, ought to have bin practiced; and that
in other some part thereof is an advancement of the Kings authority, which
last part also is lively pourtraicted out unto us, by presidents from the
Archbishop, and Bishop them selves, we shall through the grace of God, and
favor of the King, be able well enough, quite and clean to wipe away all the
spots of this calumniation. And first, touching the intimation, and
supplication to be made unto the King, Petition and intimatio^ to the King,
agreeable to laws settled.
that his H. would be pleased to command every Minister to be presented by the
patron, ordained by the Bb. and Ministers, and elected by the people; and that
the King, being certified by them of the execution of his writ, should upon
their testimonial, by another public writ, cause the Clerk ordained, to be
confirmed, admitted, and inducted to the real possession of the temporalities
of the benefice; This manner (I say) of intimation, petition, testimonial, and
admittance, in substance and effect, differs but little from the form of the
petition, nomination, 25. H. 8. c.
election, investiture, confirmation, and consecration of the Arch-Bb. and Bb.
of this Realm. For when soever the Church of Canterbury, Winton, or other
Bishops sea becomes destitute of a Pastor, does not the Deane and Chapter
of the same sea, intimate unto the King their want of a B. and does not the
same Dean and Chapter, humbly supplicate his Majesty's favor and license, to
elect an other? And does not the King upon their supplication, by letters
patents under his great Seal, favorably grant their petition; willing them,
vt talem eligant in Episcopum and Pastorem, qui Deo devotus, and Ecclesiae suae
necessarius, nobisque and regno nostro vtilis and fidelis existat? And with the
same letters patentes, does not the King send a letter missiue, containing the
name and commendation of the person to be elected? After the election
finished, does not the Deane and Chapter intimat the same also unto the King,
and humbly again pray the King, to yield his Royal assent to the lord
elected? Whereupon does not the King again direct his letters patentes of
warrant to the Archb. or some other who^ the King shall appoint, to perform
all things, which accustomably are to be done, apperteyning to his
confirmation, and consecration, according to the laws and statutes of his
Realm of England? Lastly, the consecration and confirmation being finished,
and the Bb. having done his homage, and sworn fealty, is not the Kings writ
out of the Chancery directed to the Escheator, to restore unto him, the
temporalities of the same Bishopric? Yea and may not the Bishop also, if it
please him, procure another writ out of the Chancery directed to his tenantes,
commanding them to atturne, and to take him for their Lord?

Now the^ in this platform whereof mention has bin made touching the placing of
a parochial Pastor (any parochial church with cure of souls being void)
when it is craved that the people of the same parish, might intimate their want
unto the Kings officer, and that the same officer might command the Patron to
present, the Ministers to ordeyn, and the people, according to the Kings laws,
to assent unto, and approve the Clerk; what other intent or meaning have we,
then that the King has as ample, and as lawful The King has as large a
power to command a Minister to be elected and ordained, as a Bishop, to be
chosen and consecrated.
a power to command a Minister to be presented, ordained, and elected, to be a
Pastor in a parochial Church, as he has to command a Bishop to be elected,
confirmed, and consecrated to an Episcopal sea? And are we not then
merveylouslie giddi-headded, newfangled, and strange innovators? Again, when
we desire, that the King at the humble suite of the Ministers, the Patron and
the people, would be pleased, to confirm and admit the Patrones Clerk, in,
and to the temporalities of a benefice, what other thing is required, but that
the possession of no church should be delivered unto any Minister without the
Kings public writ. And would not this breed a perilous sturr, garboyle,
discord, and contention, when the Archdeacons pretty signet, as Dagon falling
down before the Arck, should give place, bow down, and do reverence unto the
Kings of England seal at arms.

Oh! but in this platform, there be other dangerous innovations and
alterations, not to be attempted: Yea? And what then be they? The Admonitor him
self, The Prophets ought to be tried by the Prophets.
in his admonition holds: Yea May. Bilson, and all other supporters of the
Hyerarchie defended, That the Clergy ought to i^dge of the Clergy, and that
the Prophets ought to be tried, examined, and ordained, only by the
Prophets, and that the spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the spirits
of the Prophets. Wherein then consists the disagreement and variance
between us and them, touching the ordination of a Prophet, by Prophets, or of
a Minister by Ministers? Certes to mine understanding, there is none other
matter of dissonancie in this case, but even alonely this: viz. That he by
these words (the spirits Corinth.
of the prophets are subject to the prophets) intends that the Spirits of
many prophets, touching their trial, examination, and ordination, are
subject to the spirit of one prophet, and that Whether ye spirits of many
Prophets be subject to one, or of one to many.
therefore one prophet by his own spirit, may try, examine, and ordeyne
many Prophets: Whereas on the other side, we affirm, that one prophet
according to this rule of our holy faith, is to speak, and the other prophets
are to judge, and that no one prophet may try, examine, or ordeyne many
prophets: Because from this place we gather, that the spirits of many
prophets in the ordinary course of the ministry of the Word, were never
subjected in this case to the spirit of one Prophet. But in this platform
there is no mention made of the King, if he be patron, neither is there any
institution spoken of; and then how can any action of quare impedit, be
brought, to try the right if two patrones pretend title to the Patronage:
besides the Patron by this platform must fetch his Clerckes only from the
Universities, Schools of learning, and Nurseries of the Ministry, whereas
now he has liberty, to present any Clerk wheresoever or howsoever ordained:
Again, strife and contention may arise in the presbytery between the Bishops
and the Ministers them selves, appointed to be examiners, and ordeyners, which
of the two Clerks nominated, by the Patron is most worthy to be preferred. If
both the Patrones Clerks, for non ability, or criminousnes, be refused, who
shall then nominate, and to whom shall the election devolue? And lastly, what
if the Bishop and presbytery shall disalow one for inability, which in deed is
notwithstanding, of ability to teach? to all these difficulties, thus we
answer.

If the Kings Majesty be Patron, to any benefice with cure of souls,
because Touching the Kings patronage.
we judge and confess him, to be a King, endowed with a rare and singular
spirit of zeal, for the glory of our God, with an excellent spirit of love,
for the salvation of the souls of his subjects, and to be the Nehemiah of our
age, sent unto us from above, for the building of the walls, and reedifying of
the ports of the house of God, which were broken down and devoured: We for our
parts doubt nothing at all, nay rather we most certeynly persuade our selves,
his Highness, having once been pleased, to prescribe all wholesome and
commendable laws, unto his people, will also vouchsafe, much more to prescribe
laws, yea and to be a law unto him self: And that his Majesty will set this
business of the Lords house, so near unto his Kingly and Christian heart, by
the planting of able Ministers, in all the Churches, of his Highness Patronage;
as that all other Patrons, by his godly example, will be excited readily to walk
in the Kings path, to wear the Kings colors, and to become the Kings
chief favourytes in this so holy a work. And therefore touching the Kings
Patronages, cum Maiestas imperatoria, H. de ley. and fidei. 3. l. ex imperfecto.
legibus esse soluta videatur, we commend them wholly to the Kings most
Christian care, providence, and fidelity.

The Bishops institution, and writ of quare impedit, we grant must cease:
The Bishops institution may cease.
but in place of institution, the election and ordination by the Presbytery
succeeds: and the Clerk nominated by the Patron, elected and ordained by
the Presbytery; shall have idemius, ad Ecclesiam, and in Ecclesia, which in
forme^ times, the Clercke presented by the Patron, and instituted by the
Bishop, was wont to have.

If any suite in law, happen for the right of Patronage, between two or more
Patro^s, If suite fall out between two patrons what then may be done.
pretending title to the gift of one benefice: It seems that this suit, might
have far easier, and more speedy way of trial, by some other writ, then by
the writ of quare impedit; for upon this writ many times by negligence, or
unskillfulness of the Aturneyes, it falls out, that one of the parties is
driven some times to sit down by great loss, and not to have his title tried
at all, only for want, of some ceremonial form, not observed in the
pleadings of the cause: And therefore, both Patrones, within the time to be
limited by the Kings writ, having nominated their Clerks, to the Presbytery,
as heretofore they presented to the Bishop, we leave it to be considered,
whether it were not meet, and convenient, that the Presbitery should wholly
defer the election, and ordinatio^, of either their Clerks, until the right of
patronage were finally adjudged before the Kings Justices at the common law:
upon which judgment passed, they might then without scruple, or impediment,
proceed to the full election, and ordination, of that Patrones Clerk, for
whom the judgment was given. By which manner of trial, if the action might be
brought in the nam^ of Patron, against Patron, the Clerks should not only
be freed from much obloqui, whereunto they are now subject, by prosecution of
suites at law, one Clercke against another, but also they should be exempted,
from all expense, labor and turmoile, with which heretofore they have
incumbered the^ selves, to the hinderance of their studies, and decay of their
estates, by pursuing the Patrones title, at their own charge. Neither might
the occasion of suite about the right of Patronage, be any let or hinderance
that the Church, in the mean time should be left as a Widow destitut of an
husband. For any one of the Clerks nominated by either of the Patrones, might
be appointed by the Presbytery, to preach the word, and publicly to pray,
until the controversy were ended. And out of the fruits also, of the same
Church remaining in the custody, of one of the Patrones, or sequestered by the
King, to the use of the next incumbe^t, he might have such allowance, as were
requisite for the time of his continuance in that place. And for the
Sacraments, if any were of necessity to be administered, some other Minister,
near adjoining, might be provided, to administer the same, as in many places,
it has bin, and is now daily used, in like cases of vacancie.

That the Patron should be curbed with two hard a bridle, as being barred The
curbing of a patron with to hard a bridle, answered.
to fetch his Clerckes, from any other place, then from the Universities or
other Schools and Nurseries of learning, is a matter, if it be well weighed,
of less importance, then the Admonitor would insinuate the same to be. First
it is not of necessity required, that all Patrones should at all times fetch
all their Clerks, from those places and not from else where. For many times it
may happen upon just cause, (for the benefit of the Church) that a Clerk
already ordained, and placed in one Church, may be removed from the same; to
another. But only the meaning is according to the laws and canons already
settled that the greatest part, of the Patrones Clerckes, must of necessity,
be called thence, because they can not else where be had.

Now then whereas the law intends, every Church to be a wife, and to have an
husband, to be a body, and to have an head; the law as a parent unto the
Church has provided, until she be a widow in deed, that no husband, be
provided for her. And therefore by sundry as well ancient Decrees, as by
Canons of Ex: de prebend. c. tui^ lib. 6. de prebe^d. si Episcopus.
Discipline, made and published by the Bishops 1571 it is decreed and
confirmed, That the Bishop shall lay his hands on none, or at any other
time, but when it shall chance some place of ministratio^ is void in the same
Diocese As for stipendarie Curates, it is expressly against the policy of our
Church, that any should be ordained a Minister, to serve only as an hireling.
From which Decrees, and Canons, already settled (as I said before) it
follows, for the most part, that the Patrones Clerks to be ordained, of
necessity must be called from the Universities; or other places of learning.
For if every place of ministration, be full, and none must be made a Minister,
until some place be void, then albeit some patrones, upon good causes, to be
allowed by public discipline, might be permitted, to nominate some Clerks
already placed in administrations: Yet in the end, as well the patrones of
those Churches, from whence these are to be removed, as other patrones also
(many benefices at one time being void) must of necessity, seek out men,
to be ordained, which never were ordained to the ministry before. And where
are these to be sought, if not only at the Universities, or other Schools
and Nurseries of learning? For that prophets in the ordinary time of
prophesying, should be taken from the feet of the Apothecaries, Tailors,
Drapers, Milners, Mercers, Prophets in the ordinary time of prophesying to be
taken out of ye Schools of Prophets.
or from the butry, pantry, kitchen, celler, or stable, of any Bb. Peer,
Knight or Gentleman, and not from the feet of the prophets, is a thing
abominable, and odious unto God, and man. Wherein the^, does this platform,
in this point of fetching Ministers, only from the Universities, or other
places of learning, differ from the intendement of laws settled? Or wherein can
the patrones receive any detriment by such a practice? Nay they are so far
from receiving any The difference between the platform and the Bishopps
practice.
prejudice hereby, as indeed both they and their Clerks shall reap great
commodity by it. Wherein I grant some discrepance, to consist between the Bb
practice, and this platform. For the Bb. at one time, allow a Clerk for
ability, and at another time, dissallowe the same Clerk for non ability.
And him, who^ they have ordained, and adjudged, to day, worthy of an office,
they many times disordayne him to morrow, and refuse him as a person unworthy,
to possess a benefice: Whereas on the contrary part, we think it very
absurd, and unreasonable, to bar any man from a benefice, whom the Governors
of the Church shall judge worthy to bear an office. So that the Patron by
this platform, should be sure, if at any time, he nominate a Clerk already
ordained, that the same Clerk (unless it were for crime, or some defect after
happeninge) should never be refused. And if such be the laws, and liberties of
the Ordinaries, what alteration of the law, or prejudice to the Patron, could
it be, if by a new law, the King provided new means, to put his old laws in
due execution?

If upon difference of judgment, any variance should arise, between the
Ministers Upon difference of judgment about the ability of a Clerk what may
be done.
appointed to elect, and ordeyne, which of the Patrones Clerks, were most
worthy, the same diversity, we assure our selves, can breed no greater
inconvenience, nor further danger, then does now daily fall out in the
election of scholars, fellows, and heads of Houses, in the Universities, or
of other Officers in Colleges, Cathedral churches, and bodies politic or
corporate. As those controversies therefore have been, and are appeased by the
good orders and laws of those places, eve^ so might these also. And therefore
some good law might be made to this effect, viz. If any four of the seven did
agree together, upon any one Clerk nominated by the patron, that the same
four, should strike the stroke, and make the election good, against the other
three. Neither do we think it to stand with reason, that the Archipresbyter,
or any other Minister among the seven, should necessarily be of the quorum.
For if any one of the seven, should necessarily be of the quorum, the^
(having, as it were, a negative voice against all the rest) if he should be
wayward, and apt to contention, he might then always frustrat the election,
either by opposing him self to all the rest, or by inclining to the lesser,
and worser part, as lately came to pass about the election of a Scholar,
among great Doctors. If A Clerk refused for nonabiliti^ to whom the
nomination may devol^^e.
both the Patrones Clerks, should be disabled, by those unto whom the
judgment of their nonhabilitie did appertain, we leave it to be considered,
whether the right, to nominate, elect, and ordain, for that time only, might
not hereafter devolve unto the presbytery, as in like case it has done
heretofore unto the Bb. And from that Presbytery, if the same should make
default, that the benifice, should be then in lapse unto the King.

Lastly, touching the nonhabilitie of A Clerk wronged by a refusal for
nonabilitie how he may be releued.
a Clerk: if the Clerk whom the presbytery should refuse, come from one of
the Universities, then as a Clerk before time refused for non ability, by the
Bb. was to be tried by the Archbishop, and by him to be allowed, or disalowed,
so in this case we leave it to be considered, whether it were not meet that
this Clerk, so refused, and complaining himself unto the Magistrate, to be
wronged, should have his ability to be again tried, by that next Synod of
Ministers to be co^gregated within that Deanery. And if upon trial made, and
bringing a testimonial under some authentike seal, from the Synod, of his
ability: whether the Presbytery, upon a good pain within a time to be
prefixed, should not be constreined, to ordeyne, and dedicate A Clerk refused
for crime to whom the nomination may devolve
the same Clerk, to the ministry of the same Church. And as for the refusal
of a Clerk by the Presbytery, upon objection of crime, if the crime be so
heinous as for which by the canons of the church, he might not be promoted, to
the Ministry, then is it to be considered, whether the presbytery in this case
also, as in the former of nonhability, might not nominate, elect, and ordeyne,
the Clerk to that place, for that time only? and upon the presbyteries
default, the lease also to be unto the King.

And thus have we compared, the manner of church government, now in use,
touching these points, with that form of Discipline, which is desired to be
planted. By which comparison the Kings The benefits ensuing, the platform of
ordination, etc. required.
Highness, may very easily discern, the differences between them, to be such,
as whereby the Kings dignity and prerogative, shall highly be advanced, the
Kings poor subjects, both Ministers and people, diverse ways eased, and
unburdened, and the laws better observed, to the unspeakable peace, and
tra^quilitie, both of church, and common weal. The Prophets trial of the
Prophets; the peoples approbation of their Pastors; the Ministers entrance
into their Ministry, according to the Apostolical practice of the primitive
church, would be a means utterly to extinguish, that schism, that remains
yet among us; that we have no Christian Ministers; no Christian Sacraments; no
Christian Church in England. Besides, the Ministers, for letters of orders;
letters of institution; letters of inductions; for licenses to serve within the
Diocese; for licenses to serve in such a cure; for licenses to serve two cures
in one day; for licenses to preach; for licenses of resignation; for
testimonials of subscription; for letters of sequestration; for letters of
relaxatio^; for the Chancelours, Registers, and Somners diners; for
Archidiaconal annual, and for Episcopal trieniall procuratio^s, the Ministers
(I say) to be nominated, elected, ordained, approved, confirmed, and admitted,
by the Patron; by the Presbytery; by the People, and by the King, should be
disburdened, from all fees, for these things, and from all these, and such, and
such like grievances. Only for the Kings writts, and for the traveyle and
peynes of his Highness Officers, taken in, and about the execution of the same
writts, some reasonable fees, (as it shall please the King,) may be taxed, and
set down. The people also in souls, in bodies, and in their goods could not
but be much comforted, relieved, and benefited. They should not henceforth to
the peril of their souls, have unlearned, unable, and indiscreet Ministers
thrust upon them, and set over them: Neither should they be compelled, upon
light occasions, to take many frivoulous oaths in vain. They should not be
summoned, from one end of the Diocese, unto the other: nor be posted from
court, to court, and from visitation, to visitation, The Churchwardens, and
sidemen, of every Parish, should not upon peine of excommunication, be
constreyned, once, or twice in the year, to pay six or eight pence, for a
sheet of three halfepeny articles. They shall not any longer, out of the common
treasury, reserved for the poor, bear the charge of their Parishes for
making bills, visitation and diverse other expenses. There should be no more
suits at law, between Clerk and Clerk, about the Patrons title; no more
suites of double quarrel, between the Clerk and the Bishop no more debate
between the Bishop and the Archdeacon; and lastly there should be no occasion
of any riots, and unlawful assemblies to be made upon entries and
possessions, by virtue and color of two presentations, two institutions, and
two inductions, into one benefice, at one time. The Patrones as being Lords and
avowers of the Churches, might have the custody of the Churches, during their
vacancies, and their ancient right, in this behalf, restored. All swearing of
canonical obedience, unto the Bishops by the Ministers: all swearing, and
forswearing of Clerks, for any symoniacal bands, promises, or agreeme^ts,
between them and their Patrones, and all robberies 31. Eliz. c. 6
and spoiling of the Churches, by the Patrones, should determine and cease.
Especially if it might please the King and Parleament, to have one clause of a
statute, against abuses, in election of Scholars, and presentation, to
benefices enlarged. For although every corrupt cause, and consideration, by
reward, gift, profit, or benefit to present, be inhibited by that act; yet
notwithstanding by experience in many places we find, that the Patrones for
small rentes, and for many years, are in possession, some of the mansio^
houses, some of the glebe lands, and some of the tithes, of such benefices as
since the publishing of that act, have bin bestowed upon Clerks: which breeds
great suspicion and ielouzie in the minds of men, that the Clerk and Patron
at the beginning directly or indirectlie, did conspire to frustrate and delude,
the intendement of the statute: And therefore we leave it to be considered by
the Kings Majesty and Parleament. If any Clerk after confirmation and
possession A means to restrain patrons from corruption.
to any benefice, hereafter to be made and given unto him, shall willingly
and wittingly, suffer the Patron of the same benefice, or any other person, in
his name or to his use, directly or indirectly, mediatly or immediately, to use,
occupy, or enjoy, the mansion house, gleebe land, or other ecclesiastical
commodities, or any part thereof, belonging to the same benefice: In this case
(I say) we leave it to be considered, whether it were not meet and convenient,
that every such willing and witting sufferance by the Clerk, and every such
willing, and witting possession, use, or occupation, by the Patron, should not
be adjudged, to be a just cause, to determine the presentation, to have bin
first made upon corrupt respect, and consideration. And that therefore the
Clerk, ipso facto, to loose the benefice, and the Patron, ipso facto, to
forfeyte his right of patronage to the King, for the two next turns following.
And these being the principal reasons, and grounds of our desires, we are
humbly to pray the Lords spiritual, either to convince them of indignity,
insufficiency, and incongruitie, or else to join with us unto the Kings
Majesty, for the restitution of that manner of government, which they
themselves confess to have been practiced, at the beginning by the Apostles
and primitive Church: but the Admonitor has yet more reasons unanswered against
this platform.

Admonition.
That every Parish in England may have a learned and discrete Minister,
howsoever they dream of perfection, no man is able in these days, to devise
how to bring it to pass, and especially when by this change of the Clergy, the
great rewards of learning, shallbee taken away, and men thereby discouraged, to
bring up their children in the study of good letters.

Assertion.
In some part to justify this opinion, I grant, that no man is able in these
days, to devise, to bring it to pass, that every Parish should have a learned
and discrete Minister. And why? because in these days not any one Bishop has
afforded, to ordeyne one learned and discrete Minister, for five Parishes:
secondly, because where some of the reverend Fathers, have ordained and placed
in many Parishes, many learned and discrete Ministers, some others of the same
Fathers, have again disgraded, and displaced those learned and discrete
Ministers, and in their romes have placed many unlearned and indiscreet
Ministers. Now then if these days wherein so few learned and discrete
Ministers, and so many unlearned and indiscreet Ministers be ordained, and
wherein also, so many learned, and discreet Ministers are disgraced, and so many
indiscreet and unlearned Ministers graced: If these days (I say) were ended;
then albeit no perfection, whereof never any one of us dreamed, could be
atteyned unto, and albeit no one man were able to devise, how to bring it to
pass, that every Parish should have a learned Minister: Yet nevertheles, all
good and holy means being used, to aim and to shoot after perfection, and
all good and holy men laying to their heads, and applying their hearts to
further this enterprise, and service unto God, we know that the Lord might
call, and make, and fill with the Spirit of God in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in spiritual work-manship, many Bezaliels,
and many Aholiabs, spirituallie to karue, grave, and imbroyder the Lords
spiritual Temple. The perfection therefore after which we long, and the change
of the Clergy, whereof we entreat, is but such a perfection, and such a
change, as (good means for the restitution of impropriations being used) may
easily be atteyned, and well made. What perfection of a Minister is required
by this platform.
For the perfection required by us, to be in a Minister, is none other then
such as the holy law of God, and the laws, canons and injunctions already
settled, do require. viz. that every Minister, to who^ cure of souls is
committed, with some competent knowledge, according to the measure of the grace,
of the gift of Christ, be able to teach, to exhort, and to reprove the people,
yea and to convince the gainesayers, if any should arise among them. From
whence also springs the change intended by us. viz. that in the Churches of
all Ministers, unable to teach, etc. There might be a change of Ministers able
to teach, etc. Wherefore if the Admonitour meant otherwise then we intend, and
if upon placing a learned and discrete Minister in every Parish, he should
not intend, the change of an unlearned, and indiscreet Clergy, but a change
of the high and Papal state of Prelacie: then either is not his answer
pertinent to the question, or else it must necessarily follow, from his
intendeme^t, that the high and Papal state of Prelacie, and the placing of a
learned and Prelacy and a learned Ministry can not stand together.
discrete Minister in every Parish, are like unto Coleworts planted among
Vines, or unto Parsley sowed among Bishops Weed, which will never spring,
grow, and prosper together. Because the rising of such a learned Ministry
must be the fall, ruin, and break neck of Prelacy. And this follows
inevitable upon his own reason, drawn from the taking away of the great
rewards of learning, by the change of the Clergy.

For the great rewards of learning, whereof he speaks, must of necessity
be the Prelacies, viz. Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, Deanries, Archdeaconries,
Prebendaries, Canonries, Chanterships, Commendames, non Residencies, and
Pluralities. And then let us observe, whether in effect he has not reasoned
thus: If Prelacies (being the great rewards of learning) should not stand,
and not be changed, there is no man able to devise, how a learned and discreet
Minister may be placed in every parish: but if Prelacies (the great rewards of
learning) may once be changed and not stand, then were it possible to have it
devised, that a learned and discreet Minister, might be placed in every
parish. And then has he not profoundly, and learnedlie disputed, when he
has preferred the Damsel, before her Dame, and the maid, before her Mistress?
When he has advanced a great deal of learning in one before a great deal
of learning in many, and learning in some places, before learning in all
places; lastly, when by continuance, and furtherance of the great rewards of
learning, he has greatly hindered, and disco^tinued learnednes, and greatly
furthered and continued vnlearnednes? For if Prelacies were no hindrances, but
only furtherances of discreet and learned Ministers; and again, if Prelacies
were no furtherances, but only hindrances, of unlearned, and indiscreet
ministers, to be had in every parish, then might the great rewards of
learning, still remain, and men should not be discouraged, to send their
sons to the study of good learning, For generally me^ be not so much
encouraged, to set their sons to learning, where a few great rewards of
learning are provided for a few men greatly learned, as where many good
rewards of learning, are provided for many good learned me^ are more
encouraged to learning, where many good rewards then where few great rewards
are provided.
men. And to speak as experience teaches us, and as the truth is, what one
father among twenty, will dedicate his son, to learning, if men (as the case
now stands under Prelacie) not brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, but at the
feet of some swashbuckler; not taught from any Doctors chair, but schooled
upon some crafts man stool, when me^ who can but read, and can not preach,
may be Ministers, and capable of the fattest benefice, within a whole County?
In the common weal, if there be many places, of honor, profit, and dignity,
for such only as have valiantly served the King in his wars, or paynefullie
attended upon him in the Court, then will many fathers incite, and encourage
their sons to prepare and furnish them selves to the wars, and to the
Court. But if all men's sons, in the camp, and in the court, be capable of
enterteynments alike; if as well a laborers son following the cart, as a
noble man's son a wayter in court, may be the Kings lord Chamberlayne, in time
of peace; and if as well a carpet knight, as a valiant warrior, may be lord
general in time of war, would any father for many years together, costly,
and gorgeously brave his son at Court; or would any father adve^terouslie,
and dangerously hazard his son in the field? Again, fathers do not therefore
send their sons to be students, at the Innes of Court, or to be apprentices
in the City of London, only in regard, that they may be all great Citizens,
and all great rich men, all great lawyers, and al great Judges of the land. It
suffices all parents, and the purpose and intent of all parents is, that
their sons, become such lawyers, and such Citizens, as by their law, and by
their trades, they may thrive, and live ba^resterlike, and lawyerlike;
marchantlike, and citizen-like, though they be not able to live Serieantlike,
or Iudge-like, Alldermanlike, or Lord-like. In like sort questionles would it
be an excellent encouragement, to many fathers, to send many sons, unto
many Schools and Universities of learning, if so be there were many and good
rewards, rathet then few and great rewards, provided for many, rather then
for few learned men in the Church. For if there be but few rewards, albeit
the same be great, then but a few fathers among many, will adventure the
spending of their substance, upon a vain hope, that their sons shall
obtain great rewards of learning. For what father knows the capacity, and
diligence of his son? Or who can divine, that his son, shall be one, among
the number of a few men greatly learned, worthy of a great reward, and to live
Deanlike, Archdeaconlike, Bishoplike, or Archbishoplike? Wherefore if such a
change of the Clergy, as whereof we speak, were made, that is to say, if an
unlearned, and indiscreet ministry, were changed into a discreet and learned
ministry: it is not to be doubted, but a far greater number of sons,
would be sent by their fathers, to the study of good learning, then now there
be.

From whence also it follows, that either Papal Prelacie is the only bane
Prelacy the bane of a learned ministry.
of a learned Ministry, or else that an unlearned Ministry, is the untimely
fruit of the womb of Papal Prelacie. Both which twain, rather then one of
which twain, being true, we leave it to be considered, whether the mother
conceyving to soon, or the daughter borne out of time, or both as an after
birth, and superfluous members should not be cast away, and cut of from the
body of the Church? The Admonitors next argument, is drawn from the small
continuance in the Universities.

Admonition.
Furthermore who sees not, how small continuance there shall be in the
Universities to make men of any profou^d knowledge, when the very necessity of
places, shall draw men away, before they come to any ripenes or profound
knowledge, etc.

Assertion.
This argument is as an headless arrowe shot against a corslet of steel, out
of a bow unbent, for what can this argument pearce, when in effect the
conclusion is thus: If every parish should have a learned and discrete
Minister, the^ men should have but small continuance in the University, to
make them men of ripenes, or of any profound knowledge.

But that men should be of small continuance in the University, and should be
drawn away, before they come to ripenes or perfound knowledge, is not meet.

Therefore it is not meet, that every Parish should have a learned and discret
Minister.



The reason of which consequence is this: viz. The very necessity of places
Page 80.
(says he) shall draw men away before they come to any ripenes: The learnednes
then, and discretion, of a Minister, by his reason, depends upon his long
continuance in the University. And what shall we then say of the learnednes
and discretion, of such Ministers of the Bishops making, as did never continue
in the University, one day in all their whole life? but hereunto they answer,
that the very necessity of the one, is so great, as that the people must have
prayer said, and the Sacraments administered, least the people in the country
should grow to an heathnish barbaritie: unto which answer, again I reply and
reason thus: If a man of vnlearnednes, and without knowledge and ripenes, may
be a Minister, then a man of small vnlearnednes, of small knowledge, and of
small ripenes, may be a Minister much more; and again: If necessity of
places, may draw men of no continuance in the University, of no knowledge, and
of no ripenes, into the Ministry: then may the necessity of places draw
men, of small continuance, knowledge, and ripenes.

But the necessity of places may draw men of no continuance, knowledge or
ripenes into the Ministry:

Therefore the necessity of places may draw men of small continuance,
knowledge, and ripenes, into the Ministry.



The second proposition of which sillogisme, is confirmed by practice, and
precept, by word, and by deed, of most of our reverend Bb. And then from
their own practice, I argue thus: If the necessity of saying prayers, of
reading service, and of delivery of the elements, b^ of necessity, and of
necessity require unlearned Faith more necessary to be preached then the
Sacraments be administered
ministers, rather then no ministers: then much more the necessity of having
faith; the necessity of the salvation of our souls, and the necessity of God
his glory, is of necessity; and being of necessity requires ministers of
small learning, of small continuance, of small knowledge, and of small ripenes:
rather then ministers of no learning, no continuance, no knowledge, and of no
ripenes. And if Faith, salvation of men, and the glory of God, as soundly, and
as sincerely may be preached and promoted, by young and rude Timothy, as by
aged learned, and eloquent Apollo, what necessity is there of continuance in
the University, to obtain more profound knowledge, or any other riper
understanding, then is that knowledge, and that understanding, whereby faith to
the salvation of men, and to the glory of God, is of necessity to be
preached? Again, if by continuance in the University, profou^d knowledge, and
ripenes, be so necessary, that (as is pretended) in respect thereof, a change
of the Clergy may not be made, and that unlearned, and indiscreet ministers,
as it were by necessity, should still be placed; then seems it reasonable,
to move the Lord Bishops, that it would please them, to effect an abolishment
of some of the statutes, of all the Colleges in Oxford and Cambridge: whereby
all Masters of Art, of what youth, ignorance, or rudenes soever they be
(excepting some small number, which by order of their foundation, be put apart
to the study of Law or Physic) some after two, some after three, and some
after four years, of their co^mencement, are compelled either to enter into
the ministry, or to leave their fellowships: Nay in some Colleges, if
Bachelors of arts be chosen felows, and be not ministers after one year, by
statut they loose their places. The principle reason of the fou^ders of all
which statutes (to my best remembrance) is this: namely that the harvest being
great, and the laborers but few, many laborers, shall be sent from those
Colleges, into the harvest. Neither can it be intended, that many laborers of
long continuance, many laborers of profound knowledge, or many laborers of
ripenes should be sent. But it is simply provided, that many laborers, and not
loyterors should be sent, and yet now the Admonitor, rather the^ that some
loyterers should not be sent, contendeth to seclude some laborers from the
work. Besides, how can they be of any long continuance, of any ripenes, or of
any profound knowledge, in the mysteries of faith, and Godliness, when not
having accomplished the age of 24 years, 26 years, or 28 years at the most,
and not having given them selves above 2. 3. or 4. years at the most, to the
study of divinity, nay which after the study of 3. or 4. years of
Philosophy or arts, and no study of Divinity, must notwithstanding enter
into the ministry? wherefore from the statutes of the Colleges in the
Universities I thus dispute: If the necessity of the College statutes, do
compel: All Masters of arts before mentioned, and some Bachelors of arts not
having any profound knowledge, or being but of small continuance, or not of any
ripenes, either to leave their colleges or to enter into the Ministry, then
much more the necessity of preaching Faith, the necessity of being saved, and
the necessity of God his glory may compel men of small learning, of small
knowledge, of small ripenes, and of small continuance, to execute their
Ministry, rather the^ that any parish should be necessarily clogged with a
Minister of no learning, of no discretion, of no knowledge, of no ripenes, and
of no continuance.

But the necessity of the college statutes do compel the one,

Therefore the necessity of Faith, etc. may compel the other.



Admonition.
Against the inconvenience of discipline, by excommunication Page 81.
only (which he says we so much cry for) he tells us that some learned men
of this age have at large declared in their works set forth to the world, that
the same wilbee of most men contemned, and that it will be of small force to
bring to effect any good amendment of life.

Assertion.
But who taught him to father, or to fasten this untruth upon us? only then No
discipline by excommunication only called for.
this might suffice for answer, that he did never yet hear, any one of our
part, so much as call, much less to cry for discipline by excommunication
only. For we say clean otherwise. viz. that the Discipline of the Church
ought not to be executed (as now for the most part it is) by excommunication
only. This manner Discipline by excommunication only, no more to be suffered
of discipline therefore, by excommunication only, is one of the disorders in
the Church, used by the reverend Bb. and which we so much desire, to be
reformed. And for this cause we entreat their Lordshippes, to forbear the
practice of that, which (as it seems) they would so feign have others to
mislike.

But happily this was not the mark whereat the Admonitor short; for Bishopply
and Archdeaconly excommunication, being daily used, it is like that he bent
his bow, and aimed at that excommunication only, which is Pastoral and
Elderly. Against which form The writings of so^^ learned men not sufficient to
condemn excommunication by Pastors and Elders.
and manner of excommunication, let be so, that some learned men of this age,
have at large declared in their works, set forth to the world, that the same
will be of most men contemned, and that it will be of small force to bring to
effect, any good amendment of life, let this (I say) be granted, what of all
this? must the Church of England therefore, dislike and reject the same? God
forbid. The whole doctrine of Faith and Sacraments, we know to be of most men
contemned, and to be of small force to bring most men from superstitions and
Popi^h idolatry. And how the^ is it possible, but that the sword of this
doctrine, should have as little enterteynement amongst most men as the doctrine?
He that casts away the kernel, will much more despise the shale: And he
that sets light by a sword, will set less by the scabberd. It suffices
then that the children of the Church in England, striving to enter in at the
narow gate, and embracing the doctrine of the Gospel, it is sufficient (I say)
that they submit and subject their necks unto the yoke of the Gospel, for
what have we to do with them that are without? Does the law of England
endight, condemn, and judge a Spaniard resiant in Spain?

The Admonitor himself affirms Page 134.
(at the time when our Savior Christ said, dic Ecclesiae) that there were
many presidents, as it were, and governors of the Church together with the
chief Ministers of every congregation; nay further he says that he will not
deny that the Apostles afterward, and the primitive Page 235. The Bb.
confesses that the Minister and Elders, did govern in the primitive church.
Church, did practice the same.

These some learned men then, either must show, and prove (unto us the children
of God in England) that this form of governing the church, and excommunicating
by many presidents and governors, together with the chief Ministers of every
Congregation, was given to the Churches in the time of Christ, and his
Apostles, but only for that time, and that therefore that form is now at an
end, and ceased, or else it must be confirmed unto us, tha^ God has in these
days altered and changed his mind touching England; and that he has by some
new vision, or revelation, commanded the reverend Bb: in these days, to teach
the church of England, that he will not have the same manner of government
used in the Church of England, because The opinion of some learned men not
sufficient for the Church of England to depart from the word.
it would be of most of his children in England contemned, and of small force
to bring to effect any good amendeme^t of life in them: for albeit all the
learned men in the world, had declared as much in their works set forth to
the world, as is here spoken of, what were that to the children of God in
England, unless the same learned men, had taught unto us true learning from
the mouth of God? How much less are we bound to regard, what only some learned
men of this age have declared unto us, the same some learned men having no
warrant out of the holy book of God, for such their learning? For if the
declaration of some learned men of this age, in their works set forth to the
world, may be a sufficient warrant to draw men from the way of truth: then
hardly let the declaration of Doctor Harding, against the true use of the Lords
supper, and then let the declaration of Osorius against Justification by faith,
and the declarations of Bellarmine, against diverse articles of our religion,
and the declaration of Doctor Allen, against the execution of justice in
England, and the declaration of Doctor Saunders, a rebellious fugitive, in the
defense of the Popes Bull, and the declaration of G. T. for the pretended
catholics; and lastly, let the declaration of the Pope, and his whole clergy,
exco^municating our late Sovereign lady the Queen deceased, be receyved, and
listened unto. For who can deny but that these men were some men, and that
these some men were also some learned men, and who then sees not the loosenes,
the vanity, the trifling, and the toying of this argument.

The argument following which the Admonitor would seem to let pass, Page 81.
drawn from experience, is of like quality. For though experience (as he
says) reach that men of stubbernes, will not shun the company of such as be
excommunicated, and though such men of stubbernesse, must be also (as he
says) excommunicated, for keeping of company with them, yet to affirm, that
by means of Pastourly, and Elderly excommunication, more will be
excommunicated, By excommunication of Pastors and Elders, more can not be out
of communion the^ in communion.
as being men of stubbernes, then in communion, is a very gross, and palpable
error. For we hold (as the truth is) that the greater part of the Church can
not be excommunicated by the lesser; nor that many should be excommunicated, by
a few; nor that a few should be excommunicated by one of the Church. And if the
common union must necessarily consist of all, or of the most part of the
faithful, then is the lesser part always out of this common union. For what
else is excommunication, but extra communionem eiectio, a casting forth of
one, or of more persons from the common fellowship, society, and company of the
faithful? The greatest part whereof, and not the least, are accounted to be the
church, and to be in communion; unless then the whole church, or the greater
part of the Church, having once cast out from among them, one or more
adulterers, blasphemers, extortioners, or such like, and having also
excommunicated men of stubbernes, for keeping company with such, shall them
selves all, or the greatest part, become children of disobedience, and men of
stubbernes: it can not be, but there must be still more of the church, in
communion, then out of communion. But if the whole Church shall have cast away
the yoke of Discipline, and become such them selves, as were those who^ before
they had excommunicated, then is it a clear case, that there is not any more,
any communion among them. For how should any common union be there, where is
no vnio^ at all? And if all be departed from obedience, where then can the
Church be? Nay further, if the greatest part of the Church should revolt, and
forsake the faith, yet hereupon it would not follow, that more of the faithful,
be out of communion, then in communion. For then such only as remain in the
unity of faith, and have not separated themselves from Christ, remain now
only to be in communion with Christ: out of which number also, if any should
be excommunicated, by the residue of their brethren, yet even among this
small number, there would be still more in communion, then out of communion. For
to be out of communion can not be understood, to be of any but only of such as
remaining in the profession of faith, and godliness, are yet notwithstanding
found guilty of some transgression, and for the same by the Church, for a time
cut of from the Church by sentence of excommunication.

These deformities, and inconveniences therefore, can in no wise follow, that
Discipline of excommunication, by Pastoures and Elders, which so much is
called for. But certes, it fared (I fear me) with the Admonitor, and sundry
of his colleagues in this case none otherwise, then it fares with incontinent
women, once (say they) incontinent, and ever incontinent, we know it by our
selves. Our ecclesiastical Judges and Officers, in like manner, seeing by
experience, those whom they account to be men of stubbernes, not to shun the
company of such as they daily excommunicate; yea and they perceyuinge also,
that it may fall out, that more, under their Jurisdiction, By the Bb.
excommunication more may be (...) of communion, then in communion, it is
therefore by his own reason, a deformed discipline.
may be out of their communion then in communion with them, because one man
alone (as he playnelie insinuates) may excommunicate the greatest part of
the Church under his censure (for otherwise he could never have supposed, that
more would be out of communion then in communion) because (I say) these
deformities, and these inconveniences, by their own experience, have been
found to have followed upon that discipline of excommunication, which hitherto
has been practiced; It falls out that they can not otherwise judge, but that
all other manner of discipline, by excommunication, must be of the same nature
and condition, that is, as deformed and inco^venient, as their own is. And yet
in this place it is worthy to be marked what a rod the Admonitor has gotten
out of S. Augustine, to By S. Augustines reason Bishopply excommunication has
many deformities.
whip his own discipline, by excommunication only out of the church, and thus
it may be framed. That discipline whereby more will be, or more may be
excommunicated then in communion, has in it many deformities, and
inconveniences:

But by the Discipline of excommunication which the reverend Bishopps, their
Archdeacons, Chauncelors, Commissaries, and Officials practice, more will be,
or more may be excommunicated, then in communion.

Therefore that Discipline by excommunication, which the reverend Bishopps
their Archdeacons, etc. practice, has in it many deformities, and
inconveniences.



The Mayor proposition (if he speak truly) is St. Augustines, but whether it
be or be not, it is no great matter, because it needs not the authority of
any man to confirm it, the same being sound and true in it own nature. The
minor is drawn from his own reason thus: Where there be more men of stubbernes
in the church, then of obedience, and where there be more men that shun not,
then that shun the company of those that be excommunicated, there more will
be, or may be excommunicated, then in communion.

But there be more men of stubbernes, then of obedience, and more that shun
not, then that do shun the company of those that be excommunicated, by the
Reverend Bishopps, their Archdeacons, Chancelours, and Officials.

Therefore there may be, or will be more excommunicated, by their Lordships, their
Archdeacons, Chancelours, etc. then in Communion.



The assumptio^, though I cannot warrant the same to be simply true, yet I may
safely warrant it, to be drawn from the Admonitors own experience. For I let
pass (says he) that experience teaches that men of stubbernes, will not
shun the company of them that be excommunicated, etc. and that they must be
excommunicated Bishoply excommunication has many deformities.
for keeping of company with them. And so it will fall out, that more will be
excommunicated, then in communion; but this last consequence (say I) ca^ not
follow, unless he first presuppose both his antecedents to be true And
therefore because he must needs be intended to have spoken of that kind of
excommunication, whereof he has had experience, it follows that these
deformities, and inconveniences whereof he speaks, must needs be found, in
that excommunication, which he and his use. For of the other kind of
excommunication, he never yet had any experience: And then by experience he
could not speak. If he spoke not of his own experience, but of the experience
of some other men, then have we but little cause to believe him, because we
know not what manner persons those were, from whom he drew his argument of
experience, and whether they reported deceytfully, or truly of their own
experience, or no.

And if this argument drawn from the experience of his own manner of
Discipline, be of sufficient validity to impugn (as he weaneth) that
Discipline by excommunication, which so much (as he says) is cried for, and
whereof as yet he never had experience, how much more effectual then is this
argument to overthrow that his own manner of discipline, which he so long time,
to so small profit, and with so great inconveniences, and deformities, has so
unprofitably practiced? For can there be any greater deformity, By discipline
of Bishopply excommunication one may be a community.
then that one member should be supposed to be the whole body, or that one man
should make a community? And yet this deformity, by his experience, may fall
out, to be seen even under that discipline, which every ordinary exercises.
For if by process, ex mero officio, an ordinary should excommunicate any one
of his jurisdiction for not communicating with an idol minister, or for
holding that Christ in his soul, did not descend into hell, or for denying
reading to be preaching, and withal should pronounce all them to be men of
stubbernes, which would not shun the company of him so excommunicated. And
for that cause also should excommunicate them as is here supposed lawful to be
done, were it not a clear case that the body of that church, must now be taken
to consist only in the person of the ordinary, and one member to become the
whole body? For if all under his jurisdiction were once exco^^municated, how
could then any be in communion with him: And if they all were once
excommunicated, must not the ordinary then alone be the common union, and so
make a community? And what a deformed kind of excommunication, then is that
kind of excommunication, whereby it may fall out, that to be one, is to be
many, and that to be a church, a company, a society, and a fellow^hip, is to
be one? of which nature, and of which kind that manner of excommunication, which
by Pastors, and Elders is to be executed, can not be as has already bin
proved. If then excommunication now used, be a deformed kind of discipline,
and therefore, as we say, to be no more tolerated, and if excommunication by
Pastors and Elders, be a kind of discipline for the inco^venience thereof (as
he says) not to be planted: what manner of discipline by excommunication would
he have in th^se days, The Admonitor would have no excommunication at all
trow we? would he have none at all? verily I suppose none at all. For so do
^his words plainly insinuate, by two rea^^s following: First (says he) the
loose(...) of these days, require discipline of ^^arper laws by punishment of
body, and danger of goods, which they do, and will more fear, then they will
excommunication: Secondly we have (says he) a very good manner of discipline,
by the Ecclesiastical commission which does much good, and would do more, if
it were more common. But why did he not speak plainly, and why did he not
affirm devoutly, that discipline by excommunication, was good where the church
was in persecution, and that it is not necessary, nor so convenient under a
Christian Magistrate, as it may be otherwise? For if Pastors and Elders were
appointed joint officers, only for tim^s of pers^cution, and not to be under
Christian Princes, it follows (these joint officers ceasing) that al
accessaries, appe^dices, and consequences, of their joint offices must also
cease, unless it can be proved out of the holy scriptures, that the offices
of Pastors ought still to continue, and that the offices of Elders ought not to
continue; because the offices of Elders, with all their appendices, have been
translated by our Savior Christ, unto Archbishoppes, Bishops, Archdeacons,
their Chancelours, Commissaries, and Officials. For unless these Officers be
Christ's Officers, the discipline which they use cannot bind the consciences of
the people of God. And for this cause is it very probable, that he so
commends discipline of sharper laws, and discipline by the Ecclesiastical
commission. For if these officers, by their discipline have not to do with the
consciences of men, then is it no merveyle that men fear not their discipline.
And therefore if they will be still officers, it is requisite, that they call for
such a discipline, as might cause men to stand in awe of their authority. But
were they indeed the officers of God, and had they indeed authority from God,
to execute discipline by excommunication, as Pastors and Elders did in the
primitive Church; then were the loosenes of this age never so great, yet that
the children of God in England would more fear the loss of goods, lands,
bodies, or lives, then the censure of Gods officers is one of the Admonitors
paradoxes. And here I appeal the consciences of all the reverend Bishops and
Prelates in the land, and let them answer me hardly, if they judge themselves
to be the children of God, and had seven times seven thousand lives, whether
they had not rather seven thousand times be committed to the Iaylor of
Winchester, then once be delivered over, to the Iaylor of Hell. And are not all
the children of God in England their brethren? And are they not all led by one
and the self same spirit? And how then can they less fear excommunication
(which is a delivery of the soul to Satan) then the punishment of body and
danger of goods? And yet touching this point of excommunication, he seems
Admonitor supposes it to be a fault not to excommunicate yt Prince, and
Rulers: and then what force is my Lo. of Ca. judgment, who supposes it
unlawful for the Church to excommunicate a Prince.
to be against him self, for in the 137. page, he tells us that happily it
may be a fault, yea and a great fault that is found with the Bishops in these
days, that they do not excommunicate the Prince and Rulers, and so constrain
them to do that, which by persuasion they will not do. If then
excommunication be so terrible to Princes and Rulers, how should it be of so
light account with subjects? And if it be so powerful as it can constrain
Princes and Rulers to do their duties, how much more fearful would it be, to
compel inferiors, and men of low estate, to live soberly in their vocations?
I will not here debate the matter touching the excommunication of Princes and
Rulers, much less touching the excommunication of the Prince and Rulers of our
land. But I would gladly be informed, what they were, or who they be, that
found great fault with the Bishops in these days, for not endeavoring to
excommunicate the Prince and Governors?

The Papists, they think it sufficient, that the Prince and Governors, be
excommunicated by the Pope, and his Clergy. The Ministers, and people
professing the Gospel, and seeking for reformation of excommunication, deny
the Bishops to have any divine power granted by the word of God, to
excommunicate a private man, much less do they think it lawful for them to
excommunicate the Prince and Rulers: Who then (I say) find fault with the
Bishops, that they do not excommunicate the Prince and Governors, and so
constrain them to do that which by persuasion they will not do? For my part I
ca^ not guess, whom he should mean, unless he meant to give us to understand,
that some Prelatists have consulted about the excommunicating, both Prince and
Governors, for not making sharper laws, against such as whom the Prelates, and
their favorites, have falsely slaundered, to be pestilent fellows, movers of
sedition, enemies to Caesar, troublers and subverters Act. 24 5. Act 1. 16. 20.
17. 6.
of the state; puritanes, and I whot not what chief mainteyners of the sect of
the disciplinarians; unless (I say) he should mind some such Prelatists, I
can not guess any subjects within the land, to be so undutiful, as to find
fault with the Bishops, for not attempting to bring our late Sovereign Lady
the Queen deceased, to theit excommunication. And therefore to inform the
people of an Author, and not to bring him forth, it argues and breadeth great
suspicion that the enformer was the author himself. Touching the looseness of
some or of all in these days, that are without the Excommunication touches
them only which make profess^on to be of ye church.
Church, if he intend that they require discipline of sharper laws, by
punishment of body, and loss of goods, then excommunication, and that they
will more fear that manner of punishment, I hold, and affirm therein as he
holds, and affirms, and yet (I say) that to the matter in question, he has
fitted no other answer, then as if he had answered, a poke full of plummes, or
a buchet full of pears, (for the controversy is not concerning those that are
without, but concerning those that are within: not touching those, that are not
of the household, but touching them that are of the household of faith and of
God). As for the first sort of which people, the reverend Bishops with good
leave, may procure what sharp punishment, they can devise, for by the Church
excommunicated they should never be. For how should any be thrust from the
communion of the Church, who never were in communion with the Church? But it is
to be feared, that this sharpnes of punishment, is not urged so much to be
inflicted upon them, that are without as upon them, that are within the bosom
of the Church. For though such, as be without, did a long time scorn, and set
naught by the sword of excommunication, which was not only drawn out, by
the Chauncelours, Commissaries, and Officialls: for every crust of bread, and
for every piece of bacon, but also, which was again put up, for every
cracked grote, and for every Irish harper; the reverend Bb. whose freehold by
such contempt, was not touched, were pacified, and contented them selves well
enough by inflicting, and releasing that manner of punishment, but now for so
much as they perceive the children within the church, to begin seriously, and
religiously to stand against the use of Lordly and humane censures for the
Crown and Scepter of our Savior Christ, and that the statelines of Prelacie,
must be taken one hole lower, if the simplicity of the holy ministry be
exalted a degree higher, they pretend Discipline by excommunication, which is
the sword of the son, and heir of God, to be too bluntly pointed, and too
badlie edged, to foyne, or to strike withal.

Touching that very good manner of Discipline by the Ecclesiastical
commission, which he says has done and does daily much good, and would do
more, if it were more common, the people whom he admonishes, have just cause
of being desirous to understand what manner of Discipline it is, which Not
one manner of Discipline used by the ecclesiastical commisioners.
is so highly commended? For all men know, that the ecclesiastical
commissioners use not in all places, and at all times one and the self same
manner of Discipline. For the same Commissioners, for the same kind of
offenses, sometimes suspend, sometimes deprive, sometimes degrade, sometimes
excommunicate, sometimes fine, sometimes imprison, sometimes command this
penance, and sometimes that. Nay sometimes having convented before them, grave,
learned, and godly Ministers, for crimes supposed This Discipline was practiced
against master Cartwhright, Fenner, Whight, L. (...) and others.
to be Ecclesiastical, and for the same pretensed Ecclesiastical offenses,
having deteyned them some years in durance, for refusal of the oath ex
officio: in the end not having any other supposed just cause of inflicting any
punishment upon them, by ecclesiastical authority, have bin forced, for a
show, to mainteyne their own credites, to cause accusations to be framed
against the^, by the Queen's Attorney in the high Court of Starchamber, as
against violators of the dignities of the Royal Crown, whose innocencies by
the very witnesses produced by their means on the behalf of the Queen, have
notwithstanding bin fully cleared from the faults objected, and the Ministers
discharged, without any ordinary punishment usually infflicted by that Court
upon malefactors. Nay further, when the Ecclesiastical Ecclesiastic.
discipline used by the high Commissioners against Ma. Vdall.
Commissioners had committed Master Vdall to prison, where he remained half
a year, for refusal of the oath ex officio, touching his knowledge of the
Author of a book, entitled The Demonstration; in the end he was delivered
over as a fellon for making of the same book, and for the which he was
arayned, and convicted, and so died in prison: notwithstanding our Soverayno
Lord, King JAMES, the King of Scotland, had graciously written for his
deliverance. And how the^ would the Admonitor have the people contented with
such a moderation of Ecclesiastical discipline, as the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners many times use? For did he think that every manner of discipline
used by the high Commissioners can not be, but a very good moderation? Why
then let some of the Commisioners, tell the people whether the Ecclesiastical
commissioners An oath tendered by the Ecclesiastic. Commissio. unto M. Vdall in
case of felony.
used a very good moderation, and manner of Discipline Ecclesiastical against
the same Master Vdall, when they tendered unto him a corporal oath, to have
appeached him self upon a matter which was adjudged to be felony? or let them
declare, what a very good manner of discipline Ecclesiastical, certain
Ecclesiastical Commissioners used, when having a Gentleman before them,
wearing long hair, they constreyned the same Gentleman, by force, and strong
hand, to have his head notted in their presence? The wearing of long hair, by
our laws being not reputed an Ecclesiastical crime, no although the same be
worn by attendants upon the reverend Bb. waiting on their trenchers. Or let
them signify unto us, what a good manner of discipline, and moderation it was
for a Bb. and his associates, to make an act, in the high commission Court,
repugnant The Minister authorized, to put sacramental bread into the mouth a of
communicant.
to the institution of our Savior Christ, and contrary to the order appointed
by the book of common prayer, that the Minister should put the sacramental
bread, into the mouth of a superstitious communicant, and not deliver it into
his hands? After our hearty commendations (says the Bb. and his associates)
whereas I. V. one of your charge, has been often convented before us her
Majesty's Commissioners, in causes ecclesiastical, for not receyving the holy
Communion, it seems unto us, that he has not of any contemptuous mind,
refrayned from the same, but is willing to receive it, and so has bound him
self, saving that he has a scruple in his mind by reason of a fond vow, or
promise he made long ago (whereof he is sorry) never to receive the Sacrament
into his hand, but to put it into his mouth by the Minister? And therefore we
pray you to bear a time, with his weakness, and permit him to receive it in
that sort, until by your good counsel, and persuasion, he may be reduced
from that fond scruple. And so we bid you heartily farewell.

Your loving friends, etc.

And seeing the Admonitor has opposed a very good manner of Discipline, Master
E. excommunicated by the high Commissioners, most whereof were lay men.
by the Ecclesiastical commission against excommunication, it seems that
excommunication in his judgment, is no good or moderate discipline, to be used
by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners. And the^ were it fit, that the people
were resolved, what a ve^^ good manner of Discipline Master D. W. and other
Ecclesiastical Commissioners used against Master E. whom by virtue of the
ecclesiastical commission they excommunicated? The tenor of which
excommunication, taken out of the Register at L. follows. In Dei nomine,
Amen. Nos I. W. sacrae theologiae Doctor, etc. Cancellarius ecclesiae, etc. M.
A. M. Armigeri, and M. H. civis civitatis, etc. Commissarij rite, and legitime
procedentes, I. E. de B. L. Dioceses ad hos diem and locum legitime, and
peremptory citatum, and praecognizatum, diuque expectatum, and nullo modo
comparentem, pronunciavimus co^tumacem, and in poenam contumaciae suae
huiusmodi eum excommunicavimus in hijs scriptis.

T.
Concordat cum Regio.
Moreover it seems not an unmeet thing, that some ecclesiastical
Commissioners, did make known unto the people, whether banishment be an
ecclesiastical discipline; and what moderate discipline Ecclesiastical the
Commisioners used when they banished religious Master Fullerton the Scott,
from dwelling at Warwick, or within certain miles thereof, Or let the^
inform the Realm, what a very good moderation was used, when by the
Ecclesiastical commission, Authority committed to purseva^ts by the
ecclesiastical commissioners.
for suppressing of Martines books, and other books of argument, against the
Hierarchy, they authorized drunken and swearinge pursevantes, to search men's
houses, and to break up their chestes, etc. the copy of which their letters is
this, viz. Whereas the bearer is (say they) by the Queens Majesty especially
appointed, If ye Queen had specially commanded this search, it is credible,
yt her privy Cosisaylors should have set to their hands, rather the^ the high
Commissioners.
to make search, and to apprehend, certain suspected persons, according to
such particular directions, as he has in that behalf receyved, these shall be to
will, and require, and in her Majesty's name straightly to charge, and command
you, and every of you, to whom these shall apperteyne, to be by all good and
possible means, ayding, and assisting to the bearer in the execution of this
service, by entering into all such houses, as he shall think meet, and hold
suspected, as well within liberty as without, and that in them, and every of
them, to make due, and diligent search. And to search all manner of writings,
letters, papers, books, and all other things carrying note of suspicion,
sparing no studies, chestes, cubbards, locks, or walls, as also to apprehend,
examine, and bring before us, such persons, as by her Majesty's said direction,
therein appointed, and wherein if he shall any way require your further
assiste^ce, you may not fail, to yield him the same, with all diligence, and
dexterity, according to the trust reposed in you, as you will answer for
your default, for the contrary at your uttermost peril. Directed unto all
Mayors, Sherifes, Justices of peace, and quorum, Baylifes, Constables,
Hedboroughes, Tythingmen, and to all other her Majesty's officers, and
subjects, etc. But beit that all these mane^^ of disciplines were moderate,
and good ecclesiastical Disciplines, and more to be used, yet there may a
scruple remain, which were fit to be discussed, what a very good moderation,
and manner of discipline, within our remembrances, was used, between an
Archbishop, and a Bishopp, both high Commissioners, against certain
Gentlemen, and one of their wives, about these Articles following.

Articles objected by her Majesty's high Commissioners, for causes
Ecclesiastical against G. B. of B. and F. B. of B. in the County of L.
INprimis, We object unto you G. B. and L. your wife, that you have within
these seven years, and so at this present, do keep company, and use
conference with diverse persons, disobedient to her Majesty's laws, and such as
be suspected to resort and frequent, unlawful co^venticles.

Item, we object unto you, to the end you Quere whether this co^ventio^ were
lawful, for this cause. Quere, against what law this enterteynment was, and
whether the Bishop of L. conversing with Popish Priests and traitors, did not
more offend.
might the better insinuate your selves into their companies, you have tabled
and boorded with the same parties, and that you or one of you, have been
heretofore co^vented for the causes aforesaid, before the now lord Archb. his
grace, for enterteyning into your house a person which stood then, and yet
standed suspended, and deprived, for disliking the book of common prayer, and
other godly orders established by her Majesty's authority in this Realm.

Item we object unto you the said G. B. and L. yourwife, that you have not
frequented divine service, celebrated within your parish Church of Bothese vi.
5. 4. 3. 2. or one years last, nor do not at this present, at least every
Sunday, nor have receyved the holy Communion within your said parish Church
during the said years. Quere, whether the Bishop did not more offend the law
of God by preferring these articles, then the Gentleman did by procuring his
children to be Baptized by a preaching Minister having none at home.


Item, that you the said G. B. and L. your wife, within the time aforesaid,
have not Christened, nor baptized your children within your parish Church, but
contrary to the form, and order of her Majesty's laws in that case provided,
have either christened them at home privatelie in your own house, or have
carried, or caused them to be carried to other Churches. And let them declare
what Church, and what Minister did baptize them, and where, and whether the
same Minister, did at the same baptism, sign the child with the sign of the
cross, and let them declare the cause, why they did baptize their children
out of their parish.

Item, that the Ministers pew or seat in the church of B. aforesaid by the
direction Note that the Bishop of L. was not Bishop of the Diocese.
of the L. reverend Father in God the Bb. of L. that now is, being at the same
Church, as also by the consent of the Minister, and Churchwardens, there was
placed in a very convenient place of the Church, to the end the parishioners
there might the better hear, and understand the Minister, at the time of
reading the divine service.

Item, we object unto you, that you the said F. B. within these vi. or 3.
months last past, have without any sufficient warrant, or commandment from
the father in God, the Lord Bishop of L. or his Chancelour, or other having
authority therein, very disorderly, and contemptuously, remooved the same
seat, to the great offense of the parishioners, and bad example of others.

Item, we object unto you, that you know, believe, or have heard say that Za.
G. is a Preacher of the word of God, and a man of good life, and conversation,
and lawful Parson of B. aforesaid.

Item, we object unto you, that the premises notwithstanding you the said F. B.
upon a Sunday, within a quarter of a year, last past, when the Parishioners of
B. were assembled together, at the said Church to hear divine service, caused
diverse serving men, and others to sit in the pew or place, which properly
belonged to the Parson of the said Church: so that when the said M. G. came to
take his place they thrust him, and very disorderly in the time of prayer,
kept him out of the said place.

Item, we object unto you F. B. that about six years past you the said F.
brought into the Town of B. a bastard child, as it is credibly thought of your
own, and there placed it at nurse, and have lately receyved it into your own
house, to the great offense of the inhabitants there, and the bad example of
others. Et obijcimus cum duus and de quolibet. Subscribed, etc.

Whereunto in the foot of these articles was added.

Master B. I pray you let this matter be followed ex officio, and the parties
presently to be sent for, by warrant. Subscribed, etc.

Now these Gentlemen, according to the Bishops direction, being presently
sent for by a Pursevant, to answer the articles objected, they forthwith
make their repair to the Archbishop, with a copy of the articles, with whom
they find such grace, as in their behalf immediately he writes to the
Bishop as follows.

SAlutem in Christo, My very good Lord, I have by means received these
articles enclosed, signed by your Lordsh. hand, and can not but greatly
merveyle, that contrary to the orders of the commission Court, subscribed by
your self, and the rest of the Commisioners, you would cause a Gentleman of
such a quality, as Master B. is to be sent for by a Pursevant, before the
ordinary process of a letter missiue Note that ye sign of the cross in
Baptism by an Archb. opinion is but of small moment, and that suspicion of
bastardie may easily be dismissed.
were served upon him, especially for matters of so small moment. Neither will
it be thought to proceed of any just cause, but rather of some other
misconceyte, when it shall be understood that there is a controversy in law
elsewhere depending, between him and a kinsman of yours. And therefore for the
avoiding of his further complaint and other offense, that may grow thereby, I
heartely pray your Lordship to suppress the same, and proceed no further
therein. Desiring you withal to have due consideration of the cause, least I
be enforced to deal likewise, in the defense of my kinsman, as you do for
yours. And so praying your Lo. Note that ye 17. of Octo. was the Saboth day, at
what time the Archb. D. C. and D. B. sitting as Commissioners, the Archb. took
pen and ink, and crossed ye articles all overthwart, and so sent them back
with this letter.
to return unto me answer hereunto, and what you mean to do, with my very
hearty commendacions I commit you to the tuition of Almighty God. From, etc.
the 17. of Octo. etc. Subscri. etc, Unto which letter also was added as
follows. Master B. I pray, you according to the tenor of this letter, to see
that this cause of M. G. and F. B. be dismissed from thence, and if any be
bound to prosecute the cause against them, let them understand that I mean to
hear it at, etc. otherwise let it wholly be dismissed, and the bands
delivered.

The Bishops answer to the Archbishops former letters.
MAy it please your grace to understand that I was the more willingly drawn,
to send for Ma. B. in that sort, because he was often, and of long time accused,
not only to be a disordered man him self, but also a great and open
mainteyner, and carier from place to place of that wrangling puritan, W. And
as it is to be proved, a refrainer from his church, and from the Communion,
as I am informed. And therefore if we have omitted any circumstance or
ceremony, it is in zeal of the redress of such a disordered person. Which if
it should be found in your own brother, I think your grace would not spare
him. Nevertheless if you yourselfe take it in hand, to his redress, I for my
part shall be entreated, so that the man be amended, who has carried himself
outragiously, both in that, and other things. And so referring the whole
matter to your graces discretion, I take my leave, praying God to bless us, in
the peace of the Church. From, etc. the 17. of October, etc.

Your gra. most assured in Christ, etc.

Whatsouer special cause might move these two great Prelates, to stand either
of them, for the defense of his kinsma^, is not a thing material to this
treatise. But this honestly enough may be averred, that it was no very good or
moderate kind of ecclesiastical discipline, either for the Archb. and his
associates, in regard of his kinsman presented to a benefice by the gentleman,
to cancel the articles of his colleague, and fellow commissioners: or for the
Bb. upon a spleen taken against the gentleman, for standing upon the right of
his patronage, against his kinsman, to violate the public orders, of the high
commisioners, whereunto he him self had subscribed.

Many other forms of ecclesiastical discipline of late years have been used
by the high commisioners: But whether they were all very good, and moderate
disciplines or no is greatly doubted, by many wise, learned, and godly men. And
namely it is doubted, whether such ecclesiastical commisioners as by letters
patents, under the great Seal of England were authorized from the Queen, to
exercise, use, occupy and execute, all manner of jurisdictions, privileges,
and preheminences concerning any spiritual or ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
be able to prove unto the Realm, that they had lawful power and authority,
by the statute of 1. Eliz. c. 1. or by the Queens letters patents made
according to the true intent of that statute, or by any other law or statute
of the Realm to depute and substitute, any other person under them, to use,
exercise and execute any part of that jurisdiction ecclesiastical which by
virtue of that statute, and letters patentes, was committed only to their
fidelities and discretions. And whether it were a very good manner of
ecclesiast. discipline, which was used, exercised, and executed either by the
person so deputed, or by the Commisioners them selves, upon any process or
proceedings made by the said person substituted. Again, it is doubted, whether
it were a good manner of ecclesiastical discipline, for Ecclesiastical
discipline against the Magistrates of Banbury.
the high Commissioners, to command the Magistrates of the Town of Banbury at
the suite of certain Popish companions to reset up a Cross which by virtue of
the Queens injunctions, they had peaceably, and lawfully pulled down. It is
also doubted whether it were a very good manner of Ecclesiastical discipline
for the high Commissioners, to deteyne Master More one year or two in prison,
depriving him also from his living, for his confident asseveration that William
Summers with diverse others in Lanchashire were possessed, and that Master
Dorrell was not an impostor.

The occasion of the Admonitors great commendation, of a very good manner of
ecclesiastical discipline, used by the high Commisioners, has necessarily
drawn me, to show the differences of the disciplines used by the same. To the
intent the Kings Highness might be pleased, with the advice of his Parleament,
to co^sult, whether it were not more agreeable, to the good laws, statutes and
customs of the Realm, and more convenient, for the good government of the
Church, to have one certain form and rule of ecclesiastical discipline, to
be established, and to be used, by the high Commissioners; rather then thus at
random, to suffer their only discretion, to be the Mistres of all manner of
ecclesiastical discipline; especially sithence without any manner of appeal,
or supplication to be made from them unto the King, they use what manner of
discipline soever, seems good in their own eyes, whether moderate or
immoderate, civil or ecclesiastical, without check or controlement. Then the
which there can not seem any thing more prejudicial and burdensome unto the
people.

Admonition.
Furthermore their whole drift, as it may seem, is to bring the government Page
82.
of the church to a Democracie or Aristocracie: the principles and reasons
whereof, if they be made once by experience familiar in the minds of the common
people, and that they have the sense and feeling of them, it is greatly to be
feared, that they will very easily transfer the same to the government of the
common weal. For by the same reasons they shall be induced to think that
they have injury, if they have not as much to do in civil matters, as they
have in matters of the Church, seeing they also touch their commodity and
benefit temporally, as the other does spiritually, and what hereof may follow,
I leave to the judgment of other.

Assertion.
Let it be granted, that their whole drift is to bring the government of the
Church to that manner of government which the learned call Aristocracie, what
incommoditie should the Church or common weal receyur by such a government?
when as the same government is not only authorized by the holy law of God, but
also commended unto us by the desires Book of common prayer title, co^munation
and confirmed by 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 1. prim. Eliz. c. 2. 8. Eliz. c. 1.
Aristocracie in the church not hurtful to the common wealth
and wishes of sundry Acts of Parleaments. For says the book of common
prayer, the Discipline of the primitive church, is greatly to be wished.
Aristocracie therefore, and the discipline of the primitive Church, differing
but in name, and not in nature; it can not be hurtful to the common weal,
that the principles and reasons thereof should by experience, be made familiar
in the minds of the common people; nay it can not but be beneficial unto the
common weal, when the same shall understand, that the best observers of the law
of God, and the best friends unto God and his people, are to be the Officers
in the house of God. Neither is their whole drift, to be disliked, but to be
commended, that labor to bring the government of the church from a Papal
Prelacie, to a christian Aristocracie: the one viz. Aristocracie, Aristocracie
in ye Church optimarum, Prelacia pessimarum, potestas.
according to the interpretation of the name thereof, being optimatum
potestas, a power of the best observers of the law; the other, viz. Prelacie,
according to their practice, being pessimatum potestas, a power of the worst
observers of the law: the first derived from the law of God, and practice of
Gods people; the other deduced from the laws and customs of the Gentiles and
idolatrous Priests. And this of necessity, in defense of the truth, the
Admonitors argument, forces me to speak; for by an implicatio^ of the dislike
of bringing the government of the Churches by Pastors and Elders, to a
Democracie or Aristocracie, he has by consequence, disclaymed and disavowed
the government of the Church by Prelacie to be any of those two. And what other
government then should we think Prelacie to be, but either Oligarchie, or
Tyranny? For neither Monarchy may it be, neither Policy, Prelacie either
Oligarchie or tyranny.
or polliticall estate can it be: and other kind of government besides these
there is not any. For my part, I more charitably judge of the government of
the Church by Prelacie, then to match it with Tyranny. And although the
Admonitor, and the Pervsers and allowers of his book, were men in their
generation wise, yet had they well weighed the nature of the government of
Oligarchie, they would rather in this argument, have bin silent, then upon
disclayme of Democracie, and Aristocracie, (goverments both of them commendable
in their kind) have cast the commendation of their own government of the
Church by Prelacie, to so desperate an estate, as is the estate of Oligarchie.
Wherein if any do glory, because not many of the best, but some few of the
wealthiest, and richest sort do govern, then let him hearken and consider,
what (long since) was preached before Pope Urban the fifte, by Act. and Mo.
one Nicolas Orem, a man singularly commended for learning in his time.
Nicholas Orem his opinion of Oligarchie.
Amongst all the regiments of the Gentiles, none (says he) is more to be
found, wherein is to be seen so great and exceeding ods, the^ in the policy
of Priests: Amongst whom one is drunken, another is sterved, amongst whom some
be so high, that they exceed all Nobles and Princes of the Earth; some again
be so abased, that they are under all rascals; and such a common weath (says
he) may well be called Oligarchie. But Thomas Aquinas, he seems to set the
discommodities of Oligarchie, a pin Thomas Aquinas what he thinks of
Oligarchie.
higher: for (says he) as a Kingdom has in it the commodities of all other
good regiments; of Aristocracie, that the Noblest and chiefest persons among
Aristocracie a good regiment.
the people, be taken to Council: of Policy, or political estate, where an
assembly of all estates is had, and when the very best of all sorts, are
chosen, to consult, and deliberate, of the public weal: so does Tyranny
contain, and has in it all incommodities, and vices of all naughty and
corrupt regiments: of Oligarchie it borrows, that the most wicked Oligarchie
a corrupt regiment
and corruptest men be Counsaylors, and that (as it were) a route of Tyrants
do govverne. The reasons and pillars of which Oligarchie, are immoderatnes,
excessivenes, disparitie, and inequality, passing and beyond all mean and
measure. Now if our reverend Bb. shall show them selves to be mal-contented
with me, as though out of the opinions of these learned men, I would gather
that the government of the Church by Prelacie, is one of the corruptest
governements; I am to desire them to have patience until they shall plainly
demonstrate unto us, that the same is not Oligarchie. For if hereafter they
shall revoke their former disgraceful judgments, against the discipline by
Pastors and Elders, containing in it the very nature of true Aristocracie; and
withal, instruct us better of the true nature of their own government, of the
Church by Prelacie; they shall find us pliable to their opinion, so that it be
grounded upon the principles and reasons of truth. In the mean season (after
the fashion of the Admonitors manner of admonishing the people, we most humbly
beseech the King and Parleament to be informed, that it is greatly to be
feared (if Prelacie be Oligarchie) that the Prelates will endeavor, It is to
be feared least (by the example of Prelates) Oligarchie be brought in the
common weal.
to transfer that manner of government, from the Church unto the common weal.
And that the common weal shall as miserably be rent, and torn, with factions
and vproares, as now the church is disquieted by schisms and divisions. For if
only a few of the richest and welthiest sort, shall get an head, and bear all
the sway in the common weal, they shall think by the principles and reasons
of Oligarchie, that they have injury, if they have not as much to do in civil
matters, as the Prelates have to do in the matters of the Church: And what
hereof may follow, as the Admonitor leaves, so do I also leave it to the
judgment of other. Only if the way hereof already has bin trodden out unto
them, by some who A caveat against Oligarchie.
have not written, nor spoken, but yet practiced the principles and reasons of
Oligarchie in the common weal, only then this I say, and add as a caveat,
that the danger to come, is more heedefully to be preve^ted. For like as in
good harmony (to make the Music perfaict) is required a moderate, and
proportionate inequality of voices; which, if it too much exceed, takes away
all the sweet melody, so by too much immoderate inequality, or disparitie of
Citizens, the common weal falls to ruin. But why may not the government of
the The government of the Church by Prelacie, is not Monarchical.
Church by Prelacie, be a Princely and a Royal government? In deed this
question, if it should be resolved, by the rules and principles of the canon
law, I could hardly disprove that government to be Princelike: for, (as has
bin said before) quilibet Ordinarius in sua Diocoesi; est mayor quolibet
Principe. Yea and every Bishop, by the same law, has as absolute a spiritual
power, within his Diocese, as a King has a temporal power within his
Kingdom. But because that law with the rules and principles thereof, is, or
ought to be discarded out of this Kingdom, we will not wade in it. Only we say
that the government of the Church by Prelacie, cannot be any kind of Royal
and Monarchical government, because Prelates have not like power spiritual,
as Kings and Monarchs have power re^porall. For there was never yet lex regia,
de Prelatorum spirituali imperio, lata, qua Prelatis, and Institut. de iure
nature. gent and ci. Sed and quod.
in eos, omne imperium suum, and potestatem, aut Deus, aut populus Dei
contulerit. And therefore where the people have made the fore said regal law,
as there it is justly said, quodcunque Imperator per epistolam constituit, vel
cognoscens decreuit, vel edicto praecepit, legem esse constat: and quod
Principi placuit, legis habet vigorem; So likewise, where there is no such
regal law, made in the church, there it is as justly affirmed: quod Prelato
placuit, legis non habei vigorem; quodcunque Prelatus per epistolam constituit,
cognoscens decrevit, vel canone praecepit, legem non esse constat. And then how
can every Prelate, or why does every Prelate, by his sole authority, inioyne
canons, articles, injunctions, and orders, to be observed as laws, in all the
Churches of his jurisdiction? If the Admonitor supposed the government If the
gouvernment of ye Church by Prelacie be Monarchical, the^ may the government
by Pastors be so to
of the Church by Prelacie to be Monarchical, because the Queen was a
Monarch, and that the reverend Bishop governed under a Monarch; then what did
he else, but put a weapon into the hands of Pastors and Elders, to prove their
government also, to be Princely and Monarchical? Because Pastors and Elders
desire not to have that manner of government, to be brought into the Church,
otherwise then by the Royal assent, Souveraigne authority, and express
commandment of our most gracious King and Monarch. Besides, if any government
may be therefore said to be a Monarchy, because the same is derived from an
earthly Monarch, how much more then may the government of the Churches, by
Pastors and Elders be adjudged Monarchical, by reason the same is deduced from
our heavenly and everlasting Monarch. For the reverend Bb. by their public
preachings, and apologeticall Ma. Horn, Bishop of Winch. Ma. Jewel, Bishop
of Sali. May. Bilson, Bishop of Winch.
writings testify, that power and authority to ordeine and depose Ministers;
to excommunicate and to absolve; to devise and to establishe rites and
ceremonies in the church; to define what is truth; to pronounce what is
falsehood; to determine what is schism; and to condemn what is heresy: our
reverend Bb. (I say) confess this power, to be originallie decided, unto the
true Bishops, and Pastors of the Church from the Kingly and Sovereign power
of our Savior Christ. By what name therefore soever the gouvernment of
Pastors and Elders in the Churches be called, there is no manner of cause to
dislike of the planting of that government in a Monarchy, because the same is
instituted by the Monarch of Monarchs, who is able, and ready, to uphold the
state of al Monarchies in commonweals, together with the state of
Aristocracie in his No cause for a Monarch to fear, that his Christian
subjects should have the sense of Aristocracie in Church government.
Church. Neither is there any cause for any Monarch in the world, to fear the
making of christian common people, by familiar experience, to have the sense
and feeling of the principles and reasons of Aristocracie.

For if a people have once submitted their necks to the yoke of Christ, they
can live a peaceable and godly life, under all kinds of powers, because they
know all kind of powers, to be the ordenance of God. But especially, there is
not, neither ever was, neither ever can there be, any cause for any King, or
Monarch of England, greatly (as the Admonitor insinuates) to fear, that the
common people, will very easily transfer the principles, and reasons of
Aristocracie, to the government of the common weal; and thereupon be induced
to think that they have injury, if they have not as much to do in civil
matters, as they have in matters of the Church, seeing they also touch their
commodity and benefit temporallie, as the other does spirituallie. And certes
it seems that the Admonitor was drawn very dry of reason, when he was feign
to pluck this stake from the hedge, to make a fire, and to kindle the wrath of
the Magistrate, against the form of discipline, by Pastors and Elders. For
whether he intends that the Pastors and Elders will think them selves to
have injury, if they deal not in all causes of the common weal, as well as
in all causes of their churches; or whether he meant, that the common people,
will easily transfer, the government of the common weal, from a Kingly
Monarchy, to a noble Aristocracie, there is neither soothnes nor soundnes in
his meaning. For sithence Pastors disclaim to deal in civil matters.
the learned Ministers against the reverend Bishopps by the holy rules of our
faith, mainteyne that it is not lawful for a Minister of the Gospel, to
exercise civil magistracy, and that it is not lawful for the man of God, to
be entangled with the affairs of this life; how is it probable, that those
Ministers will easily oppugn their own knowledge, by their own contrary
practice? Or how is it probable, that they would overloade them selves with
that burden, to ease the Church whereof they have contentedly exposed the^
selves into a number of reproaches, contempts, bytings, and persecutions? As for
that other intendement of the Admonitors, that it is greatly to be feared,
that the common people will easily transfer Monarchy, unto Democracie, or
Aristocracie, if the principles and reason thereof, by experience, were made
familiar in their minds. this reason (I say) might seem to carry some show
of affrighting a Monarch, if the same were insinuated unto a king, whose people
were never acquainted with the principles and reasons of Democracie, or
Aristocracie: but this fear being insinuated unto our late Souveraigne Lady
the Queen, whose people ever since the time they first began to be a people,
have had their wits long exercised, with the The people of England have their
wits exercised with the sense of Democracie and Aristocrarie
sense and feeling, of the reasons and principles, as well of Democracie, as
also of Aristocracie, what sense had the Admonitor to urge this fear? That in
the Kingdom of England, the common people have already the sense and feeling
of the reasons and principles of Democracie, cannot be denied. For in every
cause almost, as well of criminal, as civil justice (some few only excepted)
to be executed in the common weal, by the common laws of the Realm, have they
not some hand, and dealing in the same, by one means or other? Nay which is
more, have they not the sense and feeling, of the making, and vnmaking their
own laws in Parleament? And is not their consultation in Parleament, a mere
Democraticall consultation? As much also there is to be avowed, for the sense,
and feeling of the reasons, and principles of Aristocracie, to be already in
the minds of the Peers, the Nobles, the Judges, and other great men of the
Realm. For are not the Wisest, the Noblest, and the Chiefest taken out of
these, by the King, to be of his Counsel, and to be Judges and Iusticers in
his Courts? Yea, and is not their assembly also in Parleament, a mere
Aristocraticall assembly? And what translation then is there greatly to be
feared, out of the Church to be made into the common weal, when the minds of
all sorts of our common wealthes-men, be already seasoned, with the things
which he fears? And when the common weal is already seysed of the
principles and reasons, which he would not have familiarly known unto it.
Wherefore that the King, the Nobles, and commons, may no more be scarred, with
the strangenes of these uncouth, and unknown greek names, of Democracie, and
Aristocracie, written in his book with great and capital letters; I have
thought it my duty, by these presents to inform them, that the government of
the church by Pastors and Elders now wanting amongst us, and desired to be
brought into the Church, by the Souveraine authority of our King, Nobles, and
commons in Parleament (for the outward form and manner thereof) is none other
manner of government, nor form of The manner of policy, by Pastors and Elders
in the Church, is agreeable to the government in the commonweal
policy, the^ such as they, and their progenitors and Ancestors, for many
hundred years together, without interruption, have used and enjoyed in the
common weal. And that therefore it will be a very easy matter, to transfer
the same, to the government of the Church. For by the reasons and principles of
their own government, in the common weal, and by the sense, and feeling
thereof, they may well be induced, to think, that they have injury, if they
have not as much to do in matters of the Church, as they have to do in
matters of the common weal, seeing they touch their commodity and benefitt
spiritually, as the other does temporally. And withal on the other side, I
shall do my best endeavor, to advertise them that the government of the
Church by Prelacie, is such a manner of government, as was never yet The
government of the Church by Prelacie, disagreeable to the government used in
the common weal.
in the administration of justice by any subject (no not touching the outward
form thereof) once admitted into any part of common weal: and that therefore
the same (if it may please the King) will very easily be sent, and
transmarined unto Rome, from whence it first came, and where it had it
original and birthright. And to the end, that we may clearelie discern,
whether the nature of the government of the Church by Prelacie, or the nature of
the government, desired to be planted by Pastors and Elders, be more agreeable to
the nature of the policy, received and used both by the Nobles, and common
people, in the common weal; it is necessary that the manners and forms, both
of Prelaticall, and Pastoral government, be made familiar unto the mind of
the Reader. And because we have already declared, the manner of the election,
and confirmation both of a Bishopp, into his Episcopal Sea, and of a Minister,
into his Pastoral charge; what the one is by the law already established,
and what the other, by a law desired to be established, ought to be, we will
not any more speak of their entrance, into either of their places, unless only
(a little to recreate the Reader) we merely note what answer some Bb. have
made, when as long chasing after Bishoprics, they have chafed in their minds,
for fear of loosing their pray: as was the answer of that Italian Bishopp,
The answer of an Italian Bishop, loath to loose his Bishopric.
who being thrice demanded of the Archb. (as the manner is) vis Episcopari?
vis Episcopari? vis Episcopari? and being willed by one standing by, thrice
again to answer (as the manner is) nolo, nolo, nolo. He making no bones at
the matter, answered aloude with an oath, Proh Deum, dedine ego tot milia
Florenorum, pro volo Episcopari, and iam debeo dicere nolo? or as was the
answer of that English Bishop, who having promised a Courtier one annuitie of
xx. pound, during The answer of an English Bishop, having obtained his
congedelier.
his life, out of his Bishopric, if he could procure the speedy sealing of
his congedelier: within a while after, when it was sealed, he rapt out an oath,
and swear by Jesus God, that the same Gentleman had done more for him, then an
other great Courtier, who before hand, for that purpose, had received from him
one thousand marks: But whether all Bishops buy their congedeliers dearer,
or better cheap, is not a matter incident to this treatise; only if they buie
dear, they may happily think with them selves, that they may sell dear,
vendere iure potest, emerat ille prius, sets not any price upon any wares
in the Royal exchange. But to return to our purpose, whence by occasion of
those Bishoplie oaths and answers, we have a little digressed: let us see
what is the manner The manner of the administration of spiritual justice in the
Church, by Prelacie.
and form, of the administration of spiritual justice, in the government of
the Church, by Prelacie, as the same is ordinarily administered, in all places
throughout the Church of England. Wherein that we be not mistaken, it is to be
understood, that the manner of administration of justice, whereof we speak, is
that administration of justice only, which respects the punishment of
crimes eccllesiasticall to be inflicted by spiritual censures. In all which
cases, penances, suspension, and excommunications, in the Bishops consistory,
proceed from the judgment, and authority of the Bishop alone, if he be
present, or from the sentence and power of his Vicar general, or Co^missarie
alone, if he be absent: Nay does not everi such censure likewise in the
Archdeacons consistory, proceed from the sole authority of the Archdeacon?
or if he be absent, from the sole authority of his official? But if the like
course of the execution of Justice as this is, can not be found, to be an
ordinary course of Justice, in the common weal, where Justice is administered
in criminal causes, by the ministry of a subject: I would feign learn, what
prejudice may be feared to redound unto the common weal, if the administration
of spiritual Justice (after a sort) were established, to be after the same
manner in the Church, after which civil Justice is already practiced in the
common weal. I said after a sort, to this end, least I should be mistaken.
For the meaning is not, that spiritual Justice should be ministered exactly,
in No one subject in the common weal, can alone exercise civil justice, in
causes criminal.
every respect, after the manner of civil Justice, but the comparison stands
only in this; that, as not any one temporal subject alone has authority to
hear, to examine, and to judge any one criminal cause, in any Court of civil
justice, in the common weal; so likewise that not any one spiritual person
alone should have authority, to be examiner and judge of any one criminal
cause in any Court of spiritual Justice in the Church. For if certain
principal The administration of spiritual Justice, by Pastors and Elders,
agreeable to the execution of civil justice in the common weal.
and godly persons, associated unto a learned and zealous Pastor, in the
presence, and with the consent and authority of the people of every Parish,
did enjoin penance, suspend, or excommunicate a spiritual offender, were not
this form of administration of spiritual justice, more consonant, agreeable,
and conformable, to the daily execution of civil Justice in the Courts of the
common weal, then is the administration of spiritual Justice, by the Bishopp
alone, or by his Vicar general alone, in his Consistory? and to make this
matter more familiar in the mind of the Reader, for an insta^ce or two let us
suppose, that May. Doctor Bancroft were still Parson of S. Andros Master D.
Bancroft with his assista^ts letter, able to repress Puritanes in one Parish,
then Master D. Stanhope alone, to repress all in a Diocese.
in Holborne, and that he had chosen Master Harsnet to be his Curat, and
withal that May. Dodge, Ma. Merbury, Master Flower, and Master Brisket, (all
chief attendants on his late great Lord and Master) were inhabitants within
the same Parish, and that the chief men, of the same Parish, had chosen those
to be assistants to him, and to his Curat, for the inquisition of the
demeanours of all the Puritanes and Precisians within his Parish; let this (I
say) be supposed, would not he and they (trow we) think it a high scorn,
and an indignity to be offered unto their Maisterships, in case it should be
insinuated, that Master Doctor Stanhope, were better able, with one little
blast of breath, upon a piece of paper, to blow away all Puritanisme, out of
the City and Diocese of London, then these great Chaplins, and discrete
gentlemen, with their thundrings, and with their lightnings, were able to
fright the same out of one poor Parish in Holborn? And again, to make this
matter yet a little more familiar to the mind of the Reader, let us suppose
again that thundering May. Merburie now Lecturer in in the church of Saint
Mary O^eris, were Pastor of the same church, and had, to be his assistants in
the Ministry but simple M. Butterto^, and that they two, for the Elders of the
same Church, to be chosen by the Parish, had such, and such, and such, and such
men lovers, of all honesty and godliness, and enemies unto all dishonestie, and
ungodliness; could not these learned and grave Ministers, with the assistants of
such wise and godly Borough-maisters, be as well able, to reform Papists,
Atheists, swearers, prophaners of the Sabbath, Drunkerds, adulterers, and such
like, within the Borough of Southwark; as is Master Doctor Ridley, to bring to
any good amendment of life, all such kind of persons, within the whole
Diocese of Winchester? If the examination and judgment of all theeueries,
pickeries, burglaries, robberies, murders and such like, were committed to
Master Doctor Ridley alone, for the Diocese of Winchester, and to Master D.
Stanhope alone for the Diocese of London, were it not like, that for one such
malefactor, as there is now, we should shorthly have an hundred? And therefore
to hold us still to the point in question, it is very plain and evident, that
this manner of spiritual Justice, mentioned to be executed, by the Pastors and
Elders, is more correspondent, to the administration of civil Justice, in the
common weal, then is that manner of the execution of spiritual Justice, by
Doctor Stanhope or Doctor Ridley; by the Bishop of London, or by the Bishop
of Winchester. For to begin with our meanest, and basest Courts, let the^ show
unto us, any Court, Leete, Law-days, or Sherifs turns, within Matters in Leets
and Lawdayes not ouerruled by one alone.
any County, City, Town, Borough, Village, or Hamblet within the Realm,
wherein matters of civil Justice are heard, examined, and adjudged by one man
alone. If for the common benefit of the Tenants against incrochme^ts,
ouerlaying of commons, wast, nuisances, or such like, any pain is to be
offered, or presentment made, the same is not set or made, by the Steward,
Sherif, or other Officer alone, but by the common voice and consent of all the
homagers, and suitors to the Court. The Steward indeed is the director, and
moderator of the Court, the giver of the charge, and the mouth of the whole
assembly, to pronounce and enact the whole work of their meeting, but he is
not the only inquisitor, the presentor, the informer, or the Judge, to dispose
all things according to his own discretion. Besides, matters of the Kings
peace, are not committed in any County, or other place within the Realm, only
to one Justice of the peace alone. For neither at the general Breaches of the
Kings peace, not punishable by one alon
Sessions of the peace, nor at any other less public meetings, any person,
for any offense, (whereof he stands indighted, or for which he is punishable)
can be fined, amerced, or bodily punished, at the discretion of one Justice
alone, but by the greatest part of the Justices assembled, his penalty is to
be imposed upon him. Furthermore, this manner of the examination of the fact,
and declaration of the law, for the trial of the fact, and judgment of the
law, does not reside in the breast of one Iuror or Judge alone. In the Court
of the Kings Bench, if a prisoner be brought to the Bar, and confess not
the crime, Justice in any of the B. Courts, is not executed by one Judge alone
by the Justice of that Court he can receive no judgment, unless he be first
indicted, by inquisition of 12. grand Jurors at the least, and afterward again
be tried by other 12. brought iudicially into the Court face to face. Yea and
in this Court, neither the interpretation of the common law, nor the exposition
of any statute depends upon the opinion, credit, or authority of one Judge,
no not of the Kings chief Justice him self alone; for his other three
brethren and Co-juges; varying from him in point of law, may lawfully overruled
the Court. The same manner of judgment, for the law is in use, and is practiced
by the Judges, in the Court of common Pleas, and by the Barons of the
Exchecquer in the Latin Court of the Exchecquer. And not only in these
Courts of law and In ye Courts of Equity are many assistances.
Justice, but also in all the Kings Courts of equity and conscience; it is
not to be seen that any one person alone, has any absolute power, without
assistants, finally to order, judge, and decree, any cause apperteining to the
jurisdiction of those Courts. In the Court of Requests, there are not fewer
then two, Court of Requests.
yea some times three, or four, with Master of Requests in commission, to
hear and determine matters of equity in that Court. In the Court of Wards
and liveries, there sits not only the Court of Wards.
Master of the Wards, but also the Kings Attorney, the Receaver and other
Officers of the same Court. In Court of the chequer Chamber.
the Court of the Checquer-chamber, with the Lord Thresorer, (who is chief
and President of that Council) yet with him as assistants, do sit the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Lord chief Baron, and the other Barons.
Whatsoever decree final is made in the Kings High court of Chancerie.
high Court of Chancerie, the same is decreed, not by the Lord Chancelour
alone, but by the Lord Chancelour, and the high Court of Chancerie: wherein the
Master of the Roles, and the twelfe Masters of the Chancerie as coadiutors,
do sit and give assistance. In the most honorable Court of Starre-cha^ber,
the Court of Starre-cha^ber. 3. H. 7. c. 1. and. 21. H. 8. c. 20.
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Thresaurer, and the President of the Kings most
honorable Counsel, and keeper of the Kings privy Seal, or two of them,
calling unto them one Bishop, and one temporal Lord, of the Kings most
honorable Council, the two chief Justices of the Kings bench, and common
Pleas for the time being, or other two of the Kings Justices in their absence,
have full power and authority, to punish, after their demerits, all misdoers
being found colpable before them. If we search our statutes (besides the
Courts, and matters determinable in these spoken of before) we shall find, that
the complaints of error, whether it touch the King, or any other person, 31. E
3. c. 21
made in the Exchecquer, should be done to come before the Chancellor, and
Treasurer, who taking to them two Justices, and other sage persons, are duly
to examine the business; and, if any error be found to correct, and amend the
Roles, etc. By reason of delays of judgments, used in the Chauncerie, in the
14. E. 3. c 5
Kings bench, common bench, and in the Exchecquer, it was assented,
established, and accorded, that a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons chosen by
the Parleame^t, by good advise of the Chancelour, etc. shall proceed to take a
good accord and to make a good judgment. When it was complained unto the King.
that the profits, etc. of his Realm by ^0. K. 2. c. 1
some great Officers, etc. were much withdrawn and cloyned, etc. it pleased
the King, etc. to commit the surveighing, as well of the estate, etc. of his
house, etc. unto the honorable Fathers in God, William Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Alexander Archbishop of York, etc. by a statute of commission
for 6. H. 6.
Sewers: by a statute for punishment of 11. H. 5. c. 25.
perjury: by a statut against making or executing of acts, or ordinances, by
any 19 H. 7. c. 7.
Masters, etc. being not examined, etc. by the Lord Chancelour, Treasurer, or
chief Justices, etc. By a statute for the erection of the Court of 27. H. 8. c
27.
Augme^tation: by a statute for erection of the Court of first 32. H. c. 45.
fruits and tenthes: and lastly by an 27. Eli. c. 8
act for redress of erroneous judgments in the Court commonly called the
Kings Bench: By all these statutes (I say) it is very apparent; that the
Administration of public affairs, in the common weal, has never been
usually committed, to the advisemnet, discretion, or definitive sentence, of
any one man alone. Which point is yet more fully, and more perfectly Lord
president, and counsel in Wales. Lord president and counsel in the North
parts Lord Deputy, and counsel in Irelande. The King, and his honorable
privy Counsel
to be understood, by the establishment, and continuance, of the Kings Lord
President and Council in Wales; of the Kings Lord President and Counsel
established for the North; of the Kings Lord Deputy and Council within the
Realm of Irelande; of the Kings Highness most honorable privy Council,
chosen by him for the assistance of his Royal person, in matters apperteyning
to his Kingly estate; and lastly of the supreme and grand Council of the
three estates in Parleament, for matters concerning The King and his grand
Counsel in Parleament.
the Church, the King, and the common Weal. For whether respect be had unto
the secret affairs of the Kings estate, consulted upon in his Highness
Council Chamber, by his privy Counsaylors, or whether we regard the public
tractation of matters in Parleament, there can be no man so simple, as not to
know, both these privy and open negotiatio^s, to be carried by most voices of
those persons, who by the King are called to those honorable assemblies. And
what a vain iangling then does the Admonitor keep, and how idly and
wranglingly does he dispute; when against the government of the church by
Pastors and Elders, he obiecteth, that the same will interrupt the laws of
the Realm: that it will be great occasion of partial and affectionate dealing,
that some will incline to one part, and that the residue wilbee wrought to
favor the other; and that thereby it will be a matter of strife, discord,
schism and heresies? Howbeit if never any of these extremities and dangers,
have fallen out in the common weal, by any partial or affectionate dealing of
the Kings Deputies, Presidents, Judges, Iusticers, and other Officers and
Ministers, associated unto the^ for the administration of Justice, or equity
in any of the Kings civil Courts; how much less cause have we to fear any
partiality, affection, working inclination, favor, strife, debate,
schismatic or heretical opinions, if once Pastors and Elders in every
Congregation, and not thoroughout a Diocese one Bishop alone, had the
spiritual administration of the Churchcauses? Can many temporal Officers,
Iusticers and Judges, rightly and indifferently administer the law, and execute
justice and judgment, without that, that some do incline to one part, and
without that the residue be wrought to favor the other part? And cannot
spiritual Officers dispatch spiritual affairs, without that, that they be
partially and affectionally disposed? What? is it so easy a matter that the
Ancients of God, and the Ministers of Christ, can the one part incline to
righteousness, and the residue be wrought to favor wickedness? can some incline
to God and unto Christ; and can other some be wrought to follow Satan and
Antichrist? For what other controversy, is required to be decided by Pastors
and Elders, then the controversy of sin, between the soul of man, and his
God? And is there any Christian Pastor or Elder, that will be wrought, rather to
favor the sin of a mortal man, then the glory of his immortal God? But to
leave the state of the Kingdom and common weal, and the good vsages and
customs of the same; let us come to the state of the Church it self, and to
the lawful government thereof, established even amongst us at this day. The
government of the Church, ought not to be, by one alone.
For whatsoever our reverend Bishops practice to the contrary, yet touching
ordination and deposition of Ministers; touching excommunication and
absolution; touching the order and rule of Colleges, Cathedral churches, and
the Universities, the ecclesiastical law does not commit the administration of
these things, and regiment of these places, to any one person alone. The
Universities admit not the government of the Chancelour being present, nor of
his Vicechancelour The government in the Universities not by one alone.
(him self being absent) as of one alone: the Doctors, Procurators, Regents,
and non-Regents, have all voices, and, by most of their voices, the University
causes take success. The businesses The government in Colleges not by one alone.
of Colleges, by the statutes of their founders, are commended to the industry
and fidelity of the President, Vice President, and fellows; unto the Provost,
Viceprovost, and fellows; unto the Warden, Sub-warden, and fellows; unto the
Master and follows: and unto such like Officers and fellows. The Cathedral
The government in Cathedral churches, not by one alone.
churches their livings, and their lands, their revenues and their dividents,
their chapiters, and their conferencies, depend upon the will and disposition
of the Deane and Chapter, and not of the Bishop alone. Neither can the
Bishop Ex. de exces. Prela. c. (...). Exc. de (...) quaes. cons. cap c. novit.
alone, by any ancient canon law (pretended to be in force) place, or
displace, excommunicate, or absolve, any ecclesiastical person, without the
judgment of the Chapter. And as well by a statute 21. H. 8. c. 13. as also by
the book of consecrating Archbishops, etc. the presence of diverse Ministers,
and the people is required, at the ordination of every Minister. As for the
deposition, or degradation of Ministers (under the correction whether the
degradation of a Minist. be warantable.
of the reverend Bb. be it spoken) I think, they have not so much as any
color of any law for it. The form of the degradation of a Popish and
sacrificing Priest, by the canon law can be no pretexte to degrade a Minister
of the Monsieur de Plesis 164. in the second book of the Mass.
Gospel, because a Minister of the Gospel is not set into his charge, per
calicem, and patinam, with a cup full of wine, and dish full of hosts: Neither
receaveth he any charecter at al of a shaveling Priest. And because a Minister
of the Gospel, is ordained only after that manner, which the statute law
has appointed, how should the ordination made by so high an authority, be
undone by any other power? unto the former manners, of the administration of the
causes of the Universities, Colleges, and Cathedral churches, may be added
the execution of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, committed heretofore by the
Queen unto the ecclesiastical Commissioners. For althoug by the words of the
statute, her Highness had full power, and authority, The ecclesiastical
commission exercised by many commissioners, and not by one.
by her letter patents, to assign, name, and authorize, any one person, a
natural borne subject, to execute spiritual jurisdiction; yet nevertheless,
according to the laudable vsages, and customs of her kingdom, and Courts
temporal, she evermore authorized, not one alone, but diverse and sundry,
as well temporal, as ecclesiastical persons, for the execution thereof. Which
manner of commission, because the reverend Bb. commend the same, and avowe that
it would do more good, if it were more common, it cannot but seem, to be a
most grateful thing, unto all good men, especially unto those reverend
Fathers, if humbly we beseech the King, that his Highness would be pleased, to
make it more common. And therefore, in the The ecclesiastical commission
commanded by the Bb. if it please ye king may be enlarged unto all Parishes
wherein are godly preaching Ministers.
behalf, as well of the reverend Bb. as of all the learned and grave Doctors,
and Pastors of every church, we most insta^tly entreat our most gracious
Souverayne Lord the King, that where in any Parish, there shall be found a
learned preaching Minister, resident upon his benefice, that there he would be
pleased by his authority Royal, under the broad Seal, to enable him, and some
other godly and faithful Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens,
Borough-Maisters, or other chief men of the same Parish, to execute spiritual
Justice against dru^kards, adulterers, swearers, raylers, and such like
ecclesiastical offenders, inhabitants only within the same Parish. For in
this case we say, as the reverend Bb. say, bonum quo communius, eo melius. If
any No exception to be taken against lay Elders to be authorized by the king in
every Parish; sithence the king authorizeth lay Elders, in every
ecclesiastical commission.
exception should be taken, or challenge made scoffinglie, and with scornful
terms, against these lay parochians, as heretofore has bin used, against lay
elders, or lay Aldermen (as they call the^) let him that takes such exception,
advise him self well, and remember before he speak, that in speaking he
control not the policy, the practice, the wisdom, and the authority, both of
our late Queen deceased, and of our Souverayne Lord the King now reigning; who
authorized, and does authorize laymen to be ecclesiastical commissioners.
Which kind of lay men, or lay Elders (as they call them) that they have joined
in the exercise of the chiefest censure of the Church, viz. excommunication,
with ecclesiastical persons, has bin already proved, by the sentence of
excommunication pronounced against E. by Master W. and his associates, whereof
diverse were laie-men. Again if one lay Elder dwelling at Winchester, may call
and ssociate unto him self, one ecclesiastical Elder, dwellinge at S. Georges
in Southwarke, to excommunicate any Parochian or Minister subject unto the
jurisdiction of the Archdeaco^ of Surrey, in what Parish soever of the same
jurisdiction the party shall dwell: if it be lawful (I say) Discipline of
excommunication exercised by one lay Elder and one ecclesiastiall Elder.
for every ordinary, to join one lay Elder, and one ecclesiastical Elder,
together in commission, the one to pronounce sentence of contumacie, the other
to denounce sentence of excommunication, for every spiritual contumacie,
committed within his jurisdiction; what reason can any man pretend, why it
should not, be much more lawful, for the King by his Royal authority, to
apoint a learned, and preaching Pastor with the assistance of some company of
faithful inhabitants of the same Parish, to exercise all manner of spiritual
justice within their own parish?

If the King shall stand in doubt, whether any Discipline by excommunication be
exercised, after this, and this manner, in the church of England, then to put
his Highness out of all doubt hereof, may it please the King to consider the
precept of the reverend Bishops made in their convocation; together with the
practice of the venerable Archdeacon of Surr. following. The precept is this;
Vnusquisque Articlo pro clero. c. de quibusdam circa excom: excessib. coercend:
1584.
Vicarius generalis, officialis, seu Commissarius, qui ordines ecclesiastico;
non susceperit, eruditum aliquem presbyterum, sibi accerset, and associabit,
qui sufficienti authoritate, vel ab ipso Episcopo, in jurisdiction sua, vel ab
Archidiacono (presbytero existente) in jurisdiction sua munitus, idque ex
praescripto iudicis tunc praesentis, excommunicationis sententiam pro
contumacia denunciabit. Every Vicar general, Official, or Commissarie, which
has not taken upon him, ecclesiastical orders, shall call and associate unto
him some learned Presbyter, who being armed with sufficient authority from the
Bishopp in his jurisdiction, or from the Archdeacon, being a Presbyter in his
jurisdiction, shall denounce, and that by the prescript of the Judge present,
the sentence of excommunication for contumacie. Now the manner of the D. Hones
practice of the Bishopps article.
practice of this precept, ensues in these words: Johannes Hone, legum
Doctor, Officialis venerabilis viri domini Archidiaconi Surr. omnibus and
singulis rectoribus, etc. salutem. Cum nos rite and legitime procedentes, omnes
and singulos quorum nomina, etc. in no^ comparendo coram nobis, etc. seu saltem
in non satisfaciendo mandatis nostris, etc. pronunciaverimus contumaces,
ipsosque, etc. excommunicandos fore decreverimus. Cumque discretus vir magister
Roll. Allen presbyter, eosde^ omnes and singulos subscriptos, ex officio nostro
excommunicaverit in scriptis iusticia id exigente, vobis igitur committimus,
etc. quatenus eos omnes, etc. sicut prefertur ex officio nostro mero
exco^municatos fuisse and esse, etc. palam denuncietis, etc. Datum sub sigillo
officialitatis nostrae, 19. die Decembris Anno Domini 1587. John Hone Doctor of
the Laws, Official of the venerable man, the Archdeacon of Surr. to all and
singular persons, etc. greeting: Whereas we, otherwise rightly, and lawfully
proceeding, all and singular whose na^^s are underwritten, in not appearing
before us, or at leastwise, in not satisfying our mandates, have pronounced
contumacious, and decreed them to be excommunicated: And whereas also the
discrete man M. Rouland Allen presbyter, out of our office, has
excommunicated, all and singular under written, justice so requiringe,
wherefore we charge you that openly you denounce, and declare them, and
every of them, so as aforesaid out of our office to be excommunicated. Given
under the seal of our officialitie. The 19. day of December. 1587.

By this practice, it does appear, that Doctor Hone, and Rouland Allen
canvased many poor men very piteously. And that this poor curate Rouland
Allen, had a warm service, to attend upon Doctor Hone, and to ierk those,
whose points soever he should untie. But because this precept, was an article
concluded upon, by the reverend Bishopps, in their convocation, and confirmed
(as I suppose) by the Royal authority of our late Queen, we will forbear,
to speak what we think, might justly be spoken, against the inco^gruitie
thereof. Only this without offense, to the reverend Bishops, we may safely
demand: sithence every ordinary, whether he be a Bishopp, or a presbyter, by
this article of their own devise, has such an absolute power, resiant in his
person, as that thereby, thoroughout his whole jurisdiction, he may thus
commit, the execution of discipline, by excommunication, partly to one lay
person, and partly to one ecclesiastical person, partly to a supposed
spiritual Elder, and partly to a lay Elder: sithence (I say) this is so; we
may safely demand, what reason they can produce, to hinder the King, from
having authority, to co^mande three, or fo^re, or (if occasion The King,
hathas good right to command, excommunication, to be exercised, by a Pastor
and Elders, as ye Bb. have to commit the same to a Curate, and one lay Elder.
serve) five or six lay Elders (as they call them) and one spiritual Pastor,
being a true spiritual Elder in deed, all lawfully chosen ecclesiastical
Officers in the house of God, that they jointly should not execute the
discipline of Christ, viz. excommunication and other censures of the church, in
every Parish within his Kingdom? If it be answered, that in this case, the
Presbyter alone does excommunicate, is it not, as if one should say, that the
executioner does give judgment when at the commandment of the Judge, he smites
of the head, or casts down the ladder? or may not as much be said, for the
excommunication whereof we speak, that the Pastor only should excommunicate,
when by virtue of his office, with the consent, and not by the prescript of the
Elders associated unto him, he should declare and pronounce the party to be
excommunicated? But let it be granted, that Rouland Allen, denounces the
lesson which is written in the paper, for him to read; yet is it clear by the
precept, that the same must be done, by the prescript of Doctor Hone. Besides
Doctor Hone, he cites; he precognizateth, the parties, and they being absent,
he pronounces them contumaciter absentes, and in paenam contumaciarum suarum
huiusmodi, decrees them to be excommunicate: and are not al these necessary
parts incident to the execution of discipline by excommunication? And how then
can the Minister, be said to excommunicate alone, when Doctor Hone of
necessity must play three parts of the four; without all, or without any one
of which parts, the excommunication by reason of a nullitie, is merely void?
Again, the act being done as it were vno puncto, at vno halitu, and Rouland
Allen, and Doctor Hone, having their commission from the Archdeacon, in
solidum, how can their judgment be divided? Furthermore to say that Rouland
Allen does excommunicate, by the authority of Doct. Hone, were to overthrowe
the intendement of the article: Because by the scope of the article, it is
plain, that the Presbyter, to be associated to the official, must only
derive his authority from one, who has taken ecclesiastical orders. But
those orders Doctor Hone never took, otherwise Rouland Allens presence, had
been unnecessary and superfluous. And therefore if the excommunication be of
any validity, the^ is discipline, by excommunication in the Church of England
exercised, partly by one lay Elder (as they call him) and partly by one
Ecclesiastical Elder; wherein again, it is worthy the observation, for the
matter we have in hand; that Doctor Hone, a mere lay and temporal man, has
authority from the Archdeacon, to call, and associate unto him, and to
prescribe Roll. Allen a Presbiter, and an other man's hireling Curate in
Southwark, to excommunicate, not only the Parochians, of an other Pastors
charge, but also any other Pastor whatsoever subject to the Archdeacons
jurisdiction. And has not the Kings Highness then, as good right, as great a
privilege, and as high a prerogative, to command Master Doctor Andros, or
Master Doctor King, and lay Elders, by a lawful election to be associated
unto either of them to excommunicate either of their own Parishioners, for
public drunkenness, or other notorious sins, committed in their own Parish?
For if it be lawful, at the voice of a lay stranger, that an hireling and
stipendary Curate, should chase an other man's sheep out of his own fold, how
much more is it lawful, that a true sheepherde, should disciplinate his own
sheep, feeding and couchant within his own pasture and within his own fold?

Furthermore touching the admittance of governing Elders, or lay Elders (as
they call them) unto the Minister of every congregation, according to the
former pattern of one lay Elder, that the same is not, a matter so strange,
for lay men to be joined in this charge of ecclesiastical government, as the
opposites Lay men appointed by the Queens iniuuctions, to execute some part of
discipline.
bear us in hand to be: it shall not be amiss, to call unto their
reme^brances, one of our late Sovereign the Queens iniuctions, whereby
certain lay persons called overseers, were commanded, to be chosen by the
ordinaries, in every Parish for the better retayning of the people in
obedience, unto divine service. In every Parish (says the Iniunction) three
or four discrete men, which tender Gods glory, and his true religion, shall
be appointed, by the ordinaries, diligently to see, that all the parishioners
duly resort, unto their Church, upon all Sundays, and holy days and there
to continue, the whole time, of the godly service. And all such as shall be
negligent, in resorting to the Church, having no great, or urgent cause of
absence, they shall streightlie, call upon them, and after due admonition, if
they amend not, they shall denounce them to the ordinary. Thus far the
iniuction. Which, that it is not meant of the Church Wardens, appears by the
very next article; for unto them, as is assigned an other name, so also
another Office. That sidemen also, are not these kind of overseers, is plain,
in that they be neither so many in number, as are here required, neither
chosen by the ordinaries; neither yet do they admonish and denounce, according
to this article. Wherefore because it is meet, that the effect of this
Iniunction, being religious, should be put in due execution, it seems a
thing very reasonable, and much tending to the honor of the King, that his
Highness, under his letters patents would be pleased, to appoint three, four,
or more discrete and faithful persons in every Parish, not only to perform
the effect of this article, but also generally to oversee the life and manners
of the people, that without great and urgent causes they resort not unto
Typling-houses, or houses of evil note, and suspected fame; and that upon the
Sabboths, they use no Heathnish dancing, about their disguised May-poles: And
after due admonition if they amend not, to denou^ce them to the Pastor of the
place. For then might the Pastor be encouraged, to give Book of the form of
ordeining Priests.
his faithful diligence, as at the time of his ordination, he solemnly
promises unto the Bishop, always to Minister the Doctrine and Sacraments,
and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded; by which words inserted
in the book, there is a plain and open confession made by all estates in
Parleament, that Christ has not only established Every Minister ought to
minister ye discipline of Christ in his own cure, by consent of parleament.
discipline, but a certain form of discipline, in his Church, and that the
Pastor to whom the care, and charge is committed to teach the people, ought to
minister the same discipline. For it had been a very absurd part for the
Parleament, to appoint the Bishop, to receive a promise from the Minister, to
minister the discipline of Christ, if Christ had not instituted a Discipline;
or that the same discipline, which he instituted, had not in their judgments
belonged unto the Minister. And therefore this very letter of the book
co^vinceth the whole answer made unto the abstract, touching this point to be
very erroneous, frivolous and impertinent, to the point in question; For
whereas in the abstract, it is alleged, that the Bishop by virtue of The
Minister by promise binds himself to Minister the discipline of Christ.
the order and form appointed, by act of Parleament, binds the Minister,
as well to minister the discipline of Christ, within his cure, as the doctrine
and Sacraments of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, etc. hereunto first he
answers that these clauses do not dispositively, Page 55. Page 60.
ordain any thing for discipline, as though the law meant, by authority
hereof, to establish, that the order in these things, by the Realm received,
should be holden as agreeablie to the word of God, but must be taken
enunciatively, to declare and affirm, that following the order by law
established, they should do agreeable to Gods will. But alas what repugnancie
is there heard? for how Regugnance in the answer to the abstract.
can the law declare and affirm, that the Ministers following the order by
law established, shall do agreeablie to Gods will, if the order in these
things, by the Realm received, should not (by the meaning of the law) be
holden as agreeable to the word of God? What? does the law mean, that a man
can do agreeably to Gods will, in any thing, which is not agreeable to his
word? or if the law have established, an order in the discipline, which is not
agreeable to Gods word, shall the Ministers do agreeably to Gods will, if
they follow the Law? For the meaning of the law is plain, viz. that the
Minister by virtue of his promise made to the Bishop, shall be no further bound
to minister any Doctrine, Sacraments or Discipline received by the Realm,
unless the Realm have received the same, according to the commandment of God.
For the Parleame^t having a religious consideration, that the Minister of
Christ, must not have so much respect, what the law of the Realm, as what the
law of God comma^deth, carefully provided for his indemnitie in this behalf.

Besides, what a frivolous comment, has he made upon the words of the A
frivolous comment upon the words of the boo^e of ordeining Priests, etc.
book, when he says, that these words of the Bishopp, do not dispositiuely
ordeyne any thing for discipline? When as the question is not whether the Bb.
words, but whether the law and book dispose any thing for discipline? For the
Bishop being but a serva^t to the book, and to the law, and one unto whose
fidelity the execution of the law and book is committed, though he do not by
his words, dispose any thing of Discipline; yet by his demand, he shows
unto the Minister, that the office of the Ministration of discipline, within
his cure and charge, is committed unto him, and that by his ordination, his
person is fully enabled, as well to minister the Discipline, as to preach the
doctrine of Christ. And hereupon also falls to the ground, his other answer,
as wholly impertinent to the point in question. For where he says, that the
Law meant not, by authority hereof, to establish that the order of these
things, by the Realm received, should be holden as agreeable to the word of
God; this (I say) seems wholly to be impertinent to the purpose of the
abstract. For there is no such thing insinuated, The answer to ye abstract
wholly impertinent to the point in question.
to be intended by the statute: only the scope of the Authors drift, in that
place seems to be this: viz. That every Minister, by virtue of his promise,
enjoined by act of Parleament, to be made by him, and by the office of
ministry taken upon him, at the time of his ordination, has bound him self,
to minister the doctrine, sacraments and discipline of Christ, as the Lord
has commanded. And what then if the Law, The not disposing in
perticularitie, all rites and ceremonies of discipline, does not hinder the
exercise of discipline by the Minister.
have not authorized, disposed, or established in particularitie; the order of
these things, or if the Scripture have not delivered every ceremony, form,
or circumstance, about these three things, shall not the Minister therefore,
minister these, or any of these three things at all? And suppose, I pray you,
that neither this, nor any other law, had in particularitie, appointed the
ceremony of the Cross, the ceremony of Godfathers, or any other ceremony in
Baptism; or that the Law had not appointed the ceremony of kneeling, or any
other ceremony, at the celebration of the Lords Supper, should not the
Minister therefore, minister neither Baptism, nor the Lords Supper, in the
charge committed unto him? yes, he should. And why? forsooth because he has
promised so to do, and because the Lord has commanded him so to do.
Besides, sithence every Minister, by virtue of his promise, and force of this
law, is bound to teach the doctrine of Christ, to the people of his charge,
notwithstanding he be not tied, by the law of the Realm, nor by the holy
Scripture, to any rite, ceremony, or circumstance, or to any exact form, or
particular manner in teaching, what reason can any man pretend, that the not
particularizing, of al rites, ceremonies, or circumstances, in the Scripture,
or the not establishing, of any order, by the law of the Realm, touching
discipline, should altogether hinder every Minister, from the administration
of al discipline in the church? For as touching the answer, that the
Ministers may, and do exercise not the Answer to the abstract. Page 59.
least parts of Discipline, of declaring by doctrine, according to the word
of God, men's sins to be bound, and loosed, and the censure of rebuking and
reproving Page 55.
openly, and that the discipline Discipline of declaring by doctrine, is
called discipline, erroneouslie.
which the Minister is to execute, reaches no further, then to reach his
Parish, with all diligence to keep, and observe so much of the Doctrine,
Sacraments and Discipline of Christ, as apperteineth unto them; as touching
this answer (I say) it is as erroneous, as the former were frivoulous and
impe^tinent. For as consolation and comfort, by way of exhortation, so reprofe,
and sharp rebuking, by way of dehortatio^, belong properly, to that part of
the Ministers function, which concerns the binding and loosing of sinners by
doctrine, and not by discipline, and is but an application of the doctrine to a
wounded, or seared conscience. He therefore that leaves no other Discipline,
to be executed by the Pastor of the church, then of declaring by doctrine, men's
sins to be bound, or loosed, and by teaching his Parish, to observe,
doctrine, sacraments, and discipline, Discipline and doctrine confounded by the
Answerer.
confounds the matters both of discipline and doctrine. Again if not any
other discipline, was meant to be attributed, to every Minister then such as is
declared by doctrine, the^ these words, viz. (and the discipline of Christ)
were superfluouslie, and idellie added by the Parleament. For then had it been
sufficient, for the Parleament, to have enjoined the Bishopp, to demand of the
Minister only this and no more: viz. Whether will you give all faithful
diligence, to Minister the Doctrine and Sacraments of Christ? There is
therefore some other kind of discipline of Christ, intends by the Parleament,
to be attributed The Parleament intends some other discipline, then of
declaring by doctrine.
unto every Minister, and wherewith also the law of the Realm does enable
every Minister, then is this manner of discipline of declaring by doctrine, and
teaching the people. And this discipline also must needs be understood, to be
of the spiritual censures of the Church, because Christ never instituted any
other discipline. And therefore because our opposites agree with us in a
generality that the doctrine, Sacraments, and Answer to the abstract. 55. 60.
discipline of Christ, are to be Ministered as the Lord has commanded only,
and none otherwise, and yet nevertheless do dissent from us touching the
persons, by whom this discipline is to be ministered, because (say they) every
particular ceremony, rite, or circumstance of external policy, are not set
down in scripture, because of this their answer (I say) it is to be
considered; First, unto what persons, the function of the ministration of the
discipline of Christ, by the holy Scriptures is committed. Secondly, whether
the same persons with their functions, be arbitrable, ceremonious, rituall, or
circu^stantiall to be altered, and changed by authority of the Church, as
things To what persons the discipline of Christ by ye scriptures is committed,
and whether the persons be arbitrable or no.
indifferent, yea or no. To the first, seeing to one and the self same person,
the holy Scriptures attribute these two names, Bishop, and Pastor, thereby
signifying what are the two duties, which belong to the same one person; and
seeing also no one person by Gods word is called a Bishop or Pastor in regard
of Phil 1. 1.
his fellow brethren, the other Bishopps Tit. 9. 1. 5. and 7.
or Pastors, but in regard of his own flock, which he overseeth; and seeing
1 Timothy 3. 1^
also in well ordered Churches, by the ordinance of God, certain men of
approved godliness (called according to the common name of the Hebrews, by the
common name of Elders, whom partly calls governors) were joined as
ecclesiastical Magistrates, to the Bishop, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Pastor, or teaching Elder, by whose common direction, and authority,
ecclesiastical discipline was practiced; seeing (I say) these things are so,
we affirm that the persons, to whom the ministratio^ of the discipline of
Christ, rightly belongs, are the persons only above specified and none
other. And further we say if any spiritual Discipline, or power, which
directly belongs unto the conscience, The Discipline of Christ profaned, if
the same be ministered by other persons, then ye holy scriptures do appoint.
be ministered in the church, by any other persons, the^ by those persons only,
that the same discipline is not to be called the discipline, but a mere
profanation of the Discipline of Christ. For as it is unlawful, for any
person, to usurp any part, of the Bishopps or Pastors office, which consists
in spiritual teaching the word and administering the sacraments; so is it also
unlawful for any person to usurp any part of a Bishopps, Pastors, or Elders
office which consists in spiritual rule and government. Whereupon it
secondly follows, that the same persons, with their functions, are not
arbitrable, ceremonial, rituall, and circumstanciall, as things indifferent,
to be altered, by the authority of the church, but perpetual, substanciall,
essential, and as it were the very main and fundamental pillars, to uphold,
and stay the house of God, from all spiritual sliding, and falling down. And
therefore from the execution of the discipline of Christ, we seclude the
persons of all humane Archbishopps, humane Bishops, Suffraganes, Archdeacons,
Chauncelors, Commissaries, Officials, and all Rowland Allens, because their
persons together with their functions, are arbitrable, ceremonious, rituall,
traditionall, or circumstanciall, yea and removeable at the pleasure of the
King and State.

Neither does this disagree, from that A Bishopp, Pastor and Elder, and our
Lord B. diffu.
which was erst said of a Bb. or Pastor, that they be all one, in respect of
their function. For it is not said that an humane Bishop, and Pastor, but that
a Bb. and Pastor are all one. For a Bb. simply so called, is not a Bishopp,
and Pastor, in respect of his fellow brethren, but only in regard of his
flock, which he ouerseeth, feeds, and rules. But a humane what a lord
Bishopp is.
Bishopp is he, that is promoted, unto this dignity by man, and who by man's
authority takes upon him superoritie, and pre-eminence over them which are
equal unto him, touching their function, that intangleth himself with civil
government, and wordlie affairs, and whose Bishopplie office consists not so
much, in the dispensation of Gods word and Sacraments, as in Lordly and
Bishoplie apparel, Crossing with the sign of the cross, confirmation of
children, sole imposition of hands, sole excommunication, sole enioyning of
articles upon the people and Clergy of his Diocese, consecration of
oratories, delegation of his episcopal authority to his Suffragane Vicar
general, and principal official, and other such humane and Bishopplie
functions. All which are after the customs, precepts, and traditions of men.
And albeit D. O. by virtue of the Queens congedelier, were chosen, by the
Deane and Chapter of Lichfield, in episcopum, and Pastorem ecclesiae
Lichfieldensis, yet is he never entitled The Lord Bishop of Lichfield is
never honored with the title of being Lord Pastor
with the dignity of being the Lord Pastor, but only with the honor, of being
the Lord Bishop of Lichfield, so that one and the self same person being a
Bishop, and a Pastor, may be a Lord Bishop over Pastors, but not a Pastor,
over Pastors. Whereupon it follows, that the Pastoral Pastoral authority of
a Lord Bb and of other Pastors, is equal.
authority, which he has in common, with his brethren, the other Pastors of
his Diocese, is of no superiority or proheminence, above theirs; and that
touching the function, both of his, and their Pastoral cure and charge, there
is a paritie between him and them, by reason whereof, he can have no power over
them; because par in parem non habet imperium. But why is it, that he can not
be called, Pastor Pastorum ecclesiae Lichfieldensis, Lord Pastor of the Pastors
of the Church of Lichfield, and yet may be called Dominus Episcopus Pastorum
ecclesiae Lichfieldensis, Lord Bishop of the Pastors of the Church of
Lichfield. Why? but only for that there is custom, tradition, and the law of
man, for his episcopal jurisdiction, and for that his pastoral function (if
he have any) belongs unto him in common, with his brethren the other
Pastors, iure divino. The Bishop then having these two several Whether a
lord Bishop minister the doctrine, sacrament and discipline of Christ, by
virtue of his lordly episcopal or pastoral office
and distinct offices imposed upon his person, the one by divine, the other by
humane law, the one humane and episcopal, the other without pomp, and
pastoral; there arises from thence this question: by which of those two
functions he may lawfully (I mean according to Gods law) minister the
Doctrine, Sacraments, and censures of Christ? If it be answered, that it is
lawful for him, by virtue of his Pastoral office, to minister the doctrine
and Sacraments; and by force of his humane Episcopal office, to minister the
censures of Christ, then is not the answer fitted to the question, the same
being made, a been coniunctis, ad male divisa. For the censures of Christ, as
well as the doctrine of Christ, being simply of divine ordinance, it must
follow (if his episcopal power be only of humane right, and pastoral power,
only of divine institution) that the censures may be ministered by authority
derived only from man, but the doctrine and sacraments, by power derived only
from God. Which commixion of divine and humane right, in the execution of the
ordinances of God, can no manner of ways be sound, pure, and sincere, and
therefore also can not be pleasing unto God. For no more can the censures of
Christ, to the pleasure of God, be lawfully administered, by the authority of
any one whose function is of man, and not of God; then could the sacrifice of
God, be offered by one, who was a priest of man, and not of God. Now that
humane episcopalitie, or Bishoppisme, in the Church of England, is authorized,
and deduced from the power and law of Lordly episcopalitie authorized only by
the law of the Realm.
man, viz. of the King, and Realm alone, is evident, as well by the donation
and endowment of the ancient Bishoprics founded by the Kingly prerogatives
of the Kings of this Realm, as by the erection and establishment of the new
Bishoprics of Chester, Gloucester, Bristoll, Peterborough, and Oxford, with
their cathedral Churches, Seas, Cities, meeres and bounds of those humane
Bishops, for the exercise of their episcopal administration, according to an
act of Parleame^t, authorizing the Kings Highness, to make Bishops by his
letters patentes. Nay further that humane episcopal jurisdiction within the
meres Note that King Henry the eight by letters patents made Bb. therefore, etc.
and bounds of every Diocese within England is merely of humane, and not of
divine iustitution appears, by that power and authority which the King has
in translating, and dissolving of Bishoprics, in conserving episcopal
jurisdiction, 31. H. (...). c. 9
sometimes to such persons, as be no Bishopps (as did William the Co^querour,
when he gave Episcopal power to the Abbot of Battle,) and lastly, by the
very manner and form of the nomination, license of election, authority of
investiture, confirmation, and consecration of Archbishoppes and Bishops,
established by the more positive law of the Realm. But if it be answered,
that 25. H. 8. c. 20.
the Bishop, by his humane episcopal power, does minister the doctrine,
Sacraments, and discipline of Christ, then is the case worse with him then it
was before: because then, not only the Discipline of Christ, but also the
doctrine and Sacraments of Christ, should be ministered by that authority
which is of humane institution. Besides, the answer should be untrue, because
the Bishop at the time of his consecration, does not receive any authority
to preach the word, and minister the Sacraments; (for that authority was
then committed unto him, when first he was ordained to be a presbyter): But the
authorite which he receives at the time of his consecration, is to correct,
and punish such, as be unquiet, disobedient, and criminous within his
Diocese. Whereby once again is that confirmed which was erst said, viz. That
episcopal power in England is not of divine, but of humane institution.
Especially for that, by the scriptures, it can not be prooved, that there be
two several and distinct forms of ordinations; the one called consecration,
proper to a Lord Bishop, for the exercise of Discipline; the other called
ordination, peculiar to a Pastor, or teaching Elder, for the ministration of
the word and Sacraments. Whereunto lastly If the Lord Bishop, have power to
minister discipline by divine right, the^ no more can he commit that his power,
to another, the^ he can commit the power which he has of preaching to another.
may be added another maine reason, that Episcopal power in England, to
minister the discipline, can not therefore be of divine institution, because, if
it were of divine institution, the Bishop could no more surrogate the same
his episcopal power to his Suffragane, to his Vicar general, or Rouland
Allen, to minister the censures of Christ in his own name, then he can depute
them or any of them, to minister the doctrine and Sacraments in his own name.
But how does it appear, that the Vicar general, Rowland Allen, or any other
Presbyter, did ever excommunicate by the power, or in the name of the Bishop?
For the proof hereof we shall not need to search any other authentical record,
then the precept, and the practice before entreated of. For it is not said in
the precept, That the Presbyter, being armed with authority from Christ, but
it is said, that the Presbyter, being armed with authority, from the
Bishop, or Archdeacon, shall denounce the sentence of excommunication; the
practice also of Doctor Hone, every way, confirms as much. For therein Doctor
Hone does not challenge to be an officer unto Christ, but he says, that he is
the official of the venerable Archdeaco^ of Surrey; and that Master Rowland
Allen Presbyter, by virtue of his office, does excommunicate, the parties who
obeyed not his mandates, who made not their appearances before him, etc. If it
be answered that Rowland Allen, though he be not an immediate officer from
Christ, that yet nevertheles, he is a mediate officer, deputed to his office,
by an immediate officer unto Christ, vix. the Lord Bishop, or Archdeacon:
then we reply, and say: First, that the Lord Bishop, and Archdeacon, be
neither immediate, or mediate officers, appointed by Christ, to be Ministers of
his discipline. Secondly, if they were immediate officers from Christ, that
yet they have no authority by the law of Christ, to transfer their right, or
any part thereof, to an other person, or to depute an other person, in their
name, or by their authority, to excommunicate. As for these words, viz: In Dei
nomine, amen: nos Ioha^nes Hone, or nos Roulandus Allen, etc. sometimes used in
their scedule of excommunication; it is but a profaning of the holy name of
God, whereby they make them selves guilty, of the taking of the glorious name
of God in vain. And thus much touching both the question and answer, whether
the discipline of Christ, may be ministered, by the Bishops humane episcopal
power, yea or no. But now on the other side (because no divine censure, can
lawfully be executed in the church, by that authority which is of humane
institution) if it be answered, that the Bishop, by reason of his pastoral
Whether ye L. Bishopp by pastoral authority, may excommunicate a Pastor.
power (which he is said, to have over all the Pastors and people of his
Diocese) may lawfully not only minister the word and Sacraments, but also
the Discipline of Christ, unto them all; then it follows, that by a
Pastourall power, one Pastor, may be a Pastor of Pastors, which is against
the Scriptures, and contrary to the brotherly and fellowlike authority, which
is common to all Pastors under the sun, and between whom, touching their
Pastourall functions, there is to this day, by the Scriptures, as little
superiority, and as great a paritie, as ever there was between Apostles, and
Apostles; between Prophets, and Prophets; or between Evangelistes, and
Eva^gelistes; and as at this day, there is between Bishops, and Bishops;
between Archbishops, and Archbishops; or between Patriarckes, and Patriarckes:
yea and as is between Earls and Earls, Dukes and Dukes, Kings and Kings,
Emperors and Emperors. For no greater superiority, or pre-eminence, has any
one Pastor, over the person or function of an other Pastor, touching the
administration of any thing properly belonging Pastoures over small flocks,
are as truly pastors as Pastors over great flocks.
to either of their pastoral functions, the^ has one Emperor, over the person
or function of an other Emperor, or one King, over the person or function of an
other King; or one Lord Bishop over the person or function of an other Lord
Bishop, or one Archbishop, over the person or function of an other Archbishop,
or then had one Apostle, over the person As great paritie between Pastors and
Pastors, as between Apostles and Apostles.
or function of an other Apostle. Nay then has one eye over an other eye; one
hand over an other hand, one arm over another arm, or one foot over another
foot. And therefore if touching the functions which Pastors, either among them
selves, have in common one with the other, or which they have over their
flocks, there be no disparitie, but that the Pastors, to whom small flocks
are committed, do as reallie, and as truly participate of the nature of true
Pastors, as those great Pastors do, upon whose great shoulders, great burdens
are imposed; it behooves great Pastors, to prove unto us, by the holy
Scriptures, that by the institution of their great pastoral functions, they
have their power so enlarged, as that thereby they may preach the Word,
minister the Sacraments, and excommunicate: and that on the other side, the
little Pastors, have their power by the institution of their petie pastoral
offices, so straightened, as whereby they may only preach the Word, and
administer the Sacraments, but not excommunicate: it behooveth (I say) great
Pastors, to be able sufficiently to show unto us these things out of the holy
Scriptures: or else it seems to stand, with reason and equity, deduced from
the same Scriptures, that a Pastor over a few, should have like power to teach,
and to govern a few, as a great Pastor over many has to instruct and to rule
many. Marie, if they think, that only great Pastors be true Pastors, and that
great powers spiritual, be only true powers spiritual; then let them also
conclude, that only great Knights be true Knights, that only great Dukes be
true Dukes, that only great Kings be true Kings, and that only great
principalities temporal, be true principalities temporal. Which conclusion
Not only Kings of great kingdoms, but also Kings of small kingdoms, be
true kings.
if they shall judge, to be conclusionles; because King Rehoboam had as large a
patent, to feed, and to command two Tribes, as King Solomon his Father had to
command, and to feed twelve; or as the Archbishop of York may suppose him
self to have, over nine or ten Counties, as the Archbishop of Canterbury,
ca^ have over nine and thirty or forty: the^ me thinks it a matter, very
reasonably of them to be confessed, that all true Pastors, whether they be
great Pastors, or little Pastors, may lawfully exercise, all manner of such true
power spiritual, as unto true spiritual Pastors by the holy scriptures does
apperteyne. For if Bishops, being great Pastors, may therefore preach, and
minister the Sacraments, because they be, as they say, true Pastors; the^ also
may little Pastors, therefore excommunicate, because they be, (as the scripture
says) true Bishops. Wherefore, if the L. Bishopp of London, by virtue of his
Pastoral office, (as he thinks) which with his brethren the other Pastors
of his Diocese, he has in common deriveth unto him, immediately from the word
of God, may lawfully excommunicate: then the pastoral office, which Master
Doctor Androes has over the people of his Parish of St. Gyles without
Creeplegate, and the pastoral function which Master Doctor White has over
the people of St. Dunstones within Temple-barre, being as absolutely, and as
immediately, deduced unto them, out of the same word; what proof can be made
out of the word, that the Bishop being not Lord Pastor of the Pastors of
his Diocese, may lawfully by the word excommunicate, all manner of offenders
both Pastors and people, within his Diocese; and yet nevertheless that neither
Master Doctor Androes, nor Master Doctor White, by the same word may
excommunicate, any one of their Parishioners at all? Nay further, what reason
can there be afforded from the law of God, that Master D. Abbot, Deane of
Winchester, that Ma. Brown, Master Barlowe, and diverse other prebendaries, in
the church of Winchester, having certain parochial, and pastoral churches,
annexed to his, and their Deanrie, and Prebendes, and Master D. Gray in his
parish by their pastoral functions, should have absolute authority (unless
it be during the time of the L. Bishops trienniall visitation) to exercise
the discipline of Christ, within their several, and peculier churches; and yet
notwithstanding, that neither Master Richman nor May. Burden, being both of
them, grave, godly, and learned Pastors should have at any time, any
pastoral authority, to exercise any censure at all? And as it is in the
church of Winchester, so is it in the church of Paul's, in the church of
Salisburie, and in well nigh all, if not in all the Cathedral, and Collegiall
Churches, thoroughout the Realm. The Deane, Prebendaries and Canons, having
certain parochial Churches, exempted from the Bishopp within their exempt and
peculier jurisdictions, by mere Pastoral authority (for episcopal authority,
by the laws of the Church have they none) may exercise all manner of spiritual
censures, and that as well by their substitutes as by them selves. Nay which is
more, in Cheshire, Lancashire, Rural Deanes in Cheshire, etc. use some part of
episcopal power.
Yorkshire, Richmondshire, and other Northeren parts, there be many whole
Deanries, exempted from the Bishopps jurisdiction, wherein the Deanes and their
substitutes, have not only the probate of Wills, and granting of
administrations, but also the cognizance of ecclesiastical crimes, with power
to use the ecclesiastical censures. Yea and this authority of the execution
of ecclesiastical censures, have those Deanes, either long since by some
papal privileges Episcopal power to excommunicate granted by papal
privileges, or prescribed use.
obtained, or else by long use prescribed against the Bishopps. Whereby again,
it is clerelie convinced, that Episcopal excommunication used in the Church of
England, is not of divine institution, but only by humane tradition. For were
it of divine right, then could the same Power to excommunicate, if it be of
divine right, may not be prescribed.
no more be prescribed, or by papal immunitie be possessed, the^ could these
Deanes prescribe power, or be enfranchised to preach the word or to administer
the Sacraments.

These things have we thus at large and more fully entreated of, to the end
that the Kings Highness, and his Parleament, and all sorts of people, might
well understand, how it is not altogether, an vnvsual and unaccustomed thing,
in the Church of England, that private and inferior ministers (as they call
them) in their own right, and in their own parochial parishes, without any
authority from the Bishop, should exercise even the highest censure of the
Church. And that in sundry places of the Realm there is no preeminence in the
matter of the execution of the censures, attributed to a Bb. above a Minister.
Nay, which is more, then is attributed to a Bb. above a No more prehemine^ce
given to a Bb then to a Minister, or to a lay man in some places for the use of
excommunication.
lay man: yea then to such a lay man, who is authorized only, by a lay man to
his office. Which is evident by the ecclesiastical jurisdiction and censures,
exercised a long time by lay men, in the peculiar jurisdictions of Newton,
Gronbie, Anstic, Soke of Rothelie, Evington, and other parishes and hamlettes
in the County of Leycester. The officers of al which places, for their
spiritual authority, having not had any other warrant, then such only as has
bin signed, sometimes under the hand and seal of the right Honorable the
Earl of Huntingdon deceased; sometimes of the Honorable Sir Henry Gray
knight; sometimes of Henry Skipwith Esquire, and sometimes of others.

For the avoiding therefore of sundry intolerable inconveniences which
hitherto has ensued for want of that authority, which the Law settled, does
enable every Minister with, It is most expedient, that all humane authority in
the execution of spiritual censures, be utterly taken away, and that the
divine and Evangelicall censures of Christ, be ministered in every
Congregation, where learned and godly pastors, with discrete Elders may be
had, as from the mind of the Lord they were executed, in the Apostolical and
primitive church.

I had almost forgotten to speak of one common and usual kind of
jurisdiction spiritual in the use of the censures of the church, by the Archb.
which in cases of their prerogative, they have prescribed against the Bb. over
the presbyters and people of every Bishops Diocese, and Archdeacons
jurisdiction within their provinces: of one other common and usual kind of
pretensed spiritual jurisdiction, and use of the censures, which the Archb.
and sometimes the Deane and Chapter, (sede Archiepiscopali, or sede Episcopali
vacant) exercise: and lastly, of that spiritual kind of jurisdiction and
censures, so called of the Church, which Suffraganes, and Archdeacons, have
and do use.

As touching which supposed spiritual power, both of the Archbishopps and
Archdeacons, because the same their power, does only belong unto the^ iure
consuetudinario and non scripto, by unwritten, and not by written law; I must
conclude against the jurisdiction of the Archbishopps prerogative, and against
the Archdeacons jurisdiction in all cases, as out of St. Cyprian, King Henry
the eight concluded against the Pope. viz: That their authorities can not be
from Christ. Because Christ said, ego sum via, veritas, and vita. He never
said, ego sum consuetudo.

Touching the jurisdiction of the Deane and Chapter, the papal law being
abrogated, how the same may lawefullie now be used, otherwise then by
sufferance and consent of the King, and Realm, I know not. But of all
spiritual authority exercised at this day in the Church of England, the same
seems to draw most near to the semblance of the government practiced by the
Apostles and primitive Church. And might be approved in many points, if so be
the Deane and Chapter, being as it were a Senate of preaching Elders, did no
more commit the execution of their ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to the
wisdom of one Vicar general, or principal official, then they do put over
the leassing of their Lands, or divide^tes of their rentes to the only
discretion of one of their Baylifes, or Stewardes.

As for Bishops Suffraganes, in England and in Wales, how many there may be,
and what Cities and Towns, are to be taken and accepted, for their Seas, it is
at large expressed in a statute, made for the nomination of Suffraganes. By
which statute also we are given to understand, that it remains only in the
disposition, and liberty of every Archbishop and Bishop within this Realm,
etc. to name and elect two honest and discrete spiritual persons, being
learned, and of good conversation, and them to present unto the King by their
writing under their Seals, making humble request to give to one such of the
said two persons, as shall please his Majesty, such title, name, style and
dignity of Bishop of such Seas specified in the said act, as the Kings Highness
shall think most co^venient for the same, so it be within the same Province,
whereof the Bb. that does name him is. Besides after such title, style, and
name given by the King, it is said that the King shall present, every such
person by his letters patentes, under his great Seal, to the Archbishop of the
same Province, wherein the Town, whereof he has his title, name, style and
dignity of Bishop; and that the Archbishop shall give him all such
consecrations, benedictions and ceremonies as to the degree and office of a
Bishopps Suffragane shall be requisite. It is further enacted, and provided
that every person nominated, elected, presented, and consecrated according to
that act, shall be taken, accepted, and reputed in all degrees and places,
according to the style, title, name and dignity, that he shall be presented
unto, and have such capacity, power and authority, honor preeminence and
reputation, in as large and ample manner, in and concerning the execution of
such commission as by any of the said Archb. or Bb. within their Diocese
shall be given to the said Suffragane, as to Suffraganes of this Realm
hertofore, has bin used and accustomed. And that no Suffr. made and
consecrated by virtue of this act, shall take or receive any manner of profits,
of the places, and Seas whereof they shall be named, nor use, have or execute,
any jurisdiction or Episcopal power, or authority within their said Seas,
etc. but only such profits, jurisdiction and authority, as shall be licensed,
and limited unto them, to take, do, and execute, by any Archbishopp or Bb.
within their Diocese, to whom they shall be Suffraganes under their seals.
And that no such Suffragane shall use any jurisdiction ordinary or Episcopal
power, otherwise nor longer time, then shall be limited, by such commission to
him given upon pain, etc.

From which Act, touching the use, and exercise of Episcopal power, and
censures by the Suffragane, we may again safely conclude, that the Episcopal
power, granted by the Bishops, to be used by the Suffragane, is not of divine
right, and institution, but only from humane devise and ordinance. For the
Suffragan could not exercise any power called spiritual or Episcopal, unless
by the Bb. he were nominated, by the King elected and presented, by the Archb.
consecrated, and by commission under the Bb. seal authorized, in what manner,
and for what time he should exercise the same. Custom then being not from
heaven, but from the earth; and again the Bb. commission limiting the
Suffraganes delegated power being of man, and not of God, it follows
necessarily, that, that Episcopal power, which the Bishops use and exercise
in England, can not be divine but humane. Because Episcopal authority which
is divine, being conveyed from the Royal and Sovereign authority of our
Savior Christ, the giver of all power unto every officer within his Church,
can not be transferred, to any other person, by the same Bb. by the King, by
the body of the state, or by custom. For the Kings person, and body of the
state, not being made capable by the holy scriptures, to use and exercise that
Episcopal power which is of divine institution, can never transfer the same
to others, whereof they be the^ selves incapable. And to defend that custom,
or any municipall law, should transfer divine Episcopal power from a divine
Bishopp to any humane officer, is more erroneous.

And from hence if the now L. Bb. of London judge his Episcopal power to
belong unto him by divine, and that by the same right, he have power, as well to
ordeyne, depose, suspend and excommunicate presbyters, as to confirm boys,
girls, young men and maidens,) there seems to be good reason that the same
Bb. should make it apparently known unto the King and Realm, by what power or
commission descended from heaven, he may delegate under his Seal, the same
his divine authority, of ordination, deposition, suspension, excommunication,
and confirmation, unto Doctor Stern his now Suffragane of Colchester.

For if from the holy Scriptures, he can produce no warrant, for the making of
a delegation of any part, of that Episcopal power which he holds to be
committed unto him from our Savior Christ: then well may we conclude against
the ordination, deposition, suspention, excommunication, and confirmation made
by the same his Suffragane, that the same his Suffraganes ordination,
deposition, etc. is not divine. For how can an ordination, a deposition, etc.
made by a Suffragane, be divine, when as the commission granted by the Bishop,
is meerlie humane?

Wherefore seeing the Bishop himself, has plucked certain of his principal
feathers from his own spiritual wings (if so be his own wings may be
spiritual) and imped them with an vntwysted thread of humane policy, to the
humane train of his Suffragane; and seeing also his Archbishoppes grace of
Canterbury, in cases of his metropoliticall prerogative, the Archdeacons,
London, Midlesex, Essex, Hertforde, the Deane of Paul's, and certain
prebendaries in Paul's, the Deane of Westminster, the Master of the Savoy, and
diverse other Persons, have by Papal privileges, or by ancient custom
prescribed almost all other parts of his Episcopal power; there seems good
reason, that the Bishop should again declare, whether the Churches within
the said Diocese after the decease, or translation of his Lordshippe shall
stand in need of any Lordly Successor, to sit in the same Sea, for any
other profitable use or purpose, then only for wearing of a white rochet,
walking with a pastoral staff, keeping seven years Sabbath, from preachinge
in his parish Church of Fulham, consecrating of Chapels, hallowinge of
Fontes, Christening (as they call it) of Belles, whyting of Walls, painting of
Tombs, garnishing of Sepulchers, preserving of superstitious Monumentes in
glass Windows, repayring and gylding rotten and outworne Crosses, confirming
Leases of Benefices, with cure of souls, upon small rentes, improprying
Churches, or such like. For if the great things of his Episcopal power, may
be transferred, either by express, or by secret consent, either by commission
or custom, and that as well to an inferior, as to a superior, as well to a
Suffragane, a Deane, an Archdeacon, and a Prebendarie, as to an Archb. then it
seems reasonable, that the smaler things, before spoken of, may well be
performed, without any Lordly authority.

When I had thus finished, according to our line, that which I first
undertook, against the Admonitors pretensed dangerous alterations,
innovations, and inconveniences, and was also purposed, to have added that
which (in mine opinion) seems to prove that, which the Admonitor by his
opinion, denies; viz: that the external government of the Church should
always, and in all places be one, when (I say) I had thus purposed, by
reason of some other present, and for the time more necessary occasion, I was
drive^ to alter my mind, and to show the same, in a place somewhat more
convenient.

And yet in the mean while, it shall not be amiss, but a thing very
necessary, in this place, so to clear the state of the question, between the
Admonitor and me, as the same being rightly before hand understood, there
might no preiudicate opinion be conceaved against the truth.

The Admonitor against the not having of one form of external policy in all
ages and states of the Church of Christ, alleges that in Denmark, they have
Bishops, both in name and in office: that in Saxony they have Archbishoppes,
and Bishops in office, but not in name: that in Tigure, they have no Senate
of Elders; nor the discipline by excommunication, which they more mislike; that
in Geneua, in Scotland, and in other places, they have a government not much
unlike that platform which is desired to be among us: that in Saxony, and
Basil they kneel at the Lords Supper: all Tigure they sit, and it is
brought unto the^, and that in other places they go and receive it, for the
more expedition, as they pass. And that he doubts not but that the learned
men, whom God sent, to instruct those churches in which the Gospel in those
days was first received, have bin directed by the spirit of God, to reteyne
this liberty, that in external government, and other outward orders, they
might choose such, as they thought in wisdom, and godliness, to be most
convenient, for the state of their country and disposition of the people.

Unto all which we answer briefly; viz. that Bishops both in name and in
office being of divine institution, ought as well to be in the Church of
England as of Denmark. that it is an error (by their leave) in the Church of
Saxony, not to have Archb. and Bb. in name, if so be they hold it lawful to
have Archb. and Bishops in office. For what should a necessary officer do,
without a convenient name? And touching the Church of Tigure, it is not
material, what the same church does think not tolerable, or does more
mislike, but what she ought not to mislike, or what it ought not to think
tolerable. And the^ what a poor proof is there here made (trow we) for the
confirmation of the corruptions in the Church of England, by producing for two
witnesses, two erroures in the Church of Tigure. For not to like a Senate of
Elders, and more to mislike excommunication, is more and more to slide out of
the right way.

And sithence we have the whole christian Kingdom of Scotland, the most
famous, and renowned Church of Geneua, and sundry Churches, by his confession
in other places, to be lights unto us, and to agree with us, in a government not
much unlike to that, which we desire: we have not only great cause, to rejoice
in this our desires, but also to be much comforted and encouraged, by these
examples, by all holy means, to labor the full accomplishment thereof. For
by this testimony, and by these instances given and produced by him self, the
Admonitor has quite and clean weakened, and disabled, his own general
position, opinion, and thoughts of the vnnecessaries, and inconvenientnes, of
having the Apostolical and primitive government, in the time of peace, under a
Christian Magistrate.

For has not the free Kingdom of Scotland, the free City of Geneva, and
other Sovereign and free Princes, Potentates and Powers, (not being under
Tyrants, and persecution) received the same, as being the best, the fittest,
the convenientest, and most necessary government (yea even in the time of peace
and under their christian Magistracy) for the state of their country, and
disposition of their people?

And as touching rites and ceremonies, we affirm not, that every rite,
ceremony or circumstance to be used in the external execution of church
government, is preciselie set down in the holy Scriptures, but touching the
substance of government, thus we say, and thus we hold: viz. that the Officers
and Governors appointed by our Savior Christ, to be over the Churches in
every Country (observing the general rules of decency, comelines, and
edification) have liberty, with the consent of their Christian King, or other
supreme Magistrate, to choose what rites and ceremonies, they in wisdom and
godliness shall think most convenient. And therefore we grant that the
officers of Christ, in the use and dispensation of their functions, are no more
exactlie tied, by any direct commandment in the holy Scriptures, to use at all
times, and in all places, one only manner of rites and ceremonies, then were the
Priests of the law, to use all one manner of knives, to kill their sacrifices,
or the singers to sing all songs after one manner of tune, or upon one kind of
instrument: or then are Kings and Princes in all Countries commanded, to use
all kind of circumstances, in the outward execution of civil justice in their
commonweals.

As then, as it was lawful for the Priests to have knives and trumpets of
diverse fashions; and for the Levites to have their Musical instruments of
diverse forms: Nay as sundry Justices of peace, in sundry Shires of the
Kingdom, are not bound to keep their quarter sessions, all in one day to
begin, and to break their sessions at one instant; to stand, to sit, and to
walk, when soever they speak, to wear all one fashion, hates, cappes,
cloakes, or gowns, and such like: so likewise, is it with the Bishops,
Pastoures and Elders of the church.

In the ministration of Baptism, there is no direct commandment, that the
vessel to hold the water, for the childs Baptism, should be of stone, of
pewter, of brass, or of silver; whether the Minister should descend to the
lower end, or the child ascend to the upper end of the church: Whether the
child should have a great handful, or a little sponefull of water powered upon
his head. In the celebration of the Lords Supper, it is directly commanded,
that the people shall stand, sit, or pass: whether it should be celebrated
every first or second Sabbath of the month; whether in the morning; at noone,
or at night. In the ordination of Ministers, there is no just proof to be
made, that any certain number of Ministers, are to lay on their hands, that
the day of ordination should be always one: that the Minister should be of
such an age, or that the prayers should be of this or of that lenght and form
of words. And therefore touching these and such like things of indifferency,
we agree with the Admonitor and reverend Bb. that one form of external
orders, rites and ceremonies is not of necessity, to be in every Church,
because there is no such order witnessed by the holy Scriptures to be of
necessity. But touching the joint, and several functions of Bishops,
Pastors, and Elders, that they, or any of them, should in any age or state of
the church of Christ be wanting, or that such offices as by warrant of the
Scripture are coupled together, should be severed, or that any other persons
should be appointed, to execute any functions in the Church, then such persons
only, as for their functio^s, have warrant from the holy Scriptures, we can
not in any sort thereunto agree. And why? forsooth because all, both offices,
and officers in the Church, must only, and alonely, be derived from our Savior
Christ, as from the only fountain and bestower of all officers, and offices in
the house of God. And therefore, albeit we should grant, (as the Admonitor
has said) that the outward order used in the primitive Church, touching rites
and ceremonies, by Bishops, Pastors and Elders, is neither necessary, nor so
convenient as it may be otherwise, in the time of peace, and under a Christian
Magistrate, yet we may not herevpo^ imply, as his negative implies: viz. that
Bishops, Pastors and Elders, or any of them, are neither necessary, nor so
convenient officers, or governors, as other officers of man's invention might
be. For which our opinion (by the help of God) we shall assay (as before has
been mentioned) in an other place, to lay down, out of the word of God, some
just proofs, (according to the Admonitors request) that there ought to be in
all ages and states of the Church, this outward order and form of government:
viz. that Bishops, Pastors and Elders, ought evermore to be spiritual
governors, and that evermore they, and none other, ought to use that
essential kind of spiritual government, and none other which was practiced by
the Bishops, Pastors and Elders, in the Apostolical and primitive Church.
Always leaving the outward rites and ceremonies of their spiritual kind of
government, to be indifferent, as erst has been said.

FINIS.
Speeches used in the Parleament by Sir Francis Knolles: and after written to
my L. Treasurer, Sir William Cecill.
TO the end I may enform your Lord ship of my dealing in this
Parleament-time, against the undue claimed superiority of the Bishops over
their inferior brethren, Thus it was:

Because I was in the Parleament time, in the 25. year of King HENRY the eight.
In which time, First, all the Clergy, as well Bishops as others, made an
hu^blie submission to King HENRY the 8. acknowledging his Supremacy, and
detesting the usurpation of the Bb. of Romes authority: Upon which submission
of the Clergy, the King gave unto the said Bb. the same ample rule, that
before they had under the Pope, over their inferior brethren; saving that the
same rule was abridged by statute by this parenthesis following, that is to say
(without offending the prerogative Royal of the Crown of England, and the laws
and customs of the Realm) In the latter end of the Statute, it was added, that
whosoever offends in any one part of that statute, and their Aydors,
Counselors, and Abbetters, they did all fall into the penalty of the
praemunire. And after I had recited this statute in the Parleame^t-house, I
declared that in King HENRY'S the eight days after this: There was no Bishop
that did practice superiority over their inferior brethren. And in King
EDWARDES days, the said Bb. obtained a statute, whereby they were authorized to
keep their Courts in the Kings name: the which statute was repealed in Queen
Mary's days, and was not revived in her Majesty's time that now is, whereupon
it was doubtful to me, by what authority the Bishops do keep their
Courts now in their own names, because it is against the prerogative Royal of
the Crown of England, that any should keep a Court, without sufficient
warrant from the Crown. Whereupon I was answered, that the Bishopps do keep
their Courts now by prescriptions, and it is true that the Bb. may prescribe,
that King HENRY the 8. gave them authority, by the statute of 25. of his
reign, to have authority and rule over their inferior brethren, as ample as
they had in the Popes time. But this was no special warrant for them to keep
their Courts by, and that in their own names. And yet they have none other
warrant to keep their Courts (as they do now in their own names) to my
knowledge. And this was the cause that made them obtain a statute in King
EDWARDS days, to keep their Courts by, in the Kings name. Now, it is a
strange allegation, that the Bishopps should claim authority at this present
to keep their Courts in their own names, (as they do) by prescription,
because the statute of 25. does restrain the^ generally from offending of the
prerogative Royal of the Crown of England, and the laws and customs of the
Realm. And no man may justly keep a Court without a special warrant from the
Crown of England, as is aforesaid. And the general liberty given by King H.
the 8. to the Bishops to rule and govern, as they did in the Popes time, is no
sufficient warrant to the Bishops to keep their own Courts in their own
names by prescriptio^, as I take it. And therefore the Bishops had done wisely,
if they had sought a warrant by statute to keep their Courts in the Queens
name, as the Bb. did in King EDWARDS days: In which time Archbishop Crammer
did cause Peter Martyr and Bucer to come over into this Realm to be placed in
the two Universities, for the better instruction of the Universities in the
word of God. And Bb. Crammer did humbly prefer these learned men without any
challenge to him self of any superior rule in this behalf over his inferior
brethren. And the time has bin, that no man could carry away any grant from
the Crown of England by general words, but that he must have special words to
carry the same by: Therefore how the Bb. are warra^ted to carry away the
keeping of their Courts in their own names, by prescriptio^: it passes my
understanding.

Moreover, where as your Lordship said unto me, that the Bishopps have forsaken
their claim of superiority over their inferior brethren, (lately) to be by
Gods ordinance, and that now they do only claim superiority from her
Majesty's supreme government: If this be true, then is it requisite and
necessary, that my L. of Canterbury, that now is, do recant and retract his
saying in his book of the great volume against Cartwright, where he says in
plain words (by the name of Doctor Whitgift) that the superiority of Bb. is
Gods own institution: Which saying does impugn her Majesty's supreme
government directly, and therefore it is to be retracted plainly and truly. For
Christ plainly and truly confesses, Ioh. 18. 36. That his Kingdom was not of
this world. And therefore he gave no worldly rule or proheminence to his
Apostles, but the heavenly rule which was to preach the Gospel, saying: Ite,
predicate in omnem mundu^, quicu^que crediderit and baptizatus fuerit, salvus
erit: qui non crediderit, condemnabitur. Go and preach in all the world, whosoever shall believe and be Baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not
believe, shall be condemned, Mark 16. 15. But the Bishops do cry out, saying,
that Cartwright and his fellows, would have no government, etc. So, belike, the
Bb. care for no government, but for wordly and forcible government over their
brethren, the which Christ never gave to his Disciples nor Apostles, but made
them subject to the rule of Princes, who ought not to be resisted, saving that
they might answer unto Princes, that they must rather obey God then men (Acts.
5. 29.) and yet in no wise to resist the Prince, but to take up the cross, and
follow Christ.

FINIS.

