THE CHRISTIANS SACRIFICE: Much better then all the Legal Sacrifices of the
Jews; and without the which, all the said Legal Sacrifices of the Jews, even
when they were in force, were not acceptable to God.

OR, A Logical and Theological exposition of the two first verses of the
twelfth to the ROMANS, with all the doctrine in the said two verses, plainly
laid forth, and fitly applied according as these times do require the same.

Wherein also besides the orthodoxall exposition of the said words, diverse
other places of Scripture by the way occurring, before somewhat obscure, are so
naturally interpreted, as that the judicious Reader shall think his pains
well bestowed in vouchsafing to read this Treatise following.

With the Authors Postscript to his children, as it were his last Will and
Testament unto them.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST TRVLY RELIGIOUS ROBERT EARL OF WARWICK, and
Baron of Leez. AND TO HIS MOST HOPEFVLL YOUNG SON AND heir, ROBERT Lord Rich.
All increase of true piety and honor in this life, and everlasting glory and
happiness in the life to come.
Most Noble Earl, and Right Honorable Lord.
IF David so well acc^pted of the kindness of Barzillai the Gilaadit (though his
subject) performed 1. Sam. 17. 27.
unto him in his distress by the treason of his son Absalon, that being
delivered and restored to his kingdom, he did not only offer Princely
entertainment to the said Barazillai himself, but upon his refusal thereof
did also most graciously accept of his son Chinham to be in his Court: yea,
2. Sam. 19. 33. 36.
if he were also so mindful of the said loyal kindness of Barzillai, that upon
his death bed he gave charge to his son Solomon to show kindness to the sons
of the said Barzillai, and to let them be of those that should 1 Kin. 2. 7.
cate meat at his table, because they had come to him when he fled from his
son Absalom: yea, if merciless and 1. Sam. 39. 44. and 20. 33.
unnatural Saul that would have killed his own son Jonathan, spared the
Kenites for the kindness of Iethro their father, 400 years before showed to the
1. Sam 15. 6. Exodus 18. 17.
Israelites in giving good counsel to Moses for the better government of the
Israelites, and in directing of them in their iourneys in the wilderness, if (I
say) Number. 10. 31.
David so respected the kindness of one of his subjects that ought in duty and
allegiance to have performed much more unto him: and if that merciless Saul
showed kindness to the Kenites for the kindness of Iethro so long before showed
to the Israelites, much more may I poor man and forlorn creature acknowledge
my self bound to perform all duty and service unto your Honors, for the
Honorable favors of the Noble Earl of Warwick now deceased unto me, a mere
stranger unto him, and altogether vnknowue, but only by the commendatorie
testimony of that grave and religious gentleman Mr. John Butler of Toby
Esquier, now also at rest with the Lord. Having therefore nothing else whereby
to express my duty to your Honors, I am bold to present such as I have, the
rather, because as I dedicated the first fruits of my like labor to my old
most Honorable Lord before mentioned, about some 24. years past, even before I
was thoroughly known unto him, and that because of his most Christian care for
the churches of God in Essex whereof he was Patron, so I thought I might the
more presume of your Honorable acceptance of these my pains, the rather
because in respect of my manifold infirmities by age, they may be my last. The
more also that God himself has now honored your Noble house, and made it
renowned in the Church, both by the profession of the Gospel, and also by the
protection of the professors thereof, even now to the third generation of your
name, the more my self and all other that love the Gospel have cause to honor
you: even as the more any king aduanceth any subject, the more all other
subjects ought to respect such a subject for his kings sake, yea we have the
more cause to pray also for your honors, so to continue still your honoring of
the Lord, and of the Gospel most worthy of honor, as you have begun, that your
selves and your posterity may yet be the more honored: yea, and this as a
Minister of the Gospel I exhort you in the name of the Lord Jesus, that showed
me mercy in making me a Minister, that you continue so much the more so to do,
by how much the more enemies the Gospel daily has, both of A theists and of
carnal professors thereof, and also and especially of papists: not only in
other countries but even in our own: and those even of your own rank: I
mean of the nobility it self: besides them of the gentry and other
inferiors at the command of such superiors. Herein if ye shall overcome (as
I doubt not but that ye shall) oh how great shall your honor then be. One of
you two now do sometime wear a coronet with other the like princes, and do sit
in Parliament with one of the Lords Chief Kings and Judges of the earth. But
the time shall come, when the Lord Jesus, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
Psalm. 2. 10. Reu. 17. 14. and 19. 10. Mark. 8. 38.
coming in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels: and sitting in
judgment upon men and Angels shall crown you both with crowns better then of
the finest gold, even of righteousness, life and glory, which 2. Tim. 4. 8.
Iam. 1. 12. 1. Pet 5. 4. Reu. 3. 4. and. 21.
shall not fade: and shall also give you both to walk with himself in white,
yea to sit likewise with him in his throne, as himself has already overcome,
and sits with his Father in his throne. Are you not affected with these
things, I doubt not but you are, and be ye so always to the end. Yea as Paul
having highly commended the 1. These. 4. 9. 10.
Thessalonians for such brothe^ly love, that he needed not to write unto them
thereof, because they were taught (inwardly) of God, to love one another, and
so indeed did, yet for all that exhorted them more and more Heb. 6. 10. 11.
to abound in so doing: and as the Apostle to the Hebrews, having said that
God was not unrighteous that he should forget the work and labor of their
love, which they had showed to his name in having ministered to the Saints, and
yet ministering, does for all that desire every one of them to show the same
deligence to the full assurance of hope to the end, so do I (Right Honorable)
exhort you to do the like for the advancing of the Gospel, and the
countenancing and comforting of the professors, especially the sincere and
painful Ministers thereof even to the end: that your present comfort from
consideration and hope of the former glory promised, may be the more enlarged
in you. And verily ye have the more need so to do, because the enemies of the
Gospel do not only increase and swarm, but also they think they do God
best service that do most persecute it, and the Ioh. 6. 1. 2.
professors and Ministers thereof, even to death it self. But hereof the Lord
Jesus has told us before, that when it should come to pass we might not be
offended neither marvel at it. Hereby also all that love the Gospel may be
the better assured that they Ioh. 15* 19. Phil. 1. 28.
are not of the world but of God. This to such adversaries is a most sure token
of perdition, but to them that are so persecuted of salvation, Finally, this
plainly bewrays that religion that is so bloody and merciless Iam. 3. 15.
17.
to be the wisdom that is earthly, sensual and deuilish; because that that
is from above is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy.
Lastly hereby therefore all men may be the more encouraged to put forth their
hands for the upholding of the Gospel here professed by us, and of the
professors and Ministers thereof, as likewise to do what else they can and may
for the opposing, oppugning, and overthrow of popery, and of the champions
thereof: as whose chief weapons for upholding their abominations, are
slaundering of Gods servants, cruelty, and treachery, all which the Prophet
Psalm. 5. 6.
says the Lord abhors. If there were nothing else to condemn papists and
to discover them to be of Ioh. 8. 44.
the devil, who has bin a murderer and a liar from the beginning, these only
were sufficient. And there fore these should the more provoke all that love the
Lord Jesus to set themselves against Rome the daughter Psalm. 137. 8.
of New Babylon, and to reward her as she has served others. The rather
because she shall as certainly fall, as old Babylon is long since fallen. Yea,
I doubt not Reu. 18. 3.
also, but that some yet striving tooth and nail to support her, shall at the
last, and ere it be long, either in the sight of the truth, or in the love of
her riches be principal agents in her destruction. He that inquireth Psalm. 9.
12.
for blood, and that daily brings to light the most secret murders that are,
and causes such murderers blood to be shed, and in justice to be spilt on the
ground, will at the last much more be revenged of that Roman Antichristian
bloody and treacherous brood, that has betrayed and murdered, and daily does
betray and murder so many thousands and millions of his Saints, whose death is
most dear and Psalm. 116. 15.
precious in his sight. The greater any are the forwarder should they be in
repressing this generation, Whose teeth are as swords, and whose iaw teeth are
as Pro. 30. 12.
knives to devour the poor of the earth, and yet are pure in their own eyes.
To behold one to murder another, and not to resist the murderer what may be,
is (as I hear) by our law, and as I am sure by the Law of God to be an acter
in shedding of blood.

How much more are they to be oppugned that live by the blood and death of
other. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants Judge. 5. 23.
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the
Lord against the mighty. If they be cursed that came not to help the Lord (or
that came not to help when the Lord helps) in such a case, and that against
the mighty, how shall they escape that come themselves forth, against the
Lord, and against his people, and yet for all that say they are for the Lord,
and that themselves only are his people? As they that are blessed of the Lord
shall be Genesis 27. 33. Number. 23. 8. verse. 19.
blessed: so they that are cursed of the Lord shall be cursed. Has the Lord
said and shall he not do it? or has he spoken and shall he not make it good?
In this respect therefore as all men should be the more ready to oppugn that
man of sin, and to help them whom he persecuteth, so especially they ought
to fear the putting their hand or little finger, in the least degree to aid
him, and to uphold and repair his state so long since decayed, and begun to
fall. If Joshua cursed Josh. 6. 12.
before the Lord the man that should rise up, and build Jericho, which
notwithstanding we never read to have bin a bloody City, how much more may
all they look for a curse that rise up to support Rome, that always not so
much before as since it has been the seat of Antichrist (I mean of the
Pope) has bin a most bloody City, and has murdered more men, women and
children, (of the Saints and of other) then ever had dwelt in Ierecho before
the said curse of Joshua, from the first foundation thereof to the time of
Joshua? The blood of one Abel cried to the Lord from the earth for such Genesis 4.
11. etc.
vengeance that the Lord so cursed the earth, and Caine himself for shedding
the same, that he being made a fugitive and vagabond upon the earth cried out
unto the Lord and said, My punishment is greater then I can bear. Oh then how
loud is the cry of the blood of so many thousands as that man of sin has
shed and daily does shed? Verily, as he has a long time showed himself to be
the man of sin, so all 2. These. 2. 3.
men shall shortly see him to be also the child of perdition. The longer the
Lord has suffered him to rage and reign, and to exalt himself above all that
is called God etc, and to sit in the Temple of God, and to show himself as
God, presumptuously forgiving sins, dispensing with sins, casting down to
hell those whom God has prepared for heaven, advancing them to heaven, and
canonizing them for Saints, that were traitores and rebels here in earth
against Princes, and so speaking great things, and blasphemies, Reu. 13. 5. 6.
and 17. 3.
yea being full of blasphemies, the longer (I say) the Lord suffers him thus
to do, the greater certainly, and that speedily will be his condemnation. This
is so much the more manifest, by how much the more now he rages and stormeth
as a man having the panges of death upon him. The devil himself rages the
more, and did the more rent and tear Mark. 9. 20.
the child possessed with him, by how much the nearer he saw his eiection to
be; yea when Christ charged him to come out of him, and to enter no more into
him, even then did he rent him sore, and verse. 25. verse. 26.
laid him for dead, so that many said he was dead. Pharao and the rest of the
Aegiptians, notwithstanding all the great signs and wonders the Lord had
wrought amongst them, did then most cruelly oppress the Israelites when the
Lord was nearest to deliver them, and to overthrow the said Pharao and all his
host in the red sea. As therefore Moses said to the Israelites greatly fearing
and murmuring, when Exodus 14. 13.
they saw Pharaoh following them behind, hard at the heels, and the red sea
before them, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord; for
the Aegiptians whom ye have seen ye shall never see again, so may I and all
other the Lords Ministers say to all the Lords people now fearing because of
the Romanists present raging, and prevailed against the Churches, Fear not,
stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord. For the time cannot be far off
when this Reu. 17. 16. and 18. 18.
great Whore of Rome shall be judged and burnt with fire, and her City laid
wast and desolate. Then shall all her friends howl and cry as bitterly, as
ever they merrily rejoiced and tryumphed and much more then ever they made the
Lords people to weep and mourn. As therefore Right Honorable, you are wise,
iudiciously to consider of these things: as you are godly to help the Lords
people against the mighty by your daily prayers, for performance of his
promises in confounding his said mighty adversaries, and doing to them as
sometimes he did to Midian, and Sisera, and Iabin, and to other his Psalm. 83. 9.
old enemies, so be you also strong in the Lord, and in Ephesians. 6. 10.
the power of his might, to do whatsoever you now may or shall hereafter be
able to do, by your selves, or by your acquaintance of like place and honor
with your selves: yea also, with all such as over whom you shall have any
authority from his most excellent Majesty. Too much is known to be done for
the said enemies of the Lord, even by the papists here at home, and much more
is done then is known. Shall therefore such friends of the Lord as your Honors
are, do little for him, and for his people* God forbid. As therefore the
Apostle exhorts Heb. 10. 24.
the Hebrews to consider one another and to provoke unto love and to good
works in general, so I beseech you to suffer the words of exhortation to do
the like in this special against that Beelzebub of Rome, and all his deuouted
and sworn friends: that by your noble examples, all other may be the more
provoked to do the like also. Do the new Edomites cry one to another against
the Church. Raze it, Raze it, even to Psalm. 137. 7.
the foundation thereof, and shall not all that love the Lords Jerusalem cry
the like against the new Babilonians the enemies of the Lords said Jerusalem,
for whose downfall and utter ruin we have so many promises delivered in the
presentence, as certainly to assure us of their performance, as if they were
already performed? Far be this from all such noble spirits as yours is. Hate
you therefore that shameless and graceless Whore of Rome. Hate her (I say)
and all her bauds the Jesuits and other Seminary Priests. Hate them, hate
them with perfect hatred. The more you shall hate them, the more assurance you
shall have of the love of God toward your selves: especially if with the
hatred of them you shall love all them that do hate her and hers. You have most
worthily begun. Since also your Call. 5. 7.
beginning, you and your noble ancestors have run well. Let nothing hinder your
obedience to the truth unto the end. Let none take your crown from you. That
crown (I say) that much more excels all the Crowns and Diadems of all
Emperors Kings and other Princes in the world, then all the said Crowns and
Diadems do excel the basest pebble-stone that is. It may be also that
sometimes you may with other your like Peers of this Kingdom speak a word in
such a season to his most excellent Majesty, for the helpeing of other
Churches abroad, against the fury of their Antichristian Roman adversaries,
and for the repressing of Jesuits, Seminary Priests and other obstinate and
traitorous hearted Papists at home, It may be (I say) that you with other may
speak a word in such season that shall be as apples of gold in pictures of
silver: Pro. 25. 11.
both for the greater glory of God and also for the better comfort of the
Churches, and the like safety of his Majesty himself, of his Royal
posterity, and of all his kingdoms. As the Lord sometime in the very like
case cursed him that did the work of Ier. 48. 10.
the Lord negligently, and kept back his sword from blood: so shall all
Princes and other most certainly be blessed, that in these distresses of the
churches shall be merciful (according to the mercy of God, whereby themselves
have bin advanced) for they shall obtain Mat. 5. 7. Iam. 2. 23.
mercy, and their said mercy shall rejoice against judgment.

As hitherto Right Honorable I have directed my speech to both your Honors
jointly, so give me leave now to convert my self to you my young Lord more
especially; whom before in the inscription of this myepistle dedicatorie I have
mentioned. And so much the more do I presume thus to do because you are not
nobly desended only according to the flesh, but also because you come of a
stock as noble for religion and the profession of the Gospel. For of my
knowledge you are now the fourth of that Honorable house in a right line that
have bin renowned in the Churches for profession of the Gosspell, and favor
unto the professiors and Ministers thereof. Your Honorable great Grandfather
maintained in his house learned Mr. Wright, afterward called from thence to be
Preacher at Ispwich in Suffolk: and then from thence removed to Dinnington,
where yet (I hope) he remains, a grave reverend and vigilant pastor. My
self also once being at Hampton Court about some 43 years past, when Doct.
Some was to preach before most renowned Queen Elizabeth of most blessed
memory, did there see your said Noble great Grandfather, in his humility to
be as careful (yea also painful) to see all things in pulpit to be fit for
him, as if he had been some inferour officer in the chapel to have looked
unto such things. Of your late Noble Grandfather the memorial was and is most
sweet and precious, and will never die. Of your most Noble Father I have said
enough before in this my epistle dedicatorie to him and your self. Here also
may not be forgotten the most virtuous and gracious Countess and Lady your
Mother, of piety and modesty a most worthy pattern to all other Noble women
of like sort.

How good also is the Lord unto you in your christian education and instruction
under Mr Collens the godly and painful pastor of Braintree, as it were at
the feet of Gamaliel? In which respect it Act. 22. 3.
may be said of you as Paul writes of Timothy, that 2. Tim. 3. 14. 15
you from your childhood have learned and known the holy Scripture. Therefore
also all that know these things may the better hope the like of you, that Paul
testifies of Timothy touching the faith of his Grandmother and Mother, yea
in a degree higher viz that the faith which dwelt first in your Honorable 2.
Tim. 1. 5.
great Grandfather: secondly in your Grandfather, thirdly both in your Noble
Father and Mother dwells also in you. All these things considered I may well
say, that you are not only Nobly descended, but also Royally even of the blood
Royal of heaven, of God himself. So also you are a greater heir then of an
earthly Earldom, even of the Romans 8. 17.
Kingdom of heaven: and heir together with Christ Jesus of an heavenly
inheritance, immortal etc. 1. Pet. 1. 4.
And for your preservation unto this inheritance, the Angels not only pitch
their tents round about Psalm. 34 7. Ioh. 10. 28. 1. Pet. 1. 5. Psalm. 5. 13.
you, but God himself also guardeth you with his power, and compasses you
about with his favor. God therefore being greater then all, you may no more
doubt of your preservation to the foresaid heavenly inheritance and Kingdom,
then you may doubt of the power of God. As you are heir apparent to an Earl,
and may hereafter be an Earl, you have men to attend upon you: but as you are
such as before I said, you have the glorious Angels of heaven to wait on you,
and to bear you in their hands etc. In the Psalm. 91. 11. 12.
resurrection you shall not only be as the Angels of Mat. 22. 30.
God in heaven, but you shall be also like unto Christ Jesus himself: being
where Christ Jesus is, and beholding the glory of God etc. O Right Honorable,
were Peter James and John so ravished with the sight of Christ Mat. 17. 4.
Jesus his transfiguration only for a time, that they prayed him they might
never depart from that mountain where they saw him so tra^sfigured: How
therefore ought your Noble heart to be ravished with the certainty of the
everlasting promises? Therefore also rejoice more in these things, then in all
your earthly honors whatsoever. And as the Lord has thus highly honored you,
so labor you (I beseech you) to honor him accordingly: not so much considering
what benefits you have received from him for this life, and for the life to
come, as deliberating with your self what to render unto him Psalm. 116. 12.
Luke 12. 40.
in behalf of them. Unto whom much is given, of him much is required. So shall
you indeed present your self such a sacrifice as in the treatise following you
shall see the said mercies of God to bind you unto. The same that David said to
Solomon, know the God 1. Chron. 28. 9.
of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart etc. Even the same I
beseech you to consider to belong unto you. So shall you be sure of that that
Azariah 2. Chron. 15. 2.
said to Asa, namely that the Lord will be with you, while you be with him etc.
As you are one of the sons Psalm. 29. 2.
of the mighty, so give unto the Lord glory and strength: yea the glory that
is due unto his name. He that only 1. Sam. 2. 7. 8.
aduanceth whom it pleases him, can also bring low them whom before he has
advanced. As young as you Psalm. 113. 7.
are, you have seen mean persons advanced to great honor: and Noble Houses
brought to desolation. Let not your tender years prejudice your consideration
of these things. For in this treatise you shall afterward see, that men may too
long defer the sacrificing of themselves unto God, but they cannot begin to
soon. And indeed what subject can begin too soon to serve such a sovereign
as will entertain him into any special service? That you may so do, beware (I
beseech you) of flatterers: beware of evil council to the contrary: both of
superiors and also of equals. Let the testimonies Psalm. 119. 24.
of the Lord be your delight, let them be your counselors. yea persons also of
such emminencie have need likewise to beware of servants. For even such
sometimes do more prevail by evil suggestions, then the grauest learned
and godliest divines can do by their best instructions. Notwithstanding as the
Apostle says, I am persuaded better things of your Honor: Heb. 6. 9.
and such as beseem all Christian wisdom: viz that you will continue
according to your beginning: growing like a Cedar in Lebanon, flourishing like
Psalm. 92. 12. 13.
a palm tree in the Courts of God; bringing forth fruit in your old age: and
being then (in your inward man) fat andin good liking. Therefore to conclude
with the words of Peter, as your Lordship shall grow in age, strength, stature
and outward comeliness of person, so I beseech you all so to endeavor to grow
2. Pet. 3. 18.
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To speak again ioynctly to both your Honors, although my labors following
be not worthy to be presented to such Honorable persons, yet as God himself
toward the building of his Tabernacle, as well accepted the small gifts of the
poor sort, viz goats hair, red skins of Rames, and badgers skins Exodus
35. 22. 23
etc, as he did of the braccletts and earerings, and tabletts, and other
Ieweles of gold, offered by the Princes, and other the richest sort of the
Israelites, so I do humbly crave the like acceptance of this my poor treatise
in my old and poor state presented unto your Honors in testimony of my
thankful mind for those favors I received long since of that most Noble
Earl late deceased, and now in heaven resting from all his labors, and
enjoying the fruit of all his Reu. 14. 13.
works. Indeed Right Honorable, my thankful mind for the said favors
required, the later I present these my labors unto you, the more exact in all
reason they should have bin, because as every Grammar scholar has learned,
that Gratia ab officio qu^d mora tardat abest, So Seneca has also we^l said,
Seneca. epis. 82.
Beneficia crescunt mora, tantoque plus solvendum quanto tardius. Ingratus est
qui beneficium reddit sine usura. Whereunto agree the words of Tullie, Terra
nunquam sine usura reddit quod accepit, sed alias minore, Cicero. de senectute.
plerunque maiore cum faenore: and elsewhere, Beneficio provocati imitari
debemus agros fertiles, qui malto plus De offic. lib. 1.
afferunt quam acceperint. And as in the beginning of this my Epistle, by some
divine examples, I showed that the kindness of Ancestors is to be remembered to
their posterity, so Dionysius Halicarnassaeus by the light of nature speaking
of a worthy Roman, says, Quamdiu ipse vixit, illinos decuit pro beneficijs
habere graciam Nunc vero postquam fato functus est, posteris Dionisi Halicar.
lib. 4.
cius referenda est: ne videaminicum corporibus simul defodere beneficiorum
memoriam. These things I acknowledge so much the more to oblige me unto both
your Honors in respect of the honorable favors of the late most Noble Earl
unto me; Notwithstanding as Tullie again says, Malui me tibi debere Philipie.
2.
consiteri, quam cuiquam minus prudenti non satis gratus videri, so say I to
your Honors, I had rather acknowledge my self to owe to you more duty (being
as I am) then to any that cannot well judge seem not at all to be thankful.
For although according to the former words of Seneca benefits do require so
much the greater thanks by how much the late: they are performed, yet
according also to other words of the same Seneca, in the same epistle
Beneficium non quantum sit, sed a quali profectam animo perpenditur, I do
likewise hope that your Honors will not so much regard this my gift it self,
as esteem of the mind where with I present the same. In hope whereof, as
likewise of your pardon both of my boldness in dedicating the same unto you, and
also of my tediousnes in this my epistle, I now being going the way of all the
earth, as Joshua said to the Israelites, Josh. 23. 14.
and David to Solomon, and being ready to be 1. Kin. 22. Philtpi 1. 23. 2. Tim.
4. 6.
dissolved, and to lay down my earthly Tabernacle, and the time of my
departing being at hand, and so being shortly to take my leave of all the
world, do also in the mean time most humbly take my leave of your Honors, not
ceasing whiles I live to pray for your long continuance here, with a daily
increase of grace and honor, and for your everlasting happiness and glory in
the world to come.

Your Honors in all duty most humble to be commanded. THOMAS STOVGHTON.
From my poor lodging in the poor Hospital called S. Bartholomewes by
Sandwich in Kent. August 20. 1622.
TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader.
Beloved, I am not ignorant of two other treatises already published, in Title
somewhat like to this of mine following: the one only translated into English,
and compiled by another, without a name expressed. The other being the work of
a godly brother amongst us, Master Thomas Cooper. Notwithstanding* because
neither the one nor the other, either in matter or in form do agree with this
of mine, therefore as I fear no disgrace to mine by theirs, so I wish no
prejudice to theirs by mine. The godly minded reader may well make use both of
theirs and of mine. Yet this without any disgrace to either of theirs I may
safely say, that hereinmine differs from theirs, both in handling a special
place of Scripture, and also that in the interpretation of the said Scripture,
I discuss diverse points of doctrine, making such particular application of
them, as the times require. Now whereas in this treatise upon the second verse,
I write somewhat largely, and it may be in some men's conceit, somewhat
sharply against conformity to this world I desire such as shall so think to
consider that the more general the fault is, as well of them that would be
accounted lovers of the Gospel, as of them that are open contemners and
scorners thereof, therefore also it is the more dangerous, and for curing
thereof requires the more sharp reprehensions. The bitterer any potion is,
the more any ointment or plaster smarteth, the more effectually for the most
part such portions and ointments and plasters do work in or upon them to
whom they are administered. Such also as shall so judge of my writing I entreat
further to consider how sharply the Prophets have enveyed, and how fearful
judgments of the Lord they have thundered out against offenders Isay. 3 13.
Zeph. 1. 8.
in this kind. The Prophets indeed were imediatly sent and commanded of God to
speak that which they spoke. But why? Because the ordinary Priests and
Levites, either did not that which they should have done, or were not regarded
in doing thereof. This therefore is no just exception against the Ministers
declaming and exclaming against this sin in these days: neither is it any
excuse at all for any so sinning. The grace of God in the Gospel does not
tolerate but agrauate such things. Notwithstanding I do not alike condemn all
persons in like sort offending: but the sin it self I condemn alike in all.
Some infected with this disease of the fashions I grant do diligently hear the
word: yea rise early (though of great place and state) to go some miles to
hear the word; and do often hear it against such fashions, and yet reform
not themselves therein, what then? Shall I judge them so to come rather to show
themselves, then for love of the word? I dare not be so uncharitable. I know
better things by some of them, and such as accompany salvation. God opens
not the eyes of all Heb. 6. 9. Mark. 8. 24.
to see all at once. I do not therefore so much wonder thereat, as hope and
pray they may still come, that so at the last they may hear that, whereby they
may be converted and reformed. The words of the wise are as goades and nails
etc. The Eccles. 12. 11.
The more therefore any are pricked with such goades, the more they will be
quickened: the oftener such nails are smitten, the deeper they will pierce. A
little coal from Gods altar may Isay. 6. 6.
grow, yea will grow to a great fire.

The women indeed that in these days are so shameless as to poule their heads,
(so likewise changing their sex; and opposing themselves to the express word
of God, are also most hopeless. Yet if any of them shall come to the word,
though nothing less minded then to profit by the word, they may for all that
be either caught by the net of the word, and converted; or else be so peirced
with the nails of the word, as that the same may enter as deeply into their
hearts for their confusion, as the nail of ^ael the wife of Heber peirced and
was stricken into Iud. 4. 21. and. 5. 26.
the temples of Sisera his head to his destruction.

That which afterward I have written for the reverence and maintenance of the
Ministers of the Gospel, I have not without grief written, to see the great
contempt and strange neglect of such Ministers, as are both in their ministry
most faithful and laborious, and for their life and conversation most
unblameable. For does not many a man of any great ability, and kind
disposition, better respect a servant that has been with him some years, and
faithfully also served him during the said time, then many that would be taken
great professors, do respect their Ministers, though never so long and
painefully preaching unto them? Do not also such persons by some preferment
more bountifully reward such servants at their departure from them, then such
people do reward such Ministers, even whilst they are with them? And may not
such judgments of God be feared against the whole land for this sin as
heretofore have bin executed upon other people for the like? The same I say
for that which I have written of the itching ears of some to hear other
preachers farther off dwelling, with neglect of their own, and nearer
dwellers, though they cannot justly except any thing against them: yea I have
written the more in this behalf, not only because of the great discouragement
of such their own and other near dwelling Ministers, but also because sometime
such itching ears upon a light report of some stranger preaching 3 or 4 miles
off on the Lords day going to hear him, and have lost their labor, heard no
Sermon at all.

That notwithstanding which I have written of hearing the next dwelling
Preachers after their own, rather then further dwellers, I do not mean of
Preachers in the same City or Town that has diverse Churches, because in
such places farther dwellers may be heard after their own Preachers without
any great labor of the hearer, and without any prejudice to nearer dwellers.
In such places more liberty may be used, then where further dwellers cannot be
heard without more labor, then is fit to be taken on the Lords day.

Neither also do I so condemn all hearing of further dwellers (men's own or
near dwelling Preachers not being neglected) but that in some extraordinary
causes, and at sometimes, for comfort of afflicted consciences, or for
resolution of some doubtful minds in some things, men may hear some furthers
dwellers, whom they shall understand either to preach of such a text as may
minister most comfort to such troubles of conscience, or to handle such points
as are especially doubted of: Provided notwithstanding that it be no ordinary
matter, neither often but seldom.

These things I have here promised to prevent all misconstruction of any thing
in this treatise by me written: and consequently to avoid all offense by such
misconstruction. If any other thing shall seem strange, I hope that love and
judgment shall qualify the strangeness thereof.

Loath I am, and very loath to offend any of Gods children. But touching such as
are so curious that nothing will please them: and that rather read men's works
to carpe at them then to profit by them: seeming always to learn and yet 2.
Tim. 3. 7.
never attaining sound knowledge, I care not to please their humors.

Thus craving thy prayers for my own comfort in my old and weak age, and for
the blessing of God upon this my Treatise, that many may present themselves
such sacrifices to God as in this Scripture he requires, and may also
according thereunto take the m^re heed of all conformity to this world, and be
the more careful to be reformed in their minds etc, I commit Act. 20. 32.
thee to God, and to the word of his grace, whereby we may all be built up, and
at the last have that inheritance which he will give to all them which are
sanctified.

Thine unfeignedly in the Lord Jesus. THOMAS STOVGHTON.
From my poor lodging, in the poor Hospital called S. Bartholomewes by
Sandwich in Kent. August 21. 1622.
THE CHRISTIANS SACRIFICE.
ROMANS 12. 1. I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that you
present your bodies a sacrifice, living, holy and acceptable to God, your
reasonable service. 2 And be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good,
that acceptable and perfect will of God.
CHAP. I.
The first Chapter, concerning the coherence of this Text and all following to
the end, with the former eleven Chapters, and the doctrine in them delivered.

IN all the former part of this Epistle, the Apostle after the testification of
his love unto these Christian Romans, by his gracious salutation of them, and
holy thanksgiving unto God in their behalf, as also by his earnest prayers for
them, has chiefly and principally labored in delivering certain maine and
fundamental points of Religion; yet not so wholly and altogether, but that
sometimes he inserteth some exhortations, according to occasion offered by the
particular doctrines handled by him.

The points of doctrine before delivered, are especially The points of doctrine
handled in all the former Chapters.
these: First, the corruption of all men, Jews and Gentiles by nature, in
transgressing the law of God, together with the wrath of God deserved thereby,
in the latter part of the first Chapter, and so forward to the end of the
second; showing notwithstanding by the way, that the Jews were deeper in that
corruption then the Gentiles* in respect of their greater knowledge; and that
yet God had bin very patient and long-suffering toward them, thereby the
better to lead them to repentance.

Secondly, proleptically to prevent an objection he shows that their greater
sin did not prejudice their prerogative above the Gentiles, by the word of
God only vouchsafed unto them, and to no other nation; and so preventing some
other objections to make way to the doctrine of justification by faith alone,
without the works of the law either ceremonial or moral, performed by mere
natural men, or in part sanctified by grace; he handles this point largely in
the third and fourth Chapters, amplifying the same by diverse effects and
fruits thereof, and declaring the grace of God therein to be the greater,
because God vouchsafed the same, when they that were so justified by him, were
his enemies, etc. Chap. 5.

In the sixth Chapter he has showed the said grace of God in so justifying men,
not to give liberty to men to sin, but to bind men to make the more use of
the death and resurrection of Christ, to the dying unto sin, and living unto
righteousness; and giving their members as plentifully, as truly and as
cheerfully unto righteousness, as ever before they had given them unto sin and
unrighteousness.

In the seventh Chapter he shows in what manner we that now live under the
Gospel are freed from the Law, and how we are dead unto the Law, and yet that
the Law is still necessary to show us our corruption, remaining in the best,
and being so forcible that many times it makes them to do that that they
should not, and the which by grace they would not do: so that even the very
best (though as holy as Paul) may cry out of their miserable estate in that
respect, and yet the more give thanks to God for their deliverance from the
same by Jesus Christ.

In the eight Chapter he insisteth in the former privilege of them that are
delivered by Jesus Christ from their miserable condition by sin remaining in
them, declaring not only that all that are in Christ Jesus are freed from
condemnation, and who they be that so are in Christ Jesus, but also that they
are by the same Jesus Christ adopted to be the children of God and heirs of
God with Christ, and endued with the Spirit of God, whereby not to fear, but
boldly to pray with assurance of being heard, and that all things shall work
together for their good. By occasion whereof he briefly shows the causes of
the former benefits, freeing us from all fear, and concluding that nothing
whatsoever shall separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

In the ninth Chapter making protestation of his great love unto the Jews, in
respect of many privileges of God unto them, and showing who were the true
seed of Abraham, he handles two great points: one, of election of some to
salvation: another, of reprobation of some to condemnation; without respect of
good works in the one, or of an evil work in the other, only of his own
will, and yet without any injustice.

In the tenth Chapter, further professing his love to all Israel, by praying
from the desire of his heart for their salvation, with the causes of his said
prayer, he takes occasion to show the difference of the righteousness of the
Law and of the Gospel, proving that both Jews and Gentiles that are partakers
of the righteousness of the Gospel shall be saved, one means whereof he
shows to be calling upon God from a true and lively faith, wrought through
the preaching of the Gospel; for that cause showing how acceptable the
Ministers of the Gospel should be to all them to whom they preach the Gospel:
and proving that although the Israelites had had the Gopell, yet they had not
believed and obeyed it; and that therefore the Lord had threatened to take away
his word from them, and to give it unto the Gentiles, that by their believing
thereof and obedience thereunto, he might provoke the Jews to the like
jealousy and indignation (as it were) whereto they had provoked the Lord,
because they had not believed and obeyed his word. So he concludes the Chapter
with the doctrine of the calling of the Gentiles, long before foretold by Moses
first, and afterward by Isaiah, and that because of the disobedience and
rebellion of the Isra^lites.

In the eleventh Chapter proleptically he entreats at large of a remnant
notwithstanding of the Israelites by grace only to be saved, and of another
calling yet of them, by a new covenant to be made with them, even an
everlasting covenant that should never be changed; repressing notwithstanding
the Gentiles from insulting in the reiection before made of the Israelites, and
admonishing them to fear their own reiection, by the example of the reiection
of the Israelites; comforting them for all that, by assuring them that the
Jews and they should be made one people to God: and so concluding the whole
doctrine of Gods mercy toward the Jews and Gentiles, by an holy acclamation
of the deep riches and knowledge of God, and of his unsearchable judgments in
that behalf.

These points of doctrine being largely before handled by the Apostle, which
now briefly I have recapitulated, the Apostle in the next Chapter and in the
Chapters following comes to application, and exhortation, even to such a life
as beseems such doctrine. Now before we speak particularly of the two first
verses of this twelfth Chapter before set down, let us first of all observe
this point, that Doctrine and exhortation must be joined together. Doctrine
must be first, then exhortation. Both must go one with another. The one without
the other, is not sufficient. This is the course of this our Apostle, and of
other, almost in all their Epistles. And this our Apostle says, that the whole
Scripture given by inspiration from God, 2. Tim. 3. 16.
is profitable, first for doctrine, then for reproof, (that is, for
confutation of all errors contrary to true doctrine) for correction and
instruction in righteousness: in which place, as the two first concern
doctrine, so the two latter concern dehortation from all sin, and
exhortation to all piety; both which are comprehended in one word. For to
suffer Heb. 13. 22.
the words of exhortation, signifies as well reprehension of vice, as
exhortation to virtue. So does the same word before Chap. 3. 13. and 10. 25.
in the same Epistle. The same is taught by the Apostles charge to Timothy to
preach the word, whereby he 2. Tim. 4. 2.
means the doctrine of the word: and then he adds, reprove (viz. errors)
rebuke (viz. vice) and exhort (viz) to Titus 2. 15.
all virtue. I might allege that to Titus, and many other the like
testimonies: but these are suficient.

This is the more necessary, because we are living stones 1. Pet. 2. 5.
of a spiritual house: and doctrine is as the foundation, upon Ephesians. 2. 20. 21,
22.
which we are built; being (as it were) mortised into Christ Jesus the chief
corner stone, for the better holding us together without swaruing one way or
other: that so being framed together, we may also grow up (or rise) in him 1.
Cor. 3 16. 2. Co^. 6. 16.
to an holy temple, and an habitation of God (himself) through the Spirit. And
according to this we are elsewhere also called the temples of God, inhabited by
the Spirit of God: and 1. Cor. 6. 19.
our bodies are said to be the temples of the holy Ghost. As therefore the
building and the foundation must go together; the foundation without a building
upon it, being nothing, but arguing the folly of the layer thereof; and the
building without a foundation* soon decaying and coming Math. 7. 27.
to ruin: so doctrine and exhortation must go together; the former being first
laid; and by exhortation the elect hewn and prepared, and then built upon it.

Moreover, exhortation is (as it were) the life of doctrine, and doctrine (in
some sense as it were) the body. And therefore as the body is dead without
the life, so is doctrine without exhortation. For this cause the Apostle much
longed and earnestly prayed to be with the Philippians. Wherefore? That by his
presence and pains amongst Phil. 1. 9. 10. 11
them, their love might abound more and more in knowledge and in all judgment.
And why? He renders a reason from four ends of their said abounding in
knowledge and judgment: two inward, and two outward. First, that they might be
able to discern things that differ, both doctrines and manners; and so not
take hob for nob. Secondly, that they might be pure, or clear as the Sun,
from which he borrows that phrase, by allusion to that Cant. 6. 10.
in the Canticles, that is, the same within and without; no hypocrites. These
two ends are inward. Thirdly, that they might be without offense; not for a
time, but till the day of Christ. And lastly, that they might be filled with
the fruits of righteousness, both of the first and of the second Table, toward
God and men. These two ends are outward, and concern the outward conversation.
In this place, knowledge and judgment, are for doctrine; the word love, with
all the four former ends, why he would have their said love so to abound in
knowledge and judgment, are for exhortation. And indeed, love to God and men,
will much err without knowledge and judgment to direct them: and men also
cannot discern things that differ, neither be sound at the heart, nor free
from offense, much less filled with the fruits of righteousness, without the
same knowledge and judgment to show them what is false, what true; what evil,
what good: neither can they be sound and sincere, except they know what
soundness and sincerenesse is, and how it is to be had, and whereby to be
retained. Finally, how can men abound in the fruits of righteousness, except
they know what works are righteous, and what unrighteous?

Moreover, doctrine is (as it were) the whole loaf or joint of meat;
exhortation is the dividing of it aright, and 2. Tim. 2. 15.
the distribution thereof according to the diverse states and capacities of men;
and men to be instructed in doctrine, are as children that cannot carue for
themselves. As therefore it is not enough for whole loaves of bread or joints
of meat to be set before children, except the same be cut and divided to every
one according as their need requires, and as it were by parcels and several
por^ions: so it is not enough for doctrine to be only delivered, except also
by exhortation the same be applied, as every man is capable thereof, and has
need, in respect of his place and calling, and conversation.

All this is not to be so understood as though every Minister of the word
should be able to teach and exhort in the same measure. For these faculties of
teaching and exhorting, are distinguished in this Chapter, verse 7. 8. and
Pastors and Teachers are reckoned as several callings, as well as Apostles,
Prophets and Evangelists; and to one is Ephesians. 4. 14. 1. Cor. 12. 8.
given by the same Spirit the word of wisdom, and to another the word of
knowledge. This therefore is only the meaning, that doctrine alone is not to
be taught, but also to be applied by exhortation, either by one and the same
man, or by diverse; some teaching, some exhorting: some having a special gift
in teaching, that are but mean in exhortation; and some being excellent for
quickening men by exhortation, that have not the like faculty for doctrine.

The use of all this is twofold,
1. Reprehension. 2. Instruction.
It reproves all that content themselves with one only, The use of the former
doctrine
without the other. Some with doctrine only, that never care to be pressed
with exhortation, for doing of that which doctrine teaches and requires. Some
for a time are moved with earnest exhortations, and a while are hot on the
spur in their affections to the Preachers, and swift to speak in
commendation of such Sermons as do so on the sudden affect them, who
notwithstanding cannot bear doctrine, though never so divine, at least who
cannot endure much thereof, but think it tedious and irksome. So neither the
one nor the other does long give them good content. Such are like to those
little children Math. 11. 16, 17 18, 19.
that our Savior speaks of, and to whom he compares the Jews, who were not
pleased with the preaching either of John the Baptist, or of himself; but had
their exceptions against the one and the other. Our Savior indeed says, that
they were willing for a season to rejoice in John's Ioh. 5. 35.
light. But this word for a season, bewrays their said joy had no soliditie,
though the phrase used imports great joy, but that it was quickly quenched,
like to the laughter of a fool, compared to the cracking of thorns under a
pot, Eccles. 7. 6.
that makes a great blaze for a time, which suddenly is clean out.

Some great scholars likewise and Doctors are always reading of many books,
and day and night plod for doctrine, and grow to be great clerks and learned
men, which seldom preach to other, applying their doctrine by exhortation, but
keep all in their bosoms to themselves, no man else almost faring the better
by all their learning; yea Psalm. 42. 5 11. 43. 5. 103. 1. 2. 22.
some never apply their said doctrine and knowledge to themselves, in exhorting
themselves, and provoking their souls to such duties as belong unto them, as
David often did his soul.

Now for the second use of instruction; let all learn to join both together.
That which our Savior speaks in the matter of marriage, is to applied to all
other things, as spoken in the neuter gender; That which God has joined Math.
19. 6.
together, let no man dis-ioyne. Let doctrine be highly regarded as the
foundation, and much labored for, as that whereby the Lord does make known
his manifold wisdom Ephesians. 3. 10.
unto principalities and powers in heavenly places, that is, unto his holy
Angels, and whereinto they do greatly desire 1. Pet. 1. 12.
to pry: as sometimes the Cherubims were made with their faces toward the
Mercy seat, as it were to attend Exodus 25. 20.
what oracles the Lord from thence would deliver unto his people.

As the Apostle in this Epistle and in many other, especially the writer to the
Hebrews, have written most of doctrine, so let every man by doctrine lay a
good foundation to eternal life. There never was more need hereof then in
these days, wherein the Apostle has foretold, some should depart from the
faith, giving heed to seducing 1. Tim. 4. 3. 4.
spirits, and doctrines of devils: and the which days therefore 2. Tim. 3. 1.
he has called perilous times: and when also he has said that men will not
endure sound doctrine, but after their 1. Tim. 4. 3. 4.
own lusts shall heap up unto themselves false teachers, and having itching
ears, shall turn them away from the truth unto fables, such as these
doctrines of Popery are, viz. of the nine Orders of Angels, of the number of
Angels, of Limbus Patrum, of Purgatory, and of many other the like: yea the
same Apostle has said, that he knew that after his departure should wolves,
yea grievous wolves enter in Acts 20. 29.
amongst the faithful, not sparing the flock. Who ever were such wolves as
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and the rest of that Popish rout? Alas, how evident
is this to all the world, in respect of the bodies of men, as well as of their
souls, by the blood of the Saints shed by them heretofore, and now daily in
France, as also since by their cruelty to the West Indian Heathen.

Has not the Apostle said, there must be heresies, that they 1. Cor. 11. 19.
that are approved may be made manifest? And are not many amongst us made
manifest to be Priests, that before were accounted good Protestants? Whence is
this, but from wnat of a good foundation of doctrine? Certainly hereby men are
as apt to take any impression, and to embrace any heresies, as wax is apt to
receive any picture of a seal. The Lord keep us from further experience
hereof. If doctrine be not in higher estimation with v^ then of long time it
has bin, we may fear a greater rent and revolt from the truth then yet we
have seen. Without this regard of sound doctrine, what delight soever we have
in exhortations, what good motions soever for the present, all will quickly
vanish. How good soever a pace a Gelding has, what life and mettle soever he
has for a while, yet if he have not legs to maintain the same, he will not be
able to hold out a long journey, but will give in, and sink under his rider,
when perhaps he has most need of him. The greater, and goodlier, and higher
any building is for the upper part thereof, the sooner it will fall and come to
ruin without a foundation answerable to support it. Even so, though men seem
to be forward for a while in godliness, yea to be very zealous for the Lord
(as Iehu 2. King. 10. 16.
boasted himself, and indeed seemed to be,) yet alas such hot love will soon
be cooled, without sound doctrine to confirm, strengthen and nourish the same.

How many at the first are very forward (yea so forward that if Paul were
living they would deceive him) who notwithstanding embrace this present world
with Demas, 2. Tim. 4. 10.
fall from all, and would forsake Paul himself, as Demas did? I am sure they
forsake his doctrine. How many take exceptions against the Ministers doctrine
and exhortations, as being either too harsh or too mild, too vehement or too
cold; and at their utterance, as being either too slow or too quick; or at
their voice, as being too high or too low, that they either run to other
Ministers, Ioh. 6. 66.
or do forsake all, as many of Christ's disciples did, never walking any more
with them, or hearing them? Whence is all this, but from want of a good
foundation of doctrine. Hereby there are many such men and women, (...). 2 Timothy
3. 6.
as those women the Apostle calls little women (not of stature, but in
knowledge and understanding) were, y^ Paul says, were laden with sins and
carried away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth: and therefore such do easily fall away and are
perverted, because they could never attain to such knowledge of the truth, as
Paul in this Epistle before and after elsewhere has taught. Some ouerswayed by
pleasures, for want of a good foundation in doctrine; some 2. Chron. 24. 17 etc.
for the same reason perverted by flatterers. If Ioash had had a good
foundation, would he so easily have bin corrupted by the flattery of his
Pinces, and fall away too as he did, to his own woeful ruin from the goodly
profession he had made in the days of Iehoiada? Some also fall away by
tribulation and persecution, and trouble for Math. 13. 21.
the words sake. The same I might say especially of covetousness, and the love
of money, and of the world, yea 1. Tim. 6. 10. 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
also of many other particulars.

That that I have said of a good foundation to be laid before exhortation, I
may say of exhortation to be added to doctrine: for without it, doctrine will
lie dead, and not profit a man at all. It were better for a man never to have
heard any doctrine, neither ever to have learned or known it, then not to make
use thereof by application and exhortation to live accordingly: yea the truth
is, no man truly knows any good doctrine, that does not frame and conform
his life and conversation unto it. Remember, and remember it again and again,
and consider seriously thereof, that He that says, he knows God, 1. Ioh. 2.
4.
and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
Yea, remember and forget not, that doctrine or knowledge without practice by
exhortation, increases a man's condemnation. That servant that knows his
masters Luc. 12. 47.
will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Have not or had not
they great knowledge, that are or shall be able to teach others, and to boast
of their prophesying and casting out of devils in Christ's name, yet what a
Math. 7. 22.
dread^ull answer shall they receive? Had not Judas Iscariot by his commission
to preach, and power to cast out Math. 10. 1.
devils, etc. like knowledge with the other Apostles? yet how fearful was his
end. To conclude, the devils know the doctrine of the Scriptures more exactly
then all the Doctors of Divinity in the world: for they have heard all the
Prophets. Apostles, Evangelists and other Ministers, yea our Savior himself,
and God himself speaking by Angels: they have bin at all disputations, in all
conferences and councels from the beginning to this hour, and they are of
quicker capacity by their spiritual nature then any men; yet ye know their
present state in hell, and their reservation there in chains for a greater
condemnation Jude 6.
at the last great day of the Lord; because of all the exhortations they have
heard made unto others, they never made or could make any use to themselves,
but only for the tempting of men to do against the doctrine that themselves do
know. O therefore let not us think doctrine or the knowledge of doctrine alone
to be enough, but let us labor to make use thereof to faith and holy life,
according to the said doctrine, by application of it to our selves, and one to
another. And why? First to adorn and grace the some doctrine thereby; because
the wicked Why we must join exhortations unto godliness with doctrine. 1.
Tim. 6. 1. Tit. 2. 20. Math. 5. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 12. 2. Pet. 1. 10.
are ready to take every occasion by the evil life, yea by the least slips of
professors (how mean soever, and how new soever the said professors be) to
blaspheme the name of God and his doctrine. Secondly, to win others to the
doctrine, and to provoke them to glorify God. Thirdly, to confirm our own
hope of salvation, and to make our election and calling the surer, not with
God, but to our own souls and consciences, for our greater comfort in the day
of our affliction and hour of tentation, and the more to encourage us to
resist Satan, as knowing that so he will fly from us; and that we, howsoever
assaulted by Iam. 4. 7.
him, shall not be moved; it being a part of Gods righteousness, Psalm. 15. 5.
Math. 7. 25. 1. Ioh. 2. 17. I^m. 1. 22. 2. Pet. 1. 10. Heb. 6. 10. Ioh 10. 28.
1. Pet. 1 5. (...).
as well as of his mercy, not to forget such things. Such also as do so hear
the voice of Christ, and follow him, being kept by the power of God unto
eternal life, so that no other can take them from Christ, yea also guarded
about by the same power ( apprehended) by faith unto salvation, prepared to be
showed in the last time. Thus much of the or^er of the Apostle in teaching
doctrine so amply before, and now adding exhortation thereunto; and of the
doctrine thereby commended unto us, with the use thereof to be made by us:
wherein I have bin the larger, because of the great and general neglect of the
one and of the other, to be joined one with another.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the two verses read are Logically aualysed; and the two first
arguments prefixed to the maine exhortation, from the words I beseech, and
brethren, are also handled.

NOw follows the words before taken out of the beginning of this twelfth
Chapter. Touching this Chapter therefore, this is the Apostles method therein.

First, he exhorts all men generally to a life beseeming the former doctrine,
in the five first verses.

Secondly, he commends some particular duties, belonging.
specially to Ecclesiastical persons, in verse. 6, 7, 8. generally belonging to
all men, verse. 9. to the end of the Chapter.
The general exhortation is expressed, and propounded in these words, Present
your bodies a sacrifice to God.

The which so propounded, is pressed, and guarded by
Three arguments before: One after.
Two of the former arguments are taken from the manner of exhorting,
1. in the verb, I beseech. 2. in the adiunct of the Romans, Brethren.
The third fore-argument is taken from that that might and ought to move them
to present their bodies a sacrifice to God, viz. the mercies of God. Then the
Apostle describing this sacrifice by three adjuncts thereof, living, holy,
acceptable; and amplifying the third by the subject or person to whom it must
be acceptable, adds the after argument for confirmation of the former
exhortation. This argument is taken from a fourth adiunct of the sacrifice, as
the words your reasonable service: the which what they mean; and how they
serve for confirmation of the exhortation, we shall hear when we come unto
them. This is the sum and anatomy of the first verse.

In the second verse he amplifieth
First, the maine exhortation, by removing one special hindrance thereof, as
by an argument from a diverse thing or a contrary. Secondly, the same diverse or
contrary thing by another contrary, amplified by the means and by the end.
The special hindrance of the former, contain exhortation, in these word, And
be not conformed unto this world.

The contrary thereof is to be transformed: whereof the means is by the
renewing of the mind: and the end hereof is to prove the will of God.

This will of God is described by three adjuncts, good, acceptable, perfect.

This is the sum and anatomy of the second verse. And so ye have the
Synopsis or abridgement of all that shall be spoken of this theme of The
Christians sacrifice, in this treatise.

Now to return and to follow the Apostle step by step, and word by word,
without changing his own method; I beseech.
and to begin with his first argument prefixed, from the manner of his
exhortation. The word translated I beseech, 2. Tim. 4. 2. Tit. 2. 15. Heb. 3.
17. and 10. 25.
signifies also to exhort, and is commonly so translated in the places noted
in the margin, and after elsewhere.

Touching this word, let us note and observe that the Prophets immediately sent
from God, never used it, but always spoke more imperatiuely and commandly. So
our Savior never used it immediately, but is always said to have spoken as
having power and authority. I say, that Math. 7. 29. Mark. 1. 22. Luke 4. 32.
our Savior never used it immediately, and speaking in his own person, because
mediatly speaking in the Apostles he did use it. For Paul says in the person
of himself and 2. Cor. 13. 3. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
of Timothy, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead, etc. Why Christ himself immediately used it
not, the reason is plain, because he was the Lord and Master himself: why
the Prophets did not so speak, I cannot well determine, except it were because
they were sent to the Lords own people by special covenant before, that had
obstinately and rebelliously violated the said covenant, and were become
rebellious stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in Acts 7. 52.
heart, though circumcised in body. The Apostles do use it, because for the
most part they spoke to the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. 12.
before strangers from the covenant; by such mild speaking the better to
allure them unto, or encourage them in the faith; or unto the Jews that began
to relent of their obstinacy, and to incline their ears to the Gospel.

Now touching this place, the Apostle had power (as he writes to Philemon) to
have commanded or charged these Romans to do that which here he requires of
them, and yet for loves sake (as he says further to Philemon) Philemon 8.
he did beseech or exhort them. For Paul in the same place to Philemon, uses
the same word in the original, that he does here and in the former places.
This he does in his love, meekness and mildness, the more to persuade them,
and to win their love; the which to do he beseeches them rather, then (as he
might) commands them.

But here we are not altogether to pass by that that Thomas a Watering (I
mean Thomas Aquinas) notes upon this place, namely, that he beseeches them,
first to test^fie Tho. Aquinas in Romans 12. 1.
his humilite, as Prou. 18. 23. The poor uses entreaties, but the rich
answers roughly. Secondly, that he might the more of his love move them by
entreating the^, as Paul did Philemon and the Galatians. Thirdly, for reverence
of Philem. 8. Gal. 6. 1. 1. Tim. 5. 1.
the Romans, as Paul admonishes Timothy, not to rebuke an Elder, but to
entreat him as a father. Here, in medio consist it virtus: the middle of these
three is the best. For although by so entreating them, Paul did show his
humility; yet that he did it as the poor creeps and croucheth to the surly
rich man, is not to be yielded. Touching the third, that Paul did so entreat
the Romans as he would have Timothy to entreat Elders as fathers, this
likewise is not to be granted, because Paul was many ways superior, no ways
inferior to these believing Romans. The second is that I have before noted,
yet the place to the Galatians is not fitly applied, because we read not these
Romans to have bin overtaken with such a fault, as whereof the Apostle writes
to the Galatians. Notwithstanding these word of Thomas Aquinas being a Papist,
do argue a more modest spirit in him, then is to be found in the Papists of our
time.

To return, as Paul in his love here beseeches these Romans, so do the other
Apostles the like. For proof whereof I need allege no places, the thing is so
common. And this teaches all Ministers of the word so to do also with those
with whom they think by such means they may prevail. For the servant of God
(that is, the man of God, and Minister of God, in place of speaciall service
unto God) must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt 2. Tim. 2. 24. and
3. 17.
to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if
God peradventure (or at any time) will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth: that is, to try if God will give them repentance.
As all men must have that wisdom that is from above, peaceable and gentle:
Iam. 3. 17.
so especially the Ministers of the Gospel must be endued with it, that so
their words may the better be as goades and as nails, fastened by the masters
of the assemblies, given from Eccles 12. 11.
one Shepherd.

Notwithstanding, as before we heard that Paul said, he had power to command
Philemon; so all the Ministers of the Gospel have the like power to reprove
and rebuke with 2. Tim. 4. 2. Tit. 2. 15.
all authority, as being themselves commanded so to do. Yea, in that place 2.
^im. 4. 2. the word translated to rebuke, sometime signifies to chide or rate;
as when it is said, that Christ rebuked the winds, the same word is used. So
also when he rebubed the Devil in the child. The same Math. 8. 26. Mark. 4.
37. Luke 8. 34. Mark. 9. 25. Luke 4. 35. 41.
word is also used when he rebuked the Devils in another possessed with them.
Notwithstanding this is not to be done but upon urgent necessity, and then
also in great discretion and wisdom, with good respect of persons, of the
quality of the sin, of place, and of the time. I could confirm this by
diverse arguments, and illustrate it by diverse examples, of Prophets, John the
Baptist, our Savior, the Apostles, diverse ordinary Ministers that feared not
in godly manner, sharply, roundly and worthily so to rebuke Kings of Judah and
Israel, and other Kings and Emperors; yea not only those that were wicked,
but some also that were good, as occasion by their sins required. And surely
fear and cowardlinesse in sparing reprehensions where they are necessary, is
sometimes the betraying of Gods truth the bane of Princes, and the ruin of
whole kingdoms. But this shall suffice for the first prefixed argument from
the manner of Paul's exhortation in the word, I beseech.

The illatiue word Therefore, has relation not only to the 32 verse of the
eleventh Chapter, God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy on all, but also to all the doctrine of the Apostle before in part
recapitulated; and it is to be joined with his mention afterward of the
mercies of God, whereby he does thus beseech them.

Now touching the word Brethren, he does not give it Brethren.
them as he did before to the Jews, for he calls them Romans 9. 3.
his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh; but these being by nature of
another nation, and heathen, he calls Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 7.
brethren according to the Spirit of adoption, whereby they were with him the
children of God, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven, which is a far greater
and more honorable brotherhood and kindred then to be brethren or kinsmen to
the greatest Kings and Emperors in the world. Math. 12. 49. Luke 11. 28.


This title of brethren being every where in all the Epistles so frequent, I
need not to stand upon it, as some perhaps would do. Only thus much, that it
is a word testifying love and humility, not proceeding ex more, sed examore,
not of custom, but of love; not used to fill up the sentence, and to make the
phrase and style the fuller and smoother, and the more delightsome to the
outward ear, but coming from humility, and serving to the furtherance of Gods
sacred truth and verity. As the wicked do spue and cast out bitter words,
railings and reuilings Math. 12. 34, 35.
from the abundance of wrath, hatred and malice in their hearts; so did the
Apostles, and so ought all good Ministers to send forth such amiable and kind
words from that abundance of unfeigned love in their hearts. Neither is there
any repugnance betwixt this word and babes and children, etc. For in
Christianity, the same persons may be fathers and brothers, and children to
the same, though they cannot be so in flesh and blood. Both these words, I
beseech and brethren, are the more in Paul, in respect of his high calling
above all sorts of Ministers in these days, and in respect likewise of his
great and admirable graces.

Touching this word also brethren, it shows the Apostle the reprehension of
the Pope.
esteemed them not as servants, but as his brethren in Christ, the pride of
Antichrist and of all his Prelates, that exercise Lordly authority over all the
Lords heritage, yea over all the Lords Ministers, though of greater graces then
themselves, using them as servants and as slaves; directly contrary to his
command, whose successors they 1. Pet. 5. 3.
boast themselves to be. Yea though the Pope call himself Seruus seruorum,
Servant of servants, yet he never shows himself so to be, no not to any
Princes or Emperors: but as clean contrary to himself, most blasphe^ously he
anogateth the prerogative title of Christ Jesus, styling himself King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: (Oh ^euela. 17. 14. and 19. 16.
what Christian heart can endure such blasphemies? especially how strange is
it, that Christian Princes have so long endured it, and yet do endure it?) So
he deals and carries himself accordingly toward Princes, Kings and
Emperors, and toward all other, not only putting their necks under his
girdle, but trampling with his foul feet upon their sacred heads, yea upon
the souls of so many as subject themselves unto him, and whom the Lord in his
just judgment leaves to themselves, and gives them over to believe lies,
because they received not the love 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
of the truth that they might be saved.

As this serves for reprehension of the Pope and all his, 2. Use for
instruction.
so it teaches all Ministers by the like love to draw their people to better
love of the word, and of such exhortations as from the word and upon the word
they make unto 1. Pet 2. 5.
them; whereby the better to build them up as living stones, and to make them a
spiritual house for the Lord himself to dwell in. Yea, their very
reprehensions should come from such love, that they may be the better regarded,
and Psalm. 141 5.
accepted as kindness, and as precious oil that shall not break their head.
Therefore the Apostle prefixeth this word brethren, not only before such
exhortations as this is, but also before his reprehensions. When he could
reprove the Corinthians for not profiting by the word as 1. Cor. 3. 1.
they might and should have done, does he not begin his reprehension with the
same word? Does he not the like in his rebuke of them for their confusion and
disorder in their public meetings, every one of them having his Psalm 1. Cor.
14. 1.
his doctrine, his tongue, his revelation, his interpretation by himself? Yea,
does he not with the same word enter into his reproof of them for their too
easy harkening to them that had denied the great article of our faith,
concerning 1. Cor. 15. 1.
the resurrection from the dead? The same may be said of many other the like
reprehensions made in love. Yea, the Lord will have all reprehensions of one
another, to proceed from the same root; accounting them to hate their brethren
in their heart (whatsoever they pretend Leuit. 19. 17.
outwardly) that do not rebuke him. Oh that this were seriously considered and
diligently practiced.

But to add a little more touching this title brethren; it may be demanded,
whether all that profess themselves Christians are to be accounted brethren? I
answer, yea, till they bewray the contrary. For love thinks no evil, 1. Cor
13. 5. Gal. 2 4. 2. Cor. 11. 26.
without some apparent cause. Notwithstanding, some are falsely so called, and
therefore termed by the Apostle false brethren. Yea, as one says, Multae sunt
foris oues, multi sunt intus lupi: There are many sheep without the Church,
and many wolves within: so there be few visible Churches (or rather none)
wherein there are not some unworthy altogether of the name of brethren. When
our Savior commanded his Disciples not to give that which was holy unto dogs,
neither to cast their pearls before swine; does he Math. 7. 6.
not mean that even amongst the Jews that were the only visible Church and
children of God, there were some such swine and dogs? Yea that apparently were
such: otherwise that precept needed not. For he forbad his Disciples Math. 10.
5. Prou. 9. 7. 8.
all preaching as then to the Gentiles. Is not this further evident by Salomons
commandment against rebuke of scorners? Were there not also dogs amongst
Phil. 3. 2.
the Philippians? yea some that openly oppugn the truth, and scorn and scoff
at Professors, Ministers, and all admonitions and reproves; are worse then
those dogs and swine that Peter speaks of, because they never vomited 2. Pet.
2. 22.
up their evil, neither ever have bin washed from their mire, and yet proudly
and impudently come daily to the word and Supper of the Lord, remaining still
in their evil.

But may a Minister, speaking generally to an auditorie, wherein he knows and
sees such, call them by the name of Brethren? What else; though there be but
a few true brethren known: as, for the presence of a few honorable or
wor^hip^ull persons, he may say, Right honorable or Right worshipful. And so
the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, commends them in every thing 1. Cor.
1. 5.
to be enriched by Jesus Christ in all utterance and in all knowledge: and yet
amongst them there were many evil that troubled all the rest, as appears by
many things in the same Epistle afterward written. And though a man know such
wicked persons in his auditorie, with whom having used all good means, he
could do no good, but that still they remain scoffers and scorners, and yet
will come to the word, he is no more to be troubled therewith, then by very
dogs that come with their masters to Church: yet not altogether despairing of
them, or utterly discouraging himself, as long as they come; because as God is
Math. 3. 9.
able to raise up children unto Abraham of stones: so such dogs for the
present, he can turn into sheep, as well as he changed Paul from a roaring
Lion against the Church, to be not only a sheep, but a worthy Apostle, for
the gathering Acts 9.
together of many sheep into the fold of Christ.

Now as all must be lovingly and tenderly dealt with by the Minist^rs of the
word, so especially must new conuerts, as tender plants and young graffs in an
orchard, especially such as come of evil parents, that they may be the more
encouraged, and the better strengthened in the faith, lest they turn again
into their fathers ways.

This title so often occurring in the Epistles of Paul and the other Apostles,
teaches us what natural love there ought to be betwixt Ministers and people;
and that the people are to accept of their doctrine, admonitions, exhortations
and reprehensions, as of the best brotherly kindnesses, according to that that
before we heard. Oh also that the people themselves would live so together, and
mutually love one another as brethren; and perform such mutual duties in deed
and in truth one to another, as are often commended and commanded, not only to
be performed, but also to abound more and more: and that not 1 Thessalonians. 4. 10.
Heb. 6. 11. and 10. 24. 2. Pet. 1. 8.
only for the good of one another outward state, but also for the furthering
one of another salvation. Was there ever any time that required these things
more then this age does? Touching Ministers notwithstanding they are more to be
respected then only to have duties of brotherly kindnesses performed unto
them: but hereof more afterward. This shall suffice for the second argument
prefixed to the exhortation following, taken from the word Brethren.

CHAP. III.
Of the third Argument prefixed to the exhortation following, taken from the
mercies of God.

HEre we are first of all to observe the plural number. oictirmos oictos.
He says not mercy, but m^rcies: though the ol^ Latin vul^ar translation and
all ancient interpreters read it singularly mercy. And the word is derived of
another signifying mercy. But this word derived from thence here used,
signifies the execution of mercy, and dec^a^ation of mercy by some work.
Both words, the primitive and deriuatiue have relation to misery. Now the
plural number signifies the manifold works of Gods mercy, according to the
manifold miseries of men. Gods mercy is but one; yea all that is in God is but
one, as God himself is but one. For God is so simple an essence, that he
admits Ephesians. 4. 6.
no variety in him. Diverse attributes are ascribed to God; but that is only
for our capacity, and according to his applying of himself to our manifold
necessities: otherwise whatsoever is in God, is all but one. Now the plural
number is here and elsewhere used, in respect of our manifold sins, and like
manifold miseries by our sins. For as many diseases require many medicines,
and Psalm 77. 10. 106. 7. 2. Cor. 1. 3.
many sores crave many plasters; so our manifold sins and miseries require
many medicines, or many works of Gods mercy.

This argument is like to that, I Paul my self beseech you 2. Cor. 10. 1.
by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, etc. There is some similitude (I
say) betwixt these two places. Only herein is the difference, that in the one
place he says the mercies plurally, and in the other the meekness and
gentleness singularly: secondly, yt in ye one place there is the name of God,
in the other of Christ. By mercies he means also in this place, Gods works of
mercy only concerning our souls and the life to come. For this word
therefore, refers us only to those things that the Apostle had before
written, even to all those passages of Gods dealing before mentioned, and
before in part recapitulated by me, as to justification by faith without the
works of the Law, etc. In all the former part of the Epistle the Apostle had
not mentioned any mercy of God concerning this life: all before said,
concerns everlasting salvation.

Now by speaking plurally of mercies, he noreth that all All the mercies of God
do concur in the salvation of any. Ephesians. 4. 7.
the former mercies of God do concur and must concur to the salvation of
every one appointed to salvation. Whosoever has one, has all. One is not
enough without all. Yet this is to be understood first, of all common mercies;
I mean common to all the elect: secondly, of all such in several measures.
There are many mercies of the life to come, specially belonging to some
special persons, as appears by those particulars here mentioned in verses 6.
7. 8. All such graces are not necessary for all, neither do concur in all.
The special works 1. Cor. 12. 4.
also of Gods mercy to special callings, are not all alike, and wrought in
equal measure. But to every one is given grace according to the measure of the
gift of Christ. And there verse. 6.
are diversities of gifts but the same Spirit. And in this Chapter, Having
gifts differing etc. And what need so grave an admonition in verse 3. by the
grace given to Paul that every man among these Christian Romans should not
think of himself more highly then he ought to thinks, if all mercies or
graces were alike in all? Gods mercies to come, greater then any past or
present.


Not to stand any longer hereupon, but to proceed; by the mercies of God in
this place, he means not only mercies past, and mercies present, but also
mercies to come; which are greater then any we have had or have. First, because
they shall be in heaven; whereas these are all here below. Secondly, because
they shall be without fear of any loss, of any deprivation, of any of
diminution. Thirdly, they shall not be by degrees as here, but all at once, and
everlasting. But are our mercies here uncertain? Not so: yet in respect of our
weakness, and of the multitude 2. Cor. 7. 1.
and power of our adversaries, both without us, and Philip. 2. 12. 1. Pet. 1.
17.
also within us, we are never without fear, neither must be; not of losing,
but of ceasing them, and of weakening and obscuring our assurance of them.
Fourthly, Gods mercies to come, are greater then any past or present, because
they shall be without any misery at all. And as in these respects they are
greater, so they are also as certain as those that here already we have.

And the mercies of God which here we have, are assurances Gods future mercies
as sure as any past or present. Numb. 23. 19. Iam. 1. 17. Heb. 6. 17. 1. Pet.
1. 19.
of those we shall have. And for our better assurance of them, we are first of
all to consider the immutable promise of God, bound with a solemn oath, even
by his own name.

Secondly, they are as sure as those that we have, in respect of the great
price of our redemption, even the precious blood of Christ Jesus. For, has
Christ redeemed us with so great a price, and will he lose us?

Thirdly, in respect of Christ's intercession in our behalf for those mercies:
first, whilst he was here in earth: secondly, Ioh. 17. 24. Romans 8. 32. Ioh.
11. 42.
now in heaven. This reason is the stronger, because Christ is heard always;
and God cannot but hear him, because he is his Son in whom he is well
pleased: Mat. 3. 17. 1. Pet. 3. 18. 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
and he was always just, never sinning, either in any other thing or in
praying.

Fourthly, as before he did and now does make intercession for us, so it was
the end of his ascending into heaven to prepare a place for us. Has he
prepared a place for Ioh. 14. 2.
us, and shall we be frustrated of it?

Fifthly, Christ has not only promised these future mercies, but also upon his
promise, and to bind himself the more to the performance thereof, he has
given us the earnest of his Spirit. Will he lose his earnest? Can any force 2.
Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13, 1^.
withhold that from him, for which he has given earnest? or can we withhold
our selves? Hereunto belongs our sealing by the Spirit of redemption. Are not
men's writings ^ phes. 4 30.
sure that are sealed? and shall not the writings of God and of Christ Jesus,
sealed in our hearts with a seal of such a price, be much surer? God Spirit is
the seal of our redemption, to assure us both that we are already redeemed
Tit. 2. 14.
from all iniquity, and also that we shall be redeemed from all miseries of
this life, and from death it self, as they are punishments of sin; so that
we may say even whiles we live here, Death is swallowed up into victory: O Hos.
13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 54. 55
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

Sixthly, the mercies of God to come are as sure as those that we have, because
(in the former respects) God is not Heb. 6. 10. See more in Chap. 1. in the
end. Ioh. 13. 1. Romans 11. 29. Genesis 27. 33.
unrighteous, that he should forget our works and labor of love, etc.

Seventhly, whom God loves he loves to the end; and the gifts and callings of
God are without repentance. Did Isaac say of Jacob, I have blessed him, and he
shall be blessed; and wicked Pilat to the wicked Jews of the title of Christ
that he had written upon the cross, What I have written, Ioh. 19. 19. 22. Luk,
10. 20. Philip. 4. 3. Revel. 3. 5.
I have written? and shall not God say the same much more of them whom he has
blessed, and whose names he has written in heaven and in the book of life.

Eighthly, There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, Math. 24. 24.
and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible)
the very elect shall be deceived. It is not therefore possible that they should
be deceived, and consequently that they should perish. Ergo they shall be most
certainly saved.

Ninthly, all partake of the mercies of God before spoken Ephesians. 5. 30. 1. Cor.
12. 14.
of in this Epistle, are one with Christ Jesus; by which union they as
certainly know they shall be in heaven with him, as they know himself to be
there; and whiles he was here, to have prayed for us, that we might be there
where he should be; yea by which union we do already sit with Ephesians. 2. 6.
him in the heavenly places.

Tenthly, the Apostle has assured us that he will make our vile bodies like
unto his glorious body: and that when he Philip. 3. 21. Col. 3. 4.
shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory: and John says, we shallbe
like him, and see him as he is. 1. Ioh. 3. 2.


Eleuenthly, the wicked soldiers that brake the bones of the thieves crucified
with Christ, could not break his bones, because it was written of the
Passe-ouer a type of Christ, A bone of him shall not be broken. Was it not
possible for a bone of his natural body to be broken, because it Ioh. 19. 33.
36.
was so written; and shall it be possible for any whole member of his mystical
body to be utterly lost?

Twelfthly and lastly, (not to be tedious herein) None of the sheep of Christ
that have heard his voice and followed Ioh. 10. 28. 29.
him, can be taken out of Christ's hand: because the Father that has given them
unto him, is stronger then all. And all the children of God, begotten again
through the rich mercy of God, are kept and guarded (as I said before) by the
power of God etc. Is it not blaspemous either to say that God is 1. Pet. 1. 5.
In Chap. 1. at the end.
unrighteous, or to deny his omnipotency, that he is not able to keep his
own? May we not upon these grounds cry out, O the unsearchable riches of Gods
goodness, as well as of his wisdom? May we not break out into admiration of
the happy and blessed state and condition of all them that are partaker of
such mercies of God? Oh then how forcible an argument is this of the Apostle,
to provoke, urge and press all by these mercies to present their bodies a
sacrifice unto God? Yea certainly this argument is greater then whatsoever can
be urged to this purpose from all the judgments of God. We are many times
provoked Ios. 23. 8. etc. and 24. 14. 1. Sam. 12. 24.
to cleave unto God, to fear God, etc. by consideration of the great works of
his mercy for this life, both performed and also promised: how much more then
ought these his great mercies of the life to come quicken us thus to present
our bodies a sacrifice, living, holy, acceptable. Therefore this Apostle from
the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead in that glorious manner that he had
described the same, infers this exhortation to stedfastnes in judgment, and
to abounding in all good works with constancy; Therefore my beloved brethren
be steadfast, 1. Cor. 15. 58. (...).
that is, rest your selves in the former doctrine* as in a seat or chair of
state, after ye have bin wearied with the errors of false Apostles to the
contrary: be immovable, let no man vnseate you; abounding always in the work
of the Lord; forasmuch as ye know (even certainly) that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. Does not the Apostle Peter also from the same certainty of
Gods future mercies exhort the Christian Jews with all diligence to add to
their faith 2 Pet. 1. 5. 6. Vt virtus a nomine vir proforti and strenuo, ita
(...) ab (...) deriuatur, (...) autem est Mars quam Poetae imperunt Deum b^lli.
virtue (or rather fortitude or courage, according to the deriuation of the
Greek word) and to their said courage knowledge (for the better direction
thereof) and to knowledge temperance (because men of courage are commonly
intemperate) and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness love, even toward
all men. Does not John likewise exhort to love one another unfeignedly and in
deed, as well as in word, from our knowledge that we 1. Ioh. 3. 14. 18. 19.
are translated from death unto life, and of our being in truth for the
present, and from assurance of our hearts before him for the time to come? Away
therefore with all doctrine of Popery, that teaches the certainty of Gods
mercy to come, to be the doctrine of security and liberty. Away with all
Arminianisme, that teaches that no man can be sure of his salvation; and that
men partaker of the former mercies, may for all that lose all, Heb. 6. 9.
and utterly and finally fall away from grace. All objections to the contrary,
are strawy, watery and weak. The mainest objection of all other from Heb. 6.
4. etc. is dog-lame; yea, the legs thereof are so cut off in the very 9. 10.
same place, verse. 9. 10. that it must have legs made of wood to support it,
that will be burnt with the fire. For the Apostle adding, that he was persuaded
better things of them, and such as did accompany salvation, proving the same
from the very righteousness of God, in those respects that before I have
spoken, does by his said words plainly teach us, that he had not before spoken
of such things as necessarily accompany salvation. Can there be any thing
better then faith, and these mercies of God apprehended by faith? Therefore it
is certain that the Apostle had not before spoken of such things, as in verse
the 9. he calls better things, and such as accompany salvation. They that
fall away from the communion of Saints, and that lose their taste of those
mercies they seemed to have, never were of the Saints, neither ever indeed had
received those 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
mercies. I have seen a little dog-bolt book, lately published by some that
style themselves, falsely called Anabaptists: but it is lamentable to see how
the poor men moile themselves in their errors, and how they are puzzled with
the former place of John, laboring to answer it, but most foully abusing it,
saying themselves cannot tell what. They multiply words indeed, but in them not
a word to purpose, neither worth any answer.

But to return and proceed; does not this our Apostle from the very promises
of God made to the Jews in old time, mentioned in the end of the 2. Cor. 6.
provoke us Gentiles engrafted into Christ, to purge our selves from all 2. Cor.
7. 1.
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, etc. As for the words following,
in the fear of God, and the like elsewhere, they are only to be opposed to
presumption, and are to be understood as motives to the more watchfulness, in
respect Philip. 2. 12.
of the weakness of our selves whiles we live in the flesh, and of other that
in particulars have deeply fallen, and also (as I said before) of the manifold
and mighty adversaries of our salvation: yea not only in respect of the
number and power of our said adversaries, but also in repect of their great
craft and subtlety.

With these mercies of God concerning the life to come, we may also join the
afflictions wherewith the Lord does chastise our outward man, because by them
he schooleth us, to make us the fitter for the life to come, and humbles us to
make us more capable of his graces accompanying salvation. In which respect the
Prophet says, It Psalm. 119. 71.
is good for me that I have bin afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.
And the Lord threatening, that if his people would not hearken unto him to do
all his commandments, he would Leuit. 26. 14. etc*
thus and thus afflict them: and if by such afflictions they would not learn
to refrain their ways, then he would send seven times more plagues upon them,
according to their verse 21.
sins, etc. The Lord (I say) threatening these things, does not only teach us
that afflictions are for sin, but that also they are medicines to cure us of
sin, and so to reform us, that we may present our selves such a sacrifice as
here we are exhorted unto. The same is manifest by other places, Job 5. 17.
Psalm. 94. 12. Pro. 3. 12. Heb. 12. 5. Revel. 3. 19.
that in the former considerations pronounce him blessed whom the Lord
chastises; as also that teach, the Lord to love them whom he corrects. By
all these things we see, that we may well reckon the Lords chastisements among
his mercies. And therefore the more the Lord has exercised any in such manner,
the more every such man should labor to present himself such a sacrifice to
God, lest he send seven times more such plagues upon him, Leuit. 26. 18 etc*
such chastisements not being the least of Gods mercies. For, whom he loves,
he will not leave: but though he make no use of one affliction to the bettering
of himself yet he shall have another, till he be reformed of such evils as for
the which the Lord has so before once, or twice, or thrice afflicted him. Let
every man therefore be admonished by Gods chastisements, not only according to
these Scriptures before alleged, but also according to the counsel of our
Savior to him that had; bin so impotent for 38 years, that he was not able to
help himself, and Ioh. 5. 14.
whom he had restored with a word of his mouth, Behold, thou art made whole;
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. But of this somewhat more
afterward.

All the former mercies, and every one of them concerning the life to come, are
so great, that he is more then stony, yea of a steely heart, that will not be
provoked by them to give himself such a sacrifice, as here is commended.

Notwithstanding, although the Apostle in the former part of the Epistle, has
treated only of Gods mercies for the life to come, and from them especially
does in this place exhort the believing Romans and all other to give their
bodies a sacrifice unto God; yet Gods mercies also of this life, being
appendices of them, and appurtenances unto them, ought to move us so to do: the
rather, because that God by the giving of Christ for us (as the fountain Romans
8. 32.
of all mercies) has assured us freely with him to give us all things. If all
things, then also the mercies of this life. Has not Christ also promised also
all mercies even for this life to be cast upon them that first seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness? And indeed the blessings of Math. 6. 33.
this life, great and small, are not only free gifts in respect of our
unworthiness of them, but they are also mercies, both in respect of that
miserable state wherein all men are first borne (even the children of Princes
as well as of the poorest,) yea more weak and miserable then any other
creatures at their first coming into the world, and also because the first
parents of all mankind by their first sin brought themselves and all their
posterity into all miseries of this life, depriving themselves and all theirs
of all those blessings even of this life, that before the Lord had most richly
endowed them withal. In this regard therefore, we here in England have greater
cause thus to present our selves a sacrifice unto God, because as the, Prophet
after enumeration of many blessings and mercies bestowed upon the Israelites,
whereby he had provoked them to praise the Lord, he concludes with these
words, He has not dealt so with any nation, so we may truly say, Psalm. 147. 20.
that the Lord has not dealt so with any nation in his bountiful blessings
and mercies, even of this life as well as of the life to come, as he has dealt
with us here in England: especially at this time may we say so, because we
daily hear and almost see all our neighbors round about us as sheep appointed
to the slaughter, to be killed all the day Psalm. 44. 22. Romans 8. 36.
long without all mercy; according to the religion now of that man of Rome,
and contrary to the religion that is of God, or else to be forced to fly for
their lives: Iam. 1. 27. and 3. 17.
whereas we with our children in the mean time dwell safely here every man
under his fig tree, from Dan even to 1. King. 4. 25.
Beersheba, that is, from one end of the land unto the other, all the days of
our present Sovereign, and of our former most renowned Queen. Oh that we had
hearts to consider of these mercies, as we ought to do, so by them to provoke
our selves to offer our selves such a sacrifice to God, as also we ought: and
so much the more, by how much the more unworthy we are of the least of them.
But do we so? Oh that we did. Nay rather we are all the more se^ure, and do the
more add sin unto sin, soothing our selves in our said mercies, saying
with old and new Babylon, I shall be a Lady for ever; and giving our selves
Isai. 47. 7. 8.
to pleasure, and dwelling carelessly, and with them saying also in our hearts,
We are alone (viz. honorable and happy) and none else besides us; we shall not
sit as a widow, neither shall we see the loss of children. We are also like to
them that were at ease in Sion, ^and trusted in the mountain of Samaria, Amos
6. 1. etc. Ezekiel. 12. 27.
putting far away the evil day, etc. But oh that at length we would be wi^e,
and see the evil to come, and hide Pro. 22. 3^ 27. 12.
our selves from it. Oh that we would take heed, lest we feel that which the
Prophet Isaiah in the place before mentioned, threatened even in a moment to
come to that old Babylon, in one day the loss of children and widowhood, that
is, those evils that she never dreamed of, yea that she in her pride and
security boasted she should never see: were not this just with the Lord so to
deal with us, that like to the sons in law of Lot, have thought them that
have preached Genesis 19. 14.
judgment to come, thereby to move us to repentance, to have but mocked?
Verily it were most just. But let us at the last make this right use of the
mercies of God for this life, that Samuel commended to the Israelites, saying,
1. Sam. 12. 24.
Fear ye the Lord and serve him etc. and consider how great things the Lord
has done for you. If we still go on in our sins and security, and do
wickedly (not presenting our selves such a sacrifice unto God, as here the
Apostle exhorts us unto) let us beware of that which he threatens verse. 25.
in the next verse.

As this argument from these outward mercies toward us here in this Land, is
generally to be applied unto all (because all have a share in them,) so let
every man particularly consider, that the greater measure of these outward
mercies the Lord has bestowed upon him, the more he endeavors to present
himself such a sacrifice to God as here we are called upon to present. For if
to whom Luke 12. 48.
men have committed much, of him they will ask the more; will not the Lord do
the like? But does every man make this particular use of Gods mercies for this
life, particularly received from the Lord? Alas no, but clean contrary; he
withdraws himself the more from God; and the greater that any man (for the
most part) is in outward blessings, the more he hardneth his heart and face
against God, and the more he thinks he may sin both against God and also
against men. Therefore if there be any goodness in any great men, though it be
never so poor and little, we use to say, Little is much in such a man. Whereas
indeed we should rather say, It is nothing in such a man, as for whom the Lord
has done so much. For doubtless for the least of Gods blessings for this
life, a man is more in his debt; and the more he daily receives of that kind,
into the greater arrerages he runs with him, even such as he shall never be
able to discharge; so that he may well say, What shall I render unto the Lord
for all his benefits toward Psalm. 116. 12.
me. And if we make this use of such blessings for this life, then shall they
also be mercies of the life to come: but if we do not, then shall they be
judgments of this life and of the life to come. And when we have deliberated
never so long, what to render unto the Lord for these or for other sorts of his
mercies, we must not dream of making God any recompense, (for how can a man be
profitable Job 22. 2.
unto God?) but we must altogether think of receiving more, and every one say
with the Prophet in the former place, I will take the cup of salvation, and
call upon Psalm. 116. 13.
the Name of the Lord. We must still prepare our selves to beg more (at least
heavenly and spiritual blessings) and to magnify his Name for those that
already we have received, and not to boast or prate of any merits by any thing
we have done, but acknowledge that whatsoever we have done, yet we are but
unprofitable servants. Luke 17. 10.


By the premises hitherto spoken, we see that they do abuse the mercies of God,
that are made the more secure by them, and that take liberty to commit sin
upon sin, either from the mercies already received, or from the certainty of
Gods mercies to come. For his said future mercies are not promised to any but
to such as fear him and Psalm. 103. 11. 13. 17. 18.
keep his covenant, and remember his commandments to do them. Yea certainly,
they that rightly consider of Gods mercies but toward other, be they never so
mean, will thereby provoke themselves, though living and wallowing in their
sins, to confess and forsake them, and to return Pro. 28. 13. Ier. 4. 6.
unto the Lord, in hope they shall find mercy. Did not the prodigal son so
do, by remembering the plenty of Luke 15. 17. 18.
the poorest servant in his fathers house? Oh that all prodigal and lascivious
sons would do the like! such as are swaggerers, drunkards or great drinkers,
though not unto drunkenness, riotous, waste-goods, stubburne, rebellious,
Isai. 5. 11. Luke 18. 2.
neither fearing God nor reuerencing men, no not their fathers that begat them,
nor their mothers that bare them with great pains, and gave them suck with
many a pinch, and in their age have more sorrow of heart by them then ever they
had joy before. Oh that all other ungodly persons would do the like. If they be
very graceless children (as there are too many) that will not submit
themselves to their parents, and perform duty unto them from consideration of
such before mentioned fatherly and motherly kindnesses; how graceless are they
to God, how wicked, how rebellious, that from these his mercies will not be
provoked to yield their bodies a sacrifice unto him? They therefore are enemies
to all piety, and to these mercies of God, and to all grace of God, that from
the same do argue for all liberty and impiety, saying (being admonished of
their sin, and exhorted to reformation) What? God is merciful, he is not so
hard as you make him.

Moreover, if Gods mercies be so great and certain unto men most unworthy of
them, how should this provoke one man to show mercy to another, in imitation
of this mercy of God, according to that of our Savior, Be ye Luke 6. 36.
Math. 5. 7. Iam. 2. 13.
merciful as your Father also is merciful. And has he not said, Blessed are
the merciful, for they shall receive mercy? Has not the Apostle also said,
There shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy? but mercy
rejoices against judgment. God has no need of us, but we have need one of
another. We cannot be profitable to God, but Job 22. 2.
we may be beneficial one to another; yea the poorest that is, to the greatest,
as diverse other ways, so especially by praying for him, as the Prophet of Judah
was unto Jeroboam, 1. King. 13. 6.
by his prayer curing his withered hand. Yea, we may deserve kindness one of
another; but (as in part has bin showed before) we cannot recompense God for
that we have had of him, much less can we merit any new blessings.

Besides all the premises, if Gods mercies be so great as we have heard, how
highly are we to esteem of the word of God, the cabinet or casket wherein all
the said mercies of God are contained, and whereby likewise the Lord conueyeth
them all unto us, and the which it self is one of the principallest mercies?
Yea further, how highly are all Gods Ministers to be regarded, that faithfully
bring those mercies unto us? even so highly, that we should receive them as the
Galatians sometime did Paul, Gal. 4. 14. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
even as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus himself, for whom they are
Ambassadors: and finally, that if it were possible (as Paul speaks in the
former place to the Galatians) we should pluck out our own eyes, and give
them unto them, if thereby we might do them good. If as Christ laid down his
life for us, we ought to lay down ours for the 1. Ioh. 3. 16.
brethren, should we not much more do the same for faithful Ministers that
teach us, and are Gods hands to deliver Isai. 52. 7. Romans 10. 15.
these mercies unto us? How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad
tidings? Shall their faces then be odious unto us? so indeed they are to many;
especially if the Ministers preaching never so freely and without any charge
unto them, do reprove them or theirs; yea if from the guiltiness of their
consciences they do but think themselves or theirs reproved, then they take
them to be their enemies, as Ahab did Eliah. Sometime also they shake their 1.
King. 21. 20. Psalm. 22. 7. Math. 27. 39.
heads at such Ministers, as David's enemies did at him, as a type of Christ;
and as they that passed by did at Christ himself upon the cross, and as the
bull does at the dogs. But of the regard of the Ministers of the word, more
afterward.

Here also from these words, the mercies of God, let us learn humility, and
acknowledge all that we have to come from Gods mercy in respect of our
misery; even a plurality of mercies in respect of the plurality of our
miseries. How then can any boast of any merits in respect of any works? How can
any man glory in himself? Yea, let all men give all glory to God for
delivering them from their manifold miseries, by vouchsafing them so manifold
mercies. But it shall be sufficient thus briefly to have pointed as it were
with the finger at this point of humility by Gods mercies. To conclude this
argument from Gods mercies, the more mercy that any man has received, the
more let him present his body a sacrifice to God. But will some man say, do you
not forget your self by speaking of more mercy? For did you not before say,
that all Gods mercies of the life to come go together? and he that has one,
has all? if therefore every one have all that has any, how can he have more?
can there be more then all? I said so indeed, and so say again: and do not you
forget your self that think to take me napping, your self being napping? For
to omit that before in saying as now you charge me, that all Gods mercies go
together, I spoke only of his mercies for the life to come; I have now spoken
of the mercies of this life, which are given more in number to one then to
another, to omit this (I say) I pray you remember that before I spoke of
mercies in the plural number, now I speak of mercy in the singular number.
Although therefore all Gods common mercies for the life to come and
accompanying salvation do go together, so that where there is one, there are
all; yet I said also before, that the mercies of God are given in several
measures touching the particulars* knowledge, faith, hope, love, patience,
humility, temperance, etc. go all together, (yea so, that he in whom any sin
reigns, has none of all these) notwithstanding though he that has one of
these has all, yet every man has not these in the same measure; some have
knowledge in a greater measure then other; so also faith: the same is to be
said of the rest. This therefore is my meaning, that every man the more
knowledge, the more faith he has, the more hope, the more love, and the more
and greater measure he has of any other mercy, the more he give himself a
sacrifice to God, for the more glorifying of God. Let no man boast of greater
mercies of God in him then are in other, but let him consecrate himself the
more unto God, and glorify God the more. Thus much of the three arguments
prefixed to the exhortation.

CHAP. IIII.
Coutaining an entrance into the exhortation, and an explication of the words
thereof, Present your bodies a sacrifice.

NOw follows the exhortation it self, wherein I will first open the several
words, and note some points of doctrine in them, and then speak of the whole
exhortation. The words are these, Present your bodies a sacrifice. The word by
some translated give, by our new Bibles present, commonly signifies and is
used for adesse, to (...) to present.
be present. Sometimes for probare, to prove, as when Paul says, his
adversaries could not prove the things whereof Act. 24. 13.
they accused him. Sometimes for commendare, to commend; as, Meat does not
commend us unto God: and very often 1. Cor. 8. 8.
to present, as here it is translated, viz. in the places noted in the margin;
and often elsewhere. For I do but name Luc. 2. 22. To. 6. 16. 19. 2. Cor. 4.
14. 11. 2. Col. 2. 22. Ephesians. 5. 27.
the places in haste to the words following. So I take it in this place. By
bodies here synecdochically he means the whole man, Bodies and our bodies.
bodies and souls: and the pronoune yours, is not altogether to be neglected,
but to be well observed, as excluding the bodies of beasts, and the body of
Christ. The former law for sacrificing of beasts is abolished by the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ offered and sacrificed by himself; and so accomplishing
and performing all typically signified by the former sacrifices of beasts.
Touching Christ's own body, and Christ himself, none in heaven or in earth,
neither man nor Angel ever was or now is worthy or meet to offer the same,
but Christ himself. Christ with once offering of himself did bear the sins
Heb. 9. 28. Heb. 10. 10.
of many, etc. And by his will are we sanctified through the offering of the
body of Christ once for all, etc. And his body being now in heaven, and there
to remain till his coming Act. 3. 22.
to judgment, how can it be offered by any upon the earth? And who by the
doctrine of the Papists themselves knows when it is offered. For without the
intention of the Priest for making thereof, there is no offering of it, as
themselves affirm in the celebration of their Mass. Now who knows or can
know the intention of the Priest? Whether also do they make the body of Christ
(as they speak) in the state of humiliation or of glorification? Is God also
the only maker of all other things, even of the least worm, and can a shaven
Priest make the body of Christ? Did the only mighty power of God raise the
body of Christ out of the grave, and afterward exalt it to heaven; and shall
every such greasy Priest at his pleasure be of power to fetch it from heaven?
Or has Christ now two bodies, one in the state of humiliation, another in the
state of glorification; one visible in the heavens, another invisible in the
earth? Yea, how many millions of Christ's body do they make here in earth? For
they will deny, that in the celebration of their Mass, where and whenever
the body of Christ is received perfrusta, by pieces or scraps; but they avouch
that every one receives the whole body of Christ. So then there must be so
many bodies of Christ, not only as there are Masses celebrated in all the
world, but also as there are several communicants in the whole world, and yet
forsooth the body of Christ must still remain whole. O noble Arithmeticians*
Let no Merchants therefore, or any other that have great accounts to make, ever
make up their reckonings and cast up their accounts, without some Mass Priest
present, by whom they may make the speedier work. Then will there not be so
many bankerupts as there are.

Yea further, I pray you note another abomination in their Mass. For they
say, that every one receives the whole body of Christ, flesh, blood and bone,
really and materially with his bodily mouth, as it was borne of the virgin
Marie: but whether so little as then it was, or of full growth, that they tell
not. But to omit this; what follows? I pray you remember that our Savior
himself says, Whatsoever enters into the mouth, goes into the belly, Math.
15. 17.
and is cast out into the draught, according to the Greek and Latin word. Do
not these men (think you) highly (...) Latrina.
dignifie the body of Christ, to afford him no better room being now glorified
in the heavens, then this? But soft; they have not yet determined whether (as I
said) it be the body of Christ glorified, or as it was in the shape of a
servant. Well then, demurre a while, and consult one with another of that. In
the mean time, whether of both they mean; is it not much worse then the
stable wherein he was borne, and the manger wherein so borne he was laid? Yet
who can express the savage barbarousnesse of the people, in vouchsafing the
virgin Marie no better room, though they knew her not to be with child of the
Savior of the world? How horrible an indignity therefore is this, so to abase
Christ's body, he being so mightily declared to be the Son of God? Yea, this is
most horrible blasphemy: what Christian heart or ear can endure it? If Peter
compare 1. Pet. 2. 12.
some that feared not to speak evil of dignities amongst men, and of things
which they understand not, unto natural brute beasts, or unreasonable
creatures; whereunto may these be compared, that so abase and disgrace Christ
Jesus himself, whom they profess to know to be the Son of God, the Lord of
life and glory? Is it any marvel that they speak evil of Princes in the
earth, that do so foully deal with the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. If
Peter Revel. 19. 16.
also say further, that such as so speak shall utterly perish, (for so the
word by him used signifies,) how fearful and (...)
direful shall be the end of these wicked wretches? For, is not this to
crucify to themselves afresh the Son of God? And Heb. 6. 6.
indeed so they must do, if they make a new oblation of him. For a new oblation
of Christ, requires a new death of Christ. But Christ once dead, and now
living, dies no more. Revel. 1. 18.
And if they do again so crucify Christ, let them take that which follows
in the former place to the Hebrews, and acknowledge themselves to be so fallen
away that they cannot be renewed by repentance, that is* they cannot repent.

Furthermore, they say their Mass is a Sacrament. Non sententias, sed
contradictoria loquuntur carnifices. These butchers speak not sentences, but*
(in some sort) contradictories. For if it be a Sacrament, as the Supper of the
Lord is to be acknowledged, then is it not such a sacrifice as they speak of.
For, a sacrament and a sacrifice are two such distinct and diverse things, that
the one cannot be the other. A sacrament cannot be a sacrifice, neither can a
sacrifice be a sacrament. If it be objected, that the Passe-ouer was a
sacrament, and yet a sacrifice; I deny the latter, namely The Passe-ouer was
no sacrifice
that it was a sacrifice properly so called. For every sacrifice was to be
slain by the Priests, and to be offered at the Tabernacle and Altar of the
Lord: but the Passe-ouer was to beslaine, yea eaten also by every family; it
was to be roasted with fire, leaving no part thereof till the morning; Exodus
12. 8.
it was not at all to be consumed by fire, as other sacrifices were. If yet it
be objected, that it is called a sacrifice. I first ask where? Secondly I say,
it might improperly be so called as a type of Christ, of whom it is said, that
Christ 1. Cor. 5. 7.
our Passe-ouer is sacrificed for us. Thirdly, in respect of many
peace offerings after the first institution offered at 2. Chro. 32. 22. and 35.
7.
the first celebration thereof. In which respects the Supper of the Lord has
bin by the Fathers often called a sacrifice, because of the praises of God,
prayers to God, and alms given to men when the same has bin celebrated.
Besides all the premises, that the Passe-ouer was no sacrifice properly so
called, it is manifest by express Scripture, Exodus 8. 25. 26.
because when Pharaoh gave liberty to the Israelites to sacrifice to the Lord
in Egypt, Moses answered, that it was not meet so to do, etc. And yet
afterward they slew and did eat the Passe-ouer in Egypt. Therefore I conclude,
that Exodus 12.
the Passe-ouer was not properly a sacrifice, but only as before I said. And
touching the body of Christ, I also conclude, that neither any shaven Priest
nor any other is now to offer the same, but that all Christian religion
consists in the receiving thereof, yea of whole Christ, not into their
bodies, but into their hearts by a true and lively faith. But leaving these
their blasphemies to themselves, and to the judgment and condemnation of God,
I proceed.

Now having showed the body of Christ not to be any ways here meant, neither
now to be offered by any shaueling Priest, or any other, as the Popish Church
blasphemously say they offer it daily in their Mass; let us more fully see
what yet is meant by these words your bodies. I do therefore understand by them
(as I said) our whole man, bodies and souls. The word body indeed properly
signifies but one part of us, that was at the first made of the earth, and
that we now take from our parents, Genesis 2. 7.
and so it is distinguished from our souls at the first, and now also infused
into the body immediately by God. So Zech. 12. 1. Heb. 12. 9. 2. Cor. 7. 1.
Isai. 4. 6.
it is the same with the word flesh, though the word flesh have diverse other
significations most commonly for all mankind, as also for the whole corruption
and old man, and so it is opposed to the word spirit, that is, the new Romans 8.
1. 2. etc.
man, wrought by the Spirit of God in us.

In the proper signification thereof the word body is taken in diverse other
places: as when it is said, that Christ Phil. 3. 21.
shall change our vile body, etc. and when Paul prays God 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
to sanctify the Thessalonians throughout in soul, body and spirit: so also
when to the Hebrews the Apostle says, they were washed in their bodies, etc.
and so in the doctrine Heb. 10. 22.
of the resurrection, and often elsewhere. But in this place it is taken for
the whole man consisting of soul and body. So it is taken when the second
person in the Deity is brought in saying, A body have thou prepared for me. So
after Heb. 10. 5. 10.
when it is said, By the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ once for all. So Peter 1. Pet. 2. 24.
says, that Christ in his body bare our sins upon the Cross. In all which
places the body of Christ is taken for the whole humane nature of Christ,
soul and body, yea also for the whole person of Christ God and man; in which
respect by communication of the properties it is said Act. 20. 28.
that God has purchased his Church by his own blood. So likewise our body is
taken for our whole man, when the Romans 6. 12.
Apostle says, Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body. For he
forbids sin to reign as well in the soul as in the body: and although the
soul be immortal, yet the whole man jointly is mortal. And so Peter Martyr
says, that when he says body per synecdochen, he does understand the whole
man, as sometime by the word soul he does the like. For so Jacob is said to
have entered into Egypt with seventy souls: and yet presently after he says,
Genesis 46. 26.
that in this place it is not a name of nature but of vice: For our corrupt
affections are to be mortified, and good are to be put into their place, that
our sacrifice may be acceptable. But I confess I do not well understand how
these words do accord with the former. Some other for all that do so interpret
the words our bodies in this place, viz. not for our whole man, neither for our
natural bodies distinct from our souls, but only for our whole natural
corruption, as the word flesh (as before I showed) is diverse times so taken. Of
these Ambrose upon this place seems to be the ancientest and chiefest: Our
bodies (says he) being subject to sin, are not accounted living but dead.
Then he says, Non enim sicut tunc corpora pro corporibus immolantur, nunc vero
non corpora sed vitia corporis sunt perimenda: For not as then bodies are
sacrificed for bodies, but now not the bodies, but the vices of the body are
to be slain. Their reason seems to have bin, because as particular sins,
fornication, uncleanness, etc. are called our Col. 3. 5.
earthly members; so our whole corruption is called by the name of the body of
death, as when Paul cries out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body Romans 7. 24.
of this death? But for my part I rather approve of the former interpretation
of our bodies to signify our whole man, as M. Calvin also interprets it,
because it is said our bodies must be a sacrifice living, but our whole old man
must be slain, mortified and crucified. How also can the old man properly be
said to be holy and acceptable unto God? when it is killed and mortified, it is
not in being; and not being mortified, it is altogether unholy and odious unto
God, who hareth all that is evil.

That our whole man, soul and body, must be presented Our whole man soul and
body must be sacrificed to God. Isai. 1. 16. 2. Cor. 7. 1. Psalm. 51. 2.
unto God a sacrifice, it is manifest: First of all, by diverse commandments
for the washing of our selves, not in part, but in whole; and for purging of
our selves from all filthiness both of the flesh and of the spirit. Secondly,
so also by David's prayer for himself, wholly, not in part to be washed.
Thirdly, so by Christ's sharp reprehension of the Pharisees for their washing
themselves only outwardly, for making clean the outside of the cup and of the
Math. 23. 25.
platter, and for being like to whited sepulchers, etc. but within full of dead
men's bones and of all uncleanness. Fourthly, ver. 27.
our whole man has sinned, therefore our whole man must be offered to God*
Fifthly, our whole man was at the first created, and after our fall redeemed.
Sixthly, in the world to come we desire our whole man to be glorified, and so it
shall be. Seventhly, Christ suffered in his whole man, in soul and in body,
in the one as well as in the other. And it is to be observed, that as the word
soul is expressed by Isaiah, so the word used by John, and translated Isai.
53. 10. Ioh. 10. 17. 1. Ioh. 3. 16. Christ's suffering in soul and body for us
necessary.
life, is not the word (...) life, but (...) soul. And so it was necessary
that Christ should suffer and present himself a sacrifice to God in both parts
of his humane nature, that he might be a perfect Savior unto us of our souls
and bodies, because we had sinned in both. And this Christ's suffering in soul
as well as in body, is manifest by his threefold most earnest prayer to God,
to be delivered from that passion if it had bin possible: by his sweat
trickling down like great drops of blood: by his bitter Math. 26. 39. Luk 22.
44. Math. 27. 46. Ioh. 12. 27.
cry upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? yea also by
his prayer to be delivered from that hour long before. All these things do
plainly testify, that Christ suffered more then in body only, even in soul
also; and not such punishment as man only did inflict, but the heavy wrath
and indignation of God his Father. For many a man has suffered as great
torments in body and greater, that has not so prayed to be delivered from his
sufferings, nor so sweat nor so cried out. Moreover, the necessity of Christ's
such suffering, and consequently of his so offering himself, is further
manifest, because himself speaking of his suffering before, says, not only
that he should or would so suffer, but also that he must Math. 16. 21. Mar. 8.
31. Luke 9. 23. and 17. 25. Ioh. 12. 24.
suffer death, etc. Yea he shows the necessity of his death by the
similitude of a grain of wheat, that except it die, it abides alone; but if
it die, it brings forth much fruit: thereby teaching, that except he should
be put to death, the salvation of man could not have bin effected. After his
resurrection also, is it not said by the two Angels, that Christ had before
said, that the Son of man must Luke 24. 7.
be delivered into the hands of sinners, and be crucified etc. Does not Christ
himself also rebuke the two Disciples that were walking to Emaus, in this
manner, Oh fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken! verse. 25. 26.
ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
Does not this word ought, plainly import a necessity?

The necessity of Christ dying and suffering all that he A threefold
necessity of Christ's sufferings. Act. 2. 23. Math. 26. 54. Luke 24. 25.
did for our salvation, is threefold. First, because of the determinate
counsel of God. Secondly, for the performance of former Scriptures which had
spoken of his said sufferings: yea, not only the plain words of Scriptures,
but also all the sacrifices of the Law, which were all offered by death, as
types of Christ. Thirdly, for expiation of our sins, which could not
otherwise have bin taken away then by his being made a curse for us; because it
was written, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the Law. The justice of God therefore required all his said sufferings,
even that he should not suffer something only, but all: neither did it stand
with the wisdom of our Savior to suffer more then he needed, himself having
taught, that men shall give an account Math. 12. 36.
of every idle word in the day of judgment: shall they not then much more give
account of every thing they have done or suffered more then they needed? I have
the rather spoken thus much hereof, in confutation as of other Papists, so of
Stella, that is not any ex stellis fixis, of the fixed Stella on Luke 9. 31.
stars, but a Planet, a wandering star, both in himself and also in his
endeavors to deceive and seduce others, and to lead them out of the way, like
unto the Meteor that the Philosophers call ignem fatuum, the foolish fire,
burning up and down till it be wholly consumed. But what does he teach or say?
that one drop of Christ's blood had bin sufficient to have saved the whole
world; and that we are not saved by the quantity of Christ's sufferings, but in
respect of the dignity of his person. So what needed Christ to have sweat so
many great drops of blood, and afterward Luke 22. 44. Ioh. 19. 1. and 34.
to have shed so many more when he was scourged; and last of all by a spear to
have had so much blood let out of his side. Yea, by the former doctrine, the
blood which he shed at his circumcision had bin enough for all, and might have
saved all the rest. Yea, so indeed in plain words he avouches; and for his
whole errouious interpretation childishly plays with the Latin word excessum
there used by the vulgar Latin translation, but not meaning any thing
superfluous, but only according to the Ioh. 16. 5. 7.
Greek word so translated, meaning Christ's departure or going away, spoken of
by our Savior himself, as necessary before the sending of the Comforter: for
the word used by Luke, signifies only a going out of the way; and it is the
very name of the second book of Moses, called Exodus, because it contains
chiefly the departure of the Israelites out of the land of Egypt. But will this
doctrine stand without blasphemy against Gods justice and Christ's wisdom?
But this shall suffice for the necessity of Christ's sufferings, by the way
inserted.

To proceed, the next word is sacrifice, this English word Sac^ifice.
and the Latin sacrificium touching the signification of them do not express
the Greek word of the Apostle. For sacrificium and sacrifice, naturally
signify an holy work, as beneficium any good work, and maleficium any evil
work. Notwithstanding, whatsoever the natural signification of the word is,
yet I confess it is chiefly used for such a sacrifice as the Jews were wont to
offer unto God, and as the heathen also offered to their Idols, according to
the signification of the Greek word here and elsewhere used; yea also
according to the two Latin words used for the same, victima and hostia. Here
let us not omit the distinction made by learned Sadael betwixt Contra Missam.
the action of sacrificing and the thing sacrificed; and that the word
sacrifice more properly is to be understood of the action (as before I said,)
and that the thing sacrificed was called hostia or victima: hence it is that
our spiritual and internal worship of God, and the duties of piety and
charity, are called sacrifices, by the former similitude of legal sacrifices
in old time. Now the Greek word here used, is (...), all one with another
(...), both of the verb (...), which signifies mactare, to kill some living
creature for some holy use in the worship and service of God. And therefore for
that that we call, and in the Law was called a sacrifice, the heathen had those
two Latin words before mentioned, hostia and victima; touching the Etymology
whereof, the Poet had two Latin verses:

Victima quae dextra cecidit victrice vocatur,
Hostibus a victis, hostia nomen habet.
The Dictionaries, Cooper, Rider, etc. make this difference betwixt the two
said words (yet not according to those verses) that hostia was a sacrifice
offered to their supposed gods at their going forth to war against their
enemies; victima that which they offered after victory obtained. In both these
respects we are to present our bodies and whole man a sacrifice to God, both
for our victory already obtained by Jesus Christ, according to that of the
Apostle, that having spoiled Principalities and powers, he Col. 2. 15.
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them upon his cross; and
according to that, that ascending up on high he led captivity captive: and
also to that end, that we may overcome Psalm. 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8.
all our enemies yet remaining, and in the end triumph our selves and say,
Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O g^aue, where
is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. 54. 55
This we have the more need to do, because although the Seed of the woman
Christ Jesus has already bruised the Genesis 3. 15.
head of the Serpent, yet still he wrigleth with his tail, and still we are to
wrestle (for our exercise) not against flesh and blood, but against such
adversaries as in respect of our weakness are called Principalities and
powers, rulers of the Ephesians. 6. 12.
darkness of this world, (that is, of the children of darkness in this world,
not of the children of the light) and against spiritual wickednesses in high
places, yea also against him that (in respect of his subtlety and our
simplicity) is called the old Serpent. Revel. 12. 9. 20. 2.


The reason of this phrase sacrifice, is, because being ingrafted into Christ
Jesus, we are partakers of his Priesthood, and are Priests as well as Kings unto
God. For though 1. Pet. 1. 5. Revel. 1. 6. and 5. 10.
in that place of Peter we be called also living stones, yet this is not
prejudicial to the other: for in diverse respects we are called by diverse
names: and there we be called stones rather then timber; First, because Princes
houses are rather built with stones then with timber, and we be the houses and
temples of God himself, who is King of Kings. Secondly, in respect of the
perpetuity of all the elect, stones being more durable then timber. Thirdly,
because Christ himself, into whom (as before I said) we are mortised, is also
called the chief corner stone. In like manner as Ephesians. 2. 20.
Christ was both the Priest and also the sacrifice once offered for all, so are
we both Priests and also sacrifices, according to this present text. Thus much
of the several words of this exhortation.

CHAP. V.
Wherein an entrance is made into the matter of the whole exhortation, showing
the sacrificing of our selves to be active and passive; and how first of all we
are actiuely to sacrifice diverse particular parts of our bodies unto God.

NOw we come to the matter of the whole exhortation for the offering up or
presenting our selves such a sacrifice. Touching this therefore, let us
understand that Our sacrifice now not expiatorie but encharisticall.
when the Apostle requires or exhorts these Romans (and in them us also) to
present our selves a sacrifice, he means not any propitiatory, expiatorie or
satisfactorie sacrifice, for our own sins or for the sins of other, but
only an Eucharisticall or gratulatorie sacrifice, in thankfulness to God for
the expiation of our sins and satisfaction of his justice, made by his Son
on our behalf and on behalf of all the elect, and that by the appointment of
God the Father himself in that behalf, and in the mere and free love both of
the Father and of the Son toward us, without any desert of ours; yea
contrary to our desert.

Let us also further understand, that this our sacrifice Our sacrifice of our
selves twofold, active and palsiue.
of our whole man, body and soul, is twofold: First, active: Secondly,
passive. Active, in doing all both in soul and in body that God has
commanded us to do. Passive, in suffering whatsoever either he shall lay upon
us, or call us to suffer.

Before we enter into the sacrificing of our selves actiuely, A fourefold
difference between the sacrifices of the Law and of the Gospel.
let us note one thing more, viz. the difference between the sacrifices of the
Law and of the Gospel, to be fourefold. First, in respect of the Priests
offering the one and the other. Secondly, in respect of the place. Thirdly, in
respect of the times. Fourthly, in respect of the persons for whom the
sacrifices of the Law were to be offered.

Touching the Priests of the Law, they were all of one Leui; and not all they,
but only the posterity of Aaron: neither all the posterity of Aaron; for
there were excepted from the service of the priesthood, all that were blind,
lame, flat nosed, or that had any thing Leuit. 21. ver. 18 19, 20, 21.
superfluous, or that were broken footed, or broken handed, crooked backed, or
dwarfes, or that had any blemish in their eyes, or that were scuruie or
scabbed, or had their stones broken, and finally all that had any blemish. Now
in the time of the Gospel, Christ Jesus having offered himself once for all,
and he being a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek, not of the Tribe
of Leui, but of the Tribe of Judah, and having abolished all the Priesthood of
Aaron with all the appurtenances thereof; all Christians both men and women,
without exception of any, are priests to offer this sacrifice of their souls
and bodies Eucharisticall unto God.

Touching the place, after the building of the Tabernacle, 1. Sam. 1. 9. and 3.
3.
Now under the Gospel, every where all men and women may and must offer
themselves such a sacrifice, as Paul here exhorts these Romans to offer.

Touching the third difference before mentioned betwixt Leuit. 23.
contained; there were set times for the sacrifices of the Law, viz. morning
and evening; sometimes also the sacrifices were doubled, twice as much being
commanded to be offered at one time as at another; yea there were also set and
several sacrifices enjoined at for several feasts of the Lord. Now in the time
of the Gospel there is no such set time appointed for this sacrifice of our
selves; but as we are to pray always and without ceasing, as well as every
Ephesians. 6. 18. 1. These. 5. 17. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
where (this duty of prayer being a branch, as we shall hear of this sacrifice
of our selves,) so we are always and without ceasing to offer this sacrifice
of our selves.

Touching the persons for whom the old sacrifices were Leuit. 4. 3.
for the sin of the whole congregation, another for the magistrate, another
for any of the common people, and that also according to the quality of every
ones sin; for the sins of knowledge, a greater sacrifice being enjoined
then for the sins of ignorance. But now the spiritual sacrifices of the
Gospel, comprehended in this sacrifice of our selves, must be offered for all
alike, as well as by all alike; the neglect of this sacrifice or of any such
branch thereof, as whereof afterward we shall speak, being prejudicial to all
the whole body whereof we are members, as well as to the party himself that
so neglects it.

Having thus spoken of these differences of the old sacrifices of the Law and
of this of our selves, let us now return to our former dictinction of
sacrificing our selves both actiuely and passiuely. To begin therefore with the
active sacrificing of our selves, because the Apostle (as before has bin
showed) by our bodies means our whole man, body and soul, and yet names
only our bodies; let us in that respect begin with the active sacrificing of
our bodies, and then speak of the sacrificing of our souls; and of both as
briefly as we may.

Touching our bodies; I may first of all consider the The active sacrificing of
our bodies.
sacrificing of our heads, wherein let us only remember that sober and modest
wearing of our hair, which the Apostle (by the testimony of nature it self)
commends 1. Cor. 11. 14. 15
unto us, namely, that men wear short hair, because it is a shame for them to
have long hair; and that women likewise account of their long ha^re to be an
ornament unto them, and on the contrary that it is a shame for them to be
shaven or polled. These premises do plainly show first of all, that all men
that accordingly do not so wear their hair, do not therefore sacrifice their
heads so unto God as here the Apostle commands: for what is it to sacrifice
our bodies and every member of them, but to frame and conform them according
to the word, as afterward we shall hear more at large. The same is to be said
of women, either impudently cutting off their hair, and so making themselves
like to beardlesse young men, or not wearing their hair in such modesty as the
word prescribes. But of these things more afterward upon the second verse.

To come now to the particular members of our heads. Our ears.
Our ears are to be sacrificed to God, first by restraining them from hearing
any false doctrine. That which the Apostle requires of Timothy, namely to
withdraw himself from disputings with men of corrupt minds, etc. belongs 1.
Tim. 6. 5. 2. Tim. 2. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 3.
to all other; as also the shunning of profane and vain babbling: yea, our
ears must not so much as itch after teachers of such things, because to do
these things is the beginning of turning away our ears from the truth.

As we must turn away our ears from all false doctrine, Ephesians 4. 29. Ephesians.
5. 4. 1. Cor. 15. 53.
so also must we from all filthy talking and corrupt communication, yea also
from all foolish talking, because such communications corrupt good manners, and
them that otherwise are well affected. For there is none so well affected but
that still he has some relics of the old man that is altogether apt to hear
evil, and to stop the ears against all goodness, like the deaf Adder
against the charmer, not Psalm. 58. 4. 5.
harkening to his voice, charm he never so wisely. The Lord Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
by Moses commanded the Israelites not to hear the words of false Prophets.
And does not our Savior admonish his Math. 16. 5. Mark. 8. 15.
Disciples, to take heed and beware of the leven of the Scribes and Pharisees,
that is, of their doctrine. If the Israelites that had heard God to give his
Law in most glorious manner, and had seen the great works of God in Egypt, and
their own most wonderful passage through the red sea, and the mighty
overthrow of Pharaoh and all his host therein, and many other great works of
God; if the Disciples that had bin so taught by Christ himself, and had seen
all his miracles; if Timothy that had known the holy 2. Tim. 3. 14. chap. 1. 5.
Scriptures from a child, and in whom dwelt the unfeigned faith of his
grandmother Lois, and of his mother Eunice: if all these needed such
admonitions; how much more need have we and all that live now in these
perilous times, wherein lesuites and other false Antichristian teachers, as
also Anabaptists and other heretics do so swarm, much more dangerous and
hurtful then all the flies, frogs, grasshoppers and lice that were in the land
of Egypt. Hitherto belongs that grave admonition to the Hebrews, before by
the Apostle commended to have had such things as did Heb. 6. 9.
accompany salvation; that they should take heed as they feared falling away
from the grace of God, lest any root (never so small) of bitterness did
spring up (or peep out) whereby they should be troubled and many defiled. And
alas who sees not the necessity of this admonition in these days, and in
this our land, not only by the swarming of these Romish and bloody
caterpillars before mentioned, but also by their perilous effects in many like
children of disobedience, even by the falling away of many to Popery, that
have bin borne of Protestant parents and instructed in the truth? How many also
are corrupted in their manners, by harkening unto vain, foolish and filthy
ballads, and by other the like corrupt communications against the first and
against the second Table?

Neither is it enough for sacrificing of our ears to God, only to restrain
them from hearing that which is evil, but they must also be applied to hear
that which is good. This the Apostle intimates, when he says, Be swift to
Iam. 1. 19.
hear. Hereunto belong many precepts in the Proverbs, Prou. 2. 2. and 4. 1.
20. Pro. 22. 17. Math. 11. 15. and 13. 9. 43. Revel. 2. 7. 11. 17. 19. and 3.
6. 13. 22.
for inclining our ears to wisdom, etc. for hearing the instructions of
fathers, etc. How also does our Savior both in the Gospel and in the
Revelation, say, Whosoever has ears to hear, let him hear: and, He that has an
ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. How
comfortable soever the eye is for the direction of the body in matters of this
life, yet the ear is more necessary for the life to come, because Faith both
comes and also is increased especially by hearing.

That which has bin said of sacrificing our ears, is also To sacrifice our
eyes. Psalm. 119. 37. 21 Pet. 2. 14. Math. 5. 28. Gen* 6. 2.
to be said of sacrificing our eyes, by praying that they may be turned away
from beholding of vanity; and by taking heed they be not eyes full of
adultery; neither do behold a woman with intent to lust after her; or by whom
to be provoked to unlawful marriage, as the sons of God were before the
flood; or to any other breach of the seventh commandment, such as Shechem
committed, or Genesis 34. 2. Genesis 39. 7. 2. Sam. 11. 2.
Potiphars wife enticed Joseph to commiti, and as David himself did commit: as
also that they be not too much fixed upon any object either of covetousness, as
the eyes of Iosu. 7. 21. 1. Kin. 21. 1.
Achan upon the Babylonish garment; etc. and Ahabs were upon the vineyard of
Naboth: or of envy, in which respect an envious man is often called a man of
an evil eye, Pro. 23. 6. Math. 20. 15. Mark 7. 22.
because the looking too much upon the prosperity or mercies of God bestowed
upon another, does provoke such lookers to envy and fretting, as these words
of the Prophet do plainly show, I was envious at the foolish, when Psalm. 73. 3.
I saw the prosperity of the wicked. In these respects, as Job. made a
covenant with his eyes not to look upon a maid, so Job 31. 1.
it were good for every one to do, that will sacrifice his eye unto God;
neither to look upon any woman whereby to lust after her, (especially for young
men to beware hereof, in whom the lusts of youth are most violent;) neither
upon any other object, whereby to be provoked either to covetousness or to
envy.

Besides all before said of sacrificing our eyes, we must so take heed unto
them, that by their lofty looks we bewray not our selves to be high minded,
because such lofty looks are made a note of an high mind; and a proud look
Psalm. 131. 1. Pro. 6. 16. 17.
is said to be one, yea the first of the six things which the Lord hates, and
of the seven which the soul of the Lord abhors. It is also said that there
is a generation, of which Agur speaks by an exclamation or admiration,
saying, Oh how lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up. Pro.
30. 13.
Therefore also before that, Solomon had joined together an high look and a
proud heart, pronouncing both to be Pro. 21. 4.
a sin, that is, a great sin. Again, the eyes of a man looking too much
upon the redness of wine, provoke to Pro. 23. 30.
drink unto drunkenness, and thereby to fall into whoredom and to worse
uncleanness, (such as just Lot fell into, Genesis 19. 33.
without knowledge of that that he had done) and to speak wickedly, and to
plunge himself into many other dangers, without any sense or feeling of them.
Therefore every Christian in this respect has need so to sacrifice his eyes
unto God, lest that being that way overcome, of a man he become a beast, and by
drunkenness do drown, or at the least quench the graces of Gods Spirit before
in him; the Apostle having opposed the fullness of Gods Spirit Ephesians. 5. 18.
unto drunkenness with wine. To conclude this point, let not our eyes wander
in the corners of the world, as the eyes Prou. 17. 24. Pro. 4. 25.
of a fool do: but let them look right on, and our ey-lids look straight
before us.

I might here take occasion to speak of the sacrificing The mouth.
of the mouth, as it is the door of the belly for the receiving of meat and
drink, and so take occasion to speak again against drunkenness before
touched, and against surfeiting: for the avoiding of both which, our Savior
Luke 21. 34.
gave a special charge to his Disciples, a little before himself did drink
of the bitter cup of his passion, (bitter to him, but sweet to us,) that in
respect of the time when he gave this charge, it might be the better remembered:
the rather I might here speak thereof, because these two sins, especially
drunkenness and excessive drinking, do now more abound then ever they did,
even in all ages, in all states, in all sorts, and in all degrees of men. But
these things being spoken of afterward in this Epistle as works Romans 13. 13.
of darkness, I will forbear the speaking of them here, lest I should draw
too many particulars into this general, and so make a confusion.

from the former therefore I descend to the tongue, the To sacrifice the tongue.
noblest part of a man's body, and that where by being sacrificed to God, we do
most glorify God and edify men in their salvation. The hand indeed is an
excellent member, whereby to do good to our selves and to others concerning
this life: but for the life to come it is nothing comparable to the tongue. The
greater hurt is done by the tongue abused (as James teaches us) the more good
chap. 5. 3. 5, etc.
may be done by the tongue rightly used. For it is as the foreman of the Lords
shop, for the uttering and selling of his ware of greatest price. As therefore
the foreman of great Mercers or Grocers, etc. may do their masters much hurt or
good as he carries himself; so is it with the tongue.

Now to speak briefly hereof; the tongue is to be sacrificed to God by
restraining thereof both from uttering any errors in doctrine publikly or
privately, and also from all corrupt communication touching the manners Ephesians.
4. 29.
of men, as by evil counsel and enticing of other to evil, such as against
which Solomon instructed his Son to beware. It is also to be sacrificed to God
by the emploiment thereof altogether in good speech publikly and privately.
Prou. 1. 10.


Of the abuse of the tongue either in publik teaching or in private whispering
and uttering of false doctrine by such as secretly creep into houses, I have
insinuated something before, in speaking of the sacrificing of the 2. Tim. 3. 6.
ears, the which I need not now to enlarge by adding any more thereto, because
it is a matter not beseeming so short a treatise as I intend this to be.

Touching the other, a maine thing wherein the tongue Leuit. 19. 15. Deuteronomy. 1.
17. and 16. 18. 19. Exodus 23. 8.
is to be sacrificed by restraint from evil, is in public judgment, either
in respect of persons, or for gifts and bribes, both being expressly forbidden
in many places; yet of this also I will add no more.

Touching other evil speeches, from which the tongue is to be restrained, they
are either against the first Table and against God immediately, or against the
second Table against m^n, and in men mediatly also against God.

Against God, the tongue is to be restrained from swearing, blaspheming,
cursing, disgracing of his word or works etc. All these are against the third
command^ment

Against men, the tongue is to be restrained from rai^ings, reuilings scornful
and reproachful speeches, not calling any m^n in anger so much as fool: so
also from all filthy Math. 5. 22.
talking, whereby to provoke unto unchaste lusts; yea Ephesians. 4. 29.
from all corrupt communication, which makes not unto edifying, and to doing
good to other: yea, from foolish jesting, whereby to show our wit we either
gall and disgrace our neighbors; or to hinder better and more sauoury speech
we make the company merry, accounting it a great grace to make our selves
fools, and thereby to disgrace the image of God in our selves, that others may
laugh, even when they ought rather to be provoked to mourning. Honest mirth and
witty speeches to exercise and quicken the wits of our selves and of others,
for the better fitting of our selves and others to better services of God, is
not to be condemned, so it be with moderation, and without the disgracing of
any, as also without prejudice to better things: but the other is that which
the Apostle forbids. Ephesians. 5. 4.
Within this rank I may well comprehend the telling of foolish tales:
especially men's laboring to make men merry in the pulpit, and provoking them
to laughter, except it be soberly, to bring the Idolatry of Popery and
Papists themselves into disgrace, as Eliah in an holy manner 1. King. 18. 27.
did scoff at Baals Priests for their madness, thereby to bring the worship
of Baal into detestation. Herein notwithstanding men must so speak, as that
they may wholly aim at the detestation of evil, and not intend the pleasing of
men, and the provoking of them to a carnal laughter.

Here I might take occasion to speak against such Plays as are too common
amongst us, and as are the shops of all vanity and impiety, not only by the
abuse of the tongue, but also of the whole body, in such gestures as s^rue
only to wickedness. The tolleration whereof yet amongst us is so much the
worse, not only because they are condemned by our own laws, but also because
they were odious in Rome, and in all other well governed Commonwealths of other
heathen.

To this also of the tongue belongs the putting away of lying, and every man's
speaking the truth to his neighbor. Ephesians. 4. 25.


Because laughter also is as proper to man as speech, herein they offend with
their whole mouths, that make may-games and sports of such as are called
natural fools and innocents; whereas indeed such should be glasses for our
selves, to behold Gods goodness to our selves, in giving us wit, reason and
understanding, rather then unto them: yea, they should teach us to fear the
more, and to be the more humble, and to use our reason and understanding the
better, lest God bereave us of them, as sometime he has done other by nature
as witty as other; yea also Kings, as Nebuchadnezzar; and some great
Statesmen (I might say Councellers) among us, long before they have bin
children by old age. Oh that the heathen King Achish, when David in more
carnal policy then spiritual 1. Sam. 21. 14. 15
wisdom, feined himself mad before him: oh (I say) that that heathen King
could blame his men for bringing David before him, and said, Lo, ye see the man
is mad, wherefore have ye brought him to me? have I need of mad men that ye
have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my presence? shall this fellow
come into my house? Oh (I say once again) that this wicked and heathen King
should so speak, and so rebuke his servants; and that yet Christians, and more
then common Christians, can make themselves merry with them, that either are
fools and mad indeed; or that upon stages and elsewhere feine themselves so to
be, which is much worse then so to be indeed.

For the further sacrificing of the tongue, it is not enough to restrain the
same from evil, but it must also be employed in good talk, for Gods glory
and the edifying of Psalm. 51. 15.
men. Therefore as the Prophet prays, that God would open his lips, that his
mouth might show forth his praise. And again Psalm. 37. 30.
says, that the mouth of the righteous speaks of wisdom, and his tongue
talks of judgment, because the law of his and 119. 13.
God is in his heart. And again, With my lips have I declared all thy
judgments. So Solomon says, The tongue of the Prou. 15. 2. and 10. 11. 13.
wise uses knowledge aright. And again, The lips of the wise disperse
knowledge. And before yt, The mouth of the righteous man is a wel-spring of
life. And presently after, In the lips of him that has understanding wisdom
is found. Therefore also the Apostle says, Let your speech be always with
grace, Col. 4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 29.
and seasoned with salt. And again, Let your communication be good, to the use
of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. They that have not thus
learned to sacrifice their tongues, though they bear the name of Christians,
yet indeed they have not true faith. For the Prophet says, I Psalm. 116. 10.
believed and therefore have I spoken. Let such therefore as say, they believe,
take heed how they hold their peace when they should speak for Christ and his
word here. For if here they will not so speak when they may and ought to
speak, Christ will not hereafter speak for them when they would be glad he
should speak. Yea, if they have not a tongue to speak for Christ and for his
words Math. 10. 33. Mark. 8. 38.
before men, let them be assured that he will have a tongue to deny them before
his Father, when he shall come in the glory of his Father, attended with his
holy Angels. If all the former do not sacrifice their tongue to God in so
speaking, what shall be said of them, whose mouth is full Romans 3. 14. Psalm. 10.
7.
of cursing and bitter speeches?

As the tongue must so be sacrificed, so also must the To sacrifice the hand.
Prou. 21. 17.
hands, in restraining them from all evil, as from play, because He that
loves pastime (or pleasure) shall be a poor man: so also from shedding
innocent blood; yea also from fighting, filching and stealing, and the like.
For Prou. 9. 17. 18.
though stolen waters (for a while) be sweet, yet afterward and for that
comes death: and the mouth shall be filled with Prou. 20. 17. and 29. 24.
gravel: yea, He that is but partner with a thief, hates his own soul,
etc. and the robbery of the wicked shall destroy them. Neither is the hand to
be sacrificed only by refraining from such evil as is committed with the
hand, but also by applying the same to the doing of all good in the power
thereof. Hereunto notwithstanding I will not apply that of Solomon, Whatsoever
thy hand finds to do, do it Eccles 9. 10.
with thy might. For it is not spoken as the words of a regenerate man, but as
of an unregenerate man carnally counselling himself and others to do
whatsoever is in his power, in making no scruple hereof, because in the grave
and after death a man shall hear no more of any thing here done. Yet hereto
belong many other sayings: While we have time let us do good unto all etc. And,
Let him Gal. 6. 10. Ephesians. 4. 28.
that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands,
that he may have to give to him that needs. Hitherto belong many sentences in
the Proverbs against Prou. 10. 4. and 14. 1. and 31. 13 16. 19
idleness especially, that a diligent hand makes rich. As also the
commendations of a virtuous woman by Solomon: so also by a Queen, for
laboring with her hands, from the fruits thereof. If virtuous women must thus
employ their hands, may men keep their hands in their pockets? The lifting up
of the hands also should testify the zeal of Psalm. 28. 2. and 88. 9. and 119.
48 1. Tim. 2. 8.
the heart in prayer. Hence is that precept of Paul, I will that men pray every
where, lifting up holy (and pure) hands, without wrath, etc. So it is said,
that Solomon spread forth his hands 1. King. 8. 22.
toward heaven. A special point of hands sacrificed, is in distributing and
giving to the poor. In which respect a virtuous woman is commended for
stretching out her Pro. 31. 20.
hands to the poor. Is it not also before showed to be the end why the Apostle
would have men to labor with their hands, namely, that they might have to give
to him that needs. There be many that labor and take great pains with their
hands, but either they spend all in drinking, or playing, or whoring; or else
they keep all to themselves: not one of twenty so laboring, has sacrificed
his hands to God, for giving to them that need.

The feet also must be sacrificed, both by restraining To sacrifice the feet.
Esaias 54. 7. Romans 3. 13.
them from swiftness to bloodshed, or to commit any other evil: and also by
being nimble for performance of any good; particularly to do any work of
kindness or mercy. What haste made Abraham to his tent, to make Genesis 18. 6.
provision for entertainment of the Angels? What haste and 20. 20.
also made Rebecca to show kindness to Abraham's servant, before she knew the
said servants errand? What haste did Zaccheus make out of the Sycomore tree,
for entertainment Luke 19. 6.
of our Savior? Most worthy especially of our observation, is the example of
Abraham's haste about a work most heavy and doleful to flesh and blood, even
the sacrificing and slaying with his own hands his own son, Genesis 22. 3.
his only son, his son whom he loved most dearly, his son in whom the
promise was made for the blessing of all nations; yea, and that immediately
after that at the Lords commandment he had sent away his son Ishmael, borne
of the bondwoman: yea further, whilst Isack was young, and before he had any
issue, in which all nations might be blessed? And is not this haste with our
feet and whole man the more necessary in respect of this dull and slow age,
wherein men are as hardly persuaded to any good work, especially of mercy, as
we say The Bear is drawn to the stake? and wherein we may sooner catch a Hare
with a pipe and a tabret, at least with many pipes and tabrets set in diverse
places for the scaring and wearing of her, then we can persuade most men to any
such work, what necessity soever require the same? Yea, sometimes profane
persons of a civil disposition only, are more easily persuaded to show
kindness, then some that are great professors. Alas also, that the wicked
should be hasty to commit any wickedness against God and men (as the daughter
of Herodias Mark. 6. 25. 27.
being instructed by her mother, made haste straightway to ask of Herod the
head of John Baptist; and Herod himself to grant that devilish request, and
immediately to send an executioner to cut it off;) and that Christians should be
so slow to any good work, either toward men or for the comfort of men. If
these men had learned that of Solomon, As vinegar is to the teeth, and smoke
to the eyes, Prou. 10. 6.
so is a slothful messenger (or a sluggard) to him that sends him: or if
they had learned that the Lord says, I will have Hosea 6. 6.
mercy and not sacrifice; would they be so slow in that work of the Lord, to
the doing whereof the Lord sends them, whether Ministers of the word, or any
other? As therefore the Prophet and Apostle does exhort us, To day if we will
Psalm. 95. 7. Heb. 3. 13. etc.
hear his voice, not to harden our hearts: and as another Prophet says, Seek
the Lord while he may be found. So while Isai. 55. 6.
we have time to do good, even any thing the Lord requires of us, either
concerning his worship and glory, or concerning our neighbor, let us make
haste to do it, lest that light we do yet enjoy be taken from us, and the night
Ioh. 12. 35. 36. and 11. 9. 10.
come upon us, when either we shall not see to do anything as we ought to do,
or that in doing it we stumble. Who Eccles 11. 2.
knows what evil shall be upon the earth? and what need himself may have of
the mercy of others? If the Lord pronounce him accursed that did his work
negligently, and Ier. 48. 10.
that kept back his sword from blood, for execution of judgment and vengeance
upon his enemies the Moabites; what may they look for that negligently do, and
that withhold their hands from the works of mercy?

Touching other particular parts of our bodies, I shall not need to speak of
the sacrificing of them, the former parts being the principal, by that which
has bin said of them, we may have direction for the rest. Let this generally
suffice, that we do not apply them to any thing whereto the Lord has forbidden
us to apply them, but only to such things as the Lord has commanded or
allowed them to be applied unto, and that also in such manner as the Lord has
prescribed. We must not apply any member of our bodies to every thing, for
doing whereof it has strength, but for doing whereof the Lord has given
order; and according to that order that God has g^uen, so must our whole body
and every member thereof be used.

In all that hitherto I have said of the active sacrificing of those former
members of our bodies, that I may not seem too singular in particularizing
those former parts of our bodies, let it be considered that I have but trodden
Chrysostom. in Romans 12. 1. and tom. 1. page 980. in Psalm. 150.
in the steps of Chrysostom who writes thus: Quomodo corpus hostia? nihil
mali respiciat oculus, and factus est hostia: nil turpe loquatur lingua, and
facta est oblatio, etc. How is our body a sacrifice? let thine eye behold no
evil, and it is made a sacrifice: let thy tongue speak no filthiness, and it
is made an oblation: let thy hand commit no inquitie, and it is made a burnt
offering. Imo non sufficient ista, sed bonorum nobis and studio and lucro opus
est, etc. Yea, let not these things suffice, but we have need also of a desire
and of the benefit of doing good, namely, that the hand give alms, that with
the mouth we bless them that rail on us, that our hearing do continually
attend to divine words. For a sacrifice has no uncleanness, it comprehends
the first fruits of all other: and therefore let us render unto God the first
fruits of our hands, of our feet, of our mouth, as well as of all our other
parts, such a sacrifice pleases God, when in the mean time the sacrifices of
the Jews are unclean. And again, when we have mortified our members, then we
shall begin to live. For this is a new law of this our sacrifice: and therefore
here is a marvelous kind of fire; for we have no need either of wood or of any
other such subject matter, but our fire lives in it self, not burning the
sacrifice, Chrysostom. in Psa 95. or rather 96. tom. 1. page 154.
but more quickening it. Elsewhere also he notes many more particular
sacrificing, of our selves, which here were too tedious to remember.

He also observes that the Apostle says not, Make your bodies a sacrifice,
but present them; as if he had said, Have no thing to do with them, since ye
have bestowed them upon another. This he illustrateth by this similitude,
namely, that they that bestow horses of war upon another, have nothing to do
with them afterward: so he that has bestowed his members for war against the
devil, even a terrible war, may not afterward recall them, and convert them
to his proper use. Hereby also he shows us another thing, that we must first
try them, forasmuch as we present them to another. For we do not present them
to any earthly person but to him that is God of all; not only to war with
them, but that they may have the King himself as it were to be their rider:
for he disdaineth not to sit on our members, but greatly desires it. And that
which a King that is our fellow servant will not, the same does he desire that
is Lord of the Angels. Because therefore thy members are to be presented to God
(to be a sacrifice) therefore purge them of every blemish* for if they have any
blemish, they are no sacrifice. For the eye may not be offered, that is a
servant to fornication; nor the hand that is a taker and deceiuer; nor the feet
that halt or frequent Plays; nor the belly that is given to dainties, and
inflameth the desires of pleasure; nor the heart that nourishes wrath or
unchaste love; nor the tongue that speaks filthy things. We must therefore
enquire very exactly into the faults of our bodies. For if they that offered
Leuit. 22. 20. etc
the old sacrifices, were commanded, first to consider all things, and were not
pemitted to offer any thing that had cut ears, or a short tails, or were
scabby, or that had any worm; much more must we that offer, not unreasonable
sheep, but our selves, be more diligent, and in every part more clean. He
says further, that our fire, our knife, must be from above, and It seems
that by this Altar he means Christ himself in heaven, as Heb. 13. 10. 1.
King. 18. 38.
our altar the height it self of heaven. For if Helias offering a sensible and
a bodily sacrifice, had a flame from above, that consumed all things, both
matter, wood and stones, much more shall this come to pass in thy offering.
And although thou have something that is weak and worldly, and yet shall offer
thy sacrifice with a right mind, yet the fire of the holy Ghost coming thereto,
shall both consume that worldliness, and also make thy offering perfect.

But in all hitherto noted out of Chrysostom, it is to be observed, that there
is no mention of one part of our bodies, that in these days is most abused, to
Gods great dishonor: neither indeed could there be any mention thereof, either
by Chrysostom or by any other, neither then living, or afterward in any age,
till this last and most wicked age of all other. But what part of the body is
that? Our very nostrils. Why? How can that be made a sacrifice now to God?
According to other things before noted out of Chrysostom, by refraining the
same from that foul and monstrous abuse of Tobacco, that is now so common in
all sorts, in Church and Commonwealth, in the Universities themselves, in the
Innes of Court, in Gentlemen, in Yeomen, in Clownes; what shall I say more, the
very rogues and vagabonds now have got it: yea, being committed to cages, and
laid by the heels in the stocks, while they are thus under punishment of the
magistrate, so impudent are they, that even then and there they have their
Tobacco-boxes and Tobacco-pipes, and make the smoke of hell furnace to come out
of their nostrils, in the sight of all standing about their said cages, and
gazing on them, while they so sit in the stocks. Oh woeful, oh lamentable! Most
of all woeful and lamentable is it, that yet for all this, others that should
be and would be of some sort and fashion, should still continue the foul abuse
of it. Is it not, as it is used, the nurse and nourishment of drunkenness? Can
any show as many benefits of it, as all men see inconveniences? Verily though
it may be it is good for some thing, yet if the common saying be true, Better a
mischief then an inconvenience, it were better it were quite suppressed and
clean hist out of the kingdom, in respect of the manifold detriments and
inconveniences by it, then still to be retained. Alas, alas, that men, yea and
men of understanding, should be so enchanted and bewitched with it. Strange
fashions beginning at the higher rank of men, do cease and are forborne by
such as first began them, when every base person of the country has laid hold
of them: how strange therefore is it, that they that are more base then the
basest, even the rogues themselves that are past all grace and shame, should
practice it and glory in it, and yet others should retain and support it.
This shall suffice to have added to Chrysostom, above that that either he or
any other since his time, ever dreamed of, or could dream of.

Now to speak no more from Chrysostom, whereby to show that that before I
have said to be according unto To sacrifice our strength.
him, and especially agreeable to the word of God; but to proceed: as all
members of the body must be sacrificed to God, so also must all the strength
and powers of our whole bodies be applied unto the service of God, in duties
both of religion, because we must love God with all Mark. 12. 30.
our strength; and also of love to men in our general and in our special
callings; because the second commandment, that is, the second Table of the
moral Law for the love of our neighbor, is like unto the first for our love
to God. Thus much for the actual sacrificing of our bodies, and of some
particular members thereof.

CHAP. VI.
Of the active sacrificing of our souls: and of some particular active
sacrifices of our whole man, soul and body.

NOw follows the active sacrificing of our souls; The active sacrificing of
our souls. All sacrifices of the body nothing without the soul.
without which whatsoever our bodies do is nothing, at least no better then
puppet play: for the Lord rejects it, though never so glorious in the eyes of
men. It may be beneficial to other, yea to our selves also, by procuring us
credit and reputation with men, and thereby also some preferment in the world;
and our outward man, touching the outward state thereof, may perhaps for a
while, yea for our whole life time fare the better: but the soul it self,
touching the everlasting life and glory thereof, shall have no benefit, by
whatsoever service is done to God, or duties performed to men, by the whole
body or any part thereof, not working with and from the soul. No man shall
live by the faith of another, himself not believing; so shall not the soul
have any benefit for the life to come by all the works of the body alone,
except it self also work with the body, and the body also by it: yea, the
body it self shall have no benefit for the glorifying and making thereof like
to the glorious body of Philip. 3. 21.
Christ, unless all that it does, come from the soul* Sometime soul and
body do fare and shall fare the better by the works only of the soul, as by
the meditations and by the prayers and supplications of the soul alone, when
the body being some way oppressed cannot join with the soul, as Hanna
oppressed with grief, could not pray with her tongue, and yet speaking in her
heart and pouring 1. Sam. 1. 13. 15.
out her soul unto the Lord, she obtained her desire: but neither the soul
alone, nor body alone, nor both jointly shall fare the better for eternal
life, by any works whatsoever, or by any sacrifices whatsoever of the body
alone, without the soul working with the body. Because Isai. 29. 13. 14.
the Jews drew near to God with their mouth, and with their lips did honor
him, removing their hearts far from him, and that their fear toward him was
taught by the precept of men, (as many amongst us do many things more by the
law of man then by the word of God.) Therefore the Lord threatens to proceed
(by that word noting a beginning already made; as for the ingratitude of good
King Hezekiah 2. Chro. 32. 25.
the wrath of God began against him and Judah and Jerusalem) and to do a
marvelous work and a wonder, even that the wisdom of the wise men should
perish, and the understanding of the prudent men should be h^d. Oh the Lord
keep us from this judgment! for what greater almost can there be? For what was
it else, but so to strike their great Statesmen that did manage and govern
their whole Commonwealth, with a kind of frenzy and madness, that they
should not be able to do any thing, but suffer all to go to wrack; like to
that of great Nebuchadnezzar, whom the Lord for his pride smote with such
madness, that he was Dan. 4. 25.
not fit for the society of men, and therefore was cast out to live and feed
with beasts for seven years together: or like to that of Achitophel, who for
his wisdom was in 2. Sam. 16. 23.
that estimation, that the counsel that he counseled in those days was as if
a man had enquired of the oracle of God; him notwithstanding for his pride in
joining with Absolon against David, whose counselor he had bin, the Lord Chap.
17. 23.
so smote with a kind of frenzy, that in his said frenzy being malecontent
that Absolon had preferred the counsel of Hushai before his, he went to his
house and hanged himself. Could there be a greater madness then to hang
himself? So to overthrow the wisdom of the wise (as the Lord before
threatened) which were as it were the eyes of the whole people, was to put out
their eyes, as Judge. 16. 21.
the Philistines put out the eyes of Samson, by the just judgment of God for
breaking his vow of the Nazarites: and as Elymas the sorcerer, for withstanding
of Paul, was by Acts 13. 11.
Paul (as the instrument of God) smitten also with the like blindness. If then
the light that was in them (that is in their kingdom) should be darkness, how
great would that darkness be? Moreover, why did not the Lord respect the
sacrifice of Cain? was it not because it was Genesis 4. 5.
brought and offered only with the body, not with the soul? Therefore also
the Lord calls upon us to wash Ier. 4. 14. Math. 5. 8. Iam. 4. 8.
our hearts: and our Savior says, Blessed are the pure in heart, etc. and
James bids us, not only to cleanse our hands, (that is our bodies,
synecdochically) but also to purge our hearts. The soul of a man is the more
principal part, and therefore called the glory of a man: so that whatsoever
Psalm. 16. 9 and 30. 12. and 57. 8
the body does without it, is nothing.

Now by the soul, I mean the whole spiritual part of a man, even all that is
within him: as the Prophet says, My soul bless the Lord, and all that is
within me bless his Psalm. 103. 1.
holy Name.

To speak more particularly and plainly: as by the body is to be understood
all the parts and members of the body; The sacrifice of our wit, reason, etc.
so by the soul is to be meant all the powers and faculties thereof, with,
reason, understanding, thoughts, memory, the will, and the affections, as
love, hatred, anger, envy, fear, hope, grief, joy, delight, etc. all these
and every one of these must be sacrificed to God, and so dedicated, that they
must not at any time be used or employed against God or his children, but
always for God and his glory and truth, and for the good of his people.

Our wit must not be employed in opposition to the truth, but in the defense of
it; so must all our reason, understanding and learning. None have bin greater
adversaries to God and his truth, nor greater heretics, neither more dangerous
for the salvation of men, yea also for their outward state, then such as have
bin most witty, most learned, and of greatest reach. Satan making choice of
the Genesis 3. 1.
wittiest creature of all other to assault our first mother, did thereby
prevail, and overthrew both her and our first father, and all their
posterity. The same is to be said of not employing our wits to any other
vanity, as to making of Plays, or jests and sports for men to laugh in
carnal manner, especially then, when common calamities present, or future
dangers do call us to mourning and weeping, to sackcloth and ashes. Such as do
strain all that is in them to make other merry only, and to show themselves
fools, disgracing and defaming the image of God wherein they were made, do
slander God as though he had done that that he has not, and as though he had
made them that they are not. Is it a small matter to belie a King? Is it
nothing to deface the image of a Prince* though but in jest? This then is the
first degree of sacrificing our wit, reason, understanding, and learning to
God, even to restrain them from all such evil.

The second is, to employ them to the advancement of Gods glory, the
furthering and promoting of his truth, the edifying of men in their faith, or
the benefit of them touching this life. It were better for us to have no wit,
no reason, no understanding, no learning, then not so to sacrifice and employ
them. Herein let us not forget the sharp, yet most just sentence against him
that had not employed Math. 25. 26.
that one talent committed unto him to the benefit of his Lord, of whom he had
received it, though he had not wasted it, neither by it oppressed or wronged
any man, but kept it, without doing any good wi^h it. Oh let us (I say)
remember this, and learn by it to be the more careful to sacrifice the
foresaid faculties of our souls as before has bin said.

Our thoughts also must in like manner be sacrificed, and The sacrifice of our
thoughts Gen 6. 5. Math. 3. 9. and 9. 4.
both restrained from all evil, in which respect all evil thoughts are
condemned and forbidden; and also wholly set upon God and all goodness, both
toward God himself, and also toward our neighbor. Such as our thoughts are,
such are our words: for of the abundance of the heart Math. 12. 34.
the mouth speaks; such also are our actions. In this consideration therefore,
for the full sacrificing of our thoughts unto God, if we will be blessed, we
must meditate in the law of God day and night: yea, by such meditation, our
practice Psalm. 1. 2.
will be according, and we shall be wiser then our enemies, and have more
understanding then our teachers or ancients. Psalm. 119. 97. 98. 99.
As this concerns all, so principally them that are in greatest and highest
places, and yet for all that such do Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Josh. 1. 8.
most neglect it. The worse is it for them that are under such; and the greater
shall be the woe of themselves in the end.

That which has bin said of our thoughts, is also to be To sacrifice our
memory.
said of our memory. It were better never to have learned any thing, then to
forget it; or remembering it, not to make use of it, as occasions shall require.
Therefore our Savior reproved his disciples for their forgetfulness of his
Math. 16 9. Mark. 8. 17.
two miracles, in feeding many thousands with a few loaves etc; or at lest for
their not making use of them. For it is all one, to forget a thing, and
remembering of it, not to make use of it. This forgetfulness was the cause of
Peter's Math. 26. 75.
fearful fall; and his remembrance of it, the means of his recovery.
Therefore our Savior also exhorts the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, to
remember from whence Revel. 2. 5.
he was fallen, and so to repent, etc: and the Angel of the Church of Sardi,
that having a name to be living, and yet chap. 3. 3.
was dying, to remember how he had received and heard, to hold fast, and to
repent. These things teach us, that our memory of our falls, and of the things
we have heard and learned, is to be sacrificed, by sanctifying and applying the
same to repentance.

Our will is sacrificed to God, when it is conformed to The sacrifice of our
will.
the revealed will of God in his word, yea also when it is subjected to the
secret will of God by his providence, either revealed, or to be revealed: so
that touching the one, we may say with Job* The Lord has given, and the Lord
Job 1. 21.
has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord: and touching Math. 26. 37.
the other, we may also say, Not our will, but thy will be done. Touching the
revealed will of God in his word, our will is sacrificed, when it is always
framed thereunto, and by prayer that this will of God may be done in earth as
it is chap. 6. 10. and Luke 2.
in heaven: so that not to endeavor to do all things accordingly, is a great
abusing of his name in so praying.

Touching our affections, they must likewise be dedicated To sacrifice our
affections.
and sacrificed unto God: otherwise being suffered to have their swinge, they
many times overrule wit, reason, understanding, judgment, thoughts, memory
and will. That these our affections therefore, love, hatred, anger, etc. may be
sacrificed, this is first to be observed, that they attend upon the former and
higher powers of the soul, wit, reason, understanding, etc. and that they be
not suffered in any case to dominiere over them, or to go without them. They
must not go before them, but follow after them, and be directed by them.
Therefore even touching love, the most principal affection of all the rest,
the Apostle will have it to abound in knowledge and in all judgment. Philip.
1. 9.
Without knowledge and judgment, we may and will love either too much or too
little; yea we cannot but so do. Knowledge and judgment (this judgment is the
application of knowledge unto particulars) must direct our love both touching
the object thereof, and also touching the measure thereof. The first and most
chief object Mat. 22. 37. etc.
of our love, is God himself: the next is our neighbor. The one is not to be
loved without the other. Yet God is most to be loved, and that for himself:
our neighbor for God. In both these our love may err without direction from
knowledge and judgment. By God himself we mean his word also, and all his
ordinances: for he that loves not these, loves not God; and such as our love
to God is, such will be our regard also Leuit. 19. 18.
to these. By our neighbor also, our selves are to be understood, because our
love to our selves is the rule of our love to our neighbor: for so it is said
in the former place, and in the law. And although our love to God cannot be too
great in respect of the measure, yea, not answerable to the measure, yet it may
swerve in respect of the effects: namely, when our love to God shall be such,
that it carries us beyond his word; and not thinking the word to contain
duties enough, we shall do more then the word requires; and hence comes all
superstition. But I may not thus amply discourse of every affection.

Our hatred is sacrificed to God, when it is bent against Hatred.
all that God hates, and when we hate no further then we have warrant from the
word of God. The same is to be said of our anger, envy, fear, grief, joy,
etc. The object of these and all other our affections, must be such as the word
warranteth, and no other. Neither must the cause, measure or time exceed the
rule of the word for them. They must be employed for God, not against God. They
must all be directed by God and by his word, not by man, or by the word or will
of any man, of ourselves, or of any other.

In this sacrificing of our affections, let us especially remember to sacrifice
our sorrow and grief, in mourning for, and lamenting and bewailing our sins,
according to the number and greatness of them, as also our long continuance in
them: and let us measure our said sorrow by the mercies of God toward us, by
our knowledge, by our callings, by the offenses we have given to other by our
said sins, especially by our causing the name of God and his doctrine to be
blasphemed and evil spoken of. Yea, in these and other the like respects, let
us mourn Psalm. 37. 4. and 107. 37. etc Ierem. 30. 15.
more for our sins then for any outward losses, indignities, wrongs,
injuries, sicknesses, or other afflictions of this life whatsoever, because all
such things come for sin. Of this sorrow for sin, the Prophet says, The
sacrifices of God Psalm. 51. 17.
are a broken spirt; a broken and contrite heart, O God, thouwilt not despise.
Notwithstanding in this sorrow for our sins, we must always have an eye to
the mercies of God before mentioned, lest we be swallowed up of sorrow, and
fall into despair. Therefore the Apostle b^ddeth us to Romans 11. 22.
behold the goodness and the seueriti^ of God; not the goodness of God alone,
nor his severity alone, but both together, the one with the other; the goodness
of God that we do not despair, the severity of God that we do not presume.

As hitherto I have generally spoken of the actual sacrificing The sacrifice
of righteousness and praise, Psalm. 4. 5.
of our selves souls and bodies; and as we are in this sacrificing of our
selves to remember the general sacrifice of all righteousness, that is, of
all obedience to the first and second Table; so let us not forget to offer the
sacrifice of praise unto God, which is called the calves of our Psalm. 50. 14.
Hos. 14. 2. ^
lips* The more the mercies of God have abounded toward this land above all
other lands, in his word, in our peace, in our wealth, etc. the more must we
abound in the calves of our lips in that behalf: yea, so much the more must we
abound therein, because thereby we shall please the Lord better then they did
in the Law, that offered Psalm. 69. 31. 1. Cor. 13. 13.
oxen and bullocks that had hoxnes and hoofes: yea, as the Apostle prefers
love above faith and hope, in respect of the continuance thereof, when faith
and hope shall have Praises more excellent then prayers.
an end; so in the same respect, this sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving may
be preferred before prayers themselves, because when prayers shall cease, as
whereof there shall be no need, even then shall thanksgiuings and praises
remain and continue. As the glorious Angels of heaven Luc. 2. 13. Revel. 5. 11.
are already employed in this duty, and are always ready to perform the
same upon every occasion, so shall all the elect being glorified, glorify God
without ceasing, for their said glorification. The more difficult also any
du^ie is, and the more hardly performed, the more excellent without question
the same is to be acknowledged. But the difficulty and hard performance of
this duty above prayers, appears by the ten Leapers, all jointly craving
Luke 17. 12. etc.
help of our Savior, and being healed, one only returning to give thanks.
Yea, this greater difficulty of thanksgiving above prayers, is manifest by all
experience. For who being under any affliction, is not ready to crave release?
but release being granted, who (almost) is as ready to give thanks? The more
that God has dignified any of his children with his mercies of this life or of
the life to come, the more such ought to abound in these sacrifices of praise
and of the calves of their lips for the same.

With those notwithstanding, in the second rank of The sacrifice of prayers.
Col. 4. 2. 1. Tim 2. 1. 1. These. 5. 17. 18
these particular sacrifices, whiles we live in this world, let us join the
sacrifice of prayers and supplications and intercessions, as the Apostle
joins them together. And although the Apostle to Timothy uses more words
touching this sacrifice, then touching the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, yet that is not for the excellency of prayers above praises or
thanks, but because whiles we live here, our wants are greater then the mercies
we have already, and future mercies are more and greater then all that we have
received. These prayers are by the Prophet called incense, and the lifting up
of our hands, an adiunct of Psalm. 141. 2.
them, and put for them, is compared to the evening sacrifice.

As we are to praise God for his mercies received, so we are to pray both for
the increase of them, and also that we may still enjoy such as we have, and
that God will always so shut the gates of our kingdom, and make the Psalm.
147. 13.
bars thereof strong, and so bolt them (as Amnon commanded 2. Sam. 13. 17.
his servant) against Antichrist and all his champions, Jesuits, Priests, and
other greater then they, that having bin long from hence banished and
abandoned, they may never return and be entertained by us again, lest by
their return we become worse then before; as our Savior speaks of him, out
of whom the unclean spirit being cast, and returning again, and finding the
place Mat. 12. 43. etc.
from whence he was cast swept and garnished, he takes seven other spirits
more wicked then himself, and enters again, and so makes the last state of
that man worse then the first. We have the more cause to fear this, because
all the Jesuits and their consorts, are even of the same disposition that such
unclean spirits are; yea, even possessed with 1. King. 22. 22.
them, as the prophets of Ahab were possessed with that lying spirit, whereby
they deceived Ahab to his ruin and overthrow.

With those our prayers, oh that we would also join Fasts.
holy fasts, as the which have bin often commanded and highly commended in the
Scriptures by the admirable success of them; and which be reckoned also among
the Leuit. 23. 27.
feasts of the Lord: and finally, the which rightly performed, have always
ended with joy and feasting. Is not this 2. Chron. 20. Ezra 8. Nehem. 1. Ester
4.
evident by the fasts of Iehosophat, of Ezra, of Nehemiah, of Ester, and diverse
other? Yea, have not we our selves often had experience hereof? Oh therefore
that we would turn some of our riotous feastings into such religious fastings,
lest as the Lord has threatened, he turn our feasts Amos 8. 10.
into mournings, and our songs into lamentations, and bring up sackcloth upon
all loins, and baldness upon every head, and make it as the mourning of an
only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day. Yet fie upon all the
hypocritical and detestable fasts of the Papists, which are plain mockeries
of the fasts of the Lord: yea, which are so much more detestable in the eyes of
the Lord, by how much the more in number they exceed the fasts of the Lord. For
whereas the Lord commanded but one day in a whole year for such ordinary
humbling of the Israelites, they command an hundred and an half at the least
every year; and yet never appoint any day of such extraordinary humbling our
selves upon extraordinary occasions, as the true Church of God has always in
all ages used: neither do they require any prayers with their fasts, nor
enjoin any preaching of the word for the better humbling of the people;
neither do they restrain any man from his ordinary Isai. 58. 5.
work and labor. Is this such a fast as the Lord has chosen?

Bellarmine a great champion for the Papists (like to Goliath for the
Philistims) and according to his name a 1. Sam. 17. 4.
man armed for war against God and his truth, mightily labors the
upholding of them, and wresteth this place to his purpose in that behalf,
saying, that it speaks Bellar. de bonis operibus, ^n party. lib. 2. cap. 11.
page 1100.
of the suppressing of carnal concupiscences; which is especially done by
fasting; and this suppression and mortification he calls a sacrifice, and
(...), that is, our reasonable sacrifice. Then he concludes, that therefore a
fast whereby to repress concupiscence, is a service grateful Cap. 1. p. 1068.
and acceptable to God. And before that, making four sorts of fasts: A
spiritual fast from sin; A moral fast, nothing but a Philosophical
temperance; A natural fast from all kind of meat and drink upon any reason;
And an Ecclesiastical fast, which he defines to be abstinence from meat (not
forsooth from drinks or medicines) according to the rule of the Church,
forgetting the rule of the word, whereby Church and all therein must be
ordered. In all the premises clean leaving out all civil abstinence from some
kinds of meat at some times of the year, for the better increase of the said
kinds. In the second Chapter also he concludes without any adversary, that in
a fast there must be but one refreshing, and that a supper, not a dinner; not
restraining men from their ordinary labor, though he restrain them from
meat. Afterward, but immediately before page 1099.
the first noted place, he affirms a fast to be profitable for the pacifying
of God, for satisfying for sins, for the obtaining of help, and for the
meriting of the heavenly reward. But all this must be understood of bare
fasting. For what serious prayers can there be of men laboring in their
ordinary callings? yet still he^ harpeth upon this string amongst the benefits
of such Ecclesiastical fasts, in the fourth place, after three benefits before
mentioned, he says, it is profitable to satisfy God, or to pacify him as
Ahab did; and yet still denying that which we charge him with, that this is ex
opere operato: though what he can say for 1. King. 21. 29.
Ahab otherwise, that had neither faith nor repentance, but only opus
operatum. He adds also a fifth benefit of such fastings, viz. to merit
benefits of God, both temporal and everlasting, as Anna by her fasting (not
mentioned in the Scripture, 1. Sam. 1. 9.
but the clean contrary said, and only presumptuously affirmed by Bellarmine)
obtained Samuel; and as Ierom says, lib. 2. in Iouinianum, she merited to have
her belly p. 1 102.
empty of meat to be filled with a son. Behold here a Popish fast. Behold
here how easily a man may merit both earthly and heavenly blessings. Behold
here how easily a woman of being barren may be made a mother of children; Let
her but keep her belly empty of meat, and it shall be filled with children.
Alas, how simple was Jacob not to think of this, when Rahel contended with
him, Genesis 30. 1.
and said, Give me children, or else I die? Who but mad men would be Papists?
yea, who but mad men are Papists? For what Christian heart can endure such
blasphemous speeches of so easy meriting of heavenly and earthly blessings?
And what is this kind of fasting other then y^ of the Jews, about which they
contended with God, as if they had merited at Gods hand, and for which they
quarelled and chode with God, saying, Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see
Isay 58. 3.
not? wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge?
What also differs this Popish fast from the other fasts of the Jews by
themselves invented in the fifth and seventh month, during the time of their
seventy years captivity, which notwithstanding the Lord by the Prophet
Zechariah so sharply reproved? Although therefore Zach. 7. 5.
religious fasts (from all kind of meares, not from some, as the Popish fasts)
are to be wished for, joined with prayers, for the quickening of our zeal in
praying, and for humbling our whole man, upon special occasion taken in hand,
either to remove some present judgment, or to escape some wrath to come, or to
obtain some special mercy; and as solemnly to be observed and sanctified
during the time thereof, as any Lords day, with a serious covenant for
reformation of our whole life afterward; yet such Popish fasts are detestable
to God, and of no use unto men. And yet the best fasts are not in this place or
in any other required otherwise then need shall require the same.

But to return and to proceed, in the third place for Alms.
our particular sacrifices unto God, let us adorn the former particulars with
alms and brotherly kindness, and such other duties of mercy as the Prophet
commands Isay 58. 7.
in all true fasts, and at all other times; and as the Apostle Heb. 13. 16.
commends and says of them, that with such sacrifices the Lord is well
pleased. So also Paul calls the kindness he had received from the
Philippians, an odor of a sweet Phil. 4. 18.
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God: using the very same
words, sacrifice and well pleasing, in the original tongue, that he does here.
But let not these our alms and kindness be to such only as are a far off,
but also to them that are near unto us. This I do the rather add, because I
have observed some reasonably forward to any good motion toward such as dwell
a far off, that respect not their next neighbors, whatsoever necessity and
distress they know and see them to be in. Some notwithstanding Prou. 11. 24.
and 15. 27. 2. Cor. 9. 6.
neither respect the one nor the other, but are altogether for themselves, and
yet thereby altogether against themselves. Herein men should be so forward, as
that they should not need to be sued unto for their kindness Does not God give
us many things that we never ask? If he did not, alas how woeful would our
state be? Yea, sometime 2. Cor. 8. 3. 4.
also we should give above our ability, as the Macedonians did toward other
Churches, praying the Apostle with much entreaty that he would receive their
gift, etc. Where now shall we find such? Yea, it is well if men by much
entreating will be persuaded to give. Zaccheus without any exhortations stood
forth and said unto the Luke 19. 8.
Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor. Where is there
such a one in these days? Alas, most men's hearts (yea Professors) are so
hardened against all such kindness, that like to the deaf Adder that will not
hearken Psalm. 58. 5.
to the voice of the charmer, charming never so wisely: like (I say) to this
deaf Adder, they will not hearken to the exhortations made for liberality, be
they never so earnest. But such exhortations go so to the heart of many, that
they go from them as heavy and sad as he did, whom our Savior bade to sell
all that he had, and to give it to the Math. 19. 22. Mark. 10. 22.
poor. But certainly they to whom such exhortations are so harsh, being men of
wealth, never have in any thing else so sacrificed themselves as the Apostle
here required. For he that does not sacrifice himself in all things, does in
nothing.

Now if we must thus sacrifice our selves, souls and bodies, with all the
powers and faculties of the one, and with all the parts and members and
strength of the other; must we not also sacrifice our riches, our honors, and
whatsoever authority we have unto God? These are but adjuncts of our whole
man. If therefore we must sacrifice the subject and more principal unto God,
must we not much more sacrifice the adjuncts, and those things that are of
less value? Doubtless, doubtless, whatsoever riches, authority, honor or
grace we have in this world, we ought to employ the same as sacrifices to the
glory of God. That which is said of riches, Honor the Lord with thy P^ou. 3.
9.
riches, etc. the same is to be understood of honor and authority, etc.
Wherefore has the Lord honored us with them, but to honor him? All the
premises, we are so much the more to sacrifice to God, by how much the more we
have before given them to the world, and to the Prince of the world. Does not
the Apostle expressly require this, saying, As ye have yielded your members
servants Romans 6. 19.
to uncleanness and to iniquite unto iniquity; even so now yield your members
servants to righteousness unto holiness? In which place the word translated
to yield, is the very same in the original text, that is here translated to
present. In this respect therefore that place serves the better to my present
purpose. Is not the Lord a better master, and will he not more bountifully
recompense whatsoever service is performed unto him, and whatsoever sacrifices
are unto him offered, then the world and the Prince of the world? The Prince
indeed of the world offered all the kingdoms of the world to our Savior, and
so much Math. 4. 9.
more will he offer to other; but alas he has nothing to give: for, the earth
is the Lords, and all the fullness thereof* Psalm. 24. 1.
yea, and this Lord has appointed our Lord Christ Jesus to be the heir of all
things. Whatsoever therefore the Prince of Heb. 1. 2.
the world craketh and boasts, yet in all his brags he is a liar, and not
able to perform any thing he promises.

Let me yet add one thing more touching the active sacrificing The more
parents have sacrificed themselves to evil, the more their children should
sacrifice themselves to God. 1. Cor. 10. 20.
of our selves, namely, that the more the parents of any man have sacrificed
themselves (for so I may speak, and use this word sacrifice of that which is
evil, by the authority of the Apostle that says the Gentiles did sacrifice
to devils, and no^ to God,) the more (I say) the parents of any man have
sacrificed themselves either to Popery or to any the like abomination, or to
the world, or to any other wickedness, the more such a child do labor to
sacrifice himself unto God. The Papists indeed plead the religion of their
parents, as a special and a principal argument why they will not turn from
their religion. But what says the Lord? Be ye not as your fathers. And is it
not said in the Psalms, that the Lord had established a testimony Zech. 1. 4.
Psalm. 78. 5. 6. ver. 8.
in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, etc. that the generations to come
might not be as their fathers, a stubburne and a rebellious generation, etc. Is
it not also said, Harden not your hearts as in the provocation, and as in the
day of tentation in Psalm. 95. 8. 9.
the wilderness, when your fathers tempted me, etc? What is the meaning of
these words, but that they should not in hardness of heart be like to their
fathers? If therefore the fathers of any have bin evil, the children must not
be like unto them: yea rather, they must forget their fathers house. Psalm. 45.
10.
And alas, what do many ignorant Papists and other, pleading their fathers
religion for themselves to be thereof but as if a man should say, that his
father had bin a robber, or a murderer, or a witch, or a traitor, and was
hanged for his labor, and therefore he will take the same course, to have the
same end? Oh therefore let all children of any such, or any other evil
parents, make the more haste to be unlike to their said parents, and thus to
sacrifice themselves, because the Lord has most sweetly promised, that if any
child has seen his fathers sins, and considers, Ezekiel. 18. 14. 17.
and does not the like, he shall not die for the iniquity of his father, but
shall surely live. O gracious promise! Has Number. 23. 19. Heb. 10. 23.
he said it, and shall he not perform it? He that has promised is faithful.
Oh therefore that every man would labor to make such children such sacrifices
to God as here the Apostle speaks of. Let him know that he that conuerteth
Iam. 5. 20.
such a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and
shall hide a multitude of sins: yea, such a one Jude 23.
is as a fire brand plucked out of the fire. Let all such also, both the one and
the other, the child of such parents, and he that shall be the instrument of
God to make him a sacrifice to God, do that that now I speak of the sooner,
because the longer continuance in the sins of such parents, hardens the
more, and makes the conversion of such the harder work. Thus much of our
active sacrificing of our selves.

CHAP. VII.
Of the passive sacrificing of our selves.

NOw follows the passive. This is twofold. First, patiently The passive
sacrificing of our selves twofold.
to bear all common afflictions laid upon us by the Lord. Secondly, to submit
our selves to all persecution by the wicked, for the testimony of his truth,
and better confirmation of the faith of other. The first also seems twofold:
either for some special sin; or for the demonstration of some special work
of Gods power or mercy, for the greater glory of his name. This distinction I
gather from the answer of our Savior to his Disciples, asking him of the man
borne blind, whether he or Ioh 9. 2.
his parents had sinned, that he was borne blind; that is, whether he or his
parents had committed any special sin, for which the Lord had laid this
blindness upon him. To this our Savior answers, Neither has this man
sinned, ver. 3.
nor his parents; but that the work of God should be made manifest in him. Our
Savior thus answers, not altogether to free him and his parents from sin;
for there is no man 1 King. 8 46. Iam. 3. 2.
that sins not; and in many things we offend all; and every man must daily
ask the forgiveness of his trespasses: neither to teach that this blindness
was not from sin, and for sin. For ^^ death entered by sin, so also all
afflictions Romans 5. 12. Psalm. 38. 3. 4.
are the fruits of sin. This answer therefore was only made according to
the supposition and opinion of the Disciples and other, that thought not only
all afflictions to come from sin, but also every special affliction to have
some special sin for the cause thereof; and that the greater affl^ction any
had, the greater sinner he had bin: as Jobs friends thought of him. Howsoever
the Lord afflicts any man, whether for some special or personal sins of
himself, or only generally for sin, but yet for manifestation of some
special work of God, for his own further glory thereby, all must be
patiently and without grudging or murmuring borne; in respect both Heb. 11. 6.
of the cause thereof in God, namely his love; and also in respect of the
desert thereof by man's sin; and in respect of the end of such afflictions,
namely that the person so chastised might either be reclaimed and converted
from sin, wherein before he had altogether lived: as Manasses the greates^
sinner that ever we read to have bin converted, was notwithstanding by his
captivity and bonds so 2. Chron. 32. 12
greatly humbled before the God of his fathers, that he prayed unto him, and
found mercy, and became a most worthy convert for ever after: either (I say)
that the person so afflicted Psalm. 94. 12.
might be converted, or that having before bin converted, he might be better
instructed in the law of Heb. 12. 1. Ioh. 5. 17. Psalm. 94. 12.
God, and made more plentifully partaker of the holiness of God* In all which
respects, a man so afflicted being said to be blessed; what great reason has
every man so afflicted, patiently to bear such affliction? This being added,
that such afflictions are as fire to purge us of all our dross (as gold is
tried and made finer by the fire) whereby we may 1. Pet. 1 7.
be the fitter sacrifices for God, and the said trial of our faith may be
found to our praise, honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Most
cause especially have such to be patient, how many, how great, and how heavy
soever their said afflictions are, that before have enjoyed great mercies;
according to those excellent words of Job to his Job 2. 10.
foolish and troublesome wife, What? shall we receive ^ood at the hands of God,
and shall we not receive evil? In such afflictions also, every man ought to
make so much more use of them, that by them he may more mort^fie his old man
with all the lusts thereof in him, and be the more renewed in the inward man,
that so his whole man may be a sacrifice to God, more living, holy and
acceptable, as here the Apostle speaks. Of this passive kind of sacrifice Job
is a Iam. 5. 11.
most worthy example, highly commended to our imitation: so also is David, who
notwithstanding he had many Psalm. 39. 9.
afflictions, yet was dumb, and opened not his mouth, because the Lord did it:
and though many sought after his life, laying Psalm. 38. 12.
snares for him, and speaking mischievous things against him, yet (as before)
he was as a deaf man not hearing, and as a dumb man not opening his mouth.
How did he manifest this even when he was King, and when wicked Shimei 2. Sam.
16. 5.
not only most impudently railed of him and rau^d against him in the rebellion
of Absalom, but also most villanously cast stones at him. All which was the
more grievous in respect of his other great calamity by the rebellion of his
own son against him. Thus much briefly of the first kind of our passive
sacrificing of our selves to God.

The second passive sacrificing of our selves, is by suffering The second
passive sacrificing of our selves.
persecution both in word and deed for Christ and his Gospel: the which as it
is often commanded to all that will be indeed his Disciples, even to take up
his cross Math. 10. 38. 16 24.
and follow him; he being pronounced unworthy to be his disciple that will not
so do: and that by the example of Christ himself suffering for sins and for
the unjust, himself 1. Pet. 3 18.
being without all sin, and most just: as (I say) this is often commanded, so
is it likewise commended, they being pronounced blessed that suffer
persecution, and be railed Man. 5. 10. 11.
on for Christ's sake, because theirs is the kingdom of heaven, 1. Pet. 4. 13.
14.
and the Spirit of glory rests on them. By such sufferings Christ himself
entered into his glory. Would we be partaker of his glory more easily then
himself? So indeed we shall Luke 24 26. 1. Pet. 1. 11.
be; because our sufferings, how great soever, are but fleabites in comparison
of his. For though we had the strength of all Angels, we could not suffer so
much for him as he has suffered for us. Notwithstanding, if we will be
glorified Rom 8. 17. ver. 29.
together with him, we must also suffer with him. And whom God before knew,
them he predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son. And alas, what
are the sufferings of this present time? verily, not worthy to be compared
(reckon ver. 18.
how we will or can) to the glory that shall be revealed. Yea the sufferings
of Christ were the more in respect of the eminency Phil. 2. 6. etc.
of his person* he being in the form of God, etc. and yet taking upon him the
form of a servant, and humbling himself to the death of the cross; even to
such a death as would have broken the backs of men and Angels. The sufferings
also of Christ for us were the more, because though he suffered them of
necessity (as before we heard) yet that necessity was by the decree of
himself with his Father and the holy Ghost: neither was it by any coaction or
constraint, but most freely, most willingly, most cheerfully. For at the first
he said, Behold I come. He Psalm. 40. 7.
says also, I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No Ioh. 10. 17. 18.
man takes it away from me* but I lay it down of my self. He could also when
he was apprehended have prayed to his Mat. 26. 52. 53.
Father, and he would have given him more then twelve legions of Angels. He
also that with a word made all the company that came to take him, fall to the
ground, could as Ioh. 18. 6. Mat. 16. 23. Ioh. 11. 7. 8. 9
easily have smitten them all with present death. Yea, so willingly did he
suffer, that most sharply he rebuked Peter, yea all his Disciples for speaking
to the contrary. All these things considered, who would not go through fire and
water, and suffer a thousand deaths (if it were possible) for him? Certainly we
ought all and every one to say as Paul said, I am ready not to be bound only,
but also to Act. 21. 13.
die for the name of the Lord Jesus. We ought with as great alacrity,
cheerfulness and gladness to suffer for Christ, as ever we were glad and
joyful to receive and enjoy any blessings and advancement here in this world.
We ought as willingly and cheerfully to submit ourselves to any torments for
the confirmation of the truth of Christ, as ever any Bride went willingly and
cheerfully to be married to any husband, how honorable soever her husband was,
or how mean, how poor, and how base soever she before had bin. Did not the
Apostles so? did not the Martyrs so, Act. 5. 41.
as in former times, so also in the late days of Queen Marie? Their histories
plainly testify this. Notwithstanding we must always remember the words of
Peter in this 1. Pet. 1. 6. and 3. 17.
case If need so require, and If the will of God be so. If well without any
prejudice of the Gospel, or to the Professors thereof, especially for the
furthering of the Gospel and the good of the professors of it, we may avoid
persecution, we are not to thrust our selves into it, but by the authority
Math. 10. 23.
of Christ himself, we may fly from one city to another. Touching Origin
that was so eager to have suffered when Eusebius. Eccles. hist lib. 6. cap. 2.
he was young, that his mother could not persuade him to the contrary, and was
constrained to hide his apparel, thereby to restrain him from going forth:
and touching Melas Bishop of a small town Rhinacurura, that refused Sozomen
lib. 6. cap. 31.
to escape, liberty being offered by them that were sent to murder him: and
touching some other that in great multitudes offered themselves to the death;
either their zeal exceeded their judgment and knowledge, or else God gave
them an extraordinary spirit. Upon such examples notwithstanding we are not to
presume doing the like; but God going before us, we may and must follow. If his
will be not apparent for our suffering, but rather the contrary, let us not too
boldly offer our selves, lest either we do as D. Pendleton did, or else suffer
with the less comfort. And let us always remember that of the Apostle, If 1.
Cor. 13. 3.
we give our bodies to be burned and have not love, it profits nothing. Zeal
is an excellent grace, if it be accompanied with knowledge, and guided by
judgment: otherwise it ^s dangerous.

Above all we must be sure of the cause. For, Not the suffering, but the cause
makes a Martyr. To suffer for evil* as many Papists for treason, and they and
many other for heresy, is not to present their bodies a sacrifice to God, but
to the devil. The Papists being so notorious idolaters as they are, in
inuocating of Saints, yea sometimes See Cal^^^ de reliquijs.
of traitors for Saints, in worshipping of their ^reliques, and sometimes of
things not to be named, in stead of relics, and of the very sign of the
cross with the same worship (as themselves blasphemously say) that they
worship Christ himself withal; and making a god of a piece of bread, and
worshipping it, and then gobling it up wholly with their mouths, and swallowing
it down into their bellies, and (as before I said) casting it out into the
draught; yea teaching also that mise or dogs may do the same: and falling
down also before wood, stocks and ston^s. The Papists (I say) in doing all
this, do it not to God, but unto an idol of their own making: and so therein
they sacrifice their bodies, yea their souls also being agent with their
bodies, not unto God, but unto idols: yea, all their long and tedious
pilgrimages, all their knocking of their breasts, setting up of candles before
their crucifixes, to their Saints and other their idols, and all other their
bodily exercises* which the Apostle says profit 1. Tim 4. 8.
little: all their whipping and scourging themselves is no better then m^ere
madness; and the leaping of Baals 1. Kin. 18. 28.
Priests upon his altar, with their cutting themselves with knives and lancers
till blood gushed our. And to say the truth, they have no other president for
so doing, from one end of the Scripture to the other, but only that example of
Baals Priests. As therefore Eliah laughed the said Priests of Baal to scorn in
that behalf, so may all wise men laugh to scorn the like doings of the
Papists: yea, the example of Eliah is a much better warrant for so laughing,
then the doing of Baals priests is for imitation thereof.

Moreover, all opinion of meriting for our selves, or for any other, by
sacrificing our selves, must be fa^r^ from us. Heb. 9. 28. and 10. 10. 14.
For Christ by once offering of himself for all, has sufficiently and
abundantly merited for all belonging unto him. They need not therefore any
merits of their-owne or of any other, either by suffering martyrdom, or by
p^rforming any works Neither indeed can any suffer or do any thing, whereby to
merit any thing but wrath and condemnation. For who is without sin? Where
there is any sin, how can there be any merit of any good? Is not all that God
has done or will do for us, before called by the name of mercies? We are not
worthy of the least of his benefits bestowed: neither can we make any
recompense for them; how then can we deserve any other. We cannot Job 22. 2. 3.
and 35. 7.
be profitable to God, etc. If we be righteous, what do we give unto God? or
what receives he at our hand? Why then should any be so mad as to think he
can deserve any good at his hand^? Are not all our righteousnesses as filthy
Isay. 64. 6.
rags? And do not our best works come short of that that they ought to be, when
we have done all things that are commanded, we must say, that we are
unprofitable servants, as No merit by marti^dome. Luke 17. 10.
has bin before touched? Does any man merit any thing at the hands of his
creditor, by paying that that he owes him? All that we do or can do unto God,
yea much more also, we do owe unto God. If therefore we merit nothing at the
hands of any man, by paying our debt unto him, can we merit any thing at Gods
hands, by paying that that we owe him? In the foresaid Chapter also of Luke,
Ver. 7. 8 9.
our Savior had before taught, that a man's servant meriteth nothing at the
hands of his master, by doing that that his master had commanded him. If
therefore the servant of a man cannot merit any thing at the hands of his
master by doing his commandments, who notwithstanding is his fellow-seruant
unto God; how alas can any man merit any good at the hands of God by keeping
his commandments? yea, that cannot so keep them, but that he breaks many of
them, and fails also much in his best keeping of any of them? If also men's
servants cannot merit so much of their masters as a little liberty for a
while, as our Savior in the same place teaches; how much less can they
deserve to be made their heirs, by doing that which their masters commanded
them? Least of all therefore can any man deserve to be made the heir of God
and of his kingdom in heaven, though he could do all for matter and manner that
God has commanded him. If we cannot merit by suffering of martyrdom, how much
less can we merit by doing any thing else? The kingdom of heaven is not the
hire of any works or sufferings, but Gods reward of his mere grace. Thus and
no otherwise are all those places to be understood, that speak of rewards,
namely, that they are rewards of mercy, not of merit: or if of merit, only of
Christ's merit in Gods mercy imputed unto us. So also is that to be understood,
Well Mat. 25. 21.
done thou good and faithful servant, thou have bin faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. Thus I say, and no otherwise are such places to be understood; and not as
the wrangling Rhemists foolishly and grossly inter prete that place of Luke.

All the premises well considered, all that we do here at any time suffer or
can suffer for the name and testimony of Christ, is but a sacrifice only of
thanksgiving unto God, for his more then marvelous love toward us, in giving
Phil. 2. 17.
his Son to suffer for us. Those places also of Paul's being offered upon the
sacrifice and service of the Philippians 2. Tim 4. 6.
faith, and of his being ready to be offered, are not to be understood of a^y
such sacrifice as here the Apostle speaks of. For Paul in those places
compares not his martyrdom to any burnt offering of the Law, but only to the
Exodus 30. 9. Numb. 6. 15. and 15. 7. and 29 16. 18. 21. etc.
drink offerings that were annexed to the sacrifices for the perfecting of
them The Apostle in these places uses not the word (...), to sacrifice, but
the word spend^^^i, to be powered out, according to the manner of drink offerings
annexed to their burnt sacrifices. The Philippia ^s indeed by the preaching of
the Gospel, being as it were slain with the sword of the Spirit are therefore
called a sacrifice: but Paul compares his martyrdom to a drink offering* to
be as it were powered on the Phlippians faith, and on themselves for the better
perfecting of their faith* and confirming themselves in their faith.
Furthermore, we are to be the more willing in suffering any thing for Christ's
sake, because of the shortness of all our sufferings. Our Re^. 2, 10.
tribulations shall be but for ten days; wherein if we be faithful unto
death, we shall not only receive a crown of life* but also he shall give it
us, that is the Lord (or Prince) Act. 3. 15.
of life, and the righteous Judge. For he has promised it, not only to Paul,
but also to all that love his appearing. If it shall 1. Tim. 4. 8.
be of gift, then shall it not be of merit. For what is freer then gift?

Thus to suffer, is a degree of dignity from God to us, above the common work
of faith. So the Apostle makes Philip. 1. 29.
it, saying, To you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
on him, but also to suffer for his sake. For indeed thus to suffer, is a
greater honor, a greater glory, then all the great dignities, titles and
honors in the world without it, where God calls unto it. The casting of
Daniel into the Lions den for calling upon God, contrary to Dan. 6. 16.
the commandment of the King, was more honorable unto Daniel then the scarlet
r^bes and the chain of gold he had; and then the proclaiming of him to be the
third Dan. 5. 29.
Ruler in the kingdom of Belshazzer for interpretation of the handwriting
upon the wall.

But here a question may be made from that before said of presenting our whole
man, soul and body a sacrifice

I answer, that the soul, though in it self free from suffering, sympathy,
or a fellow-feeling. For, both soul and body make but one man: and by the
afflictions of the body the soul is grieved, as well as by the good of the
body the soul rejoices. Both grief and joy are passions: wit also, reason,
understanding, learning, faith, godliness, etc. do all belong to the soul and
inward man; yet all these sometime and in some sort suffer at the hands of the
wicked. They that are of the best wits, of most understanding, most judicious,
most learned, being reviled by the names of fools, dolts, dunces, men of no
capacity, of no learning, yea also wicked, schismatiks, disturbers of the
peace, heretics, rebels, seditious, etc. yea such as are sometimes punished by
men, as if they were such as they are called. Are not these things sufferings,
reaching to the soul it self, the subject of wit, reason, learning, faith,
etc.

This doctrine of suffering for Christ and his truth, is the more needful to
be taught, because the longer peace we have enjoyed, the more unfit we are to
suffer, not so much as knowing what belongs to suffering: yea, our long peace
with other mercies by the Gospel enjoyed, has br^d in all sorts a contempt of
the Gospel, and other mercies, with such a security, that neither daily
hearing of the troubles of other countries, nor rumors of wars intended
against our selves, will awaken us or make us look about us, to use means
whereby to escape the wrath that is to come. As our Savior told his Disciples
Ioh. 16. 1. 2. 4. etc.
of many things they should suffer, to the end they might be the better
prepared for them; and that when such things should come. they might not be
offended and troubled: so must we take the premises as admonitions to us. Shall
we then see and hear so much daily as we do, and shall we not the more prepare
our selves to suffer whatsoever shall come? It is Gods mercy toward us, to
warn us before. For he that is warned, is half armed. Let us therefore take
such warnings, and arm our selves accordingly to suffer whatsoever shall come,
and whenever. To whom should we more willingly resign our lives, then to him
that gave them, and has prepared a better life for us afterward? yea such
things as eye 1. Cor. 2. 9. Isay. 64. 4.
has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man, but the
which notwithstanding he has revealed unto his servants by his Spirit. Hereof
especially they may be assured, that in this passive manner do present
themselves a sacrifice to God. For such light afflictions being but for a
momnt, works for us a far more exceeding weight 2. Cor. 4. 17.
of glory. And as the hatred of the wicked against the godly is to them that
so hate them an evident token of perdition, Phil. 1. 28.
so to be so hated and troubled, is to the godly as evident a token of
salvation, and that of God.

But having spoken thus much of suffering, some may How we may be able to
suffer.
demand, how we may be sure that we shall be able to? suffer? and how we may
make our selves fit for such a passive sacrifice. It is called a fiery trial.
And what more 1. Pet. 4. 12.
fearful, what more unmerciful then fire? how then can flesh and blood endure
it? Indeed not possibly: but the children of God are more then flesh and blood:
for they have the Spirit of God; and by this Spirit they are members of Christ,
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. Yet to Ephesians. 5. 30.
prepare men the better for this sacrifice, let them first Heb. 11. 33.
before the Hebrews; especially let them look to Christ Jesus himself, who
for the joy that was set before him, endured Heb 12. 2. Col. 2. 15.
the cross, despising the shame, etc. yea, this Christ Jesus by his said
enduring the cross has spoiled all principalities and powers for all them for
whom he so suffered; and has 1. Cor. 1^ 57.
by his death overcome death for us, so plucking out the sting thereof, that it
shall never be able to hurt us. Secondly, not to fear. The rather may such
cast away all fear, Isay. 4^. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 18.
because the price of their redemption was so great, even the precious blood of
Christ Jesus. Yea, but Peter there exhorts us by this argument to pass the
time of our dwelling here in fear. Fear and assurance are contrary. I answer
(as before I have said) that this fear is opposed only to carnal security,
not to the assurance of our perseverance; and it commends unto us only an
holy care, so much the more not to defile our selves with sin, by how much the
greater price our redemption from sin did cost.

But how shall we know that we are so redeemed? By our being a peculiar people
unto himself, zealous of good works. For these two, our redemption by Christ
from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14.
and our being a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works, are
joined together. And this our being such a people, is a work of the Spirit,
and a real testimony Romans 8. 16. 17.
thereof that we are the children and heirs of God, etc. This Spirit also
working this in us, is the Seal of God, which he has set to his epistle
written in our heart, and 2. Cor. 3. 2.
his earnest (as I said before) of our inheritance, whereby Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
likewise our redemption already wrought by Christ Jesus, and to be finished
from all evil remaining, is further Ephesians. 4 30.
sealed unto us.

Thirdly, let us beware of pride and much confidence Mat. 26. 33. 69
Peter, and his great fall for all that. Let us not forget the great boasting
of D. Pendleton in the book of Martyrs, and his great encouragement to M.
Sanders against fear, and for suffering whatsoever the enemies of the Gospel
should inflict: and yet the cowardly reuolting of the said Pendleton, and the
manfull martyrdom of that M. Sanders. Blessed is the man that fears always.
They that do Pro. 28. 14.
most brag, do oftentimes prove the greatest cowards. And they that do most
fear themselves, are most strengthened by the Lord to endure any violence of
the wicked. The greatest boasters ^re not the best soldiers. The Turkey cock
is a great foul, and makes a great brustling and strouting with his wings;
yea, he will also fight Iustily a few blows: but a little dunghill cock will
for all that at the last drive him away, and make him to hide his head in a
hole, and never dare to fight blow more. So is it with many Christians; they
will be very hot before persecution comes, and perhaps very sharply condemn
them that in weakness yield: but when persecution comes, and themselves are
called into the field, alas what cowards do they prove? how do they shrink?
yea, how foully sometimes do they palinodiam canere, and turn cat in pan, and
become themselves persecuters of other? Oh therefore let all men beware of such
craking before and of such presumption.

Fourthly, in the former holy fear, let us be much in Ephesians. 6. 11. etc.
to the Ephesians. If but any piece thereof want, all the rest will do us
little good: yea, the truth is, that we cannot put on one piece, except we put
on all.

Fifthly, let us well labor the mortifying of our old man,

In all the sacrificing of our selves before spoken, of active and passive, let
us always remember to do all and to suffer all, only to God, and for God.
Herein God will be alone, or none. We must not so sacrifice our selves partly
to God, and partly to some other: but all must be only to God, and for God. We
must not be like to men-seruants of Serieants at Law for the first year, whose
Liueries are parti-colored, black on the one side, tawnie on the other, as
though they served two masters: but our Liuerie must be all of one color;
because No man can serve two Mat. 6. 24.
masters etc. All sacrifices must be offered only to God. We must not be like
unto them that are said to have feared 2. Kin. 17. 33. 41.
the Lord and yet to have served their own gods and their own graven images;
neither must we worship and swear by the Lord and by Malcham: but as in other
things we Zeph. 1. 5.
must serve the Lord only; so must we in this sacrificing of Mat. 4. 10.
our selves. He that but in part sacrifices himself to the Lord, sacrifices
himself wholly to the devil. Let every man therefore give all that is without
him and within him to the Lord: if he do not, he gives nothing to the Lord,
but (as I said) all to the devil. Ananias and Saphira Act. 5. 1. etc.
his wife are worthy remembrance herein: they sold a possession, and kept back
a part of the price thereof, making show for all that of giving all to the
poor, (oh that they that are niggardly in their sacrifice of alms before
mentioned, did well consider hereof,) but because they gave not all, all men
know the fearful judgment of God upon them both, upon Ananias as the
principal offender, upon Sapphira as accessarie to his offense, consenting and
keeping counsel. That that is done to the poor, is done Pro. 19. 17. Mat. 25
40. 45.
to the Lord. That that is withheld from the poor, is withheld from the Lord.
If therefore this part-sacrificing of the price of their possession unto the
Lord were so heinous a sin in Ananias and Sapphira, is there not the like
danger for all other that so sacrifice unto the Lord? Did not the Lord threaten
by Zephaniah to stretch out his hand against them that swear by the Lord and
by Malcham? Let not this therefore seem a small matter. For indeed it is not
so easy a matter as most men think it to be, to sacrifice our selves to the
Lord. As God has given us all that we have, so he is worthy of all, he will
have all, he must have all, or else nothing. And thus to sacrifice our selves,
as I have said, is more then even when the legal sacrifices were in request
and force, the sacrificing of all bulls and rams and lambs, and all other
creatures by the Law required. For even then, without this sacrificing of
themselves, Psalm. 50. 8. etc. Isay. 1. 11. M^ca. 6. 6.
all the other were nothing; yea rejected as odious, loathsome and detestable to
the Lord. Finally, to conclude all this argument, let us never forget to join
together all before said of the sacrificing of our selves both actiuely and
also passiuely. For, neither the active sacrificing of our selves is enough
without the passive, when we shall be called thereunto, and cannot lawfully
avoid it; neither this without the former. Though I give my body (says the
Apostle) to be burned, and have not love, it profits nothing. Thus much of
sacrificing our selves both actiuely and also 1. Cor. 13. 1^.
passiuely.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the two first adjuncts of the sacrifice of our selves, living and holy.

THe adjuncts of this sacrifice are three, 1. living; 2. holy; 3. acceptable.
There is also a fourth, your reasonable service: but this being more then an
adiunct, even a post argument (as I may speak) for confimation of the maine
exhortation, I do not therefore reckon it with the rest.

Touching these three, the last is both an effect and also an end of the two
first. An effect, because if the sacrifice be living and holy, it cannot but be
acceptable. An end, because we must not offer our selves a sacrifice living and
holy to please men, to get credit to our selves, or to make any other gain
thereby for this life, but to be acceptable to God, to please God. As before
the Apostle had set down the substance of our sacrifice to be our bodies, yea
our whole selves, souls and bodies, as has bin showed; so now in the two
first adjuncts here annexed he sets down the quality. As before he had set
down what we must offer; so now he sets down what manner of sacrifice our
said sacrifice must be, viz, living and holy and acceptable.

The word living is to be taken by oppsiotion to the old Living. Exodus 29. 10.
Leuit. 1. 3. 1. Why the old sacrifices were slain, Romans 5. 12. and 6. 23. 2.
Romans 56.
sacrifices of beasts; which though they were presented alive at the door of
the Tabernacle, yet before they were to be sacrificed they were to be slain:
and that first to note that we by our sins had all deserved death; for death
entered by sin; and death is the wages of sin. Had not man sinned, he should
never have died. Secondly, the old sacrifices were to be slain, typically to
represent the death of Christ Jesus, who died for the elect when they were
ungodly; and for sinners, that he might redeem them from all their Tit. 2. 14.
2. Cor. 5. 21.
iniquity, and be made the righteousness of God in him; and so all together
might be sanctified and cleansed, and presented to himself a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrinkle. Ephesians. 5. 26. 27.
In opposition therefore to those sacrifices of the Law, the Apostle here will
have this sacrifice of our selves to be living. We must then here d^eame of
sacrificing our selves by killing our selves, as the Papists do ma^ly whip and
scourge themselves like to the Priests of Baal before spoken of: for this is
devilish, and (as I before said) this is to offer ourselves to the devil and
to do his service, who Ioh. 8. 44.
was a murderer from the beginning. God has forbidden every man the murdering
of himself, as well as the murdering of another: yea, though a man have done
any thing worthy of death by the magistrate, yet to put him to death for the
same, must be the work of the magistrate, not of himself that so has deserved
death, neither of any other that has not authorite so to do. Yea, though the
magistrate himself have committed any such heinous sin as whereby he has
deserved death, yet he must not be put to death by himself, but by some other
superior magistrate. If himself that has committed such a sin be the
supreme magistrate, no other man must put him to death for the same, but he
must be left to God the Judge Judges. 18. 29.
of all the world. We must indeed (as before I said of the second kind of the
passive sacrificing our selves) submit our selves to death for Christ's sake and
for his truths sake; not only for the whole, but also for any part thereof, if
we cannot lawfully avoid it without denial or betraying of it, but otherwise
we must not by any means take away our own lives. David by the law, for his
adult^rie with Bathsheba and murder of Vr^as, had doubly deserved death, yet he
put not himself to death, neither had any other power so to do. Yea, to say
more, I make no question but that a man having by some capital sin deserved
to die, may for all that defend himself against any private man, though never
so near in kindred to a man murdered by another, and not willingly suffer
himself to be slain by such a private person, without authority attempting
the revenge of the person murdered, or otherwise so iuiured, that by the said
doer of the iniutie, death had bin deserved. Might not Amnon have defended
himself against the violence of Absalom, if he had bin aware thereof, though he
had deserved to die for the rape and incest he had committed against Tamar his
own sister by the father, and sister of Absalom by father and mother.

This life here spoken of, is not our natural life only, though touching it
we live in God, move, and have our being; Act 17. 28.
but especially a supernatural life here begun, and in the world to come to be
perfected, and therefore called everlasting life, and in a singular manner the
life of God. It is the Ioh. 10. 28^ Ephesians. 4. 18.
life of grace, often times indeed here begun and continued with much
heaviness and with tears (as the Prophet speaks Pal. 126. 5. 6.
of the people in captivity,) but ending with joy, as the sheaues by the
husbandman are gathered with gladness, though the seed cost never so dear, and
were therefore grievous to the sower: yea, in the mean time also all their
present afflictions of this life are accompanied with joy unspeakable and
glorious; because after this life ended, 1. Pet. 1. 6. 8.
and all the miseries thereof ceased, then the former life of grace shall be
crowned with the life of glory.

This life also is the life of Christ himself even in us, because it comes
from Christ, who is therefore called the Prince of life, and that especially in
a double respect; first, Acts the 3. 15. How Christ is the Prince of life.
because by his death he has purchased eternal life for us* secondly, because
he being our head, and we his members; as from the natural head the whole
natural body Gal. 2. 19. 20.
Therefore the Apostle says, I through the law am dead unto the law, that I
might live to God. I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I*
but Christ lives in me: and the life which I now live, I live by the faith of
the Son of God. But how do we live by the faith of the Son of How we live
by the faith of the Son of God.
God? Because as God is the author of it, and Christ the purchaser, the subject
and the conduit of it, so faith is our hand whereby both we are incorporated
into Christ, and he is made our head, and we joined unto him as to our head;
and also whereby we turn the cock of this conduit, and so draw the water of
life, and life it self from Ioh* 4. 14. and 7 38. Act. 16. 14.
him: our hearts being before by God himself opened (as the heart of Lydia
was) and so made capable both of that water of life, and also of the life it
self.

This life here being the life of grace, is the assurance of the life of
glory: and after all our afflictions and combats here well ended, and the
faith well kept, shall at the last be 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. ^ames. ^. 12. 1. Pet. 5.
4.
crowned by the righteous Judge himself with the crown of righteousness, the
crown of life, the crown of glory, which shall not fade.

To speak yet a little more of this adiunct of our sacrifice, The adiunct
living includes in it allaeriti^ and constancy.
living, it includes in it two other qualities of our sacrifice: first,
alacrity or cheerfulness: secondly, constancy. The former is by some noted
upon the word present, before spoken of: but all presenting of gifts being not
always cheerful, but sometime unwilling, and for fear of some displeasure by
not presenting, I suppose it rather to be more aptly and naturally signified by
this word living. For every man in his right mind, willingly lives, and
desires to live. Satan had learned this, and could therefore say, Skin for
skin, and all that a man has Job. 2. 4.
will he give for his life. The word also living, is all one with lively or
cheerful. For if a man do any thing dully, or grudgingly and lazily, as though
he cared not whether he did it or no, do we not say, that such a one has no
life in him? and that he does that which he does, as though he were at lest
asleep. If one go nimbly about his work, do we not say, that such a one has
life in him? Hence are those often petitions of the Prophet, Quicken me
according Psalm. 119. 25. ver. 37. v. 88. and 149. 156.
to thy word Quicken me in thy way. Quicken me after thy loving kindness: and,
Quicken me according to thy judgments. So also when the Lord by the Prophet
says, I dwell with him that is of a contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of
the Isay. 57. 15.
humble. In all these places the words to quicken and revive being both one, do
signify to make alive. Now neither does the one or the other Prophet speak of
the first life of grace from the sins wherein men are dead before
regeneration, but of the quickening grace, whereby men are made more and more
nimble, cheerful and lively in the works of grace. For the Psalmist was before
partaker of the first work of grace: and the Prophet Isaiah speaking of the
humble, must needs be understood to speak of such as had before received the
life of God, whereof humility is a special and a great measure. As there are
the reliks of all other sins in the best of Gods children, so are there of
that sluggishnesse, against which Solomon in Pro. 6. 6. 1. ^. 4. and. 15. 19.
and. 18. 9. and 24 30. etc.
the Proverbs gives so many precepts, and in respect whereof the most lively
that are in goodness have need to be rouzed up, and to be provoked to be more
lively, and also daily to pray in that behalf. In these days especially is
this most necessary, wherein the greatest part of men are altogether dead in
their trespasses and sins, and Ephesians. 1. and. 4. 18
utterly void and alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, because of the blindness (yet) of their hearts; and the best in a
manner not only of the common people, but also of the Ministers of the word, and
of all other sorts and states of men, like to the Angel of the Reu. 3. 1.
Church of Sardi, have a name to be alive, and yet are dead, not stark dead as
the former, but sick, and very sick unto death, needing admonition to awake,
and to strengthen the things that remain, and are (otherwise) ready to die. As
therefore this attribute is here set before the next, of being holy; so it must
go before it. No man can be an holy sacrifice, except he be first a living
sacrifice. Thus much of alacrity or cheerfulness, intimated by the word
living.

Touching constancy, that also is commended by the Mat. 16. 16. chapt. 26. 63.
Ioh. 6. 67. 2. Cor. 6. 16.
same word. For as when God is called the living God, by the Apostles and by
the high Priest, the meaning is, that he lives for ever, and is immutable and
unchangeable: and as the Spirit of God which Christ promises to all that shall
come unto him and believe in him, is called by the name of rivers of living
water, that is, such as should Ioh. 7. 38.
never be dried up; as also before that to the woman of Samaria Ioh. 4. 10.
by the name of living water, and is more plainly interpreted to be such, that
whosoever should drink thereof ver. 14.
should never thirst again, but that that water so given by our Savior
shouldbe a well of water in her springing up to eternal life. So here a living
sacrifice, signifies such a sacrifice, as once having life should never die.
Christ indeed our life, once died, but now he lives for evermore. As therefore
Reu. 1. 18.
Christ now lives, and neither shall nor can die again; so whosoever has
truly given himself a sacrifice to God, so being a member of Christ, he must
be and cannot but be a living sacrifice for ever. If any that seem to be
living do die, he never indeed was alive, but seemed only so to be. He that is
once truly a living sacrifice, so will be to the end. He can no more lose this
his spiritual life, then God himself or Christ Jesus can die: because that
his life is the life of God and of Christ Jesus. O unspeakable comfort!

This life of our sacrifice, must not be concealed for fear of any danger
whatsoever; yea, it cannot be concealed: where it is, it will show it self by
the effects and works thereof. As our natural life will show it self
wheresoever it is, so will this our spiritual life. I believed, therefore I
spoke. It can no more be hidden then fire. As fire will Psalm. 116. 10. 2. Cor.
4. 13.
break forth wheresoever it is, so will this life: yea, fire may be quenched,
but this life cannot be extinguished. Though Jeremiah in respect of many
discouragements, such as the faithful Ministers of the Gospel in these days
every where, especially in their own country meet with, Mark. 6. 4. Ioh. 4. 44.
not only at the hands of enemies, but also at the hands of such as bear a
fair face unto the Gospel: though Jeremiah (I say) by such discouragements
had determined to have suspended himself from his ministry, and not to Ier.
20. 9.
have spoken any more in the name of the Lord, yet the word of the Lord was in
his heart as burning fire shut up in his bones, and he was weary of
forbearing, and could no longer stay. They that have this life of God in them,
have also the same word whereby that life was wrought (as afterward we shall
hear,) and therefore this life cannot be hidden, but it will break forth and
show it self.

That of the Apostle, our life is hid with Christ in God, is Colo. 3. 3. How
our life is said to be hid with Christ in God.
to be understood in a double respect: first, of the life to come, and of the
perfection of this life in the world to come: secondly, in respect of the world
and of all dead in their trespasses and sins, that have no eyes to see this
life, or any work thereof in them that have it. Sometimes also they that are
thus living, do not themselves feel this life in themselves, but fear they
have it not, as being for a time in a spiritual swoune, and oppressed either
with their sins, or with many afflictions: yea, sometimes their eyes are so
dazeled with the great prosperity of the wicked, that they think their state
better then their own, as thinking all to be in vain that they have done in
cleansing Psalm. 73. Chap. 33.
their heart, and washing their hands in innocence. But hereof enough is
written in the Dignity of Gods children. By these things hitherto spoken, it
is manifest, that whosoever shows not this life, has it not at all in him.
Let no man therefore deceive himself touching this life, but seriously examine
himself by the effects of this life, whether he have it or no. But this shall
be more evident by the adiunct holy in the next place; because without that
holiness there is no spiritual li^e.

To add one word more concerning the former constancy and perpetuity of this
life, all that trust in the Lord Psalm. ^25. 1.
are like unto mount Ston that stands fast for ever, and shall never be
moved. And our faith whereby we live, is therefore 1. Pet. 1. 7.
said to be more precious then gold, because gold, though tried in the fire,
perishes. Does not the Apostle thereby manifestly show that our faith cannot
perish; else were the argument of the Apostle from the comparison thereof with
gold, of no force.

All hitherto spoken of this attribute living, here given to this our
sacrifice, is to be applied to all before said of our active and passive
sacrificing of our selves, we must do all, we must suffer all with all
alacrity and cheerfulnes, as also with all constancy and steadfastness. That
which is said of a liberal person, that the Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2.
Cor. 9. 7.
is to be understood of the active and passive sacrificing of our selves. If we
must be cheerful in giving unto men, must we not much more be cheerful in
sacrificing our selves to God, that in many respects has right unto our
selves, and to all that we have? All the active sacrificing of our bodies, and
of every member of them; as also of our souls and of every power and faculty
of them, must be cheerful. So must likewise be all our passive sacrificing of
our selves. The more honorable also it is to suffer for Christ's sake, the more
willing and cheerful should we be to part from all, yea to lay down our lives
for his sake. And indeed whosoever has truly believed that Christ has so
willingly and cheerfully suffered those direful torments for us that he did, he
cannot but be willing and cheerful also to suffer any thing for him. Oh that
this life were in every one that pretends to sacrifice himself to God. In
things that concern our selves for this life, how lively, how nimble are we?
but alas in sacrificing our selves to God, in doing or suffering any thing for
God, how drowsy, how dead, how leaden heeled and handed are we?

The same may be said of constancy in sacrificing our selves both actiuely and
passiuely. It is not enough to suffer a little, or at once; but if we should be
called often to suffer for his truth, it should not be grievous unto us. Though
we should be first reviled touching our good names, then spoiled of all our
good, then laid up in prison, and there kept with great hardness for many
years; then brought out to execution, and to have our flesh torn from our
backs by peece-meale, as some have had; or be burnt by little and little, as
William Gardener Merchant was beyond the seas; yet none of all these ought to
make any of us to shrink.

One thing more let me yet add touching this adiunct living, namely, that the
more our natural life decays and consumes in the powers thereof, manifested
by the trembling of the keepers of our house, and by the strong men Eccles. 1^.
3.
bowing themselves, and the ceasing of the grinders, and by the darkness of
our windows, (all which I feel in my self,) the more we labor to cherish and
to increase this our spiritual and heavenly life in us, that so we may bring
forth Psalm. 92. 14. Reu. 2. 19.
fruit in our old age, and be fa^ and flourishing; and like to the Angel of
the Church of Thiatyra, having our last works more then our first. This shall
suffice to have spoken of this first adiunct of our sacrifice, namely, living.

The second adiunct is holy. This is necessary to be joined The second adiunct
of our sacrifice holy.
to the former: first, to teach us to distinguish the former from natural
living: and secondly, to teach us our sacrifice to be living in holiness: yea,
without this holiness men have no life of God, no spiritual life in them, but
are altogether dead, as before I said, not able to stir hand or foot toward
heaven; as spiritually dead, as Lazarus Ioh. 11. 39.
was naturally dead in the grave, and had bin dead four days, till Christ
crying aloud unto him, said, Lazarus, come forth; and by that means raised him
from death unto life: and so by raising other from death to life, and by daily
raising up other from the death of sin to this life Romans 1. 4.
of holiness, mightily declaring himself to be the Son of God: for so with
reverend regard notwithstanding of the different judgment of my betters, I
understand that place to Mat. 17. 9. and 27 64. and 28. 7. Mark. 6. 9. Ioh. 2.
22. Ephesians. 1. 20. Ioh. 20. 9. Acts. 3. 15. chapt. 4. 10. chapt. 10. 41. cha.
13. ^0. and 34 1. Pet. 1. 3. Romans 4. 24. cap. 6. 4. cap. 7. 4. cap. 8. 11. cap.
10. 7. 9. 1. Cor. 15. 20. Col. 2. 17. 1. These. 1. 10. Heb. 13 20. 2. Tim. 2. 8.
2. Cor. 7. 1.
the Romans. For it seems to me, that it cannot well be understood of the
resurrection of himself from the dead; because in the Greek there is no
preposition signifying from, as is in those places that speak of Christ's own
resurrection from the dead, of which I have noted some before in the margin,
and many more might have noted. Neither do I think it very easy for any man
to name any place wherein Christ's own resurrection is mentioned without some
prepositio^ (...), or (...): or to name any where that the genitive case of the
dead, there used by the Apostle, does signify from the dead.

But to return from whence I have a little digressed for the interpretation of
that place to the Romans, that we may be thusholy, as here the Apostle
speaks, we must first of all purge our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and of the spirit, and then deck our selves with the contrary virtues of
sanctification. For filthiness and holiness cannot any more agree in one
subject, then light and darkness: and both those branches of our holiness are
elsewhere signified by putting off the old man, and putting on the Ephesians. 4.
22. Col. 3 9. 10. Tit. 2. 12. 1. Pet. 2. 11. 12. Romans 6. 11. verse. 18. Psalm.
34. 14. 1 Pet* 3. 12. Exodus 12. 5. Leuit. 1. 10. and 22. 19. 20. 21.
new: by denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living soberly and godly,
etc. by abstaining from all fleshly lusts which fight against our souls, and
having our conversation honest etc. by dying unto sin and living unto God,
and to righteousness: by being made free from sin, and servants unto
righteousness: by eschuing evil, and doing good: and by other the like.

Now, as the Passe-ouer was to be without blemish especially, as the legal
sacrifices ought so to have bin, yea also without any other deformity or
maime: so the Apostle here requires this our sacrifice to be holy, and without
any spiritual blemish or deformity. If the sacrifices of sheep and lambs in
those days must be without blemish, must not the sacrifice of our selves much
more be such? Yea, this is also necessary, in respect that our selves must not
only be the sacrifices, but also the Priests to offer this sacrifice. For as
the Lord would have all the sacrifices to be without blemish, so also he would
not have any of the seed of Aaron that had any blemish, to approach to offer
Leui. 21. 18. 19. 20.
the bread of his God, that had any deformity or defect, as before I have
showed. This holiness is always here imperfect; but yet as certainly to be
perfected in that life to come, being once here begun, as if it were already
perfected. Though also it be here imperfect, yet it proceeds from another
work before in us (but not of us) that is perfect, namely, from our
justification, and full discharge from the guiltiness of all our sins
whatsoever in the presence of God: in respect of which our justification, we
may well cast away all fear. For, who shall lay any thing to the charge Romans
8. 33.
of Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Ambrose upon this place says, Adhoc
peccatis Dei abluimur, etc. For this cause by the gift of God are we washed
from our sins, that from henceforth living an holy life, we might provoke the
love of God toward us, not frustrating the works of his grace in us. To
provoke the love of God, may seem somewhat harshly spoken; but the meaning
thereof and of other the like speeches in this and in other Fathers, is only
to signify the assuring of our souls more and more of Gods love toward us.
For, that he means not any meriting of his love, appears both by the word
of his gift before, and also by his words following, that do ascribe every good
work in us wholly to his grace: then which, what can be Romans 11. 6. 3. 24
Ephesians. 2. 8. Titus. 3. 5.
more opposite to merit? For as in our election, so also in our calling and
whole salvation* grace and works are opposed one to another.

This attribute holy* is as large as the former living, and it is to be applied
to our whole sacrifice before mentioned, to our bodies and to every member of
them, to our souls and to every power and faculty of them. This word holiness
joined with righteousness, is distinguished from righteousness, and signifies
godliness and religion, even all Luke 1. 75.
duties of the first Table; as righteousness so joined with holiness, and
distinguished from it, does signify all duties of the second Table to be
performed to our neighbor: and so they seem to be the same with godliness
and honesty. But the one and the other being used alone, does signify 1. Tim.
2. 2.
both: and so the word holy in this place is to be taken for both: for the
observation of the first and of the second Table: of our duties to God, and of
our duties to men. And as before I said, that this was to be applied to our
whole sacrifice here commended unto us, so also it is to be applied to all the
particular sacrifices in that general comprehended, namely, to our praises of
God; and therefore Psalm. 50. 23.
it is said, He that offers praise, glorifieth me: and to him that orders
his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. The joining of these
two together, the offering of praise, and the right ordering of our
conversation, shows that the Lord regards not the one without the other. So
when the Prophet says, All thy works shall praise Psalm. 145. 10.
thee, and thy Saints shall bless thee, he shows that the Lord respects
only the praises that are given him by his Saints, that is, by them that are
holy. The same he teaches afterward, saying, Let thy Saints be joyful in
glory, let them sing Psalm. 149. 5.
aloud upon their beds. As it is to be applied to our praises of God, so it is
to our prayers and supplications unto God. For, the sacrifice of the wicked is
an abomination to the Pro. 15. 8. and. 21. 27. James. 5. 10. Hos. 14. 1. 2.
Io^l. 2. 13. 17. Romans 15. 30. Ephesians. 6. 18. Col. 4. 2. 1. ^ hes. 5. and. 2. 3
^. Heb. 13. 18. Iam. 5 13.
Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight. Neither is it said, that
the prayer that is fervent avails much, but that the prayer of the righteous
that is fervent avails much. Therefore as the Prophets do first exhort to
repentance, and then to prayer: so the Apostles do first exhort to all other
duties (in a manner) before they exhort to prayer: thereby teaching that prayers
are of no account without the performance of other duties, without holiness.

The same is to be said of our alms: for howsoever our alms may relieve and
refresh the receivers; yea also keep them from some great extremities either
against other, or against themselves, before being in great distress (alas
that men's hearts should be so stupefied and hardened that the consideration
hereof should not move them being of ability the more to open their hands to
them that are in necessity,) yea, howsoever they may provoke such receivers 2.
Cor. 9. 11. 12.
to great thanks unto God (sometimes to more for a little, then ever the giver
gave for all that he has) yet for all that, if we give al our goods unto the
poor, and have not love, (a branch of this holiness) it will profit us
nothing. The 1. Cor. 13. 3.
same is to be said of our passive sacrificing of our selves, because if
without the same love we give our bodies to be burned, it avails us as little.

To provoke us to be thus holy, let us consider of these reasons.

First, that we are commanded so to be holy, by the example Reasons to provoke
to holiness.
of God himself: yea, to be holy in all manner of conversation, toward all, in
all things, in all places, at all Leuit. 15. 44. 19 2. and. 20. 7. 1. Pet. 1.
15. 16.
times.

Secondly, this holiness is the end of our election. For, God has chosen us
to be holy and without blame before him. Ephesians. 1. 4.


Thirdly, it is the end of our redemption by Christ, Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14.
and purge us, etc.

Fourthly, it is the end of our regeneration. For, Of his own will beg at he
us with the word of truth, that we should be James. 1. 18.
as the first fruits of his creatures. As the first fruits therefore were
dedicated unto God, and were holy, so must all they be that sacrifice
themselves unto God. Therefore it is said, Israel was holiness unto the Lord,
and the first fruits of Ier. 2* 3.
his increase. Yea, so holy were all things ceremonially only dedicated unto
the Lord, that Belshazzars drinking Dan. 5. 3. etc.
and glowsing in the cups of the Lord, taken out of the Temple of the Lord,
etc. it cost him both his life and his kingdom the very next night.

Fifthly, it is the end of our calling: God has not called us 1. These. 4. 7.
to uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Sixthly, all such as have partaked of the mercies of God before spoken of,
among other were incorporated into Christ Jesus, and made his members. As
therefore Christ Mark. 1. 14. Luke 4. 34.
is the holy one of God, so acknowledged by the devils themselves; so such must
be all his members.

Seventhly, all that attend upon Princes, must be apparelled accordingly,
whereby to be fit for such attendance. They must not come before them in rags,
but they must so present themselves unto them, as they may no ways be
offensive. Therefore Joseph sent for out of prison before Genesis 41. 14.
Pharaoh, shaued himself, and changed his raiment, and so came unto Pharaoh.
And when Ester presented her self Ester. 5. 1.
unto Ahashuerosh, she first put on her royal apparel. Is not the same
intimated unto us by that that is said of the Kings daughter being first said
to be all glorious within, and to have Psalm. 45. 13. 14.
her clothing wrought with gold, before she be said to be brought before the
King in raiment of needle-worke, etc. Certainly this is the fitter for this our
present purpose, because all such to whom and of whom the Apostle here
speaks, are also members of the said Kings daughter, of the Church of God, of
the which in the Articles of our faith we confess this to be a special
prerogative that she is holy. According hereunto David said, I will wash my
hands in Psalm. 26. 6.
innocence, so will I compass thy altar, O Lord.

Eighthly and lastly, (not to be too tedious in multiplying of reasons,) we are
all now (as before has bin said) Priests unto God. What a shame therefore is
it, that any of us should present our selves unto God without holiness? Does
not the Prophet pray, Let thy Priests be clothed with Psalm. 132. 9. 1. Sam 2.
17.
righteousness? As in the time of the Law, for the sin of the Priests the
people abhorred the sacrifices of the Lord; and as now the vicious life of some
Ministers of the Gospel, makes many to stand aloof from the Gospel, not
regarding 1. Tim. 6. 1.
it, but despising it and the profession of it: so the life of many professors
of the Gospel, who are all Priests unto God, is so scandalous, that it causes
the very name of God and his doctrine to be blasphemed* Neither are we only 1.
Pet 2. 9.
Priests, but also Kings unto God, and a royal priesthood, or Exodus 19. 6.
a kingdom of Priests. If Kings attendants must be apparelled Apoca. 1 6.
chap. 5. 10.
fit to attend upon kings, must not Kings much more have their royal garments
and princely ornaments? What better ornament then this holiness? What better
chains Pro 1. 9. chap. 4. 9.
for the neck? what more glorious crown for the head of Princes then this
holiness? Therefore in the former place of Exodus, the Lord says not, Ye
shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests, but he also adds, and a holy nation.
And without this garment, Christians do disgrace their royal dignity: yea,
they also prejudice the glory of God himself. In which respect our Savior
exhorts us to let our light Mat. 5. 16.
so shine before men, that they seeing our good works (that is, the holiness
of our conversation) may glorify our Father which is in heaven. Has not Peter
also the very like exhortation 1. Pet. 2. 11. 12.
confirmed from the same end?

The use of all this is, first to reprove all them that will The use of that
before said of our being holy.
have the names of Christians, and are ready to defy all them and to spit in
their faces that shall deny them to be Christians, and yet live most
profanely, leudly, loosly, and dissolutely; yea, in all gross iniquity,
swearing blaspheming, contemning the word and Sacraments, seldom coming unto
them, not regarding the Lords days, or any exercise of religion, especially if
they be but half a furlong from the place, or it blow, or rain, or snow: yea
also quarrelling, drinking so long till they cannot stand, neither speak a
wise word: being likewise extremely covetous, partly in gathering wealth,
without any satietie, like to the horsleaches two daughters; yea though they
have no charge, Pro. 30. 15. Eccles. 4. 8.
neither know who shall enjoy that which they gather: partly in sparing, and
neither giving nor lending, where great need requires; but to such as ask the
one or the other, complaining always of their own wants, and saying, they
must borrow. How contrary are these things to ye Psalm. 112. 4. 5. 6. 9.
description of a blessed man fearing God. If they be admonished of these
things, they think it enough to answer, that they say their prayers every day,
though wretched men they understand not a word of their prayers, neither do any
thing according to their prayers; never hallowing the name of God; shutting
their ears and hearts against Gods kingdom: never regarding to do the will of
God upon earth; abusing of their daily bread and drink: not forgiving such as
trespass against them; not shunning any tentations, but rushing into the
thickest of them.

Secondly, for our instruction, let us when we draw near unto God, remember
this holiness; according to the commandment Exodus 3. 5. Iosu. 5. 15.
of God given both to Moses, and also to Joshua, for the putting off of their
shoes, because the ground was holy: according to the example of Iakob, who
going to Bethel at the commandment of God, charged all that were with him to
put away the strange gods that were amongst Genesis 35. 1. 2.
them, to cleanse and change their garments: according to the commandment of
God to Moses for sanctifying the people one day and the next, and for their
washing their clothes before the Lords giving his Law in their audience: Exodus
19. 10. 11.
according to the practice of David before mentioned, who washed his hands in
innocence, and so compassed the Lords altar. And to comprehend many things in
a few words, according to Salomons counsel for looking to both Eccles. 4. 17.
or 5. 1.
our feet at our entrance into the house of God: to the charge of our Savior
for being first reconciled to our brother before Mat. 5. 23. 1. Tim. 2. 8. Iam.
1. 21. 1. Pet. 2. 1. 2.
we offer our gift: of Paul to Timothy, for men's lifting up pure hands without
wrath etc. in prayer: of James also and Peter for casting away all filthiness
etc. before the hearing of the word. And touching the hearing of the word in
such manner, is there not great reason thereof, since Christ 2. Cor. 13. 3. 1.
Cor. 3. 9.
himself speaks in his Ministers, and God himself works also with them;
works (I say) not labors. For to speak properly, God cannot be said to
labor, because he does whatsoever he will* without any labor, only by Psalm.
33. 6. 9.
speaking his word. The same is to be said of the Supper of the Lord, that is
of praying and hearing the word: and therefore the Apostle wills a man to
prove himself, and so to eat and to drink. The word and Sacrament also 1.
Cor. 11. 28.
being so precious as they are, who can be too careful in purging themselves
before the receiving of them? Who is so foolish as to put precious licour into
a fustie vessel? Neither must this cleansing of our selves be for the present
only, afterward returning with the dog to the vomit, 2. Pet. 2. 22.
and with the swine unto the mire; but we must so keep our selves: and the
oftener we hear the word and receive the Sacrament, the more holy every day
must we be.

All this our holiness must be in humility: without humility, there is no
holiness. The more humble we be, the more capable are we of the knowledge of
the word, Psalm. 25 9.
and of comfort by the Sacrament, yea also by prayers. Luke 18. 14. 1. Pet. 5.
5. Luke 1 53.
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. The Lord fills the
hungry with good things, and the rich (in their own conceit) he sends
empty away, even from word, from Sacraments, from prayer. He that thinks 1.
Cor. 2. 8.
he knows any thing, knows nothing as he ought to know. Oh that this were
well considered of. For certainly many great professors are so ouer-weened and
puffed up with a conceit of their own knowledge, that they think no man can
teach them any thing that they know not already: yea some are like to those
the Prophet said, did strive Hos. 4. 4.
with the Priest; so (I say) some are more ready to snap at that which is said
by the Minister, and to find fault with and control the same, as thinking
themselves could speak better, then in humility and meekness of mind to
learn any thing.

As the former life is of God, so is this holiness. Christ Ioh. 17. 17.
prayed the Father to work it through his truth: and Paul 1. These. 5. 23.
prayed the God of peace to sanctify the Thessalonians throughout, or wholly.

Thus also to be holy is a work of Faith as well as to be living. For, our
hearts are purified (or sanctified) by faith. Act. 15. 9.


As the life also of our sacrifice before spoken of, notes alacrity and
constancy; so whatsoever in this holiness we do to God or to men, we must do
the same without grudging or murmuring: yea, as God gives to all men
liberally, and Phil. 2. 14. Iam. 1. 5.
vpbraideth no man; so and much more ought all men to be cheerful in all duty
to him. As whom God loves, he loves them to the end: so let him that is holy,
be holy still. Ioh. 13. 1. Reu. 22. 11.
This holiness is of great price, far excelling all the robes of all Monarks,
yea more precious then all the vestiments of Aaron with their appurtenances. It
is the garment of all the blessed Angels in heaven: of Christ Jesus and of God
himself: freely given unto us for Christ Jesus sake. Who therefore would not
wear it for the giuers sake. If one have something given him by some special
friend, he will say, that he will be known by it as long as it will last: how
much more ought every man to say, he will always be known by this garment,
that is always new, and will never be old, or the worse for wearing? Thus much
for this adiunct holy.

CHAP. IX.
Of the third adiunct of our sacrifice, well-pleasing: and of the time when we
must thus sacrifice our selves: as also showing that no free will can be
gathered by this or any other the like exhortation.

THe third adiunct of this our sacrifice is acceptable, amplified by the
subject to whom it is acceptable, viz. to God. As here holy and acceptable are
joined together; so the Apostle exhorting that prayers, etc. should be 1 Timothy
2. 3. and. 5. 4.
made for all men, especially for Kings, as also exhorting to honor widows
indeed, etc. enforces both exhortations by the very like argument, saying;
This is good and acceptable in the sight of God. In both which places the words
in the original are altered: for holy, the Apostle saying good; and for (...),
saying (...); but the sense and meaning is all one. Now the word here used
being a compound of two words, one signifying well, the other pleasing; the
word signifies well pleasing. This third adiunct well pleasing, is an effect
of the two former. For whatsoever sacrifice is living and holy, the same is
also well pleasing. The sacrifices indeed of the Law being themselves dead,
were yet holy and well pleasing to God, not of themselves, but as they had
respect and relation to Christ, of whom they were types. And we being both
living and holy, are wellpleasing, because our said life and holiness are from
God, and do make us to resemble God, as also from and in Christ Mat. 3. 17.
Jesus, in whom God rests, and is well pleased, not only with his own
person, but also with all that are in him, and his members, having communion
with him.

This word is used again in the next verse, to persuade these Romans to be
transformed, by the renewing of their Romans 14. 18.
mind, that so they might approve the acceptable or well pleasing will of God.
It is also used in matters of indifferency: He that in these things serves
Christ, is acceptable to God (or well pleasing to God) and approved of men.
Where it is worthy observation, that to forbear things indifferent, for the
weakness of other, is to serve Christ, and to please God. What the contrary
is, I leave to the judgment of the wise. 2. Cor 5. 9. Ephesians. 5. 10. Philip. 4.
18. Col. 3. 20. Tit. 2. 9. Heb. 13. 21.
It is also elsewhere used; but it were more labor then profit to set down
the words of every place.

This adiunct well pleasing, must not be taken alone, but with the
amplification thereof from the subject to whom it is well pleasing, viz. to God
himself. To be well pleasing to other, may be a discomendation as well as a
commendation. It must therefore necessarily be joined with the former. And thus
to be well pleasing to God, is more Gal. 1. 10.
then to be well pleasing to all men in the world. And therefore sometime to be
pleasing to men, is opposed to the serving of Christ: and we are forbidden to
be servants 1. Cor 7. 23.
to men. It is notwithstanding lawful, and more then lawful to be pleasing to
men in the Lord, as children to their Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13.
parents, and servants to their masters, especially subjects to their Princes,
as whom the Lord has set over both parents and masters; yet so, that we still
remember them to be Gods subjects, and God to be their Sovereign, as well as
they Sovereigns of other: and that therefore we join these two together,
Fear God, honor the King: and so 1. Pet. 2. 17. Mat. 21. 21.
render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, that we forget to give unto God
the things that are Gods. If both cannot Act. 4. 19.
be performed, it is better to obey God then men. If we please God, it is no
matter though we displease men, so it be not in pride: and that always we be
ready to submit our selves to suffer, where we cannot submit our selves to do.

To speak yet a little more of this third adiunct with Reasons of the former
adiunct.
the subject thereof; so well pleasing to God is this living and holy sacrifice,
that whosoever touches any of them (to do touches the apple of Gods own eye.
Zach. 2. 8.


Excellently also does the Lord set forth how well they please him, by
comparing his love toward them to the love of a woman toward her young child,
showing, that Isay. 49. 15. etc.
though a woman should forget such a child, yea such a son, as not to have
compassion on him, (as some such 2. Kin. 6. 29.
mothers there have bin, and too many are by whoredom bringing forth children,
as often as they may have mates to partake with them in such wickedness, and
never performing any duty to such children) showing (I say) that though a
woman should so forget such a son, as to have no compassion on him, yet he
will not forget his, (viz. that have this mark holiness in their hearts and
foreheads) Isay. 49. 16.
because he has graven them upon the palm of his hands, etc.

Is it not likewise a great testimony of their well pleasing ask what Mat. 7.
7.
they will of him, not only for themselves, but also for other, Iam. 5. 16.
assuring them they shall have it? What can a man have more of a Prince, then
to ask and have for himself and for his friend, as Ester had of Ahashuerus?
yea, even against Ester. 5. 3.
him that before was of all other the greatest favorite of Ahashuerus. Yea,
God acknowledges himself so overcome by the prayers of his Saints, that is,
of such as are holy and well pleasing unto him, that when they pray, he
entreats them (as it were) to hold their peace, and to let Exodus 32. 10.
him alone: thereby not obscurely insinuating, that though he be Almighty, yet
he is in some sort overcome by the prayers of his children, and cannot do that
that they for whom they pray had deserved. Yea, so well pleasing are the Lords
holies unto him, that sometimes he grants their requests for the most wicked
that have bin or are: as of Exodus 8. 8. 31. and 9. 33.
Moses and Aaron for Pharaoh: of the man of God that came from Judah to Bethel
to threaten the ruin of the Altar there, praying for the healing of wicked
Ieroboams 1. Kin. 13. 6.
hand. It were infinite to tell what mighty things have bin done by the
prayers of some of the Lords holies for themselves and for other good and bad:
how the Sun stood Joshua. 10. 12. 2. Kin. 1. 20. etc. Isay. 38. 1. etc. 1 Kin.
17. 17. and. 2. Kin. 4. 20. etc. Act 12. 7. chapt. 16. 25.
in the firmament: how Hezekiah sick unto death, and by the Lord told that he
should die, yet by his prayer recovered health: how the dead have bin restored
to life: how prisons have bin opened, and prisonerrs extraordinarily set at
liberty: yea how the foundation of the prisons has bin shaken, all doors
opened, and the prisoners bands loosed. Of these and other the like, it were
infinite to make relation.

So well pleasing also are the Lords holies unto him, that Potiphars house for
Joseph; Genesis 39. 3.
but that also for some few of them, many millions have fared the better whiles
they have bin with him. The whole world was not drowned whiles Noah was among
them, and till the Lord had put him and his small company into Genesis 7. 10.
the Arc. No fire and brimstone came upon Sodom and Genesis 19. 23.
Gomorrha, till the Lord had violently (as it were) taken Lot and his wife, and
two daughters, out of Sodom.

The like may be said of many judgments of God inflicted 2. Kin. 1. 10.
Captains and their fifties, whom Ahaziah sent to fetch Eliah, for their rude
and rough carriage to the Prophet. So dangerous it is for men to be employed by
Kings in wicked businesses. Did not the Lord send two she Bears out 2. Kin. 2.
24.
of the wood, that tare in sunder 42 silly and wanton boys for mocking Elisha?
What a slaughter and havoc also did one Angel of the Lord make in the camp
of the Assyrians, for the bragging and reproachful speeches of Sanaherib Isay.
37. 36. etc.
against the Lords virgin the daughter of Zion, etc? Yea, how was the said
Sanaherib slain by two of his own sons, when he thought himself most safe,
worshipping Nisroch his god? How also did the Angel of the Lord smite and
consume with a foul and fearful death Herod Act. 12. 23.
that had killed with the sword James the brother of John, and had also clapped
up Peter into prison? I might here also remember the great judgments of God
against the Egyptians in Egypt, and the utter overthrow of their King and
themselves, desperately pursuing the Israelites in the red sea, and that for
all their hard dealing with the Israelites the Lords holies, whiles they had
them in their power. So also the great and manifold judgments of God against
Judah and Jerusalem for their abusing of the Prophets, and 2. Chron. 36. 15 16.
contempt of that word whereby the Lord endeuouted (as it were) to have made
them also well pleasing unto him. But what need I remember such ancient
matters? Later times do afford us many examples of Gods heavy hand against
many persecuting Papists in other countries and in our own of the Lords holy
professors of the Gospel, and such as desired well to please him. The year
also 88. and the powder treason do plentifully show the truth of the premises.
For what moved the Lord to show us such grace? his own goodness: but yet for
his holies sake amongst us laboring well to please him. And is it not hereby
most apparent, how well pleasing such are unto him?

With the former judgments of God against the wicked maligning the godly, must
always be remembered his great favors to them that are his holies. For in Gods
judgments against the wicked, there is such mercy toward his holy ones, as
whereby he does abundantly testify how well pleased he is with his said holy
ones.

Moreover, what means that that is said by Balaam the sorcerer, yet by the
special instinct of the holy Ghost, He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob,
neither has he seen Numb. 23. 21.
perverseness in Israel? Doubtless the meaning is not, as some (not well
advised, nor judicious in the Scripture) have thought and taught, that the Lord
sees no evil, neither can see in his children. For (as before has bin
showed) there is no man in this life that sins not. Is the Lord blind, who
sees all things, that he should not see that? And is not that, I know thy
works, as well to be understood Reu. ^. 1. etc.
of evil* as well as of good works? And does not the Lord reprove the best
Churches as well for their evils, as commend them for their goodness? Do not
the children of God see the faults one of another, as well as their virtues? Do
men see more then God? Does not the Lord sometime chastise his children for
their sins, as David for his adul^erie and numbering the people; and Hezekiah
for entertaining so honorably the Ambassadors of Merodach Baladan, etc. What?
does the Lord herein as the blind man shoots at the crow? The meaning
therefore of the former place in Numbers* is only this, that they that are the
Lords holies, are in so great grace and favor with him, and so well pleasing
unto him, that though they have their faults, yet he takes no notice of them,
but as a most indulgent father passes by them as if he saw them not at all.
How pregnant an evidence therefore is this of their well pleasing God, that
give themselves a living and holy sacrifice unto God?

Now although I have hitherto spoken of this adiunct well pleasing, as
amplified by the subject to whom the same is well pleasing viz to God; yet
there is no absurdity to refer the same to ye whole exhortation, and to
every branch thereof. For we must sacrifice our selves only to God, because to
him only all sacrifices are due. We must live only to him, touching both our
natural, and also our spituall life; because of him only we have received
both, and do wholly hold both the one and the other. And touching our natural
life, all our actions thereof, even our eating 1. Cor. 10. 31.
and drinking, our walking and talking, our sleeping, etc. and whatsoever we
do, all must be done to the glory of God: yea, our not eating, and our not
drinking, that is, our fasting must be to bring our bodies into the better
subjection 1. Cor. 9. 27.
unto him. The same must be said of all the actions of our spiritual life, of
our hearing, reading, meditation* preaching, or talking of the word, of our
receiving Col. 3. 17.
or delivering the Sacraments, of our praying, singing, admonishing or
instructing one another, etc. all must be done unto God. Our holiness
therefore, both inward and outward, in all places, at all times, as well
secretly as openly, must be only to God, as it is wholly from God. Thus the
whole sacrifice of our selves shall be pleasing and well pleasing to God.

We are here further to consider that these words well pleasing to God, are not
added as a several adiunct of our sacrifice, but also as a reason to move us
to present our selves a living and an holy sacrifice unto him. For we ought to
do any thing whereby well to please him. Children ought Col. 3. 20.
to do any thing whereby to please their parents: so ought servants to please
their masters. So especially all good subjects to please their Princes in all
things that possibly they 2. Sam 23 16. 17*
may, even to the danger of life it self, as those three Worthi^s of David
did, that adventured their lives to fetch water for David from the well of
Bethlehem. And this subjects ought to do, because Princes are called Gods, and
Psalm. 82. 1. 6.
are by God himself set upon his throne, and are made Kings for the Lord their
God, not to do whatsoever they 2* Chron 9. 8.
list, but to execute judgment and justice: yea, not only in the former
respects, neither because the wrath of a King Pro. 19 12.
is as the roaring of a Lion, but also because his favor is as the rain upon
the grass. And who indeed either of fear of Princes wrath, or of desire to be
in grace with them, do not labor by all mea^es to please them? especially to
recover their favor, having before done some thing whereby they have provoked
their indignation against them? Much more therefore ought we by this reason to
be encouraged to present our selves a sacrifice living and holy to God, because
such a sacrifice is well pleasing unto him. Yea, the more careful ought we to
be of so doing, in consideration both of our former, and also of our daily
sins, whereby we justly deserve his everlasting displeasure. But having thus
largely hitherto spoken of these words well pleasing to God, both as another
several adiunct of our former sacrifice, and also as a reason to move us the
more willingly to present the same living and holy to God; what is the use of
all that has bin said hereof? That The use of the former doctrine
soul, active and passive unto God, must be referred to this end, that therein
we may be well pleasing to God. It is no matter for pleasing of men, except by
pleasing of them we do also please God. If by doing of that wherein we please
God, we displease men, yea all the men in the world (if that were possible)
that also is no matter. For if God be Romans 8. 31. Ioh. 10. 29.
with us, what skilleth it who is against us? Is not God stronger then all?

By the conjunction of this with the former, we are in whom God is well
pleased. Only they that are holy, and all that are holy have faith, whereby
the heart is purged, Act. 15. 9. Heb. 11. 6.
and without which no man can please God.

When we know our selves to be in grace with God,

Forasmuch also as before we have heard, how many prerogatives whereby the Lord
testifies the same; how should this provoke and quicken all men, and as it
were set their teeth on edge to be of that number. The more bountiful any
Prince, Nobleman or other great person is to his servants, the more suitors have
such by themselves or by other to be entertained by them: yea, the more
bountifully such persons reward such as are sent with presents unto them, the
more forward is every one to be employed with such gifts unto them. When
therefore we hear how well pleased God is with such as present themselves such
a sacrifice unto him, is it not a wonder that any should be backward in doing
hereof?

If God also be so well pleased with us, in whom notwithstanding David before
mentioned, were to hazard their lives for a small matter in David's behalf.

Moreover, how willing should this former consideration

Since also the Lord does so take the parts of such his holies, ought men to
fear the hurting of them in the least measure? Every man ought to think of
that of Hamans wise men* and of Zer^sh his wife, If Mordecai be of the seed of
Ester. 6. 13.
the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail
against him, but shall surely fall before him. Are not such as give themselves
a sacrifice to God, living and holy, in as good request and reckoning with God,
as these Jews?

Again, the more the Lord respects them that do thus

When notwithstanding all that we can do for our children

But will some man say, How soon are we thus to present How soon we are to
give our selves a sacrifice to God.
our selves, souls and bodies a sacrifice living, holy and well pleasing to
God? How soon? Now, presently, without d^lay. Mora trahit periculum. Delay is
dangerous. Now therefore (says Solomon) hearken unto me, o ye children. Even
Pro. 8. 32.
now and in your tender years, whiles ye are but children. The sentences to
rouse up the sluggard from* his sluggishnesse, are not to be understood of the
bodily sluggard, Pro. 6. 6. etc. 24. 23.
but of the spiritual, even of him that is negligent, sluggish and lazy
concerning the life to come. But do thou ask how soon thou must thus
sacrifice thy self unto Psalm. 957. 8. Heb. 3. 7. 13. and. 4. 7.
God? Then remember what another Prophet says: To day if ye will hear his
voice, hearden not your hearts. Without hearing his voice (as afterward we
shall hear) we cannot so sacrifice our selves, as before we have heard. The
word is the knife, whereby we are to prepare the sacrifice; and therefore the
hearing thereof is not to be neglected or deferred. Again, have thou forgotten
one of Salomons last precepts, Remember, and Remember now thy Creator in the
Eccles. 12. 1.
days of thy youth: that is, not only whiles thou art young, but in the very
prime and beginning of thy youth? Must we not all walk while we have the
light, lest darkness come Ioh. 12. 35.
upon us? If darkness come upon us, how shall we see to prepare ourselves such
a sacrifice? Our young age, after infancy and childhood, for freshness of wit
and strength of body, is our best age: therefore most worthy to be sacrificed
to him that is the best. What impiety and sacrilege is it for us to detain
this from him, and to reserve the worst for him? In the time of the Law,
nothing blind, lame, crooked, etc. was to be sacrificed to God, as before has
bin showed; shall we not then present our selves to God, till we be such? Alas,
then we are unfit for any service to our Prince. And if in our youth we should
refuse to serve our Prince, and offer our selves when we are old, lame, blind,
etc. would he be pleased with us, or accept our Mala. 1. 8*
persons?

But O fool, what know thou whether thou shall live to be old? Art thou
surer of thy life till old age, then that fool in the Gospel, to whom it was
said, Thou fool, Luke 12. 20.
this night shall thy life be required of thee? How know thou also whether
thou shall be more willing in thy old age then in youth to sacrifice thy self
unto God? Or that he will then accept of thee and thy sacrifice, that would
not present it before. The older the worse. As wit grows duller, so wit also
becomes more stout and obstinate. Age does callum obducere, and makes men the
more hard hearted against God, and the further from God, rather then the fitter
for God, or the nearer to God. It is not in our power to sacrifice our selves
to God when we please, but it is the work of Gods grace in us. Those mercies
of God prefixed to this exhortation, must first in part be conferred upon us,
before we can so sacrifice our selves as here we are exhorted. Forget not
Nabal. Are there not 1. Sam. 25. 37.
many in these days that die like stones, without sense and feeling or care of
any goodness? yea* that are taken napping in their sins wherein they had
lived, in their filthiness, in their drunkenness, in their worldliness, in
their swearing, cursing, banning, as the poor children before 2. Kin. 2. 24.
showed to be devoured by Bears even in their mocking of Elisha? Yea, how many
die worse then they lived; and do die raging and rauing, and stark mad?

And why should any make question of the time when so to present himself unto
God? Besides the premises, do not many die suddenly of apoplexies, dead
palsies, and otherwise, they know not whereof? Are not many slain, either
wilfully or unawares? Are not some so distempered in their brains, even in a
moment, that they have no power to dispose of their outward state according to
their former purpose? I have heard of some great persons, that having no heirs
of their own body, have in their health often protested that their next
heirs otherwise should never have foot of their land, or penyworth of their
other goods: who notwithstanding being at last visited with sickness, and very
long sickness, and during their said sickness often persuaded to make a Will,
could never be drawn thereunto; but not dreaming of death, have in the end
left all that they had, both lands and goods, worth many thousands, to them
against whom before they had most protested. Alas also, how many are there,
that having before neglected the sacrificing of themselves unto God, at their
end cannot endure any motion thereunto? yea, that have nothing but worldly
matters in their minds and in their mouths.

Oh therefore let all men sacrifice themselves to God betimes. Let young men
remember the commendations of Timothy for having learned the holy Scriptures
from his 2. Tim. 3. 15.
childhood. Let Princes* and Noblemen remember the example of Josiah in former
time, who in the eight year of 2. Kin. 22. 1. 2. Chron. 34. 1. 2. 3.
his reign (being then but sixteen years old) began to seek after the God
of David his father: and in these last times of our most noble and renowned
King Edward the sixth, who being but nine years old when he began to reign,
and dying in the sixteenth year of his age, made so gracious and admirable a
reformation of religion in the chief substance thereof, as for the which till
this day we have all cause to bless God. Let these examples provoke all, both
great and small, to consecrate themselves betimes to God, who has most right
unto them. We may defer the time too long, we can never begin too soon. The
sooner we thus do sacrifice our selves to God, to live an holy and well
pleasing a life unto him, the greater shall our comfort be in our age, the more
peace in our end. But beginning, let us remember that steadfastness, constancy
and perseverance unto the end before spoken of. Let us beware we justify not
the old devilish proverb, A young Saint and an old Devil. But of the danger
hereof, enough has bin said in the adiunct living.

The greater that any is, the sooner let them begin thus to sacrifice himself
to God the greatest of all, and from whom he has had all his greatness. Let
such a one I say begin the sooner, that by his beginning he may provoke other
to do the like. Let him also the more take heed of falling. The higher the
place is from which any falls; the greater and heavier the person is that
falls, the more dangerous is the fall of such an one.

One knot yet remains to be untied, concerning free will, gathered by the
Papists from all the former exhortation. They gather the like from other the
like exhortations, to purge our selves* from all filthiness of the flesh and
No free will to be gethered from this or any other exhortation.
of the spirit, to repent of our sins, etc. For, say they, if man have not
free will and power to do these things, why are they exhorted unto them? To
this I answer, that there are two sorts of men, one merely natural, another
regenerated, yea perfectly here regenerated; as the weakest newborn children
are as perfectly bone as the strongest, yea as the stoutest and lustiest men.
For being once out of the womb, they are fully borne: they have all the parts
and memb^rs of the body that ever they shall have. The like is to be said of
all the powers and faculties of the soul, though so oppressed by the infirmity
of the body, that they cannot show themselves, as afterward in better strength
of the body they do. As it is in the natural birth of man, so also is it in
his supernatural and spiritual birth. They that are regenerated, are fully
regenerated. As the natural child notwithstanding once borne, grows in
stature, natural knowledge, strength, etc. so does the newborn spiritually,
grow in heavenly knowledge, saving grace and godliness, yet according to the
measure of grace. And therefore as some touching their natural growth remain
Ephesians. 4. 7.
still dwarfes and weaklings, though brought up and fed in the same manner, and
are outgrowne by them that are their yongers by many years: so is it in our
regeneration; some are outgrowne in all grace and knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by other, long after them newborn. Regeneration is our new birth:
Sanctification is our Christian stature. The former (as I said) is perfect: the
other imperfect, daily increasing, or to be increased. Now touching mere
natural men, not converted, not newborn, they are not half dead, as he that
fell into the hands Luke 10. 30. Ephesians. 2. 1. chap. 4. 18.
of thieves betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho, but they are altogether dead in
trespasses and sins, etc. and utterly alienated from the life of God.
Otherwise, who can make good the word of God to Adam, In the day wherein thou
^atest of Genesis 2. 17.
the tree (before forbidden) thou shall surely die?

Touching this and diverse other the like exhortations; they are not made to
them that were mere natural men; but to them that were newborn, and in part
also sanctified, as whom he exhorts as brethren by the mercies of God to
present themselves a sacrifice, etc. And yet neither of both those two sorts
have free will or power to do that that the Apostle here exhorts unto. The
former hau^ no more power then stark dead men have to walk, eat, drink, etc.
Neither have the second, but by a new supply of grace. For he that has begun a
good work, must and will Phil. 1. 6. Phil* 2. 15. 1. The^. 5 23.
perform and finish it. And, it is God that works in us the will and the
work, of his good pleasure* And the God of peace sanctifies us throughout.
The increase of knowledge, judgment, faith and love, and of all goodness, is
as well the work of God, as the beginning of grace. Zanchius says well,
Liberum est quod est liberum a malo, non quod ad malum: Zanch de op^ri^us Dei
l^b. 30. cap. 12 page 169* A^^quarto.
That is free, that is free from evil, not that is free unto evil. Adam had
posse non peccare, he had not non posse peccare, he had power not to sin; he
had not such power as not to be able to sin, that is, he had no such power as
that he could not have sinned. If he had had such power, as that he could not
have sinned, then he should not have fallen at all. That he sinned, was not of
any power to sin in himself, but rather by the power of Satan, who by
iniection of his fiery darts, so weakened the power wherein God had created him,
that he fell. Neither at this day does any man commit murder or any other the
like sin, of any power that he has so to do, but of the power of Satan, so
weakening such sinners in Adam at the first, that they have no power to resist
the tentations of Satan unto any sin. There is also a difference inter
potentiam and potestatem; it can hardly be expressed in fit English words, except
we call the one ability, the other a faculty. Touching the act and doing of a
thing, there may be strength to do it; but there is no power, that is, no
authority, touching the quality of the act* as it is a sin. Potentia is of
nature, and as well in beasts as in men: but potestas is a lawful power and
authority from an higher, communicated to an inferior, subject to the higher
power, and at command thereof. So Adam may be said to have had a kind of
potentia to eat of the forbidden fruit, the same being a thing of no more
difficulty or hardness then to eat of the other trees: but he had not
potestatem, that is, any lawful power or authority so to do, because God had
forbidden and restrained him, to whom he was only subject. Pilat indeed in his
pride said to our Savior, that he had power to crucify him, and power to
release him, meaning from Caesar: and so the wicked in pride of their hearts
may say, they have power to do this and that, in respect of their inferiors,
or because perhaps some higher power in earth has given them leave and
liberty to do what themselves think good, and for doing whereof they have a
bodily strength, to kill and slay, to commit adultery upon adultery, and to
defile so many women in one night (as some foul and filthy mouthed beasts
rather then men, do sometime vaunt and boast.) Yea, from men also they may have
power and commission to persecute the Saints (as Paul had from the high Priests
to persecute all whom Act. 9. 2. chap. 22. 4.
he could find professing Christ,) but there is no lawful power but of God.
The wicked commit their wickednesses willingly and with delight; but therein
their will is not free, but bound unto Satan, and to the sins which Ioh. 8.
34. Romans 6. 16. 2. Pet. 2. 19.
they commit: yea, so much more are they so in bondage, by how much the more
willingly and with delight they commit such things. Notwithstanding as freedom
is opposed to coaction and constraint, so they may be said to do all their
evil freely, because no man sins by constraint and against his will, but
every man willingly. It were no sin, if it were not willing. Neither can the
will be constrained. Will constrained, is no will. There can be no two things
more contrary then will and constraint. Will is within a man; constraint is
without.

To proceed yet a little further; men now have potestatem, that is, leave and
liberty to refrain from evil and to do good; yea, God having commanded them
so to do, necessity lies upon them of so doing: so that they may not only so
do, but they must so do. But they have neither will nor power to do the one or
the other of them, but both these must come from God. We cannot of our 2. Cor.
3. 5.
selves think any thing that is good; our sufficiency is of God. Every
imagination of the heart of man, is only evil continually. Genesis 6. 3.
Yea, naturally we understand nothing of the will of 1. Cor. 2. 10. 11. 12. 13.
14. Mat. 16. 17.
God, but only by revelation of God himself, by his Spirit. Flesh and blood
reuealeth not Christ unto us, but the Father which is in heaven. It being so
with our thoughts and understanding, it cannot be otherwise with us touching
the will and the work of any good. Therefore it is said, Phil. 2. 13. 1. Cor.
12. 3.
that it is God that works in us both to will and to do, and that of his good
pleasure. Yea, No man can so much as say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy Ghost. Therefore the Prophet Psalm. 51. 15.
prayed the Lord to open* his lips, that his mouth might show forth his praise.

But to return to the objection, and to untie the former ob.
knot; why then are we commanded or exhorted to do any thing* if we have
neither power nor will to do any thing commanded us, or whereto we are
exhorted? Here^o An.
I answer by the like question; why said our Savior to Iairus his daughter
that was stark dead, Damsel, I say Mark. 5. 41.
unto thee, arise? There was no power at all in the Damosel either to arise or
to hear our Savior so speaking. For she was known to be dead; that when our
Savior said, in respect of the nature of death, which the last resurrection
considered, is but a sleep, and in respect of his purpose for raising her
presently from death to life; when (I say) our Savior in these respects said,
She is not dead but sleeps; all the company laughed him to scorn. Lazarus
also was dead, yea buried; yea, he had bin dead four days; so that Martha
objected the same, as thinking perhaps that our Savior had not known it, and
therefore took more in hand then he could do; Lazarus (I say) was so dead*
having bin dead so long, and also buried, with a tombston^ laid upon him, y^ he
could not stir either hand or foot: may it not therefore be as well asked,
as the former question was moved, why our Savior said unto him, Lazarus, come
forth? The answer to these questions is a full answer to the former objection.
For though neither Iairus his daughter* nor Lazarus, being both dead, had power
to do that that Christ bad them to do; yet Christ's command was the means
whereby they received life and power to Rise and Come forth. And though our
Savior could have raised them both by his secret power, yet he spoke unto them
so to do, thereby to teach us, his word to be the means of raising men from
the death of sin to the life of righteousness, and to enable us to do that
that he commands us to do, being of our selves altogether unable.

Yea, but it is expressly said, y^ every one that has the hope to 1. Ioh 3. 3.
be like to Christ, purges himself as he is pure. What of this? The Apostle
in this place speaks not of mere natural men, but of such as in whom the
Lord had already wrought grace, and even that hope before spoken of, of being
like unto Christ: such are more then mere natural men. Secondly, the Apostle
says, purges himself, not other men; to correct the curiosity of some, that
call for reformation of other, neglecting their own; whereas both must concur.
Thirdly, this phrase purges himself* signifies to use the means whereby he
may be purged. As Job is said to sanctify his children, because he rose up
early in the Job. 1. 5.
morning, and offered burnt offerings according to their number. For this was a
principal means whereby they might be sanctified, for the obtaining of pardon
of whatsoever sin they had committed in their mutual feasting, because it is
hard to feast without sin; also, that pardon thereof obtained, they might
have more grace of sanctification afterward. He that uses not the means
whereby he may be purged and sanctified, bewrays that whatsoever he boasts
of his hope in Christ, of being like to Christ at his appearing, has indeed no
such hope at all. Now to conclude, the answer to this objection, such
exhortations as this is and other, are the means both to give life to them
that are dead in their sins, and also to preserve life where by such
exhortations it was before begun: yea also by the same to discover their
corruptions remaining, and to quicken them to labor for more grace for
reformation of them. Thus much touching the former objection for free will from
the former exhortation. And this also shall suffice for the three former
adjuncts of this sacrifice, living, holy* well pleasing.

CHAP. X.
Of the last argument for confirmation of the former argument, contained in the
last words of the first verse.

NOw follows the last words of this first verse, and the fourth argument for
enforcing the former whole exhortation of presenting our bodies a sacrifice
living, holy and well pleasing to God. This argument is in the words commonly
translated and read, your reasonable serving or service.

Neither are these words only a confirmation of the foresaid exhortation, but
also an amplification of the former three adjuncts of the sacrifice to be
presented* living, holy, well pleasing. And this amplification is from the
means, whereby the said sacrifice may be made so living, holy, well pleasing,
as we shall see after the meaning of the said words opened.

Touching the words themselves, the common interpretation and reading of them
has seemed not only hard, but somewhat strange also unto me, namely, that it
should be translated reasonable. For I could never see any sufficient reason
for the said interpretation. The word indeed from whence it is divided
signifies reason, at least in other writers; but it can hardly be showed so to
signify in ye new Testament. The compou^d thereof with a privative particle
signifies unreasonable, as beasts are, and so used by Peter and Jude: yet the
simple word I do not remember 2. Pet. ^. 12. Jude. 10.
in Scripture to signify reason: yea, and in the places of Peter and Jude
before alleged, the compound may as well be translated speechless as
unreasonable: according to the common signification of the simple word, which
signifies the word, and so it is commonly used, as when it is said, Let him
that is taught in the word, etc. Let Gal. 6. 6. Col. 3. 16. 2. Tim. 4 2. 2.
Pet. 1. 19.
the word of Christ dwell in you, etc. Preach the word, etc. We have a most
sure word of prophecy, etc. and in diverse other places, needless to be
alleged.

The reason of the common translation of this word, has bin from the
opposition of this sacrifice of our selves to the sacrifices of the Law, all
offered of unreasonable creatures: but the word your service here interposed,
makes this reason of no great force.

Other say, that this our sacrifice is called reasonable, by opposition
likewise to the former old sacrifices, but in another respect, namely, because
there could be no reason given of the former old sacrifices, why the Lord
required so many beasts to be sacrificed, but there may be and is great reason
of sacrificing our selves. But this reason is unreasonable, and contrary to all
truth. For who is so simple, as not to know, the former sacrifices to have bin
commanded to foresignifie and foreshew the death of Christ: as also to teach,
that we had deserved to die. Are these no reasons?

Chrysostom comes nearest to the truth, and to that that I intend, though he
do not so fully lay it open, as were to be wished he had done. These are his
words, Rationalis cultus, est spiritualis seruitus; ratio viuendi iuxta Christi
instituta: Our reasonable worship, is our spiritual service; the manner of
living according to Christ's institutions. If he had spoken more plainly, it had
bin well. For I think the Apostles meaning by the words translated your
reasonable service, to be* that so to present our selves a sacrifice living,
holy and well pleasing to God* is that service that God or Christ requires in
his word. Of this interpretation I am the more fully persuaded, because the
very like words are so interpreted by all other, and cannot be interpreted 1.
Pet. 2. 2.
otherwise; As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word. In this
place (...) is commonly translated, not the reasonable milk, but the milk
according to the word, or the milk of the word. The adjective (...), is no
where else in all the new Testament, but only in these two places: in this to
the Romans, in that of Peter All interpreters wha^soeuer English that I know,
do interpret this of Peter, the milk of the word. Why therefore should this
place to the Romans be translated either in Latin rationalem cultum, or in
English your reasonable service, and not rather the service of the word? And
this interpretation of mine accords with that (as I said) of Chrysostom,
iuxta Christi instituta, according to the institutions of Christ. For according
to Christ's institutions, and according to the word, is all one. By this my
interpretation, notwithstanding different from the former, I do not altogether
infringe or control the common translation, your reasonable service;
especially if we understand the word reasonable as oftentimes it is taken in
our English tongue for that that is just and equal. For such things we say are
reasonable. Thus my interpretation of these words your service of the word, is
nothing different from the former, your reasonable service. For as it is
reasonable that subjects should obey their Sovereigns, and children their
parents, and servants their masters, according to the laws, orders and
directions of such Sovereigns, parents and masters, and not of other: so and
much more it stands with all reason, that all men, of what rank and degree
soever, should serve the Lord according to this own word, or, according to
Chrysostomes own word, according to the institutions of Christ from God given
unto us; and not according to men's own devices, or to the doctrines and
traditions of any other.

Thus having interpreted the words, and proved my interpretation by the
signification of the adjective here used, and by the like place of Peter* where
the same adjective is used, and by all men so interpreted as I have interpreted
here; let us a little more amply speak of the matter it self, both as it is
the confirmation of the former maine exhortation, and as also this fourth
adiunct your service of the word is the means whereby our said sacrifice of
our selves is made living, holy, and well pleasing to God.

Touching the first, the whole argument is this: That service that God has
required in his word, is to be performed unto him: But God requires in his
word this service, that we should present our selves a sacrifice living, holy
and well pleasing unto him: Therefore this sacrifice is to be presented unto
him. If any man shall think these words to be rather a confirmation of the last
former adiunct of this sacrifice, well pleasing to God, it comes to the same
pass. For the confirmation of this one branch of the exhortation, is the
confirmation of all.

The proposition or first part of this argument, viz. that that service that
God requires in his word, is to be performed unto him, or is well pleasing
unto him. This (I say) is so evident, that it needs no further proof or
speech, but only this, that whatsoever is contrary to the word, or more then
the word requires, in matter or in manner, is abominable to the Lord, and
rejected by the Lord, with this denial thereof, Who required this at your
hands? And Isay. ^. 12. Isay. 29. 13.
again; Forasmuch as this people draws near unto me with their mouth, etc.
and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men, therefore behold I
will do a marvelous work amongst this people, etc. On the contrary therefore,
whatsoever service is according or agreeable unto the word, or commanded in the
word, that is to be performed to God, that is well pleasing unto him.

Moreover, the former proposition is manifest by the perfection of the word, to
convert the soul, to give wisdom Psalm. 19. 7. 8.
to the simple, to rejoice the heart, and to enlighten the eyes. Yea, this
perfection is further manifest by the commendation of the word by Paul, to make
the man of God perfect, 2. Tim. 3. 17.
and thoroughly furnished unto every good work. For what means the Apostle by
the man of God? The Minister of the word, often else where so called, because
he is employed by God in his special service, and the greatest work of all
other, the salvation of men's souls, the perfecting Ephesians. 4. 12.
of the Saints, the reedifying of the body of Christ.

God has also commended the perfection of the word Deuteronomy 4. 2* 12* 13 Pro. 30.
6. Reu. 22. 19.
by forbidding any thing to be added thereunto, or detracted from it. And
indeed, is it not as much a life is worth, for any man employed by any Prince
either in embassage or in any other commission of great moment, either to go
beyond his commission, or not to go so far as thereby he is enjoined? Such
dealing is no better then treason. What then is to be said of like dealing with
God in his word? Did Balaam say, If Balack would give me his house full Numb.
22. 18. and. 24* 13.
of silver and gold* I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord to do less or
more? Did this sorcerer (I say) whose teeth watered and fingers itched after
Balacks silver and gold, so speak, and shall not all Christians speak the
same, and acknowledge the word so perfect in every respect, that nothing is to
be done, less or more then the word warranteth? This word especially being now
every way so perfect as it is, and as we shall again in this treatise have
occasion to show it to be? Is it not further said, that these Ioh. 20. 31.
things are written to make us believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
and that believing we might have life through his name? If by those things that
are written we may have faith whereby to have eternal life, what would we
more? or what need we more? Many things were spoken and done, the which
particularly are not written: yet this is enough, that those things that are
written, are sufficient for faith and eternal life.

To charge the written word with want of any thing necessary to salvation,
either to be believed or to be obeyed by any particular persons or by whole
Churches, is to charge God either with insufficiency and inabilitie to inspire
the writers of the word withal, or with want of will so to do; or at least to
impute unfaithfulness and negligence unto the said writers. Either of the two
former is blasphemous. For no insufficiency can be laid Romans 16. 27.
upon God, because he is most wise and only wise; yea, he 1. Tim. 1. 17. Jude.
25.
is so wise that he has confounded and daily does consound the wisdom of the
wise, and brings to nothing the understanding 1. Cor. 1. 19. 20.
of the prudent, and makes foolish the wisdom of the world. Even the
foolishness of God is wiser then men, etc. ver. 25.
Yea, such is the wisdom of God in his word, that as the Apostle accounts
them fools that do not understand Ephesians. 1. 17.
it* so the Prophet denies them that were accounted the great wise men of
Judah, to have any wisdom in them, Ier. 8. 9.
because they had rejected the law of the Lord. To deny God to be willing, is
directly contrary to the Apostle, that from God has said, that God will have
all men (that is, all 1. Tim. 2. 4.
sorts of men) to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.

Touching the third point, of unfaithfulness of the writers, it cannot stand
without impeachment to God and Christ Jesus* by whom they were appointed to
write. And does not Paul say, that Christ had accounted him faithful? 1. Tim.
1. 1^.
Were not the rest faithful as well as Paul? What a weakening of the faith of
the elect is this, to say that the Prophets and Apostles were unfaithful, that
in respect of their doctrine are called the foundation of the Church? Ephesians. 1.
20.


Here before I come to the use of this doctrine, let me insert something
touching the word (...) service, about the which the Papists in every place
where it is used, make a kind of tumult, distinguishing it from (...):
ascribing the former as proper only to God; and saying that the other is to be
communicated, to Angels, to Saints, to Images, etc. But this distinction is
both new, and also vain or idle. It is new, because it was first made by
Augustine, who was no great Grecian, neither is constant in the said
distinction, but shuffleth therein, and acknowledges the Qu. 94. in Exo. 23.
upon these words, If t^on shall serve any other gods.
word (...) to be du to God as he is our Lord; and (...) as he is our God. But
alas it is magis accutum quam sanum, more accute then sound. It is a mere
quirk, not beseeming so grave a Father. The point it self is not a point of a
penny a dozen. For the verb (...) is indifferently applied Mat* 6. 24.
to God and Mammon. And Paul* James and Peter in the Luke 16. 13. Tit. 1. 1.
To. 1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. Iam. 1. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 1.
inscription of their Epistles do call themselves (...)* servants of God and
Christ Jesus. So the Apostle says, The servant of the Lord must not contend;
using the same word (...).

He uses the verb also derived from the nowne speaking Romans 7. 6. Act. 7. 42.
of serving in newness of the spirit, not in the oldnesse of the letter. The
verb also (...) is used by Steven, speaking of Gods giving up the Israelites
to worship the host of heaven. If the verb also (...), which they contend to
be proper to God, be derived (as some say) of the particle (...) in composition
signifying intension, and (...), signifying to tremble, it does most properly
belong to the servants of men, that do all they do in fear and trembling, Luke
1. 74.
rather then in love cheerfully; as we are to serve the Lord without fear,
that is, without any such servile and slavish fear: though we are also to
serve him with such fear Psalm. 2. 11. 2. Cor. 7. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 17.
and trembling as is opposed to security, and which may keep us from
presumptuous sins, and whereby we may serve him with reverence beseeming his
high Majesty.

Now whereas the Papists say, that (...) is indifferently attributed to Angels,
Saints and Images, this also they speak besides the book, and without the
book. For, let them show any one place from the beginning of Genesis to the
end of the Revelation, where it is attributed to Angels or Saints (except they
mean Saints living,) much less can they show it ever to have bin given to
images. The Angels indeed and we are called Fellow-seruants; but only to God,
not one to another: yea, the Angels by another word are called our servants,
and are said to be sent forth to the ministry (or service) of them that shall
be Heb. 1. 14.
heirs of salvation. We are never called such servants to Angels. Herein is
the pre-eminence of elect men above elect Angels: because men are said to be
members of Christ, and are made one with Christ; so is it not said of Angels;
neither can it be said so of them* because it is said that he took not the
nature of Angels The Angels therefore Heb. ^. 16.
cannot be said to be the members of Christ, as ^le^^ men called and sanctified
are.

Thus much obiter and by the way, for answer to the Papists wrangling and
brangling about the word here translated service.

To return therefore to the perfection of the word, The use of the former
doctrine
and to the argument here of the Apostle for confirmation of the former
exhortation, from the authority of the word, the use of the doctrine before
proved, is two*fold: first, concerning such as are already the children of God:
secondly, concerning them that are not, but are enemies The first use
concerning Gods children, viz. direction.
to this doctrine. Touching the former sort, first, it serves for their
direction and instruction, even always to teach them to have recourse unto
this word, and to do all that they do according thereunto, not at all swaruing
from it: as David made Gods testimonies his counselors, for himself, Psalm.
119. 24.
for his kingdom, for peace, for war, in prosperity, in adversity; so let
us do. They are able to make us wise, not only to salvation, but also general
for all affairs of this life, 2. Tim. 3. 15.
touching our selves, touching ours, touching other. They can make us wiser
then our enemies, then our teachers, then Psalm. 119. 98. 99. 100. Ier. 8. 9.
Ephesians. 5. ^7.
our ancients. We have before heard from the Prophet and from the Apostle, that
they that reject them can have no wisdom in them; and that they understand
not what the will of the Lord is (no where to be had but in the word) are no
better then fools or mad men, as the word of the Apostle imports. Certainly
the wisdom of the word is the best policy for the upholding of kingdoms.
When Saul transgressed the word in sparing Agag, did he not concerning himself
and his posterity, overthrow his kingdom? When David did but number the
people, Quantam Deus stragem fecit? how great a slaughter did God make? Oh
therefore that all men, great and small, would in all things and always
consult with this word, and lay it before Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Joshua. 1. 7.
them in all affairs they deal with, for themselves and other, to observe and
do according to all things therein, and not suffer it to depart from them. The
greater any are, the more need they have of respect thereunto, that so they may
have the better assurance of prospering whithersoeuer they go, and in
whatsoever they take in hand: and that the Lord may be with them, whiles they
are so with him, and may be found of him, whiles they so seek 2. Chron. 15. 2.
him in his word, no where else to be found: lest otherwise they forsaking him
(in forsaking his word) be also forsaken of him. Was it not so with Saul? was
it not so with Ioash? 1. Sam. 28. 16. 2. Chron. 24. 20* 1. Kin. 11. 14. 26
was it not so for a long time with Solomon himself? against whom the Lord
first stirred up Hadad the Edomite; and afterward Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
to whom immediately after Salomons death the Lord gave ten parts of Salomons
kingdom, never restoring the same again to 1. Kin. 12. 20.
Salomons post^ritie.

Let all men therefore fear the neglect of the word of God. Let all that would
dedicate themselves to God a sacrifice living* holy and well pleasing, attend
unto the word which God has given for direction in that behalf. As any man
desires to be well pleasing to God, so let him apply himself to the study
and knowledge of the word. It is impossible to please God without the knowledge
of his word, wherein he has revealed his will and pleasure, what is good and
acceptable unto him, what is evil and displeasing in his eyes. Therefore the
Apostle having exhorted Timothy, that prayers, supplications and intercessions
should be made unto God for all men, especially for Kings, etc. confirms his
said exhortation by this argument from an adiunct of so doing, namely, that it
was good and acceptable 1. Tim. 2. 3. 4.
unto God; proving this in the words following, and saying, who will have all
men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth; thereby noting that it
is not possible for any man to do that which is good and acceptable to God,
without the knowledge of the truth. Alas therefore, that so many should neglect
knowledge, and with the Papists think ignorance to be the mother of devotion.
The 2. use of the former doctrine concerning Gods childr^n* viz. consolation.


Besides, the former use of the former doctrine for instruction and direction
of the children of God, there is great consolation and comfort for them, that
God has given them such a word as wants nothing, and out of which they need
not to seek for any thing, but wherein they may have all that heart can desire
to make them such a sacrifice: yea, this word has abundant consolation against
all kinds of afflictions, against enemies at home, against enemies abroad,
against sickness of what sort soever, against poverty, against reproaches,
ignominies, slanders and disgraces in the world; against imprisoments in our
own country, against banishments into other, yea from the house of God;
against famines, against oppressions, against the outrages of open enemies,
against the secret hatred of pretended friends and kinsmen, and brethren by
nature. All the premises are manifest by the examples of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, the Israelites after the death of Joseph and of Pharaoh that first
advanced him, of Job, of Naomi and Ruth, of Eliah, Michaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel,
and other Prophets; yea of David, first a Prophet, and then a King, both a
Prophet and a King: of our Savior especially, and of his Apostles. I do but
name these examples, because thus to name them is sufficient to lead men to
the consideration of other the like mentioned in holy Scripture. Thus much for
the uses of the former doctrine, concerning such as are already the children of
God.

Concerning other, it serves first to reprove the Papists The 2. use of the
^ormer doctrine concerning them that are not the children of God.
that strive and contend so much for their traditions and unwritten verities,
equalling the same with the written word of God; though directly contrary
thereunto, and that in material points: such is their invocation of Saints,
their worshipping of images, their going of pilgrimage, their whipping and
scourging themselves, after the example of Baals Prophets before spoken of,
their worship of the cross and the sign thereof, even with the very same
worship that is due to Christ Jesus himself; their transubstantiation
especially, and their Mass, with all their abominable adoration and idolatry
belonging thereunto, and grounded thereon: their advancement of their Pope
above all Princes, giving him authority to make and depose them, and to
discharge all subjects of their allegiance, at his pleasure: of the like sort
are their manifold holidays, and fasting days, more then all the days of the
year besides: so likewise abstinence from marriage for their Clergy
altogether, giving them leave for all y^ to have their whores; and for all
other for almost for half the year, without money licenses from them. And all
these or the most part of these they urge as parts of Gods worship, having no
other ground for them then their own traditions, and Mark. 7. 9.
by them making void and rejecting the commandments of God, that they and
other may keep their own traditions, and making the word of God of none
effect.

Touching all these things, forasmuch as it cannot be said of them that they
are the service of the word, as here the Apostle speaks; let not us account
them as well pleasing unto him, but as odious and detestable in his sight, and
let us cry, Foh, and stop our noses against them, as loathsome savor unto us:
yea, as the Lord speaks in one of the premised particulars, let us cast them
away as a Isay. 30. 22.
monstrous cloth, and say unto them, Get ye hence.

As the foresaid doctrine serves for reprehension of Asecond use of the former
doctrine viz. reprehension of some amongst us. 2. These. 2. 15.
those archenemies of God and his truth, as also of the salvation of all men
(as Paul speaks of the Jews,) so it serves for rebuke of some among our
selves, that making a scoff of all goodness, do deride men for being too
strict and nice, because they make conscience of their words and actions
according to this word, calling them by the names of Puritans, Precisians, and
I know not what; in the mean time accounting them for the best men that will
swear fearfully, drink lustily, swagger riotously, etc. Alas that there
should be such amongst us, making so light account of the word of God,
especially after so long time preaching thereof, graced likewise with so many
other great mercies of God, before spoken of. It is fearful, it is Deuteronomy. 5.
32. 17. 11. 28. 14. Ios. 1. 7. and. 23. 6
fearful, that God having so often commanded us, and so straightly charged us
not to turn to the right hand, or to the left hand, there should be any,
especially so many to scorn them that make conscience of so doing, and of
living as near as they can according to the word. This shall suffice to have
spoken of these words as they are a confirmation of the former whole
exhortation.

Now it follows to speak of them as they are an amplification The word is
that means whereby we are to be made living, holy, acceptable.
from the means of the former three adjuncts of this sacrifice here commanded,
viz* living, holy, well pleasing.

Touching the first adiunct therefore living, it is manifest that the word is
that means of God whereby we are made living, for therefore is the word called
by this our Apostle the word of life. The Proverbs also of Solomon has many
Phil. 2 16. Pro. 3. 18. ver. 22. Pro 3. 22. chap. 4. 22. chap. 6. 23. chap. 10.
11. ver. 17. chap. 15. 4.
sentences to that purpose, as that Wisdom is a tree of life to them that lay
hold of her: that she is life to the soul. Does not Solomon also exhort his
son to attend unto his words, etc. because they are life unto them that find
them. And again that the very reproves of instruction are the way of life.
And, The mouth of the righteous is a well of life: and that he is in the way of
life that keeps instruction. And again, An wholesome tongue is a tree of
life. To omit many other the like; it is also said by David, that the law of
the Psalm 19. 7.
Lord conuerteth the soul* What is it to convert the soul, but to give life
to the soul before dead? Peter also for himself and for all the rest of the
Apostles, says to our Savior, Ioh. 6. 68. Iam. 1. 18.
that he had the words of eternal life. James also makes the word of truth
the means of our regeneration, which is the beginning of our spiritual life.
The like does the Apostle Peter. For the same cause our Savior raised 1. Pet.
1. 23.
up Iairus his daughter and Lazarus by speaking unto them (as before we heard)
that could have raised them up by his secret power, that thereby he might
commend his word to be word of eternal life.

That the word is also the means of our holiness, our Savior shows, Now
are ye clean through the words that I Ioh. 15. 3.
have spoken unto you. To be clean, pure or holy are all one. The same is
taught by our Saviors prayer, Sanctify them Ioh. 17. 17.
with thy truth, thy word is truth. Paul says, that our Savior gave himself
for the Church, to sanctify and cleanse it with Ephesians. 5. 26.
the washing of water by the word. Peter likewise testifies 1. Pet. 1. 22.
the same, saying, that our souls are purified by obeying (or hearing) of the
truth.

As evil words corrupt good manners, so the good word 1 Cor. 15. 33.
of God cannot but make men's manners good, that are appointed to life. That
some remain still dead and filthy, that daily hear the word, it is either
because they belong not to life, or because the hour of their calling and
opening of their hearts, as the heart of Lydia was opened, is Act. 16. 14. Gal.
4* 4.
not yet come. As there was a fullness of time for Christ to come into the
world, so the Lord has his fullness of time likewise for sending his Son into
the hearts of men. How excellently soever also y^ word be preached, except 1.
Cor. 3. 9.
God do work with the preaching thereof, it cannot effect any thing. That which
the Prophet says, that except the Psalm. 127. 1.
Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it* etc. is not only to
be understood of our labors and endeavors for this life, but most of all of
building men up as living stones to be an holy temple of God himself. Hence it
is that not only the Sermons of the Apostles, but also of Christ himself, did
not only not work holiness, but a so through the corruption of the hearers,
and for their former sins, did more and more strike them with blindness Mat.
13. 14.
and hardness of heart, to their further destruction and condemnation.

As the word is the means to revive and to sanctify, so that it is also to
make us well pleasing to God, has bin showed before. And how can it be
otherwise, since we can no longer please him then we contain our selves within
the limits thereof, and perform the duties of faith and obedience therein
contained? If we pass the bounds 1. Kin. 2. 36.
thereof, and do contrary thereunto, then as Shimei by Solomon confined to
Jerusalem upon pain of death, passing notwithstanding his said bounds, and
going over the brook Kidron three years after to fetch his two runaway
servants from Gath, did thereby so provoke Salomons indignation against him,
that it cost him his life: so we passing the bounds of Gods word, and doing
contrary to the will and pleasure of God therein revealed (though observed
Ezechil. 18. 24.
for some good while) shall most justly incur the just displeasure of God,
and purchase to our selves everlasting condemnation.

What is the use of the former doctrine? That as we desire The use.
life, to be holy and well pleasing to God, so we regard ye word, hear the word
with all due reverence, attention and humility; yea, study also and meditate
of it, conferring thereof with other, not for disputation or contention, but
Psalm. 119 18.
for our further learning and obedience, praying God likewise to open our eyes
that we may behold the wondrous ver. 33.
things of his law: to teach us the way of his statutes, for keeping thereof to
the end: to incline likewise our hearts unto his ver. 3^.
testimonies; and neither to covetousness the greatest impediment Col. 3. 5.
1. Tim. 6. 10.
of all other unto godliness, as being idolatry and the root of all evil;
neither to any other vanity. Sweet and precious is our natural life, much
better then riches and glory, as the which are but in the left hand of
wisdom, Pro. 3. 16.
whereas length of days is in her right hand: and the which our Savior
prefers before all things, even necessarily Mat. 6. 25.
pertaining to life. How sweet therefore and precious ought the life before
mentioned to be? The same is to be said of holiness, Gods own robe, and yet
vouchsafed to us as a Liuerie, whereby we may be known to be his servants:
Isay. 6. 3.
well to please God, oh how pleasant a thing is it? It brings that peace of
conscience that passes all understanding. Phil. 4. 7.
As an evil conscience accusing men of their displeasing of God, is an hell
upon earth, and a continual gnawing worm that shall never die; so a good
conscience Isay. 66. 24. 1. Pet. 1. 8. Pro. 15. 15.
is an heaven upon earth, accompanied with joys unspeakable and glorious.
Therefore it is called a continual feast. A feast, and a feast without end,
far passing the royal feast of Ahashuerus; for though therein he showed the
riches of Ester. 1. 3. 4. etc
his glorious kingdom, and the honor of his excellent maiesti^; yet that
feast was but of the body, this is of the soul; that was but for an hundred
and fourscore days (an whole half year within three days,) this feast is
an everlasting feast, lasting unto and in the life to come. And yet also all
the feast of a good conscience here, is but as it were a drinking or breakfast
to stay our stomachs till the life to come and the Supper of the Lamb and of
the great God, and till Reu. 19. 9. 17. Mat. 22. 2.
the marriage of the great Kings Son. All these things considered, how ought
we to esteem of the word? how ought we to meditate and confer of the word, to
love it and to delight in it? How ought we to pray for the knowledge of it, and
obedience unto it, the same being the means of all the former? The same is to
be said touching all that belong unto us, wives, children and servants, whom we
would have to be such sacrifices, living, holy, and well pleasing to God. But
having spoken enough before to induce us to the due regard hereof, I will
forbear all further speeches thereof in this place.

This word of God in the former respects is often called by the name of the
bare word, for the excellency of it above all words; no other word or words
whatsoever being to be compared thereunto, neither able so to quicken and
sanctify us, and to make us pleasing to God, but this. Therefore here I might
take occasion to speak again of ye honor and other duties that are to be
performed to the Ministers and Messengers of the said word: but I shall have
yet another occasion to speak thereof; and therefore I will reserve it till
then.

Thus much therefore of this fourth and last adiunct of the foresaid sacrifice
of our selves, both as it is a distinct adiunct from the former three, and also
as it is a reason of the whole exhortation for presenting our selves a
sacrifice living, holy and well pleasing to God; and likewise as it is the
means whereby we are made so living, holy and welpleasing unto him.

CHAP. XI.
Containing an entrance into the second verse: and first of all, of not
fashioning our selves unto this world.

NOw I come to the second verse; wherein let us first remember, that it
contains an amplification of the maine exhortation before handled, by an
argument taken from a diverse or contrary thing thereunto: and then that the
said diverse or contrary thing is amplified by another contrary, which is
likewise amplified by the means and by the end. The first is in these words,
And be not fashioned (or conformed) unto this world: the second in these words,
But be ye transformed, etc. Touching the former, let us first examine the
words; then consider of the matter: both as briefly as may be.

The words are chiefly two: the verb, be not fashioned; and the nowne, to this
world. The second notwithstanding is the more principal of the two, because it
is diversely taken in the Scripture: and yet I will not speak of all the
significations, because that were needless and idle; but only of such as make
most for my present purpose. In the tongue of the Apostle, there be two words,
both translated the world: the one is (...), in Latin aeuum or seculum: the
other is (...), in Latin mundus. The former is a word of time, properly and
naturally signifying eternity, always being; but by authors used as sometimes
for eternity, so also sometimes for the age of a man; and sometime for some
set and certain time, as for a thousand years, for an hundred years, for
thirty years. But in the Scripture it is always used for eternity: as in
the conclusion and Mat. 6. 1. Romans 16. 27. 1. Tim. 1. 17. Jude. 17. Luke 1. 33.
ver. 55.
reason of the Lords prayer: in the conclusion of Paul's Epistle to the Romans:
so likewise in the former to Timothy, and of Jude: as also by the Angel to the
virgin Marie, and in the Song of the virgin Marie herself. So by our Savior
himself, speaking of the sin against the holy Mark. 3. 24. chap. 11. 14.
Ioh. 4. 14. chap. 6. 51. 58.
Ghost: of the fruitless figtree: of the water of eternal life: and of him
that eats the bread that come from heaven, which was himself. So also in
diverse other places of the Scripture.

The second word (...), translated in Latin mundus, and in English the world,
naturally signifies order or ornament: and the Latin word adiectiuely used,
signifies clean, neat; substantiuely it is sometimes taken for all the
attire and ornaments of a woman; but most commonly for heaven and earth, and al
things within their compass: for the whole world; and that because the whole
world was at the first created by God in a most excellent order, most
accurately, most exquisitely, most beautifully: and though now that form and
frame thereof be much altered from that that it was at the first, by the sin
of man, Romans 8. 20.
being made subject unto vanity, yet still the order and frame thereof is
exceeding comely, exceeding beautiful. So this word the world, signifies the
whole world, as it is the place of all creatures, when it is said of Christ,
that he was that light that lights every man coming into the world: that Ioh.
1. 9. 10.
he was in the world, and the world was made by him. So the same word is used,
when it is said, that the devil showed our Mat. 4. 8.
Savior all the kingdoms of the world. So when it is said, that the mysteries
of the Gospel were kept secret from the foundation Mat. 13. 35.
of the world: so when it is said, that the inheritance Mat. 25.
was prepared for the elect from the foundation of the world: so also of our
election before the foundations of the world were Ephesians. 1. 4. 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
16. 17.
laid. So also by John five times together dehorting from the love of the
world, and of the things therein, he means not the wicked in ye world, but
only the place of ye world, and the things in the world; and by the lusts there
of the flesh and of the eyes, he means such things in the world as the which
by the flesh generally and the eyes particularly provoke man to lust after.
He means not the lusts themselves that are in the hearts of men, but the
things that provoke the said lusts. The lusts themselves of the heart, are
contained in the word love not. For what else means the word love not, then
not to lust? The Apostle also plainly distinguishes the lusts of the flesh and
of the eyes from the world it self and the things in the world. So it Mat. 16.
26.
signifies elsewhere.

Touching the other word (...), seculum, translated also the world, though it
be a word of time, yet it is also used for the former, even for the place of
the world and all creatures therein; as when it is said, that by him (that is,
by Heb. 1. 2. chap. 11. 3.
the Son) God made the worlds: and again, by faith we understand the worlds
were made by the word of God.

To come to our present purpose, both the one and the other most commonly
signify the people in the world, in every place, of every age and time
whatsoever. The former word also (...), sometime signifies all generally,
sometimes more particularly the elect only, both believing, and also ordained
to believe, though not for the present believing: and sometime the same word
signifies only the wicked, so long as they so remain, especially the
reprobate.

It is taken for the elect, when it is said, So God loved the Ioh. 3. 16.
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. For God never loved the
reprobate, but hated them as Esau. Whom Romans 9 15. Mala. 1* 3. Ioh. 13* 1. chap
1. 29.
God loves once, he loves to the end. So when it is said, Behold the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world. Christ takes away no sins but
of the elect. So when the men of Sichar said, We know that this is indeed the
Savior Ioh. 4. 42.
of the world. And when Christ himself said, The bread of God is he that
comes down from heaven, and gives life Ioh. 6. 33. ver. 51.
unto the world. And again, I give my flesh for the life of the world. To omit
many other places, that of John of all other is not to be forgotten, that
Christ is not the propitiation 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
for our sins only (that is, of us that are already called) but also for the
sins of the whole world, that is, of all the elect in the world. No general
grace. Ioh. 17. 9.


Neither do these places make for general grace, since our Savior prayed not
for the world, that is, for the reprobate of the world; and therefore much
less did die or was the propitiation for the sins of all without exception.
And for whom Christ is given, to them all other things Romans 8. 32.
cannot but be given also. If all things, then salvation it self. Who then
shall be condemned? Those places that seem most to make for general grace, as
that God will 1. Tim. 2. 4. Tit. 2. 11.
have all men to be saved, etc. and the grace of God that brings salvation
unto all men, are to be understood only of all sorts of men, as both the
precedent mention of diverse sorts of men does plainly show, and the words do
also prove, because in the one place he adds, and come to the knowledge of
the truth; and in the other, teaching us to deny all ungodliness, etc.
meaning not teaching imperatiuely or outwardly only, as did the law, but also
effectiuely, powerfully and inwardly, accompanied with the Spirit. Do all men
without exception of any, come to the knowledge of the truth? Are all men so
effectually taught to deny all ungodliness, etc.?

As the same word is taken for the elect only, so also Ioh. 12. 31. chap. 14.
17.
is it for the wicked, especially the reprobate in the world, as, Now is the
judgment of the world. Now is the Prince of this world cast out: and the world
cannot receive the Spirit of truth: so that Judas (not Iscariot) says, How is
it that thou ver. 22.
wilt manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? And again, If the
world hate you, ye know it hated me first. If you Ioh. 15. 18. 19.
were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of
the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, Ioh. 16. 20. chap. 17. 4.
14. 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
therefore the world bateth you. And for this cause the world knows you not.
And in many other places.

Touching the word (...), I have not yet observed any place where it is used
for the elect and believing only in the world, but that it is only used for
the ungodly, as when it is said, The children of this world are wiser in their
Luke 16. 8.
generation, etc. so when the Apostle says, In whom the god of this world has
blinded their eyes; that is, the god that rules the wicked, and whom they
worship and serve as God. So it is taken in this present place for the wicked
in the world; the rather because as this word (...) is a word of age or time,
so the wicked are always ready to change themselves according to the times,
and to conform themselves to all times and seasons: so that always they may
sing with the Poet,

Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis:
The times changed be, and with the times changed are we.
But here two questions are briefly to be answered: First, Why the godly are
called by the name of the world? Secondly, Why the wicked are so also called;
both being contrary the one to the other?

I answer, that the godly are so called, because they Why the godly are called
by the name of the world.
indeed are the principallest parts of the whole world, though they be the
fewest. Even as the principallest parts of a kingdom, are not the greatest
number, but the smallest, as the King and his royal seed, with Dukes,
Marquisses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons; etc. these are but few in respect of the
rest in any kingdom, yet they are the most principal.

The godly also in the world are the only wise men of Ier. 8. 8. 9. Psalm. 111.
10. Pro 1. 7. Ephesians. 5. 17.
the world: the wicked are all fools, and no better then mad men, so long as
they so continue, howsoever they account of themselves, or be esteemed by other.

The godly are the only Free men and Princes of the world: the wicked are no
better then servants, and slaves and bondmen to the devil, to the world, to
the wicked lusts of their own hearts. Therefore Solomon says, I have Eccles.
10. 7.
seen servants (that is, the wicked and fools) upon horses, and Princes (that
is, the godly and only wise) walking as servants (on foot) upon the earth.
Are not the godly also 1 Pet. 29. Reu 1. 6. and. 5. 9.
called a royal Priesthood, that is, Kings and Priests unto God?

Again, the godly are (as it were) the only pillars and supporters of the
world, and of the kingdoms of the world. This is manifest by the examples of
Noah and Lot before mentioned; by one of which the whole world was prescrued
from drowning, whiles he was in it; and by the other Sodom and Gomorrha* were
kept from burning with fire and brimstone. Were not Eliah also and 1 Kin. 2.
12. and 13. 14.
Elisha, whiles they lived, the charets and horsemen of Israel? But these were
Prophets and extraordinary men. What then? Yet the same is to be said of all
fearing God. Does not Solomon say y^ a little citi^ besieged by a great King,
was Eccles. 9. 14. ^5.
delivered by the wisdom of one poor man dwelling therein? Verily one poor
man fearing God (such only as I said are wise) may do more good to a whole
city (yea to a whole kingdom) then all the great men besides in that said
city or kingdom, not fearing God, by all their carnal policy, power, force
and strength whatsoever. Let therefore the world, and the politic wise men
therein account of the godly as basely as they will, yet are they the fairest
flowers of their garland, and those by whom they and theirs fare the better
every day they rise. Thus much for answer of the first question before
propounded, why the godly are called by the name of the world.

Concerning the second question, the wicked are also Why the wicked are called
by the name of the word. Mat 7. 13. Luke 12. 32.
called by the name of the world, because they are the greatest part thereof.
For, wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat Christ's flock is but a little flock. How few
professed Christians are there in respect of the Heathen, Turks and other
infidels? How small likewise is the number of true Christians within the
visible Churches, in respect of hypocrites, Atheists, Papists, and other
notorious wicked ones?

Again, the wicked for the most part have the world and the things thereof
most at will. They have most elbow room. They live and become mighty in
power. Their seed is Job. 21. 7. 8. 9. etc.
established in their fight with them, and their offspring before their eyes.
Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them Their
bull gendereth and fails not, their cow calueth, and casts not her calfe.
They send forth their little ones like aflocke, and their children dance. They
take the timbrell and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ. They spend
their days in wealth: but for all that in a moment, when they dream of no
such matter, much less look for it, suddenly they go down to the grave.
There are also no bands Psalm. 73. etc. 6.
in their death, but their strength is firm. They are not in trouble as other
men, neither are they plagued as other men. Therefore pride compasses them
about as a chain, violence covers them as a garmont. Their eyes stand out
with fatness, and they have more then heart could wish. And what do they
render to the Lord for all his former blessings? They sin so much the more,
and blaspheme God to his face. But he that enters into the Lords sanctuary,
and consulteth with the word of God, howsoever before he were moved, troubled
ver. 17. 18.
and astonished to see their said prosperity, understood their end, and found
that God had set them in a slipperie place, and cast them down into
destruction.

Furthermore, the wicked are so called, because for the most part are Lords of
sea and land, they are in greatest authority, bear the greatest sway, and
have the greatest swinge in the world. They ride on cock-horse, or rather in
coaches and carioches, and other go on foot sometimes, as their servants, and
footmen, or pages.

Last of all, in respect of their foresaid prosperity and pride, thereby they
only are the brave and gay fellows and gallants of the world. They swagger,
they revel, they speak and do what they list, and no man may control Psalm.
12. ^.
them; or at least they care not for anything that any man speaks against
them. Thus much of this word the world.

The next words are, be not fashioned. Upon this, Chrysostom The word
fashioned.
writes thus: Huius seculi figura est humi depressa, temporalis, nihil habens
sublime, nihil stabile, nihil recti, sed omnia puersa, etc. The figure (or
f^shion) of this world lies groueling on the ground, is base and temporary,
having nothing excellent, nothing firm, nothing straight, but all things
perverse. Therefore if thou will go right on, frame not thy self to the
fashion of this present life; for here is nothing that abides firm: whence he
calls it a figure (or a fashion;) and in 1. Cor. 7. 3. 1.
another place, The fashion of this world passes away. For it has nothing
that will endure, or that is steadie, but all things it has are temporary,
wherefore he says, Unto this world. For by (this) he shows that it is
frail: and by (figure) that it has no substance. Afterward upon the next
word* Be transformed, he adds, Non dicit transfigureris, sed transformeris,
etc. He says not Be fashioned, but Be transformed; showing that there is only
a certain fashion in the world; but that virtue has not a fashion (or shape)
but a true form, not needing any outward painting, which vanishes as soon as
it appears. For all these things, before or as soon as they appear, do also
perish. If therefore thou shall cast away the figure (fashion or shape)
presently thou shall come to the form. So this Father opposes the one word to
the other (as we shall hear anon how they are opposed) and makes the one word
(...) from whence the verb here used is derived, to be only a shape or show
(without any substance) of that that is not; as there appear many things in
the air, that are not, and therefore do suddenly vanish: the other word (...)
to be a form having substance. This is the judgment of Chrysostom, witty,
true and godly, because indeed the whole world lies in evil: neither have the
things of this world any sound form, but (as Peter Maxtyr writes) scenicam
personam, that is, they are like to Players on a stage, that play the parts,
and make show of the persons they are not. Notwithstanding the said Peter
Martyr thinks the said interpretation of Chrysostom to be more witty then
sound, because the two nownes from whence the said two verbs are derived, are
confounded in the Scripture, and used both for one thing. For the Apostle
says, that Christ being in the form Phil. 2. 9.
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: here he uses the nowne
from whence the second verb is derived. Then afterward he says, and being
found in the fashion of a ver. 8.
man, etc. using here the nowne from which the first verb is derived; and yet
meaning a true form in both places: the true form or essence or nature of
God; or the true form, essence and nature of man. Again, speaking in the
Phil. 3. 22.
same Epistle of Christ's changing our vile body, and making it like to his
glorious body; there the verb translated change, is the same that is here
translated conformed: but speaking of our body to be made like to his glorious
body, the nowne translated like, is that from whence the verb comes, here
translated transformed: yet the Apostle means a true and real changing and
making of our body like to Christ's glorious body; but in another place (as
after we shall hear) he uses the verb here translated conformed, for 2. Cor.
11. 13. 14. 15..
that that is not, but only in show. The word also from whence that second
verb is derived, is used for a show of that that is not. For it is said by
Mark of Christ himself, that he appeared in another form; whereby it
appears that Man. 16. 12.
Christ showed himself in diverse forms, at least appeared or seemed to
appear to his disciples to be of diverse forms, though always in essence and
person he were the same, yet not seeming so to them. Arretius says, that (...)
the first nowne, is the figure of things without life: as if the Apostle had
meant, that If we fashion our selves unto them, we do nothing else then laying
aside our natural form which we have from God, turn our selves into the
shape of brute beasts, and become without sense, logs and stocks, and are made
hard stony, blockish beasts. But I find no ground in approved authors for this
signification of the said word. Neither can my Philosophy make brute beasts
to be res inanimatas and insensatas, things without life and senseless. Thus
much for the words.

Now to the matter, and that as briefly as I may.

First of all therefore, the Apostle making a kind of opposition of this
negative precept to the former affirmative exhortation, teaches us, that both
cannot stand together, and meet in one subject and be performed by one and the
same person. As the Prophet praying God to incline Psalm. 119. 36.
his heart unto his testimonies, and not unto covetousness, thereby teaches
that no man's heart can be inclined to Gods testimonies and unto covetousness:
so the Apostle here exhorts these Christian Romans, and in them a^l other,
to present themselves a sacrifice living, holy a^^d well pleasing to God,
according to his word in that behalf, and not to be fashioned or conformed
unto this world, does thereby plainly teach yt no man can be such a sacrifice
to God, and yet be fashioned and conformed to this world: whosoever is
fashioned and conformed unto this world, plainly bewrays himself never as
yet so to have sacrificed himself unto God, as here the Apostle has required
What consormitie to the world is.
.

But what is it to be conformed to the world? To be conformed to the world, is
to be conformed to the wicked in the world. But who are such wicked, as to whom
the children of God and they that have devoted and consecrated themselves to
God, must not conform themselves? I answer, that these wicked ones are the
timeseruers of the world, that is, such as (before I said) do look to no other
rule of their lives, but only to the times, and therefore do conform and
always frame themselves to be such as the times, by reason of them that rule
in the times. That we may the better know who be such as to whom the children
of God are not to conform themselves, let us understand them to be of two
sorts.

Some without the visible Church. Some within the Church.
They without the visible Church, are also of two sorts:

for
Some are absolutely without the said Church. Some having the name of the
Church, yet are indeed without the true Church of Christ; as having a name
only to be that that they are not.
They that are absolutely without the visible Church, are all the heathen,
Turks and other infidels, yea, the Jews also yt yet believe not Christ to be
come in ye flesh.

They that have the name of the Church, and yet are not of the true Church, are
all Popish Churches, and all those that live in them, wholly subject unto them.
The same is to be said of all other heretics, Arians, Manicheans, Macedonians,
Anabaptists, and other the like, having assemblies by themselves.

By them that live within the Church, I mean those that are within any of the
reformed Churches, in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, Denmark,
the Palatinate, the Low countries, or elsewhere. Such are all Papists, both
Recusants and also Church-Papists, that worship the Lord and yet serve their
graven images, and worship 2. Kin. 17. 41.
the idols of other Papists, their breaden god, their crucifixes, their Saints,
etc. All which do (as it were) swear by the Lord and by Malcham, that is, by
their abominable Zeph. 1. 5.
Mass, by their Saint Marie, Saint John, etc.

Such also are all Anabaptists, and other the like, that though they hold an
outward communion with our Churches, yet secretly do hold their heresies and
other dangerous errors, and will not be reclaimed from them.

Such also are all other wicked and profane persons, in their lives showing
themselves to be such, and profess Tit 1. 16.
that they know God, and yet by their works deny him, being abominable, and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, and yet still living in the
bosom of the Church, being within the Church, but not of the Church; as John
speaks of them that had forsaken the communion of Saints, They went out from
us, but they were not of us. As 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
the Church it self is in the world, but not of the world: so there are many
within the Church, that are not of the Church. Multae sunt foris ones, multi
sunt intus ^upi* There are many sheep without the Church (viz. elect, not
called,) many wolves within.

Neither do I mean the wicked only that now are, but them also that in former
times have bin: yea, not only other, but also our selves before our
regeneration; and when we were as such other have bin and yet are, Walking
Ephesians. 2. 2. ver. 3.
according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power in
the air: and having had our conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling
the desires of the flesh, etc. To

To none of all these must we conform our selves, welking 1. Pet. 4. 3.
as they have done or do, or as our selves did before our calling. For it is
sufficient that in the time past of our life we have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, etc. As this is forbidden here, so also is it elsewhere. To the
Ephesians thus the Apostle writes with great authority, This I say therefore
Ephesians. 4. 17.
and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles
walk, in the vanity of their mind, etc. The like he does in the next Chapter,
though somewhat more obscurely; for having mentioned diverse particular sins,
and amplified the same by the fearful state of all such as commit them,
showing that they have no inheritance in the kingdom Ephesians. 5. 3. etc.
of Christ and of God, and therefore admonished them to beware that no man by
any flattering words did deceive them, and draw them to the said sins,
because that for them the wr^th of God comes upon the children of
disobedience; he concludes with this exhortation, Be not therefore partaker
with them. What is it therefore to be partaker with them, but to walk in the
same ways, to conform unto them. Peter also (as even now I showed) exhorts
all for whom Christ suffered, no longer to live the rest of their 1. Pet. 4. 2.
3.
time in the flesh (that is, whiles they lived in this world) as before time
they had done, and as the Gentiles not called yet did. James also plainly
condemns this conformity with the world, commending pure religion to be the
keeping Iam. 1. 2. 17.
of our selves unspotted from the world. What is it to keep our selves
unspotted from the world? but not to be conformable to the world. Yea, though
our fathers have bin men of the world, and co^formed themselves unto the world,
yet we are commanded not to be like our fathers, yea to forget Zach* 1. 4.
Psalm. 78. 8. and 45. 10. Ier. 11. 10.
our fathers house. In which respect diverse have always bin reproved that did
conform themselves to their fathers. Hitherto belong diverse particular
precepts for not doing this or that* as other have don. Our Savior dehorteth
from distrust of Gods providence, and distrustful seeking what to Mat. 6. 32.
Luke 12. 29 30.
eat, and what to drink, because all these things the nations of the world
did seek after; by y^ nations of y^ world, meaning y^ heathen, that then did or
now do sit in darkness and in the Luke 1. 79.
shadow of death. Does not our Savior condemn the saluting of our brethren
only (and not others as well) by the Mat. 5. 47. Mat. 6. 7.
example of the Publicans doing the like? So he forbids vain repetitions in
prayer, from the example of the heathen doing the like? the which
notwithstanding the Papists still practice, repeating so many Pater nosters, so
many Aue Mary's, so many Cr^do^s as they have beads, thinking that by their
said repetitions so mumbled to themselves they merit to be heard, though
directly contrary to the Cor. 14. 15. etc.
Apostles doctrine, they understand never a word what they say. Does not the
Apostle also forbid the Corinthians to be idolaters, to be fornicators, to be
tempters of 1. Cor. 10. 6. etc.
Christ, to be murmurers, to be lusters after evil, because many of the old
Israelites in former times had bin such? Yea, had he not also before dehorted
them from some of 1. Cor. 6. 11.
the former sins, and from some other, because themselves had bin such?

Long before also all these things, the Lord had charged the Israelites, when
the Lord should seat them in the places of the heathen, whom he should cast
out before them, to take heed to themselves that they were not snared by Deuteronomy.
12. 29. 30 31.
following them, and that they should not enquire after their gods, saying* How
did these nations s^rue their gods, even so will we do likewise? Then he
adds, Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God* etc. And hereby in them* the
Lord teaches us in these days, that we must not only not conform our s^lues
to idolaters (Papists or other) in the matter it self of their idola^rie, but
also not in the manner of the worship of God himself, worshipping him in that
sort that idolaters do their gods.

Besides all the former commandments against our conformity Reasons against
conformity to the world.
to the world, either generally in all things, or particularly in any
particulars, there are also other reasons to move us not so to do. Here first
of al let us remember y^ Peter makes this the end of Christ's sufferings for
us, (...). ^^t. 4. 2. 3.
namely, that we might not so live, so walk, either as the Gentiles do, or as
we our selves have before done according to other Gentiles.

Secondly, they that do such works as the world does, and that walk according
to the world, they walk also according to the Prince of power in the air, the
spirit it that Ephesians. 2. 2.
works in the children of disobedience. This is no other then the devil
himself, whose children our Savior charge the Jews to have bin, because
they did his deeds, and would Ioh 8. 41. 44. 1* Ioh. 3. 8.
not be reclaimed from doing his lusts, that is, the works that he commanded
and incited them unto. For he that commits sin, is the servant of the devil.

Thirdly, does not the Apostle say, What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16.
light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has he that believes, with an infidel? And what agreement has the temple of
God with idols? For ye are the temple of the living God* etc.

Fourthly, No man can serve two masters; therefore also no man can be
conformable to the world, that has dedicated himself to God. To whom one is
servant, to him he must be conformable. This reason is the more weighty,
because God and the world are not only two, but also contrary one to another.
For the wisdom of the flesh is enmity Romans 8. 7.
against God: and therefore our Savior tells Peter, Mat. 16. 23.
that he sauoured not the things that were of God, but the things that were of
men: so opposing men to God; and by men meaning the world, and the wicked in
the world, as when it is said, The sons of God saw the daughters of men Genesis 6.
2.
that they were fair. Such as the wisdom of the world is, such are the
affections of the world to God* For the friend ship (or love) of the world is
the enmity of God: and whosoever Iam. 4. 4.
will be a friend of the world, is an enemy of God. Such as the love of the
world unto God is, such are all other affections of the world. For love is (as
it were) the queen of all other affections, commanding them all, and
ouercoming them all, though sometimes distempered.

Fifthly, the world hates not only Christ jesus himself, but in the hatred of
him, hates also all his members; and therefore it hates his members because
they are his members. Ioh. 15. 18. 19.
Shall therefore any of Christ's members be conformable to them that hate them?

Sixthly, such mutabilitie of affections, cannot but argue great mutabilitie of
mind, and such as (upon tentation thereunto) will as well be carried about with
diverse doctrines Ephesians. 4. 14. Heb. 13. 9.
contrary to the word in that behalf.

Seventhly, all the notorious wicked without and within Mat. 7. 6. and 15. 26.
the Church, so remaining, and refractarie, are called swine and dogs. Shall
they that are holy, conform themselves to swine and dogs? So to conform, is
more then to give that which is holy unto dogs, or to cast our pearls before
swine.

Eighthly, all that have presented themselves a sacrifice to God, are Kings and
Priests unto God, as has bin before showed. Alas, is it meet that such should
abase themselves to the conformity of the world. These reasons shall suffice
to dissuade us from being conformable to the world.

CHAP. XII.
More largely and more particularly entreating of conformity unto the world.

TOuching the conformity unto the world here forbidden, all that have
presented themselves a sacrifice Comformitie to the world two ^ould.
to God, or that so would do, let us further consider that this conformity is
twofold:

first, spiritual. secondly, bodily.
By sprituall conformity, I mean conformity in apparent sins, both of mind
and affections, and also of the outward man; and that in matters both of the
first, and also of the second Table.

By conformity in apparent sins of the mind and affections, I understand
all consent with the world in any heresies or other errors, either of Popery,
or of any other such doctrine, only because men of the world, our parents or
other friends have bin of such mind, and have lived and died in such heresies
and errors.

The same I say of being conformable to the world, Papists or other, in the
outward transgression of any of the commandments, that concern the worship of
God, or duties to men. As to pray to Saints, to worship images, crucifixes and
other, to adore the bread and wine in the Supper of the Lord, to observe days,
to refrain from meats allowed by God, superstitiously thinking them
unlawful; to go on pilgrimage to the images or reliks of this or that supposed
Saint, and the like. So also to make vows of perpetual virginity, and to
think our selves in conscience obliged to ye keeping of such vows, though in
the mean time such votaries either burn in lusts, or have their whores, and
think it better so to have, then to marry; directly contrary to the Apostles
commandment, that for the avoiding of fornication, every man should have his
own 1. Cor 7. 2.
wife: as also contrary to that elsewhere said of marriage, to Heb. 13. 4.
be honorable amongst all men, without exception of any, fit for marriage, and
needing marriage. The like is to be said of the vow of wilful poverty, and
men's betaking themselves to Monasteries, by the witchcraft and enchantment of
Popery, for the enriching of their superstitious and idolatrous houses, falsely
called Houses of Religion.

The same is to be said of conformity to the Popes bulls for discharge of
subjects from their allegiance to Princes, God having commanded every soul of
the Clergy, as they speak, yea of the Pope himself (if he have a soul) to
be subject to the higher powers, as well as the souls of others: Romans 13. 1.
1. Pet. 2. 13.
yea, the holy Ghost having commanded prayers, supplications, intercessions and
thanksgiving to be made as for 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2.
all other sorts of men, so especially for Kings and all in authority, yea
even then when there were no Christian Kings, but all were heathen and
infidels. To think therefore or to practice otherwise upon the Popes
discharge, is to be conformable to the world, and not unto God and to his word.

So is it also to marry within the degrees of kindred forbidden by the Lord;
and to do any thing else contrary to any commandment of God, only upon the
Popes dispensation. The like is to be said of doing any thing else forbidden by
God, either by the persuasions, or by the example of the world, or any men of
the world, either in Act. 4. 19. and. 3 29. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. Exodus 23. 2. Mat. 7.
13.
respect of authority, or in respect of kindred and affinity and friendship,
or in respect of multitude.

The use of all this, is to admonish us to take heed of all common sins of
the time, swearing, blaspheming, drinking and drunkenness, whoring, and all
other carnal wantonness; prosaning of the Lords days by buying, selling,
riding, etc. gaming, rioting, contempt of the word and Sacraments, as likewise
of magistrates or ministers, or parents or masters, etc. For the commonnesse of
these things does not any whit excuse or lessen them, or give us the more
liberty to commit them; but it does the more aggrauate them: and the more do
conform unto other in them, the more ought all that desire to sacrifice
themselves to God, to beware of all conformity with them.

Especially, according to some thing before said, let us beware of worshipping
our only true God in the false and adulterous manner that the Papists the
greatest part of the world in Europe do worship him, or as they worship their
idols. For certainly the gods of those nations that the Lord did cast out
before the Israelites, of the manner of whose worship the Lord charged them to
beware in worshipping of him: the gods (I say) of those nations were never more
abominable in Gods eyes, then the idols of the Papists are; yea, not so
abominable: For never was there so much spoken of any amongst those heathen, as
is spoken against the new Babylon, Rome: there never was any called an
Anti-god, as now the Pope is called Antichrist: There never was any styled
with the name of The man of 2. These. 2. 3. 4.
sin and child of perdition, as the Pope now is. There was never any said so to
oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped,
as the Pope is said to do. There was never any that challenged to himself all
power in heaven and in earth, to forgive sins, etc. as the Pope does. There
was never any that claimed power to set up and to depose Kings at his pleasure,
as the Pope does. The head therefore of the Papists being so wicked, and so
showing himself to be of the world, can the Papists themselves, that are his
devoted slaves and bondmen, be better? How then may we have any conformity
with them, especially in the worship of God? Oh let us not forget how great the
sin of Ahaz was, in sending a pattern of an Altar from Damascus, and
commanding Vriah the Priest 2. Kin. 16. 20.
to make another at Jerusalem conformable thereunto. It is therefore no small
matter to dally with God, or to fail in the least point of the manner only of
his worship. For though our selves may be deceived, not only by other, but
also by our own hearts, being deceitful out of measure: Ier. 17. 9. Gal. 6. 7.
and though we may also deceive other, yet God never is deceived or mocked. It
is not good (they say) to play with Isay. 6. 3. Reu. 4. 8. 1. Sam. 2. 2.
Saints; much less with him that is holy, holy, holy, and with whom in
holiness none is to be compared.

We may yet extend this conformity to the world a little further, and more
particularly to the Ministers of the word, viz. for their not conforming
themselves in preaching of the word, either to the old Popish Schoolmen and
Friars, or to the Jesuits and Popish Priests of these times, even in their
such manner of preaching, by affecting much Latin, and many frivolous
distinctio^s, needless questions, abstruse and quaint points, whereby the
Scripture is not plainly and perspicuously opened, neither fitly applied, but
rather obscured, without any edifying of the hearers: yea, whereby also some
points of Popery are secretly couched, to make way for other afterward. This I
do the rather add, because the practice of some in this kind of preaching
amongst us, is much to be lamented: yea, the more, because it is applauded by
the common people, though understanding almost nothing that they hear. Alas,
did the ancient Levites in the time of Nehemiah so preach, of whom it is said,
that they read in the book of the Neh. 8. 8.
law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people to understand
the reading? Is this according to Paul's charge to Timothy, for rightly dividing
the word of truth? Is such 2. Tim. 2. 15.
preaching according to Paul's preaching, that although he knew more tongues
then all other, and had revelations in great 1. Cor. 14. 18. 2. Cor. 12. 7.
abundance, yet for all that made no ostentation of any such learning, neither
declared the testimony of God with 1. Cor. 2. 1. 13.
excellency of speech, or in the words which man's wisdom did teach, but
which the holy Ghost taught, comparing spiritual things with spiritual? Yea,
who also said, that not withstanding his variety of tongues, he had rather
speak (but) five 1. Cor. 14. 19.
words with his understanding, that he might teach other also, then ten
thousand words in an unknown tongue? Yea, is this kind of preaching (whereof
now I speak) according to the preaching of the most learned and reverend
Preachers and Fathers in our Church, who do not only labor themselves to
preach plainly and to the edificatio^ of their hearers, but also earnestly
exhort all other to preach in like manner? Oh therefore that all other Ministers
would conform themselves in their preaching to these examples, and leave all
conformity herein with the old rustie Schoolmen, Friars, and other Papists.

Before I proceed any further, I might here observe the passive voice,
especially for spiritual conformity, that is, for conformity in apparent and
known sins. For the Apostle says not, and conform not your selves, but he
says, and be not conformed, by any other, either by their examples, or by
their counsels, allurements and inticements whatsoever. This I might the rather
observe, because some excuse their conformity to the world, even in the
premises, by the provocation of other to the said conformity. But endeavoring
brevity, I will content my self with the bare naming of this observation.

To come now to bodily conformity, thereby I mean Bodily conformity.
not such conformity as is altogether and only bodily, nothing spiritual;
but that which is especially of the body, and in such things as pertain to
the body: which also are by the most accounted bodily, and not at all
spiritual; and therefore to be no sin at all in such things to conform to
the world. But such dreamers, and they that do so think, have forgotten the
like plea of some for other matters in the Apostles time, and his answer
thereunto, All things are lawful to me, but all things are not expedient: 1.
Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23. 1. Cor. 10. 31.
all things are lawful, but all things edify not: neither do all things make
to the glory of God, at the which notwithstanding all Christians must aim,
even in eating and drinking, and in whatsoever else they do. Such pleaders also
for such conformity of body, have forgotten that which elswere the Apostle
speaks, for the thinking upon. and therefore for practice accordingly of
whatsoever Phil. 4. 8.
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, as well as of
whatsoever are simply true, honest, just, and pure. And although the kingdom
of God do not consist in meats and Romans 14. 17.
drinks, viz. only or principally, yet even in such things we are to have
respect to the kingdom of God. But what are these things now to be touched
concerning bodily conformity? Even the general conformity of all sorts, of
all ages, of men and women, as well professors of the word as of other, to the
world, and to them that are altogether of the world, mere worldlings, and a
very little better then Atheists. Wherein is this conformity? First of all in
apparel, not so much touching the matter, the same being oftentimes above men's
callings and abilities, that therein they may brave it out with the best; but
also and especially in the fashion and color, and manner of making the same.
For the Lord has commanded not some These. 5. 5. 8. Ehes. 5. 8.
but all that are of the day (that is, children of the light) to be sober, with
sobriety joining the breastplate of faith, and love, and hope of salvation:
thereby showing that where there is true faith, and love, and hope, there is
and will be sobriety also; and the less sobriety, bewrays less faith,
love and hope. So says Peter, Girding up the loins of your mind, be sober,
and hope to the end, etc. No sobriety therefore, 1. Pet. 1. 13.
no hope to the end. And again, Be sober and watch, for the devil your
adversary goes about like a roaring Lion 1. Pet. 5. 8.
seeking whom to devour. They therefore that are not sober, expose and lay
open themselves to the devil. I could allege many other Scriptures in
commendation of sobriety. Yea but, will some man say, such Scriptures are
only for sobriety of the mind, and confining of the thoughts, and moderation
of the affections, the which are (as it were) the loins of our minds. What
then? The inward man commands the outward. Where there is the inward
sobriety, there cannot but be the outward. The outward may be where there is
not the inward: but it is impossible for the inward to be without the outward,
where there is knowledge of the things that belong to the outward sobriety.

The sharp reprehension also of the daughters of Zion, Isay. 3. 16. etc.
for their immodestie in apparel, and lightness in their gesture, going
minsingly, and with their necks stretched out, (oh that our Ladies and other
fine Dames would wisely consider that place, and make use thereof accordingly,)
this reprehension (I say of those daughters of Zion) does condemn the like in
all, and commend the contrary to all. The Lord also by another Prophet does
very heavily threaten to punish the Princes, and the Kings children, and Zeph.
1. 8.
all such (without exception of any) as are clothed with strange apparel. What
shall I say of the Apostolical precepts for women to adorn themselves with
shamefastness and sobriety, etc? Do not these Scriptures belong to these
times, as well as other Scriptures both commandments and promises? Deny the
one, and deny the other; take away the one, and take away the other. So in the
end, we that have received most mercies, shall be most lawless. No Scriptures
shall belong unto us. May any look for salvation, without the Scriptures,
which only are able to make 2. Tim. 3. 15.
us wise unto salvation? Do not such Scriptures also belong to men as well as
women? Doubtless they do; except men will say, that God will have women only
to be saved, and not men. Women are especially named, because y^ sex most
commonly is given most to pride and new fashions. Yet that place of Zephaniah
is of men, Princes, and Kings sons, yea of all such generally as are clothed
with strange apparel, or with the apparel of strangers. If yet any will harp
upon the former string, of those Scriptures of the old Testament to be now out
of date, as having belonged only to the Israelites; let him remember, that
whatsoever things are aforetime written, are written as well Romans 15. 4.
for our learning (or instruction) as for the learning and instruction of the
Israelites: yea rather more for us, then for 1. Pet. 1. 12.
them. And has the Lord dealt more bountifully with us then with them, and
does he not require more duty of us then of them? Doublesse the more that God
has honored Heb. 2, 1.
us, by speaking immediately unto us by his Son in our own nature, the more
earnest heed we ought to give to those things which we have heard from that his
Son, etc. Yet alas in these times, and in this matter of fashioning to the
world, all men live as if there were no word of God to the contrary: yea, as
though not only the Pope (that dispenses with greater matters) but God
himself had given dispensation for all to live as they list, and to do what
they list. We may now well cry out, O the fashions, the fashions of these
times. He that in apparel will see the fashions of all countries, need not to
travel out of our own land: he may see all, and more then all within the
land. Every other nation do better content themselves with their own fashions,
then we here in England. Yea, we here in England, by our multiplicitie of
fashions, do read a lecture of doing the like to all other nations.

This horse disease of the fashions, has hatched another of the yellowes, as
dangerous, as foul, as uncomely as the former, a species and a daughter of the
former; and from the foundations of the world (for ought appears by any
histories) never heard of till now very lately, and in our land, as if the same
were the common school of all vanity; except only in Ireland, where they
saffron all their wearing linen (as some report) for the avoiding of that
vermin, that do most abound in y^ country.

Thrift indeed is pleaded for this yellowing of linen, as the which being so
yellowed, needs not so much washing. But why do they not so yellow also their
other wearing linen, and bed-linnen and table-linnen? They also that herein do
most plead thrift, in all other things are least thriftie; yea, most
prodigal, most riotous.

With the premises may be remembered the diverse forms otherwise of apparel,
sometime long waists, sometimes short waists; the aprons of women and the
girdles of men being almost at their chins. So also the variety of men's
breeches, sometimes like great cloak-bags, sometimes below like water-tankers
at the top. So also of hats, sometimes high crowned, sometimes low crowned;
sometimes narrow brimmed, sometimes broad brimmed, so bangling about the ears
of men, and hiding their faces, that they cannot easily be discerned: and
therefore the more resembling such couerings of the face as the Apostle forbad
1. Cor. 11. 4. 4. etc.
the men of Corinth in their Ecclesiastical meetings and religious exercises.
Notwithstanding such hats seem more tolerable for women, as being more
agreeable to such couerings as the Apostle commends to the women of Corinth,
in the place before alleged.

The like may be said of the variety of girdles, points, garters, boots,
spurs, shoes, and shoo-strings; though now boots and spurs have go^ the
upper hand of shoos and shoo-strings, and have almost iustled them like Jack
of Lent clean out of doors.

Moreover, the former diseases of fashions generally, and of the yellowes
particularly, go not alone, but are likewise accompanied with a third, at least
in men, namely, the staggers. For alas, how do men in these days, of all sorts
almost, stagger and reele in all places. Husbandmen, servants men and boys*
come not to any market almost, but they go home staggering and reeling. But
this belonging to the spiritual conformity to the world before spoken of, it
shall be sufficient to have interposed thus much thereof in this place: the
rather have I named this now, (though somewhat disorderly) because I had before
but named the root of this disease. The premises are the more worthy of
reproof, because as the spider takes hold with her Pro. 30. 28.
hands, and is in Kings palaces: so the greatest of these evils have gotten
footing in the houses of the greatest professors, 2. Cor. 8. 18.
and of such as have bin of praise in the Gospel, and have infected not only
their servants, but also their children, yea their wives, yea themselves, at
least they being whist and winking at them in their servants, children and
wives, not saying unto them, Why do ye so? and so being 1. Kings 1. 6.
accessorie unto them. O lamentable, O woeful. For, is this inhibition of
conformity to the world, only to husbands themselves, and not also to wives?
to parents, and not also to children? to masters, and not also to servants?
Doubtless it is to the one as well as to the other. The husband Genesis 2. 24.
Mat. 195. Psalm. 128. 3.
and wife are one flesh. Children are branches of their parents. Servants are
hands to their masters. All make an household. Is not Abraham commended that he
would Genesis 18. 19.
teach his children and household the way of the Lord* etc. The commendation of
Abraham is a commandment for all that will be children to Abraham; and a
reprehension of all that do not that, for which Abraham is commended. Oh let
such remember the sharp reprehension of Eli by 1. Sam. 2. 31. etc* and. 3. 17.
the Lord, for his being no sharper to his children: as also the fearful
commination against his house in* that behalf, 1. Kings. 2. 17.
with the event according.

Here let us not omit amongst the conformities of these times to the world
women's painting their faces and breasts, and laying open their said breasts
most immodestly, almost to their wastes, yea, their picturing likewise upon
their breasts cherries and birds, yea, the patching of them also, and of their
faces, here a patch and there a patch. Oh abominable, oh monstrous; the
daughters of Zion before mentioned and wicked Iesabel her self never came to
this height.

To the former may be added their wearing of strange hair, I mean the hair
of other women, either bought of some that are poor, and for money glad to cut
it off to serve the foolish desires of other, or taken from the heads of some
before dead, the which strange hair* likewise sometimes they dye, not
according to the color of their own hair, but white, or of some other
color, according to the fashion of most, that so all in color of hair may be
like one to another, how unlike soever in complexion; and all may wear one
liuerie, as serving all one mistress. The like may be said of their pendent
lock about their cheeks most indecently, howsoever they think themselves
adorned thereby, and directly contrary to the precepts of Paul and of Peter, I
suppose also that if they knew 1. Tim. 2. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 3.
their butter to be made by any wearing such locks, they would not very
willingly eat thereof, I could speak more homely hereof, but that I think
some to do it more of ignorance, and custom, and to satisfy the minds of some
other, either husbands, or parents, or mistresses, then of any pride they take
therein, either not knowing or not remembering what holy Scripture has said
against the same.

But let us diue a little deeper into these deep abominations of these times,
drawn from the deep pit of hell it self. How therefore have men and women
changed their s^xe, (as much as they can) one with another? Men wearing long
hair like unto women, and women cutting off their hai^e like unto boys, or
beardlesse young men, wearing nothing thereon but hats, putting them also off to
such as they meet. Oh monstrous, oh monstrous. Are not these things in men,
and also in women, dir^ctly contrary 1. Cor. 11. 14. 15
to the Apostles doctrine? Is not ye doing of either of both, to gain say to
the face of the Apostle? yea, of Christ himself that spoke in the Apostle, as
the soldiers did? Is 2. Cor. 13. 3. Mat. 27. 30. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
it not a crying of defiance to the holy Ghost, by whose inspiration the whole
holy Scripture was given, and by whose direction Paul wrote all that he did? Of
such long haired men the Scripture records one, and but one example, Absalom
the rebellious and traitorous son of David, 2. Sam* 14. 26.
whose fearful end and direful judgment all men know, namely* that by that
his long hair he was hanged chap. 18. 9.
in an oak. Oh that our like haired gentlemen would make use thereof, and
tremble. Would any of them have the like end? Though they would not, yet let
them fear a worse.

Of such short haired Gentlewomen, I find not one example, either in Scripture,
or elsewhere. And what shall I say of such poled rigs, ramps and Tomboyes? May
it not be thought that they do so, that sometimes by some not knowing them,
they may be taken for young men in long coats, the rather because some of them
also wear boots and spurs, and short swords by their sides, that being so
taken they may also be bed-fellowes to such young men, and so play the harlots
with them, as holy Pope Ioane did, who by that means being with child, fell
into her travel thereof as she was in the midst of her holy Procession with all
her carnal Cardinals, none of them all perceiving any such thing before.

We may ask the question that the Lord asks, and make that answer that the
Lord also makes: Were they Ier* 6. 15. and 8. 12.
ashamed when they committed this abomination? Nay, they were not at al
ashamed, neither could they blush. But if they be not past all grace, let them
take heed in time. Let them be ashamed and repent, and that speedily; otherwise
let them fear, yea, certainly look for y^ which in the former places
follows: Therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I
shall visit them, they shall be cast down, says the Lord. In this their fall
they shall be confounded, and ashamed with everlasting shame. In the mean
time, the less themselves are ashamed or touched with this their great sin,
let us all that fear God, mourn the more for them, praying also for them (as
Simon Magus entreated Peter and John to pray for him) that none of those things
Act. 8. 24.
they have deserved may come upon them. Yea, let us mourn and pray the more
for our selves and the whole Land, because such sins are crying sins in the
ears of the Lord of hoasts, for judgment against the whole Land.

With that before said, of men's wearing long hair like to women, we may join
the great variety of men's cutting their hair, whereby they greatly disguise
and deforme themselves, not only making themselves fools, but looking also
like to some unreasonable creatures: especially some fools of the country that
go to plough and cart, and in other places men of all trades, tailers,
shoomakers butchers, millers, tapsters, etc. are to be admired for their
strange locks and long hair, some all before, some all behind, some long round
about, their crowns being cut short like cootes or Popish Priests and Priers:
some having long locks at their ears, as if they had four ears, or were
prick-eared: some having a little long lock only before, hanging down to
their noses, like to the tail of a weasell; every man being made a fool at
the Barbers pleasure, or making a fool of the Barber, for money to make him
such a fool. For as it is said of the makers of idols and images, They that
make them, are like unto them: so may it be said of such fools and such
barbers. Psalm. 115. 8.


Most lamentable especially is it, that great fore-tops and long hair has
seized upon some in the ministry, that come up to the chair of Moses, more
like some Gentlemen's butlers, then Ministers of the word; and being in that
place, they conform themselves to another sort altogether of the world,
namely, Players, and so they speak like to actors upon a stage. Alas, how
lamentable is this? I do the rather speak a word hereof, hoping that my
labors may come to the hands of some that have power and hearts to reform it.
For it is a great scandal, and no small disgrace to that honorable calling.
The young years of some, may not be pleaded for excuse thereof: because though
they be young in years, yet by calling they are Elders, and ought to be of
grave carriage beseeming Elders. Tit. 2. 12.
All these things I have not spoken with any delight in so speaking, but in
grief of heart from love to God and men, to see such things, and not without
fear of Gods judgments against such things.

I might speak much more of this theme, but I cannot reckon all fashions of
the world, and of other unto them; and therefore no longer to linger in this
conformity to the world, which makes a deformity of all things; neither to
speak any more of Gods childrens fashioning themselves to this wicked world,
that puts all out of fashion; before notwithstanding I pass altogether from
The pronowne, this*
this argument, let us not altogether forget the pronoune this, as interlaced
by the Apostle, and prefixed before the word world, the better to enforce the
dehortation from all conformity thereunto. For it notes the shortness and
uncertainty of the world. In which respect it is elsewhere called this present
world; yea, with this adiunct evil also inserted Tit 2. 12. Gal. 1. 4.
before it. And this is not so much to be understood of the place of the world,
as of those persons in the world, which before I have showed to be meant by the
word world in this place. And therefore the Prophet speaking of such, says,
How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? Psalm. 73. 19.
Zophar also speaking of the wicked man in the singular number, says, Though
his excellency mount up to the Job. 20. 6. etc.
heavens, and his head reach to the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever like
his own dung: they which have seen him, shall say, Where is he? He shall fly
away as a dream, he shall be chased away as a vision of the right, etc. Have
we not also heard Job. 21. 13.
before, that Job says, that the wicked in a moment go down to the grave? Is
not this manifest by the whole world (eight Genesis 7. 17.
persons only excepted) taken all napping in the flood? Genesis 19. 24.
by Sodom and Gomorrha suddenly consumed by fire from heaven? So likewise by
the examples of Pharaoh and Exodus 14. 24.
his army, suddenly drowned in the sea? of Corah, Dathan Number. 16. 31.
and Abiram, suddenly swallowed up of the earth? of Nabal, suddenly becoming
like a stone, etc. of Absalom, subdenly 1. Sam. 25. 38. 2. Sam. 18. 9.
hanged by the hair of the head in an oak, and all his army as suddenly
vanquished: of the army of Senaherib, all almost slain in one night by one
Angel of the Isay. 37. 36. 38.
Lord, and himself likewise murdered by his own son suddenly, as he was
worshipping in the temple of Nisroch his god: of Haman, on the sudden hanged on
the tree Ester. 7. 9. 10.
which he had prepared for Modecai: of Belshazzar, suddenly losing both life
and kingdom: and finally (to omit Dan. 5. 30.
many other) of Herod in a moment smitten by an Angel of the Lord, and eaten
up of worms? Act. 12. 23.


The riches of the world are uncertain, their honors uncertain, their
friendship uncertain, their health uncertain, their lives uncertain, not
only as other men's, but also much more: who therefore that is wise would
conform unto them?

Besides the former uncertainty in every respect of the men of the world, who
sees not that men fashioning themselves to the world, and being at greater
expenses by the daily change of such fashions, then they need, to disable
themselves from performing many duties of love unto other, and from leaving so
much to their own children (though many) as their parents left to themselves
alone? yea, sometimes by such conformity and often change of fashions, as new
fashions are invented, they that were (at the first) full, are brought to such
penury, that they are glad to hire themselves out for bread: or that which is
worse, 1. Sam. 2. 5.
they hide themselves, and play least in sight: yea, that is worse of all,
either they beg for bread, or else being taken and committed to prison, they
die in great misery: yea also do greatly damnifie other, by their great
bravery, making show of great wealth, and running into greater debt then they
are able to pay, do also beggar other as well as themselves. Do not some also
fall to theeuerie and robbery, for maintenance of their new fashions and
bravery?

Last of all, for our further admonition to be the more wary of all
conformity to the world, it is worthy our remembrance and good considerations,
that the Israelites 1. Sam. 8. 5. 6.
desired a King, only to be in the fashion of other nations: so they said, Make
us a King to judge us, like all nations. This thing did not a little displease
Samuel, but it di^pl^ased the Lord much more. For though the Lord bade Samuel
praying in his grief for direction therein, to hearken ver. 7.
unto the people in all that they said unto him: yet mark the Lords reason why
he would have Samuel so to hearken unto the people, For (says the Lord) they
have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign
over them. May not such as are so ready to conform to the world, as the
Israelites were desirous of a King, to be like to other nations, fear lest the
Lord say of them, that they have rejected him, in that they have rejected his
word, and not submitted themselves to his word against such conformi^ie? This
reason against such conformity from the former example of the Israelites
desire of a King that they might be conformable to other nations, is the more
weighty, because the Lord by the Prophet Hos. 13. 10. 11. Number. 11. 33. Psalm.
106. 15. Qu.
says, that when they asked a King, he gave them a King in his anger, (as
before he had given them quails) and took him away in his wrath. But if he
gave them a King in his anger, how did he take him away in his wrath? The
taking away of a King given in Gods anger, may seem to be a testimony of his
favor rather then of his wrath; especially the Lord advancing David to his
throne, a man according to Gods own heart? I answer, that the Lord gave An.
Saul to be their King, in his anger against them; but he took him away in
his wrath against Saul himself for his sins, namely, for his transgression
of the Lords commandment 1. Sam. 15. 23. 1. Chron. 10. 13
touching the Amalekites, and for his asking counsel of one that had a
familiar spirit. How we may avoid conformity to the world.


That we may the better take heed of such fashioning our selves* or being
fashioned to the world, let us all, especially such as have bin borne of
Christian parents, and have had Christian education, take heed of all familiar
society with the world. For there is no means more effectual to conform men
to the world, then company and familiarity with the world. Therefore the Lord
both often and earnestly charged the Israelites to beware of all Exodus 23. 32.
and 34. 12. Deuteronomy. 7. 2. etc.
covenants with the heathen nations, lest they should learn their fashions,
and be infected with their sins, both in the worship of God, and also in
other things, So does Solomon his son, and all other. We know likewise what
Pro. 1. 10. 4. 14. 2. Chron. 20 37
the Lord said to Iehosaphat for his society with Ahaziah King of Israel; how
also he commanded Amaziah King of Judah to dismiss the hundred thousand
Israelites whom he had hired to help him against his enemies, though to the
loss of an hundred talents of silver paid before, and to the great spoil that
they so dismissed did make as they 2. Chron. 27. 7. etc.
returned. He also that will dwell in Gods tabernacle, must* contemn avile
person. David also himself often protests Psalm. 15. 4. Psalm. 26. 4. 31. 6.
139. 21. Psalm. 119. 15.
his hatred of the wicked, and bids the evil doers to auant, because he was
resolved to keep Gods commandments; thereby noting that he could not keep
Gods commandments, if he should suffer the wicked to be his companions. A
little leaven does the more easily sour the whole 1. Cor. 5. 6. 1. Cor. 15 33.
lump: and evil communications the more easily corrupt good manners, because
we are all by nature more apt and more inclinable to evil then to good; yea,
altogether to evil, not at all to good.

Another means against being fashioned to the world, is to turn away our eyes
from beholding of vanity, and the Psalm. 119. 37.
fashions of other. Dinah paid dear for her going but to see the fashions of
the Shechemitish daughters: and the Israelites Genesis 34. 1. 2.
being invited by the Moabites to the sacrifices of their gods, that is, to
their idolatrous feasts, became idolaters Number. 25. 2.
with them, and bowed down to their gods.

If of necessity we come in company where we cannot but behold such things;
and if by the like necessity we have some dealing with the men of the world,
and cannot avoid it; then by prayer to God let us carry such spiritual
preservatives about us, against all corruption thereby, as we use to carry
about us in times of common sickness, so to preserve us from all infection of
such sickness.

These things must be joined with those afterward now to be spoken of: in the
mean time let none flatter themselves. Sin, of small beginnings and small
means, quickly grows great; and being once so grown, it is hardly
repressed. Neither does one sin go alone, but is accompanied with another.
The world also is a subtle harlot, yea more subtle then that harlot whereof
Solomon admonishes his son and all men to beware, and to take heed of Pro*
6. 25. and 7. 5. etc.
her inticements and allurements unto her fashions. Thus much of this first
part of this second verse, in these words, And be not conformed to this world.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the next words, viz of the amplification thereof by an opposite thereto,
namely, transformitie: as also of the means whereby we may be transformed: and
of part of the second amplification of our said transforming, from the end
thereof that is, that we may prove what is the will of God.

THe next words are, But be ye transformed. Of these Be be transformed.
words I will speak very brefly. The first word, but, here and elsewhere
notes a plain opposition betwixt that before, and this now spoken; betwixt
that conformity to this world, and this transformitie: yea, such an
opposition, as that the one and the other cannot agree together, neither may be
joined together. The like opposition of impossible agreement together, is noted
by the same word in the original text elsewhere, as when our Savior says,
Mat. 16. 17. Ioh. 6. 27.
Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven. And, Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which
abides to everlasting life. By the same word also Paul notes such an
opposition betwixt fainting and being daily renewed in the inward man, 2. Co^.
4. 16.
as that thereby he teaches such as so faint and be discouraged by
afflictions, cannot all the while they so faint be renewed in their inward man.
The opposition also betwixt ver. 17.
looking on the things that are seen, and the things that are not seen, is
expressed by the same word that is here translated but. So when John says to
Gaius, Follow not that which 3. Ioh. 11.
is evil, but that which is good; he teaches, that both evil and good cannot
be followed. Many other the like places there are, needless to be here
alleged. By this word therefore but, the Apostle in this place teaches, us,
that 2. Kin. 17. 33. 41
we can be no more conformed to the world and thus transformed, then we can
truly fear God, and yet serve other gods; or then we may swear by the Lord
and by Malcham; Zap. 1. 5.
or to be short, then we can follow both good and evil.

Secondly, this word but, in sinuateth something to be understood after the
word be transformed, whereunto we must be transformed, as well as before the
Apostle had showed whereunto we must not be conformed, viz. to the world. As
therefore conforming and transforming are opposed one to another; so, what is
to be opposed to the world, but God himself? For we have before heard, that
the amity of the world, and the wisdom of the world, are opposed to the love
of God, and to the wisdom of God. By these things therefore it is evident,
that when the Apostle exhorts us to be transformed, he means, we should be
transformed to God, in being holy as he is holy, as before we heard. It is a
turning, but from the world unto God, as God himself says, If thou return,
return unto me. And Iam 4. 1. A and. 16. 18. Ephesians. 22. 2. Cor. 4. 4.
this all one with turning from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
(the Prince and god of this world) unto God. This turning must be of our whole
man, as the former sacrificing of our selves. It must be in truth, and not in
show, as the Apostle says, that Satan transformeth himself into 2. Cor. 11.
13. 14
an Angel of light. For the word there used, is not that that is here in the
second place, but that that is before used, and translated be not conformed to
this world, whereby the distinction before noted out of Chrysostom, and his
difference betwixt the two original words here translated conformed and
transformed, seems to be the more authentical, because as Satan's
transforming himself into an Angel of light, is not real and permanent, but
superficial, and therefore suddenly vanishes, he quickly appearing in his
colors again: so all conformity to the world is superficial, and does
quickly vanish, like a morning mist or dew, or rainbow in a cloud. But
transformitie and turning to God, is that that continues and abides for ever.
Once wrought, it is done for ever. For as it is unto God, so it is of God, who
is not like to that unwise man that takes in hand the building of a tower,
never counting before Luke 14. 28.
what it will cost him, and is therefore forced to leave before he have
finished it, as not being able to go through with it; but God is wise, and able
to go through stitch with whatsoever he begins: for who can hinder him?
Notwithstanding because no man is here so transformed and turned to God, but
that still there remains in them some corruptions, and some dregs, and as it
were stumps of the old man, in respect whereof he may still cry out as Paul
himself did, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me Romans 7. 24.
from this body of death? Therefore the Apostle here exhorts these worthy
Romans to transform themselves, that is, more and more to turn unto God, as
before he had exhorted them to present themselves a sacrifice to God, living,
etc. though they had bin such a sacrifice long before. Now both our first, and
our second, and our daily turning unto God, is the work only of God,
according Psalm. 80. 7. 19.
to the Prophets prayer, Turn us again, O Lord God of hoasts, etc. and that
because our said first turning is as great a work as the first creation of the
world; and our second and daily turning, is as great a work as Gods daily
government of the world: yet for all that, we have all need of daily
exhortations so to turn, as the means whereby God works our said turning,
and provoke us more and more so to turn.

The word here used, is also of the passive voice, to teach us as much as
before I said, that it is not our work so to turn and to transform our
selves, but the Lords.

It is also that word that is used for Christ's transfiguration Mat 17. 2. Mark.
9. 2.
in the Mount: yet it does not cross any thing that before I have said. For
though that transfiguration or transformation were but for a time, for the
better strengthening and comforting of those Disciples that he had there with
him: yet it was in truth, and real, as a president of that glory he should
have when he should ascend into Heb. 1. 3. 8. 1.
heaven, and the which now he has in the heavens, at the right hand of
Majesty. It was not like to that transformation that before we spoke of, of
Satan into an Angel of 2. Cor. 11. 13:
light; but it was that very true transformation which he had in his ascension,
and yet has, and ever shall have. Yea, this very word also is used of us by
the Apostle, when he says, We all as with an open face beholding as in a
glass the 2. Cor. 3. 18.
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory,
etc. For here also he means a real and a true change, not a change only in
show. The sum of this is, that it is not enough for us not to be conformed
unto the world, but we must be transformed and made like unto God. This shall
suffice to have spoken of these words, But be transformed.

The next word in our text, is concerning the inward By the renewing of your
mind.
means of our transforming unto God; this is said to be by the renewing of our
minds. Or these words may be read thus, in the renewing of the mind: as noting
ye subject wherein this transformation is begun: but I rather read it as
before, for the means of our transforming. So here are two things: renewing;
and the subject of renewing, viz. the mind. Neither is the pronoune your,
altogether to be neglected, but to be observed, as teaching, that although
these Romans were already excellent Christians, (it were well if our Romanists
were such) yet even they need more renewing, and daily renewing of their
minds; as also that men must not post over the instruction of men to other,
but apply them to themselves. But the chief matter here, is the renewing of
the mind. Now although these two words intimate two things (as I said,) first
a renewing; secondly, of the mind: yet I will not speak severally, but jointly
of them both. The former expresses a renewing; the other signifies how and in
what manner, or rather in what part we must be renewed. If we will not be
conformed to the world, but desire to be transformed and turned unto God, we
must be first renewed. Without renewing, all our not conforming to the world,
and transforming and fashioning our selves unto God, is nothing worth. But this
renewing must be of our mind. If our minds be not renewed, all other things are
nothing; even all the renewing of our outward man: yea, it is not possible
either for our outward man to be renewed, or being renewed, long to hold and
continue, except the mind be renewed. If the mind be renewed, the whole man
will be renewed. The Apostle has the like words, though not the same,
elsewhere, Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind. Ephesians. 4. 23.
The word renewing coming from a verb compounded with a preposition prefixed,
in composition signifying a reiteration of a thing before done; here signifies
the restoring of the mind to that state wherein it was before the fall of Adam.

By the mind, is to be understood the principallest part or power of our soul,
the chief seat of our reason, understanding and thoughts; the queen and
commander of all our affections, and of the will it self. This being changed,
the whole heart or soul will be changed. This being renewed and restored to
the first perfection thereof in Adam in his first creation, the whole heart and
soul will be renewed and restored, which is done by the word. The Psalm. 19. 7.
whole heart being renewed and restored, touching knowledge, thoughts and
affections, and will also it self, the whole outward man, touching all the
behavior thereof, will also be renewed and restored. Yet all this renewing 1.
Cor. 13. 9. 4. etc.
is but in part in this life, but to be made perfect and complete in the life
to come. Notwithstanding being here once begun, this beginning is such an
assurance of that future perfection thereof, as that all the devils in hell by
all their subtlety and power shall never be able to hinder the said perfection.

This mention here of the renewing of our mind, teaches, the very mind and
best part of men to be decayed; for otherwise there needed no renewing.

It teaches also, that there remains some oldnesse in the minds of them
that are as well renewed as these Romans; in respect whereof they have need to
be every day more and more renewed.

But there may be a show of renewing of the outward man, without this renewing
of the mind and whole man: but that is but for a time, it cannot hold out, it
will vanish, 2. Kin. 10 31. 2. Tim. 4. 10. Ioh. 6. 66. 2. Tim. 1. 15. 1. Ioh.
2. 19.
as appears by the examples of Iehu, of Judas that betrayed our Savior, of
Demas, of diverse that forsook our Savior himself, and walked no more with
him; of many other that forsook Paul and John. All these and diverse other were
outwardly transformed, and in some sort renewed; and so many daily are and
shall be renewed to the end of ye world, but not by their renewing of the mind
here spoken of: yea, some have on the sudden some good thoughts and motions, as
it were flashes of the Spirit, which afterward by the watery corruption (as it
were) of the heart more abounding, as also by worldly cares or pleasures of Mat
13. 22. Luk 8. 14.
this lise are soon quenched. Yea sometimes good thoughts and good motions
wrought by the ministry of the word, a^e all dashed, especially in young men, by
the wicked counsel of some other young companions. All these are not
transformed by the renewing of the mind. But leaving this, let us now come to
the end whereby our former transforming to God by the renewing of our mind, is
further amplified. This is, to try or prove what is the good, acceptable To
prove the will of God.
and perfect will of God. Here are two things to be considered: first the
action, trying or proving: secondly, the thing to be tried or proved.

To try or prove here may signify, by experience to try or prove, and so to
find out a thing by through fi^ting and boulting of it, as that we do also
approve and allow it. Therefore Peter making this to be the end of manifold, 1.
Pet. 1. 6. 7.
light and short afflictions in this life, that the trial of our faith, much
more precious then of gold tried in the fire, might be found to our praise,
honor and glory, etc. uses both the nowne trial, and also the passive
particle being tried, that come from the same root from whence the active
verb here used also comes, and so does signify our faith approved, and the
gold also purged from all dross* by the fire, and so made manifest to be good
and current.

Howsoever we take this word, whether for proving or The necessity of
knowledge.
approving, it being written to an whole Church, teaches, that all ought to
have knowledge themselves to try. For, without knowledge, there can be no
trial. So elsewher 1. These. 5. 21. 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
we are willed to prove all things and to try the spirits. This we must do of
our own knowledge, not relying upon the Church only. Are not the men of Berea
commended Act 7. 10. Hab. 2. 4.
for proving the doctrine of Paul himself? And how did they prove it? By the
Church? No: but by the Scripture. As every man must live by his own faith, and
not by the faith of another: so for trial what is the will of God, he must
have knowledge of his own. The knowledge of another will do him little good.
Ignorant men that doubt of pearls or precious stones, or gold, may try the
same by the knowledge of other that are skillful and faithful: but in matters
of salvation, they must not trust only to the knowledge of other, how learned
or faithful soever. Therefore we are charged to join knowledge with faith and
2. P^t. 7. 2. Pet. 3. 18.
other virtues; and to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and Paul longed and prayed to be with the Philippians, that by his
presence their love might abound Phil. 1. 9. 10.
more and more in knowledge and in all judgment, whereby they might be able to
prove (using the word here used) things that differed, etc. Neither is there
any true faith without Ephesians. 4. 13. Tit. 1. 1.
knowledge. For knowledge is the genius in the definition of faith. The
Gentiles also are said to be alienated from the Ephesians. 4. 18.
life of God, through the ignorance that was in them. And how shall a man
examine himself before the Supper of the 1. Cor. 11. 28. 2. Cor. 13. 4.
Lord, and try whether he be in the faith or no, without knowledge? But having
written at large elsewhere of the necessity of knowledge, I will say no more
in this place for proof thereof, or for the confutation of the Popish and
dol^ish doctrine for Ignorance to be the mother of devotion, thereby to make
all fools and dolts, and so of their religion. In which respect, understanding
devotion to their religion, they speak most truly. For none of any knowledge
will have devotion unto it.

Oh that some would seriously consider of the former last place to the
Corinthians, for examining whether they are in the faith or no, for proof of
Christ speaking in the 2. Cor. 13. 3. 5.
Ministers of the Church of England, by faith wrought and increased in the
hearts of many through their ministry: then would there not be so much
question of their ministry, whether it be Christian or Antichristian, as there
has bin.

But to return. When the Apostle exhorts these Romans to be transformed to
God by the renewing of their mind, for the proving what is the will of God, he
thereby teaches us, that we cannot possibly prove what is the will The will of
God cannot be proved but by them that have renounced conformity to the world,
and transformed themselves to God, and be renewed in their mind. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
Ioh. 3. 3. Mat. 16. 17 Ephesians, 1. 17. 18 Mat. 16 23. Mark ^* 33.
of God, except we first have renounced conformity with the world, and be also
transformed to God and renewed in our mind. For all the wisdom of the flesh
is enmity to God. One enemy will never judge well of the will of another:
neither is the natural man capable of the things of the Spirit of God. Except
a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. He cannot understand
the mysteries thereof. Whatsoever any man knows of Christ unto salvation,
flesh and blood has not revealed the same unto him, but the Father of Christ
himself by his holy Spirit; the which is therefore called the Spirit of
wisdom and revelation, to enlighten our understanding, etc. Without this
Spirit, man sauoureth not the things that are of God, but the things that are
of men.

The use of this point therefore briefly is, as to refute the Popish doctrine
of man's natural capacity of the mysteries of God; so also to instruct us,
that if ever we will prove, and know, and approve this will of God, then we
leave off conformity to the world, and labor to be transformed to God, and
renewed in our mind. For what is the cause why many in these days, never so
much as try and examine what is the will of God, much less approve it to be
such as it is? Even this, that such have not renounced the conformity of the
world, neither turned to God, nor renewed in their mind. Whatsoever, and how
excellent soever this will of God be in it self, yet it is obscure unto them.
Though they hear this will of God never so perspicuously and plainly laid
forth and opened unto them, yet all things are done in parables unto them, that
seeing, they Mark. 4. 12.
may see, and not perceive, etc. Let such therefore look to themselves in
time, not only that contemn the word and neglect the hearing* thereof, but
that also are euer-learning, 2. Tim 3. 7.
and never be able to come to the knowledge thereof; lest they be of the number
of them of whom the Apostle says, If our 2. Cor. 4 3.
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish.

Moreover, to whom God has revealed this his will, let them give thanks to God
the Father, the Lord of heaven and earth, in this behalf, as our Savior did
for revealing Mat. 11. 25.
the same to the babes of his time, and as Paul did for the 1 Cor. 1 5.
enriching* of the Corinthians by Jesus Christ in every thing, in all
utterance, and in all knowledge.

But how shall we be so withdrawn from conformity to the world, and be
transformed unto God, and renewed in our minds? It is the work only of God;
yet he works it by means, especially by preaching his word, wherein this
will of God is contained: yea, he begins it, vpholdeth it, and increases it
by this means; as also by much reading and meditation of the said word; by
conference likewise with them that have more shaken off the world, and turned
unto God, and be more renewed in their minds then our selves. And all these
will be the more blessed unto us, the more often and earnestly by prayer we
crave the blessing of God upon them. I could plentifully prove these
particulars, but that I labor for brevity.

The next point to be considered, is the thing it self The will of God, and
what is meant hereby
to be proved, This is the will, not of man, but of God. What is this will of
God? If I should tread in the steps of Thomas Aquinas upon all the former words
of this text, who makes point upon point, as the rest of the Schoolmen
likewise do upon other Scriptures, I would I might not say also as some in
these days upon every text do so make quaere upon quaere, that they rather
obscure then illustrate and open the Scripture, and so do more oppress the
memory of their hearers or readers, then edify them, and stand long upon a
little, and be tedious to all men; if (I say) I should take this course in
showing what will of God is here meant, I might make distinction upon
distinction, (as the Schoolmen do upon the grace of God, and of what not) and
so also make more show of learning then I have, and yet with no great profit to
other. To omit therefore this vein, which to me seems but vain; touching
the former question of the will of God, Peter Martyr says, that some
understand it of those things that God wi^leth, not of the power whereby he
wills them; as if this will signified the expressing of his disposition: as
when we say, this is mine, or this man's, or his will; when it is only meant
what I, or this man, or he wills: so that when we see the will of God (namely
by the effects hereof) we should account it good, acceptable. But all this
seems somewhat obscure, and not sufficient to make plain the will of God.
Other understand it of all before spoken, of not conforming our selves to the
world, of being transformed unto God, and renewed in our mind; as if the
Apostle had said of all that, This is the will of God. Of these two opinions,
Peter Martyr approves the former, seeming not to allow it spoken of Gods will
revealed in his written word, but of the will of God revealed by his works, in
sending prosperity or adversity, peace or trouble, health or sickness, etc.

Haymo (though a foolish Papist) interprets it of the revealed will of God in
the Scriptures. For thus he writes first of all, of not conforming unto the
world, and of being renewed in our mind: Nolite (inquit) conformari huic
seculo, i. nolite similes fieri amatoris huius seculi, etc. Be not (says he)
conformed to this world, that is, be not like unto the lovers of this world,
who despise virtues and follow after vices: sed reformamini in nouitate sensus
vestri, per studiam lectionis and meditationis veteris and noui Testamenti: but
be reformed in the newness of your mind, by the study of the reading and
meditation of the old and new Testament. Our sense and understanding is daily
renewed and reformed, whiles we profit daily, and more and more increase in
wisdom, understanding those things of God, which before we were ignorant of,
etc. Afterward coming to the word now in hand, that ye may prove what is the
will of God, thus he writes, Qui sacras Scripturas sedulo legit, ille inuenit
quid sit voluntas Dei. etc. He that diligently reads the holy scriptures,
finds what is the will of God, that is* what pleases God, what displeases
him, or how his will may be fulfilled. For in all our actions we ought to weigh
whether our works be acceptable to God or no. Thus much out of Haymo: and the
more, that we may the more admire the wisdom of God in bringing such sweet
water out of such a bitter and stinking fountain, as anon we shall see. The
same also seems to be the judgment of Piscator in his Scholia upon these
words. So of Rolloc. For upon these words, that ye may prove, thus he says,
Hic finis est transformationis sine renouationis mentis vt viuamus ex voluntate
Dei, etc. This is the end of our transformation or renewing of our mind, that
we may live according to the will of God: for this is that which he says, that
we may prove what is the will of God. For we prove (or approve) the will of
God, whiles we live according unto it. Now we are not to live according to the
secret will of God, manifested only by his providence, but according to his will
only revealed in his sacred Scriptures. This is also the judgment of most
reverend Calvin. For after other things soundly written upon this text, he
adds, Mundus quo ipso fabricauit opera, sed persuadet esse bona, etc. The
world persuades it self that the works which it forgeth are good; Paul
denies, saying, that by Go^s commandments we are to esteem what is good and
right* The world applaudeth and makes it self merry with her own devices;
Paul affirms, that nothing pleases God, but what he has commanded. The
world to find perfection, falls to new inventions; Paul determining all
perfection to be in the will of God, shows, that if any man passes these
limits, he is deluded by a false imagination. All this says Calvin, wherein
who can dissent from him?

Notwithstanding, to speak my mind ingenuously and freely, without the envy
of any, I do not think the whole revealed will of God in his word to be here
meant, but chiefly and principally the will of God revealed in his Gospel, first
preached by our Savior, and afterward by his Apostles and other Ministers
thereof according to the preaching of Christ, and to the preaching and writing
of the Apostles, yet also contained (though not so perspicuously) A and. 26.
22. Romans 12.
in the writings of the Prophets and Moses. And I do the rather thus think,
because this will of God in the Gospel is most worthy to be called by the name
of the will of God, as the which reuoketh and cancelleth many things in the old
Testament, and is the last will of Heb. 1. 1.
God, in these last times delivered by the Son of God. For as the last Will
of a man is his only Will, disanulling all former Wills, and all former gifts
and bequests not contained in the last Will: so this last will of God, in many
things disanulling the former, and in many things also ratifying the same, is
chiefly, principally, and only to be accounted the will of God. The three
adjuncts also following, whereby this will of God is described and commended,
do most fitly belong to this last will, revealed and contained in the Gospel,
and in the scriptures of the new Testament, as afterward shall more fully
appear. As for the moral Law, that is not at all nullified by the new
Testament, but thereby ratified, as appears Matthew. 5. from the seventeenth
verse to the end, and by many precepts of the Apostles for observation both of
the whole moral Tit. 2. 12.
Law, and also of all the particular duties therein contained.

Touching the use hereof, let us always for avoiding of conformity to the
world, and for transforming our selves unto God, and the renewing of our minds,
have recourse to this will of God revealed in his word, especially Iam. 1. 25.
2. Cor. 3. 18.
in the new Testament, wherein only as in a most perfect glass, and the rule
of all righteousness, we are to see all things amiss in our selves, and
whatsoever is good and acceptable to God and perfect: yea, this word,
especially this word of the Gospel, is not only such a perfect glass as
wherein we may see all things amiss in our selves and other, and what is to be
done, what not to be done; but The Gospel an ex^llent optic glass.
it is also a most precious optic glass, far passing all optic glasses for
this life, which notwithstanding are in high price with men. For by this glass
we see things in heaven it self, hid from all the men in this world, that are
also of this world. By this glass we see behind us as well as before Heb. 11.
3.
us, even the making of the world at the first by the word of God, and all
other things done by the Lord from the beginning of the world till this hour,
that are recorded in the word; and that a thousand times more perfectly and
certainly, then we see any other things mentioned to be done in any other
histories whatsoever. Yea, by this glass we see not only things that are and
that have bin, but things also not yet extant or being, but that shall
hereafter be. Is there any such optic glass in all the world, for the sight
of things belonging to this life?

Now although we have before by the words of M. Calvin, seen much concerning
the three attributes of this The third adjuncts of the will of God. Good.
Acceptable. Perfect.

will of God following, good, acceptable (or well pleasing) and perfect; yet
something more is now to be spoken of them. First of all therefore let us
understand that the Apostle adds them, not only to amplify and commend this
will of God, but also the better to confirm the former exhortation, and the
more to provoke us to the more care and diligence in examining, trying, and
proving and approving this will of God. For who that has any thing in him, will
neglect a will so good, so well pleasing to God, so perfect? this also being
considered, that whosoever belongs to God, shall in this his such will, find
many and bountiful legacies for himself, most worthy his seeking, and his
pains to get them.

Here, in the next place, for the meaning of the said three Haymo an haymaker.
adjuncts, let me show you what Haymo before mentioned speaks thereof* Before
we have heard him to speak honestly and soundly, like a good Divine: but now
having laid aside his Episcopal robes, yea his Divinity books also, he
comes as it were stripped to the waist, like a lusty hay-maker into the field,
tossing these words up and down, as an hay-maker tosseth the grass in the wind
and Sun, to wither it and weather it for hay. For he brings a tripartite
interpretation, as it were a Tridentine forke (more usual indeed to load dung
with, then to make hay with) expounding these three adjuncts three ways, and
yet not saying to any, vtrum harum mauis accipe, of these three choose which
pleases you best; but leaving them all at random, as if they were all meant by
the Apostle. The tripertite interpretation of three adjuncts of Gods will by
Haymo.


But what are these three interpretations of his? The first is this: Bona
voluntas Dei est quia bona desiderat semper, etc. The will of God is good,
because he always desires those things that are good: it is well pleasing,
because all good things are pleasing unto him: it is perfect, because he loves
no doubling, but those things that are done with a sincere heart. Where let it
be noted, that he condemns such iuggling and equiuocating as now is commonly
practiced and stoutly defended by the Papists. That is his first
interpretation, not much to be blamed. What is his second? Aliter (says he)
bona in fide; been placens in spe futurorum bonorum; perfecta in Dei charitate,
id est, in Dei dilectione and proximi: haec enim tua voluntatem Dei perficiunt:
Good in faith; well pleasing in the hope of good things to come; perfect in
charity, that is, in the love of God and our neighbor: for these three make
perfect the will of God. What is the third interpretation? Most excellent. Sieve
aliter, Bona voluntas Dei est in coniugalis, been placens in viduis, perfecta
in virginibus. hi tres ordines, si secundum voluntatem Dei, and virtutis
tramitem processerint, proemijs voluntatis Dei donabuntur: Or otherwise (says
he) the will of God is good in married persons; well pleasing in widows and
widowers* perfect in virgins, that is, in persons never married: these three
orders, if they proceed according to the will of God, and in the pathway of
virtues, shall be rewarded with the rewards of the will of God. Is not this
lustily done? Has he not played the man in them, especially in the last? Alas,
what pity was it that he died but a Bishop, and was not first rewarded with
the triple crown of Rome. The first indeed (as I said) of these, is not much to
be blamed, save that the one may be confounded with the other. The second is
the less to be condemned, because 1. Cor. 13. 13.
he aims at the words of the Apostle, Now abides faith hope and charity.
Yet when he says, that these three make perfect the will of God, and yet
before had put perfection in charity, he seems to confound and contradict
himself, making perfection to consist in all, or to require all, and yet
before having ascribed it to one, and namely* to charity. The third is
ridiculous, and a mere dotage, albeit taken from some of the ancient Fathers,
that too much doted upon the excellency of single life above marriage. For
Jerome (too far gone that way) interprets those degrees of good fruit upon
the good ground, Mat. 13. 23.
as Haymo does these three adjuncts of the will of God. For he expounds an
hundred fold of virginity, sixtis fold of widowhood, thirty fold of married
persons. Some other Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 7. Mat. 19. 12.
of the Fathers also did too too much magnify a single life: yea, and as
Eusebius testifies, Origin (though in other things too much allegorical)
interpreting the words of our Savior literally, There be Eunuchs which have
made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven; Origin (I say) upon the
said words literally interpreted, did geld himself. Why do not all Popish
Priests and other Votaries in these days, the like? But it was not thus from
the beginning. For God at the first creation of man, said, It is Genesis 2. 18.
Heb. ^3. 4. Against. Dureus. 1. Cor. 7.
not good for man to be alone. And the Apostle says, Marriage is honorable
among all men. Upon which words, D. Whitaker notes, that he never so said of a
single life. All the commendations of a single life by the Apostle, are only
in respect of some outward inconneniences by marriage: and secondly, for that
present time of the distress of the Church, and for the like. For he says,
This I say, that this ver. 26.
is good for the present distress, or necessity: and by good he means not
morally good, but only outwardly good. If he had meant it morally, he would
not have said, If thou marry, thou have not sinned; and if a virgin marry she
has not ver. 28.
sinned. But I will not any longer insist upon this matter, whereinto I have
fallen but obiter, and by occasion of the former words of Haymo, for a short
confutation of his dotage.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the two first adjuncts of the will of God, Good and Well pleasing.

TO return now to the Apostles three adjuncts of the How the third adjuncts of
the will of God are here to be taken
will of God, having before showed how this will of God is here to be taken,
namely, for his revealed will in the new Testament; let us now consider how the
said three adjuncts are here likewise to be taken.

For my part therefore, I cannot but think them to be spoken partly by
opposition in some sort to the will of God before in the time of the Law;
partly by comparison therewith, and preferment above it.

By opposition, as he does elsewhere call the ministry 2. Cor. 3. 6. etc.
of the new Testament the ministry of the Spirit, but of the Law the
ministry of the letter: saying further, that the letter kills, but the
spirt gives life: yea further, calling the old Testament the ministry of
condemnation, but the new Testament the ministration of righteousness. Yea,
moreover saying, that the one is done away, but that the other remains:
concluding, that therefore that is in the former respects the ministration of
the new Testament and of the Gospel is glorious, but that the ministration of
the old Testament and of the Law, was in some sort without glory.

By comparison also of the will of God in the new Testament with his will in
the old, I take these three adjuncts to be understood, namely, good to signify
better, acceptable or well pleasing to signify more acceptable; or more
pleasing: and perfect to signify more perfect. These things shall be more
evident, by handling these adjuncts particularly.

To come therefore to the particulars; by good here I do What is meant by good.
not understand all goodness generally, but chiefly Gods grace and kindness,
as the word good is often elsewhere taken. The Prophet saying, that God is good
to Israel, means Psalm. 73. 1. Psalm. 106. 1. 107. 1.
that God was gracious or kind to Israel. So is it taken when it is said, O
give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good etc. And again: Praise ye the Lord,
for the Lord is Lam. 3. 25.
good. And again, The Lord is good unto them that wait for him. And who
knows not that in this time of the Gospel the Lord has showed himself
better, that is, more kind and gracious then in former times he had done, in
removing the law of ceremonies, for the manifold and chargeable sacrifices, for
the abstinence from many kinds of meats, for the manifold washings in diverse
respects, Exodus 23. 17. 3^ 24 Act. 15. 10.
for the great and tedious iourneys; in respect of all which the Apostle
calls all the said Law by the name of a yoke, which neither their fathers nor
they were able to bear. Doubtless Mat. 11. 30. 1. Ioh. 5. 3.
in this respect as well as in other, Christ comparatively calls his yoke
easy, and his burden light. And John says, that Gods commandments are not
grievous. Who knows not also the Lord to have showed himself more gracious
now then in the time of the Law, by performing all things before promised, and
signified by types Col. 2. 17. Heb. 10. 1.
and figures, which were only shadows of things to come? How great likewise
is Gods goodness now, above that it was in old time, even to the Israelites,
in speaking unto us by his Son immediately in his own nature once for all;
and doing such things by his said Son, and by his H^b. 1. 1.
Apostles furnished with power from his Son for the doing of them, as never
had bin done before; and whereunto all the wonders that he did in the land of
Egypt, and all the great victories that afterward he gave unto his people, are
not to be compared? In respect of the said doctrine delivered by his Son, and
of the said works he said to his Disciples, Blessed are your eyes which see the
things that Mat 13. 17. Luke 10. 24.
ye see, and your ears for they hear: for verily I say unto you, that many
Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things that ye see, and
have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them. This Isay. 44. 8. 2 Cor. 6. 2.
time of the Gospel is that acceptable time and day of salvation, wherein the
Lord has succored us in Christ Jesus. This time of the Gospel is that
fullness of time, wherein the Lord in his love unto the world sent forth his
Son, his only Ioh. 3. 16. Romans 8. 32. Mat. 3. 17. Heb 1. 2. Col. 1. 15. 17.
begotten Son, the Son of his love, in whom he is well pleased; the heir
of all things, by whom he made the worlds; the brightness of his glory, and
upholding all things by the power of his word, and much more excellent then the
Angels. This time (I say again) is the fullness of time, wherein the Lord Gal.
4. 4.
has sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law, that they might receive the adoption of sons.
This time of the Gospel is that time, wherein Christ Jesus being equal to
God, for the working of our said redemption humbled himself, and took our
nature upon him, and therein became obedient Phil. 2. 8. Gal. 3. 13.
unto death, even the death of the cross, and so became a curse for us, to
discharge us from the curse of the law, and to make us everlastingly blessed:
and upon that cross he blotted Col. 2. 14.
out the handwriting that was against us, and contrary unto us, and took it
out of the way, nailing it to his cross; and spoiling principalities and
powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in the said cross.
This time of the Gospel is the time wherein the Lord according to Joel. 2. 28.
Act. 2. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8.
his promise has powered out his Spirit upon all flesh, and wherein at the
ascending up of Christ Jesus on high, and leading Ephesians. 4. 8.
captivity captive, he has given gifts unto men: even greater gifts then all
the mighty Monarks of the world can give to their greatest favorites.

It is likewise much for this purpose, that the mystorie of Romans 16. 25. 26.
the Gospel, kept secret since the world began, and not made known to the
sons of men (that is, to the Gentiles, that were only the sons of men, as
the daughters of the wicked Gen 6. 2. Ephesians. 3. 5.
are called the daughters of men) is now made known and revealed unto his holy
Apostles before, and in these times also to the sincere Ministers thereof.

Whereas before also God showed his word only to Iaakob, Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
and his judgments unto Israel, not dealing so with any nation: and the
Oracles of God were only committed to the Romans 3. 2.
Jews; now they are communicated to all nations, the partition wall being
broken down and Jews and Gentiles made Ephesians 2. 13. 14. Gal. 3. 28.
one, and there being no difference of the one from the other.

In all the former respects, may not the will of God now revealed in the
Gospel, be called good, yea better then the will of God revealed in the old
Testament? Certainly we may so call it by Apostolical warrant and authority.
For this will of God contained in the new Testament? and being the new
Testament is expressly said to be a better testament, Heb. 17. 22. and 8. 6.
or a better covenant; as having better promises, not of an earthly Canaan, but
of an heavenly kingdom, typically signified by the former Canaan; and being
confirmed and sealed, not by the blood of bulls and goats, but by the Heb. 9.
13. and 10. 4.
blood of Jesus Christ, though figuratively also represented by that blood of
bules and goats; and yet not repeated, but Heb. 7. 27. and 9. 28. and 10. 10
once shed, for ever to sanctify them that are sanctified; yea, that are to be
sanctified for ever afterward: yea also, that were sanctified ever before. For
all the Fathers, even of the old Testament, were not sanctified and saved by
the sacrifices of those times, but by the sacrifice only of Christ Jesus
himself, offered by himself, and typed by the former Ephesians. 44. 5.
sacrifices. For as there is but one faith, and one hope, etc. so there was but
one salvation, and that one was common to all believers under the Law as well
as in the time of the Gospel: Christ Jesus is the same, yesterday, and to Heb.
13. 8. ^^n^l. 13. 18.
day, and for ever. He is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
that is, by virtue of whose blood shed in these last times, all the elect
before the coming of Christ in the flesh, as well as they that were borne
after, were saved, and en^red into heaven immediately after their translation
from hence. And therefore our Savior promises no other happiness or
salvation to them that shall be called and come from the East and from the
West, that is, from all corners Mat. 8. 11.
of the world, then to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom
of heaven.

But to return; in consideration of the things before said, the Apostle
speaking of these times, wherein this good will of God is revealed, says, The
grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation unto all men. By the word grace
Tit. 2. 1^.
of God, he means the Gospel: by the word appears, he means has shined
and gloriously broken forth, dissoluing and scattering all the cloudie types of
the Law, like to the Sun breaking out of, or scattering the darkness of the
night, and the thick clouds of the air. By the words bringing salvation, he
means the declaring, yea also the conferring of salvation more plentifully
then before. And by all men he understands all, both of what state and
condition soever, old or young, men or women, masters or servants, etc. and also
of what nation soever, Jews or Gentiles, as before was showed. And though in
the words following* he says, that it teaches us the same things that the
moral Law teaches, and that as children, according to the signification of
the word, thereby insinuating that all that will be taught by the Gospel of
the kingdom, and Mat. 4. 23.
that will by the Gospel enter into the kingdom of God, must be like to little
children: yet he means another manner Mark. 10. 15.
of teaching then only of the bare Law: namely, not imperatiuely only and
outwardly, but also effectiuely, powerfully and inwardly working that it
teaches.

So also, and in the former respects, the Gospel is called Heb. 2. 3. Act. 3.
15. and 5. 31. Heb. 2. 10.
by the name of salvation, and of great salvation, as more powerfully and
abundantly making men partakers of salvation, and of the Prince and author of
salvation Christ Jesus himself, who therefore by Simeon in his Song is called
Luke 2. 30.
by the name of Salvation.

Neither is the Gospel called great salvation, in the former respects only,
but also because of the great misery of all men without the Gospel: all men
without the Gospel sitting in darkness and in the shadow of death; and being
in Luke 1. 79.
the hands of their enemies, not bodily, but spiritual, even of Satan
himself. Act. 26. 18.


The punishment also of the contempt or neglect of the Gospel the means of
that great salvation, being greater then of the men of Sodom and Gomorrha at
the day of judgment, Mat. 10. 16.
does plainly show, that the Gospel is more excellent then the ministry of
former times* yea, so much the more, because the Apostle saying, How shall we
escape, if Heb. 2. 3*
we neglect so great salvation? by that manner of question notes an
impossibility of escaping the punishment. For this Ioh. 3. 4. 12. Mat. 26. 54.
Rom* 8. 32.
word how, notes an impossibility in diverse other places of the Scripture.
And is not this just, since they that contemn the Gospel, contemn Christ
Jesus, and God himself? Luke 10. 16.
And falling away from the Gospel after the receiving Heb. 6. 5. 6.
thereof, and thereby tasting the powers of the world to come* they again
crucify to themselves Christ Jesus? Neither Heb. 10. 26*
does there remain any more sacrifice for their sins. The contemners of Lots
ministry, and of the ministry of the Law, had and have their remedy in
Christ. Out of Christ in his Gospel, and out of his Gospel so neglected and
renounced, there is no other remedy to be used, no other refuge whereto to
fly. Is there any other name among men Act. 4. 12.
whereby we may be saved, then by the name of Christ? Or, is there any other
Savior in heaven or in earth, by whom to be saved, Christ Jesus being shaken
off and forsaken?

Moreover, the Gospel is so excellent, so glorious, that now (and here in this
world) this is one end (as before I in Chap. 1.
said) of the ministry thereof by men, that unto principalities and powers in
the heau^nly places (that is, unto the Ephesians 3. 10.
Angels of heaven) might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of
God. For which cause the Angels (as it were stretching out their necks) do
desire to behold (that 1. Pet. 1. 12.
is* more and more to understand) the things that are now preached in the
Gospel: as sometime the two Cherubims Exo. 25. 18. etc. and 37. 7. etc.
made of gold* were set with their faces one toward another, looking (both) to
the M^rcie seat, as it were listening what the Lord from thence should speak
unto his people. Is it a small matter that the Angels must know, and desire to
know? O the wretchedness then of men, that care not for the knowledge thereof;

The Angels also are said to rejoice at the least beginning Luke 15. 7.
of this salvation, even in the first conversion of any sinner. How also did a
multitude of them rejoice at the birth of Christ* for the working of this
salvation? and who Luke 2. 13.
is both the author, and the matter, and the end of the Gospel?

Let all these things be seriously considered, and no man is so blind but he
will see, no man so wilful but he will acknowledge the will of God now
revealed in the Gospel, since the coming of Christ, to be better then his will
before delivered in the Law, and the time thereof better then the time of the
old Testament. If any be so blind that he does not see it, and so wilful that
he will not acknowledge it; oh woe, woe unto him: I would not be in his coat, in
his condition for a thousand thousand worlds. Thus much of the first adiunct in
this place, of the will of God, viz. that it is called good.

The second adiunct thereof is acceptable or well pleasing. The second adiunct
of the will of God. Acceptable, or well pleasing. Ephesians. 5. 10.
For it is the same word (as I noted before) that is used for the third adiunct
of our sacrifice. The same word both for the verb, and also for this adiunct of
the will of God, is used elsewhere, proving what is acceptable (or well
pleasing) unto the Lord. This adiunct is a consequent of the former, good, as
before it was of holy. For whatsoever is holy or good, especially so good as
before we have heard this will of God to be, cannot but be also acceptable and
well pleasing to God: because God himself is good, and the author of all
goodness and kindness in other; and it was his good pleasure, that this his
will and new Testament should be so good as it is. Therefore he says not,
There Ier. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 8.
shall be a new covenant, but I will make a new covenant with the house of
Judah, etc. And this the Apostle applies to the time of the Gospel, and to
the new Testament before spoken of. If therefore this new Testament be Gods
own work, it cannot but be acceptable and well pleasing unto him. That this is
here taken by opposition and comparison, as well as the former, it is manifest,
because the former will of God* and the old Testament, especially touching the
sacrifices, and other rites and ceremonies of the Law, had all relation to the
new Testament and Gospel, and to the will of God therein contained: without
which relation, the observation of them was never acceptable or well pleasing
unto God: yea, it was rejected by him, as i^ he had not required it: yea, it
was hateful unto him; even Isay. 1. 11. 12. 13 14. Isay. 66. 3.
an abomination, and as a thing that troubled him. Yea, he that killed an ox
(for sacrifice) was as he that slew (or murdered) a man; he that sacrificed a
lamb, as he that cut off a dogs neck: he that offered an oblation, as if he
offered swines flesh, etc. By another Prophet also he says, that their burnt
Ier. 6. 20*
offerings were not acceptable unto him, neither their sacrifices sweet. Does
he not also say the very like by the Prophet Amos? Yea, likewise by Micah? Some
perhaps will object Amos. 5 21. Mica. 6. 7.
, that all that was, because with such sacrifices they did not join obedience
unto the moral Law. True: but whence was this, but because they looked not to
Christ in the new Testament, without faith in whom there is no Heb. 11. 6.
pleasing of God? and because the law of God moral was not written in their
hearts, according to the promise for Ier. 21. 33. 2. Cor. 3. 3. Heb. 8. 10.
the time of the Gospel and new covenant of God; as also according to the
commendation of the new covenant by the Apostle.

Touching the comparatiue taking of this adiunct, that now the will of God, or
the new Testament and Gospel declaring that will of God, is more acceptable
and pleasing, it is evident, because Christ Jesus before only promised, is now
come into the world, and has by the Father himself bin visibly sealed (as
himself speaks) by Ioh. 6. 27.
the holy Ghost descending upon him in the form of a Dove, and as publikly and
audibly proclaimed to be his Son Mat. 3. 16. 17.
in whom he is well pleased. And according hereunto God is oftener and more
plainly called the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by him our Father, in
the new Testament, then ever before in the old Testament. What does this
intimate, but that God has more abundantly powered out his Fatherly love in
these days, and is better pleased with us, as with his adopted children, then
ever before?

And* did the Lord ever show himself so well pleased in the time of the old
Testament and under the Law, as he has done in the time of the new Testament,
and since the preaching of the Gospel? Did he ever so grace any Ministers of
the old Testament, yea the best Prophets, as he did the Apostles, by sending
down the holy Ghost in the visible similitude of cloven tongues like as of
fire, sitting Act. 2. 3. etc.
upon every one of them, whereby they that before could speak but one tongue,
did presently speak all languages? yea so also, that at the same time, by one
days preaching ver. 41.
, there were converted to the faith and added to the Church about three
thousand souls, which did abundantly testify their said effectual
conversion, by making all things common, and selling their possessions, and
parting them to all men as every man had need: doing the like also afterward
with great alacrity, and being of one heart and of one soul; the Act. 4. 32.
number of believers that were before but three thousand, being then increased
to five thousand ver. 4.
.

How also did the Lord show himself well pleased, yea better pleased then ever
before, by working greater miracles then ever before had bin wrought, at least
in such abundance? not only by giving sight to the blind, hearing and speech
to the deaf and dumb, raising the dead, casting out of devils, a work never
before heard of; and that not only by our Savior himself, but also by the
Apostles; by giving health to the sick, not only to whom the Apostles spoke,
but also to such as did but stand in the shadow of them? Were not also the
gifts of the holy Act 5. 15. Act. 8. 17 and. 19. 6. Act. 10. 44.
Ghost given to many other, by laying on of the hands of the Apostles? yea, by
their words, and that even to speak with tongues? Does not the Apostle also by
this Gods bearing witness unto the Gospel by signs and wonders, and diverse
miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost, prove the Gospel before by him called by
the name of the great salvation, to be more excellent then the Law, which he
calls but by the name of a word (as it were a bare word) spoken by Angels?
Heb. 2. 2. 3.
and therefore also the neglect of the Gospel to be a greater sin then the
despising of that word, though spoken by Angels?

All these things do abundantly show the will of God revealed in the Gospel,
to be better pleasing to God now, then his will before in the ol^ Testament:
and all this to be so, because himself would have it so to be. It is not
therefore of us, or from us, as though we in this time of the Gospel had
procured or deserved God to be better pl^ased with us, then with other
heretofore. For how could this be, since we had always before sit in darkness
and in Luke ^. 79. Ephesians. 2. 1. ver. 12.
the shadow of death, and had also bin dead in trespasses and sins* etc.
strangers frrom the covenants of promise, etc. being also so without knowledge,
that we did not so much as call upon his Name, much less did we crave any
grace Psalm. 79. 6.
of him, at least so, as to be heard, and to obtain such grace as whereby to
be well pleasing unto him? But, as therefore the first covenant that God made
with Abraham, and afterward renewed and continued with his seed, was not for
any goodness of them, or of any desert in them, (they then serving other gods)
but only of Gods love toward Josh. 24. Dan 7. 8. 1. Sam. 12. 22.
them, and because it pleased him to make them his people: so is it to be said
of this, and of all that enjoy this good will of God, whereby they were or are
acceptable unto him.

If it be said, that this is the time of the Gospel and of the new Testament,
and that yet we living under the same, have no such thing: I answer first, that
Gods graces are at his own disposition; and that therefore in that place before
to the Hebrews, of Gods so bearing witness to the Heb. 2. 4. Psalm. 24. 1. and
50. 10. Hag. 2. 8.
Gospel by signs and wonders, etc. it is added, according to his own will.
May man do with his own what he will, though indeed he have nothing of his
own, but all be the Lords; and may not God much more do with his own, and
bestow his graces on whom he will, where, when, and how Mat. 20. 15.
it pleases him? Gods sparing of his graces now, and not pouring out his
Spirit, nor bestowing his mercies as at the first he did, is not of any
niggardliness in him, but of his wisdom, as knowing what is fittest for all
persons and times. It is also according to his own word, fortelling the cause
thereof, namely, the falling away of many from the 1. Tim. 4. 1.
faith, and their listening to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; and
believing of lies, and not the truth, but taking pleasure 2. These. 2. 11. 12.
in unrighteousness: so that the restraint of Gods mercies now, is not from
any inconstancy in God, but from the sins of men, and for the manifestation
of Gods justice, to his own glory, for men's such sins.

In respect of the former apostasy and declining from the truth, and believing
of lies, notwithstanding the Lord had so graced and magnified the same truth by
those manifold means before mentioned, we may rather admire his goodness in
vouchsafing the least mercy now, then charge him with any unfaithfulness or
inconstancy.

The former gifts also of the holy Ghost in former times bestowed, and the
former miracles and works of God before wrought, were not only for that age,
but also for all ages to come, and for confirmation of the Gospel to all
other. As our Savior says of the writings of Moses, If ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words? And Ioh. 5. 47.
again of Moses and the Prophets, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
(that is, the preaching of their doctrine) Luke 16. 31.
neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead: and so much more
may it be said of those former works done by our Savior, and his Apostles
through the power of our Savior, as also of the gifts of the holy Ghost then
bestowed, they have the works of our Savior and his Apostles already written:
and in his written word they may read how the Lord before has powered out his
Spirit upon all flesh; if they believe not them, neither will they believe, if
they should see the like in these times.

But I demand, has God shut up all his works and graces for confirmation of
his Gospel in former times so long past? Has he not in these last times,
since the breaking forth of the glorious light of the Gospel out of the foul
fog and thick and palpable darkness of Popery (a thousand times worse then
the darkness of Egypt, or at Exodus 10. 21. Mat 27. 45.
the death of Christ?) Has not God now, I say, by many graces and works
testified this his last will and testament made by his Son in his name, to be
acceptable and well pleasing unto him? yea, so acceptable and well pleasing, as
before we heard? Many ways. For how mightily has his said will and Gospel
prevailed and increased since the days of Wickliffe, John Husse, Jerome of
Prague, Luther, Melancthon, Occolampadius, and a few other, all but few and
weak, and yet strongly opposed and oppugned by many potent adversaries? yea,
though all the world almost, Pope, Emperor, and all other Princes (the Duke of
Saxony excepted) contended with the said Luther, most worthily propugning and
maintaining the Gospel against them all, yet they could not prevail against
him; but he, maugre the heads of them all, and inuitis and reluctantibus
omnibus, in despite of them all, escaped all their hands, and peaceably died
in his bed. Were not these things the works of the Lord? They were the works
of the Lord, Psalm. 118. 23.
and justly marvelous in our eyes. The like may be said of the mighty
preserving and upholding of little Geneua, often strongly assaulted by great
enemies. So likewise of Rochell* long since long besieged by a former King, and
yet in the end delivered; and before their delivery, graciously relieved in
their great distress and famine, by a multitude of small fishes, the which
ceased presently upon the breaking up of their siege.

May not the same be said of the flourishing state of our late most renowned
Queen Elizabeth, mightily always preserved from many great home-conspiracies,
and from the intended Spanish invasion in the year 1588. yea, often also
cursed by that man of sin, Antichrist of Rome (most of God accursed himself)
and yet ye more always blessed by the Highest, that only has power
effectually to bless and to curse; and that has cursed that Man of sin, and
will yet (ere it be long, we doubt not) curse him with a much more bitter curse
then ever the Angel of the Lord cursed Meroz and the inhabitants thereof,
because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
Judge. 5. 23.
the mighty.

May not the like be said of the Lords present Lieutenant here in Great
Britain, now sitting upon the throne, touching his gracious preservation, as
from other conspiracies, so especially from the Powder Treason? Verily, so much
the greater has his preservation bin, by how much the more Popery and all
other sins have lately abounded. For the sin of the people, is the danger
of King and kingdom. If still (says Samuel) ye do wickedly, ye shall be 1.
Sam. 12. 25.
consumed, both ye and your King. I might here speak of the great judgments
of God upon many great adversaries of the Gospel. For such judgments upon
such, do most abundantly and graciously testify Gods will in the Gospel to be
acceptable and well pleasing unto him.

Though also God in these last times have not given the gift of tongues
immediately and extraordinarily, as he did in the Apostles times: yet who
knows not, but that the knowledge of them and of all other learning has
mightily increased since the late decrease of Popery, by the increase of the
Gospel, and the breath of the Lords 2. These. 2. 8.
mouth. The Papists themselves are much more skillful in the tongues, and every
way more learned, then they were when Popery was at the highest. For all which
their learning, they may thank the Protestants, whose learning has bin a
whetstone to provoke them to the more study for the maintenance of their
damnable heresies and doctrines of devils: and yet notwithstanding by all their
learning, they have not bin able neither shall be able to support their said
heresies and devilish doctrines from falling more and more.

In the chief time of Popery, alas what poor, what pitiful learning was
there? It was then a common proverb, Graecum est, legi non potest: It is
Greek, it cannot be read. Now I do verily think, that in some one College in
Cambridge and Oxenford, there are more good Grecians and Hebricians, then were
200 years since in all Christendom. That most reverend learned man D. Fulke
(the bane of Papists) being Master of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, would
sometimes make the Fellows of that House merry with the verses that were made
by some old Fellows and Masters of Arts in S. John's College, at the burning of
Bucers bones. For there being a commandment from the Vice Chancellor then
being, that all Masters of Art should make verses against Bucer, some Fellows
of that House were much troubled therewith, and did much murmr amongst
themselves, and complained one to an other. Some of them opening their grief
to the Tutor of D. Fulke, then a young and new Student in that House; his said
Tutor said unto them: Why Sirs, I will tell you what ye shall do; I have a young
scholar that is very pregnant and nimble in versifying; make you verses
therefore as well as ye can, bring them to me, and my scholar shall correct
them. So they made verses as well as they could, and brought them accordingly
to his Tutor, who gave them to his scholar to be corrected by him, who also
kept them by him. But such stuff, as (according to the common speech) would
make a horse to break his halter to hear them. Whiles I was in Cambridge,
being then somewhat familiar with one of the Fellows of that House, yet
living, and a great learned man, and one of the chief Bishops in the Land,
sometimes meeting together, he would make us all sport by relating some of the
verses, as D. Fulke had made him and other Fellows of that House merry with
them in their meetings. I confess my fault in my great forgetfulness of them
as well as of better things. One Pentameter verse I do only remember, which is
this,

Crematur anima, cremeturque corpus. Is it not a sweet one? I could laugh my
self, as old as I am, as heavy laden with many afflictions as I am, but that
these times call us rather to mourning and prayers. Lachrymae and preces sunt
arma Ecclesiae: Prayers and tears are the weapons of the Church; never more
needing them then now it does, in so many places lying a bleeding as it does.
But equivocation, truce-breaking, treachery and treason, cruelty and murder
(even of Princes) are the weapons of the Romish synagogue. Therefore the Romish
synagogue is not the Church.

To return; I may add to the former the gift of Printing, invented about the
time of breaking forth of the Gospel out of the darkness of Popery, never
before heard of; and the time since the beginning hereof is not yet 200 years:
notwithstanding this, by whom soever first invented, the Lord has graciously
used as his Lighthorseman for carrying of his Gospel into all countries, and
for the better propagation thereof; as also for the further battering down of
that Romish mystery of iniquity.

The use of this briefly is first to teach us, if we will have our selves,
thoughts, affections, words and works to please God, then repair to this will
of God, and thereof to learn so to be, and so to do for matter and manner. If
we reject or neglect this will, neither shall our persons ever please him, nor
our thoughts, affections, words or actions be any delight unto him. For this
adiunct is here given to this will of God, by the way of excellency and
singularity, as belonging only to this will, and as noting that no man's or
Angels will can bring our persons into favor with God, or make our thoughts,
affections, words or works well pleasing unto him. Yea, the more we attend and
apply our selves to the will of any other, not agreeing Isay. 29. 13.
to this will, the more we offend and displease God. But hereof somewhat has
bin said before. The same is to be said of other belonging unto us, to do what
lies in us for the provoking of them to such due regard of the will of God, as
whereby they also may be made acceptable and well pleasing to God, as this will
of God it self is.

Secondly, the more that God acquainteth and affects us with this his well
pleasing will, the more thankful let us be unto him in that behalf, and
labor also the more to please him according thereunto. Thus much of the second
adiunct of this will of God in this place.

CHAP. XV.
Of the third adiunct of this will of God, viz. perfect.

THe third and last adiunct of the will of God now remains, Perfect.
namely, that it is here said to be perfect. This also I understand
oppositiuely and comparatively. Oppositiuely, because the old Testament was
imperfect: comparatively, because this therefore is more perfect; yea most
perfect, complete and absolute. If it be objected, Psalm. 19. 7.
that the Prophet says, The law (or doctrine) of the Lord is perfect, long
before Christ came; and the Gospel was given and written, as now we have it.
Yea, if it be further objected, that that which before I said, that the will of
God was before imperfect, and that now it is more perfect then before, implies
a contradiction, because the comparatiue argues a positive, and more perfect
now, intimates a perfect more. I answer to the second objection first, y^ ye
comparatiue does not always argue a positue, neither does one thing more
perfect then another, argue the other therefore to be perfect. This is plain
by diverse places in the Scripture. When Peter says, It is better* if the will
1. Pet. 3. 13.
of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing then for evil doing; he does not
therefore argue, that it is good to suffer for evil doing; but only means
that it is not all good, but evil to suffer for evil doing. When Paul says,
It is better 1. Cor. 7. 9.
to marry then to burn; does he mean, that it is therefore good to burn?
When the Prophet says, It is better to trust Psalm. 118. 8. 9.
in the Lord, then to put confidence in man: it is better to trust in the Lord,
then to put confidence in Princes: does he mean that it is therefore good to
put confidence in man, or in Princes? I trow not. For another Prophet says,
Cursedis Ier. 17. 5.
the man that trusts in man, etc.

Touching that place, The law (or doctrine) of the law is perfect; and for
further answer of both the branches of the former objections: a thing may be
perfect in diverse respects; and first in respect of time or ages. That may be
perfect for one time and age, that is not for another. As for example, a
horne-booke (as we call it) may be perfect, and have all that is needful for a
young child: and a Primmer for him afterward, when he is grown of more stature:
and after that he can read English, then an Accidence for the principles of
Grammar: which books contain not all things fit to be learned when he is
elder. So is it touching this matter. The Church of God before the Gal. 4. 1.
4. etc.
coming of Christ, was as it were in her nonage, under age, in her childhood,
and not capable of all doctrine; and therefore the Lord dealt accordingly, and
gave her only such rudiments and principles as were fit for her, yea also
sufficient for her in that condition, accompanying the same with such other
matters, as it were gay things, as whereby she might be the better pleased, and
the more allured to learn such things as were then taught. Therefore as there
were sacrifices and other ceremonies; so also the Tabernacle first, and
afterward the Temple, were adorned with many things of silver and gold; though
also therein ye Lord had a further reach and drift, then only to allure them
the better to worship him in that manner that then he prescribed; even to
foreshew the beauty and glory of his Church afterward, especially in heaven;
and in the mean time how glorious inwardly all should be, that are members of
his spiritual temple here in this world.

And in respect of the diverse ages in grace, and capacities of men now for
knowledge of the mysteries of this will of God, all is not to be taught all
men, nor at all times. This our Savior teaches, saying, No man puts a
piece Mat. 9. 16. 17.
of new cloth in an old garment, etc. neither do men put new wine into old
vessels, etc. And again, I have many things yet Ioh. 16. 12.
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them, that is, ye are not capable of
them. Does not the Apostle teach the very same, when he says, And I brethren
could not speak unto 1. Cor. 3. 1.
you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. The
like is written to the Hebrews. As it is in garments Heb. 5. 11.
for children of diverse ages and statures, one is enough for one, that is not
enough for another: yea also in meats, according to the words of the Apostle:
so is it touching this will of God.

Moreover, for a more full answer of the former objection; there is a double
perfection. A perfection for matter or substance; and a perfection for
circumstances belonging to the matter or substance. Let me illustrate this by a
similitude. Two men bargaining together for land or some other thing, either
upon sale or upon deed, agreeing together upon the substance thereof, and
covenants and conditions thereto belonging, do pass their word one to another,
yea also before witnesses for performance of the said bargain: it may be also
they set down something briefly in writing, the better to testify the same:
notwithstanding they reserve and defer the making and sealing of deeds or
indentures or bonds till another time, for the perfecting thereof in such form
as whereby it may be the more firm for ever afterward. Such a bargain so at
the first made, is sound and good for the substance thereof: but as touching
the manner and form, and other complements, it is not thoroughly perfect, till
deeds or indentures, or bonds be drawn in form of law, signed, sealed, and
delivered before witnesses. As it is thus betwixt man and man, so is it
touching the will of God betwixt God and man. His will in substance was perfect
in David's time, yea in the time of Moses, of Abraham; yea of Adam, immediately
after his fall, when this promise was Genesis 3. 15.
made, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between her seed and
thy seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. These
words were indeed spoken to the Serpent, but belonged to the woman, yea also to
the man, and to the posterity of both. They contain two parts: a commination
to the Serpent, that the seed of the woman ( Christ) should break the head of
the Serpent, that is, should utterly subdue the devil and all his power; which
notwithstanding was a promise to the woman and to her seed. The second part of
the said speech of God, was a prophecy and a foretelling that the serpent and
devil, that had abused the visible serpent in deceiving of the woman, should
not for all that leave his malice and ha^^d against the woman and her seed, but
should always ^^ nibling (yet but nibling) at their heel, not being able ^^
do any hurt to their principal parts. And this the Lord added as an admonition
to the woman and her seed, to take the better heed of the Serpents said
nibling. Now although this will of God were in substance perfect at the first;
yet it being only in promise, and a matter of great importance required a long
time for the making of all writings, and the sealing of them, with other
matters belonging to the performance and full accomplishment of the said will.
The writings were begun to be made, or rather drawn by Moses at the direction
of God himself: after Moses, the Lord from time used other clarks (as it were)
and secretaries to write more, not in substance, but for the better explaning
of those that Moses had written, and that as occasion required in respect of
times and persons, till the coming of Christ. When Christ was come, then first
of all himself in his own person more fully 2. Tim. 3. 16. 2. Pet. 1. 21.
opened the former writings written by the inspiration of God, and as the holy
Ghost had moved holy men before to write. After Christ, the Apostles having
plentifully received the holy Ghost, wrote all things done and spoken by our
Savior, that were necessary for us to believe unto salvation. Much also of
that that Moses had written being written to continue but for a time, even til
the death of Christ, was by the death of Christ cancelled, as being performed
and accomplished, and all necessary to salvation, and to remain without any
alteration, was sealed with the blood of Christ, as with the Lords broad seal
of heaven.

Notwithstanding the Lord would have all that was disanulled Why the Lord would
have the law being abrogated to remain for all that upon record in the time of
the Gospel.
by Christ, to remain upon record for all posterity; not to be observed as it
had bin, but to the end that thereby it might be the more evident, how all
things before promised, foretold* or set forth by types, figures and shadows,
were accomplished, that so also men living under the Gospel, might the better
see their great prerogatives above them that lived under the Law, and in the
time of the old Testament. The abrogating therefore of the old Testament, so
far as it was old and to be abrogated, does not any way favor those that
fondly think the Scriptures of the old Testament no way to belong unto us now.
For how shall we see the truth of that that the Apostle Act. 26. 22.
says, he had said no other things then those which Moses and the Prophets had
said should come; and that the Gospel was Rom 1. 2.
that that God had promised by his Prophets in holy Scriptures? As also how
shall we well understand diverse things in the M^t. 1. 22. 2. 15. 18. 3. 3. 4.
14. 26 54.. Ioh. 19. 36. 37.
Gospel, of which it is said, they were done that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled, or as it was written, if we have not the Scripture of the old
Testament to show us what had bin written? How shall we also understand the
proof of many things in the Acts and in the Epistles by the testimony of
former Scriptures, if we have not the said Scriptures?

Notwithstanding the old and new Testament do herein differ: first, that all
things before promised, are in the New performed. Secondly, that the New is
more perspicuous then the Old: yea also makes the Old more plain then it was.
And hereby it is evident, that the new Testament is more perfect then the Old.
For, are not performances better then promises? All things indeed by the Lord
promised, are as certain in respect of God as if they were performed: but they
are not so perfect unto us, in respect of our weakness. David was assured of
the kingdom of 1. Sam. 16. 13.
Israel by the word and anointing of Samuel, and by many experiences of Gods
mercies toward him, whereby he comforted Saul himself against Goliath, before
in a pitiful 1. Sam. 17. 11. ^2. 24. 34.
fear of him, as well as all the rest of Israel, who for fear of Goliath did
hide their heads: yea, that David should be King, was known to all the people,
as appears by the words of Jonathan, and also of Abigail unto David. Yet 1.
Sam 20. 14. 15. and 25. 30.
alas, after all these and many great deliverances of David from Saul, how in a
kind of despair said he in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand
of Saul? 1. Sam 27. 1.


To proceed yet further, this last will and testament of God is more perfect
then the former, not only in the former respects of performing all things
before promised and signified by types, etc. of removing such types and
figures, as before did obscure his will, and of the more clearing of the
substance it self of his will, by our Savior and by his Apostles, but also
because now in these last days he has spoken by his Son, both immediately in
the person of his Son made man, and also mediatly in Heb. 1. 2. 2. Cor. 13. 3.
his Apostles, that he will never speak any more by any man in such manner, as
that the word of any man shall be accounted the word of God, as heretofore the
word of Moses, and the other Prophets, and the Apostles has bin accounted, and
is to be accounted the word of God, and for the rule of any man's faith or life,
any otherwise then it agrees with his word written by Moses, the Prophets and
Apostles.

Before the coming of Christ, God raised up diverse Prophets, Prophet after
Prophet, the latter to expound and interpret (as it were) the former; giving
lesson upon lesson, line upon line, line upon line, now a little and then a
Isay. 28. 13.
little. So likewise he directed the Apostles to write diverse Epistles to
diverse Churches, some also to particular persons: all which, and every part
whereof is to be accounted and received as given by inspiration of God, and
therefore 2. Tim. 3. 16.
for the word of God: but now he has spoken so fully and wholly by them before
mentioned, that he will never speak any more in such manner: so that whosoever
he be that shall speak or write, how learned, how godly soever he be, yet that
which he shall speak or write, though never so well agreeing with the word
written, shall not be taken so to be the word of God, as that any may make the
same a touchstone for trial of any men's doctrine, as we may and must make the
Scriptures of the old and new Testament. Oh what an evidence is this of the
perfection of the new will and testament of God above the old? No book of the
old Testament was so singularly the will of God, but that other books after
written were as well to be accounted of: neither the whole old Testament so,
but that the New was likewise: neither any part of the new written before the
other so, but that the other written afterward, was of equal authority with
the former. So may it not be said of any other books written since by any
other whatsoever.

Last of all, this word perfect, does not only import such a will and
testament, as whereto there shall never be any thing added as it were a
codicill to be thereunto annexed, but also such a will and testament as shall
continue for ever to the end of the world, and never be abolished or abrogated
in the whole or in any part thereof, as the other was: and this the word here
used and translated perfect, in the Greek and Latin tongue seems to import.
Then is a thing said to be perfected in Latin, when it is finished and brought
to the end. It is as plain in the Greek, because the substantive of the
adjective here used, signifies the end; and the aduerb derived from both,
signifies to the end: as when it is said, Hope perfectly, the 1. Pet. 1. 13.
meaning is, Hope to the end, as it is translated in our new translation. The
same is also manifest by reason, touching the will of a man. For the last will
and testament of a man cannot be altered after the death of the testator: so
cannot the will and testament of God, made by his Son, in the name of God,
and by the authority of God, be now altered: the Son that made it being now
dead, and his will being proved in the great and high Court of heaven by God
himself the Judge of all the world, from whom there is no appeal to any
other. Where a testament is (says Heb. 9. 16.
the Apostle) there must also be the death of the testator: for a testament is
of force after men are dead; otherwise it is of no strength at all whiles the
testator lives.

If it be objected, that albeit Christ died, yet he now lives Reu. 1. 18.
for evermore. I answer, that yet his death was so effectual for confirmation
of this his Will, that his said Will cannot by his present life for evermore be
cancelled or made of no force. For that his once death, though raised again,
was more then if all the men in the world, yea also if all the Angels in heaven
had died, never to be again restored to life. And by that his death he has
freed all his elect from everlasting death most justly deserved by them.
Again, though he now live in heaven, yet he is so dead unto men, as that he
shall never again live with men in this world, to eat and drink, to be
hungry and thirsty, and weary in his own person as he was.

To conclude all before written of these three adjuncts The uses of the former
three adjuncts of the will of God. 1. Reprehension of the Papists.
of this will of God, with the uses thereof, the more excellent we have heard
the same to be by the said ad^uncts, the greater is the wickedness of all
Papists, that denying the same to be so good, so well pleasing, so perfect, and
therefore do yet add the doctrines of men, and the daily decrees of that man
of sin, the child of perdition, the Antichrist of Rome, not only as equal to
this will, neither to make y^ same better, the acceptabler and ye more perfect,
but also to abrogate it, and to dispense with any thing done contrary
thereunto, as with breach of oaths, the loyalty of subjects unto their
Sovereigns, the murder also of such Princes, giving their kingdoms to whom
they list; so also with marriages within the degrees of kindred, forbidden
marriage by God himself.

It makes also for reprehension of Anabaptists, Familists, Reprehension of the
Annabaptists.
and all other, that either reject this will of God altogether, or think it
not so good, so well pleasing, and so perfect, but that there must be
revelations and visions, whereby to be made the better, the more pleasing, and
perfect.

I might likewise here speak of the contempt of the Reprehension of some among
us.
word amongst our selves; yea, by them that would not be accounted profane
persons as Esau, but professors, and such as will show fair countenances to
Ministers and to other that do indeed regard the word. But, oh who can so
speak as to reform it? Not Paul himself: not Christ as he was man, and as in
his humane nature did once speak unto men. If the word be preached to some in
the morning, somewhat sooner then other men preach; or in the afternoon
somewhat later then other men, though upon never so good reason, yea upon some
necessity; oh then it is preached out of season. What then? Has not the
Apostle commanded it so to be preached? Has he 2. Tim. 4. 2.
commanded it so to be preached, and has he not commanded it so to be heard?
Yea, but in the morning we shall hear it in our own Churches afterward, and
in the afternoon we have heard it there already; and therefore what need we to
hear it again? it is even to glut us with hearing. So the Israelites loathed
Manna. But alas, what Number. 11. 67.
followed? They lusted for flesh, and they had it of ye daintiest: Psalm. 78. 24.
but they had little pleasure in it; Whiles it was between their teeth, and ere
it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled Number. 11. 33.
against them, and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague, to the
slaying of the fattest of them, etc. Again, if Psa. 78. 31.
such men as so excuse themselves, might have silver or gold, or both, or any
other commodity offered unto them, either very cheap, or especially for
nothing, without any I^ay. 55. 1.
money, and without any price, would they make such excuses? would they be so
nice in taking pains to fetch it? As for some dainty Dames, even sprugd up of
nothing, that are so long in dressing and attiring themselves in the morning,
that they can scarce come to their own Churches, how near soever, till it be
ten of the clock, when all are come together, and they may be seen of all; and
that after their own Sermon* or perhaps Service only read in the afternoon,
they cannot take the pains to go hear the word preached a quarter of a mile
from them, be the weather never so fair, the way never so plain; let them
take heed of that baldness and girding of sackcloth that the Isay. 3. 24.
Lord by his Prophet threatens to such Touching other that object long
preaching, and the Ministers standing above his hour, to keep them from the
word, some of them care not how long in the very night they sit at a profane
Play, or at other vain exercises, as cards, dice, tables, and the like, and
some swil^ing and drinking at Tauernes, Innes, Alehouses, etc. till they
cannot see the way home, not go when they are in the way; oh how may they
fear, that it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha in the Mat. 10. 15.
day of judgment then for them. Let them consider to whom and in what earnest
manner our Savior threatens this judgment, and they shall perceive that it
belongs much more unto the^, and to such other contemners of this good, well
pleasing, and perfect will of God, as wherewith these times do every where
abound. The same may be said of all whom worldly business, buying or selling,
or walking to see their come, their kine, their sheep and lambs on the Lords
days, when they might be partaker of the preaching of this will of God.
Neither are they to be excused that spend the time in private reading of the
word, when they might hear it publikly preached. Oh that all these would
remember that to the Hebrews before mentioned, How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation? And oh that I could speak that word in season to
any of them, that might be unto them as apples of gold with pictures Pro. 25.
11.
of silver. Thus much for reprehension.

The second use is for instruction. How therefore should Instruction.
this excellency of the new Testament and of the Gospel since the coming of
Christ, inflame the hearts of men with the love thereof? yea, how should it
make them sick of love unto it? Oh such sickness is no whit dangerous: it is
not of death, or unto death; but of life, and unto life, yea, unto everlasting
life. I have heard some wish for an Ague every Spring as thinking that an Ague
in the Spring is physic for a King. But alas, where shall we find any so
sick of love to the word, as that he may cry out with the Prophet, Oh how
love I thy law? Many are sick of sin, Psalm. 119 97.
and feel it not: many of surfeiting and drunkenness and will not be cured:
many of vanities, and all kind of pleasures: many and very many, even of
professors are sick of the love of the world and of the things that are in the
world, 1. Ioh. ^. 15.
which therefore have not the love of God in them. But not one of twenty, not
one of an hundred, not one of a thousand is sick of the love of the word, and
of this good, well pleasing, and perfect will of God. On that all that do indeed
love this will of God, were sicker then they are, to see so few sick of love
to the said will of God; yea so sick of hatred unto it, that they persecute
all them that do most love it.

Touching consolation; if our Savior pronounced Consolation. Mat. 13. 16. 17.
Luke 10. 23. 29.
the eyes and ears of his Apostles blessed, because they saw and heard those
things that many Prophets and righteous men, and Kings desired to see and
hear, and could not: how blessed are we, how may we rejoice, and in the joy of
our hearts bless God, that see and hear those things that we see and hear?
For the Apostles themselves had not then seen and heard the things that are now
to be seen and heard. Christ had not then done so many miracles, as afterward
he did. Neither had he spoken so many things as afterward, even to the Apostles
themselves, both before and also after his resurrection. Yea, before his
resurrection he had not spoken so many things that afterward he spoke, Ioh. 6.
12.
because then they were not of capacity to bear them. Neither also had Christ
then suffered his bitterest passion, the which made him thrice most earnestly
to pray to be delivered from it, if it had bin possible, and if so it had
pleased Mat. 26. 39. etc.
his Father; the agony whereof made his sweat like drops of blood trickling
down* to the ground; the extremity Luke 22. 44.
whereof forced him most bitterly to cry out, My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Christ had not then risen Mat. 27. 46.
again, nor ascended into heaven, nor therefore led captivity captive, nor
given such gifts unto men, as after his ascension he did. Neither had the said
Disciples seen so great a conversion of three thousand souls in one day, as
afterward they did. Neither had the Gospel bin then, or long time after
preached to the Gentiles, as afterward it was. Yea, long after Christ's
resurrection, Peter himself that had done so strange miracles, was so ignorant
of the abrogation of the law, touching the difference of meats in the time of
the law, and of the calling of the Gentiles, that in a trance seeing by vision*
a vessel full of all manner of living creatures, clean and unclean; and being
bidden to Act. 10. 10. etc.
rise, kill, and eat; with great detestation he refused so to do, though he
were very hungry. When also understanding the meaning of the vision, according
thereunto he had preached to Coruelius and other Gentiles with him, how did the
other Apostles and the rest of the Church at Jerusalem bewray their ignorance
also of the calling of the Gentiles, by their offense at Peter's preaching unto
them, until Peter had made relation by what warrant and authority, and with
what success from God he had done all that he did. We now here living, do know
all these things: yea, we having bin Gentiles as well as any other, without
Christ, aliens from the common wealth of Israel strangers Ephesians. 2. 12. 13.
from the covenants of promise, etc. do now through the grace of God partake
with other Gentiles in their calling, and having bin far off, are made nigh
by the blood of Christ. Yea, we have all the will of God written by the
Apostles long after the former words of our Savior to the Apostles, whereunto
(as we have heard) nothing is to be added, or ever shall or may be added. How
are we therefore to leap for joy, and to rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious? 1. Pet. 1. 8.
The Psalmist often prophetically bade the Gentiles in the promise hereof to
rejoice. Shall not we then much more rejoice that enjoy this promise? Yea, let
us testify our said joy and thankfulness for the matter of it, by making
further use of instruction. Let us attend, yea the more abundantly (as the
Apostle says) attend: yea, he says Heb. 2. 1.
that we ought to attend to the things (of this will) that we have heard,
whereby we are thus blessed. The word translated to attend, signifies
adhibere, to apply. What must we apply? Our ears to hear; yea also our minds
more and more to understand; yea, our love, more and more to embrace and love
it: our fear, more and more to stand in awe that we offend not this will of
God: our delight, to take more and more pleasure in it: our hope, more and more
to expect with assurance the performance of every legacy therein bequeathed
unto us: our hatred, more and more to loath whatsoever is contrary unto it: our
zeal, to be more and more earnest according to every occasion for it. What
more? Our mouths to make confession of it: yea, our whole man more and more to
yield all obedience unto it, and to whatsoever is in our power for the
advancement of it, whereby we may the better testify it to be indeed in our
hearts. And all this we ought to do the more abundantly, according to the
signification (as I said) of the word translated the more. Now this word being
a comparatiue, must needs have relation to some other, in respect of whom we
must more abundantly apply our selves unto it. Who are they then whom we must
more abundantly, and as it were without measure, as never being satisfied, so
apply our selves to the things which we have heard of this will? The Fathers
that lived under the old Testament, mentioned in the beginning of the first
Chapter to the Hebrews. The rather must we labor so as before we said, to
apply our selves wholly to the things we have heard out of this will, more
abundantly then ever the said Fathers did; because Peter speaking of those
Prophets by whom God had in old time so spoken to those Fathers, as the Apostle
speaks in that first verse of the first Chapter to the Hebrews; because
Peter (I say) 1. Pet. 1. 12.
speaking of those Prophets, says, that it was revealed unto them, that not
unto themselves (viz. so much) but unto us they should minister the things
which are now reported (or showed) by the Preachers of the Gospel, with the
holy Ghost sent down from heaven* etc. Is it so? It is not then enough for us
so to apply our selves to the things we have heard and daily do hear, as the
said Fathers did, but we must labor so much the more herein to excel them, by
how much the more the Lord has bettered his will toward us above that that he
did unto them. For to whomsoever much is given, of him much is required. But is
it so with us? Oh Luke 12. 48.
that it were so. But alas, alas, we come far short of them. The poorest of
those Fathers, in godliness and in such regard of those things that they then
heard, are much before us, even before such of us as account themselves the
richest, in those things that we daily hear or may hear, and whereby also we
enjoy many other mercies. It may be some of us have now more knowledge; but if
the godliness of such be not according, their sin is the Luke 12. 47.
greater.

CHAP. XVI.
Of other uses of the former doctrine, from those former three adjuncts of the
will of God.

Having before made some general use of the doctrine from these three adjuncts
of the will of God, good, well pleasing, and perfect; I will now come to some
more particular use thereof concerning both the duty of the people toward the
Ministers of the said will of God, and also of the Ministers themselves in
respect of the excellency of that will, so by those adjuncts commended.

Concerning therefore the former of those two, the more excellent that those
three adjuncts before handled The excellency of the Mininistrie.
do show the will of God to be, the more excellent also must needs be the
calling of them whom the Lord has made Ministers of the said will: as his
spiritual Lawyers indeed to declare the said his will unto his people, and to
lay forth and (as it were) to plead all his bountiful and most princely
legacies therein bequeathed unto them against all the enemies of their
salvation, that endeavor what they can to deprive them of the said legacies.
The more excellent (I say) that by those adjuncts of this will the Ministers
thereof are, then were the Ministers of his former will, now by this his last
will (in part) revoked and disanulled, they more highly must they be accounted.
For, as the Apostle to the Hebrews proves Christ the Heb. 2. 3. 13. 20 1.
Pet. 5. 4. Ioh. 13. 13.
first and chiefest Minister of this will, yea the Lord and Master of all
Ministers; yea also the only Judge, before whom all his Ministers and Lawyers
must plead the said will, against all the adversaries both thereof, and also
of all them that have any legacy therein, and from whom there lies no
appeal. As (I say) the Apostle proves this first and chiefest Minister of
this Will to be so much greater then Aaron the first and chiefest high Priest
of the Law and of the former will of God, yea the chief Judge, before whom all
matters of difference betwixt clean and unclean, etc. were to be heard, tried
and determined, by how much better this Testament is, whereof this first and
Heb. 7. 22. and 8. 6
chief high Priest Christ Jesus is the surety or mediator, as having better
promises then the old Testament had; so by the same reason also all the
Ministers of the Gospel may well be justified, in respect of their calling, to
be greater and more excellent then all the Ministers of the Law; namely,
because under Christ, by Christ and for Christ they are Ministers of a better
and more excellent Testament.

Hereunto accords the commendation of John the Baptist Mat. 11. 9.
above Eliah and all the other Prophets, before whom notwithstanding he
prefers the least in the kingdom of ver. 11.
heaven, that is, the least Minister of the Gospel, even the meanest ^or gifts
if he be sufficient. For the Gospel there and often elsewhere, especially in
parables, is called by the name of ^he kingdom of heaven, because it is
Christ's Scepter of that kingdom, and the key whereby he opens it unto us,
and lets us into it; and the means whereby men are made partaker of the
kingdom of grace here, and shall hereafter be possessed of the kingdom of
glory; and without which none shall or can ever attain unto this kingdom,
either of grace or of glory. John also was greater then any of the Prophets,
because his ministry was greater then theirs, as being a middle ministry
betwixt the Law and the Gospel; neither of the Law, nor of the Prophets; and
yet, as greater then of the Law, so also less then of the Gospel. The
Ministers therefore altogether of the Gospel, cannot but be greater then both
John, and also much more then of the Law only, who were less then John.

Now then if the Ministers of the Gospel be greater then the Ministers of the
Law, it follows also, that they are more to be respected then the Ministers
of the Law, whatsoever they were.

And in the former comparatiue commendation of John by our Savior, above the
Ministers of the Law, let us note one thing, and let us note it well, that
therein he speaks climatically, that is, rises by degrees higher and higher;
from a reed shaken with the wind, to a man clothed in soft raiment: describing
such an one by his place where he is, namely in Kings houses or Courts; from
such a one to a Prophet, from a Prophet to John the Baptist; from John the
Baptist to the least in the kingdom of heaven: by the least in the kingdom of
heaven, meaning the least Minister of the Gospel, of the least gifts, so he
have sufficient for execution of the Ministry of the Gospel. So our Savior
makes the least such Minister of the Gospel, how mean soever in the eyes of
men, yet in respect of his calling greater then John, and therefore then the
Prophets; and therefore also in the third place then Courtiers, though brave,
gay and gorgeous in apparell^ which is the more to be noted, because every one
almost in these days wearing gay apparel (as who almost does not that can
brag it, or be trusted for it, though he leave them that trust him to take more
care to get the price to be paid, then he does to pay it) every one (I say) in
these days that is gay coated (though no Courtier) thinks himself a better
man then the ancientest and best Minister of the Gospel; and will therefore
take place of him; yea, so also will some Seruing-men, especially serving one
of great worship or higher rank, at least in some place near unto him. So
will every mean magistrate in any city or town almost, especially having
sometime bin his Majesty's Lieutenant, and borne the chiefest magistracy in
such cities and town, though he be out of the said office, and do but only
sit on the bench: and yet such contemners of Ministers, will give way to a
mean gentleman coming to that city or town where he is a magistrate. Aaron
indeed was subject to Moses, because Moses was both chief magistrate, and also
so great a Prophet, that Christ is said to be like unto him: and so all the
Kings and every King Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Ioh 1. 45. Act. 3. 22. and. 7. 37. 1. Kin.
2. 26. 1. Kin. 1. 19.
of Judah had pre-eminence above all Priests and Prophets: and therefore Solomon
deprived Abiathar from his Highpriesthood, for his conspriracie with Adoniah
against Solomon, to have put him by the kingdom after the death of David. And
so in these days all Kings, or having kingly authority, are above all
Ministers whatsoever, as well as above all other within their dominions, and
must be accordingly Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14.
by all honored: yea, so must also all be that any where are in chiefest place
under them, and represent their persons. And that such kingly majesty or
magistracy is above all ministerial dignity (howsoever some of the Fathers
have extolled that dignity) appears, in that the kingly dignity of all
Christians is always set before their priestly dignity. For it is always
said, a kingdom of Priests, or a royal priesthood; and that they are Kings
and Exodus 19. 6. 1. Pet. 29. Reu. 1. 6. and. 5. 10
Priests: it is never said a priestly kingdom, or a priesthood of kings; or
that we are Priests and Kings. Notwithstanding it is a weak argument, and
bewrays a weak wit and a shallow brain, from the superiority of Moses
above Aaron, to infer that therefore every mean magistrate in dignity is
above, and to take place of every Minister, yea of any that is indeed a
Minister, though he be younger in years; because in respect of his ministry,
which is character indelebilis, he is an Elder: and as so called, and so 1.
Tim. 5. 17. 1. Pet. 5. 1.
ought to carry himself, so also he is so to be respected. By the former
argument, every mean Constable may also take place of any Minister.
Notwithstanding I would not wish any Minister to strive for precedencie,
otherwise then in his ministry to teach it. But as our Savior says, Him
that takes away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat Luke 16. 29.
also: so if any such pert and high minded petty magistrate will take the place
of thee that art a Minister, yea ancient and painful, let him have it, and
more also, rather then contend with him. It is better for any to take wrong,
then to do wrong. It is better also that such an one as shall so contemn a
Minister, do show his small wit and rude manners, then that any Minister should
so strive, as whereby to give any suspicion of pride. For, the servant of the
Lord must not strive, but be gentle toward all men, etc. Notwithstanding 2.
Tim. 2. 24.
let such weak witted and ignorant gentlemen, so much standing upon their
pantofles, if they have not learned the dignity of Ministers, by their
honorable names in the Scriptures, by their emploiment for the salvation of
men's souls, and the making of them sons and daughters, as also Kings and
Priests unto God: if by these and other arguments in the Scriptures they have
not yet learled what honor to give unto Ministers, let them read the learned
Treatise of that argument, written by one of greater learning and higher place
then my self; and let the same be as a Primmer to teach him his lesson, for
the better estimation of Ministers. Let all so basely esteeming of Ministers of
the Gospel, of whom they should with admiration say, How beautiful are their
very feet! Let them Isay. 52. 7. Romans 10. 15. 1. Kin. 18. 3. 7.
(I say) remember the reverence of Obadiah (King Ahabs house-steward.) to
Eliah, no great rich man, having bin before fed by ravens, and having had no
better drink then the water of the brook Cherith, and bin also nourished by
1. Kin. 17. 4. 9.
a poor widow of Zareptah. Let them remember the like of the third Captain
sent with fifty men to fetch the said Eliah before King Ahaziah, together with
the fearful fire 2. Kin. 5. 1. 13. ver. 10. 11.
of God upon the former two Captains with their fifties, sent to the same
purpose, for their rude and imperious doing the Kings message unto him. Let
them remember what our Savior said to the seventy Disciples sent forth by two
and two, He that despises you, despises me; and he Luke 10. 16.
that despises me, despises him that sent me. Let them remember how Paul
beseeches the Thessalonians very highly to esteem them that labored amongst
them, and were over them in the Lord, admonishing them, etc. Let them remember
1. These. 5. 12.
that the Galatians whiles they were in their right Gal. 3. 1.
minds, not bewitched, nor (as it were) distracted by false Apostles, esteemed
Paul as an Angel of God, yea as Christ cap. 4. 14.
Jesus, so that they would have plucked out their eyes (if it had bin possible)
and have given them to Paul. Alas, how many in these days would if they could,
scratch out their Ministers eyes? Certainly, as Paul says of the Corinthians,
2. Cor. 12. 15.
that the more abundantly he loved them, the less he was beloved of them: so
may many good and careful Ministers say in these days of some of the people
whom they have taught, and for whom and theirs they have prayed, and have bin
heard in the things they have prayed for in their behalf; especially if they
shall either publikly reprove any thing whereof their consciences do accuse
them, though the Ministers never in such reprehensions never meant them; or at
the least any thing roundly speak of any thing but privately. And such base
estimation of Ministers having once possessed the minds of men, it will hardly be
cast out by Christ's disciples if they were here, without Mark. 9. 29.
prayer and fasting. Neither is this the fault of profane and ignorant men, but
of men of great knowledge and profession; yea also of no small fashion
otherwise: and therefore indeed toward Ministers the more bitter and impatient.

But because such love and high estimation of Ministers, How the love of men
toward their Miinsters, as also their inward reverence of them may be
discerned.
as the Apostle commends to the Thessalonians, are things inward; how may
they be discerned by others that cannot see into the inner parts of a man. To
omit that outward reverence and respect that is common to other persons of any
eminency in the world, as the which may be gathered by some thing before
spoken of the carriage of other toward other Ministers, and the which is
ordinarily used, I will only commend three things, whereby the due love and
estimation of Ministers may be discerned: first, diligent hearing of them:
secondly, sufficient maintenance: thirdly, true obedience. Touching diligent
hearing, Dilligent Ministers, diligent to be heard.
first of all let us remember, that they are so to be heard, though they do not
live according to their teaching and doctrine, but clean contrary thereunto.
For so our Savior commanded concerning the Scribes and Pharisees. Mat 23. 2. 3.
For the life of such, shall only increase the condemnation of such Ministers
themselves, it shall not any whit prejudice the attentive and reverent hearer:
neither may it be pleaded as an excuse for not hearing of such Ministers. Where
there is a commandment for doing any thing there is a promise of blessing to
them that do the thing commanded. And has not the Lord blessed the ministry
of some that have bin wicked? Verily he has: as appears by that that is
written of such as shall be able to plead in the last day, they had
prophesied, and cast out devils, Mat. 7. 22. 23.
and done many wonderful works in the name of Christ; who notwithstanding
shall be rejected as workers of iniquity. Gods blessing is not tied to the
persons of any, but attends upon his own ordinance carefully respected. The
word of God in the mouth of a man, has first come Job. 22. 22.
out of the mouth of God himself; and therefore it shall Isay. 55. 11.
not return to the Lord in vain, but it shall accomplish that which he
pleases, etc. and be a savor either of death unto 2. Cor. 2. 15. 16.
death or of life unto life: in both a sweet savor of Christ. God his justice
is as precious unto him, as his mercy. Our Savior also says, He that has an
ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says (not what man says) unto
the Churches. Reu 2. 7. 11. 17.
Do not also the excellency of the word and our necessity require the hearing
thereof, by whom soever preached?

But for all that, some perhaps may ask more particularly, Our own Ministers
especially to be heard on the Lords days.
what Ministers are to be heard? I answer, that on the week days let men
hear any soundly preaching wheresoever they can, as their callings, strength
of body and affairs will give them leave; for the better increase of
knowledge, confirmation of judgment, strengthening Phil. 1. 9. 1. These. 4. 1.
^. Pet 1. 5. and 3. 18. Heb. 10. 24.
of faith, provoking of love, growing in all grace. For we must abound more and
more in all these things. But on the Lords days, we must hear our own
Ministers soundly preaching, and especially gracing their doctrine with a life
agreeable; as also the next so preaching, whose ministry we may be partaker
of, without prejudice to our own. But what if we may hear some other of
better gifts then either our own or the next dwellers, by whom we may be more
edified? We are not so much to respect the gifts of men, as Gods ordinance,
both in setting able Ministers over us, and also in commanding rest on his day.
For we are as well bound to hear our own Ministers preaching soundly, as they
are bound to preach to us. They may as well leave us, as we them. And we are
more bound to rest on the Lords day (without very great necessity to the
contrary) then we are bound to labor on the six days. The commandment for
sanctifying the Lords day, and resting thereon as a means of sanctifying the
same, is absolute: but the words, six days shall thou labor, etc. are but the
liberty so to do, without any absolute necessity. As the like, Of every tree
in the garden thou may Genesis 2. 16.
freely eat; viz. except of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, etc. The
like is to be said of that, touching the finding of a birds neast with young
ones, Thou shall in any wise let Deuteronomy. 22. 7.
the dam go, and take the young to thee. Neither was Adam bound to eat of every
tree except the excepted; nor a man so bound to take the young birds, as that he
should sin if he took them not. So are the words to be understood for
working on the six days. Otherwise it were not lawful to hear the word on
any of these days: neither especially to keep any one of those days wholly
holy upon any occasion. By the same reason also that some may leave their own
preaching Minister, and other near, both whose labor they may enjoy, other
may do the like: and so there shall be none left to whom such Ministers may
speak. Not so. For we leave our wives, children, and servants, and diverse
other too that cannot go abroad. Yea, but by the former reason, they may go as
well as your selves. Again, that is spoken more like to them that love good
cheer at other men's tables. But will ye that thus plead, like it well if your
children or servants would not be content with your diet, but go elsewhere to
such as had better fare? As you would think your children and servants to
scorn your diet, seeking better elsewhere: so, who sees not you to contemn
your own such Ministers and other near dwellers, so preaching as before I
said, in thinking their preaching to be good enough for your boys and girls,
not for your selves?

For who will also to take liberty to go on that day whither they list, to
whom they list, is to break the heart of such forsaken Ministers, and to make
the gifts which such high spirited men in conceit of their own great judgment
think but weak, to be much weaker; and so to discourage them, as that they
shall not preach to other as they ought and otherwise would; at least that they
cannot do their work with joy but with grief, and to the less profit Heb.
13. 17.
of their hearers. Let such heart-breakers, especially by adding affliction to
such as whom the Lord by their enemies Psalm. 69. 26.
and other crosses has before smitten, (no small sin) let them remember that
if any man think he knows any thing (as such so lightly esteeming such
Ministers think 1. Cor. 8. 2.
themselves to know more then they) he knows nothing as he ought to know.

Touching gifts, many such conceited men do greatly err in their judgments of
men's ministerial gifts. The sufficiency of Ministers is not so much to be
judged by their volubilite of tongue, readiness of utterance, nimblenesse of
wit, vehemency of affections, and the like, as by substance of matter.
Especially this is not to be judged by professors scarce borne, when such
Ministers were first Preachers. Let such censurers of and carpers at the mean
gifts of other in respect of the old age of such Ministers, remember what God
said to Samuel, in his age rejected by the Israelites, pretending
notwithstanding the looseness of his sons, They have not rejected thee, but
they 1. Sam. 8. 7.
have rejected me, etc. There is the same reason of teaching, that there is of
reigning and government: especially when men can take no more exception against
men's teaching, then the Israelites did or could against Samuels government.
chap. 12. 4.
Furthermore, as such forsakers of some men's ministry, to go to other farther
off, more then double a Sabbaths day journey (which yet was not permitted, but
taken up by custom) break the hearts of them whom they do so forsake; so also
they may puff up them to whom they so go in such manner, as they know not
themselves nor their ancients, but think themselves far greater then they are,
and other to be meaner then they are, and then their betters elsewhere have
accounted them: yea then by their labors (to omit some other things) they have
approved themselves. Oh the heart of man herein is deceitful above all things,
and is as easily puffed up, as any other way corrupted. As God also gives not
always the grearest blessing to the greatest fare for the body, but sometimes
makes men to prosper as well with course cheer as with the diet of Princes or
Nobles, (as appears by Daniel and Dan. 1. 8.
his companions, and daily by many poor men's children, that being hardly
brought up, look as well, and are as comely and beautiful as the children of
other that are most daintily fed;) so also the Lord sometimes blesses the
mean gifts of some (that are especially accounted mean) to as good edifying
of other in the faith, as the greatest gifts that are. Daily experience
teaches this. The worthiest Ministers for learning, pains and godliness,
have not always the most and best Christian congregations. Some are esteemed
not according to their worthiness, but according to the conceits of the
esteemers. What comparison betwixt Paul and Apollos, either for calling, or for
divine knowledge, or for godliness? yet some preferred Apollos before Paul,
not a whit behind the very chiefest 2. Cor. 11 5.
Apostles. But did not Paul by the Spirit of God reprove 1. Cor. 1. 12. and 3.
6.
it? Notwithstanding so do some in these days: passing by the Churches of some
when they are going to their work, and going much further, and yet not faring
better then they might have fared at home More edifying also is not so much to
be boasted of by words, as to be showed by works. Much and earnest prayer will
obtain as good a blessing upon mean gifts, as upon greater. As the Lord
saves from outward dangers, as well by few 1. Sam. 14 6. 2. Chron. 14. 11.
Judge 7. 2. Mark. 6. 38. and 8. 7. P^al. 92. 4.
as by many; and feeds as well plentifully with a little as with much: so he
both can and does often feed the souls of some, and makes them as fat and in
as good liking, where there is true humility, by men of mean gifts
conscionably employed, as by the greatest gifts of other, though also carefully
employed. This by some of the best Divines is well gathered from the example of
the Angel Reu. 3. 8.
of Philadelphia, who though he had but a little strength, that is, were of
mean gifts in comparison of other, yet had the best Church of all the seven
Churches of Asia.

Let men also examine the former dealing with such Ministers, by the rule of
our Savior, Whatsoever ye would Mat. 7. 12. and 22. 39.
that men should do unto you, do ye to them: and, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. For who of them that make so light account of some, and contemn
them, doing the best they can, and that which their betters have approved; and
whereof other as good as themselves would be glad and for the which they would
bless God. For who (I say) of such would like of such dealing, toward
themselves, if they were Ministers? Neither let any man wash his hands from the
crime of contempt in this kind, as the manner of most is, how contemptuous
soever. For the holy Ghost has recorded Jacob as an hater of Leah, because he
loved Genesis 29. 30 31.
Rahel more then her. Does not the Lord also join these two together, The word
of the Lord is unto them a reproach, Ier. 6. 10.
they have no delight in it? Does he not by this connection plainly teach, that
the word of the Lord is a reproach (or a contempt) to them that have no delight
in it? He is more then purblind that sees not the like reason to be of the
ministry of the word, and of the word it self. Neither can any man discharge
himself of the contempt of the persons of such Ministers, whose ministry so
comparatively he contemns. At least the contempt of a man's ministry is
greater then the contempt of his person: because the contempt of that
ministry, against which no just exception can be taken, is the contempt of
Christ, that speaks in such a Minister, and God also works Luk 10. 16. 2.
Cor. 13. 3. 1. Cor. 3 9.
with him.

Moreover, to give liberty to our ears so to itch after variety of teachers,
though they be good, neglecting our own not inferior unto them (or if in
gifts inferior, yet sound and painful) is the next stepped to itching ears
that 2. Tim. 4. 3. 4.
shall not endure sound doctrine, but itch after such as by whom ears and
hearts shall be turned from the truth to fables, Popish or other. Let no man be
too confident of himself touching this danger. For the more confident for the
most part men are in this kind, the sooner they are overtaken and bewitched
with such teachers, as some examples before mentioned testify. Are any also
that are so confident, so well grounded in the truth, and so well affected
toward any Ministers, as the Galatians were toward Gal. 4. 14. 15. Gal 3. 1.
Paul? who notwithstanding were so soon bewitched, not to obey the truth, that
Paul himself began in his Epistle with a sharp reprehension by way of
admiration, that they were so soon removed from him that had called them into
the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. Let him that thinks 1. Cor. 10. 12.
he stands, take heed lest he fall* Especially let such take heed hereof, that
are much carried with the world. For who may think himself stronger then
Demas, whose saluations Paul had before remembered to the church of Colosse, and
Col 4 14. Phil. 2. 4.
whom he had reckoned among other his fellow * laborers? yet even him he
brandeth afterward for one that had forsaken 2. Tim. 4. 10.
him and embraced this present world. But indeed such as profess much, and yet
love the world much, and the things that are in the world, are scarce worth six
pence a 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
douzen. For how can they, not having the love of the Father in them? Such
confidence also argues that inward pride which Peter opposes to that
humility wherewith he exhorts such yongers as now I speak of, inwardly to
deck 1. Pet. 5. 5.
themselves: pressing y^ said exhortation with this argument from the effect,
both of that pride, and also of the former humility, that the Lord resists
them that are so proud, and gives grace to them that are so humble. Again,
who ever knew or heard of any age, wherein all Ministers were of equal gifts?
As in other men, so also in Ministers, there have bin, are and will be
diversity of gifts, though the same 1. Cor. 12. 4.
Spirit: and, to every one of us is given grace according to the Ephesians. 4. 7.
measure of the gift of Christ. What a confusion therefore would this breed in
the Church, for every one to make choice of his teacher, and to go to whom he
list?

I have the more labored in this point, because I have observed some men's
ministry to be so highly magnified, as if every word they spoke were worthy to
be written in letters of gold: but the ministry of other, without any just
exception against it, to be so abased (not perhaps in word, but that more is,
in deed) as if no word they spoke were worthy to be written in the earth.

I speak nothing herein to cool the heat of any, I wish every spark of good
zeal in any to be a great coal; every coal to be a great firebrand, and
every brand to be such a flaming fire, as much water may not quench, neither
Cant. 8. 7.
the floods may drown. For alas, the hotest true zeal of most, is colder then
our last Winter and Spring have bin. But therefore have I written thus much, to
direct the zeal of all, that it may be according to knowledge: and that
knowledge Romans 10. 2. Phil. 1. 9.
and judgment may go with love, lest otherwise it ouerflow the banks. It is
good to be zealously affected; so that the Gal. 4. 18.
thing wherein we be zealous be good. There be too many that cry down. Oh
that there were more to cry to every man, Awake thou that sleep, etc. and,
Be zealous, and amend. Ephesians. 5. 14. Reu. 3. 9.
And let all men be more humble, not too harshly to censure such Ministers
before spoken of, neither so to discourage them, having other discouragements
too many, and faithfully preaching the word, and gracing the same with a life
beseeming. Especially let all professors beware of so doing, because their
indignities against such Ministers, are greater, and wound the heart more
deeply then all the wrongs and injuries of open enemies, and then can easily be
cured.

To draw toward an end of this point; let all men be the more careful to
hear such Ministers so preaching and so living, (as before has bin said)
because if Ministers neglect their people and be absent from them, every man is
ready to cry out on them; and yet the cases are pares, even equal, both
Ministers and people that wander from their places, are like to birds that
wander from their nests. Is there Pro. 27. 8.
no danger herein?

As I said before, so I say again, on other days lawful to be traveled on,
let all men take what pains they can for hearing the word, so that they be
do^rs of the word, not hearers only, deceiving themselves; and showing forth
their Iam. 1. 22. Romans 2. 13.
good works, not abusing that place of Christ against ostentation, and doing
good to be seen of men, under color Mat. 6. 1. etc.
whereof some boast of that which they do not; but remembering that he that has
forbidden such ostentation, has also commanded us to manifest our faith by
good works, and so to let our light shine before men, that they may Mat. 5. 16.
see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. Yea let them
show their good works, according to their knowledge, according to their states
and callings, according to their abilities, according to the times, according
to the necessities of other, according to the defect of good works in other,
that is, the more other show their wickedness not fearing who behold it, the
more let them show their goodness, provoking themselves to love and to Heb.
10. 24.
good works, and abounding always in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15 58.
knowing that their labor is not in vain; and not being weary in well doing,
because in due season they shall reap (a hundred Gal. 6. 9.
for one) if they faint not. This I have the rather added, because as the
impudent whore in the Proverbs, by bragging of her peace offerings and payment
of her vows, Pro. 7. 14.
deceived the silly young man, and with much fair speech ver. 21.
caused him to yield to her filthy lusts: so some (I would there were not too
many) in these days make their much hearing, and going to many Sermons, a
cloak of much wickedness, thereby making the name of God himself and 1. Tim.
6. 1.
his doctrine to be blasphemed, and hardening other in their contempt of the
word and hearing thereof, as by the impiety of such judging all that be
hearers to be like. Let all therefore that fear God, and love the Lord Jesus
and his his word indeed, labor according to their hearing, so much the more by
good works to glorify God, by how much the more by such wickedness of other,
God is dishonored.

To return; touching the Lords days, if men have not the word at home, or
near them, but that they must go further off, let them so contriue the matter,
by going part of their way over night or otherwise, that they labor not and
weary their bodies on that day, whereon the Lord has commanded them to rest.
Though it may be more chargeable, yet it will quit cost. If we buy the truth,
and Pro. 23. 23.
give any thing for it; and having bought it, sell it not, neither part from
it, whatsoever thereby we may get, the wisdom that so we shall find will
make us happy, because the Pro. 3. 13. 14. 15
merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof better then fine gold: it is more precious then rubies, and all things
to be desired are not to be compared unto it.

The three adjuncts of this will before handled, do require all good pains and
cost for the getting of the true knowledge thereof; the rather because the word
what prefixed What.
to the said adjuncts, insinuate the said will to be so good, so well pleasing,
so perfect, that the goodness, well pleasing and perfection thereof may rather
be admired then expressed: as the same word prefixed to the hope of our Ephesians.
1. 18. 19.
calling, to the riches of the glory of Gods inheritance of his Saints, and
lastly to the exceeding greatness of his power toward us that believe, in so
material these things to be rather admirable, then by the tongue of man or
Angel to be spoken or uttered. Who therefore would not thereby be provoked to
any good pains, to any cost, whereby to be thoroughly acquainted with it? as
also whereby the more to encourage the Ministers thereof with the more
alacrity to declare the whole counsel of God therein contained to the full?
They that herein stick at any cost, at any such pains, bewray themselves to be
penny wise and pound foolish; yea, how rich soever, how honorable soever, how
gorgeous soever in apparel, by such riches and honor any is, that has not
the knowledge of this will of God, he is but a rich, an honorable, a gorgeous
fool. There is no other will of God whereby we may save our souls. What th^n
shall a man be profited to gain the whole world, if he lose his Mat. 16. 26.
own soul? Can he give any thing whereby to recover it?

But touching the hearing of our own Ministers; what if the Parish be so
spacious, that the inhabitants thereof dwell three, four, five or six miles
from their own Church (as some Parishes in some parts of the kingdom are) and
that the word be preached nearer, as some people go by the Churchyards of other
Parishes, that go much farther to their own Church; what I say is to be done
in such a case? I answer, that in such a case, there is better warrant for the
father travel on the Lords day, because of Gods providence in so disposing of
Parishes in former times, and thereby making a kind of necessity of such
traveling. Again, in such a case I do in charity suppose that a man's own
Minister will not be against his going to the nearer Preacher, so that it be
without contempt of him; and that when he may he do hear him, not defrauding
him of any other duty. I hope also that none of our wise Ecclesiastical
gouerners being acquainted herewith, would dislike of this that I say; but
would easily grant any reasonable liberty to such as so do dwell. For
conclusion of this point, let me speak a little more to such Ministers as are
so forsaken and discouraged: in good earnest therefore, and in the words of
sobriety I exhort them to comfort themselves, and that first of all in their
assurance of their reward with the Lord, who beholding all their disgrace with
men, will in the end give them the more honor and glory. Secondly, let them
comfort themselves with the examples of the Prophets and Apostles, who had none
more heavy adversaries then such as from whom they should have had most
comfort. And what if they find least kindness there, where they were bred and
borne, etc? has Mark. 6. 4. Ioh. 4. 44.
not Christ himself before testified, that a Prophet is no where without
honor, but in his own country, etc? and has Ioh. 16. 4.
he not foretold this unto us, that finding it true, we might not be troubled
with it, but might have the more peace in him, ver. 33. Ioh. 1. 11.
etc? Yea, did not Christ himself come to his own, and his own received him
not? Who are we that we should be grieved with the like measure that was
offered to our Lord and Ioh. 13. 14. Mat. 3. 11. Luke 3. 16.
Master? What are we in respect of him? We are not worthy to bear his shoes,
or to loose the latchet of them.

Moreover, as Paul said of some in his time, preaching Phil. 1. 16.
Christ of envy and strife, not sincerely, thereby supposing to add
affliction to his bonds, (by disgracing of him, and perhaps provoking other
against him;) as Paul (I say) said, What then? notwithstanding every way,
whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice,
and will rejoice: so let the forementioned Ministers say, Whether such people
in contempt or in truth do hear, yet Christ being preached and heard by them,
we therein do rejoice and will rejoice: especially if such other Ministers to
whom such people resort, do preach Christ in better sort, then it seems those
preached him, of whom Paul speaks. And let no man Reu. 3. 11.
take the crown of such Ministers so rejoicing from them.

Notwithstanding, I wish not such forsaken Ministers to have much familiarity
with such as so lightly set by their ministry. For how can they regard their
private society, that care not for their public ministry? Neither Pro. 23.
3.
especially let them be desirous of their dainties: that is, of taking gifts
from them. For who knows what deceit may be in them? namely, thereby to take
occasion of exclaiming against them, as being ready to take whatsoever is
offered; and to other to brag of their bounty unto them. Let such forlorn
Ministers always hold rhis resolution, not to care for the carnal benefits of
them that care not for their spiritual blessings. Yet I need not stand much
upon this caveat, because such as do so lightly esteem of men's ministry, are
very forward in offering kindness unto them. If they show kindness to any, it
is rather to farther dwellers then to near neighbors. Albeit herein they
greatly trouble not either the one or the other. Thus much of the peoples
estimation and hearing of their Ministers.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the other two duties of the people toward their Ministers, in respect of
the excellency of this will of God, of their maintenance of them, and also of
their obedience unto them: as also of the use of the said doctrine touching the
same excellency of the said will of God* belonging to the Ministers themselves.

NOw it follows to speak of maintenance of, and obedience Maintanance.
unto Ministers of this good, well pleasing and perfect will of God. For
without these, there cannot be due estimation of them: or if there be any
reverent account, yet it is not sufficient without maintenance and obedience.
Touching maintenance of Ministers that preach this will Maintanance of
Ministers preaching ^he will of God.
of God by them that are partakers of their preaching, it is a maine matter,
and such, as without it, the former is not (as I said) enough, and that
obedience that is afterward to be spoken of, is but pretended. This is expressly
commanded, Let him that is taught in the word, Gal. 6. 6.
make him that has taught him, partaker of all his goods. This argument also
the Apostle makes the subject (almost) of 1. Cor. 9.
one whole Chapter. It is likewise a part of that double honor whereof as all
Elders, so especially they that labor in 1. Tim. 5. 17. 18
the word and doctrine are worthy; and that because the Scripture says, Thou
shall not mouzle the ox that treads out the Mat. 10. 10.
corn: and the labourer is worthy of his reward. Had not our Savior said the
same before? Only for reward by the Apostle, our Savior says meat: but
thereby as by bread Mat. 4. 4. and 6. 11
he understands maintenance, and all things necessary for this life. And in
both the pronoune his is to be observed, as teaching such maintenance not to be
a matter of courtesy or of benevolence, such as need not to be given, but such
as must be paid as his own, and whereto he has as good right as to any thing
else he has already. May shoo-makers, smiths, plow men, hedgers, ditchers,
threshers, tailers, or any other laborers or artificers claim reward for
their work, and as their own due, and may not Ministers that labor and watch
for the souls of men, require reward of their labor? What good Minister is
there that watches not in body as well as mind for the people committed unto
him? yea, many a time does he wake in the night, meditating what to speak,
when other sleep soundly. The labor also of the mind is greater then of the
body. How great then is the labor of both? Two hours labor of the Minister
in preaching, does more spend his spirits and waste his body, then two days
labor in any other bodily work. Does the spirits and body of one so soke men?
Therefore the calling of a Minister is compared to the greatest bodily labors
that are; of shepherds Genesis 31. 40. Luke 2. 8, Mat. 9. 36. 1. Cor. 37. 8. 9.
10.
that in that country looked to their flock by night as well as by day; of
haruest-men, of husbandmen, of carpenters, and the like. Let them that are so
hard and straightfaced toward their painful Ministers, remember what is said
of the cries of those laborers in the ears of the Lord I^m. 5. 4.
of hoasts, that had reaped down the fields of other, because they for whom
they had labored did withhold their hire from them. The sentence of Christ at
the last day shall be heavy and direful against them that had not given meat,
drink, clothing* entertainment etc. to any of his little ones Mat. 25. 41. etc.
that had wanted the same. Oh then how fearful, how heavy, how direful shall
their sentence and doom be, that have dealt hardly with his best servants,
whom Christ used for the making of men his little ones; or for the nourishment
of them to eternal life, being before n^w borne to God by the ministry of
other? Shall shere be judgment Iam. 2. 13.
without mercy to every one that shows no mercy to any? and shall they find
mercy that have bin unjust unto their Ministers? Oh that men shoul dread and
know the sudden and strange death of Ananias and Sapphira, by a Act 5. 1. etc.
word of Peter's mouth only, for keeping back part of the price of their goods
from the Church, which while it was in their possession they might have kept
altogether, and that although they brought a certain part, and laid it at the
Apostles feet. Oh (I say) that men should read, hear and know this, and yet
fear nothing by their unjust and cruel dealing with such Ministers as preach
this excellent will of God unto them, not only not giving them any thing, yea
no part of their goods, but detaining that the which they have full dearly
labored for. Such men grutch not liberally to see Lawyers, and bountifully to
reward Physicians, for a few words of the one touching their goods, and
sometimes for recovery of, or pleading for some legacy given by the last will
and testament of some man: for the counsel of the other, and especially for
his pains in coming 8. 10. 20. or 30. or 40. miles unto him, especially in
Winter, or when ways and weather are foul. Yea, they plentifully deal with
such, whether they do them any good or no. Yea, they are at greater cost in
such things, in three or four days, then with Ministers that labor to make
them partaker of Gods infinite legacies, by declaring this his good, well
pleasing and perfect will unto them, many years together: yea also for their
daily praying for them and theirs; albeit in the distresses of them. selves and
theirs, they found God to have heard them so praying O miserable parsimonie! O
lamentable injustice! Yea, some men of great sort spend more in one year upon
dogs, hawks, horses, tobacco, and the like, then in many years upon the
Ministers of the word. If they say, their Farmers pay tithes out of their lands
for maintenance of Ministers. I answer, first that they pay tithes rather of
their own labor and great pains, then of their lands. Secondly, that if they
think this shall excuse them from maintenance of Ministers, then let them
think also it shall excuse them from going to heaven. So let their Farmers go
to heaven for them, and themselves go to hell in their own persons. Yea, to
proceed further, who almost is not at more charge with keeping of one horse in
one year, then in maintenance of the Ministers in many? Has he more benefit
by his horse, then by his Minister? It may easily be so believed. All these
things do show how base minded such men are, as altogether minding earthly
things, Phil 3. 19. Col. 3. 1. 2.
and only setting their affections on things on the earth, and not on things
above, where Christ sits at the righthand of God: but let them take heed
that their end therefore be not destruction, as Paul writes in the former
place to the Philippians, and so he lose all the benefit of this last will of
God. For certainly the Lord has not bequeathed any thing to any such wretches
as these are, but has shut them clean out of his will, for having any
inheritance in his kingdom; Ephesians 5. 56. C^l. 3. 5. 6.
yea, the wrath of God belongs unto them. And certainly all such do bewray
they never felt any sweetness by the said will: if they had, they would more
bountifully reward Gods Lawyers that declare the same. O the bounty of Matthew
the Publican, of Zacheus also of the same Luke 5. 29.
calling. The one upon his first calling made Christ and many other a feast, a
great feast. The other, as soon as ever Luke 19. 8.
Christ's word in inuiting himself to dine with him, had pierced into him, came
down hastily, received him joyfully, and with great alacrity, both showed his
justice in making fourefold restitution to whomsoever he had done wrong, and
also testified his bounty in giving half his goods to the poor. When God had
opened the heart of Lydia to attend Act. 16. 14. 15.
to the words of Paul, how earnest, how importunate was she with Paul and
Barnabas to come to her house and to abide there? So importunate and earnest
was she, that she would take no nay. When the keeper of the prison into which
Paul and Barnabas were cast, had bin restrained Act. 16. 29. 30. etc.
by Paul from murdering himself, and assured that all the prisoners were safe
there, how did he spring into Paul with trembling, etc. and having heard Paul
preach, how by this will of God he might be saved, what other great kindness
did he show to Paul and Barnabas? What shall I say of the bounty offered by
Naaman to Elisha, when he felt 2. Kin. 5. 3. etc. 1. Kin. 13. 7.
himself cured of his bodily leprosy; of the kindness likewise and reward
that wicked Jeroboam offered to the Pro-Phet of Judah, when by the prayer of the
said Prophet, his hand was restored, that before had bin miraculously withered,
1. Kin. 13. 7.
because he had stretched the same forth against the Prophet, commanding to be
laid hold on, because the said Prophet had threatened the destruction of that
Altar that Jeroboam had built at Bethel. By these examples it most evidently
appears, that all niggardly persons toward the Ministers of this Gospel of
God, have never tasted of the sweetness of the said will. For had they, though
but a little, they could not but be respective of them, and helpful unto them;
especially knowing their necessity. Yet some, whatsoever they hear or see, by
their apparel, by their debt to other, or any otherwise, will never believe
they want, till either for debt they be clapped up in prison, or starve for
hunger. Who is so rude and barbarous toward other men (except he be worse then
Nabal,) that receiving but a small kindness of them, either in a meals meat
or otherwise, that will not think upon some way whereby to requite it? O then
the ingratitude of some going for professors, that have no respect to them that
give them many a meals meat for their souls? except when they have bin at
their table, or rather at the table of Wisdom, they have sit looking one upon
another, neither eating of her Pro. 9. 5.
bread, nor drinking of her wine, etc. Such will sometimes commend the Sermons
of them that lay forth this will of God unto them; but without kindness for
all that to them that so lay the same forth; the more they commend the sermons
thereof, the more they condemn themselves. Some such hearers think the
Ministers more beholding to them for their presence and hearing, then
themselves to their Ministers for all their labor. If they give a Minister a
meals meat or two in a year, oh then they think their bounty to be great,
and that such Ministers are much in their debt. But alas, John says, that we
ought to do more 3. Ioh. 8.
then so even to strangers, that we may be fellow-helpers to the truth. But
there are few such hosts for entertainment of the Church and of strangers, as
Gaius was, to whom John Rom 16. 23.
did so write. If there be one such in a whole town, all the rest of
professors, though richer then that one, will give him leave to bear the whole
burden alone; yea also laugh sometimes in their sleeves secretly for his so
doing. Though diverse Preachers come to a town, and one of them do bestow his
labors amongst them; all will give one leave to inuit the Preacher and the
rest: or else they must go to some Inn, and dine at their own charge. Should
it be so? Let such take heed they find not as cold entertainment, where they
would have and look for the best. Do they hope for the reward of a Prophet,
that are no Mat. 10. 41.
readier to receive Prophets in the name of Prophets? Oh let Job. 27. 8.
them take heed their hope fail them not, when the Lord shall take away their
souls. Verily many do much deceive themselves in this kind. But whom do such
hard hearted and close fisted professors against the Ministers of this will,
most hurt? Not such Ministers, but themselves and other, whom (being willing to
enter into heaven) they cannot teach, being oppressed with grief by want. Let
no man say, that such Ministers are faint-hearted that will be discouraged with
a little want. Eliah himself was so discouraged by the cruelty of lezabel
against the Prophets of the Lord, that he prayed the Lord to take away his
life, etc. So also 1. Kin. 19. 4. Ier. 20. 9.
was Jeremiah, that he determined to speak no more in the name of the Lord.
And who makes a sm^ll matter of want, against which the Prophet Agur so
earnestly prayed? and Pro 30. 8. Lam. 4. 9.
whereof Jeremy says, They that are slain with the sword, are better then
they that be slain with hunger. Alas, they that Eccles. 11. 2.
are full feel it not, though they know not what evil may be upon the earth,
to make them to feel it as well as other: yet it is heavier then many can
bear; yea, that are strong to bear other burdens. The righteous has more
regard Pro. 12. 10.
of the life of their beasts, then such hard-hearted wretches have of the life
and comfort of their Ministers, or of their own souls good. Oh that these
things were considered. Did the Lord behold the hardness of some husbands
toward their wives in Malachies time, whereby such wives Mala. 2. 13.
filled the Lords altaer with tears, with weepings and cryings out? and will
he put up the sighings and gronings of his Ministers, by such hard and wretched
dealings toward them? Some hearing them complain of want, will bid them be of
good cheer, and comfort themselves as they have comforted other; the Lord will
provide for them, etc. but in the mean time themselves though never so able,
will do nothing. These indeed are wordy comforters, and such physicians of no
worth or value, as Job calls his friends. Job. 13. 4. Iam. 2. 15. 16.
These are such as James speaks of. God comfort them more by his word for the
time to come, then they for the time past by their works have comforted such
Ministers; yea, or then themselves yet have for their own souls. Some perhaps
will object, that some Ministers are rich of themselves, and have enough of
their own. So indeed some think, though they see the contrary. And so some
think, if a Minister have never so little. Every thing is thought too much for
him; though such speakers think nothing enough for themselves. And what if a
Minister be rich of himself? is that enough to excuse such cormudgers Gal. 6.
6.
from making him partaker of all his goods? Does the Apostle give the former
commandment with any such condition? Let such a one say so to his tailer, to
him that has sown his ground for him, etc. coming for money for his work,
will it be taken at his hand to tell him, what, you need not any money, you are
rich of your self? The same might the Corinthians have objected to Paul,
because he says that he robbed other Churches, and took 2. Cor. 11. 8.
wages of them to do service unto the Corinthians: and so indeed may some
Ministers say in these days, that they receive kindness of other, to do good
to them that regard them not. But was not that of Paul a commendation to the
Corinthians? No: he rather objected it as a great disgrace unto them, and a
reprehension of them. So is the like to all other that do the like.

Is it not also a shame that Jesuits and other Popish Priests should be
bountifully maintained by the Papists within our land, and diverse painful
Ministers so neglected as they are by professors of the Gospel? Alas, they
should be so bountifully rewarded, that they might be hospital 1. Tim. 3. 2.
Tit. 1. 8.
to strangers, for the better gracing of their ministry. But now, that
perhaps of the Apostle for Ministers to be hospital, is thought to be, that
they should be put into some hospital, there to live with other poor men. The
words of our Savior to his twelve Disciples sent out by him to preach for a
time, that they should not provide gold Mat. 10. 9.
or silver, etc. do not at all infringe, but much confirm this maintenance of
Ministers of this will of God that I plead for, because by confirming the said
words by these, For the labourer is worthy of his meat, that is, of all things
necessary for this life, even abundantly according to his calling; those words
(I say) of confirmation do plainly show, that the Preachers of the word should
altogether be maintained by them to whom they preach; and that that they have
of their own, to bestow it otherwise, as themselves shall think good.

Under this duty of maintenance, I comprehend all other Ministers to be
visited in prison and in sickness.
kindnesses needful for them; especially visiting them in sickness or in
prison. For if these things must be performed to any of Christ's little ones,
must they not much Mat. 25. 36. 43.
more be performed to his Ministers? Ioash King of Judah (though wicked) visited
Elisha the Prophet being sick; and 2. Kin. 13. 14.
mourned (as the text says) over his face: yea it also says, that he came
down unto him; which does the more commend his pains. What then shall be said
of many in these days accounted Professors, and far inferior to Kings, that
disdain to visit Ministers of the Gospel in their sicknesses, that are
greater then Eliah the master of Elisha, as before we have heard. Let all such
take heed, that as Adonibezek Judge. 1. 6. 7.
had the same measure offered unto him, that he had met to other, so they in
their sicknesses or imprisonments be neglected as they have neglected other;
yea even by such Ministers as by whom they might be most comforted.

Last of all for this point, let all such as have received comfort by those
Ministers that have made this good, well pleasing and perfect will of God
known unto them; for that good they have received by them, show kindness to
the wives and children of such Ministers after their death. Did not the Law
provide for the wives and children of the Priests and Levites after their
death? David showed 2. Sam 9. 3.
great kindness to Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, after Ionathans death,
for the kindness that Jonathan had showed to him whiles he lived. The like he
did to Chimham the 2. Sam. 17. 27. 28. compared with 19. 38.
son of Barzillai; for the kindness that the said Barzillai had showed unto
him. Yea, he lying upon his deathbed, gave charge to his son Solomon to show
kindness unto the 1. Kin. 2. 17.
sons of Barzillai, and to let them be of those that should eat at his
table. Yet Barzillai being the subject of David, had showed no other kindness
then which he owed unto him, and which to perform was his duty. On the
contrary, what great judgments did the Lord send upon Ioash King of Judah, for
his not remembering the kindness of Iehoiadah 2. Chron. 24. 22. 25.
the Priest unto his Jonne Zecharia?

As for such Ministers whose want is not regarded by men, let them comfort
themselves in God: and let them remember that both these and all other just
must live by faith, not only touching the life to come, but also touching
this. Want indeed is a heavy burden; but the more patiently it is borne, the
more comforr it will bring in the end. If any man's faith be so weak, let him
say with my self, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. Thus much of maintenance
Mark 9. 24.
of Ministers, and of the appurtenances thereof.

The last duty of the people to the Ministers in respect Obedience to
Ministers.
of the excellency of this will of God, is obedience. This is the chiefest for
their good, and therefore I have reserved it to this last place, that it may be
the better observed. And indeed the more excellent, the more gracious, easy,
the better pleasing and the perfecter we have heard this will of God to be, the
greater reason there is, not only why we should the more highly esteem of and
reverence them by whom the same is declared unto us, and the more diligently
hear them declaring the same unto us as often as possibly we may, and withal
why we should more bountifully maintain them, and perform all duties of
kindness unto them; but especially why we should obey them in all things that
they shall show this will of God requires of us. This is that that the Apostle
to the Hebrews exhorts us unto, saying, Obey such as are over you in the
Lord, Heb. 13. 17.
interpreting and laying forth this will of God with all the legacies (as it
were) and bequests unto you, therein contained. So Peter having most earnestly
exhorted the Elders amongst those Christian Jews to whom he wrote, to feed 1.
Pet. 55.
the flock of God, that is, to instruct them touching this will of God, and in
due season to give unto every one of the said flock that portion of spiritual
food the which that will prescribes unto them, wills also the said flock to
be subject unto their said Elders, adding, Likewise ye younger submit your
selves unto the elders, or as some read it, to your Tremellius.
elders. I am not ignorant that other interpret both the word yongers, and
also the word elders in this place for words only of age; but I cannot but
(with modesty notwithstanding) dissent from them, and so expound them for the
people generally, and the Elders, as before I have done. First, because he had
before spoken of them, vfing the word Elders for a name of office, and not of
years, as it is used elsewhere. And although one and the same word 1. Tim. 5.
17.
sometimes, in one and the same place be diversely taken, the text, scope and
circumstance thereof so requiring, yet here these things requiring the word
Elders to be so taken as in the former first verse, I see no necessity of
interpreting it otherwise, but great reason to take it as before, even for
Ministers of the word especially, as in that place to Timothy; and the word
yongers to signify the whole flock before mentioned. As the word Elders is
used for Ministers, to teach all Ministers, of what age soever, to be grave and
sober in all their carriage and conversation, as elders in years ought to be:
so why may not the word yongers be Tit. 2. 2.
taken for the whole flock, of what age soever, to teach them to carry
themselves toward the Ministers, as they that are yongers in years ought to
do toward their elders? There is the more reason thereof, because all to be
taught in the word are often in the same respect called by the name of
children, that they may as willingly obey their Psalm. 34. 11. Pro. 8. 32.
such teachers, as children ought their fathers. So also the whole Church in
the same respect is called daughter, Hearken O daughter, and consider, and
incline thine ear: so Psalm. 45. 10.
often elsewhere. So also (a^ before has bin noted) the grace of God, that is,
the Gospel is said to bring salvation unto all sorts of men, teaching us to
deny all ungodliness, etc. Tit. 2. 11. 12.
where ye word translated teaching, signifies teaching of children, even young
children, y^ al may hearken unto ye Gospel. Neither does the word yongers, in
this place used necessarily or only signify younger in age. For it comes from
another word that signifies new. And so it may be the better taken here,
because it is to be supposed that the flock before mentioned, or the greater
part thereof, was more newly converted to the faith then their Ministers.
Lastly, the word younger is elsewhere used for a word of subjection or service.
For the Evangelist Luke sets down the words of Christ to his Disciples
childishly striving who should be chiefest among them, thus, He that is
greatest amongst you, let him be as the younger (which in the Greek Luke 22. 26.
is the very same that is in this place) and he that is the chief, as he that
does serve. Here the word younger is opposed to the word greater and chief, and
is confounded with the word servant. And this will be the plainer to any that
will iudiciously compare Luke with Matthew and Mark, who both Mat. 20. 26.
Mark. 10. 43. 44.
do use two words which do both signify servants.

But to return to the point of obedience now in hand, the Apostle in the
former place to the Hebrews is very express in that behalf, confirming it
from the end (as has bin showed) namely, that elders there said to have the
ruling or guiding of them, may give the more comfortable account, and with joy
and without grief discharge their duty to them over whom they are set,
because it is unprofitable that it should be done with grief.

If also our Savior Christ charged the Jews to obey the Scribes and Pharisees
sitting in the chair of Moses, and so Mat. 23. 3.
long as they taught the law of Moses, to do whatsoever they should bid them to
do, must not all much more obey them that shall teach this will of God, so much
better then that will of God given by Moses, by how much better Christ himself
is then Moses, the Lord and Master then the servant? The rather must such
obedience be yielded to such Ministers, because they that obey them not
preaching the same, do not obey Christ himself, nor God himself. This Luke
10. 16.
obedience to Ministers must be only in such things as they shall teach out of
this will, and according to this will, and in all such things they must be
obeyed. Herod himself as wicked as he was, did many things that John preached
unto Mark. 6. 20.
him, he did not all. But Zacharias and Elizabeth his wife Luke 1. 6.
walked in all the commandments of the Lord.

The said obedience also must be constant and continue to the end, else there
is no salvation. He only that ouercometh Mat. 24. 13. Reu. 2. 7. ver. 11. ver.
17. ver. 26. ch^p. 3. 5. ver. 12. ver. 21. Psa^. 92. 14. Ho^. 13. 2. 1. Cor.
15. 58. Reu. 2. 19.
shall eat of the tree of life, etc. and not be hurt of the second death: but
shall eat of the Manna that is had, etc. and shall have power over nations,
etc. and shall walk with Christ in white, etc. and he shall be a pillar in the
temple of God, and the name of God shall be written upon him, etc. and shall
sit with Christ in his throne, as himself sits in the throne of his Father.
Neither must it continue only, but also always abound.

Finally, this obedience must be as well to their reprehensions of any thing
done contrary to this will, as in doing the things commanded therein; because
such reprehensions are as excellent ointments that shall not break our Psalm.
141.
heads. And, the wounds of a friend are better then the kisses of Pro. 27.
an enemy.

Without this obedience, all other duties to such Ministers, both which before
I have spoken of, and all other also shall be in vain. Such Ministers
themselves may fare the better by such duties so performed unto them; yea also,
other thereby may be provoked to the like; but the parties themselves shall be
never a whit the better, without this last duty of obedience. Even all
knowledge without obedience to them that have knowledge, shall be in vain. The
more also that a man knows of this will, not doing accordingly 1. Ioh. 2. 4.
1. Cor. 13. 2. Luke 12. 47. Romans 2. 5.
the good commanded, and refraining the evil forbidden, with the more stripes
shall he be beaten: and the more wrath he heapeth up to himself against the
day of wrath. All the premises by the people to be performed to the Preachers
of this will of God, are the more to be respected, because the said Preachers by
their preaching and by their prayers are the charets and horsemen of those
places where they live, as well as Eliah and Elisha were of Israel. Whether 2.
K. 2. 12. and 13 14.
also such Preachers be poor or rich, the former duties are to be performed
unto them. They are neither the more to be regarded for their riches, nor the
less to be respected for their poverty, (as touching their maintenance) but
all respect of them must be for this wills sake, the which they preach and
declare. As the faith of our glorious Iam. 2. 1.
Lord Jesus Christ must not be had in respect of persons, so must not the
ministry of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the which is the means whereby the
said faith is to be obtained and increased. And touching the former obedience,
it must not be servile. As such Ministers must not be Lords over their people
being Gods inheritance, neither reign over 1 Pet. 5. 3. Mat. 20. 26.
them as Kings over their subjects; so must not the people be in any such
subjection unto them. Their subjection must not be to them, but to their
doctrine, in teaching this good, this well pleasing, and this perfect will of
God.

To leave the duties of the people to their Ministers, in An other use of the
former excellency of the will of God, concerning the Ministers the^of.
respect of the said will of God, let me now show one use more of the former
doctrine, concerning the Ministers themselves. The more excellent therefore the
said adjuncts show this will of God to be, the more careful, diligent, and
faithful ought all the Ministers thereof to be in declaring the same, and
laying forth all the benefits thereof, to the people of God to whom the same
appertain, and over whom the Lord has set them. Let them neither ad any thing
thereto, nor detract any thing there from, lest so of the will of God, they
make the will of man. And indeed how foul a thing were it so to deal with the
will of 2 Timothy 4. 2.
a man? Let them preach it in season and out of season. The great ignorance,
and the like impiety of the people every where requires it so to be. Yet
alas, how great is the negligence of the Ministers herein? I have spoken
somewhat hereof before. But who can speak enough to cure this disease, against
which so many of other Churches, so many of our own, (all most worthy men)
have written so much, so divinely, so learnedly, so fully and substantially?
and yet no reformation, either of Non residencie, or of the idleness of them
that are resident. Verily this is the stain and the blame of many Churches.
This is the the bane of many souls: so much worse then the murder Ezech. 3.
18. and 33. 6. Act 20. 26. 27.
of so many bodies, by how much the soul is better then the body. And yet the
death of the soul is also the death of the body for ever in the world to come.
The body may here be killed; and yet the soul live: yea, soul and body may
live forever in heaven. But if the soul be here murdered, both soul and body
cannot but be cast into hell, where their worm dies not, and the fire shall
never be quenched. Mar. 9. 43. 44.
Oh, what then shall become of such murderers themselves? Shall they speed
better? No: No: A thousand and ten thousand woes shall fall upon them without
repentance: yea great repentance. How fearful was the state of the rich man
that would not refresh the body of one poor Lazarus? He would have been glad of
the least mitigation Luk 16. 24.
of his torments, and begged hard for it, but could not obtain it.

The negligence also of the Ministers: in discharge of their office, is the
cause likewise of all outward evils and calamities to the people. But this
sore requires the help of our governors, for the cure thereof by their
authority* without it all speaking, all preaching, all writting will do no
good. The more this evil has hitherto ben spoken, preached, and written
against, the more it has increased, and daily does increase. Let us therefore
the more earnestly pray the Lord to incline the heart of our dread Sovereign:
and of out other Rulers under his Majesty, to put to their helping hands, for
redress and Reformation thereof.

Thus much of these two verses, and of this Argument The conclusion of this
Treatise.
of the Christian Sacrifice. Now the Lord sanctify the consideration of all
his mercies, as especially of the life to come so also of this life, received
and promised to the good of all to whom these my weak labors shall come: yea
also of my self, that from the same, and according to the measure of the same,
to every one imparted, we may present our selves, souls and bodies, with all
the powers of the one, and members of the other, such a sacrifice both active
and passive as before we have heard: even living, holy, and well pleasing to
God: and that according to his word: and because his word does both require it,
and is also the means to quicken us, to sanctify us, and to make us well
pleasing unto him. The same Lord also for our better so doing, keep us from all
conformity spiritual and other unto this world, and the wicked therein:
giving us grace likewise not only so to do: but also to be transformed and
turned to God, by the renewing of our minds touching our understanding, reason,
will, and affections, and also of our whole man: to this end, that we may be
able to prove, judge and approve, how* gracious, well pleasing, and every way
perfect the will of God now is in this time of the gospel, since the coming
and by the coming of Christ, both far differing from, and also far above
all his will in the time of the law and old Testament, that so we may labor the
more for the knowledge of it, and so much the more to bless God for it; by how
much the more he has blessed us in it: striving likewise so much the more to
excel all that lived under the old Testament in all true godliness, by how much
the more this his last will excels the former: and that we may accordingly
regard all the Ministers thereof: by how much the more we chaue heard them to
be greater then the Ministers of the old Testament. And finally y^ same Lord,
give grace also to al such Ministers to be so much more careful, diligent, and
painful in declaring this will to God his people, by how much more God has
now graced, and honored them by be trusting them with a greater and more
glorious Ministry then ever was the Ministry of Moses, of the Leviticall
Priesthood, or of any of the Prophets. All this grace the Lord grant for
Christ Jesus his sake, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
praise and glory world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE AVTHORS POSTSCRIPT to his Children as it were his last Will and Testament
unto them.
Dear Children.
I am now going the way of all the earth, and by age ready 2. King 20.
to leave the world and the things that are in the world, and so to go from
you and all other therein, and therefore as Hezekia was commanded to set his
house in order, or to give precepts to his house because he should die and not
Isai 38. 1.
live. So do I at this time August 22 Anno Dom. 1622. and of our Sovereign
Lord James, by the grace of God of great Britain, France and Ireland King,
defender of the faith etc. the tweentie.

First therefore and principally I bequeath and resign my soul unto God, and
to his son Jesus Christ, who 1 Pet. 1. 19.
by his precious blood has redeemed me, and sealed my said redemption by his
holy spirit of promise. In which respect Ephesians. 1. 13.
as I detest all errors and heresies generally, so more especially I abhor
and condemn to the pit of hell the whole doctrine of Popery, with all the
Relics, Ceremonies, and other apurtinances thereof whatsoever, from the least
to the greatest, as the which springing from hell, have bin daily hatched and
nourished by that Antichrist of Rome, the man of sin and child of perdition,
and the which 2. These 2. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
therefore are nothing else but doctrins of devils. Touching my body if I die
in peace, I desire it may be honnestly committed to the earth from whence it
came. If otherwise* let God dispose thereof according to his pleasure. Sure I
am that whatsoever become of it here* and how vile so ever it be by sin, and
the infirmities thereof through sin, yet it Shall be changed and fashioned
like to the grorious body of Christ Jesus himself according to* that his power
whereby he is able to subdue, and will subdue all things Phil. 3. 22.
unto himself.

Touching other things whereof men use to make their Wills, because I may say
to you as Peter said to the lame man, Silver and gold have I none, but such as
I have give I Acts 3.
unto you, therefore all my Will following shall wholly consist of such
precepts to you as my self have received of the Lord. Now then, as I have
written that my former Treatise of The Christians Sacrifice for the instruction
of all Christians generally, so I bequeth the same to you my Children, and to
all yours, which God either has already given you, or shall hereafter give
unto you, neither that only but also my other three former Treatises: the
first a general Treatise against Popery, and in the defense of the religion by
public authority professed in England, published in the year of our Lord
1598. The second of the Dignity of Gods Children, published in the year 1610.
The third of David's love to the word of God, and of his meditation thereof,
published 1616. All these read, examine by the Scriptures, make use of them: of
my first Treatise, for the better confirmation of your judgment against
Popery, with a greater provocation of your detestation thereof; and the better
quickening of your liking of the true and sincere religion of protestants, of my
second, for your learning how great your Dignity is as ye are the Children of
God, and what unspeakable comforts ye may have thereby: as also how careful
ye ought to be of living according thereunto, without any disgrace thereof: of
my third for kindling a fire of such love to the word of God as that much water
may not Cant. 8. 6.
quench? as also for so whetting your minds to the meditation and study
thereof, that ye may think no pains too much, neither ever be weary of so
doing, of this my last, for the presenting your selves souls and bodies such a
sacrifice to God, active and passive, as the same sets forth unto you. By
all the said Treatises as ye shall see who has been your Fathers God, so Know
him, and serve him, with a perfect heart and willing mind: because he searches
1 Chronicles. 18. 9.
all hearts and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts, and if ye
seek him he will be found of you, but if ye 2. Chron. 15. 2.
forsake him, he will cast you off for ever. Though I can give none of you any
portion of worldly riches, yet if ye shall seek the Lord and find him, then
shall ye every one be able to say with the Prophet, the Lord is my portion: and
Psalm. 119. 57. and 142. 51. Psalm. 16. 6. Joel. 2. ^7. 1. Cor. 3. 22. Heb. 1. 2.
Psalm. 24. Psalm. 37. 29. 1. Pet. 1. 4. 5. Psalm. 34. 1. Ioh. 10. 29. Psalm 27. 1.
3. and ^6. 4. and 118. 6 Rom 8. 32. 1. Cor. 15. 12. Colos. 3. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 17.
that the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, and that ye have a
goodly heritage: and that ye your selves are parts of the Lords inheritance:
yea then, what shall ye not have. For althings are yours. Christ the heir of
all things is yours, God is yours: Is not the earth the Lords, and all the
fulness thereof? Then also ye shall have inheritance for ever, ye shall not be
ashamed in the evil time, and in the days of famine ye shall be satisfied,
yea, ye have an inheritance kept for you in heaven: and your selves are kept
for it, not by Angels alone, but by God himself: yea by the power of God who
is greater then all, and whom if ye have on your sides, ye shall not need to
fear or care who be against you: whether men or Angels. In these things I do
not say if, as doubting, but as being persuaded of that which I say, as the
same word is often in the Scriptures used.

Many are Gods mercies toward me more then to mine own Father, first that I
have lived twice his age, and twelve years more. Secondly, whereas he had but
my self alone, God has given me twelve children, whereof I have yet seven
living, besides the children of some of my children. Thirdly, that I have lived
all the time of my knowledge under the Gospel. Fourthly that I am a Minister
of the Gospel. Fifthly, that ye my children are not only mine by nature, but
Gods also by grace, having that mark whereby ye may be known so to be.
sixthly, that God has also blessed my ministry to the winning and
isntrumental begetting of other children also unto him. In the seventh place,
I might ad that whereof Paul boasts, but herein I am sparing, that I may no
ways seem to disgrace any, or any ways to insult over them, I hate a high
mind in other and therefore far be it from me to bewray the same in my self.
God have the glory of all. Now since ye are not only mine by nature, but the
Lords also by grace, fear ye not but that ye shall be blessed. The Psalm. 112.
2. Isai 55. 3. and 61. 8. 1. Sam. 12. 22.
generation of the righteous shall be blessed. And Gods covenant made with the
righteous and their seed is everlasting, whom it has pleased him to make his
people, for his name sake he will never forsake.

And now my children look to your selves, that as the Lord will not forsake
you, so whatsoever evil days shall come, ye may not fall from him, yea look
to yourselues, I do not say that ye loose not the things that we have 2. Ioh. 8.
wrought, but that ye loose not the things that God has wrought in you, that
not I, but ye may receive a full reward Philip. 1. 6.
I am confident in this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Therefore I speak not as
fearing, but as my loving children to admonish you to use all diligence for
the keeping of your standing. If yea let go your hold of that portion which you
have in God, what shall it profit you to gain the Math. 16. 26.
whole world? O gain of godliness how great art thou? Thou art profitable, and
have the promise of this life, and of 1. Tim. 6. 6. and 4. 8. 1. These. 41. 1.
Cor. 15. 61.
that which is to come. As ye have already some portion thereof, so labor to be
more and more rich therein. Be ye steadfast, unmoueable, abounding always in
the work of the Lord knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, ye
have already in part bought the truth; yet still be bargaining for it, ye want
more then ye have, Buy it therefore and sell Prou. 23. 23. Math 13. 44. 45
it not. ye shall have a good market at the last. Sell all that ye have for it,
rather then not to increase your store of it, herein be ye like to worldlings
that whatsoever riches they have, yet think they have nothing. Be ye like to
the horsleaches his daughters. Cry ye always, giu^, give, Prou. 30. 15.
neither be satisfied: never say it is enough. Let none of you be grieved that
I have left you nothing of my inheritance in Kent, neither of my lands since,
that I purchased in Suffolk, as also in Essex, all being now gone, and the
price thereof spent: not riotously or otherwise lewdly, but by other means. I
confess I have spent the more for the gracing of my Ministry, and the
provoking of others to bounty, and by so graceing my Ministry to win the more
unto God. What other things have bin the means of my present poverty, as also
of the base account that my self and ye are in by that means, though I need
not be ashamed to relate, yet for other reasons I spare to speak. I might
perhaps have left you somewhat if I had bin more frugall for the things of this
life. Notwithstanding although some do make great show of great poverty by
their bare apparel, hard fare, lean cheeks, and borrowing here and there,
without any necessity in respect of any great charge of children, and yet in
the end do make purchase upon purchase, yet for my part I hate all such
baseness of mind, as disgraceful not only to the Ministry, but also to
Christianity, as being that filthy lucer that is 1 Timothy 3. 3. Tit. 1. 7. Prou 1
19. and 11. 24. and. 18. 27 1. Tim. 6. 10.
in special manner forbidden all Ministers of the Gospel, whereof
notwithstanding there is no profit to any in the end: and whereby also some
that are in want indeed being thought to be such, and to have abundance are
much prejudiced, and altogether neglected: yea whereby likewise such secret
rich men themselves live in misery, and want as well that that they have, as
that that they have not. Be not therefore grieved (o my children) that I cannot
give you any earthly portions. Though I may say with Naomi, I have bin full,
and now (even in mine old age) I Ruth. 1. 21.
am empty, yet mnrmure not, that I have bin no better husband for you, and
that ye have so poor a father in earth, but herein rejoice that ye have a rich
Father in heaven, and Luke 12. 21.
that your selves are rich toward him who also gives (us) all richly all
things to enjoy: and who has so written your 1. Tim. 6. 17. Luke 10. 20. Reu.
3 5. Iam 1 27. Jude. 23.
names in heaven in his book of life as that they shall not be blotted out etc.
In this assurance keep your selves unspotted of the world: and hate the very
garment that is spotted of the flesh. Though it should so fall out, that ye
should live in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, yet be ye Phil.
2 15.
blameless and harmles children of God, and shine ye as lights in the world
that so ye may shine in heaven as the Stars; yea, Dan. 12. 3. Mat. 13. 43.
as the Sun in the firmament. Think no scorn to be persecuted for
righteousness, neither to be reviled etc. For Christ Mat. 5. 11. 12.
sake: but rejoice; yea count it all joy: for herein is your Iam. 1. 2.
blessedness, and your faith so tried and purged as gold in the fire, Shall be
found to your praise, honor, and glory at the appearing 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7.
of Jesus Christ: and in the mean time the Spirit of chap. 4. 13. 14.
glory even of God himself shall rest upon you. This spirit bears witness to
your spirits, that as ye are here pertaker of the suffering of Christ, so the
time shall come when ye shall be also glorified with him, when himself shall
appear, ye Romans 8. 17. Col. ^. 4. 2. Tim. 2. 7.
shall also appear with him in glory. Consider what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things. Be not discouraged by any sufferings from that
that is good; but rather be ye incoraged so to suffer, that ye may grow in
grace, and 2. Pet. 3. 18.
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. what shall I say more unto you my
loving children. Be faithful unto the Reu. 2. 10.
death, and Christ shall give unto you the Crown of life. Keep the profession
of your hope (against all opposition there unto) without wavering. He is
faithful that has promised. Heb. 10. 23. 24.
Consider one another to provoke unto love and unto good works. Though in body
ye be scattered one from another, yet in spirit hold communion one with
another. Comfort one another, help one another that ye may strengthen one
another in the Lord. Edify one another in your most holy Jude. 20.
faith; praying in the holy Ghost: every one for himself; and one for another.
So keep your selves and one another in the love of God that ye may the better
look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life: that so by this
my last Will and Testament to you, ye may the better enjoy all the legacies of
the last Will and Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ. To conclude this my
postscript, Those good Philip. 4. 9.
things which ye have learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do
ye: and the God of peace shall be with you. whatsoever Romans 7. 17. Ioh. 3. 11.
evil ye have seen me to do through the sin that dwells in me, that do
not ye. Follow not that which is evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
in me or in any other, but that which is good. The very God of peace sanctify
you wholly; and keep your whole spirit soul and body harmeles unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom in all humility and earnestnes of prayer, I
ordain sole executor of this my last Will and Testament, for the making good
and performance of every thing therein bequeathed by me unto you, and to every
one of you, and to all yours. In witness whereof, I have written this my said
last Will and Testament with mine own hand, and thereunto have set the seal
of my heart, the 22. day of August, and in the year before mentioned.

By me your loving Father whiles I live. THOMAS STOVGHTON.

Errata.
Page 18. lin. 19. after Christ. read. this condemns. l. 26. for seruu^s. ^.
serum. p. 19. l. 16. for better. r. the better. p. 24. 3, ceassing, r. crazing,
page 27. margen, for imperunt. r. fixerunt. p, 58. l. 32, for and, r. or. p.
67, l. 26. for defacing, r, defaming. p. 70, l. 12, for to these, r. of these.
p. 88. l. 35, for such as are, r. such are. p. 112. l. 2, for being themselves,
r. in themselves, p, 114, l, 25. for him, r. them. p. 117, l. 17, after not, r.
only. p, 185, l, for amatoris, r amatoribus, l, 12, for studiam, r, studium. p,
121, l, 32, for wit, r, will. p, 127, l, 20, after to be, r, so dead. p, 129,
l, 8, for divided, r. derived. p. 206. l, 10, for more ^ before p. 221. l. 21.
for can brag it. r. can buy it. p. 222. l 23 for and to. r. and may. p. 231. l.
25. after down r. with zeal p. 236. l. 1. after are r. not. p. 240. 11. after
commanding read him.

FINIS.

