A GENERAL TREATISE AGAINST POPERY, AND IN DEFENSE OF THE RELIGION BY PVBLIKE
AVTHORITIE PROFESSED IN ENGLAND AND OTHER CHVRCHES REFORMED.

Wherein they that either want leisure to read, or that have not judgment to
conceive, or that are not able to buie the learned treatises of other
concerning particular points of religion, may yet evidently see popery not to
be of God, and our religi on to be acceptable in his sight.

Very necessary for these times, for the confirmation and strengthening of men
in our religion, that neither by Jesuits, nor by any other, they may be drawn
to popery, or any other heresy or sect: and likewise for the winning of
Papists and Atheists to an unfeigned liking and true profession of our religion.

BY THOMAS STOVGHTON minister of the word.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE. Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST TRVLY RELIGIOUS AND virtuous Lord, Robert
Lord Rich, Thomas Stoughton wishes increase of all true piety and honor in
this life, and eternal glory in the life to come.
RIght Honorable, your favor having been such toward me, as that both
either upon my commendation before I was by face known unto your Lordship, and
especially my self since that time have thereby sared the better, I could
not but in all duty think of some way, whereby to show my self in some
measure thankful for the same. Having therefore taken a little pains in
gathering these general arguments against the whole mass and lump of
popery, as in defense likewise of the general doctrine publicly, and by
public authority professed in England, I thought your Honorable courtesy to
be such, that these my labors would be accepted as some testimony of my
grateful mind. Neither am I bold to offer them unto your Honor, in respect
only of that your singular favor toward my self, but also because the same
your Honorable favor has been extended and is extended toward all, whom
your Honor has seen forward in the profession of that religion, the defense
whereof is the chief subject matter of this treatise. Yea so have you
vouchsafed to countenance such persons from time to time not disdaining the
meanest, that this your Christian and godly mind is much more worthy this
work, then the work it self any ways worthy to be presented to so great a
person. For by this love toward the professors of the truth, has evidently
appeared your affection toward the truth it self. This affection also
toward the truth it self, even toward the truth, which in this treatise is
commended and justified, has in like manner been most plainly testified unto
this whole country of Essex, by your singular care for the placing of godly
and sufficient ministers in all places, where the patronage of benefices by the
ancient laws of this realms has been your right. And both these, to wit,
your love unto the persons professing this religion, and your like affection
toward the religion it self, have ple^tifully declared your true zeal of God
himself and of Christ Jesus. For Christ accou^teth that done to himself, that
is done to them Math. 25. 40.
that belong unto him. And as the enmity against God his truth and the
professors thereof, endeavoring to suppress the one and to repress the
other, does testify the like enmity against God himself and Christ Jesus, so
the Ma^h. 25. 43. Act. 9. 4.
contrary love toward both, does declare the like love toward God himself
and Christ Jesus. Further your honorable care (before mentioned) for the
furthering of this religion, showed by providing such sufficient ministers for
instruction of the people in the true knowledge thereof and obedience
thereunto, has also witnessed and does daily witness your unfeigned love unto
men. For what greater work can there be for the benefits of their souls? yea
both of their souls and of their bodies, of this life and of the life to come.
For who knows not but that as the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation,
Romans 1. 16. Iam. 1. 21. 2. Tim. 3. 15. Psalm. 19. 7. Frov. 1. 4.
and the word contained in the holy Scriptures (which also contain this
religion here commended) is able to make men wise unto the same salvation: so
also that that wisdom which the gospel and word of God teaches, has in Prove.
3. 16.
her right hand length of days, and in her left hand riches and glory? As
therefore to hinder the gospel and word of God, does plainly bewray the hatred
of men, which cannot be saved by any other means without it, (for which cause
the Apostle speaking of the Jews says first, that they 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16.
were contrary or adversaries unto all men, and then immediately adds as a
reason or confirmation of the former, that they had forbidden them to preach
the word unto the Gentiles, whereby they might be saved) so to promote the
same word, can not but witness the contrary. Finally this your godly care, has
in like sort the better witnessed, and does witness your faithful heart, both
toward her most excellent Majesty, and also toward the whole realm. For it
cannot be but that the more the true knowledge and fear of God abounds, by
the more plentiful preaching of the word also will abound true obedience unto
her Highness, and unfeigned love betwixt subject and subject: by both which the
bars of the gates of the whole kingdom, must necessarily be the stronger
against all fortaine adversaries. Since therefore (Right honorable) it has
pleased God, of his abundant goodness and rich grace, besides your great
earthly honor, thus more highly to honor and advance you in heavenly things,
as I do in this respect the more boldly dedicate this treatise of religion to
your Honor so zealous of religion, so in all humility I desire the same to
accept thereof, and to vouchsafe your honorable protection thereunto. And
because your former zeal persuades me the same of your Honor, that the like
persuaded the Apostle of the Philippians, namely, that he Philip. 1. 6.
that has begun this good work, will also finish the same: therefore that use
of this treatise, which in the end I wish generally to all great persons
already called to the fellowship of this true religion, I do more specially
commend unto your Honor, namely that you will yet be zealous thereof, as
hitherto you have been and are. Yea let not your zeal only continue, but let
it be such also as Solomon describes the love of the Church to be, strong as
death, cruel (or hard, or Cantic. 8. 6, 7.
invincible) as the grave, whose coals are fiery coals, and as a vehement
flame, (or as the flame of God) and the which much water cannot quench. Yea
because the Lord Jesus reprehendeth the slaking of the first love of the Church
of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4, 5.
threatening also to come against her, and to remove her candlestick out of
her place, except she repented and did her first works: therefore also your
love abound more and more, as the Apostle writes unto the Philippians: and as
our Savior himself Phil. 1. 9.
commends the love of the Church of Thyatira, saying, that her works were
more at the Rev. 2. 19.
last then at the first. This the Lord requires of all, but especially of such
as himself has most highly advanced, and made the sons of the Psalm. 29. 1.
mighty: yea this is the end for which he does thus advance them, and make
them so mighty. Ester 4. 14.
Neither need any man to fear any disgrace or dishonor by such forwardnes in
zeal: yea rather every man is to hope the contrary. For God himself has
expressly promised, to 1. Sam. 2. 3^.
honor them that shall honor him. Therefore the Apostle hoped and fully
assured himself, that in Phil. 1. 40.
nothing he should be ashamed, but that Christ should be magnified in his
body: where by opposing his own shame to the magnifying of Christ, and the
magnifying likewise of Christ to his own shame, he plainly teaches, that
they that study and bend their endeauours most to magnify and exalt Christ,
need not to fear any shame and disgrace of themselves. Moreover they that
continue the honoring of him, with that honor and according to that honor
whereunto he has exalted them, shall build up the surer house to their own
posterity. For as the Prophet speaking generally of the man that fears the
Lord and delights greatly in his commandments, Psalm. 112. 1. 2.
that his seed shall be mighty upon the earth: so more particularly the Lord
promised to David, to set up his seed after him, which 2. Sam. 7. 12.
should proceed out of his body, and to establish his kingdom. And this
promise all men know to have been most amply performed. Yea to Iehu (a man
not so according to God his own heart as David was) did the Lord promise, that
because he had diligently executed that which was right in 1. King. 10. 30.
God his eyes, etc. (though not with a perfect heart) therefore his sons unto
the fourth generation, should sit upon the throne of Israel. This promise also
was performed unto the full. For Iehu himself being reckoned for one,
Zecharia the son of Jeroboam king of Israel, was the fifth descent from Iehu.
And this honor was more then the honor of any other king of Israel, after the
division of the kingdom. For no other king of Israel besides Iehu, had above
one or two at the most (as several generations) of their own stock and line,
to succeed them in the kingdom. Three indeed are said to have succeeded
Homri, to wit, Ahab, Ahazia, and Iehoram: but this last was not the son of
the middle, but both Ahazia and Iehoram were brethren, and the sons of Ahab
and Iezabel. Now to return to the fruit of being zealous in honoring 2.
King. 3. ^ and 9. 22.
the Lord, when the threede of all earthly honor shall be drawn to an end,
so as that it can not possibly be lengthened one inch more, then shall begin
the honor that is without end. Then shall Christ confess them before the
Mat. 10. 22. compared with Luke 12. 8.
Father, and before his Angels in heaeuen, that have confessed him before men
in the earth. He will not commit the proclaiming of their praise to any other,
as Ahashuerosh did the praise Ester 6. 11.
of Mordecai unto Haman, but even himself will be as it were the Herald
thereof. Neither will he whisper the praise of such in secret, but he will
publish and proclaim it in the greatest and most honorable assembly that
ever was. Yea this Jesus the king of glory shall Math. 23. 35. Dan. 12. 3.
Math. 22. 30. Philip. 3. 21. 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
place them at his right hand, and shall make them like to the stars, yea to
the son in firmament, yea to the angels, yea even unto himself. Verily
(Right honorable) this glory, though it should continue but one day, is more
then all earthly glory, though it should continue a thousand years. If David
said the like of the courts of God upon earth, what may be Psalm. 84. 10.
said of the highest court of God in the highest heaven? what heart therefore
would not be enflamed and set on fire with the knowledge and certain assurance
of these things? when Peter, James, and John, did see Christ Jesus in the
mountain with Moses and Elias in that glorious apparel for a while, which one
day they should put on for ever, how were they affected there with? Truly so
that although they themselves were not one whit transfigured with Christ, yet
they could have bin content for ever to have dwelt in that mountain, only to
have enjoyed this glorious sight of Christ, Moses, and Elias. For what said
they? Peter speaks for the rest, as oftentimes he did for all (not as being
the head of all, but as having the boldest spirit) and said, Master, it is good
for us to be hear: if thou will let us make three tabernacles, one for thee,
one for Moses, and one for Elias. Were these thus ravished with the bodily
sight of the glory only of Christ and of two other, and that upon the earth,
and but for a time? How then should the heart of every Christian be ravished
with the spiritual sight by faith of the everlasting glory of Christ Jesus, of
all the Saints generally, and of himself particularly, which one day they and
himself shall have for ever in the heavens, and whereof in the mean time by
the same faith, they and he are as certainly assured, as if they were already
in possession thereof? How zealous also should every the like Christian heart
be of this our religion, whereto only this glory is promised, and whereby
only it is to be attained? So great was the glory of Moses, having talked but
a while with the Lord in the mountain at the receiving of the law, that
without a veil the Israelites could not look upon him. Exodus 34. 33.
Was glory so great at the giving of the law unto Moses? How great then shall
it be at the final rewarding of the perfect observation and full satisfaction
of the law by Christ Jesus? was glory so great after a while talking with the
Lord? how great then shall it be when we shall have our whole conversation and
live with God for ever? was glory so great in an earthly mountain? how great
then shall it be in the high heavens? was glory so great upon corruption? how
great then shall it be, when that that is sown in dishonor, shall be raised
altogether in glory? was glory so great upon weakness? how great then shall it
be, when that that is sown in weakness, shall be applied in power? Finally was
glory so great upon a natural body? how great then shall it be, when that
that is sown a natural body, shall be raised in a spiritual body? I write
not these things (Right Honorable) so much for the enlarging of your zeal
toward the religion in this treatise following commended, as for the better
provoking also and quickening of this zeal in all other the like noble persons.
The rather also and the more plentifully have I been bold to deal herein in
this my epistle Dedicatorie, because I thought it might be, that some would
read this epistle, which would read but little else of this book: and that
othersome would hereby be the more excited to the reading of the whole
treatise. Now what shall I say more? The same God that has begun this noble
work of zeal in your noble heart toward this religion, make the same
perfect. The same God that has so highly advanced you upon the earth, that
sometime you sit with most noble Queen Elizabeth clothed with Parliament
roabes in great dignity, so also exalt you, that you may walk with his son
Christ Jesus in heart clothed in white, yea and that you may Rev. 3. 4. ad 2^.
sit with him in his throne for ever, as himself sits in the throne of his
Father. Thus most humbly craving pardon of my boldness, I do also humbly
take my leave of your Honor. At Billerim in Essex, the 7. of March, in the
year of our Lord, according to the computation of the Church of England. 1597.
almost expired.

Your Honors most humble to command in the Lord, Thomas Stoughton.

To the Christian readers, especially to my Worshipful and other lo uing
friends in Kent, London, Essex, Suffolk, and elsewhere.
BEloved I am not ignorant, how dangerous a thing it is to write books in
these days, partly in respect of the great variety of all learning in many,
which thereby are able more easily to find a fault in any man his vvritings,
then the author (for the most part) himself, and partly of the great curiosity
of other which are ready to reprehend the best, and to find a knot in a
rush; yea not only to carpe at that which deserves no blame, but oftentimes
to condemn that which they ought rather to commend, or which at the least
they cannot amend. The consideration of this, did at the first make me for a
long time to vvish this labor that I have now taken, to have been set upon
by some other, more able to have gone (as we say) through-stitch therewith then
my self, before I durst once begin to set my pen to paper for the writing
my meditations thereof. After also that I had begun ana finished this treatise,
in such sort as now it comes forth (some small things only excepted) I
stayed the publishing thereof, to see if any other would have prevented me in
this argument, that so I might not have laid my self open to those
reprehensions and censures, which now perhaps I may incur and sustain. At
the last seeing none other to deal therein, and thinking it to be a thing very
profitable, yea being persuaded of the profit thereof by some other, whom I
desired to read the same written; (as whose judgments I did much better trust
unto then to my own) I laid aside all such fear: and respecting the common
good of many, more then mine own private credit and estimation with a few, I
have boldly committed it (as ye see) unto the print, and do now exhibit it
unto your reading. Although therefore it may be, that it shall pass through
the fiery and sharp purgatory of many such quick heads and nimble tongues,
as to which almost nothing will be welcome: yet I hope that it shall also
find courteous and fauurable entertainment with many, which will make such
profitable use thereof, as I have commended in the end, and in regard whereof,
I regard not all the obloquie of the other. I crave also yea and trust, that
what faults soever have escaped me herein, they may be the more favorably
interpteted, and the more esilie pardoned, because this treatise is not only
the first fruits of my labors thus published, but also such an argument, as
wherein I do not remember any other professedly to have taken the like pains.
If hereafter any man of great learning generally and particularly of much
reading and deep judgment in divinity, shall think this work to be
insufficient in this kind, and shall therefore take the same theme in hand,
and handle it more substantially and sufficiently: I shall not only not envy
the same or be grieved therevvith, but I will also willingly accept it,
reverently esteeme^ it, and be heartily glad of it. In the mean time I entreat
all Christian readers of this book, thankfully to look, and charitably to
peruse the same, even as they would have others to accept the like travel of
themselves. Neither let them be offended with my plain manner of handling
these arguments, but rather let them seriously way the matter and substance
it self. For it is not finenesse of words but pith of matter that must
edify to the vvorking, confirming, or increasing of true faith and godliness.
Good and whole some meat is not the worse to be liked, for being served to
the table in a earthen or wodden vessel. If also one argument please not, yet
let no man be discouraged, but let him proceed to the next, and so to them
that follow. Where there is variety of dishes, there men not liking of one
will taste of an other. The like favor I entreat in the reading of these
arguments, hoping that the further men proceed in reading this treatise, the
better savor they will find therein. Now as I entreat all Christian readers
generally to accept courteously of my pains in this book, so more specially I
pray the same of such, as are my friends dwelling in the places before
mentioned, or elsewhere. For being specially bound unto them, either by kindness
or by kindred, and being not able to do that good to these that nature it
self requires, I was the more willing to publish this treatise, as a
testimony of my thankefulnes to the one, and of my welwishing mind unto the
other. As therefore in this special respect, I do offer this general
treatise unto them both, that they may make the more special use thereof unto
themselves, so I do desire them especially to accept it.

Touching the addition of the dainties of popery annexed to the treatise,
partly to show the unlearned learning of their popish great clarks in
divinity, when popery it self was at her top and top gallant; and partly to
discover the abominable blasphemies, and blasphemous abominations of their
religion: (which to many perhaps were before secret and altogether unknown)
touching this addition (I say) of the se things I do also desire that it may
find the like courteous entertainment. And least any man should think that
these things thus added, were gathered out of such authors as were of no
account in their church, (as likewise many slender things might be collected
out of the books of some simple writers amongst us, that are of no reputation
in our church) least also touching those things that I have gathered out of
their service books, any should imagine them to be such, as they themselves
should now disclaim, I have sufficiently prevented these objections in the
addition it self, showing that the authors by me here tra^uced, had great
allowance from the Popes own vnholines, and were of high estimation in their
churches, and likewise proouing their ancient service books in the things here
expressed, not to differ from their new books newly reformed by the cou^cil of
Tre^t, neither yet to be any whit in a manner now revoked. Much other the like
popish trash I might have noted out of other the like popish books, but to
avoid tediousnes unto other, I did the more willingly spare my own pains.
Thus committing your selves with the success of these my labors unto the Lord
(who work both in you and in me more perfect hatred of popery and all other
errors, and more unfeigned love of his truth, that we may the better continue
therein, and be the more plentiful in all the fruits thereof,) I do lovingly
take my leave of you, from Billerim in Essex the seventh of March in the year
of our Lord according to the co^putation of the church of England 1597. almost
now ended.

Yours in the Lord unfeignedly Thomas Stoughton.

The general sum of all all things comprehended in this treatise following.
The reasons why this work was taken in hand and the state of this cause
being first breefly declared, then follow these general arguments against
popery and for our religion.

1 All true religion and acceptable to God, is wrought in the hearts of men by
the ministry of God his word conteiued in holy scripture. Popery is not
wrought by the ministry of that word in as much as where that word is most
plentifully and sincerely taught, there popery most falls, and where that
word is wanting there popery most abound, as also because papists will neither
voluntarily come, nor by authority be drawn, either to the preaching or
reading thereof in our Churches, neither do delight in the private reading
thereof at home, ergo Popery is not true religion etc.

2 All true religion is vpheld and maintained by good and lawefull means,
needing no evil and vnlavvefull means to uphold it. But popery is vpheld and
maintained by all unlawful means, as by force and violence, by fire and
faggot, corrupting, adding unto, and diminishing the text of scriptures, by
false alleging the authorities of men, by clipping and mangling the works of
the ancient fathers, both in citing their testimonies, and also in printing of
the books themselves by authority of the popish church, by lying miracles, and
such other indirect means, ergo, etc.

3 The subject matter of true religion is contained in the written word of God.
The subject mat* of popery is not comprised in that written word of God, but
is directly contrary thereunto in all, the principal points thereof. ergo etc.

4 The form of true religion is also comprehended in the canonical Scripture.
The form of poperis is not there comprehended, but is altogether diverse from
the form of God his worship in that word prescribed, yea rather popery has
in a manner no worship of God at all. ergo.

5 All true religion refers all things to God his glory. Popery refers
not all things to God his glory, but so aduanceth the Pope, saints, and man
himself, that it spoileth God of all his glory. ergo.

6 True religion brings forth obedience to the ^orall law of God contained in
the ten commandments. Popery (and not Papists only) baingeth forth no such
obedience, but transgresses every one of these commandments, and that in the
highest degree. ergo.

7 True religion works true joy and sound comfort in every heart where it
takes true place, as certifying she same both of the present favor of God,
and also of the continuance thereof. Popery works no such joy and comfort,
as the which depriueth men of the Scriptures, whereby their eyes are to be
opened and their minds instructed in true wisdom, as the which teaches
likewise that it is presumption for a man to say that he is persuaded of God
his favor, and of his own salvation, and wherein no man ever knows whither
he receives the true sacrament or not. ergo.

8 All true religion is wise as he that is the author thereof. Popery is not
wise, but most foolish and ridiculous, grossly worshipping many homely
relikes, absurdly baptizing bells and Churches, etc. and without all wit and
reason (much more without divinity) citing, condemning, and excommunicating
them that are dead. ergo.

9 All true religion is unsavory and unpleasant to the nature of man. But
popery is most pleasant thereunto, because it teaches men not to take any
pains in the scriptures, yea forbids all such pains, because it affirms
that the work done is sufficient howsoever it be done, and that therefore men
need not to be careful about their hearts, because also it commends
especially the commandments of men, giving all liberty unto men from the
commandments of God: and teaching that what good soever is neglected, or what
evil soever is by any committed, yet by confession of all this with the mouth,
by a little voluntary afflicting of the body, and especially* by a piece of
money, a man may have forgiveness of all. ergo.

The contrary of all the former arguments is proved of our religion, from
whence it follovveth that it is true and acceptable unto God.

10 Both the former conclusions, the one against popery, the other for our
religion, are proved by actual testimonies of God.

These are showed to be 1 The gifts of God promised to the latter times for the
commendation of the Gospel. 2 The works of God.
The gifts of God are showed to have been 1 Excedingly decayed, and almost
dead and buried in the chief times of popery. 2 Repaired, revived, raised up,
and greatly to have flourished, etc. at the breaking forth of our religion out
of the darkness of popery.
The works of Godare either single against popery. against our religion.

or mixed both against popery and for our religion.
All these former arguments being plentifully handled, then follows the
conclusion, wherein are exemplified the manifold use of the whole treatise.

Concerning them which are of our religion all generally vveake and strong.
more particularly great persons, and those also either generally all, or
specially David's Worthies.

not ofour religion Atheists and all of no religion. Papists 1 weak and erring
only of ignorance. 2 obstinate and wilful.



A GENERAL TREATISE AGAINST POPERY, AND IN DEFENSE OF the religion by public
authority professed in England, and in other Churches reformed.
THE PREFACE.
IT cannot be denied but that many excellent, learned, and godly men, have both
plentifully and soundly, and also profitably and fruitfully written, most
worthy treatises for confutation of all particular points of popery, and like
wise for confirmation of all particular points of our religion. In this
treatise also the mystery of iniquity in popery is so fully discovered, and
the truth of our religion from point to point particularly so evidently
declared, that all men of any judgment, exercised in those treatises may
easily see both the one and the other: yea many have seen and do see both the
one and the other. Notwithstanding as many have seen and do see it, so also
Satan the god of this world does still detain many in their former blindness and
ignorance. Yea the nearer that his kingdom is to an end, the more diligently
he goes about like a roaring lion seeking still whom he may devour.
Therefore he cease not by his chief instrument the man of sin, and child
of perdition (I mean the Bishop and Pope of Rome) continually to send forth
into all corners of the realm swarms of Jesuits and Seminary priests, as to
harden those in popery that have not yet renounced that profession, so also to
infect other there with that are either of no religion, or that having embraced
ours are not yet sufficiently settled and grounded therein. And truly both ways
he does the more prevail, partly because many have not ability to buie the
books of particular controversies betwixt us and the Papists they being some
what costly, partly because they have no leisure to read them being many and
large, and partly because they have no judgment to conceive of them being
matters of learning and learnedly handled. Where he cannot effect that which he
would for the hardening of men in popery, or drawing them to popery, there he
goes another way to work, either corrupting them with some other heresy, or
making them altogether profane, and working in them a contempt of all religion.
Because all is one to him, whether men be Papists, or other heretics, or of no
religion at all.

2 Thus therefore seeing true religion every where to decay, and the kingdom
of Satan more and more daily to be enlarged partly by popery, partly by other
heresies, and partly by profanenes, and contempt of all religion, I have
thought good an other way to try the conversion both of the ignorant Papists
that are yet persuaded their religion to be sound and true, and that wherein
they please God, and also of other heretics and profane persons themselves, if
it be possible, and likewise the confirmation and strengthening of such as
professing our religion in show, are notwithstanding unstaid and wavering,
and therefore ready to be drawn any other way. To all these therefore I do
here offer these general arguments following, in defense of our religion, and
against popery, so briefly and plainly set down, that even all that are not
able to go to the price of books of particular controversies, or that cannot
intend the reading of them to weigh and conceive them, may yet generally see
the truth of our religion, and the falsehood of popery, and seeing these
things, may likewise more seriously consider of our religion: and contrarily of
the most dangerous, fearful, and wretched estate of all Papists, and
likewise of all other that are not as yet of our religion; that so the one sort
may not forsake our holy fellowship, and the other may join with us: and that
both joined together in one truth, may zealously profess it, bringing forth
plentiful fruits thereof. Neither would I have men wholly to content
themselves with these general reasons, neglecting particular treatises of
particular controversies, but rather by this treatise to be the more encouraged
to the reading of the other, and to be made the fitter, and every way the more
able to judge of them.

3 That all men may the better see my meaning in this whole treatise, and know
the state of the whole cause: by our religion, I do here understand the
religion now established and publicly by public authority professed in
England; and such other Churches as have justly forsaken Rome, and are in good
measure well reformed according to the word of God contained in holy Scripture.
To speak more plainly, I mean by our religion that substance and doctrine of
faith, wherein we dissent from the Church of Rome, and do all of us consent
among our selves, both we with those other Churches, and those other Churches
with us in this land. By popery like wise I understand, all that doctrine of
the church of Rome, which differs and dissenteth from this our religion, and
the doctrine held and professed publicly here in England, and other Churches
in like manner reformed. In this treatise therefore I do undertake by plain
and evident arguments fit for the capacity of all sorts both poor and rich,
both learned and unlearned, though they can read or understand only the
english tongue, to prove that this our religion is of God, and that which God
as touching the substance and doctrine thereof, does well accept and like of:
and contrarily, by like arguments as plainly to show that popery is not of
God, and therefore also not in any account with him, but abominable and
detestable in in his sight.

THE FIRST ARGUMENT TOUCHING THE breeding and begetting of true religion.
THVS having declared both the reasons that moved me to this work, and likewise
the state of the whole cause handled herein, I will now enter into the
arguments themselves. Here therefore first of al, let us consider the chief
and principal means: whereby both that religion that is of God, and
acceptable unto God is at the first begun and framed, and afterward further
built and perfected in them that atteine unto it, and also of the like means,
whereby popery is at the first hatched, and afterward brooded and further
strengthoned. Touching the former, it is most certain that it is always
begun by the word of God. For the Apostle S. Paul expressly teaches us.
Romans 10. 17. That faith is by hearing the word of god preached. S. James also
chap. 1. 18. says, that we are begotten again by the word of truth. Our
Savior likewise in the parable of the seed. Matthew. 13. plainly shows that,
that only is good ground into the which the seed of god his word falling
brings forth good fruit, and so likewise that, that only is to be accounted
good fruit which springs from the seed of the word. As the word of god is
the only ordinary means whereby faith and regeneration are begun in every
man whom God will have to be saved: so also it is the especial means,
whereby they are to be further built till they be finished. S. Peter exhorts
the Christians to whom he wrote, that as they were allreadie borne a new by
the word of God. 1. Pet. 1. 23. So also as newborn babes they should desire
the sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby, chap. 2. verse. 2.
Saint Paul likewise having first exhorted the Thessalonians, not to quench the
spirit, which they had received, that is to cherish the spirit, meaning the
work of faith and regeneration wrought by the spirit (a Metonymy, of the cause
for the effect) presently admonishes them, not to despise prophesying. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. Where by prophesying (by a Synecdoche, of the special for the
general,) he means the preaching only of the same word by the which before
they had received the Spirit. Our Savior Christ also in his Epistles to the
seven Churches of Asia, Reuelat. 2. and 3. Exhorting those Churches to
repentance, constancy, keeping of the things they had received, and the
increasing of them, adds in the end of those Epistles this general
admonition, Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches, whereby he gives all men to understand, that hearing of that which
the spirit said to the Churches, was the especial means for the working and
increasing of the things commended in those Epistles to the Churches.

2 All this hitherto spoken of the word of God, is to be understood only of
the word of God written and contained in the holy Scriptures. For whatsoever
the Papists say of their unwritten verities, as equivalent to the doctrine of
the Scriptures, yet that there are no such unwritten verities of such
authority, and so to be esteemed as it has been sufficiently proved by that
worthy man, and of holy memory M. Whitaker, and other learned men that have
particularly dealt in that cause, so is it also evident by that general
admonition before spoken of, given to the seven Churches, because in it by
hearing that which the spirit says, is not meant any unwritten verity, but
that which before Christ Jesus had commanded John to write to the seven
Churches.

3 These things being thus evident touching that religion that is of God, and
acceptable unto God, let us now see by what means Popery is hatched and
brooded. Here let a view be taken of the Papists within our own land and
abroad, yea of all whatsoever, wheresoever and whenever; which of all them
may be said to be begotten and won to that religion, by the preaching of the
word of God comprehended in the Scriptures? which of all these can be said to
have been confirmed and strengthened in that same religion by the same word?
Verelie it is most certain that popery is begun, increased and perfected
not by that word, but by traditions only and doctrines of men. The more men
are purelie instructed in the word of God, the more they hear and consider of
the doctrine of the Scriptures, the further are they from all popery; the more
they dislike and abhor the same. Again, the less men are acquainted with
the word of God, the seeldomer they hear it, or read it, the more capable
certainly are they of all popery, the more also are they confirmed and
strengthened, yea rather hardened in all popery. This is most evident; First,
because as the pure preaching of the word of God decayed in the world, so
popery grew and increased; Secondly, because sithence the sincere preaching of
this word has been again revived in these latter times: the more has
popery wasted and pined according to the prophecy of the Apostle who has
said, that the Lord should consume Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Thirdly, the same is manifest by diverse examples of places and
persons in our own land. For where the Gospel is most plentifully and truly
preached, there are fewest Papists, and where the Gospel is least preached,
there is the greatest number of papists. Some places which were most popish of
all the country where they are, before they had the preaching of the word, are
now sithence that god in mercy has vouchsafed the same unto them, most free
of popery and papists. My self as young as I am, did know the time long
sithence the happy Reign of her Majesty, when we in Kent was most accounted
and also was indeed the most popish place of all that country. But sithence
it has pleased God to send unto them the ministry of his word, popery has
there vanished as the mist before the Sun: and now I think it is less noted
for popery, then any other place, especially then any place which has not had
the word, as that has had it. Yea few places are more forward the^ that in
true profession of our religion. The like may be said of many other places,
both in the South, and also in the North parts of England. Again, who are the
most obstinate papists in the la^d? are they not those that never have heard
the word of god preached unto the^? or that having heard it, are fallen away
from it? and what is the cause why many are so obstinate in popery? Is it not
because they will not be drawn to hear that word of God neither yet to read
it? Truly I doubt not but that if it might please God to give unto them
willing minds to hear or read the Scriptures, with a true desire indeed to
keep and embrace the doctrine in them contained, how contrary soever to that
which in times past they have held or do yet hold, then the more they should
hear or read, the more they would dislike of their former religion. In the
mean time whilst they care not for hearing or reading, whilst they despise
the Scriptures, whilst they rail of the hearing and reading of them (as many
of the most learned papists do) what do they else but be wray, that they are
not yet begotten unto God by them, neither the children of God, and that
therefore their religion is not of God. For if they were begotten unto god, and
that by the doctrine of the Scriptures, if they were the children of God, as
they imagine and boast of them selves, would they not delight to hear his
word? at least would they not delight to read the word by whomesoeuer brought
unto them? what loving child is not glad to hear the voice of his loving
father, or to read at least his letters sent by others unto him from the place
where him self is? He that is of God, hears God his word. Ioh. 8. 47. If
they were, the sheep of Christ, they would hear his voice. John. 10. 27. If
they suspect our preaching of the word, yet they would at the least come to
those places, where the word is read, or they would read it at home by
themselves, in such a tongue as wherein they might understand it. Since
therefore they care not for the hearing or reading it, they show they are not
begotten to God by it.

4 As touching our religion it is begotten by the word of god, it is confirmed
and strengthened by the word of God. As men's traditions grew in request with
men, so our religion at the first decayed. As the vanity of men's traditions
began to be discerned and abolished by the breaking forth of the glorious light
of the Scriptures out of the cloud of popery, so our religion was again
renewed and increased. The more common that the Scriptures are, or have been,
the more does our religion flourish, and has flourished from time to time. The
more men hear the Scriptures, search the Scriptures, meditate the Scriptures,
and pray unto God for the true understanding of the Scriptures: the more also
do men mislike of popery, and grow into love of our religion. The Papists
themselves see this to be so, and can not deny it, therefore do they by all
means they can, not only accuse the Scriptures of such difficulty and
obscurity, as whereby they discourage the unlearned sort from reading of them,
but also they utterly deny them to the common people in their vulgar tongue.
On the contrary, they care not how common their unwritten verities be. If they
feared not the overthrow of their religion, and the growing of ours by the use
of the Scriptures, why should they so straightly restrain the common people
from it? if they thought as they speak and write, that their unwritten
verities were of God, as well as the Scriptures: why should they make the^ more
common then the Scriptures? Is it because they think them more easy, and
therefore fitter for the capacity of the common people then the Scriptures?
This will not stand with that, which they make the ground of them, and which
they pretend for their special warranr: namely with the words of our Savior
to his disciples, Other things have I to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
them now etc. John. 16. 12. For by these words it is manifest, that those
things which Christ had further to say unto his disciples, were harder the^
those that then he did speak, and are now written, otherwise he would not have
added as a reason, why he did for a time conceal them, but ye can not bear
them now.

5 Now to finish this point, forasmuch as that religion which God accepts and
likes of, is wrought by the preaching of his own word, forasmuch as Popery
has not such beginning, but is only engendered by the slyme of traditions, and
doctrines of men. Finally forasmuch as the religion now publikelie professed in
England is both begotten by that immortal seed, and does also grow to further
perfection, by that pure milk of the word of God, therefore I conclude for my
first argument that popery is only such as those slimie traditions and
doctrines are, whereof it is inge^dred, and that our religion is not of man,
but of God, and acceptable unto God.

THE SECOND ARGUMENT TOUCHING THE PRE serving and maintayning of true religion.
THE same is also manifest by the second means whereby popery has bine from
time to time, and yet is vpholden and maintained. For as touching this, what
shall we say of the impudency of the Papists, I mean such as account
themselves the learned Papists, both in falsifying the ancient Fathers, and
also in alleging patches only of their writings, as making against us, but
leaving out some part of the same sentences or some sentence going before or
following after: whereby both that Father his mind is made evident, and also
our doctrine approved? Is not this to deal with the Fathers, as the devil
does with the Scripture against our Savior. Mat. 4. 6. And that the Papists
do thus abuse the readers by citing the Fathers in such sort is sufficiently
showed, by those that have written in particular controversies. To prove the
APOCRYPHA books Canonical Scriptures, they allege the testimony of
Augustine lib. 2. de doctrina Christiana. cap. 8. Yet that Augustine did not so
understand the word Canonical, as they apply his testimony is manifest in
the same place, let the learned reader see Whitak. Controuers. 1. quest. 1.
Cap. 4. Page 15. In like manner they deal with Ambrose, whose testimony they
allege for proof of this: that many things are hard in the Scriptures,
thereby indeed to discourage all unlearned, from reading of the Scriptures, as
though all things were hard in them: and yet in the very same place, Ambrose
also says, that in the Scriptures is matter fit for all persons to drink
first, second, and last; where by he also teaches that as there are some
things to be drunk last in the rivers of the Scriptures, that is, not till men
be well grounded in knowledge and judgment, so also there is for young
beginners and such as have not entered, or that have made but little entrance. So
they deal with Augustine oftentimes in the same question of the perspicuity of
the Scripture, as also the learned reader may see Whitak. quest. 4. page 276.
In like manner they deal with the Fathers almost in all other questions and
controversies; Sometime also they allege the testimonies of the Fathers out
of some of their books not regarding how they have either opened their mind or
retracted their former errors in other of their books. Sometime again they
plead the authority of some Fathers in citing testimonies of their books,
which they wrote after that they were fallen into some heresy. So they
allege the testimony of Tertullian out of such works as he made after that
he was a Montanist. Whitaker. quest. 6. page 449. Finally oftentimes they are
not ashamed to name the Fathers in particular questions as if they were on
their side, whereas the clean contrary is manifestly proved and showed by
our writers, and is likewise evident to them that are acquainted with the
writings of the Fathers. For proof hereof let the reader look their preface
to the translation of the new testament into English by themselves, and
likewise read M. Fulke his answer to the same.

2 For their first reason, why they translate the new Testament according to
the vulgar latin translation, and not according to the greek original is
this. It is so ancient (say they) that it was used in the Church of God above
1300. years ago as appears by the Fathers of those times. But M. Fulke
shows: first that no one translation was in those days commonly received;
Secondly, by many examples that Tertullian, Cyprian, the Clergy it self of
Rome in Cyprian his time, Hierome, Arnobius, Hilarie, and Ambrose, did not
follow this vulgar translation, but did read the text far diversely from the
same. In their fourth reason they commend it as that which for the most part
ever since Hierom his time has been used in the Churches service, expounded
in Sermons, alleged and interpreted in the Commentaries and writings of
ancient fathers of the latin Church. But M. Fulk proves and shows, First,
that their Church service is not so ancient as Augustine his time, many of
their Church lessons being taken out of Beda and other writers living many
hundred years after Saint Augustine his age. Secondly, that such parts of the
Scripture as seem to have been of most ancient times used in the church of
Rome are not taken out of their vulgar text; and thirdly, that since Jerome his
time Optatus Melevitanus, Fuigentius, Primasius, Prosper, Aquitanicus, and Leo
likewise himself Bishop of Rome did allege and interpret the texts of
Scripture much differing from this vulgar translation.

3 The like may be said of their belying the Fathers in their notes afterward
upon the text it self. Upon the first petition of the Lords prayer, Matthew. 6.
12. for their old distinction of sins venial and mortal, they quote
certain places of Augustine to bear the unlearned reader in hand, that
Augustine was the author or a favorer thereof. Notwithstanding Augustine in
those places quoted by them, uses no such distinction, but only speaks of
small sins, which no man denies. Upon 1. Cor. 13. 10. they say that S.
Augustine, lib. 22. de Civit. cap. 29. proves that the Saints in heaven have
more perfect knowledge of our affairs here, then they had when they lived
here. And yet S. Augustine in that place speaks not of the knowledge of the
Saints now in heaven touching our present affairs here in earth, but only
speaks generally of the perfect knowledge which all Saints both dead and yet
living shall have in the resurrection. Above all other places I wish the reader
to see how foully they falsify Chrysostom for defense of Peter's supremacy
upon Ioh. 21. 17 yea how common this fault of falsifying the fathers is with
them by the judgment of themselves, even of the University of Doway approved
by the Censors according to the decree of the Counsel of Trent, concerning the
book of Bertrame. For this University acknowledges how they do oftentimes
excuse ancient writers, being by Protestants opposed unto them in
disputation, and how by devising some pretty st^ifts they deny them, and do
faigne some commodious sense unto them: and therefore whereas it seems there
had been some consultation for the utter suppressing of the said book of
Bertram, the said University concludes that the foresaid book of Bertram
should rather being amended (that is, clipped and mangled at their pleasure)
be tolerated, then altogether forbidden. See this more largely in the answer of
M. Fulke to their note upon the place of Ioh. 21. 17. but especially let the
learned see the same in their Index expurgatorius, page 11. and 12. where also
the reader shall see what they command to be clean put out in that book of
Bertram, and what also to be changed or expounded according to such sense as
they imagine or would have to be of his words. All this their iuggling with the
people in crying out, all the Fathers, all the Fathers, are on our side, might
be showed more plentifully, but that it is not fit for this treatise. In like
manner they are not ashamed to belie our own writers, and to charge them with
such words, as they never used. So they deal with that worthy, and reverend
man D. Fulke, as himself shows in his Defense of English translations of the
Bible, in his answer to the 49. section of the preface, and of the 18. and 37.
sections of the first chapter, and in many other places. The like may be said
of their fathering new things upon ancient writers: see Calvin's instit. lib. 4.
cap. 7. sect. 20. Does truth need to be vpholden by such notorious lies?

4 But all this is nothing to their intolerable impiety both in adding unto,
and also in detracting from the writings of the Fathers what they list, to make
the Fathers to speak nothing but that which they will have the^ for to speak.
Yea thus to deal with the writings and works of the Fathers even in the
printing of them: that their whole volumes being so printed, the readers may
think, that the Fathers did speak and write as now their books are printed.
In like manner they deal with such notes as are by some new writers added to
the margent of the Fathers writings for the better directing of the reader in
reading those writings. So also deal they with such tables as by late writers
are gathered and set in the beginning or ending of the Fathers works, for
helping the reader more easily to find that which he desires in the Fathers.
Whatsoever in such marginall notes or in such tables, may any way help the
reader to find any thing, or the better to understand any thing in the Fathers
either against their errors, or for the truth received by us, that have they
by public authority and act of the Tridentine Counsel, and of the King of
Spaines Edict, commanded to be blotted and rased out of the books of the
Fathers in the new printing of them. And for the better doing thereof, they
have set forth a table of all such things as they will have so rased out by the
authority aforesaid. This table they call Index expurgatorius. And this table
though they kept from us a while, yet now we have by the industry and pains
of Junius: who also in his preface thereunto testifies, that at Lions in the
year 1559. he being familiarly acquainted with a printer, whose name he says
was Lodovicus Sauarius, did there see Ambrose his works most fairly and
exquisitely printed: so that he could not but admire the artificial and
beautiful countenance thereof. But the printer seeing him so well to like
thereof, and so much to be delighted there with, told him notwithstanding that
if he were to buie Ambrose his works, he would rather buie of any other
edition then of that. Iunius maruailing at that speech demanded the reason
thereof. The printer therefore showed him from under his table certain leaves
of the ancient copies of Ambrose, some cancelled wholly, some other in part
only rased, telling him also that those were the patterns of those leaves
which but few days before he had truly printed, according to the example of
the ancient and certain pattern. But said he further, two Franciscan Friars by
authority have put out all these leaves, and commanded these to be put into
their places, contrary to all truth of the former books. What they have
commanded to be rased out of the marginall notes and tables of the Fathers
does plentifully and particularly appear by the Index it self so set forth by
Iunius. Now let any indifferent reader judge of their religion, the which by
these means they are forced to uphold and maintain. Certainly if their religion
were of God, it would not need any such proppes of falsehood and wickedness. Yea
if the^selus or at least the chiefest of them, thought it to be of God, they
would never set such rotten shores to keep it up.

5 Neither ought men much to marvel at their clipping of the writings of men in
such sort, since they deal in like sort with the precious come of god his own
scriptures. For first of al they have been bold to take away the whole second
commandment out of the decalogue, that so they might bear the common people
in hand that there is nothing in the scriptures against images, or at the least
nothing in the moral law to bind us now as well as the Jews in former time:
and that this their dealing might not be espied by any defect in the number of
the commandments, they have divided the tenth commandment into two. Both
these things are manifest by their common primmers. The like they do with the
Scriptures in many other places, as appears by their vulgar translation and
edition of the Scriptures in latin: the which although it were not theirs at
the first, yet because they condemn all other, and do only command this as
authentical, forbidding also any man to appeal from the same to the
original text in the Hebrew and Greek, therefore it is to be accepted theirs.
In that translation and edition many things are wanting that are in the
original text, and many things also corrupted. In the 9. of Matthew. verse. 13.
Our Savior says. I came not to call the righteous but the sinners to
repentance. In their translation are these two words to repentance left out.
Romans 11. 6. All these words are wanting in their translation. If of works then
not of grace, or else were work no more work. Ioh. 14. 26. For these words,
he shall teach you al things, and bring all things to your remembrance which I
have told you. For these words I say which I have told you, their translation
says which I shall tell you. Thus they read for help of their traditions to
make the common people believe, that Christ speaks in this place of some
things, which he would speak afterward, that he had nor spoken before. Many
other places there are in like manner either clipped or corrupted. If their
cause were good, why should they sustain it by such vile means?

6 Let us here further remember their exceeding cruelty, and most bloody
dealing, for the continual maintenance of their religion. If fire and faggot
had not better helped them, then preaching and disputing, their religion had
never been so universal as it is. For although the blood of the Martires be
called the seed of the Church, and have been a notable means to confirm many
in the profession of the Gospel. Yet other also have thereby been drawn from
it, and for fear have received popery. As therefore the Priests, Scribes,
and Pharisees, and other Jews, when they were not able by the Scriptures to
resist the wisdom of our Savior, of Stephan, of the Apostles, and the spirit
that spoke in them, did use force and violence for their last and chiefest
argument: even so have the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees of the Church of
Rome always done. Such always has bin their cruelty, that as diverse wild
beasts and birds make the flesh and blood of other to be their nourishment and
life, so also the blood of the Protestants has been their special relief.
The cruelty exercised here in our own la^d, as sometime before, so especially
in the late time of Queen Marie does ple^tifully witness the same. The like
may be said of the Spanish inquisitio^ the chief means of upholding popery,
not only in Spain it self, but also in many other countries. The cruelty
thereof is so great and barbarous, that the cruelty of Nero, Domitian, and all
other the like professed enemies unto Christ Jesus and his Gospel is nothing
to be compared thereto. The copies thereof are to be seen printed in english
for justifying that which I write. A man would think that all the devils in
hell should never have devised such tortures and most exquisite punishments,
except it were thus manifest. Here also is to be considered the most bloody
massaker in France Anno 1572. in the which of noble men, gentlemen, learned
men, and common persons thought to be protestants in Paris were slain and most
violently and cruelly murdered without any proceeding by order of law, the
number at the least of ten thousand within three days, and within less then
one month presently after in many other cities and towns of France, were in
like sort slain and murdered 20000. more. So that as it should have bin with
the Jews through all the provinces of Ahashuerosh, if the cursed purpose of
Hama^ had proceeded to effect; so also was it with all the known or suspected
protestants in France, upon whom the merciles Papists could lay hands: what
does this else witness but that the religion of the Papists is like unto that
wicked decree of Ahashuerosh and from the same fountain? Neither may this be
said to have bin a fault only of that nation. For the great joy of the Pope,
with all his Cardinals at Rome, their procession, their gunshott, and singing
Te Deum in honor of the bloody act, do evidently show both the approbation of
the thing done by the whole Church of Rome, and also that the said Pope and
Cardinals were acquainted with the matter before, and had an hand and stroke
in it. I confess I note this out of the book of Martires, but no Papist is
therefore to suspect the truth of the matter: for this history there reported
is but briefly gathered out of the French Chronicles and Histories, which do
more largely describe the same. Besides this act is so late and was so notorious
at the first committing thereof, that there needs not the testimony of any
writer to be suspected therein. Thus we see that a pillar of blood is the
chief pillar of the Romish Church such as now it is.

7 The like objection made against our religion from the execution of many
Seminary priests and Jesuits in our own land has bin sufficiently
answered by others. For they have not been executed to maintain and uphold
our religion, but for their heinous treasons whereby they have sought the
sacred life of her Majesty in bringing in of forreyners here to usurp the
kingdom, and the overthrow of the whole land their own natural cu^trey.
Therefore this horrible treason against both their Prince and country, being
especially authorized by the Pope himself, and his Clergy, not only for the
seducing of the subjects from all obedience to her highness, but also for the
shedding of her blood, as also the like treasons of many other to the same
intent, attempted by the same authority do plainly disclaim their religion
as not being of God neither acceptable unto God. For truth seeks no corners,
truth requires no such stilts to go by. Neither did our Savior use such
means to commend himself and his doctrine, though he might have commanded
more then twelve legions of Angels, neither after his ascension did the
Apostles or any of the^ so further the gospel.

8 To these means before mentioned I may add their foul abusing of the simple
people with pretended revelations and lying miracles, thereby to make them to
account their religion to be as divine and from heaven, as by the same means
well looked into, it does manifestly appear to be altogether diuolish and
from hell it self. Such was the practice of certain Monks and Friars with
Elizabeth Barton a Nun in Kent whom they called by the name of the holy maid
of Kent. This holy maid by the device of the foresaid Monks and Friars,
fained her self to live with no other food then that which was brought unto
her immediately by the Angels of heaven, she made also as though oftentimes
she lay in a trance wherein she did straungly alter her countenance with
the other parts of her body, and spoke many things in commendation of
Idolatry, pilgrimage, and other like points of popery, and likewise in
derogation of the Gospel, and in disallowance of King Henry his divorce from
the Lady Katherine the late wife of his elder brother Prince Arthur,
threatening as it were by way of prophesying that if he proceeded therein, he
should not be king one month after. This knauerie being found out both she
and her abettors, namely certain Munks, Friars, and Priests, were executed for
it. See the book of Martyrs, printed 1583. p. 1054. And other histories
thereof. The like is reported in the same book. p. 1291. out of the ninth
book of Sleydan his commentaries, of certain friars of Orleance in France,
who because the Majors wife of the city upon her death bed had desired her
husband that she might be buried without the solemnities then commonly used
at the funerals of such persons, whereby their noses were wiped of a great
part of their accustomed gain, caused a boy in the time of their night
service to make a strange noise in one of the vaults of the church where she
was buried as if he had been a spirit. This boyish spirit, or spiritual boy
thus inspired by the devil and the friars, and coniured like wise after their
popish and deuelish manner, having signified that he was a dumb spirit by
signs also showed that he was the soul of the said Majors wife before buried,
now condemned in hell, for the heresy of Martin Luther. This frierlie prancke
being found out, the friars by authority of the King were committed to prison
where they continued a long time before they were released. Let the reader see
this more largely in the book of Martirs and Sleidan his commentaries. As
these and such like means continually applied to shore up popery, do show the
rotte^nes thereof, so our religion continuing and standing right
notwithstanding many storms and tempests against it, does show it self to be
sound and vpholden by him only whose power none is able to resist. But of this
more shallbe spoken afterward upon other occasion.

THE THIRD ARGUMENT TOUCHING THE SVB iect matter of true religion.
AS these means hitherto spoken of do mightelie speak against popery, and
teach the very simplest that are, that it is not of God: so also does the
matter and substance of popery speak as much. For it is partly directly
contratie unto, and partly far differing from the matter and substance of
that religion which God himself has commended in his Scriptures, and the
which no man can deny to be acceptable unto god. This is manifest, first of
all, because that religion, which the Scriptures commend, is true knowledge of
God, of Christ Jesus, of the truth. The Lord says by the Prophet Ose. I desire
mercy and not sacrifice and the knowledge of god more then burnt offerings.
Ose. 6. 6. Oftentimes also the Lord reproves and complains of the ignorance,
and want of knowledge in his people, as the cause of all evils both which they
committed, and also which came upon them, as Ier. 9. 3. and in many other
places. S. Peter also says in the name of all the Apostles, We believe and
know that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God, Ioh. 6. 69. Our
Savior Christ says, This is life eternal that they know thee to be the
only very God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. 3. He like
wise promises the knowledge of the truth to all his true disciples, Ioh. 8.
32. The Apostle says, God will have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2. 4. And again he describes faith to be the
knowledge of the truth according to godliness, Tit. 1. 1. He forbids also the
Corinthians, not to be children in understanding, 1. Cor. 14. 20. The Ephesians
also not to be unwise, but to understand what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5.
17. Finally, the Apostle S. Peter bids the Christians to whom he wrote, to
join virtue with faith, and with virtue knowledge. 2. Pet. 1. 5. By these and
many other the like places we see, that the Scriptures commend knowledge, as
the first matter of faith and religion. We see also what knowledge they do
commend, namely of God, of Christ, of the truth according to godliness, of the
will of God, of the Scriptures themselves, and that to all sorts of men. Now
what shall we say is the matter of Popery? Truly to speak according to the
nature of things, popery has indeed no matter at all, but is a mere
vacuitie or emptines for the most part. For may it be said that popery is
knowledge, and that of these things? No certainly: but it is a principle of
popery, that ignorance is the mother of devotion. Therefore the whole popish
Church generally condemns all knowledge of God, and of the scriptures in the
common people: prohibiting them the use of any part of the scriptures (as we
have heard before) and teaching and commanding them only to believe as the
Church believes. This they say is sufficient faith and sufficient religion.
And indeed touching devotion to their religion, they speak most truly. For no
man will have any devotion unto it, that knowerh ought of God in the
scriptures. But to believe as the Church, that is, as their Church believes,
is neither true faith nor the shadow of true faith, but rather of faith in the
devils. The most part also of them when they teach this faith, have it not,
but can only say that they have it, and that they do believe as the Church
believes. The most (I say) do only say that they do so believe. They do
not in deed believe, as the Church believes. For how can they, since they
know not what the Church believes? Yet are their bare words taken and allowed
for current, good, lawful faith of Rome. I grant with grief, that many
amongst us know not the principles of our religion: yet no man allows such
ignorance, but every godly man condemns it, and is grieved for it. But be it
that they did in deed believe as their Romish Church believes, and that they
knew as much as the best Doctor and all their Romish Doctors know touching
their religion, yet this is not enough.

For now to enter into the particular matter of their religion. First the
Scripture teaches us oftentimes, that there is but one God, one Lord, one
Mediator between God and man, Christ Jesus* but popery teaches that there
are many gods, and many mediators. For does it not communicate the peculiar
properties of God, the vbiquitie or universal presence, and such like unto the
body of Christ? and do they not so make an other god thereof? do they not
attribute the doing thereof to several saints for several countries,
diseases, and other several affairs, which is only proper to God, whereby
they make so many several gods, as their are saints in their Calendar? do
they not also ascribe power to forgive sins unto the Pope, and to every
shaven priest, which yet God challenges only to himself, and which also
their forefathers acknowledged to be God his own due? Yea do they not in
their Decretals, Distinctions, Canons, and such other books allowed by
general authority of their Church, in most plain words write that of him
which is a so the only prerogatiue-royall of God? verily it can not be denied.
For proof hereof to the reader, I will set down some of their own words,
that no man may challenge me of a slander, neither the pope himself bring any
action against me for belying his holiness. These therefore are the words of the
gloss upon the distinction. Jn canone Quanto de translatione episcopi, titulo
7o. Papa dicitur hasere c^^leste arbitrium, and ideo etiam naturam resum
immutat, substantialia vnius rei applicando a^ij: Et de nihilo potest aliquid
facere, and sententiam quae nulla est aliquam facere, quia in his, quae vult,
c^est proratione voluntas. Nec est qui ei dicat, curitafacis? Ipse enim potest
supra ius dispensare, and de iniustitia facere iustitiam, corrigendo iura and
mutando: Nam plenitudinem obtinet potestatis. That is (that I may interpret
these words, to let the most ignorant see what blasphemies popery teaches.)
The Pope is said to have a^ heavenly power: and therefore he changes the
nature of things by applying the substantial properties of one thing to an
other. And he can make something of nothing: and that sentence which was none
(or nothing worth) to be somewhat (or of force) because in those things that
he will, to him will is for reason. Neither is there any man that may say, why
do thou so? For he can dispense above right, and of that which is injustice
make justice, correcting and changing laws, because he has full authority.
Who does not see by these words that they make the Pope another God? for to
change the nature of things, as God turned Lot his wife into a pillar of
salt, made Baalam his ass to speak, and gave Nebuchadnezzar the heart or
qualities of a beast, to make something of nothing, to make justice of
injustice, as God is said to ferch light out of darkness, to make his own will
sufficient reason, to dispense above right, to correct and change laws, to
have full authority to do al these things, is it not proper unto God? An other
also of their doctors says, Excepto peccato, Papapotest quasi omnia facere
quae Deus potest. Sin excepted, the pope can do in manner all things thai
God can do. Johannes also Capistranus (a fit name for one so well worthy of
an halter) of the authority of the Pope, and of the Church. p. 93. B. writes
to the same effect, Vbi quaeritur ad quid protenditur authorit as Papae,
respondeo breuiter, quod ad omne bonum and nullu^ malum; est enim quas^. Deus
in terris, mayor homine, minor Deo, plenitudinem obtinens potestatis. That is,
If it be asked, how far the pope his authority extends, I answer briefly,
that it extends to all that is good, to nothing that is evil, for he is as
God in the earth, greater then man, and less then God, having full authority.
Mark good reader, how they are not ashamed even to attribute these words unto
him, whereby the Apostle does describe Antechrist. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. saying that
he should sit as God etc. So God will have themselves to acknowlenge the Pope
to be Antichrist, though they intend no such thing, but rather to make him God,
or at the least pewfellow with God. In their Decretalls also they write, that
the Pope is neither god nor man, but the Viccar of God, and mixed or compounded
of God and man. Oftentimes also they ascribe unto him all power as well in
heaven and hell, as in earth. But for further view of the monstrous blasphemies
of the Pope, I refer the reader to the large description of him which is in the
book of Martyrs, in the very end of King Henry the 7. his reign, and in the
very end also of the first volume, where plentifully are laid down both
their words of him, and also the places of their own books quoted, in which
any man may find them. By these things it is evident that although they think
great scorn to be charged, to teach that there are many Gods, yet in truth by
communicating that unto other, which is God his only due, they teach as much.
God himself has said, that he will not give his glory to any other, but they
scotch not, they fear not to give it to many other.

3 The like do they touching the Mediator: For they teach that there are many
Mediators, yea so many as there are Saints, and a great many more. Yea they
teach that the Virgin Marie is not only a Mediator, but also a Mediator
above Christ himself. For proof I will note their own words, but yet only
in English for breuities sake. Thus therefore they speak to the Virgin Marie
as I do faithfully translate their words in a certain horarie etc. Rejoice O
celestial matron, triumphantly praise God thy Savior, which has made thee
singular. Thou wast content to be called the handmaid of Jesus Christ; but as
the divine law teaches, thou art his Lady; For right and reason requires
that the mother should be above the Son. Therefore ask humbly and command
loftilie that he guide us, that are here in the evening or twilight of the
world unto the supreme kingdom; And again in the same place. Thou alone art
without example, whom god has chosen to be Mediat our between God and man,
the repairer of the world, the end of destruction, the washing away from
sins, the way of counsel, the trust of reward, the ladder of heaven, the
gate of paradise. In their common prayers also they call her the mother of
grace the mother of mercy, and they pray her to defend them from their
enemies, and to receive them in the hour of death. Again they call her the
certai^^ hope of them that are in misery, the mother of Orphans, the Savior
of the oppressed, the physic of the sick, all to all. What can be more
contrary to the doctrine and matter of religion? for this is not only to make
her another Mediator, but also another God: and indeed if she be another
Mediator, she must also of necessity be another god: because there ca^ be no
Mediator, which is not also god. Neither* is this much to be marueled at, for
they also pray to god to be heard, not only for the blood of Christ, but also
for the blood of the Martyrs. Yea of Thomas Becket, which was no Martyr, but
justly put to death for his insole^ctreason. Yea they teach that every man
must also be his own Savior, that is, merit his salvation by his own good
works, so that whereas the Scripture teaches us, that a man is only
justified and saved by a true and lively faith in Christ Jesus, Popery
teaches that a man is justified not by such a faith alone, but also by works
partly of himself, and partly of other.

4 So the Scripture teaches that Christ Jesus is a perfect Savior, which has
redeemed us from all iniquity, and that with once offering up of himself, once
I say for all and for ever, but popery teaches, that he has only satisfied
for sins before Baptism, and that he must daily be offered up, by the hands
of some greasy priest. The Scripture teaches, that there is certainly no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that they that love the brethren
are of the truth, and shall before him assure their hearts, that they shall
never perish out of the hands of Christ Jesus, etc, but popery teaches that
it is presu^ption for any man to say that he is assured of these things. The
Scripture teaches us that Christ his humanity is in heaven, and shall be in
heaven till his second coming unto judgment, but popery teaches us that it
is even now upon the earth, and that in many places at one and the same time.
The Scripture teaches us, that Christ his body glorified does so retain the
essential qualities of a true body, that it may be discerned to have both
flesh and bones by our outward senses. Luke 24. 39. But popery teaches that
it is so altered and changed, that neither by sight nor by taste nor by
touching and feeling it can be discerned to have any more flesh and bone, then
a piece of bread, yea then a wafer cake, as thin as a paper. The Scripture
forbids all graven or painted Images of any thing whatsoever and wheresoever
to be made and worshipped, or any ways religiously to be bowed unto, but
popery commands the making and worshipping of Images of things in heaven,
and in earth, material and spiritual, visible and invisible, known and
unknown, living, and without life, even of the material and wooden cross of
Christ* The Scripture forbids all detraction from, and all addition unto it
self, binding this prohibition with a commination of a fearful curse, to
any that shall so do: but popery has not feared to cut of the whole second
commandment, and many other things, neither to add whole books to the
Cannon of the Scriptures. The Scripture condemns all prayers of the mouth in
any unknown tongue without understanding and affection: but popery teaches
that in prayer, and all other things opus operatum, the work done, howsoever
it be done, with affection or without affection, is meritorious: and that all
prayers of all persons, and in all places must be in the latin tongue, albeit
they that pray understand never a word and may as well be taught to say O
Devil which art in hell, as Our father which art in heaven, yea and so they
oftentimes pray for ought they know to the contrary. For howsoever the Pope
has canonized Thomas Becket, and (as it is said) Edmund Campian, and other of
that traitorous nest for Saints: yet their treasons for which they were justly
cut off by the sword of the civil magistrate and their damnable heresies, and
horrible blasphemies whereof they showed no repentance, do rather condemn
them for devils in hell, then commend them for Saints in heaven. The
Scriptures commend the observation of the Lord his day above all other days,
condemning also the observation of any other day in like sort perpetually, but
popery commands more holidaies now then were ever commanded by God himself
in the time of the law, and that to be kept as strictly as the Lords day it
self. The scripture teaches, that al things are clean to the clean, but
popery makes such difference of meats, drinks, apparel, etc. and teaches
that at some times all flesh is polluted, that it defiles whosoever eats
thereof, more then swearing, fornication, and such like things, as God himself
has expressly forbidden. The Scripture commands to gather up the basest of
God his creatures, that nothing be lost: but popery commands upon
Sh^oue-tuseday, that whatsoever of the best flesh be left, it should be cast
unto the dogs, and ^o utterly lost, rather then saved for the good of any
man. The Scripture teaches us only to call upon God in the dare of our
trouble, and to pray only to him when we may call, Our Father which art in
heaven: but popery teaches us to pray to the virgin Marie, Saint Peter, Saint
John, Saint Swithin, etc. yea to the eyes, nose, mouth, etc. to the
neckerchiffe, girdle, etc. of the virgin Marie; as is manifest by some of their
old printed prayer books. The Scripture teaches by sentence, and example of
Priests, Levites, Prophets, Apostles, etc. that marriage is honorable in all
men, though as holy as Adam was before his fall: but popery teaches us that
at sometimes of the year marriage is unlawful for all men, and at all times
for the ministers of the word in regard of their holy function. The Scripture
teaches us that every soul ought to be subject to the higher power, and to
honor the King, etc, and that whosoever resists such power, resists the
ordinance of God: but popery teaches us that the clergy is exempted from
all civil power, and may not be called before any such magistrates, neither be
punished by any civil laws. To finish this argument drawn from the
repugnancie of the matter of popery to the Scriptures and that religion which
they commend, I must even say as the Apostle says, Heb. 11. 23. What shall I
say more? the time would be to^ short to tell of Gedeon, Baruch, etc. so, I
say, must I say, what shall I say more* long time would be too short, and much
paper too little to set down all the repugnancies and contrarieties of the
matter of Popery, and of the matter of that religion, which is commended unto
us in the scriptures. Can both therefore be of God, and acceptable unto God,
that is, alvvaies the same, and in whom there is no change, nor shadow of
change?

THE FOVRTH ARGUMENT touching the form of true religion.
THat which has been said of the matter of popery in respect of the matter
of that religion, which is commended in the scriptures may be said of the
form. God is a Spirit, and therefore to be worshipped in spirit and truth,
Ioh. 4. 24. But popery prescribes such a carnal and fleshly form and manner
of worship, as if God were all flesh and no spirit. God oftentimes commands
himself to be worshipped only according to his own word. And truly if
Princes may lawfully require obedience and service of their subjects according
to their own laws, with much more equity may God the Prince of princes
require service according to his own statutes and ordinances. Therefore he
does justly refuse the traditions, precepts, and doctrines of men in his
worship, Isa. 29. 13. Math. 15. 3. and in many other places does he also
condemn will worship, and such as is forged only in the forge of man his wit:
but popery prescribes a form of God his worship principally according to
the doctrines of men, and least of all according to the doctrine of God
himself. Yea to speak according to truth, they have brought such a dark
cloud of the precepts of men into the worship of God, that a man can hardly
discern whether they worship God according to any of his own precepts. Yea to
speak yet more plain, they make so many images, crosses, relics of saints,
they make so many prayers to Saints, and offer so many gifts unto them, they
have so many pilgrimages in their honor, they repose so much trust and
confidence in all these things, they bestow so much cost upon them, they so
precisely and superstitiously observe days consecrated unto them, etc. that a
man cannot well say that they worship God in any manner at all. As for their
foolish distinction dug only out of that colepit, from whence they have
dug their Images, relics, and invocation of Saints, etc. as none of their
learned sort have ever been able to defend it, so not one of five thousand of
the vulgar people do know or understand it. How then can they regard it, or
tell when they give that unto God, which they give unto saints, and images,
etc. or that to these things, which they should by their own doctrine only
give unto God.

2 Neither do they only worship these things, but also a piece of bread,
which as soon as they have adored, goes into the mouth, from their mouth into
the stomach, from the stomach into the paunch, and from the paunch out again
of the body, all men know whither. That this is so (whatsoever the ignorant
are persuaded to the contrary) is manifest, because that if a man were driven
to that necessity, that he had no other meat to eat then their consecrated
host (as they call it,) as sometime David was forced to eat of the shewbread,
I am sure they could not deny, but that their host so eaten for a week or a
month together would nourish the natural man as well as other bread; so as
that their should be as good digestion, and egestion of that, as also of other
bread or meat: if it be so, can the nature of it be so altered according to
their doctrine, and by their enchanting sorceries, as that there should remain
nothing but accidents of bread? It is most absurd, it is most ridiculous. For
how can mere accidents nourish a material substance, and make a material
egestion? If they say that all this is done by the substance of Christ his
very body, they speak the more grossly, in making that food for this
natural life, and the more blasphemously in saying that that goes into the
draught. Again, in such a case I demand also, whether a man forced to live
only by such means for a time, or so living voluntarily by getting some way
or other all the Hosts to himself in a cuntrie, could live by them alone
without drink? Certainly by their doctrine, for the administering of the
sacrament in one kind only, it should be so. For they say that one kind only
is sufficient, because the blood of Christ is always with the body per
concomitantiam. So then, by this reason a man that should have nothing but
their host for a week or month, or longer time to live upon, should not only
have meat, but also drink. For they must as well grant the blood of Christ to
be sufficient to quench thirst, as his flesh to satisfy hunger. Yet for all
this, let one of them try but so little a time to live in this manner, I mean
only feeding upon nothing but upon bread consecrated by some Papist, and I
doubt not but that he will be glad to ask his neighbor a cup of some other
drink beside that spiritual drink which he has by concomitance (as they
speak) of his food. Yea if some Papist would try this way, to live but a
little while, he should quickly find the knauerie of transubstantiation, and
consequently also the impiety of all popery.

3 Now to return from whence we have made this digression, the Papists do
not only worship the cross, relics, and such like things; but such as are
no relics of the Saints, and pieces of wood in stead of pieces of the cross
whereon Christ was nailed. For if so many Churches should have such large
thongs of the very cross of Christ as the Papists say they have, all gathered
together would load the best ship in England: then no marvel indeed though
Christ were weary of bearing his cross, and what a giant was Simon of Syrene
whom they compelled to bear such a burden? O, say they, you do not
understand the mystery. For the cross of Christ was not so heavy, as all the
pieces now laid together would be. How so? because ever as one piece was cut
off, the remainder did grow to the former greatness, and was never a whit less
then at the first, but notwithstanding all the pieces cut off, it still
remains whole. Let him that list believe this; my name is Thomas, and I will
not believe it, till I see it, therefore I shall never believe it. Touching
their worship of relics, he that will have sport, let him read M. Calvin of
that matter; I mean his little book of relics: where amongst other
relics, he shall find Christ his foreskinne cut off when he was circumcised,
his shoes, the earth that lay under his feet, when he raised up Lazarus from
the dead, the title set over his head at his crucifying, his thornie crown,
the dish wherein he did eat the paschall lamb, the napkin about his head when
he was buried; yea the very tail of the ass whereon he rode, and many such
morsels.

4 By these things hitherto spoken, we see how contrary popery is unto the
religion commended in the Scriptures, both in matter and also in form. Who
therefore that knows the constant, immutable, and spiritual nature of God
can be persuaded in any reason, that popery should be acceptable unto God? If
out of one fountain cannot come both sweet and sour waters, can two
religions so contrary come from one and the same God? If God approve that
religion which is commended in the Scriptures, then he must needs disalow of
that which is contrary thereunto: or if he allow of that religion which is
contrary to the Scriptures, then he must also disallow of the religion
commended in the Scriptures. If therefore no man dare think that God
disalloweth of the religion commended in the scriptures, let no man dare to
think that he allows popery so contrary thereunto. Now as touching our
religion, both matter and form agree with the Scriptures. We commend
knowledge, we commend and teach all that the scriptures commend and teach, we
say also and prove by most sufficient arguments that the Scriptures are
sufficient of themselves, and contain all things pertaining to the worship
of God and salvation of men. Therefore also so nigh as we can, we frame the
manner of our worship of God according only to the Scriptures. If therefore
the matter of the Scriptures, if the form of God his worship, prescribed in
the scriptures be acceptable unto God, then also is our religion: but the
former cannot be denied, therefore also the latter must be granted.

THE FIFTH ARGUMENT touching the end of true religion.
THat that we have said of the contrariety and difference betwixt popery in
the former things and betwixt that religion which the Scriptures commend, may
also be said touching the end of that religion which the scriptures commend,
and the end of popery. For the scriptures commend that religion, wherein all
things are referred to the glory of God. The Prophet says, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory, Psalm. 115. 1. And again,
Help us, O God, of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, deliver us and
be merciful unto us for thy names sake, Psalm. 79. 9. Our Savior begins his
prayer which he commends unto all men, with this petition, Hallowed be thy
name, and concludes it with these words, For thine is the kingdom, the power,
and the glory. The Apostle commands whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. 30. All the
Apostles say* Unto him (that is, unto God) be praise in the Church by Christ
Jesus, throughout all generations for ever. Ephesians. 3. 20, 21. And again, Unto
God even our father be praise for evermore, Amen. Phil. 4. 20. And again, Now
unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise be honor
and glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1. Tim. 1. 7. And again, To God only wise
our Savior be glory and majesty. Iud. 25. So also the Angels gave glory and
honor and thanks to him that sat upon the throne, Rev. 4. 9. All creatures
also in heaven and on earth, and under the earth, and in the sea, and all that
are in them did John hear to say, Praise, and honor, and glory, and power,
be unto him that sits upon the throne, which lives for ever and ever.
Revel. 5. 13. Many other the like testimonies of scripture there are in the
same book, in the psalms and elsewhere, teaching that all things are to be
referred to the glory of God, and that this glory of God should be the
principal end of all things, and that nothing should be done but that whereby
God might be glorified. Matthew. 5. 16. This is likewise manifest by reason:
because God has made all things, rules all things, and all things hold of
him, and serve under him: therefore it follows that all things should seek
his praise and glory above all things, and refer all things thereunto.

2 Now what does popery? does it thus respect God his glory in all things?
does it refer all things thereunto? Nothing less: what with invocation of
Saints, and trusting in them, what with making images and worshipping of them,
what with giving of the Pope the name of god, the headship of the Church, power
to forgive sins, to let out of purgatory, to command the devils in hell, to
open heaven gates, and magnifying him accordingly, what with turning of bread
into the body of Christ, and adoring the same, what with commending the free
will of man, and teaching his ability and strength to keep the commandments
of God, what with the doctrine of the blood of Martyrs, of merits, and of works
supererogatorie, what (I say) with these, and other the like things, they
ascribe so much to these things, and so much respect the praise, honor, and
glory of these things, that they do nothing almost for the glory of God.
Therefore they may say, if they would speak truly and according to their
doctrine, and all their practice. Not unto thy name, O Lord, not unto thy name,
yea they may add the third time, Not unto thy name give the glory, but unto
saints, unto Pope, unto bread, unto Martyrs, unto us. If they will yet say,
that all these things make to the glory of God, let them show how and which
ways, and what glory God has by them. Our Savior Christ, Ioh. 7. 18. says
thus of and for himself, He that speaks of himself, seeks his own
glory: but he that seeks the glory of him that sent him is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. In these words he proves himself to be true and
free from unrighteousness, because he sought the glory of God that had sent
him: and on the contrary, that he that seeks his own glory speaks of
himself, and is not sent of God. This may be well applied against Pope and
popery. For our Savior speaks as well generally, as of himself. The Pope
therefore seeking his own glory and not the glory of him by whom he says
he is sent, does manifestly condemn himself to speak of himself, and not to
be sent by him of whom he boasts. Popery likewise seeking the glory of it
self, and of other things not of God, does also bewraie it self not to be of
God, nor acceptable unto God.

3 As for our religion it ascribes nothing to Saints or any other thing,
neither to our selves, but all to God. Our doctrine and whole religion abaseth
all things, yea our selves also, and all that is in us, acknowledging that we
have no power in our selves, and of our selves, to do, speak, or think any
thing that is good, confessing also our selves to be full of all evil
naturally, and prone to all sin and wickedness; teaching that what good soever
is in us, it is only of God, and that no good thing is ever perfect whilst
here we live: further also professing that whatsoever good we do, we merit
nothing thereby at God his hands: but that God for all that, if he would deal
with us according to our unworthiness, might most justly cast us out of his
presence for ever. Thus, I say, does our religion teach, and thus we freely
confess, and with heart and tongue we say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy name give the glory. Therefore as this was a good argument for
Christ, thereby to approve himself to be sent from God; so also it is as good
and firm for justifying and approouing of our religion to be of God, because
it seeks the glory of God. Thus much for the end of Popery.

THE SIXTH ARGUMENT touching the effects of true religion.
IN the next place let us consider of the fruits of popery, and see whether
they help us not also with some armor against popery. As therefore Popery
teaches doctrine contrary to the scriptures, so the fruits of popery cannot
be agreeable to them. Such as their doctrine is, such must be their fruits:
because their doctrine is evil and contrary to scriptures, therefore their
fruits can not be good and suitable to the scriptures. Many indeed teach good
doctrine, that bear not fruits agreeable, but where the doctrine is evil,
there are never any other then evil fruits. To begin with the practice of the
commandments of the first table, it is certain that they make no conscience
or account at all of them. Their strait observation of the precepts of men in
their divine worship, has iustled all care of the commandments of God clean
out of the doors. Neither can it be otherwise. For even as when a wife opens
the door of her heart, and gives entrance unto the love of a stranger, this
new love iustleth out the old toward her former husband: so is it in the love
and worship of God. We have heard before how many other the papists do
invoke, worship, offer gifts, obs^^^^ days unto, and such like, and therefore
also how many they trust in, love, and fear besides the Lord, (for it cannot
be that the performance of those outward duties can be without the inward
things.) We have also heard touching those duties which they perform unto God,
how repugnant they are to his word, which requires no such things, or at the
least in no such manner. Now besides these things, their other fruits do
further bewraie that they have no regard at all of any thing, that God
himself in his first table concerning his worship does command. For what
Papist cares for the public hearing or private reading of the word of God,
except it be only to gather some color of matter, either for the confirming
and hardening themselves in their errors, as also the animating themselves the
more boldly to transgress the word in other things (as all the wicked do:) or
for the railing on our religion? So also, which of them makes any conscience
at all of swearing either falsely, or at the least idly or vainly by the name
of God, and by every part of Christ Jesus; or profanely also and wickedly by
the names of their Saints, mass, and such other their abominable idols? yea,
which of them thinks not him a fool, and suspecteth him not to be of our
religion (though otherwise they know him not) that is sparing of such oaths,
or that at least shows any dislike of such oaths in others.

2 Yea and here not to speak only of the breach of the third commandment by
particular persons; let us also add something of the violating of the same by
the blasphemous prayers of their whole Church. Something has been noted
before of this point, in showing the contrariety of the matter of their
religion to the matter of the religion commended in the scriptures, where we
have seen how derogatorie their prayers to the virgin Marie are unto the
Mediation of Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding in this place also it shall not be
amiss further to show how blasphemous both to God and also to Christ their
prayers are to the virgin Marie, to other whom they account as Saints, and
finally to the wooden cross of Christ. To the virgin Marie thus they pray:

Te laudamus and rogamus matter Jesus Christi Vt intendas and defendas nos a
morte tristi.
Here they pray unto her to be kept from sorrowful death, and so ascribe unto
her power of life and death. Again,

Threnosa compassio dulcissimae dei matris Perducat nos ad gaudia summi Dei
patris. that is, Let the pitiful compassion of God his most sweet mother,
bring us to the joys of the most high God the father.

These prayers are full of blasphemy, yet behold greater blasphemy then this.
For thus also they pray unto her, Virgo singularis inter omnes mitis, nos
culpis solutos mites fac and castos, vitam praesta puram, iter para tutum, vt
videntes Iesum semper collaetemur. Here they pray unto her that they being
released from their sins she would make their life pure, and their journey
safe, that they seeing Jesus might rejoice together. Again, Dele culpas
miserorum, terge sordes peccatorum, dona nobis beatorum vitam tuis precibus. In
these words they entreat her to blotte out the faults of them that are in
misery, to wype out the stains of sinners, and by her prayers to give unto
them the life of the blessed. In another prayer they speak more blasphemously,
calling her Mairem orphanorum, the mother of orphans: consolationem
desolatorum, the consolation of the desolate: viam errantium, the way of them
that straie: salutem and spem in se sperantiu^, the health and hope of such as
trust in her: fontem consolationis and indulgentiae, that is, the fountain of
mercy, of health and grace, of godliness and joy, of consolation and favor.
Are not all these petitions blasphemous to the Deity? It is here also to be
observed, that although these and most of their prayers in their service books
(from whence I have verbatim, word for word borrowed these fragments) be in
latin, yet that all ignorant me^ may think the more highly of that prayer,
and utter the words with more devotion wherein are these last attributes
proper only to God, communicated to the virgin Marie, they have prefixed this
inscription and commendation in English with read letters over the head of the
prayer: To all them that be in the state of grace, that devoutly say this
prayer before our blessed Lady of pity, she will show them her blessed
visage, and warn them the day and hour of death, and in their last end the
Angels of God shall yield their souls to heaven, and he shall obtain five
hundred years, and so many Lents of pardon, granted by five holy fathers
Popes of Rome. In an other prayer next to the former as they pray unto Christ
to be defended from the wrath of the Saints and of his holy mother. so also
they desire him to give them health of body, and power to live well, etc. by
the intercession of his holy mother. So they make Christ a Mediator between
the^ and the Saints and his mother, and yet they pray unto him for the
intercession of his mother, etc. In an other not long after the former they
call her sororem angelorum, the sister of angels: regi^am patriarcharum, the
queen of patriarks: magistram euangelistarum, the mistress of Evangelists:
doctricem apostolorum, the teacher of the Apostles: confortatricem martyrum,
the comforter or strengthener of the Martyrs: fontem and plenitudmem
confessorum, the fountain and fullness of confessors. And before this prayer
is set a red lettered preface promising to every one that shall read it
devoutly, not to depart out of this world without penance, and administration
of the holy sacraments. In the next prayer also they call her the bottomless
pit of all grace and mercy, etc. This prayer likewise has a red promise
prefixed of an hundred days of pardon granted by Pope Goodface, I should sale
Pope Boniface. In the next prayer they call her the Queen of heaven, the gate
of paradise, the Lady of the world, etc. The head likewise of this prayer is
crowned with a promise of eleven thousand years of pardon granted by the
munificence of the holy Father Sixtus Quartus Pope, etc. In an other prayer
they call her rerum omnium imperatricem, the Empress or commandreesse of all
things. Their other blasphemies in their other prayers unto the Virgin are
infinite, and almost without number.

3 To such as they account Saints in the same their printed portuus, thus they
pray as follows. To one S. Erkenwald Bishop (as they thought of London) they
pray that he would make them with himself partaker of life without end. To
S. Armigil, they pray to be released from all grief of sickness. To Sitha a
holy virgin (as they call her) they pray for the glory which she had
merited, and to be released from all evils in this life. To S. Sebastian, that
they may merit to go free and unhurt of the plague. To S. Christopher, to be
comforted in mind and released of all grief. To S. George, that being washed
from all their filthiness, they might with all joy be with him in all glory. To
William the Confessor, to have the spotts of their life taken away, and the
joys of the heavenly crown given vnta them. To Apollonia a virgin, generally
against all things hurtful; and particularly to be kept from the toothach. To
one King Henry (what king Henry I think themselves know not) that they might
not die with sweat and grief, but live and clappe their hands in heaven
without end, and by him overcome all their enemies. In all these things do we
not see how they ask those things of their Saints, which belong only to God
to work, and to bestow? And what greater blasphemy can there be then this? I
might add a thousand other like blasphemous petitions in their prayers, were
not the labor too great both to the reader and also for my self.

4 For the prayers to the cross or the similitude thereof, though I might
only refer the reader to the Beehiue of the Romish Church in English, book
the 4. chap. the third, yet because it may be that every one that reads this
my treatise shall not have the book at hand, therefore I will hear express
some of their prayers both in latin and english, which that book has
gathered out of the popish writings. First of all therefore he sets down
this prayer to God himself touching the cross, Oramus te Domine sancte pater,
etc. vt digneris benedicere hoc lignum crucis tuoe, vt sit remedium salutare
generi humano, sit soliditas fidei, bonorum operum profectus and redemptio
animarum: sit solamen and protectio ac tutela contra saeua iaculainimicorum:
that is, We beseech thee, O Lord heavenly father, that thou will so bless this
wood of the cross, that it may be a heathfull help to mankind, a
strengthening to faith, a furtherance to good works, and a redemption of souls,
that it may be our comfort, our safeguard, our defendour against the noisome
darts of the enemies. Again, thus they commend the cross and pray unto it:

Ista suos fortiores,
Semper facit and victores,
Morbos sanat and languores,
Reprimit daemonia.
Dat captivis libertatem,
Vitae confert novitatem,
Ad antiquam dignitatem
Crux reduxit omnia.
O crux lignum triumphale,
Mundi vera salus vale,
Inter ligna nullumtale
Fronde, flore, germine.
Medicina Christiana,
Salva sanos, aegros sana.
Quod non valet vis humana
Fit in tuo nomine. that is, It makes her soldiers excellent,
And crowns them with victory.
Restores the lame and impotent,
And heals every malady.
The devils of hell it conquereth,
Releaseth from imprisonment,
Newnes of life it offers,
It has all at commandment.
O cross of wood incomparable,
To all the world most wholesome.
No wood is half so honorable,
In branch, in budde, or blossom.
O medicine which Christ did ordain,
The sound save every hour,
The sick and sore make whole again
By virtue of thy power.
And that which man's unableness
Has never comprehended.
Grant by the name of holiness
It may be fully ended.


In these words although the English might have been translated somewhat more
aptly to have answered the Latin, yet the difference being not great, I
thought not good to alter any thing because I would have the reader to see both
in the book it self, from whence I borrow these things. Thus also they sing,
and provoke all to praise the cross in this manner:

Servi crucis, crucem laudent
Qui per crucem sibi gaudent
Vitae dari munera.
Dicant omnes, dicant singult
Ave salus totius sacli
Arbor salutifera. that is, as it is here translated, The servants of the holy
cross,
Her praise to heaven let them to see,
And they which in the cross rejoice,
And of the gifts of life have choice:
Let this of all both old and young,
In solemn sort be said and sung.
O holy cross, which can prevail,
O tree of life, all hayle, all hayle.


And again, Ecce lignum crucis venite adoremus. Behold, here is the wood of
the cross, come let us worship. And also, O cruxspes vnica, auge pijs
justit^am, donareis veniam. O holy cross our only help, increase
righteousness to the godly, and pardon the offenses of the wicked. What man that
has any piety or spark of true godliness, will not tremble to see and
understand such things so proper to God and his son Christ Jesus thus
blasphemously ascribed to a tottring and rotten piece of wood? Nay verily I am
persuaded that if many that have ignorantly with great devotion said and sung
these words, had understood the meaning of them, they would have abhorred both
them and all popery for them long ere this time. This shall be sufficient
touching their blasphemies, whereby they have most deeply transgressed the
third commandment. Concerning the fourth commandment, how can they sanctify
the sabbath according thereunto, since (as we have showed before) they have not
only made many other holidaies equal unto it, but also advanced and magnified
many above it.

5 This shall suffice touching their fruits of the first table. Now because the
second table is so joined with the first, that the one cannot be neglected or
contemned without neglect and contempt of the other: because the observation of
the duties of the second is also sometime called by the name of religion, Iam.
1. 17. and because the Papists do most of all boast of their good works in
observation of some things belonging to the second table, I will therefore also
take a survey, and give the reader a sight of their obedience thereunto, that
thereby he may the better judge of their religion.

Here in the first place let be considered the intolerable pride of him whom
popery and Papists account the Head of their church: let, I say, his pride be
considered against men, as before it has been noted against God. For how can
he that lifts himself above God, or at the least matcheth himself in all
things with God, make any account of men? This pride of his against men is so
well known to all, that few words thereof will suffice. For how does he
entertain the ambassadors of all Princes sent unto him, or any other that go
to see his holiness? what courtesy does he show them? Forsooth he vouchsafes
nothing unto them, but only the kissing of his filthy foot. Therefore if the
Earl of Wylshire his dog at the holding forth of the Pope his foot to be
kissed of some there present, had bitten it clean off, as he ran and took it
into his mouth, had he not been as worthy thereof as Iezabel was to be wholly
eaten and devoured of dogs? How also does his pride appear in riding upon
men's shoulders, as thinking the earth too base for his princely foot to tread
thereon, and all other creatures almost too vile to bear his divine person?
What shall we say also of his triple crown of most pure gold set with all
precious stones, not like to the thornie crown that Christ did wear, but
far passing all the diademes of all other Princes? yea what further shall we
say of his monstrous abusing of the Emperors from time to time, when they were
greater then now they are? Has he not made them with their wives and children
to wait many days together at his court gates, as if they had been beggars
at some rich man his door, craving an alms of some small piece of silver, or
of bread and cheese? Has he not sent them whither it pleased himself, to do
their penance enjoined by him? Has he not commanded them what service he
would, as if they had not only been his pages, but also his lackies? Has he
not commanded them to hold his s^yrrop, and rewarded them with a blow on the
ear for holding the wrong styrrop? Has he not troad on their necks? has he
not crowned them with his feet? will any doubt of these things because they
are reported by M. Fox in the book of Martyrs? Let him know that M. Fox has
these things out of the books of other, even of their own religion, which
have written more largely of these things then M. Fox could do^. So it pleased
God to have the memorial of his intolerable pride preserved by his own
brood, that the posterity might make the less doubt thereof. Again, what
shall I say of the right which he chalengeth to himself for advancing and
deposing, for setting up and putting down Kings and Princes at his pleasure?
what shall I say of those bulls, excommunications, and hellish (but yet
foolish) thunder bolts against the Lord his anointed over us, for the cursing
of her Majesty's own person, and discharging all her subjects of all obedience
unto her? what shall I say of the continual debate, contention, strife, and
wars which always he has made betwixt Princes? May this fellow truly say
as our Savior says, Matthew. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart? Nay rather he may truly say, Take heed of me, for I am proud and
haughty in heart. May he also say as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 131.
Lord, mine eyes are not haughty, neither are mine eyes lofty, etc? Nay rather
also he may make a clean contrary hymn to be sung in a contrary tune. Saint
Peter whose successor he vaunteth himself, commanded all men to submit
themselves to Kings and to honor them, 1. Pet. 2. 13, and 17. But he
commands all Kings to submit themselves to him, and to honor him. Saint
Peter being justly reprehended by Saint Paul, Galat. 2. 14. did patiently take
the same reprehension, and after that wrote nevertheless of Saint Paul, 2.
Pet. 3. 15. But the Pope to prevent all such reprehensions, and to stop the
mouths of all men, that no man may dare to find any fault with him,
chalengeth this as a special prerogative (as we have heard before) that no man
may say unto him, Why do thou so?

6 That which has bin said of him, may also be said of his Cardinals,
Bishops, and other of his train, Like master, like man. They are all of one
brood, of the same nature, of the same spirit. Such also as the Pope himself
is, such have bin many of his whelps here in England. From whom have all
treasons come, all insurrections, all rebellions, all conspiracies against her
Majesty's person, and the whole state of the land? Have they not come from
Jesuits, Seminary priests, and (as they call them) catholic noblemen and
gentlemen? It cannot be denied. What also shall we say of the murder of the
late French king by a Iacobine friar, and of other like practices of the
Papists against their Sovereigns in other countries? Can the Protestant be
justly charged with any such things against their princes though popish? As for
that of the Duke of Suffolk against Queen Marie, as it was before the title
of Queen Marie was thoroughly known, so all men know what color of reason he
had to do as he did, by the will and testament of that noble Prince king
Edward the sixth. Besides it is also known how soon and willingly he yielded
himself. As for the Lady Jane how innocent she was in that action, the
Chronicles of our land do testify. Touching Sir Thomas Wyat, he intended no
hurt against the person of Queen Marie, but by his oath to the will and
testament of king Henry the eight, thinking himself bound to do whatsoever
he could for the hindering of all foreign government, he did therefore
withstand the coming in of the Spanyard. Concerning the late tumult of Hacket
and his two associates, as Hacket himself was justly executed, so the other
two were condemned of all men in that behalf: and therefore all men see how
far this differs from the continual practices and heinous treasons of the
Papists, allowed and justified in their open writings, as appears by
Cardinal Allin his book of that matter, and likewise approved and warranted
by the Pope himself, the head (as they say) of their Church.

7 To leave this 5. commandment, let us come to the next, wherein the Lord
forbids all cruelty, and commands all mercy, as likewise he does in many
other places. Do they therefore (I mean the Pope and Papists as they are
Papists) behave themselves any better in observation of this commandment,
then all the former? No certainly: but such as their pride is, such is their
cruelty. As the Scripture oftentimes joins these two evils together, so
also they concur in them. For it may be truly said of them as the Prophet
writes of his time, psalm. 73. 6. Pride is as a chain unto them, and cruelty
covers them as a garment. This is manifest by that which has been before
spoken of the persequution of the Protestants in our own land, of the Massacre
in France, of the Spanish inquisition, of the dispensations granted by the
Pope for the murdering of her Majesty, and of the villainous killing of the
French king. For further proof also of the cruelty of the Catholic Prince
the king of Spain, in all those places where he reigns by right or wrong, by
inheritance or violence and usurpation, I refer the reader to the late book
of the intertainment of English fugitives by the Spanyard. In this book the
Spanish cruelty is both largely described, and also exactly penned. Therefore
this book being so lately come forth, and handling this matter so well, I do
only refer the reader hereunto. Yea the Papists have not only been cruel
to the living but also to the dead. For do not all men know that they dug
up the bones of Bucer and Paulus Phagius, sommoned them being dead long
before, to appear in their Court, and condemned them, and at last buried their
bones solemnly at Cambridge? Did they not also dig up the body of one
Margaret Elyot that had died in prison, did they not (I say) dig up her
body, after that it was buried three or four days, and so burnt the same? Is
such cruelty a note of that religion that is acceptable to him that has
commanded his children to be merciful as himself is merciful?

Touching the seventh commandment, not to speak of the filthy adulteries,
fornications, incests, and such like abominations of particular persons, even
of their Cardinals and Bishops, whereof some have been taken in adultery,
the next night after they have much inueighed against the marriage of
ministers; others have been taken in ginnes as they have climed windows, to
defile other men's wives: yea not to speak of the like filthiness of the Pope
his own holiness, that has been taken in the very act of adultery, and
slain at that very instant. Not (I say) to speak of these and other the like
things, all the world knows that their whole Church does allow Stews, and
houses of bawdrie, where any man may have his whore according to his ability
to give for them, some for twenty shillings, some for ten shillings, some
for ten groates, yea for six pence. Any old men that knew the Stews here
in our own land at London, and all travelers into other countreies, can
witness these things. I feate also that many travelers know the truth of
these things too much. The Apostles condemn all fornication and wantonness:
yea they command the Church not to suffer one such filthy person amongst
them, least by one many be defiled and made to fall from the grace of God, 1.
Cor. 5. 4, etc. Hebr. 12. 16. How much less then should the Church suffer
whole houses, and great companies of many harlots? Hither also appertain the
abominable dispensations that the Pope has granted for unlawful and
incestuous marriages, contrary to the written word of God, yea and to very
nature it self: the which also he might as well have granted for the marriage
of a man with a beast. Can all these things so contrary to the express
Scriptures, be said to be done by that spirit, by inspiration whereof the
Scriptures were given?

9 To come to the eight commandment against theft and all injustice against
our neighbor in his goods, they offend as much herein as in the former. For by
what authority or right does the Pope himself, his Cardinals, Bishops,
Abbots, Pryors, Monks, Friars, Priests, Canons, Peticanons, and other of his
generation, gather such great masses and infinite sums of money of all sorts
of people as they do? For what do they either for soul or body worthy any
thank? much less worthy so great and ample reward. The King of Spain also
the Pope his eldest son, yet not his heir, though his fellow heir of the
black and dark kingdom, by what authority or right or color of either, or
of both, has he by his force and violence gotten all those foreign kingdoms
which he has gotten, and which he holds as unjustly as he has got them? But
what need I thus to accuse the persons of the Pope and papists of the
transgression of this commandment? their religion it self especially at the
wel-spring thereof, is altogether covetousness. It is an old saying, that Omnia
venalia Romae: and this saying though it be old, yet is it not moldie or cast
away by them, but fresh, and as it were new baked, and therefore as much set by,
and as much fed upon by the daintiest mouths amongst them as ever it was:
yea many of them that think scorn of much other good and dainty meat, do
feed of this as sauourly and hungerly as if they had not had a good meals
meat an whole year before. But I forget my self to speak of their persons,
when I charged their religion of covetousness. I say therefore that covetousness
is the food and the very life of popery. For in popery what is not to be
bought for money? To omit the common sale of all their preferments, even of the
popedom it self, who knows not that masses, dirges, trentalls, forgiveness
of sins, release from Purgatory, and heaven it self, (as popery makes men
believe) may be had for money? Hence it is that the former general proverb,
All things are to be sold at Rome, has brought forth another in words more
particular, but in sense and meaning as large and general, No penie, no pater
noster: whereby is signified, that in popery the very least thing is not to be
had graiis, that is, freely and without money: and no marvel, for since they
teach, that God himself gives not heaven freely, and without merits, why
should their religion give the commodity it has without silver? Neither in
popery may a man have only pardon for any sin committed, but also a
dispensation and license for the committing and doing of any thing, how wicked
and unjust soever it be, as has bin touched before. How contrary is this
manner of dealing as well to the practice of holy men in the scriptures, as to
the other doctrine of the scriptures? Elisha refused the gift of Naaman,
offered and urged upon him, though Naaman had first recovered his health by the
means of Elisha. The Pope takes where nothing is offered, and for which
nothing is performed. S. Peter also being offered money by Simon the sorcerer,
for power that on whom soever he did lay his hand, he might receive the holy
Ghost, answered with great indignation, Thy money perish with thee, etc. Act.
8. 20. The Pope is not only ready to sell greater matters for money, then
those gifts of the holy Ghost, or at the least to take money for words only of
greater matters; but also is so greedy to sell them, that he will rage and
roar like a lion, if money be not offered unasked, or not presently paid as
soon as it is demanded. Can we therefore think that the Pope takes all such
things by the same spirit, whereby Elisha and Peter refused that which they
might have had with very good will? Nay, but most fitly may he be compared to
the true daughters of the horseleach, which cry, Give, give: as also to the
three things that will not be satisfied, and to the fourth, that say not it is
enough, etc. Prove. 30. 15, and 16. The great Alms that houses of popish
religion do give, are but sleights of the Devil to bleare men's eyes withal,
that they may not see the miserable covetousness of such houses in other
matters, neither their other wickedness, but that they should rather think them
to be liberal and good, how covetous and wicked soever they be. Further such
alms are falsely called by the name of liberality, because they are without
difference of any person, whither needy or not needy, whither able to get
their living by labor or not able: and so are they the mothers of idleness, and
the grandmothers of many other wickednesses. The thief also that robs on
the high way, or that breaks up men's houses by such means getting many rich
booties, and that afterward also franckly spends that which he has so
lewdly gotten at alehouses and tauernes, upon harlots, upon good fellows, or
upon some poor persons; may as well brag of his francknesse, and boast of
his liberality, thereby to justify his theft, as these may object their alms
for defense of their covetousness.

10 Touching the ninth commandment, first popery accounts them for
heretics, that hold nothing but the word of God. The Papists also (I mean the
learned papists) stick not to belie the dead, as well as the living, boasting
all the Fathers to be on their side, that are more against them then for them,
making them also to say that which they never spoke, as has been before
showed. Have they not also cast out libells against the most worthy servants
of God: Luther, Calvin, Beza, and such like, full of all notorious slanders,
for the better disgracing of their doctrine and religion? Yea in such libells
they have not spared Nobles and Princes themselves. As for the last
commandment, we shall not need to labor the detecting them therein. For
how can they have any regard thereof, that flatly deny concupiscence to be
any sin?

11 These things and many other do plainly show the fruits of popery to be
such, as that they flatly bewraie popery not to be of God, if we had no holy
Scripture at all to direct our judgments, the light only of nature would
descrie popery to be nothing agreeable to a divine nature. He also that had
seen no further into the invisible things of God then the works only of God,
do show them unto him, Romans 1. 20. He that had beheld no more of the glory of
God then the heavens and firmament show forth the same: he that had heard no
more then day unto day and night unto night does utter, Psalm. 19. 1, and 2.
Finally, he that had learned no more of the power and goodness of God then the
beasts can teach, then the fowls of the air can tell, then the earth it self
can show, and then the fishes of the sea can declare unto him, Job 12. 7. and
8. may easily by these fruits judge the tree that bears them to be an evil
tree, and such as the Lord will one day cut up by the roots, and cast into
the fire. M. Fox in the book of Acts and Monuments reports, that one Rulmar
and some other being Papists, seeing the extreme cruelty of other Papists in
persequuting the Protestants in the days of Queen Marie, did thereby conceive
great dislike of popery, and became likewise from that time lovers and
professors of the Gospel. If one fruit of popery were so effectual in them,
what shall be said of those that notwithstanding the evident demonstration of
all those fruits of popery before mentioned, (more differing from the fruits
of that religion which God commands in his word, then the sourest crabbe does
from the daintiest apple) do not yet see the abomination of popery, neither
have any better affection to our religion then at the first.

12 If against this that I have written of these fruits, it be objected, that
all papists are not such, but that some of them are modest, humble, loyal to
their Princes, gentle and merciful, sober and chaste, just and righteous
touching the goods of their neighbors, yea remitting some part of their own
right, and if they be great persons dealing favorably and kindly with their
tenants, and such as belong unto them or hold of them: yea sometimes better
then such as have the name of Protestants, that they are also wise and
circumspect in their speech of other: I acknowledge that these things are so
indeed, and by some experience I speak this to their commendation, and if I
should not so speak, I should do them wrong: yet I answer first that such
examples are very rare, secondly that some of them of whom I speak by
experience are rather suspected Papists, then perfect Papists, because they
refuse not to hear the preaching of the word, from the which I trust, that
they learn these virtues, whereby I also hope, that a way will be prepared
for a better entrance of the Gospel into their hearts, to the expelling of all
dregs of popery, if any remain: and lastly though all Papists bring not
forth such fruits, that yet some of them, do but conceal them, and force
themselves to the show of these virtues to merit heaven by, and that all of
them may be such as before by those fruits I have described, for all popery,
or any thing taught by popery to the contrary. For if they be such, popery
it self will not condemn them, but bear them out as well as it has borne
those out, of whom before we have spoken.

13 But some man will yet further say, if ye judge according to this rule,
then likewise may your religion be also condemned. For are here not amongst
you, O ye Protestants (that have the Gospel in your mouths) many blasphemers,
many contemners of your own sermons and sacraments, many proud, many cruel
persons, many adulterers and fornicatouts, many oppressors and extortioners,
many backbiters and slanderers, etc. To this I must needs say, that my heart
grieueth, my bowels ache, mine eyes weepeth, my face blusheth, my countenance
changes, my tongue stuttereth, and my hand trembles, and I would my whole
man were more troubled to speak, and write the answer. For I must confess and
do ingeniously acknowledge to Gods glory, and our own shame, that we have
many such as of whom the objection is made. But as yet, O ye Papists and
Romanists, ye also O ye Atheists, and that are of no religion, but deride all,
(for I know that this is the common objection of both sorts of adversaries)
know ye that this neither excuses popery, nor condemns our religion. The
reason in one word is this, because although many amongst us are of these
sins, expressly condemned in the scriptures, and contrary also to our
profession, yet does not our religion maintain and allow them in their sins:
but contrarily it condemns such hypocrites, and teaches that their judgment
in the latter day shall be greater then the judgment of Papists, and the
heathen themselves for the same sins. But as for the like amongst, O ye you
Papists, you religion it self, and the head and pillars of your Church do
allow, approve, and justify them: yea also commend some of these manifest
transgressions of God his laws, as excellent virtues, and such as whereby the
transgressors shall merit heaven.

THE SEVENTH ARGUMENT touching one necessary effect, or fruit of true
religion, which is, true joy and sound comfort of heart.
I Might add many other effects and fruits of popery, whereby more
plentifully to prove it not to be of God, but because I have written much
already, and yet have diverse other arguments of as good moment as the former
remaining, I will add one fruit more, or at the least one fruit which that
religion that is commended in the Scriptures does always bring forth, but
being not to be found upon the whole tree of popery, does therefore prove
the same never to be planted or grafted by the Lord. This fruit is the great
joy and sound comfort of conscience that always grows upon the religion
commended in the scriptures. The statutes of the Lord (says David) are right,
and rejoice the heart, Psalm. 19. 8. They are also sweeter then honey, or the
honey comb, v. 10. He says also that the promise of God had been his comfort
in his trouble, and had quickened him, psalm. 119. 50. and that he remembered the
ancient judgments of God and so was comforted, v. 52. and again, v. 92. that
except the law of God had been his delight he should have perished in his
affliction. S. Peter also joins these two religions together, believing in
him whom we see not, and rejoicing with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet.
1. 8. And indeed how can this religion be without such joy and comfort? For it
teaches that the sins of such as do believe according to the scriptures are
forgiven, Matthew. 9. 2. that they are justified and have peace with God, Romans 5.
1. that they shall never be cast away, Joh. 6. 37. but raised up at the latter
day, v. 44. that they are in the hands of Christ, and that no man shall take
them out, but that they shall certainly have eternal life, Ioh. 10. 28. which
eternal life is kept for them in heaven, as likewise they are kept for it in
earth, not by men or angels, but by the mighty power of God, 1. Pet. 1 4, and
5. that they are translated from death to life, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. and are of the
truth, and do as certainly know themselves to be of the truth, and that
therefore they shall before him assure their hearts, as God himself greater
then their hearts knows all things, v. 19, and 20. that they are borne of
God, 1. Ioh. 4. 7. and therefore are the children of God, and heirs of God,
and coheyres with Christ, Romans 8. 17. and that nothing shall separate them from
the love of God, v. 38. that they are so built upon a rock, that no storms or
tempests shall overthrow them, Math. 7. 25. but stand fast for ever like unto
mount Zion, psalm. 125. 1. that they may no more doubt that God will forget the
work and labor of their love, then they may doubt of the righteousness of
God himself, Heb. 6. 10. not in respect of their works, but in respect of his
promise, 1. Ioh. 2. 25. and the price wherewith they are bought by Christ
Jesus. 1. Cor. 7. 23. and 1. Pet. 1. 9. and of the earnest of their
inheritance, even the spirit, Ephesians. 1. 14. and of the continual intercession of
Christ for them at the right hand of God his father. Romans 8. 34. These and such
like things does the Scripture assure all them of, that by the fruits of a true
faith and religion both inward and outward, know that they have true faith and
religion. How therefore can they be heavy? yea how can they not rejoice with
joy unspeakable and glorious?

2 But what joy and comfort can there be in popery? does not popery deny the
first foundation of sound comfort, namely the doctrine of particular election,
whereby a man is taught, that God loved him, and predestined him to eternal
salvation before the world was made? does not popery take away the word of
God that gives wisdom to the simple, sight to the blind, light to them that
sit in darkness, and life to them that are dead in their sins? and does it not
therefore leave men foolish and blind, in darkness and in death it self? Can
there be any comfort in such an estate? Does not popery teach that salvation
is to be had partly, yea chiefly by our own works and merits? And who knows
when he has wrought and merited enough? Does not popery teach that the
efficacy of the sacrament, depends upon the intention of the priest? Who
knows the intention of any man his heart but his own? 1. Cor. 2. 11. who
therefore knows when he receives the sacrament, and when he does not? Does
not popery teach, that it is presumption for any man to say that he is certain
and sure of the favor of God, and his continuance therein, and of his
salvation? What sound and certain comfort can there be without assurance of
these things?

3 I grant that the Papists rejoice and are merry as other wicked men rejoice
and are merry. But such joy is fleshly, superficial and uncertain, the
ground thereof being not in God but in themselves, in Saints, in relics of
Saints, in the blood of Martyrs, in the pardon and indulgences of the Pope,
and such like sandy stuff, and therefore not certain. The joy of the Papists
is like the joy of the Israelites at the making and worshipping of the calfe.
Exodus 32. 6, 17, 18, and 19. The joy of the Papists is the joy of Nabal in
his great feast, 1. Sam. 25. 36. The joy of the Papists is like the joy of
Belshazzar, when he made the great feast to a thousand of his Princes, and
drank wine before the thousand, commanding the holy vessels of the Temple of
the Lord to be brought forth unto that feast, and polluting them at his
pleasure. Dan. 5. 1. Even such, (I say) and no other is the joy of the
Papists before their Calfe, that is, before their innumerable idols and graven
images, and at their solemn feasts which they dedicate to the honor and
worship of them and of their Saints.

4 Contrariwise our religion teaches all these things which before we heard
to be taught in the Scriptures, it teaches men to apply them to themselves,
and by them to assure themselves of God his love and favor, as certainly as if
the angel Gabriel were sent to the^ as he was to the Virgin Marie, even to
speak to them particularly, as he spoke to her and said, Luke 1. 28. Hayle,
or (according also to the natural signification of the word) rejoice and be
merry, as one that is freely beloved; and again whatsoever thy sins be,
etc. yet fear not, for thou have found favor with God, v. 30. as if also
another should say as he did to the shepherds, Luke 2. 10. Be not afraid: for
behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people, etc.
This comfort and this joy does our religion teach and commend, and offer, yea
also bring unto all them that truly embrace the same. Yea certainly they that by
the powerful working of our religion in their hearts, and in their outward
conversation, do know themselves not to be hypocrites, but truly to have
embraced our religion and the doctrine thereof, they (I say) may better cast
away all fear, and more certainly assure themselves of God his favor, and
therefore also more truly rejoice then all the Papists in the world, or any one
of them, remaining in his popery may or might, not only if one angel, but if
all the angels in heaven should come and speak unto them in like manner. This
is a great word, but it is a true word: how so? verily because one greater then
all the angels does speak it, and bids all such not to fear, but to
rejoice. God himself generally thus speaks in all the Scriptures, to all
such generally: and the holy Ghost his effectual working of true faith and
true godliness in every particular person, that is, truly of our religion
speaks also the same thing. Therefore the greater and more credible that the
master is then the servant, and so also God himself, then the angels, which
are but the work of his hands, and therefore his servants, and ministering
spirits: the more certain also may every one be assured of God his favor, to
whom God and his spirit by their effectual working do testify the same,
then if the angels of heaven should speak as much to one in whom were not the
effects of the spirit. Further also the reason of that comfortable speech of
the angels to Marie and the shepherds being well observed, does confirm that
which I have said of the applying of the same comfort to all those that are
truly of our religion. For why will the angel have the virgin Marie not to
fear? because she was freely beloved, and had found favor with God: but how
does the angel prove this? because (says he) thou shall conceive in thy
womb, and bear a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. If therefore to
conceive in her womb and bear this son only, were a sufficient argument to
persuade her to cast away fear, to rejoice, and assure her self that she had
found favor with God, how much more may he cast away fear, rejoice, and
assure himself of God his favor, whose soul and whole man has embraced
whole Christ, and is likewise embraced of Christ, and is made one with Christ,
even flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and which knows this by the
death of sin, and the life of righteousness in him, through the death and
resurrection of Christ? If she were so blessed whose womb should bear Christ
according to the flesh, and whose pappes should give him suck, how much more
blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it? Luc. 11. 28.

5 The like may be said of the argument of the angel to the shepherds, for be
not afraid, says the angel: but why? I bring you trdings of great joy, that
shall be to all people. What are these tidings, and what is this great joy?
Unto you is borne this day in the city of David, a Savior which is Christ the
Lord, etc. Now if this were such joy to hear only of the birth of Christ
Jesus, how much greater is it to hear of the birth of the whole life, of the
death, of the resurrection, of the ascension, and of the sitting of Christ
Jesus at the right hand of God, there making intercession for all his members?
yea not only to hear, but also to be assured of these things by the effects
of them in our consciences. Neither does our religion only bid men thus to
rejoice for a time, and at a start, but we say also with the Apostle, Rejoice
in the Lord always: and again I say rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. But upon what ground
does our religion bid men thus to rejoice? because it assures them not only
of the present favor of God, but also of the continuance thereof for ever to
them that are once truly incorporated into Christ Jesus. For whom God loves,
he loves to the end, Ioh. 13. 1. and, the gifts of God are without
repentance, Romans 11. 29. and, in God is no change nor shadow of change, Iam. 1.
17. Neither is he as man, that he should repent: has he said, and shall he
not do it? has he spoken and shall he not accomplish it? Number. 23. 19. And
again, Heaven and earth shall pass, but the word of the Lord shall not pass,
till all things be done. Luke chap. 21. verse. 33.

6 Upon these and many other the like grounds, we bid them that truly have
embraced our religion to rejoice always, and do assure them upon the
immutable nature of God, and of his word, that they shall never be cast out of
his favor: yea that it is as possible for the power of hell to take away from
Christ one of the members of his material body now glorified and reigning in
heaven, as to pluck away or cut off any member of his mystical and spiritual
body here in earth. Therefore of all such and every such we say, that God
speaks as Isaac spoke of Iaacob, after that he had one blessed him, I have
blessed him, therefore he shall be blessed, Genesis 27. 33. As Pilate also says
of the title and superscription, which he had set upon the head of Jesus Christ
crucified, when the high Priests labored him to alter the same, What I have
written, that I have written, Ioh. 19. 22. So say we of all them, whose names
God has once written and registered in the book of life; that (the decree of
God, being like the decree of the Medes and Persians, which alters not, Dan.
6. 8.) though all the devils in hell should labor God for the rasing of any
out of the book of life, whose names are written therein, yea if it were
possible, that all the blessed angels should endeavor and entreat any such
thing, that God would always keep his purpose, and answer them, Him that I
have written, I have written. This is the joy and comfort of God his children,
and this joy and comfort is in our religion, and never to be found in popery
or to be attained unto thereby.

7 If any object that many sometime of our religion do utterly fall away, and
sometime also despair for ever of the goodness and favor of God, I answer with
S. John, They went our from, us, but they were not of us, 1. Ioh. 2. 19. They
professed our religion, but they never truly embraced the same, neither did
ever truly feel the power of godliness in their souls; yea though it may be
that they had some joy in our religion, yet it was but the joy of the stony
ground, wherein the seed of the word has no sound rooting, Math. 13. 20. and
like unto the joy of Herod at the preaching of John Baptist, Mark. 6. 20. Yea
but some perhaps will object further, that many of the best of our religion are
often in great heaviness of mind, and do much doubt of God his favor, etc.
yea that most part of their life they continue in this pensiuenes. To this I
answer, that although this fruit of joy and sound comfort do always grow upon
the tree of our religion, yet sometime the twigges of our old crabstocke into
which this religion is grafted, do grow out so far through our evil
husbandry, and not pruning them in time, that the leaves thereof being very
thick, according to the nature of the crabbe, do so shadow this fruit, that
even he that is grafted with the impes and sciences of our religion, can hardly
find this fruit without narow search and diligent turning over, and remoouing
the leaves as it were one by one with his hand. As also we read that although
Christ were in the presence of the two disciples that were going to Emaus and
talked with them, and yet was not discerned by them, because their eyes were
holden, that they could not know him, Luke 24. 16. as also that Marie Magdalene
saw Jesus and talked with him, but yet knew him not, Ioh. 20. 14. So also the
children of God that by a true and lively faith are partakers of Christ, do not
yet see Christ, nor the great comfort which they have by Christ, because their
eyes are holden, that is, their sight is dimmed by the sight of sin partly,
and partly also by the sleights of Satan, that they can neither see nor feel
that matter of joy and comfort which they have and carry daily about within
their breasts.

8 Finally touching this comfort, it is with the children of God, and such as
are truly of our religion, as it is with many simple men in the world touching
their earthly possessions and inheritances. For although they have never so
good right unto them, and never so good assurance of them, even as good as
possibly they can have, and as all the lawyers by all the law in the world can
make them, yet for all that, they oftentimes meet with some pettifogger and
cousening mate, that tells them their title is naught and not worth a straw,
and so forth. Now by such words the simple man is half persuaded, and
begins something to doubt, yea sometime almost to fear: and thus he
continues till he meet with his learned counsel, that do again declare
unto him and assure him of the contrary: so, Isaie, is it with the children of
God, and such as are truly seasoned with our religion. By Christ Jesus they
have as good right to the kingdom of heaven as is possible, and their estate
is so good as that all the enemies they have either carnal or spiritual,
cannot possibly defeat them thereof; notwithstanding such is their simplicity
in heavenly things (as oftentimes it is greater in earthly things) that their
enemy and the enemy of God meeting with them, and reasoning the case, either
by his outward instruments, or by those secret friends which he has in a man
his own heart, does at the last by his subtlety make them to doubt, and
fills them with fear, till they meet again with their old counselor the
spirit of God (who sometime keeps himself close, and for a time will not (as
it were) be spoken withal, to try what his clyents will or can do without
him) but when they meet and confer with him, by the time that he has a
little repeated their assurance, and declared their right from point to point
by his several effects in their hearts, and how also Christ Jesus purchased
salvation for them, and bestowed it upon them, and therefore also gave him unto
them as an earnest penny thereof, to seal and confirm the whole gift; then
do they cast away their former fear, and recover their ancient comfort. So is
it from time to time with them, whilst Satan talks with them, and the spirit
of God hides himself, they doubt: but when the spirit of God talks with
them, by his lively and sensible operation in their hearts, then are they of
good cheer and comfort; yet even whilst they fear, they have no cause of
fear, but their right is always one and the same: only sometime by their
simplicity they see not their right. This shall suffice to have spoken both of
the abundance of all heavenly comfort in our religion, and also of the want
thereof in popery. Wherefore I do again conclude, both that our religion is
most pleasant and acceptable unto the God of all comfort, and also that popery
is altogether abominable in his sight.

THE EIGHT ARGUMENT touching the wisdom of true religion, an infallible note
and sign thereof.
I May here also not unfitly, nor out of place add the foolishnes of popery.
For what can be more foolish or ridiculous, then the worship of such relics
as they do both worship, and also take great pains and travail many miles,
and defray great charges for the worship of the^: especially most foolish,
absurd, and gross is it to worship such as before have been named, as the
very ^ayle of the ass whereon Christ rode, and such like. I ask here no
pardon as speaking grossly, the holiness of the thing must take away the
homelines of the word. But I marvel they could get n^ better and sweeter
morsel then the tail: it may be they came too late to market, and so all the
better pieces being taken up before by dogs, kytes, ravens, and such other
customers as do use to resort to such markets, this only was left, and so it
was bought for the Pope his own tooth; but he of his mere holy conscience
would not eat meat of so great a price, and of his great liberality bestowed
it upon the church for ever. If they make so much account of the tail, they
would much more have honored the head, if they had come time enough to the
market: what then would they have done with the whole body, if they could have
gotten it? and if they make such reckoning of a piece of a dead ass, I suppose
that if they had the living ass, and could keep him alive (and yet what a
fool am I to make a question of their power in such a thing, when as every
man knows that their Pope and every Priest of his begetting, can make God
himself, and we heard also before that the Pope himself can make something of
nothing?) I suppose, I say, that if they had the living ass (now I make no
doubt of their keeping him alive, yet for all that why do they not make* him
alive again?) they would gather a counsel for determining what new honor
should be done unto him.

2 The like may be said of their admonitions, citations, and excommunications,
against them that have been dead and buried a long time: as against Bucer,
Paulus Phagius, Tooly, John Glouer, and many other, whom being dead, they
have condemned, dug up again out of the earth, at least their bones, or the
bones of some other for theirs, and burned them. Is it not a toie for men to
excommunicate them out of the visible Church, that God has called out of the
world? And are not these two special ends of excommunication, one to keep
the Church from infection by the company of such as deserve excommunication;
the other to draw the persons excommunicated to repentance? when death has
first taken them away, what fear is there of the first? what hope or
possibility of the second?

3 As they do thus abuse excommunication, so much more foolishly do they
abuse and blasphemously profane the holy sacrament of baptism, in applying the
same to churches, bells, and such like. Christ bids nations to be baptized,
not churches or bells: Christ bids his disciples teach and baptize;
therefore also they may as well teach the gospel to churches and bells, as
baptize them. Neither have churches and bells any sins to be forgiven, or
whereof they can repent: therefore churches and bells need not the sacrament
of these things, especially no other part of God his righteousness belonging
unto them, the which they ca^performe. The same may be said of ringing the bell
in any great tempest, as though that could make fair weather. As foolishly
also did they, and do they make boys and little children Bishops and
Cardinals. Many and infinite other the like follies there are in popery,
worthy to be laughed at by little children, more worthy to be derided by
Eliiah and the Prophets of God: and altogether unworthy of the wisdom of the
most wise God. Certainly I marvel why plays, interludes, and comedies, were
in such request in the time of popery, since in their golden legend they might
daily read or hear, and in their exercises of their religion they did daily
see such pleasant things, as would make better sport then all the plays in the
world.

4 Well, to conclude this argument seriously, drawn from their follies. When
David counterfaited himself a fool, and behaved himself as a fool, by
letting his spittle fall upon his beard, and scrabbling upon the walls before
Achish King of Gath, 1. Sam. 21. 13. how does this King (in whom as there was
no fear of God, so there could be no good wisdom) like thereof? the scripture
answers that he did sharply rebuke his servants for bringing such a person in
his court, and that he said unto them: Lo, ye see this man is beside
himself: wherefore have ye brought him to me? have I need of mad men, that
ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my presence? shall he
come to mine house? In like sort, yea and much more will the God of all
wisdom, rebuke those that shall plead for popery, or present Papists unto his
court. He shall say to any that shall commend Papists unto his Majesty in
this sort: Lo, ye see these men are beside themselves, wherefore do ye bring
them to me? have I need of mad or foolish men, that ye have brought them to
play the mad men or fools in my presence? shall they come into my house?
Thus will the Lord rebuke and check such as shall speak for the justifying of
Papists unto him. Great men of this world take much and too much delight in
fools, and laugh at their follies (though they should make better use of
them:) but the only wise God is delighted only with true wisdom, and such as
are truly wise. Therefore all the follies of the Papists, and the foolish
Papists themselves, so long as they continue such, are abomination unto him. As
for our religion, as it is no other then the Scripture commends, so it has
nothing but that which well beseems the wisdom of God, and therefore it
cannot but be acceptable unto him.

THE NINTH ARGUMENT touching the opposition and enmity of true religion to the
nature of man.
THe same that hitherto has bi^ concluded of popery is further evident,
because popery is so agreeable and well-pleasing the nature of man. This
reason is very firm and good, because that in our flesh naturally dwells no
good, Romans 7. 18. and, the flesh lusts against the spirit: and, the wisdom
of the flesh is death and enmity against God, neither subject to the law,
neither can be: and, they that are of the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 6,
7, 8. and, the natural man does not so much as perceive the things of God: for
they are foolishnes unto him, neither can be know them, 1. Cor. 2. 14. and, no
man can so much as say (that is, in any good and true meaning) that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the ^^oly Ghost, 1. Cor. 12. 13. For to confess that Jesus is
Christ the son of the living God, is not revealed to flesh and blood, but by
the Father in heaven, Math. 16. 17.

2 Yea, but how is it proved, that popery is agreeable unto and well* pleasing
the natural man? surely because it requires nothing but that which the
natural man may well perform, and does perform without any special grace of
God, and without any new work of regeneration, as both been sufficiently
showed by other in larger treatises specially spent in that theme. And who
sees it not to be so? For does not popery teach (as we have heard before)
that ignorance is the mother of devotion? and does it not from hence follow
that men neither need, nor ought to take pains in the study of the word of
God? does not the natural man well like of this? Does not popery bid men
only to believe as the Church believes? can any thing be more easy? and does
not ease please the natural man? does not popery extol and magnify the
mere natural disposition of man, both denying it to be so thoroughly corrupt
as we teach, and commending it to be willing and able to conceive, and to
practice much good of it self? Is not this a pleasant song for the ears of a
natural man? and is not his heart tickled with such commendation? Again
popery offers forgiveness of sins, release from hell, the whole kingdom of
heaven, etc. to sale for money. What natural man will higgle to give any money
for purchase of such things? What shall I say more? Popery bids men not to
take to much pains about their hearts, neither to be at all careful for
resisting the first thoughts and motions unto evil, for that these by popish
doctrine are no sins: it teaches that God looks not so much to the inward
man, but regards the work wrought, howsoever it be done, and that he in
justice cannot deny a good reward to such merits. Can the natural man dislike
of all this? Further, what natural man is not ready, and apt to worship
images, to invoke Saints, to swear, to profane the Lord his day, or at
least to observe any holiday appointed only by man more exactly, to be proud,
to resist magistrates, etc. what natural man, I say, is not willing enough to
these and the like?

3 Yea but it is objected, that our religion teaches faith only to justify
without works, and that therefore our religion is a doctrine of ease and
liberty, and so consequently more pleasing the natural man then popery,
which requires many numbers of prayers, no^ to God only, but also to Saints,
many great iournies in pilgrimages, many offerings to the church, many alms,
many good works, many merits, etc. I answer, first acknowledging that we teach
indeed that faith only justifies even without any works whatsoever: yet is
this faith more hard to the natural man then all before mentioned, to be
taught and required by popery. For this says that we teach, must have
knowledge of God, and of him whom he has sent, as also of the holy Ghost, and
that as they are revealed in the word, and likewise of the promises of God in
his word particularly taught: it must also apply these things particularly to
every man his particular self. Secondly, though we say that good works are not
necessary as causes of justification, yet we do vtge true good works (not
such as the Papists commend) more straightly then they do, and teach them to be
more necessary, as effects and fruits of justification, and such as without
which there is no salvation. For we say that he that has not eternal life
begun in him hear, that is, in whom the old man is not crucified, and
sin mortified, in whom the new man is not restored, and the life of godliness
wrought, that man shall never have eternal life in the world to come, neither
shall ever enter into the kingdom of heaven. This the Apostle says, and this
we say, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither
corruption inherit incorruptio. 1. Cor. 15. 50.

4 As for all other things required by popery, the natural man can well
brook and bear so long as the inward may be dispensed withal; yea what is
there so costly, though it come to the plucking off the earings, and giving the
ordinary jewels and ornaments that men use to wear, though it be the
offering thousands of bullocks and rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil, what
is so precious though it be the first fruits of a man his own body? what is
so laborious and painful, though it be the cutting of himself with knives and
lancres as the priests of Baal did, or the whipping of himself til the blood
follow, or the pining of himself by long fasting, or at least by living only
of bread and water, and by lying in woollen and upon bare boards, or taking no
rest many years together, but only standing as many old Monks mentioned by
Socrates and Sozomen were wont to do, and some foolish papists yet do: what,
I say of all these is such, that a natural man will not willingly undergo, so
it be repugnant to Gods word and devised only by man? Again, what though
popery require all these things? what also though nothing thereof be performed
whilst a man lives here? shall he therefore to hell? No, say the Papists,
there is remedy for that. When he dies, and needs no more to use his goods
himself, let him but give liberally to the poor, especially to the Church,
and to priests for singing and saying of masses, dirges, trentalls, and other
such pleasant songs for his soul, and then all shall be well enough. He shall
not go to hell, but only to purgatoriekitchin, and there either to be a
rafter, or a little to turn the spit, and then after a few years he shall be
removed from thence, and preferred even to God his own parlour in heaven. In
the mean time who sees not that the hope of this makes any man, especially
of wealth and ability, to give liberally, if all the days of his life he may
live in all licentious manner?

5 But as for our religion it is far otherwise therewith. For by abasing the
whole man and all that is in him, and teaching those things which before have
bin spoken of, and shall not need now to be repeated, it is altogether
unpleasant and unsavory to the natural man, even as smoke unto the eyes, and
vinegar to the teeth: yet to God, yea therefore to God it is sweet and
pleasant. Certainly in this respect there is such difference betwixt our
religion and popery, that if both were offered unto the natural man, he would
make much sooner choice of popery then of ours. And this indeed is the cause
why of long tim,e and of most parts in the world, popery has been so
generally received; and why there have been more Papists then Protestants,
namely because our religion is altogether repugnant to nature, and popery
altogether agreeable thereunto. Further let every man examine his own heart,
how it stands naturally affected, and he shall find himself rather inclined
to popery, wherein he may for a money matter, have both pardon of any sin
already committed, and also a dispensation to commit what he will, though it
be incest with his own sister, then to our religion which condemns all such
pardons and dispensations. Since therefore this is now so evident, that popery
is so suitable to our corrupt nature, and that our religion is altogether so
harsh thereunto, why may I not again conclude as before I have done, both
against popery and also in behalf of our religion?

THE TENTH ARGUMENT:
the first part, touching the great decaie of Gods gifts in these times of
Popery.
MY last argument touching the maine conclusion, both against popery and also
for our religion, shall be from the testimonies of God himself in this matter.
By the testimonies of God, I mean not here the testimonies of his written
word, but real and actual testimonies (if I may so speak) that is, such
things as whereby indeed God himself has justified our, and condemned the
Romish religion unto the eyes of men, as by his written word he has done the
same unto their ears. Neither let any man be offended, that I call such things
by the name of God his testimonies, for so the like arguments are called in the
scripture it self. Ioh. 5. 36. our Savior Christ calls the works that he
did, the witnesses or testimonies of his Father in his behalf: I have (says
he) greater witness then the witness of John: for the works which the Father has
given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me that the
Father has sent me. In like manner speaks the Apostle, Hebr. 2. 4. where he
says that God did bear witness unto his gospel, both with signs and wonders,
and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Highost, according to his own will.

2 These actual testimonies of God, whereof I purpose now to speak, are
especially two. The first are the gifts of the spirit, which God has promised
to these last times of the world, for the commendation of the gospel: the
second, are his other works, whereby likewise he does bear witness thereunto.
Touching the first, let us first of all consider of God his promise for those
gifts; secondly of the performance of that promise. The promises are either
made in the old testament by the Prophets, or in the new by Christ himself.
The promises of the old testament are many. First of all, the Prophet David
psalm. 68. 18. insinuates a promise of the gifts of the spirit in these words:
Thou art (says he) gone up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and
received gifts for men: where the Prophet, by receiving gifts for men, means
the gifts wherewith Christ as the Mediator was furnished without measure, to
bestow upon the Church after that he should vanquish his enemies, and
triumphing over them should ascend into heaven, there to sit at the right hand
of God in all glory and authority. This interpretation is manifest, both by
the words immediately following, Praised be the Lord, the God of our salvation,
which loadeth us daily with benefits; and also by the application thereof, Ephesians.
4. 8. where although the Apostle do name only the callings of the Church, yet
does it not therefore follow that the place in the psalm is of such gifts
only to be understood, because that every general may be applied not only
to some, but also to all particulars comprehended in the general. The second
promise is, Isa. 44. 3. where the Lord speaking of the latter times of the
church, says thus, I will pour water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy
budds, etc. And least any should think, that this promise was only made to
the Jews or Israelites according to the flesh, he adds in the 5. v. One shall
say I am the Lords, another shall be called by the name of Jacob: and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and name himself by the came of
Israel: which words do testify, that the promise before made was as well to
the Gentile^ as to the Jews, because the Jews were already of the house of
Israel and called by his name. The promise of the same gifts of the spirit is
likewise signified, by leading or driving of them to the springs of waters,
Esa. 49. 10. He renueth also the same promise, Joel 2. 28. Afterward (says the
Lord in that place) will I pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons
and your daughters shall prophecy: your old men shall dream dreams, and
your young men shall see visions: and also upon the servants and upon the
maidens in those days will I pour my spirit: so the same Prophet chap. 3. 18.
expresses the same promise in other words saying, In that date shall the
mountains drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the
rivers of Judah shall run with waters, and a fountain shall come forth of
the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shithim. By all these
words he means nothing else but the plentiful gifts of God his spirit,
calling them by the name of wine, milk, and waters, both because of the
variety of them, and also because of their diverse effects, according to the
diverse necessities of the diverse members of the Church. And least this promise
also should be restrained only to the Jews, he adds in the 21. v. this
effect of the spirit, that he would cleanse their blood whom he had not yet
cleansed, meaning by those whom he had not cleansed, the Gentiles, that till the
coming of Christ were without Christ, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and being without God
in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. Finally the Prophet Zachary, chap. 14. etc. has
this promise, In that day shall the waters of life go out of Jerusalem, half
of them toward the East, and half of them toward the utmost sea, and shall
be both in summer and winter. These and such like are the promises in the old
testament, which to belong to the new testament, and to be made for the credit
and commendation of the gospel, appears by the application of the promise in
Joel made by Saint Peter. Act. 2. 16. And although that Prophet speak of
seeing visions, dreaming dreams, and prophesying, etc. yet by these are not
only to be understood the same, but because these served then the good of the
church, therefore by them the Prophet means all such gifts as should make for
the good of the church, under the gospel the which is manifest, because Saint
Peter applies this prophecy to the gift of tongues, bestowed upon the church
at the feast of Pentecost.

3 Touching the New Testament first our Savior alluding unto, and indeed
plainly meaning these promises of the old Testament before mentioned, says
thus, Ioh. 7. 38. He that believes in me (as says the Scripture) out of his
bell^e shall flow rivers of water of life. Where the Evangelist himself
interprets our Savior to speak of the spirit, which they that believe
should afterward receive. The like promise is made so often as he speaks of
the Comforter, Ioh. 14. 26. and 15. 26. 16. 7. and elsewhere. So also after his
resurrection, Act. 1. 5. John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost within these few dates. All these promises do
teach and assure the Church that the gospel should not come forth in the latter
days poor and desolate, but rich and accompanied with an honorable train of
all necessary gifts and graces of God his spirit: and that the more the gospel
should flourish, the more plentiful also should these gifts and graces flow
in the Church. Thus much for the promises of the gifts of the spirit.

4 Touching the performance thereof, it is certain that it was especially
accomplished in the time of the Apostles: and fit it was it should be so,
because the gospel was then first to be communicated unto the Gentiles, who
before that had never heard any such doctrine: and because also, as the Lord
did then give extraordinary callings of the Apostles, Evangelists, and
Prophets, so it was also mere that they should have gifts suitable to their
callings. Notwithstanding it is not to be doubted, but that the promise should
remain, and does yet remain in force, even unto the end of the world, as
touching the general substance thereof; and that therefore although those
times are now past, and those reasons now ceased, when and why the Lord gave
such gifts of his spirit, in such extraordinary measure and manner, yet he
will never leave his gospel without such a train of the graces of the graces
of his spirit as shall be somewhat answerable to the flourishing thereof, and
meet likewise to commend the same the better unto the world.

5 Since this is so, I demand whether this promise were performed to the church
of Rome, holding the same doctrine that now it has held for the space of
seven or eight hundred years, and enjoying that outward glory and
magnificence, the which also these years it has enjoyed? Certainly to this my
demand, it cannot be affirmatively answered with any truth. For all men know
(or may know) the contrary: yea the Papists themselves, if they be not past
all shame and grace will acknowledge the contrasie. For when the Pope began
to set his foot upon the stairs, and to ascend toward that dignity
whereunto he is now mounted, then began the holy Ghost also, as it were, to
take the wings of an Eagle or dove, and to fly away, and return again
toward the heavens, from whence before he came. Ever since that time also, as
the Pope has climed the ladder of his magnificences, so the spirit of God has
mounted more and more toward heaven, and has gone further and further out of
the sight of men. The more that the Pope and popetie have grown and
flourished, the more have all the gifts and graces of God his spirit decayed
and ^ithered. At the last when the Pope was revealed to be the man of sin,
the son of perdition, etc. and the very Antichrist, that is, when he was
come to the top and perfection of his pride, then also did the holy Ghost in
a manner take his leave and bid all the world almost farewell, at the least
touching his visible presence. When all Kings and Princes had received and
drunken the cup of his fornications, whereby being intoxicated and deprived of
all true knowledge of God and common sense, they abiected themselves unto him
and put their necks under his girdle, yea abased themselves in most slavish
manner to hold his stiroop, and kiss his filthy feet: when also they had
received his mark in their foreheads, that is, themselves had embraced his
damnable doctrines, and stooped unto his abominable idols, and commanded also
their people to do the like: when, I say, the Pope and popery were thus
advanced, and had iustled both the true religion of God and also all authority
of Princes out of the throne, and most proudly did sit in it themselves, as it
were booted and spurred: when (I say again) the Pope with all his abominations
did thus sit in the chair of estate, both of Princes and also of God himself,
then what true knowledge was there, I will not say of God, but even of arts, of
tongues, and almost of any good humanity?

6 For trial of these things, if any think I slander them, let the rolls
and Chronicles of those times be searched: let the books of those ages be
perused, let their matter, their phrase and style be examined. Was not the
knowledge of the Greek so rare, that it was a common proverb, Graecum est,
legi non potest: It is Greek, it cannot be read? And could the Hebrew tongue
be more plentiful? No verily, but much rarer. What also shall I say of the
Latin tongue? was the knowledge of that in those times any better? very little.
Every boie indeed learned their primmer, and to say his prayers, and to help
the Priest to say Mass in latin, yet could he not tell whether he prayed to
God or the devil: whether he asked bread or a stone, fish or a scorpion, yea
not one Priest of an hundredth did understand the Mattins, that he continually
said, or the masses that he daily sung; Rome was wont to be the mother of this
tongue, and the University and house of the eloquent orators, but having once
entertained the deep mystery of transubstantiation of bread into the body of
Christ, all the former eloquence of this place was also transubstantiated into
barbarism. This tongue indeed was the common tongue of their religion at Rome
and elsewhere, yet when their religion was at the full, then also was the
knowledge of this tongue in the wane, yea in the very last quarter half spent.
For it would make any man of knowledge to laugh, to read or hear the words,
phrase, and style of those books that were then written. In their prayers
indeed, (in which is least need of eloquence) especially in their prayers to
the Saints, and chiefly to the virgin Marie, by two or three figures they
affected a kind of eloquence to please the ears of men, and to make the
prayers go the more roundly, that ^o men might take the more delight in saying
or singing of them: but in most of their other writings there is nothing but
plain dunstable latin, yea nothing for the most part but barbarism.

7 If any man yet desire further proof of this ignorance, wherewith I charge
the chief times of Popery, let them read what M. Lambert reports touching
the same in his perambulation of Kent, writing of the place called Cliffe; what
(I say) he reports in that place of that matter out of William Malmesburie,
de rebus gestis pontificum Anglorum: namely, that Curbert the eleventh
Archbishop of Canterbury, in a great Synod of all or most of the Bishops of
his Province, assembled by himself to the foresaid Cliffe (then called
Cloueshoo,) did there decree that the Priests themselves should first learn,
and then teach their parishioners the Lord his prayer, and the articles of his
belief in the English tongue. In the same place also he notes, that king
Alfred in his preface upon the pastoral of Gregory which he translated, says
that when he came first to his kingdom, he knew not one priest of the south
side of Humber that understood his service in latin, or that could translate an
epistle into English. Further, he adds that Alfric in his proeme to the
grammar, says that a little before the time of Dunstan the Archbishop, there
was never an English priest that could either indite or understand a latin
epistle: and lastly that William Malmesburie himself says, that at the time
of the Conquest almost all the Bishops of England were unlearned.

8 This is not to be understood of the knowledge of the latin tongue only, but
also of the very matter it self, and that not only of books of diumitie, but
also of books of philosophy and humanity. Their absurd and gross
definitions, their infinite, intricate, foolish, and unlearned distinctions,
(wherein notwithstanding consists all their learning and deepenes, as they of
Thyatira said, Revel. 2. 24) will not only weary and tire any young
scholar, but also make a learned man sick at the very heart. Every man that
is any thing acquainted with Peter Lombard, Gratian, Scotus, Durandus, Thomas
Aquinas, Occam, Gerson, Haymo, and such like Divines of those times, can
testify that which I say of the books of Divinity. For proof
notwithstanding thereof, I refer the reader to that which that reverend
father and worthy man Master Iuel answers to a vain boast of Master
Harding, touching the learning of their side. First he bids him remember
that their provincial constitutions do begin with these words: Ignorantia
socerdotum. Then he adds as follows, It were no great masterie to charge
the chief doctors of your side with some want of learning. Ludouicus Vives
says, Vt quidque his supertoribus seculis min^s tritum fuit studentium
manibus, it a purius ad nos peruenit. For the space of certain hundred years,
the less any books came into students hands, the purer and better they came
to us: meaning thereby, that every thing was the worse for your learned
handling. Of Thomas, Scotus, Hugo, and others of whom you seem to make so
great account, your own friend Catharinus says, Scholastics multa inerudite
comminiscuntur. These schoole-doctours imagine matters unlearnedly. Erasmus
says, Portenta quae nunc passino legimus in commentarijs recentium
interpretum, tam impudentia and insulta sunt; vt videantur suibus ea scripsisse
non hominibus. The monstrous follies that we commonly read in the commentaries
of late interpreters (whereby he means the very croppe and the worthiest of
all your scholasticall doctors) are so far without shame and so peevish, as
if they had been written for swine and not for men. One of your doctors says,
Apostolus dicitur ab apos quod est argumentum vel praeeminentia, and stolon
quod est missio, quasi praeeminenter missus. Another says, Apocrisarij
dicuntur nuntij Domini pap^: Nam crisis dicitur secretum, and apos dicitur
nuntius. Another says, Cathedra est nomen Graecum, and componitur a Cathos,
quod est ^ides and edra quod est sponda. Another says, Eleemosyna dicitur ab
eleis quod est misereri, and mors quod est aequ^. More follows to the same
purpose in Iuel his defense of the apology 5. part, 12. chap. 2. division.
where the learned reader may see the quotation of those writers out of whom he
boroweth these things. By these things we sufficiently see the profaned
divinity of the chief times of popery.

9 Touching philosophy, the works of Petrus de Bruxellis, Johannes de monte,
de ponte, Dorbella, Duns, Toletus, Titleman, and many such like, do evidently
confirm that which I have said. Yea such is the rudeness of these books,
that many young scholars in Cambridge and Oxenford, for want of good direction
too much addicting themselves to the reading of them, can never afterward
attain unto any true eloquence or knowledge of the Latin tongue, neither yet
to sound philosophy. So also may it be said of such Divines as take too much
delight in reading the works of those before mentioned. Many distinctions in
these books seem witty, and have show of some depth in those things whereof
they entreat, but if they be thoroughly with judgment examined, and (as it
were) sifted or rather bolted, they will be found but mere trifles, more
curious and troublesome, then sound and profitable: so far also from
illustrating and making lightsome the things whereto they are applied, that
rather they obscure and darken them. Sometime perhaps a man may hitte upon, or
by the way meet with something somewhat worthy the observation, but it is so
rare that more time will be lost whilst a man sinde it out, then the benefit of
the thing will counteruaile when he meets with it.

10 As those books before spoken of do witness the learning or rather
ignorance of those times when they were written, so many men also now living
can testify as much of the later times of popery, both touching all the
learned tongues, and also touching divinity, and philosophy. Notwithstanding
I charge not all of those times, and of that religion with such ignorance, but
only the most: some there were more learned, but very few. The greatest part
of those that were brought up in learning, and which professed learning, were
as ignorant and unlearned as I have said. And how could it be otherwise, so
long as they taught that principle before spoken of, that ignorance is the
mother of devotion? And albeit they meant the ignorance of God and divinity,
yet thereupon follows that the knowledge of other things is also unnecessary.
For all other knowledge is especially to be referred to divinity, as to the
chief and principal end thereof. This being taken away, what need in a
manner is there of other knowledge? And indeed they desired that men should
have had no good learning at al (as it is among the Turks) that so they might
never discern the wickedness of their religion. For they knew and feared, that
the true knowledge of tongues, and arts, and humanity, would quickly have
detected all the wickednesses and abominations of their religion. Therefore
also when they could no longer keep under the knowledge of these tongues and
arts, but did see men to grow and flourish therein in despite of them, they
made a solemn and common law amongst them, that the vulgar corrupt translation
in latin of the Bible should only be authentical, and that also no man
should in any wise appeal from thence to the Hebrewe or Greek text. By this
canon they provided, that although men grew to skill and knowledge of those
tongues, yet this skill and knowledge should little help them to any further
learning of the holy Scriptures, then before they might have attained unto by
the latin tongue. Yea so also they cunningly endeavored to stop the course
of such knowledge. For who could have any great heart to those studies, whereby
he should have no help in divinity, the Queen of all studies? Again,
touching that learning that was in the chief time or popery, for the most
part it was greatest in them that inclined to our religion, and that did not a
little dislike of many gross points of popery, and of many foul corruptions
amongst the other Papists.

11 Now to conclude this part of the argument touching the general ignorance
that was in the pride of popery, how will it stand with the rich and ample
promises of God, before mentioned, for the pouring out of water upon the
ground, and his spirit upon all flesh? If popery were the religion that came
from God, would God have so pilled it and poulled it of all the gifts and
graces of his holy spirit so often promised? If it had been the same religion
which the Apostles taught after the ascension of Christ, and the primitive
Church received from them, would not the Lord have commended it with his spirit
as he then did? If the Church of Rome were the only daughter of God, and
spouse of Christ (as she boasts her self) would the Lord have left her so
naked of all ornaments? chiefly and principally beseeming her estate, and most
answerable to her royal descent? will any earthly Prince send forth his only
daughter, or let his wife go abroad, without such princely ornaments as her
princely estate requires, and whereby she may be known and reverenced with
the reverence of a Prince? much less therefore may we dream, that the Lord
God of heaven, the Prince of all princes, would so rawly send forth his only
daughter, or Christ Jesus his only son and heir suffer his only spouse
(whom he loves as himself) so poor and naked, as the Church of Rome was in
her highest prosperity.

12 I grant that the Pope and his Cardinals had their rich ornaments and
costly apparel, of silver, gold, precious stones, etc. that also the rest of
that generation even to the very hedge priest, had a gaie coat to wear in
their holy business, that likewise all their Churches had great riches: I grant
that in all these things the Pope and popery did far excel Saint Peter with
all the rest of the Apostles, and likewise all the churches of their time, but
these are not the spiritual ornaments that the spiritual nature of the
daughter of God and spouse of Christ requires. The Church of God is indeed
described, psalm. 45. 9. etc. as a Queen standing at the right hand of her
husband Christ Jesus, in a vesture of gold of Ophir, and as having apparel of
broidered gold, and likewise that she has raiment of needleworke, but the
Prophet describes here the Church only after the manner of an earthly Queen,
meaning notwithstanding by these things all manner of spiritual and heavenly
ornaments, and therefore even in the same place, and the beginning of the 13.
verse, she is said to be all glorious within. It is therefore certain that the
chief ornaments of the Church, are inward and spiritual: the which wanting,
whatsoever outward ornaments and riches she has, yet she may be called
wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked, as Christ Jesus calls the
church of the Laodiceans. Rev. 3. 17.

13 Now then, forasmuch as the Church of Rome wanted those spiritual ornaments
which the Lord has promised, and does always bestow upon his daughter, I
conclude therefore that she is not the daughter of God, neither the spouse of
Christ. If it be said that the true church has not always the like gifts, I
freely acknowledge it; yet this is certain, that the more the Church
flourishes, the richer she is in the gifts of God his spirit. But
contrariwise the more the Church of Rome flourished, the poorer she was in the
graces of God his spirit. And here by the flourishing of the Church, I mean
not only an outward flourishing in earthly things: for so I grant that as
the graces of God are many times choked in particular member^ of the Church by
outward prosperity, so it may be also in the whole body of the visible
church: but by the flourishing of the church, I mean her flourishing in sound
doctrine, and her enjoying of such authority as of right belongs unto her.
Now in this sense, when the doctrine which the church of Rome accounts only
sound doctrine, and the contrary whereof she accounts heresy; when, I
say, this Romish doctrine most flourished with least gain saying of any
thereunto, when also that authority which the church of Rome chalengeth to her
self, as her right was in such regard, that neither Princes nor people made
any resistance, the^ were those gifts of the holy Ghost promised to the true
Church, in the latter times most rare and scarce; when it was summer with the
church of Rome touching all her prerogatives which she chalengeth, then it was
the dead of winter touching those graces of God his spirit; so that scarce any
leaves of them did hang upon any tree. Thus we see that those promises were not
performed to the church of Rome in that estate wherein now it stands, and
whereof it vaunteth.

THE SECOND BRANCH OF the tenth argument, touching the reviving of Gods gifts
at the breaking forth of our religion out of the darkness of Popery.
MAy the like be said of our Churches in England, Scotland, etc. sithence the
religion now established brake forth of that darkness wherein before it lay? No
ve^ily. All the world sees what knowledge of arts, of tongues, of philosophy
and all humanity has been, yet is, and does daily increase. Now many
children sixteen or seauenteene years old are better Grecians, and more
learned Hebritians, then were the great doctors in the height of popery. Now
I may truly say that Cambridge alone, or Oxenford alone (if not some one
College in either of both) has more skillful Grecians and learned Hebritians
then all Christendom had, whilst popery sat upon the th^one. The like may be
said of the true knowledge of the Latin. Philosophy also and all arts since
our religion have been revived, have been much polished, and far more
perfected then they were before.

2 Let it not here be said, that there are some Papists now every way in these
things as learned as the Protestants. For first of all the question is not
whether Papists or Protestants be now more learned in the tongues or liberal
sciences, but when this learning, having been along time as it were banished
out of the world, returned again. This present learning therefore of the
Papists, neither much helps them, neither a whitte weakneth this mine
argument, except they could prove, that when their religion was at the
highest, then also they had bin as learned as now they are. Secondly, although
that many of them have indeed now attained unto much knowledge of arts and
tongues, yet this knowledge began first to be revived amongst us. Afterward
they seeing us by those gifts tha^ God had bestowed upon us, for commending of
our religion to the world, to be so able to maintain our doctrine, and so
mighty to oppugn theirs, they (I say) seeing this, were provoked and whetted
to take the more pains in study, that they might the better defend their
errors against us, which now they saw to be falling to the earth from whence
they sprung. Many also of the learned amongst them attained unto their learning
even against us and by us, being brought up in our schools, and afterward
better nourished and more strengthened in our Universities. But as unnatural
children do sometime forsake their natural parents, and run they cannot
tell whether; so have they forsaken our Universities: and as many roagish boys
being entertained by some master, and under him having learned some good
trade, do oftentimes when they have been a while there, forsake such masters,
and go to any other that will give them but a little more wages yearly,
unthankfully forgetting all that their former masters did for them, when no man
else would regard or pity them: even so many Papists having gotten their
learning amongst us, and in our Universities, yet seeing afterward they can not
have such outward preferrements as they looked for (which is a thing that they
especially ^^yme at) have unnaturally forsaken us, and associated themselves
with the Papists, who wan^ing such studdes to uphold their rotten and tot^ering
religion, have been glad to entertain them with great promises, but many
times not performing them, but rather bringing them, or sending them at the
least to the gallows. Such oftentimes is the judgment of God upon them, that
too much respect outward preferrements, and so does God in his justice harden
many of them that will not believe his truth, whilst they live where and when
they may have it, that he gives them over to believe lies so strongly that
they care not what danger they incur against themselves, both soul and
body, for defense and furthering of those lies which they have embraced. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.

3 Well, to return from where we have di^ressed, we see by this that I have
now spoken, that in these respects thus mentioned, the Church of Rome may
thank us for that learning which now they have, and for many of those learned
men which are now in great and ^igh estimation amongst them. Further it is no
new thing that those gifts of Gods spirit, which God at the first gives to
bear witness unto (...) truth, should be afterward communicated bo^^ to such as
do not greatly favor Christ and his gospel, and also to such as are wicked
and reprobate. In the time of Christ himself the power of casting out devils
first given to the twel^^ Apostles Math. 10. 1. for the commendation (...)
their ministry, was afterward communicated to other that would not join with
the Apostles nor follow Christ. Our Savior also says that many that should
plead for themselves the casting of devils out of other, should
notwithstanding be rejected by him as refuse persons Math. 7. 22. And thus has
the Lord dealt in these latter times. As at the first preaching of the gospel
by the Apostles after the ascension of Christ, he bestowed upon them the gift
of tongues for the better magnifying of the gospel, and furnished them
likewise with other extraordinary gifts; which gifts notwithstanding afterward
were also communicated unto many other, yea to many of the wicked: so in these
latter times also at the first breaking forth of his truth (which we profess)
through the black, the thick, and dark clouds of popery, that ^ long time
had ouershadowed and drouped the whole earth, the Lord according to his ancient
promises gave gifts unto men, in respect of the former great want of them, very
extraordinarie^ these gifts (I say) he gave at the first breaking forth of our
religion through popery, to the first preachers of our religion, for the
commending thereof unto the world, and so increased them afterward more and
more in those that embraced our religion: but after that by such gifts he had
sufficiently renewed and recovered the credit of his truth which we do now
hold, and likewise by beautifying our religion with the first fruits of these
gifts, had sufficiently disgraced popery, then he communicated these gifts
unto other even unto the Papists themselves.

4 And truly in very great wisdom has God done so, that he might teach men to
esteem of his truth, not for those gifts only but also for the truths sake it
self. So also he would have the Papists themselves, yea and all the world to
see, that all the learning in the world is not able to uphold popery, and that
our religion is as well able to stand against, and to beat down popery into
the pit of hell, from whence it came, as well when popery has the same
armor on that our religion has, as when it was naked and had almost none at
all. Therefore to conclude this part also of this my last argument, touching
the performance of those promises of God to the Church, that were never in such
manner performed to the Church of Rome. As the more the dark clouds of
popery covered the whole earth, and the more violently also the boisterous
winds thereof did blow upon the earth, making the very cedars of Lebano^ both to
be^d and to break, the more dead were all the gifts of the spirit, as we see
all things to be in the depth of winter: so like wise sithence our religion
has come about toward the summer point, and by the strength and power thereof
has scattered and dispersed these clouds, and pacified those boisterous winds
of popery in many kingdoms, the more have those gifts of God his spirit before
promised, budded and flourished even as we see after an hard winter, the more
the sun comes about toward Cancer, the more all trees and herbs before
sear and dead, do revive and spring out. I conclude therefore, that as by the
springing and flourishing of herbs and other plants, we know summer to be
come; so also by these gifts of God his spirit which have sprung and
flourished, even sithence that our religion has been revived and again
quickened: we know the same gospel to be again returned about, the which in
former times God according to the righteousness of his promise, did beautify
and comme^d with the like graces.

5 Will any Papist now object the times of Tertullian, Gregory Nazianzen,
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, Barnard, and such like? let
him first remember, that most of them were before the time whereof we spoke.
They were (I say) before any stone almost laid of the foundation of the church
of Rome in that state wherein now it is: all of them also lived before that
Church was built to that perfection whereunto it was reared, until the
repairing of our religion. Again these ancient: Fathers so many of them as
did see the building of this church begun, or any matter prepared ^owards the
same, labored by might and maine (as we speak) and to the utmost of their
power, ^he hindering and staying thereof: therefore have they plainly written
against images, justification by works, invocation of Saints, freewill, and
many other the like principles of popery, as is ^lentifully showed by our late
writers in parti^ular controversies. Especially both they and also many other,
yea some of the Papists them^elues, and of the learned of them have migh^ly
declaimed, and sharply inuaied against all ^uch proud and arrogant titles, as
now the Pope ^laimeth and usurps. Further although these ^ere excellent
persons for learning and godli^es, and worthy of honorable remembrance ^^ all
ages, yet lived they not altogether. Nay ^^ther one age had almost but one
such, or at the ^ast but very few such, as these were that I ^^ue named: but
our ages and the ages before ^s, ever sithence the return of our religion,
have (...) all times and in every kingdom had many ^^ch. Yea I doubt not to
sale, and that truly, that although it be not yet two hundred years since ^u^
religion came out into the open field, and ^ncountered with popery in such
public ^anner as now it does, yet there have been in ^is little time as many
great learned men as ^^ptaines of the Lord on our side, as can be ^^ooued to
have been with us or against us, in ^welue hundred years before.

6 Further I doubt not but that I may say, and that also truly, that we have
had and yet have many in good respects comparable to those before named, as in
the exact knowledge of all learned tongues, arts, and humanity, so also in
sound and deep judgment of divinity. vz. Luther, Zuinglius, Melancton,
Oecolampadius, Erasmus, Paulus Phagius, Bucer, P. Martyr, Calvin, Marlorat,
Musculus, Cranmer, Ridly, Hooper, Bradford, Bullinger, Bez^, Zanchius, Iu^l,
Ramus, Vrsinus, Sadeel, Daneus, Pilkington, Fulke, Humfrey, Whitaker, and
infinite other, partly dead, and partly yet living, whose name^^ I do not well
remember, or in some respect^ think not convenient to express. I may here
also name Flaccius, Illyricus, Hemingius, and many other of that sort: because
although they have some errors, yet which almost of the ancient Fathers had
not as many and ^^ great?

7 To this argument I may further add, that the Lord has not only commended
our religion by the increase of all learning according to the increase of our
religion, but also by the repairing almost of all other knowledge in common
things and matters of this life. For what trade and science is there so mean
and base, which is not much amended and brought to further perfection sithence
the late time of out religion, then it had before in the depth of poperit? yea
who knows not that there is great variety of knowledge sithence the
flourishing of our religion, which never almost was heard of before? Especially
most admirable is the gift of printing, which never was in the world till
within these hundred and three score years at the most, about which time it
pleased God to broch new vessels of his gospel with our religion. This gift
of printing is not unfitly by some compared to the extraordinary gift of
tongues in the Apostles time; because the Lord did not only prepare a way for
the gospel thereby, but also has made it as a mighty voice of a crier in the
wilderness of popery, to proclaim the grace of God in Christ Jesus, and to
further and enlarge our religion, by opening the hearts of many Princes and
more people, many noble and more base, many rich and more poor, and many
learned and more unlearned persons, for the entertainment of Christ Jesus, and
submitting themselves to his kingdom and government. Certainly by this new
benefit of printing the Gospel has been more sounded out to the ears of all
nations, then it could have been by the voice of many preachers. For by the
means hereof we that live in England, have easily heard the sermons and
readings of Calvin and Beza in Geneva, and of other in other places: and they
likewise that live in Geneva and in other places, have easily heard the
readings of Doctor VVhitakers in Cambridge, and likewise of Doctor Reynolds
in Oxenford. This printing also is not only as a quick post riding upon a
swift and speedy horse, but also as an angel of the Lord with six wings, for
the most speedy conueying of the doctrine of the gospel out of one country
into an other. Who also knows not, that a man may have more now for six
pence, then before printing, he could have had written for forty shillings?
who sees not also that books printed, are more easily both read and also
preserved, then the like only written? Now although the devil abuse this gift
of God also for the furthering of popery, (as what gifts be there that he
quickly does not abuse?) yet since it was never heard of whilst pope^ie was at
the highest, but then only appeared and came forth into the light of the
sun, when our religion was raised out of the grave where before it lay
buried, and when popery began to fall sick, and to incline unto a
consumption, who sees not that it was a special and an extraordinary gift of
God for the honoring and furthering of our religion? Thus much for the first
sort of God his actual testimonies, namely for the gifts of his spirit which
before he promised, and according to his promise has bestowed upon his Church,
not only in the time of the Apostles, but also in these latter times for the
commendation of the gospe^^ then, and of our religion now, as being the same
with the gospel, and therefore in like manner acceptable unto him.

THE THIRD BRANCH OF the tenth argument, touching the works of God against
Popery.
NOw follows the second sort of God his actual testimonies, namely the
works of God, whereby God has testified both his dislike of popery, and also
the approbation of our religion seueral^y and jointly, as evidently as if in
express words, and in his own person, he should have spoken against popery
in this manner: This is the religion that I hate, and which my soul ab^orreth:
and contrarily of our religion as he spoke of his Son: This is the Gospel
and that glad ^^dings which brings salvation unto all men, and in which I am
well pleased, therefore receive it.

2 Here first of all let us consider the great judgments of God against many
of the Papists, especially such as have been special adversaries to our
religion and to the professors thereof. For truly there have been few such
special adversaries to us and our religion, whom God has not in some
special manner so punished here in this life, or at least so prosecuted that
their malice in their posterity, that all the world might thereby clearly
see, that he utterly disliked of them and of their course, as also approved
and allowed of them and their cause, against whom they opposed and set
themselves. Touching these judgments, although I might ease my self and the
reader of much labor, by referring him only to the latter end of the book
of Martyrs, where is a special treatise of such things; yet because that book
is of so great price that many are not able to buie it, I will therefore cull
out some few of the principal examples there and elsewhere in that book
mentioned, and for the rest refer such as have that book to that special
treatise. First of all let here be remembered the history of one Pauier or
Pa^^ie, in the days of King Henry the eight: this Pauier or Pauie being
town clarke of the city of London, and a notable enemy to the gospel, upon
some report that the gospel should be in English, said with a great ^ath, that
if he thought the King would in deed set forth the Scripture in English, and
let it be read to the common people by his authority, he would cut his own
throat. And so indeed he did not much less. For though he cut not his throat
with a knife, yet he hanged himself with an haltar, anno Dom. 1533. This is
reported by Master Fox, page 1055. of his book printed 1583. but borrowed from
Hall his Chronicle, who wrote the same not upon the report of other, but upon
his own knowledge, who both heard him swear that he would cut his own
throat, and also knew how he brake promise by hanging himself. In the same
year also, that is 1533 one Doctor Foxford chancelour to the Bishop of
London, and a cruel persecutor and butcher of God his Saints under Bishop
Stokesly, died suddenly and fearfully (...) in his chair, his belly breaking
and his guts falling out before his own eyes.

3 Next to these let be considered that of William Gardener an English
merchant, most cruelly martyred at Lishbone in Portugal, for snarching the host
with one hand, and beating the chalice with the other out of both the hands of
a Cardinoll, before the King and all his nobles, the Lords day after a solemn
marriage of the said King his son with the daughter of the King of Spain,
anno Dom. 1552. and in the reign of King Edward the sixth of most blessed
memory. Let, I say, be here also remembered the judgment of God following the
execution of that most holy martyr by the Portugalls at Lishbone for the cause
before mentioned. For how did they, by whose authority he was so executed,
escape? The same night he was burned, one of the sparks of the fire where with
he was burned, by God his providence being conveyed amongst the King his
ships lying in the haven, fired one of them and burned it^ within half a
year after the young Prince then married, died: and the King himself also
within another half year after that, and so within one year both the king
and his son died.

4 An other example we have of one Alexander the keeper of Newgate, not much
unlike to Alexander the coppersmith, of who^ the Apostle complains; this
Alexander dealt most cruelly with those that were committed to his custody in
new gate for the gospel. But what became of him he died most miserably being
both swollen more like a monster then a man, and so eaten also within, that no
man could abide the smell of him. Yea further, the Lord his wrath was kindled
also against his son: for he being left very rich, was given over to such a
^iotous mind, that he wasted all within three years: and being sometime asked
how he could spend so much in so little time, he would answer, that evil
gotten must be as evil spent. Shortly after also as he walked in newgate
market, he fell down suddenly, and so died fearfully.

5 Another example there is also registered of a Sheriff of Suffolk his man,
that attending upon his master at the martyrdom of one James Abbes at S.
Edmonds Bury, and hearing the fald James Abbes exhort the people to stand in
the gospel which he would in their presence seal with his blood, bad the
people not believe him, because he was a mad man and spoke he knew not what.
But mark good reader: This railing and rauing Papist, as soon as fire was put
to James Abbes, was immediately before all the people stricken with madness, so
that he cried out as much in commendation of James Abbes, as before he railed
on him: condemning also himself, and saying, James Abbes is a good servant of
God and saved, but I am damned. This note he sung until his dying day,
railing also on the priest that his master sent for to housle him a little
before his end; yea not only railing on the priest, but also on papists and
poperic, charging them to be the cause of his damnation. Another example we
have of God his judgment upon Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More
knight: these had been persecutors of the Protestants, especially they had
procured the death of John Frith, Bayfield, and Baynham. Therefore the Lord
cried also quit with them, for themselves also were publicly executed at Tower
hill.

6 Worthy also of remembrance is that which M. Fox likewise writes of one
Vanderwarfe of Antwerp, who as he was of great place and authority in that
city, so also was he of great malice against the Protestants, most cruelly
persecuting all, and drowning many men and women to his great praise among
other of that cruel generation. For this also he was called a blood-hound, or
bloody dog. But God in whose eyes the death of all his Saints is always
right precious, forgot not his cruelty: for this Vanderwarfe having gotten
great riches, and therefore left Antwerp, living in the country at his case,
at a certain time came in a wagon with his wife, and some other to make
merry at Antwerp, where having recreated himself, he returned again toward
the country. As soon as he was out of the city, being to go over a wooden
bridge, built (as should seem) but for a shift and for a time, having bars
and rayles on both sides, the horse in the wagon stood still, and would not
go forward by any means of the waggoner. Vanderwarfe his blood being up,
and provoked against the waggoner, bad him drive forward in a thousand devils
names. Immediately upon this there arose suddenly a mighty whirle wind (all
being calm before) which tossed the wagon with this gentleman and other
passengers over the bridge, and so they fell into the water. The rest being
saved, and taken up alive for the present, (though his wife died within three
days after) himself only was drowned, as he had drowned many before. What
also shall I say of the miserable and desperate death of Steven Gardener the
great blood-sucker of this land? for at his death another Bishop coming unto
him, and (as it seems) finding him in a desperate mind; put him in
remembrance of Peter his denying Christ. But he sauouring no comfort therein,
answered that he had denied Christ with Peter, but never repented with Peter.

7 What also shall I say of Henry the second of that name King of France? had
he not committed certain great persons to prison for religion, and threatened
one of them to see him burnt with his own eyes? yet behold the work of God
herein. Shortly after he had not eyes to see it: for the very same day that
the King was in the greatest rage against the foresaid prisoners, and had
examined the Presidents and counselors of the Parliament against them, after
dinner addressing himself to run at the tilt, and indeed performing that
act very honorably with the breaking of many staves, to his great
commendation by all the beholders. He not satisfied with that which he had
done, but tickled with the former commendation, and desirous of more according
to the nature of ambition (which thinks no praise sufficient) urged the
County of Mountgommer to run an other course with him. This County had
before received the former prisoners from the Constable of France upon the
Kings commandment, and carried them to prison. Notwithstanding now when the
King urged him to run an other course; he kneeled down and crave pardon, as
thinking the king to have done enough for one day; but the King prevailing
more by commanding, then the other could do by entreating, at the last this
County addressed himself to this last course, which indeed was the last
course of that day and for cuer to the king: for the staves being broken, and
the King his vizzard suddenly falling off (so does the Lord work to bring his
judgments to pasle) one of the shiuers pearsed his head unto the brains, and
suddenly so festered that no surgeons could cure the same. Thus the King lost
one of those eyes, where with he threatened to have seen the burning of those
persons, and died also of that hurt.

8 Neither may we here well omit the death of Charles the ninth of that name
King of France, in whose time and by whose means that bloody massacre, before
mentioned was done in Paris, and in many other cities of France. For as the
King had delighted himself in the blood of his Saints, so himself also in his
youth at the age of 25. years died of a most grievous bleeding. Many other the
like examples are recorded by M. Fox, both of our own country and also of
other nations, of some that were stricken with madness, of some that did hang or
drown themselves, and of other that died in despair most fearfully, and that
in such manner as that all the world might see the just judgment of God
against them, both for their religion and also their malicious persecuting of
such as were of our religion.

9 To these will I add an other example not yet written by any, but yet as
true as any of the former, (whereof not with standing some are known to all
the world) and also no less worthy the writing then the former. At great
Wenham in Suffolk, in the days of King Henry the eight, there dwelt one M.
Cardinal, whose wife having heard one M. Worth a godly man and good preacher,
preach at Hadley about some three miles from thence, at her return home
entreated her husband one day to request M. Worth to come and preach with
them. Master Cardinal though at the first fearing some danger of law, yet at
the last yielded, and indeed proceeded and procured M. Worth to come thither.
The parson of the said Wenham being popish, withstood M. VVorth being come,
saying that no such should preach there; M. Cardinal entreated but the parson
denied, being like ^o the dog in the manger that will neither eat ^aie
himself, nor suffer the horse at the rack to eat any. So, I say, this
parson (as some also do ^n these days) neither would nor could do good
himself, neither would suffer any other ^o do any. At length M. Cardinal
seeing the parson so wilful and obstinate, said that M. VVorth should preach
do the parson what he could to the contrary, and come what danger would
come. In fine they went all to Church, and many other upon knowledge of M.
VVorth his preaching were assembled. Now when M. VVorth should begin his
sermon, the parson according to his froward word for the disturbing of him,
went toward the high altar to say, masle. What followed? a most worthy
example of God his justice. For presently before all the people assembled, the
Lord smote this popish parson for dead for the time, drawing his mouth up to
his ear, and so made him past saying of mass. Notwithstanding being carried
out of the church for avoiding further trouble of the congregation, he was
within little time recovered of his life, yet never recovered his wits and
senses, but living long after, continued a fool all the days of his life, and
turned the spit, (...) was employed upon some other service in the said M.
Cardinal his house ever after. I have heard this of many very credible
persons, who had often heard it from M. VVorth, long time after (even in this
Queens days) viccar of Dedham in Essex, and of many other that were present
at that sermon, and were eye witnesses of the judgment. Some also are yet
living about VVenham aforesaid that knew it.

10 I might add many other examples of God his judgments against like persons
for like cause: but these shall be sufficient. For by these who sees not (that
has any eyes at all to see) in what account popery is with the Lord? Let all
men therefore by these examples take heed that they deceive not themselves.
Let not them blindfold their own eyes that they may not see the things thus
manifest. Let them not disgrace the reports of M. Fox, since many things written
by him are also written by other before him, from whom he borrowed that which
he did write. Some things of his are samous, and known to all men. I am not
ignorant that M. Fox in writing some things upon the report of others might
sometime err. And although his slip in such things be taken great hold of by
the Papists, who there by take occasion to disgrace all the truth he has
written, to cover their own cruelty, to conceal God his judgments, and to
harden themselves in popery, and the more easily to draw other to be of this
mind; yet let the wise and true Christian consider, that it was by the devils
great policy, to move some (no doubt) in color of synceritie, and pretending
a mind of helping M. Fox in that worthy work, to inform him with some
untruths, that by his writing of them upon such information, all the rest of
his writing might be in disgrace, as being in like manner untrue. This no
doubt, was the subtlety of the old serpent, and of his viperous litter, so to
disgrace that noble work, and so to obscure those evident examples of Gods
disalowance of their religion, as though he had written no truth, when the most
of the things by him chronicled, are as clear as the sun is in the midst of
the brightest summer day. But albeit some be given over in the just judgment
of God, to believe truths to be lies, because they have embraced lies for
truths; yet I hope that such as belong unto the Lord, though perhaps by such
devises they have been abused, will now make better use of these examples that
I have set down, and the like. Thus much for those works of God against
popery and Papists, whereby he has (as it were) immediately testified his
dislike of both.

THE FOVRTH BRANCH OF the tenth argument, touching the works of God for our
religion.
Now although by the former works, God has also testified his approbation of
our religion; yet let us now further consider and mark diligently, what he
has directly done for our religion and the professors thereof. Truly such
have been the great and mighty works of God for our religion, that as the
Prophet says, God is known in Judah, his name is great in Israel. psalm. 76.
And again, The Lord loves the gates of Sion above all the habitation of
Jacob, glorious things are spoken of the citi of God. psalm. 87. 2, 3. So also
it may be said of many particular persons that have boldly professed, and
stoutly maintained our religion, and chiefly of those cities, countries, and
kingdoms where it has bin in like manner maintained, defended, and
established. To begin with Luther, when it pleased God first to open his eyes
to see both the abominations of popery, and also the truth of the gospel, and
likewise to deliver him from the miserable darkness and bondage of the one, and
to translate him to the glorious light and liberty of the other, yea to give
him an heart, courage, and tongue, boldly (as the Lords herault) to condemn,
and disclaim the former, and to preach and proclaim the other; how many, how
diverse, how great, and how mighty adversaries had he? How few also, how
simple, and how weak were those that took his part? yet how mightily and how
miraculously did God preserve and uphold him, yea also bless and prosper the
work of his ministry, almost to all Christendom? The like might be said of
many other, who although they had not so great, nor so many enemies as Luther
had: yet had more greater then they had been able to have resisted, had not
the Lord mightily taken their part.

2 What shall we say of little Geneua? does it not stand in the very mouth of
the adversary there of the Duke of Sauoie? does this adversary want either
power or malice? Is it not therefore manifest that the Lord which neither
sleeps nor slumbereth, psalm. 121. 4. is the keeper there of, and that he does
protect and defend it by his mighty power and outstretched arm? What shall
we say of the town of Rochel, besieged for the gospels sake, and for
harboring the professors thereof, by all the power of France for seven whole
months together? were there not during that siege many conflicts and
skirmishes? did not the whole power of France make seven principal assaults
thereunto, in all which the Pope his side and greater power had the greater
loss? do not the French histories themselves testify, that in the first
assault, within less then one month there were discharged against the walls
and houses thereof, the number of thirty thousand great shot? Do not the
same also write that in the second assault there were two thousand field
pieces laid against the town? yet what success had these and the other
assaults? The King was forced in the end to withdraw his forces, and still to
grant them continuance of their former privileges, and specially to the
grief of his heart, the liberty of the gospel. What also shall we say of God
his providence toward the said city, during all the time of the former siege?
for the poorer sort wanting corn, the Lord sent every day into the river a
multitude of such fish, as the which they used in stead of bread: and that this
was the special and extraordinary work of God it appears in that, that so
soon as the siege was removed, the supply also of the fishes did cease.

3 Above all what shall we say of our own little Island, and of our most dread
sovereign and gracious Queen? Has not the whole land, and especially her
Highness, had many and mighty enemies continually? Before she came to the
crown in the days of Queen Marie, were not Queen and Council (for five
years together) her mortal enemies? did they not translate her from place to
place, by night and by day, whether in health or sick? were not sometime her
own servants removed from her, and strangers appointed to attend upon her?
was not the place directly under her, one night fired to her great danger if
it had not been prevented? did she not sometime in the evening fear death
before the morning? did she not in the heaviness of her heart and agony of her
soul, write, Much suspected by me, nothing proved can be? Did she not send
these words to some of her servants, that came and attended to see her. Tanquam
ovis? who kept her in all those great and deep dangers? who restrained her
enemies, especially the bloody and butcherly Bishops, Bonner and Gardener, who
delivered her in the end? who advanced her unto the crown? did not the Lord
all this, and that most wonderfully? And may it not be said in some sort of
her preservation, deliverance, and advancement, as it is said of Christ
himself, especially considering that all her danger was for Christ his cause:
This is the Lord his doing and it is vvonderfull in our eyes? psalm. 118. 32.

4 Sithence she has been placed in the throne of Majesty, have her dangers
bin less or fewer? No verily: but as her place has been higher, so the
devil and all his whelps have more sought her utter ruin and overthrow. To
omit foreign assaults, many home rebellions, many secret conspiracies and
privy treasons, many open insurrections, have been against her Highness from
time to time. Many have been sent partly from the Pope, partly from the King
of Spain, first adjured by their sacrament of the altar, secretly or openly
most traitorously to murder her. Many here within the realm have conspired
and attempted the same. Neither have they been such as have wanted
opportunity to have effected their purpose, but even such as have been
continual courtyers, waiting daily upon her person; yea as have had all their
advancement and honor from her: such also as have had familiar access unto
her, and with whom likewise she of her princely courtesy and kindenes toward
them has vouchsafed very often privately to confer: yea even then, when they
have come with full purpose and resolution to have defiled their hands with
shedding of her sacred blood, have they been admitted to her private and
secret conference. Who then bridled them? who took away all heart and courage
from them? Is it not evident to all men, and must not all men acknowledge, that
the secret power of the Almighty did both withhold them, and also preserve
her? And may not she truly say with the Prophet, psalm. 94. 17. If the Lord
had not helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in silence? But is this all? No
verily: the Lord has not only thus miraculously kept her, but also highly
honored her in the eyes of all nations. As she maintains the cause of
Christ Jesus, so God has performed to her in some sort, the promises made unto
Christ Jesus. As she is a principal member of the spouse of Christ Jesus, so
has God honored her with those honors that he has promised to the same
spouse. All Princes almost have brought presents unto her, and all people have
been in admiration of her. Search all histories, turn over all Chronicles,
sacred or profane, divine or humane, ecclesiastical or civil, yet shall ye
never find a woman prince, a maiden Queen, whose preservation has been so
mighty, whose glory so great, whose government so long, so prosperous and so
happy.

5 All this has been the more admirable, and is the more to be considered, by
how much the more and oftener she has been cursed with bell, book, and
candle, by him that arrogateth to himself plenitudinem potestatis, all
authority in heaven, in earth, and in hell it self. This adds no small
force unto my argument against him and all his religion. For if he were he whom
he vaunteth himself to be: if he were Peter his successor, and Christ his
viccar-generall upon earth: if he were the head of the Church, if he had the
keys of heaven, if he could not err; how could he have erred in sending forth
so many curses causeles? or if the cause of his curses were just (the which he
rather pretends) how could he so often have cursed without success? Christ
has said and promised to Peter and his successor (as they teach) that
whatsoever, or whomsoever he should bind or loose in earth, the same should be
bound or loosed in heaven. Have his curses been such? verily they never came
half way to heaven, or else when they came there, Saint Peter was so fast
asleep that they could not awake him to let them in: or else when they were let
in or crowded in, they were nipped in the head, and by the regents there
retained with a Nescio, or Non placet. But I will not speak too much of this,
least I provoke his holiness to commence an action against Christ himself, for
not keeping promise, yea to send out a bull and excommunication against him.
For then what should become of us poor Protestants, if our head should be thus
hardly dealt withal?

6 Notwithstanding I fear him not greatly, since I have seen by so much
experience, that his bulls are but bubbles; yea that the high court of heaven,
has always turned his cursings into blessings. For I doubt not, but that the
more he has cursed her Majesty and this land, the more God has blessed
both. Elisha cursed the two captains with their fifties, which were sent to
apprehend him and carry him to the King, and presently fire came down from
heaven and consumed them. 2. King. 1. 11. Elisha cursed those unhappy hangmans
and wicked boys that mocked him, and presently came two Bears out of the
forest which devoured them. 2. King. 2. 29. The same Prophet likewise cursed
his servant Gehazi, for that sin which before we have heard to be the life of
the Pope, and presently the leprosy of Naaman did fasten on him and cleave
unto him. 2. King. 5. 27. David cursed Ioab, praying the Lord to remember him
according to his wickedness, 2. Sam. 3. 39. and so it fell out to Ioab, 1. King.
2. 34. Paul cursed Elimas the sorcerer with blindness, and immediately there
fell on him a mist and darkness, so that he went about seeking some to lead him
by the hand, Act. 13. 11. If therefore this bonus senex and holy father, had
cursed with the same spirit wherewith they cursed, and in the same name in
whose also they cursed, his curses also would have had the same effect. But
sithence they had the clean contrary, may we not safely conclude, that he is
not the Vickar of Christ, but rather the deputy of the devil; and that the
vickar of Saint fools is his ghostly father? yea that he is the adversary of
Christ and child of perdition, in taking upon him to curse the anointed of
the Lord, who is also the blessed of the Lord. Certainly forasmuch as his curses
are no more effectual, but always turned into such blessings, I wish he would
likewise curse me; for then I think I should both live the longer,
notwithstanding my present infirmities of body, which daily threaten death
unto me, and also every other way be the more blessed. David hoped of some
good from the Lord, for cursing of Shimei after another manner, 2. Sam. 16. 12.
so if the Pope would also curse me, I should hope to fare likewise the better
thereby.

7 To end this argument therefore drawn from such examples: if Nabuchadnezzer
seeing the mighty deliverance of Shadrack, Meshach, and Abednego, in the
fiery oven, did acknowledge their God to be the only God, Dan. 3. 29. If
Darius seeing the strange preservation of Daniel from the mouth of the Lions,
when he was cast into their den to have bin devoured of them, did likewise
confess the God of Daniel to be the living God which remains for ever, Dan.
6. 26. shall any that profess themselves, and would be accounted Christians,
see so many and so great mercies of God toward other professing our religion,
and so miraculously bestowed: shall any, I say, that would be accounted
Christians, seeing all these things done by God himself, for the upholding and
maintaining of our religion and the professors thereof, yet make doubt of our
God whither he be the living God, and of our religion whither it be the true
religion?

8 Yea but me thinks, I hear one object the great plenty that was in the
time of popery, when one might buie 24. eggs for a penny, a good cow for a
noble, or eight shillings, an ox for a mark, a sheep for twenty pence, a
bushel of wheat for four or six pence. And that sithence this new religion
(for which I now plead) came up, there was never such plenty, neither was it
ever so merry with us. This is an old objection, and worn in a manner with
often handling clean through: yea it is so old that it is even rotten and
consumed, so that if it be but touched, it will fall to dust or powder. It was
used by the Jews to Jeremy against the word of God that he preached, and for
defense of their former idolatry: When, say they, we worshipped the Queen of
heaven (or as some do read more generally, the things of heaven) then we had
plenty of victuals, and were well, and felt no evil; but sithence we left
such idolatry, we have been consumed by the sword, and by famine. Ier. 44.
17, 18. To this objection I return a threefold answer briefly. First I say
that this plenty of things in former time of popery, is not easily proved as
spoken. For although a man might then buie so much for so little as has been
spoken of, yet this proves not such plenty, except there had been as great
plenty also of money, to have bought the other things so cheap. Then a penie
was as hard to come by, as a tester is now: for then a laboring man had but a
penie a day for his work, but now he has six pence or a groat at the least.
Therefore it skilleth not though things be now dearer then they were then, as
long as money is more plentiful and easy to be come by. So likewise it may be
said as well of the commodities which the poor man has to sell, as which the
rich man has. When therefore a man may have a groat now or six pence as
easily as then he could have a penie, may he not as well give a groat or six
pence for that which he buieth now, as then he did give a penie? Secondly, the
number of people being now so increased above that it was then, as we see it
to be, and compared with the small number of those times, does prove that
there was no greater plenty in those times then is now. Yea rather does not
this commend the mercy and liberality of God the more, in providing as well
for the great multitude that is now, by the means of the long and great peace
we have had, as he did then for that small number of people that was then? If
it be objected, that many towns and cities were greater then, then now they
be, and that this proves as great a multitude to have bin then, as is now: I
answer that as some towns and cities are decayed, so also many more both
towns, cities, and villages, are mightily increased. Thirdly, though the
former plenty of former times should be granted, yet it is not to be ascribed
to popery. For then now also where popery is, there should be like plenty.
But we see the contrary. For in Spain and other countries of popery, there
is far greater dearth at all times, then where our religion is received.

THE FIFTH PART OF THE tenth argument, touching the works of God both against
Popery and for our religion.
NOw then let us proceed, and to the former examples both of God his just
judgment against popery and Papists, and also of his mercies for our religion
and the professors thereof; let us add an other sort of mixed works of God,
that is, of such things as God has done both for one and also against the
other, and whereby at one and the same time he has signified both his liking
of the one, and also his disliking of the other. Here I will not refer the
reader to the histories and books of other, but do only entreat him wisely
and in the fear of God to consider such things as have been so lately done in
the eyes of the whole world, as that every child of twelve years age knows
them and talks of them.

2 First therefore let the great Navy of the king of Spain, sent forth anno
Dom. 1588. for the invasion of this kingdom, and captiuating of the people (if
it had been possible) be considered, with the success which it had. This
Navy was so great, as that the seas never before did bear the like, and
therefore also themselves did call it the invincible Navy. Neither was it sent
forth only by the King of Spain himself, but also with all the blessings
that might be of the Pope and the whole Church of Rome. As the whole popish
holy clergy in England in Queen Mary's days, made many earnest and loud
prayers, went many solemn processions, and sang many deuote Masses for the
childe-birth and safe deliverance of Queen Marie; so in like manner did the
Pope and college of Cardinals, and the whole holy Synagogue of Rome, in Rome,
in Spain, and in many other places, make the like supplications, go the like
processions and sing the like masses, for the good and happy success of the
said Navy. Therefore came this great army, not only intending all violence
and cruelty, but also fully persuaded (in their own hearts) of all victory.
They made the like account of prevailing against England, that sometime
Senacherib King of Ashur with his Captain Rabshakeh made of prevailing against
Jerusalem, and therefore said (no doubt) in their hearts secretly, the same
that Rabshakeh spoke in words openly, 2. King. 18. 25. Am I now come up without
the Lord to this place to destroy it? The Lord has said unto me, go up
against this land and destroy it. They thought it had been impossible for us
to have escaped their hands, as sometimes Benhadad king of Aram did think it
impossible for the Israelites to escape out of his hands, and therefore hearing
that men were come out of Samaria against him, he made not reckoning of it, but
said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive, or whether they be
come ought to fight, take them yet alive. 1. King. 20. 18. Finally they so
presumed upon the virtue of the Popes blessing and upon their great forces,
that they made reckoning before of dividing the spoil amongst them, as
sometime Sisera and his mother with her wise ladies did, of dividing the spoil
of the Israelites. Judge. 5. 29.

3 But what came of all this? Truly, as there never had been sent forth the
like power by sea against any people, so was there never the like overthrow.
They had not cried loud enough unto their gods, therefore they did not help
them: they set themselves against the God of heaven, therefore he confounded
them. They said as the Egyptians said, Exodus 15. 9. We will pursue, we will
overtake them, we will divide the spoil, our lust shall be satisfied upon
them, we will draw our sword, our hand shall destroy them: but we may truly
sing and say as Moses and the Israelites in that place sung and said, verse. 6,
7, 10. Thy right hand, O Lord, is glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord,
has bruised the enemy. And in thy great glory have thou over thrown them
that rose against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath which consumed them as the
stubble. Thou blewest with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sanke as lead
in the mighty waters. All this may we truly say, because the Lord, the Lord
only did overthrow Pharao and his people in the red sea. He gave their flesh
to be meat to the fishes, as before he had given the flesh of the Egyptians.
Yea he did this in a manner without any strength of men, he commanded both wind
and sea against them, and they both obeyed, that so himself might have all the
glory, and none might give any part thereof to us, neither we take any part
thereof unto our selves: yea that so he might make it known to all the world,
that Pope and Spanyard had not only opposed themselves unto the Queen of
England and her religion, but also to the God of heaven and his truth. So that
as all the prayers, processions, and masses here in England for Queen Marie
her safe deliverance, and for the young Prince in her womb, came to nothing: in
like manner did all the works of like devotion, by the Pope himself and the
rest of the Church of Rome, in Rome and elsewhere, come to less then nothing.
For as before his curses of our Queen and land were turned into blessings: so
now also his blessings of the Spanyard and his forces, were turned into curses.
Who sees not by this, that he that dwells in the heavens did laugh them to
scorn, and that that the Lord had them in derision? as it is said and
threatened unto all such as assemble together against the Lord and against his
anointed. psalm. 2. 2. etc. As the prophets and priests of Baal cried unto
their gods, so did the Spanyard unto his gods, both which he imagines to be in
heaven, and also before which he falls down and worshippeth in the earth, I
mean both unto all his Saints, and also to all his graven images made of
wood, stone, silver, and gold, etc. As Elisha cried unto the true God, so also
did we in the day of our trouble. We fasted and prayed lifting up our hearts
and our hands unto God in the heavens, commending our selves and all our
forces only to him. Therefore as the priests of Baal labored in vain: so
also did the Spanyard. As Elija, Iehosaphat, Mordechaie, and Ester, and many
other the good servants of God, were heard in that they prayed; so also were
we. Wherefore, as Elija by this argument confounded the priests of Baal,
proouing their god to be no god, their worship to be false worship, and
contrarily did approve himself to worship the true God, in true manner: so
also why may not we by the like argument, condemn the god of the Pope and the
Spaniards to be no god, and their religion likewise to be no religion: and on
the contrary conclude and boldly affirm our God only to be the true God, and
our religion to be that religion which this our true God has once commanded,
does daily command, and ever accepts? Truly so great was our danger in that
expedition of the Spanyard against us, that sithence our deliverance from the
same we may truly say as the Church says, psalm. 124. If the Lord had not bin
on our side, may England now say, if the Lord had not bin on our side, they had
then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us: then the
waters had drowned us, the stream had gone over our soul, then had the
swelling waters gone over our soul. Praised be the Lord, which has not given
us as a pray unto their teeth. Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the
snare of the fowler: the snare is broken, and we are delivered. Our help is in
the name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth. This whole psalm in
respect of our mighty deliverance, may we as truly apply unto our selves, as
before we showed that we might apply part of the song of Moses and the
Israelites, when they were newly delivered from their slavery and bondage out
of the land of Egypt.

4. The second example of these mixed works of God against Pope and popery,
and also for us and our religion, is the honorable and happy success of our
forces last year sent forth against the Spaniards under the conduct of the
right honorable and most worthy Earl of Essex, and the Lord Admiral:
especially if it be compared with the former success of the Spanyard against
us. For the Spanyard coming against us (as before is said) with such huge and
mighty forces as he thought inexpugnable, and finding us as it were in a
manner altogether unprepared to meet him so suddenly, and indeed of our
selves not able then to have resisted him, yet could not so much as set any
footing of any one man within any part of our land; but by the mighty hand of
God stretched out from heaven against him, was forced to return in vain, yea
with loss (at the least) of half his forces both ships and men by the way,
to the everlasting shame and dishonor of him and of his religion. But on the
contrary our forces being nothing so great as his were, neither coming upon
him on the sudden without his great preparation for them, did yet so mightily
prevail, by the power of God going before them and with them, and the fear of
God falling upon the Spaniards (as sometime upon the Shechemites and their
neighbor nations, Genesis 35. 5.) that coming not into any obscure river, but to
one of the most famous havens in all Spain, and finding the same furnished
with a mighty Navy of the king his greatest ships, did not withstanding
both foil all the foresaid Navy, and also land, not some, but as many of
their men as themselves would: and within few days did both take and sack,
not some little village, but one of the chiefest, richest, and strongest towns
in all his kingdom, strongly fortified with men, and plentifully furnished
with victual, and whereof (by report of them that were there, and that know
the place) every house was built of stone, and in form and strength like unto
a castle. Thus did our God bless and prosper our forces against him, with
loss of no man of reckoning but only one, and of no more of the common
soldiers, then is most likely in so great a multitude would have died at home.
So did our armies return, as with a sufficient spoil and booty, so with
exceeding great honor and renown. What shall we say of these things? that by
our hand and strength we have gotten the victory? God forbid that we should so
rob God of his honor. But let us more truly answer as the Apostle answers
the like question of admiration with these words, If God be with us, who can
be against us? Romans 8. 31. Even so let us, touching the confusion of the
Spanish forces, and the gracious success of our own, likewise answer and say,
God has been with us, therefore it skilleth not who has been against us:
and on the contrary, God has been against the Spanyard, and therefore it
has not helped him against us, whomsoever he has had with him.

5 A third example also of like mixed works of God, against Pope and popery,
and for us and our religion, is that overthrow which the last winter the Lord
himself, without any means of man, gave to a great power of Spanish ships,
sent toward Ireland for aid and strengthening of the rebels against us. This
power of ships, being not so much as exspected of us, did the Lord by his
mighty power so graciously confound in our behalf, that we never heard of
their coming, till tidings came of their drowning. And may we not here also
add the happy success of our last voyage this present year against the
Spanyard, as likewise the contrary of the Spanish Navy again sent hither
against us? yes verily. These do no less deserve the registring, then the
former: these are as well worthy the observation, as the former: finally these
speak as plainly for our religion and against popery, as the former. For as
touching this second voyage of that most worthy and honorable Earl, albeit
at the first God himself seemed as it were to froune upon us and to resist us,
(for the trial of the courage, and proouing the patience, and likewise the
better humiliation of the said Earl and his forces) and finally for
instructing of us as well as the Spanyard, that the proceeding in any voyage
must not be according to the will and pleasure of man, but according to his
will and pleasure, that rules and governs as well by sea as by la^d:) yet
afterward (all things considered) the Lord has not much less (if any whit
less at all) magnified his great mercies toward us and his gospel, and his
justice against Spain and popery, then he did the last year, at the taking
and sacking of Cales. For first of all, how honorably to the great reproach of
the great King, has our little Fleet discontinued from home, partly before,
and partly about the dominions of Spain, and that in the very face of the
Spanyard? yet what has all the Spanish power done unto them? yea rather how
cowardly have they kept themselves within their safe havens and harbors, not
daring so much as once to look our forces in the faces? did we so in the year
1588? does not this speak to the renown of our little Island, and especially
to the glory of the religion therein professed? does it not in like manner as
evidently disgrace both the Spaniards themselves, and also their Roman
religion? As touching the final success of this voyage, although it were not
such as it might have been (because God well sees that so rich a booty as
the whole Indian sleete had been, would perhaps have made us too proud) yet
such was it, that we have no loss, neither they any gain thereby. Concerning
the Spanish Navy, this year also sent against us, first how cowardly was it
sent, when they thought our strength to have been from home? will not every
man utterly condemn him for a cowarde, that takes the advantage privily of
his adversary, when he thinks him to be unarmed? why therefore may not the
like be said of the like practice of a King and kingdom? especially of such a
king and kingdom, as in their high pride think they should command the whole
world. Secondly what success had this Fleet, so privily and closely thinking
to have stolen upon us? verily as he that kept England heretofore, has neither
slept nor slumbred, so now also when the Spa^yards thought to have found us
asleep, they found him waking. When they thought to have found us unarmed,
they found him as a man of war, with his sword girded to his thigh, yea
rather ready drawn in his hand, and every way prepared for the battle. For
this man of war fought for us again this year, as he did the last year:
and did partly confound them, and partly force them to recule home with all
dishonor; and that before that we did so much as once (almost) dream of any
such power coming toward us. The more did God reveal his wrath against them
and their errors; as also testify his love unto us, and to his own truth.

6 In writing thus of these things, I boast not of our selves and our own
worthiness, as if the Lord for our righteousness had done all these things
forvs: I labor not to commend our persons, but only to justify our religion.
As touching our selves, we cannot deny but that although we have the gospel,
yet our contempt of his gospel and his other mercies, our security by the^,
and our other manifold and heinous sins which we daily commit against his
majesty, are such, that we have been and are altogether unworthy of so
mighty protection, and of so prosperous success. It has not been therefore
in respect of our selves, that God has thus dealt with us and for us: but
only for his own great names sake, and that he might yet further commend his
gospel professed amongst us (but indeed not so practiced and obeyed by us as
it ought to be) unto those that yet regard it not, and that (if it be possible)
he might win thereunto both Atheists, and Papists, and also all other that
yet are enemies thereof. Thus we condemn our selves, and thus we magnify
only the power and goodness of God, in regard whereof we wish as the Prophet
often wishes in the 107, psalm, that men would therefore confess before the
Lord, his loving kindness, and his wonderful works that he does before the
sons of men: we wish also as the Prophet does again in the same psalm, verse.
22. that, men would offer sacrifice of praise, and declare his works with
rejoicing. Let no man or woman therefore, how zealous soever of popery they
have been hitherto, and yet are: or how obstinate and hard hearted soever
against our religion, so lightly pass by this argument, or so basely think of
our religion, as they have done or do. Though we do not honor it as we ought
to do, but rather dishonor it by our wicked lives and conuersations,
altogether unbeseeming the holiness thereof: yet let them more seriously
consider these arguments, whereby God himself from heaven has graced and
commended and does grace and commend the same unto them.

7 Let no man here say, that by these last arguments from the works of God, the
religion of the Turks might be justified. For albeit it cannot be denied, that
the Turk has had mighty victories, and does flow in great prosperity, yet
is their great difference between our victories, and his: between our
prosperity and his. All that he has gotten has been by exceeding force and
power: but our victories have been obtained almost without force, against
great force. His victories have never been gotten without great loss of his
own side: but as the Jews and Israelites oftentimes prevailed without any
fight at all, Judge. 7. 20. 2. Chron. 20. 17. and 23. etc. so in a manner have
we done. The Lord only has fought for us, we almost have not fought for our
selves or for him, but only have showed our faces to the enemy. As the Turk
has thus gotten that which he has, so also he maintains his estate wholly
by violence: but as the Lord has fought for us from heaven, so also he
miraculously maintains us. The like may be said of the other prosperity of
the Turk, because he has not those mighty enemies to oppugn and envy it,
which we have had and yet have, to envy and oppugn ours. The same, and more
also, may be said of all the victories of the Spanyard himself against other:
he has gotten all, he holds and keeps all, partly by violence and
cruelty, partly by falshoode and treachery. Therefore as the former great
victories of Senacherib against other nations, whereof Rabshekah boasts, 2.
King. 18. 34, 35, etc. did the more justify and commend Hezekia, and the
worship of God repaired and established by him: so the great victories of the
Spaniards against other nations either heathen or popish, makes the more for
us and for our religion, since the Spanyard cannot by those means prevail
against us, by which he has prevailed against others, as great people as we
are if not much greater. For what else does this teach, but that the Lord
himself is our light and salvation, our strength, our rock and fortress, and
he that delivers Psalm. 27. 1. Psalm. 18. 1. 2.
us. Surely the Lord is our strength, and he that teaches our hands to fight,
and our fingers to battle, he is our goodness and for tresse, our tower, and
Psalm. 144. 1, 2.
deliverer, our shield, and he in whom we trust: even he that subdueth our
people under us. It is the Lord that pleads for us and for our religion, yea
rather for our religion only; because that we ourselves are so wicked and
sinful, that we are altogether unworthy of his aid and defense.

8 Yea but the Spanyard himself has also had great victories against the
Turk, when the Turkish forces have perhaps been twice or thrice so great as
the Spanish. Let this be granted, yet does not this simply justify the
Spanish religion, but only in respect of the Turks, who are professed enemies
of Christ and of all that is called by the name of Christ. The Israelites after
the death of Joshua fell often to most grievous idolatry, the Lord gave them
notwithstanding mighty victories against their enemies. Yea the ten Tribes
after they were revolted, not only from Judah, but also from the Lord himself
and his worship, and so continued: in their battles notwithstanding with those
that professed enmity both to the^, and also to god whom they sometime had
truly worshipped, and of whose worship they retained some small remnants, had
very great and happy success, though sometimes their enemies were ten times
as many and as strong as themselves. Yet do not these victories simply
justify the Israelites, or their present religion, but only in respect of
their enemies, which did utterly deny God and his religion. The Lord
notwithstanding their falling in most things, had regard to the remnants of his
worship amongst them, and to his formet covenant, even for his own names sake,
as Ezekiel teaches, chap. 20. In like sort the Spaniards professing the name
of Christ, and having some remnants of Christian religion amongst them, but the
Turks utterly denying and defying Christ, and the very name of all
christianity: no marvel though Christ Jesus in the wars of the Spaniards
against them, do rather fight the battles of the Spaniards, as having respect
unto his name so blasphemed by the Turk. But hereby does not Christ Jesus
simply approve of the Spanish religion, but only in respect of the Turkish.

9 If it be further objected, that the most wicked that are, do sometime
prevail against the godly themselves, as the men of Ai against Israel, etc.
and that they flow also in much, yea almost in all outward prosperity, and
that therefore this argument is not sound and firm enough, to infer that
which I infer thereof, I answer that the Lord indeed gives sometime such
victory unto the wicked against his own people, but it is for some special
sin of his people, as appears by the example before alleged. For Israel
fell before the men of Ai for the sin of Achan, yea the Lord says they could
not stand before their enemies, Josh. 7. 12. because of that sin. Again,
though the Lord sometimes give his people over into the hands of his and their
enemies, yet he does it not in such miraculous manner without the force of the
enemy against them, himself fighting from heaven for the enemy, as he has
done for us against the Spaniards, but always the enemy has prevailed
against the Lord his people, by greater strength of flesh then the Lords people
had against them, and by fighting in their own person. For touching the former
example of Ai, Joshua sent but about 3000. of the Israelites against it, Josh.
7. 4. but it is most like that they were repelled by a far more greater
force. For although they whom Joshua first sent to view Ai, returned and said
it was but a small people, yet it is certain that they were able to make a
greater force then three thousand, because when Israel prevailed against Ai to
the number of twelve thousand, Josh. 8. 26. The same may be said of the other
prosperity of the wicked, they prosper, they flourish, they wax rich, etc.
but it is by ordinary means: sometime also, yea most commonly by unlawful
means, by hook and by crook (as the proverb is:) but our prosperity and
the prosperity of other kingdoms, countries, and cities, etc. professing our
religion, have so prospered and flourished in outward things, above that which
they did whilst they were ouergrowne with popery, that every man may evidently
see, that it is the special blessing of God even for the honor of our
religion, that has made us rich and thus to prosper. Again we have thus
prospered, though the wicked Papists have seen our prosperity, and been
angry; yea though they have practiced against us and gnashed their teeth.
Psalm. 37. 12. and 112. 10.

THE CONCLUSION, WITH the use of the treatise.
1Since therefore that popery is not wrought in men by the word of God, but by
traditions of men: since it is vpheld and maintained chiefly by wicked and
unlawful means: since the proper substance and matter thereof is not only
diverse from the written word of God, but also directly contrary thereunto:
since the form of Gods worship in popery is not that which god has
prescribed, but that which men have devised and forged: since the principal
end of popery whereunto it refers all things, is not the glory of God,
but the glory of Saints, of images, of Pope, and generally of man himself:
since the fruits of popery are such as God has expressly condemned in the
decalogue and ten commandments given to all nations, and for all times even
unto the end of the world: since there is no sound joy and comfort growing upon
the tree of popery, but double fear and desperation: since popery is a
foolish and absurd religion: since popery agreeable, suitable, and well pleasing
to the natural man, which sauoureth not the things which are of God: since the
gifts of God his spirit (promised to the Church in the latter age thereof, are
bestowed upon the church whilst it swarued not from the pure doctrine of the
gospel, delivered by Christ and his Apostles,), were at an ebb and dead low
water when popery was full sea: since God has inflicted from time to time,
manifest and strange judgments and punishments upon Papists, and such
especially as have most maligned our religion and the professors thereof: since
God has not regarded the sacrifices of the Pope and popish church, neither
has made their curses effectual against them whom they have cursed, neither
has given any good success to the^ for whom they have made many prayers, but
have turned his curses into blessings, and his blessings into curses: therefore
I do conclude that popery is not of God, neither acceptable unto God. Again,
since our religion is wrought by the preaching of that word of God, which is
contained in the scriptures: since it stands without all unlawful means to
uphold and maintain it: since the matter thereof is altogether consonant with
the written word: since the form of God his worship therein touching the
essence thereof is the same that god himself has prescribed: since it
refers all things only to the glory of God: since the fruits that it
allows and bears, are such as God has commanded in the decalogue and
moral law: since it always bear the sound and most sweet joy and comfort:
since in wisdom it well beseems the wisdom of God: since it is altogether
unsavory and unpleasant unto the natural man: since from the breaking thereof
through the Sodomiticall and Egyptiacall darkness of popery, it has most
brightly shined in those gifts of God his spirit, which were universally and
almost wholly eclipsed when popery was spread over the face of the earth: since
God has avenged the hatred thereof upon the heads of the Papists that
especially hated it: since God has mightily vpheld, blessed, and prospered such
persons and places, as have most boldly and constantly professed and embraced
it: finally since God has openly pleaded the cause thereof against such as
have oppugned it, miraculously preserving the professors thereof, so oppugned
by their adversaries; and fearfully confounding the adversaries, I do
therefore again conclude in behalf of our religion, that it is of God and
acceptable unto him. The general arguments used by the Papists for defense of
popery, drawn from antiquity, universality, and unity, are now stale, yea
battered in pieces by those that have often substantially and plentifully
confuted them. Therefore I mean not to increase this treatise, and so to make
further work for the reader, by setting down any answer unto them.

THE FIRST USE CONCERning generally all of our religion, both weak and strong.
THese things now written, and whereby I have proved the falsehood of popery,
and likewise showed the truth of our religion, I wish profitable unto all: both
to those that profess themselves of our religion, and also to those that
neither are, nor profess themselves to be. Of those that profess themselves
to be of our religion, some are faint, weak, and wavering: others are strong,
and well grounded, or at the least such as have never doubted our religion to
be of God. The first sort I do now wish to be as the second, that is, by these
things that now I have written, so confirmed and established in the love,
liking, and constant profession of our religion, so keeping (as it were by
force against all force whereby they shall be assaulted) this profession of
their hope, Hebr. 10. 23. without wavering, that hereafter they be never
carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, Hebr. 13. 9. yea both these
sorts of professors of our religion, I wish to be much stronger in this
profession, assuring themselves that so long as this religion abides in them,
so long they themselves shall continue in the son, and in the father, Hebr.
2. 24. and so long as they walk according to this religion, so long they walk
with God as Enoch did, Genesis 5. 22. But forasmuch as our religion is of God and
acceptable unto him, therefore they that fall away from it, do also depart
from the living God, and fall away from the grace of the same God, Hebr. 3. 12.
and 12. 15. and then does there remain no more sacrifice for sins, but a
fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries, Heb. 10. 26, 27. Let no man therefore that has given his name to
our religion deceive himself, neither suffer himself to be deceived by any
other, either Papist or Atheist, or of any other sect or heresy: for surely it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. it
had been better for such never to have known the way of righteousness, then
after they have known it to turn from the holy comma^dements given unto them,
2. Pet. 2. 21. for the end of such men shall be worse then the beginning.

2 Neither would I have this to be understood only of the soundnes and
constancy of judgment in our religion, but also of the continual abounding
in the works of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. 58. and the provoking of our selves more
and more to all love and good works, Heb. 10. 24. such as our religion
commends: the despising whereof is the despising of God his commandments,
and the doing whereof is obedience, not unto man, but unto God himself.
Further I wish this that I have written against popery and for our religion,
may so confirm and strengthen all professors of our religion therein, that if
any of them have wife or other friends yet remaining Papists, they would pray
more often and earnestly, and every other way, by themselves and by other
(perhaps better able then themselves) labor more diligently the conversion of
them, then ever they have done. How do all loving husbands and friends labor
the health of their wives or other friends being but bodily sick, the danger
whereof is nothing but this present death? O then how much more ought such
husbands and friends to labor the recovery of their wives or other friends
out of popery, a most grievous sickness of the soul, the danger whereof is
eternal condemnation both of body and soul? The like may be said touching
those that are sick of any errors or heresies, contrary or not agreeing to
our religion; as likewise of Atheists, and such as are of no religion.

THE SECOND USE CONCERning all great persons of our religion.
AS I wish this good generally to all of our religion, so more especially such
as are in any special place of honor and authority in church or common
weal, and by such special place are able to do some special good for the
aduanceme^t of our religion, and the helping and countenancing the professors
thereof, as also for the weakening and repressing of popery, atheism, and such
like: such, I say, as are in any such special place, I wish, yea (as it were)
upon my knees most humbly beseech, and yet also boldly exhort in the name of
this God, whose religion I have justified unto them, all such (I say again) I
do beseech and exhort to be of all Christian courage and boldness, for speaking
and doing whatsoever lies in them, whereby to promote this religion, and
comfort and countenance the professors thereof. To omit the famous and most
worthy examples of many most zealous kings of Judah, of Ester a Queen by
marriage, yet as touching authority, but (as it were) a lady of honor, of
Iehoida likewise and I^hoshua high priests, of Ezra a scribe or inferior
priest: to omit (I say) these and many other the like examples of zeal, let
them only consider how boldly Joseph an honorable counselor of Arimathea
went unto Pilate (but an heathen deputy of an heathen Emperor) and begged the
body of Christ being dead, that he might honorably bury the same, Mark. 15.
43. If he were so bold for the honoring of Christ, as to go to an heathen
man, how much more boldly ought men to go to Christian Princes, in causes
whereby Christ Jesus and his gospel may have any honor? If he feared nothing,
wherein all likelihoode much was to be feared, what shall be said of them that
fear where there is no fear? If he made no bones to speak for Christ, to one
that had before condemned Christ, why should any stick at speaking likewise
for Christ to such Princes, as have done and do daily speak and do so much
for Christ in his gospel and in his members, that they give great encouragement
to all persons of place fit to have access unto them, without fear to put
them in continual remembrance of further honoring of Christ? If he were so
bold for Christ Jesus being dead, how much bolder ought all men to be for
Christ Jesus raised up from the dead? yea verily he is twice risen again: once
touching his body out of the sepulcher, into which the same Joseph did
honorably lay him: and again touching his gospel out of the grave of popery,
wherein it had lien twice so many hundred years (at the least) as his body
had lien days and nights in the former sepulcher. How zealous therefore ought
men to be for the honoring of the gospel of Christ Jesus with true honor,
wherein Christ Jesus himself thus raised up and glorified cannot but be
likewise honored? As such men ought to be thus zealous, in speaking for Christ
and his gospel at all times, so especially then ought they to be most zealous,
when any special occasion requires the same, or when any special
opportunity is offered thereunto. Solomon says, How good is a word spoken in
due season? Prove. 5. 25. He speaks this by question and admiration, and
thereby teaches, that he himself, the wisest that ever was (Christ only
excepted) could not well express, how good a word was spoken in due season.
Therefore he says again, A word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold,
with pictures of silver, Prove. 25. 11. Such therefore as the Lord has
advanced to such place either in Church or in commonwealth, as wherein at any
time by word or deed, they may further this religion in this book thus
commended, I wish to watch all opportunity of doing further good, and any
being offered, not to neglect the same, but wisely to take and follow it to
the utmost of their power. Where any noble, honorable, or other great person,
sees any convenient time where his word may do good to further religion, and
thereby to advance God his glory, let him think with himself as Mordecaie
spoke unto Ester, Ester 4. 14. who knows whither the Lord has thus advanced
me for this time?

2 Neither let any such person fear the loss of their labor touching
themselves, in speaking in such causes. God whose religion ours is, has said
by his Prophet, 1. Sam. 2. 30. Them that honor me I will honor: and, he is
faithful that has promised, Hebr. 10. 23. This is manifest by many of the
examples before mentioned. The fruit indeed of such labor, does not always
appear presently: yet God is not unrighteous that he should forget the work
and labor of such love toward his name, etc. Hebr. 6. 10. but he takes such
a note thereof, yea of the least word spoken this way, that it shall most
certainly be remembered to such persons themselves or to their posterity even in
this life, and touching the benefits thereof, when all the world shall think
it buried, and even (as it were) wholly consumed to ashes in the grave of
oblivion. It was not much that Iethro the father in law of Moses did, called
also Keni, Judge. 1. 16. and of whom descended the Kenites: it was not much (I
say) that this Iethro or Keni did for the Israelites. For he did but only give
counsel to Moses his son in law for the better government of the
Israelites, Exodus 18. 19. yet note what note the Lord kept of this small
matter. After the death of Moses, after the death of Joshua, and the elders
that ouerliued Joshua, after the death of Othniel, Ehud, Shamgar, Debora,
Gedeon, and the rest of the Judges that judged Israel mentioned in the whole
book of Judges, after the death of Eli and his sons, after the government of
Samuel resigned into the hands of Saul: after all this, even four hundred
years after the former counsel given by Iethro to Moses, did the Lord think
upon this kindness, and recompensed it ten fold to the Kenites the posterity
of Iethro. Yea rather then it should not be recompensed, he raised up Saul to
recompense the same, even unnatural, unthankful, and most cruel Saul, that
had sworn the death of his own son Jonathan, 1. Sam. 14. 44. who had saved
Israel, and would indeed have killed him, had not the people rescued him, that
afterward did daily hunt for the life of David as for a partridge in the
mountains, 1. Sam. 26. 20. (who had notwithstanding killed the great Goliath
whom all Israel durst not look in the face, 1. Sam. 17. 24. and gotten many
other victories of the Philistims, and married Saul his own daughter:) that
also killed all the Lord his priests at once, 1. Sam, 22. 18. even this bloody
man did the Lord raise up to recompense the kindness of Iethro, and to save the
lives of all the Kenites. Yea though this Saul were a man most unmerciful unto
them, to whom he owed much mercy and other love, yet the Lord so wrought his
heart, for the recompencing of that that Iethro had done to Moses and for
Israel, that he was very earnest with the Kenites for the withdrawing
themselves from the Amalakites, that he might not destroy them with the
Amalakites. Therefore he says not only Go, but also depart, yea also he
adds, Get ye down from, among the Amalakites, least I destroy you with them.
And why is he thus merciful unto them? for (says he) ye showed mercy to all
the children of Israel, when they came up from Egypt, 1. Sam. 15. 6. Certainly
this mercy whereof such a stream did flow from Saul toward the Kenites, was
only of the Lord, not of Saul himself. Saul of himself (as we have heard)
was as the stony rock in the wilderness, which notwithstanding the Lord made
to give drink ple^tifully to the Israelites and their cattle, Numb. 20. 8.
Saul of himself had neither the religion nor the manners, to consider greater
things done by those that were of his own blood, for himself and for the
present generation of the Israelites. Shall we then think that he had religion
or manners to remember such old good turns, done so many years before for
the old forefathers of the Israelites? Now what does this example teach us,
but that the Lord is just to remember the like kindness, when all men shall
think it utterly forgotten? yea and to make such to consider the same, as from
whom in respect of their contrary disposition, no such matter can in reason
be hoped for, but rather the contrary feared?

3 But what shall I need to call (as it were) so loud unto antiquity so far
off, for an example whereby to justify the righteousness of God in honoring
them that honor him? Is not Queen Elizabeth yet living (and many years more,
O blessed God, may she live and reign to thy glory) is not, is not this our
most noble, gracious, and Christian Queen, a most lively and bright example of
God his righteousness in this behalf? As her Majesty hoth honored God in
exalting, establishing, and maintaining this religion, in comforting and
countenancing the professors thereof of her own people, and in harboring,
releeuing, and succouring them of other nations: so who sees not but that God
has many ways as much honored her above all her noble auncetours, as she
has excelled them in zeal toward this religion?

THE THIRD USE CONCERning the military Nobles that are of our religion.
AS I do wish zeal daily to grow in all great persons generally, for the
better upholding and further advancing of this religion, so more particularly I
do also wish all David's Worthies, that is, the principal captains and men of
war of Queen Elizabeth, to fight not only the battles of our Queen,
country, and people, and of themselves, their wives and children, etc. but
also of the Lord in defense of our religion against the Spanyard, or any other
champion of the Pope: these I wish, by this that I have written, to be the more
valiant and courageous in this cause of our religion, against such and other
enemies. Why so? because ye fight not for men, but God himself. Excellent is
that speech of Ioab, and worthy to be in every ensign that goes against the
Romish Ammonites and Moabites, etc. even written in great letters, that every
soldier might see a far off, read, and be encouraged thereby, Be strong and
let us be valtant for our people, and for the countries of God, and let the
Lord do that which is good in his eyes, 2. Sam. 10. 13. Excellent also and
worthy in like sort to be written, are the words of Iehaziel the son of
Zechariah, etc. unto Jehoshaphat and all Judah, for the encouragement of them
against the mighty forces of the Ammonites and Moabites that came up against
them, as the Spaniards have come up and do yet daily threaten to come up
against us, Fear ye not, neither be ye afraid for this great multitude, for
the battle is not yours but Gods, 2. Chron. 20. 15. I wish also such Worthies
of our land, by the former experience that we have had of God his mighty
working and fighting for us, to be the better encouraged for the time, wars,
and dangers to come, as we read David to have bin animated against Goliath, by
the former success he had against a lion and a bear. 1. Sam. 17. 35.
Notwithstanding as the cause is not their own but the Lords, so I wish and
exhort them not to seek their own praise and glory, but the praise and
glory of him whose cause they handle, and whose battles they fight. Ioab in
fighting against Rabbah a city of the Ammonites, did more respect the honor
of David then of himself: and therefore though he might have taken it without
David, yet he would not, but sent first for David, that the victory might not
be attributed to himself but unto David. 2. Sam. 12. 28. If Ioab a wicked man,
did so notwithstanding respect the honor of David above his own honor (and
yet David though he were his sovereign was but a mortal man, and but a type
of Christ Jesus) how much more ought our Christian worthies and nobles to
respect the praise, the honor, and the glory of Christ Jesus himself, above
their own praise, honor, and glory? Further besides this regard of Christ
his glory, let them also go forth not trusting in their own forces (for
after this sort go forth the heathen unto their battles) but let them trust
in the power and help of the mighty Lord Christ Jesus. And therefore as it
has been christianly provided by our most christian Prince and the governors
of our church under her, that there should be public prayers in behalf of
such expeditions against the common adversaries, so I wish also our noble
Worthies most highly to esteem of such prayers: yea themselves also before
their going forth, and whilst they shall be forth, always to commend all their
enterprises unto the Lord by most earnest prayer, yea to make also all the
friends they can at home in like manuer to remember them privately, as by
public authority they are remembered publicly. For certainly as hitherto we
are not to doubt, but that our chief success has been more by these means,
then by any strength of our own arm, so also let them assure themselves, that
if they go forth in this sort, then the Lord will not only send his angel
with them, as he offered to do for the Israelites, Exodus 33. 2. but will also
go with them himself as it were in proper person: not only to look on how
they fight for him, but also to teach their hands to fight and their fingers
to battle: yea the Lord will be as a man of war to go before them, in the
mids of them, behind them, and round about them in complete harness, both
to cover their heads in the dai^ of battle, and likewise to fight for them,
and to deliver his own and their enemies into their hands, as he has done.
Now if the Lord be thus with them, who can be against them? But yet one thing
more remains, concerning both such Worthies themselves, and also all common
soldiers, namely that as they have heard and seen by this that has been
written, that all war in behalf of our religion is God his war, and in his
cause: so also they take heed, that whilst they fight one way for our religion
and for God, they fight not an other way against religion and against God
himself. How is this? verily by transgressing, violating, or neglecting the
precepts of this religion, and that way sinning against God. For he that does
so, fights more against religion, and against God, then for religion and for
God. Therefore the Scripture plentifully teaches us, that God has oftentimes
given over his own people for their sins, yea once also his Arc to
captivity of the common enemy: yea his temple where his name was called upon
to be destroyed, and all the holy vessels and other ornaments of the temple,
which sometime had served for his worship, to be polluted and defiled by the
wicked heathen. Let all such Worthies therefore as before I have spoken of, as
likewise all common soldiers, which shall hereafter be employed against the
common enemy, diligently take heed and beware of all sin generally, and
more specially of such sins as are most common in warriors (what these are I
need not to speak) because otherwise, though their cause be good, and
commended likewise in some sort by prayer unto God by themselves and by other,
yet may they fear the success of the battle. This is manifest by the double
overthrow the other Israelites had before the Beniamits in a cause very just,
and commended also to God, and that with weeping the second time: and wherein
at the first they also prevailed having humbled themselves in prayer and
fasting and true repentance before the Lord, Judge. 20. 26. Now the sin of the
Israelites, for which they receiving such a double foil, appears by the text
to have been, first too much confidence of the victory, in regard partly of
the goodness of their cause, partly of their great multitude; and secondly that
although they sought unto god in that behalf, yet they sought not in such
humble and earnest manner as they should have done, and also did at the last,
when they had not only warrant from God to go again to battle, but also a
promise of victory. Now if these sins be so dangerous to a good and just
cause, what may be feared of great sins? Thus much shall suffice to have
spoken concerning them that are of our religion.

THE FOVRTH USE CONCERning Atheists, and all those that are of no religion.
TOuching them that are not of our religion, they are especially either
Atheists and such as are of no religion, or Papists. By Atheists, I mean not
only such as in deed and openly profess themselves to be such, not fearing
plainly to deny God and all religion (of which sort we hauee too many even in
our land) but also such as do bear men in hand that they are of our
religion, but in truth are not. For albeit they will go to Church, and
perform other outward duties that our religion requires, yea and will also
sometime speak and do something for our religion; yet all is but in policy:
they practice only the precepts of cursed Machiuel, and therefore if any change
should come (which the God of heaven keep from us) they are as ready for any
religion as for this. To this sort of Atheists, I do also refer many civil
men that never knew or heard of Machiuel himself, neither of his precepts,
which come also to Church, etc. and live likewise uprightly as touching civil
righteousness and outward equity amongst their neighbors, which will also
sometimes talk of religion both ours and popery, and yet in truth also are of
no religion at all, neither Protestants nor Papists. Moreover hitherto
belongs a great multitude of poor souls in this land, that for want of
instruction are so ignorant, that they know not what religion is, or any point
of religion, and which therefore make no difference betwixt our religion and
popery. All these I wish seriously to consider of my former arguments, and
thereby to provoke themselves to make more account of religion generally, and
secondly of our religion only, then ever they have done. As they have heard
our religion to be of God and acceptable unto him, so let them know, that they
cannot please God in any other way but only in our religion. How miserable
therefore, wretched, and fearful is their estate and condition? Let all such
therefore lament this their misery, heartily thanking God that they understood
it before their end, and whilst it is called to day let them not harden their
hearts, but hear the voice of God yet calling them to his true religion, and
knocking at the door of their consciences to be entertained with his truth. Let
them seek the Lord whilst he may be found, and call upon him whilst he is
near, Esa. 55. 6. least neglecting his grace offered unto them, the Lord
remove his kingdom, and depart himself (as it were) out of their hearing,
and so withdraw his mercies from them, and pour out his judgments upon them,
that they stretch out their hands, and the Lord hide his eyes: they make many
prayers, and the Lord hear not, Esa. 1. 15. they seek and there be none to be
found to help them, Ioh. 7. 34. yea least notwithstanding their seeking they
die for all that in their sins, Ioh. 8. 21. Let such as now laugh at, and
make (as it were) a Maiegame of all religion and the professors thereof, weep
and mourn in time for their such laughing, least the Lord also do laugh them
to scorn in their misery, Psalm. 73. 13. and do mock the^ when their fear
comes, Prove. 1. 26. bringing such heaviness upon them, that they cannot laugh
though they would; yea and in the end casting them into the place of utter
darkness, fear, and horror, where is nothing but weeping and g^ashing of
teeth, Math. 8. 12. that is, in hell fire that never shall be quenched, where
their worm dies not, and their fire never goes out, Mark. 9. 43, 44. Those
also that hitherto have been secure and careless regarding no religion, let
them likewise in time better regard such means, as whereby they may be drawn
to our religion.

THE FIFTH USE CONCERning weak and ignorant Papists.
TO Papists also I say the same, especially to such as are Papists in a kind
of conscience, that is, to such as are not of that religion of any obstinate
and wilful mind, but because in ignorance they are persuaded their religion
to be the right way, and ours to be a wrong or bywaie. I doubt not but that
there are many such in the land. Yea I hope that many Papists are such. This I
do hope of such Papists, as bring not forth those fruits that popery
approoueth of, whereof I have spoken in my sixth argument before, which are also
merciful and ready to do good, not to them only of their own religion, but
also to other. These I hope to be rather ignorant then wilful Papists:
therefore I have also some good hope of their conversion in time, especially if
it might please God to move their hearts, to have regard of the perfect law of
god which conuerteth the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. And truly in the Christian love
that I bear unto these, and in the pity and compassion I have of their
souls (as I see them full of pity and compassion toward the bodies of
other, and likewise to have many other excellent and commendable things in
them) I have the rather set pen to paper for the writing of this treatise, to
try if it might please my good God to bless my labor unto their good, even
to the winning of them to our religion. For I protest unto them (and God
knows I speak the truth of my heart, and lie not neither dissemble) that I
so desire their salvation, that I would be gladder thereof then of all worldly
wealth and good whatsoever. In the mean time me thinks, that howsoever they
be commended for many excellent things indeed not very common, yet all their
commendation is very defective and lame, for want of commendation touching true
religion. Yea certainly when a man has said all that he can in commending such
persons, and then says that these were excellent men, or worthy women, were
it not for one thing, that is, for their religion, this one thing wanting is
more then all they have. For this one thing concerns God, and all the other
for which Papists are commonly commended, concern but men. And our Savior
says, that the great and first or chiefest commandment, is to love the Lord
our God, etc. Math. 22. 38. yea this is so great, that the other without this
concerning men, not being grounded upon this, are not only little, but in truth
touching themselves, nothing at all. For Christ calls this not only the
greater, but also the first commandment. Now where there is no first, there
can be no second. Notwithstanding I hoping this want of true religion in them,
to be (as I said) especially of ignorance, do therefore the better hope of
their more easy conversion, and do the more heartily wish the same, that
there may be no such defect in their commendation as there is, but that it may
be more full and perfect. Such therefore having vouchsafed to read my former
arguments, I do also most heartily desire according to right to judge of them.
Some I have heard to have renounced popery, upon the sight of the great
overthrow of the great Spanish Navy in our narrow seas, anno 1588. by the
mighty power of God in our behalf: as Rahab hearing of the great and mighty
works of God for the Israelites, renounced her own people, and was
incorporated into the body of Israel, Ios. 2. 11. If that one argument before
more largely handled in this treatise, did so greatly prevail to the
conversion of some, how much more ought all the arguments before applied to
this purpose, prevail with other in like sort? Let none therefore so lightly
regard all such things, as whereby our religion is so commended, and popery so
evidently euicted.

2 Let none oppose the religion of their fathers and forefathers, etc. to all
other contrary arguments. Indeed David exhorts Solomon to know the God of
his father, and to serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind,
etc. 1. Chron. 28. 9. and this is an excellent instruction for all fathers to
give unto their children, and likewise for all children to learn of their
fathers, when as the fathers have known and served the same God that David had
known and served, and that according to his word, as David had done: but if so
be the fathers know not, neither serve that God, or not in that manner that God
requires; then it is a foolish and wicked instruction to be urged to the
children by the fathers, or to be obeyed by the children, namely to know and
serve the God of their fathers.

3 For when fathers have rebelled against God, and not walked in his statutes
and ordinances, then the Lord oftentimes complains of the children that have
walked in such steps of their fathers, and therefore also threatens the
greater and heavier judgment against them. In the 78. psalm. v. 57. the Prophet
complains of the wickedness of the Israelites, and amplifieth the same by like
example of their fathers, They turned back (says the Prophet) and dealt
falsely like their fathers, they turned back like a deceitful bow. So Christ
also speaks unto the Jews, as to a people past hope, and therefore bids
them to fulfill also the measure of their fathers, Math. 23. 32. So likewise
Steven amplifieth the sin of the Jews by the like example of their fathers,
Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always resisted the
holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye, etc. Act. 7. 51. Therefore also the
Lord many times admonishes the Israelites and Jews not to walk in the ways,
neither to do the works of their fathers. Harden not your hearts (says one
Prophet) as in the day of contention (or tentation) in the wilderness, where
your fathers tempted me, etc. psalm. 59. 8. By an other Prophet God speaks
thus, I said unto their children in the wilderness, walk ye not in the
ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their manners, neither defile your
selves with their idols, Ezech. 20. 18. So the messengers that Hezekiah sent
forth to inuit the Israelites to the Passover at Jerusalem, bid them not to
be like their fathers, etc. neither stiffnecked like their fathers, etc. 2.
Chron. 30. 7, 8. In like sort speaks Zachariah, Be ye not like your fathers,
etc. Zachar. 1. 4. Many other the like places are in the scriptures, whereby we
see this argument not to be good; This was the religion of our fathers,
therefore it shall be ours.

4 Yea certainly this is the very argument of many obstinate Jews, for the
defense of their idolatry, The word that thou have spoken unto us in the name
of the Lord we will not hear it of thee, but we will do whatsoever thing
goes out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the Queen of heaven, and to
pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, both we and our
forefathers, Ier. 44. 16, 17. Thus answered the wicked Jews, and thus answered
many Papists, saying, they will not hear the word of God, but will pray to
the virgin Marie (who^ they call indeed the Queen of heaven, as has bin
showed before) and to other such heavenly things, for no other reason; but
because they and their fathers have done so. But such Papists as love their
own salvation, I exhort in the Lord, not to be so wedded to the religion of
their fathers. Will any of you say thus, My father was a ttaytour to his
Prince, and was therefore executed, therefore I also will be a traitor to my
Prince, that I may beheaded, drawn, hanged, and quartered, as my father was?
Some it may be, will not stick to say so: but all that are wise, will take
heed of such words and thoughts. Therefore why also will you say, My father
was a Papist, and idolatour, and of that religion that God has condemned, and
so consequently a traitor unto God, therefore also will I be so? will any of
you say, especially such as God has advanced to great honor, or worship, and
wealth in the land, My father or grandfather was a sadler, or butcher, or
grasier, or husbandman, or of some other the like mean trade, therefore also I
will be so? I think none so foolish: why then will ye say the like and ten
times worse in religion? will any of you say, My father, or my mother, or
both, had this or that bodily disease, and died thereof for want of remedy,
therefore also I feeling the like in my self, will not be cured of it though I
may? I think none so mad. Why then will ye say the like, touching such a
grievous spiritual sickness of your souls, as popery is? why will ye die in
your sins, and not be saved, O ye Papists, and many other that are not yet of
our religion?

5 Neither do I say these things, as condemning yours and my forefathers. I
condemn not them, but I condemn their religion. As for themselves I leave
them unto the Lord, as not knowing whither they secretly repented or no of
their popery before their end. If they did not repent, it is far more better
to condemn them, then to condemn the word of God of any untruth, and God
himself of any unrighteousness. Be ye not therefore like the adder that
stops his ears, refusing to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never
so wisely. Be ye not unlike unto the first world, that seeing how miraculously
and contrary to nature, the lions, bears, woolfes, tigers, elephants,
vnicomes, hares, conies, and such like cruel and wild beasts: the swallows
also, kytes, ravens, ostriches, eagles, and many other the like wild and
ravening birds, came willingly and gently without any outward force
compelling them to Noah, to go into the arc with him and with his family,
Genesis chap. 7 verse. 7. would not yet believe, and therefore were drowned in the
waters. Be ye not like the Egyptians, and many also of the Israelites, that
seeing the great works of God against Egypt, and for the land of Zoan, would
not yet believe, and therefore perished; the one in the red sea, the other in
the wilderness. Be ye not like the Jews, that did see the great and mighty
works done by our Savior and his Apostles for commending his gospel, and yet
would not believe, and are therefore scattered upon the face of the earth, out
of their own country unto this day; and that which is worse, are given over
also to hardness of heart, and will not yet believe that the Christ and Messiah
is come.

6 Verily God has commended our religion (as we have before showed) to your
ears, to your eyes, to your understanding, to your inward, to your outward, to
your whole man. Take heed, take heed therefore that ye harden your hearts no
longer. Ye have heard many arguments drawn from the word of God, ye have seen
and do daily see his works against your own religion and for ours: O
therefore stop not your ears, shut not your eyes. Yea, ye your selves, (O ye
that will be called Catholics) have fared and do fare the better for our
religion in England. Ye your selves are partakers of the benefits, whereby the
Lord has graced it and does grace it: ye live in much peace for our religions
sake, ye enjoy your honors and dignities by our religion: yea, ye keep and
increase your livings the better for our religion. For though some of you
perhaps will say, that ye pay two hundred and forty pound a year for your
religion, yet if ye were thoroughly examined, and would truly answer, ye could
not deny, but that under pretense of this payment, ye save twice so much an
other way. For this is certain, that none do purchase more lands, build
goodlier houses, and hoard up more money, then some of them that pay the
foresaid sum yearly. Think not that it should be better with you if the
Spanyard might here prevail: ye are wise enough to see how vain such thoughts
are, by his dealing in other places, where he has won the goal. Do ye also
hope of some better estate, if popery were again here revived without the
Spanyard? perhaps ye should be deceived, partly by the old greedines of the
Pope, the rather being now like an hungerstarued curre, that for his long want
of the crummes, bones, yea and good gobbets of meat that were wont to fall from
the tables of England to his share, would now be insatiable: partly and
especially by some other judgments of God that would follow popery. Since
therefore ye enjoy such benefits by us and our religion, as Laban fared the
better for Jacob, Genesis 30, 30. and Potiphar for Joseph, Genesis 39. 5. be not so
unrighteous, as any longer to condemn that which God does justify. Be not so
unthankful, as any longer to refuse his great mercy, in calling you by such
commendations of our religion to the embracing thereof. Now I say unto you as
Paul says unto Timothy, 2. Tim. 2. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things. Yea such understanding, as that I and all
other that desire your salvation may rejoice, that the angels in heaven may
rejoice, and especially that your selves may rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious.

THE SIXTH USE CONCERNING obstinate and wilful Papists.
TOuching those that be obstinate, whither they be Papists or Atheists,
professed or not professed, but rather according to Machiuel his counsel (too
much now esteemed and followed) making a show for the present time toward our
religion: to such, I say, as will not be reclaimed and called back from their
popery or profanenes, I give this counsel, that although they will not join
hands with us in the true embracing and profession of our religion, yet they
take heed always, that they neither speak nor do any thing against our
religion, or the professors thereof. This counsel I give them in regard of
themselves, because certainly the Lord will not forget the least opposition unto
his name, or injury unto his serua^^s. Though many times he let the^ run
their race a while, so as they think all is forgotten, yet (as I have said
before of recompensing any kindness in word or deed showed to his people) at
the last, though it seem to belong, certainly the Lord even in this life will
meet with them or theirs, for their sin against his name, and wrong against
any of his servants. In the 8. of Amos, v. 7. the Prophet tells them that had
devoured and swallowed the poor, by their extreme dealing with them in
selling their corn at an unreasonable price unto them (as too too many do in
this time of dearth amongst us) that the Lord had sworn by the excellency of
Jaacob (that is, even by himself) that he would never forget that cruelty.
Observe, good reader, orrather let such observe as of whom I speak, that he
says not, that the Lord had said only he would not forget, but that the Lord
had sworn it by himself, teaching thereby, that except they did speedily
repent, the Lord would most certainly punish that their great sin, because
every word of God is certain, much more that word the which he confirms by an
oath. If the Lord did threaten and swear the punishment of hard dealing with
the common sort of the people, that for the most part are as poor in heavenly
things, as in earthly, that is, whose wickedness is as great as their poverty,
can any man hope of immunitie and to go free, that speaks or does any thing
directly or indirectly against that religion which he sees to be acceptable
unto God, or against those persons that profess the same, both which are as
dear unto God as the apple of his eye.

2 Neither let this be understood only of religion and the professors thereof
generally, but also more particularly of every branch of religion, of every
good cause, and of every one dealing in such causes. The example of God his
judgments upon diverse malicious Papists before mentioned, do testify the
same. So also do many examples in the scriptures. Though the sins generally
of Ahab and Iezebel his wife were many, yet the Lord threatened ruin unto them
both and to all their posterity, chiefly for their sin against righteous
Naboth, 1. King. 21. 20. the which was so fully executed by Iehu according to
the word of the Lord, that they paid most dearly for Naboth his vineyard, 2.
King. 9. 27, 33. and 10. 6. Though Ioash king of Judah committed many sins
after the death of good Iehoiada the high priest, yet his putting to death of
the Prophet Zechariah the son of the same Iehoiada, is only mentioned as the
chief cause why his own servants conspired against him and murdered him, 2.
Chron. 24. 25. Though Haman had not fully effected his bloody purpose against
Mordecai and the other Jews, yet we know that the same measure by the
righteous judgment of God was measured unto him, that he had only intended to
have measured unto Mordecai, Est. 7. 10.

3 Here especially let us remember how God dealt with the Amalekites, only for
withstanding the Israelites as they came out of the land of Egypt, Exodus 17. 8.
First although the Lord did discomfort them before the Israelites at the prayer
of Moses, when they first came out against Israel, yet did not the Lord
satisfy himself with their overthrow of that day, but presently he spoke
further against them unto Moses, verse. 14. saying, Write for a remembrance in
the book, and rehearse it to Joshua, for I will utterly put out the
remembrance of Amalek from under heaven* and again, v. 16. The Lord has sworn,
that he will have war with Amalek from generation to generation. Afterward
also the Lord opened the mouth of Balaam (whom Balak sent for to curse Israel)
the Lord, I say, opened his mouth with a curse of destruction against the
Amalekites. Nomb. 24. 20. Yea but perhaps these were but words. Words indeed
they were, but yet afterward when that generation of the Amalekites which then
lived, and four other at the least were dead and rotten, those words were
fulfilled. For as long after this, as before we heard that God remembered the
kindness of the Kenites for their good, the same God also remembered that sin
of the Amalekites to their overthrow. For he sends Samuel with this mandate
and commission to Saul against Amalek, 1. Sam. 15. 2. I remember what Amalek
did to Israel, how they laid wait for them in the way, as they came up from
Egypt: now therefore go and smite Amalek, and destroy all that pertains unto
them, and have no compassion on them, but stay both man and woman, both infant
and suckling, both ox and sheep, both camel and ass. This was four hundred
years after the former sin committed. A man therefore would have thought,
that God had not now any more thought upon it, for all his former note of
remembrance. But the Lord remembereth when men forget, and think also all to
be forgotten. Yea the Lord did so remember this sin, and does so remember
other the like sins, as that if he forbear the punishment for a time, yet at
the last he comes in also for arrearages. For in the former commission given
to Saul, we see with what severity the Lord will have Saul to proceed against
the Amalekites. Yea afterward in the same chapter, when Saul had been too
remiss in the execution of that commission, the Lord raised up Samuel to do
or see that to be done against Agag the king of Amalek, that Saul had neglected.

4 If therefore there shall be any such Papists or Atheists, as by no means
will be reclaimed and drawn to our religion, in this treatise commended and
proved to be of God and acceptable unto him, yet at the least let them take
heed and beware of speaking the least word, and doing the least deed against
it, or against any that love and maintain the same, for loving and maintaining
thereof. Let them not flatter themselves. God is the same now that ever he was.
And the more himself has spoken or done for commendation and justifying this
religion, the more that others raised up and also directed by him, have spoken,
written, or done in the same behalf, the greater shall be the judgment in the
end of all such, as shall not regard the same.

5 Now the success of all that I have written in this cause, I commit to him
that is only able to give a blessing thereunto. The Lord therefore make us all
that do already profess this religion, thankful unto him, for that he has
in his abundant mercy vouchsafed us the glorious light, the rich benefit, and
the sweet comfort thereof. The Lord confirm and strengthen us to continue
therein unto the end. The Lord enrich us more and more daily, with the faith,
knowledge, love, and fear of God, with the righteousness, mercy, and all other
virtues touching God or men, that it commends. The Lord fill the hearts of
all great persons with more zeal to speak and do more for the advancing it,
especially any special opportunity being offered. The Lord thereunto
animate, encourage, and enable all his own Worthies, to defend it against all
adversaries thereunto, with all honorable success. The Lord preserve,
advance, and honor them, that have advanced and honored it. Especially, O
Lord, preserve, advance, and honor thy servant our dread Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth: yea, O Lord, as thou have set her higher then all other in her
kingdoms, so still magnify thy mercy toward this Church and other Churches
(which as it were suck of her breasts that never gave suck) in making her
elder then any of her own people, especially then any of thine and he^
adversaries. The Lord open both the eyes of such as have not regarded our
religion, to see the glory of it, and also their hearts to embrace it. Finally
touching such as be incurable, the Lord restrain them from doing that to the
hindrance thereof, which Satan by them endeavors, and in the end do with
them and to them that which shall be right in his own eyes.

Amen.
AN ADDITION OF CERTAIN DAINties of Popery, collected partly out of their
popish service books, and partly out of the writings of some princi pall
Doctors of special account in the popish church, when popery it self was at
the highest.
Having in my former general treatise against popery, and in defense of our
religion, charged popery to be a religion maintained and vpheld by unlawful
means, and whereof both matter and form are contrary to that religion which
the Scriptures commend to be acceptable unto God; yea to be a religion
maintaining open blasphemies against God and Christ Jesus, and wherein there is
scarce any worship of God at all. Having also charged it to be a religion
wherein nothing is done to God his glory, but all things almost referred to
the glory of the Pope, of Saints, of the wooden, stony, golden, or painted
cross, etc. of relics of saints, of men, etc. Having affirmed it to be a
religion that teaches no obedience to the ten commandments of almighty God,
but that allows disobedience unto every one of them, and that therefore it is
a religion altogether licentious, loose, and full of carnal liberty. Having
showed it to be a religion without all found joy and comfort: having blamed it
as a ridiculous and foolish religion, nothing sauouring the excellent wisdom
of God: having likewise added, that it is plausible and well liking to the
natural and unregenerate man, and therefore altogether disliking and
unpleasant unto God: and finally having objected to the chief times of
popery, great blindness and ignorance, as touching the sound and true knowledge
of God, so also touching other good learning in the learned tongues, and in all
learned arts; and having in the said treatise firmly, though but briefly,
proved all these things (that so I might not therein be ouertedious to the
reader) sithence the finishing of the former work, I have thought good to make
this addition following, for the more evident and plentiful demonstration of
all those things before mentioned. Such therefore as desire to see all things
before touched and objected to popery more largely opened and proved, such (I
say) I call to this addition, wherein they shall see the words of the popish
Church it self, more amply to justify all my former words: yea they shall
here see not only their own words, bu^ also their own syllables, their own
letters, their own points. For as nigh as I could (and yet in some things I
may slip, because I found it an harder matter to set down their false manner
of writing, then if all things had been truly penned by them) as nigh, I say,
as I could, I have written all things in this addition (abbreuiations only
excepted) in the very same sort that I find them written in their own books.
Let not therefore the Christian and learned teader be here offended, either
with the rudenes of the latin it self, or with the false manner of writing
thereof, without observation of any rules of orthographie. For as sentences are
written here without any true points, as I have set down the words themselves,
without dipthongs, without great letters for the most part at the beginning of
sentences, and especially of proper names one letter also sometimes for an
other, as K for C, Y for I, and such like, and aduerbs that should be accented
without any accents, as (I say) these things are set down by me; so did I
find them, and so shall the reader find them in ancient books out of which I
have taken them. And thus I have the rather done, that thereby their ignorance,
their blindness, and rudenes, even in the latin tongue (whereof notwithstanding
they made most profession) might the more evidently appear even to the
children, that have learned any rules of grammar. Touching the matter it self
of these things here added, it is either so blasphemous, that it will make any
christian heart to tremble at the reading or hearing thereof; or so foolish and
ridiculous, that any man of reason, will think it more fit for a stage, then
for the Church, the place of God his worship, and to make sport withal, rather
then to have the name of religion. In this addition, for the most part I have
set down the latin it self, that so all men may the less suspect my
faithfulness in reporting their words. Notwithstanding sometime, when there
is no special thing in the latin, either for phrase, or for manner of writing,
worthy the noting, and especially when the latin is very long, I have for
breuities sake, either altogether omitted the latin, or only set down the
beginning thereof, sometimes also noting some special words in the margent. Now
although this addition may at the first seem somewhat large, yet to the reader
it need not be very painful, for that one half is in a manner the whole:
because if the reader be learned, understanding the latin tongue, then he may
read the latin only, omitting the english. If the reader know no other tongue
then the english, then the reading only of the english will be sufficient. Now
to come to the things themselves, which here I purpose to add, I will first
begin with their popish service books, and proceed from them to the
writings of some of their chief Doctors, and finally conclude this whole
addition with some of the miracles of the virgin Marie. Now because their
service books are full of many blasphemies, as wherein they give so many of
God his peculiar attributes unto the Saints, especially to the virgin Mar^e,
and to the cross, yea to the bare sign of the cross, that in truth, they
leave nothing to God himself: I will only select the principal of them
wherein are the highest blasphemies, and omit the other, as being of more
labor to be written, then of use to be read. These that follow are such, that
it may be many did never think so foolish and abominable stuff had been in
their books, until they did see their own words.

2 Therefore, out of a book, entitled (in some impressions) horae beat
virginis Marie ad legitimum sarisburiensis ecclesie ritum, etc. I have gathered
these things following: These prayers following ought to be said, ere ye depart
out of your chamber at your vprising. The Apostle teaches to pray with
understanding, but of these prayers following, as the language was unknown to
the common people, so the sentences of them do not agree one with an other.
leaf 7. first side. Auxiliatrix sis mihi irinitas sancta^ deus in nomine tuo,
leuabo manu^ meas. Crux triumphalis passionis domini nostri Ies^ Christ^. Jesus
Nazarenus rex^ Iudeor^^m: filt dei miserere mei, In nomine patris and filij and
spiritus sancti. Amen. per signum sancte crucix X, libera nos deus salutaris
noster: that is in english. Help me O holy trinity. O God in thy name will I
lift up my hands. The triumphant These sentences agree like light and darkness.
Note that here and many other places, they say not by the cross it self, but
by the sign of the cross.
cross of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus of Nazareth the king of
the Jews: O son of God have mercy on me. In the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. Amen. By the sign of the holy cross, deliver us O
God of our salvation. Again in the same leaf: When thou go first out of
thy house bliss thee, saying thus, Crux triumphatnis domini nostri Jesus
Christ, ecce viuifiee crucis dominicum sanctum, fugite parts adverse. The
triumphant cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Behold the Lords sign of the
quickening cross. Avoid ye that are my adversaries. When thou take holy
water say thus. Aqua benedicta, sit mihi salus and vita: presta mihi domine per
hanc creaturam aspersionis aque, sanitatem mentis, integritatem corporis,
tutelam salutis, securitatem spei, corroborationem fidei, nunc and in futuro,
Pater noster. Aue Maria. This blessed water be unto me health and life, work
in me O Lord, What warrant have they thus to pray.
by this creature of sprinkling of water, sou^dnes of mind, hailenes of body,
preservation of health, security of hope, strength of faith now and for the
time to come. Our father Hayle marie. leaf 8. B.

3 In the 16. leaf B. there is a goodly picture of an old man with a long
beard, and a flashing woodknife hanging by his side, wantonly kissing a woman:
the mystery whereof passes my capacity, but underneath are written these
english verses, or rather rith me dogg^el.

How Marie the mother and virgin
Visited Elizabeth wife of Zaehary Four sweet and artificial verses.

Which said blessed be thou cousin.
And blessed be the fruit of thy body.
4 In the 20. lease B. is a blasphemous picture of the trinity, having three
faces in one head and within one body. This picture is in many other places,
both of that book and also of many other. This shall be sufficient to have
spoken thereof once for all. In the leaves following follow a multitude of
idolatrous and blasphemous prayers, some to Saints, named in the Scripture,
some to other. I know not what, neither I think do they well know what they
were. These prayers I will here omit, partly that I may not be too tedious,
partly because I have touched the sum of some of them in my treatise before
named. Notwithstanding I will here express some of the most special prayers,
and many of the titles set over the prayers in english, for the commendation of
the latin prayers following such titles. To omit many titles wherein are
pardons of sin granted only for many days to all that shall devoutly say
the prayers annexed to such titles, I will especially set down such titles as
have the largest pardons, or wherein besides the pardon is some especial folly
worthy the observation.

5 ^o the 55 leaf B(...) this title, This prayer was shewea to S. Barnard, by
the messenger of As gold is better then all other metals, so prayers to the
virgin Marie are better then prayers to God. To the saying of the like prayer
is promised, that he shall not die without penance and ministration of the holy
sacraments. fol. 51. A. of the same book.
Gog (this word perhaps should be God, yet in truth Gog were fitter) saying,
that as gold is the most precious of all other metal, so exceeds this
prayer all other prayers: and who that devoutly says it, shall have a singular
reward of our blessed Lady and her sweet son Jesus. ^hen follows the
prayer it self to the virgin Marie, wherein are those epithits which I have
noted in my former treatise. Ancil^^ Trinitatis, gloriosissima regina
patriarcbarum, magistra euangelistarum, veracissima, and such like.

6 In the 59. leaf B. according to some impressions, but according to some
other in the 50. leaf there is this title. These be Let the Papists try the
truth of the first promise here made, and likewise of the last, by the
conversion of 15. of their next kindred, and the strengthening of other 15.
already righteous.
the 15. ^^os, the which the holy virgin saint Brigit^a was wont to say daily
before the holy roode in S^ Paul's church at Rome, who so say this a whole
year, he shall deliver 15. souls out of Purg^torie of his next kindred, and
convert other 15. sinners to good life, and other 15 righteous me^ of his kind
shall persevere in good life. And whit^ye desire of God ye shall have it, if
(...) be to the salvation of your soul. After that great title follow the
15.00s themselves, as O Domine Jesus. etc.

7 In the 62. leaf B. according to some other impressions 54. leaf B.
follows this title over a prayer to Christ himself. To all them that before
this image of pity devoutly say 5. pater noster, and 5. aue and a credo,
piteously The Papists in prayer must look ^oure as the hypocrites, Math. 6. 16.
beholdi^g these arms of Christ's passion, are granted 32755. reares of
pardon. And Sixtus the 4. pope of Rome has made the 4. and the 5. prayer, and
has doubled his foresaid pardon.

8 In the 65. leaf A. is this title following over an epistle of the cross,
the which epistle also I have annexed, excepting only the sign of the cross
so often made therein with read incke as the word cross is used. The title
follows. This epistle of our savior A beggarly pardon for the Popes
magnificence to send to an Emperor.
sends our holy Father pope Leo to the Emperor Carolo magno, of the which we
find written, who that hears this blessing upon hi^, and says it once a
day shall obtain xl. years of pardon and lxxx. len^ige, and he shall not
perish with soden death. The epistle it self as they call it: Crux christ's sit
mecum. crux est quam semper adoro. crux christi est verasalus. crux christ^
super at omne^ gladium. crux christi solvit vincula mortis. crux christi
invincibilis per arma. crux christi immobile signum. crux christi sit michi via
virtutum and virtus. per crucem diuinam aggrediar iter. crux christi pandit
omne bonum. crux christi fugat omne malum. crux christi abstulit penam eternam.
crux christ's salua me, sisque super me ante me and post me, quia antiquus
hostis fugit vbicunque te viderit. O altitudo crucis, quam nu^quam altitudo
tetigit and profunditas quam nunquam profunditas vallauit, and latitudo,
quamnu^quam latitudo comprehendit, libera me simulum tuum ab omnibus diabolicis
artibus, and pessimis cogitationibus, quae in me manent. Tu diabole fuge ame vt
nesciam te, and sicut tues abscissus a celo, sic te abscidat spiritus sanctus a
me, (...) sicut tu es alienus ab omnifelicitate, sic tu sis alienu^ a me: and
sicut nunquam desideras deum, sic nunquam desideres ad me venire. Fuge diabole
a me famule dei per signum sancto crucis. ecce crucem domini fugite parts
adverse, vicit leo de tribu Judah, radix, David, alleluia^ and benedicti^ dei
patris omnipotentis and spiritus sancti. Cru^ Christi descendat super me and
mecum maneat semper. Amen. pater noster, aue Maria.

The same in english.

The cross of Christ be with me. It is the cross which I do always
worship. The cross of Christ is true salvation. The cross of Christ over
comes every sword. The cross of Christ loses the bonds of death. The
cross of Christ cannot be over come by any armor. The cross of Christ is an
immooueable sign. The cross of Christ to me the way of virtues and virtue it
self. By the divine cross I will take my journey upon me. The cross of
Christ lays open every good thing. The cross of Christ chaseth away every
evil thing. The cross of Christ has taken away eternal punishment. The
cross of Christ save me and be upon me^ before me and behind me, because the
old enemy flees wheresoever he sees thee, O height of the cross, which
never height touched. and O depth, which never depth undermined. and O breadth
which never breadth did contain, deliver me thy servant from all the sleights
of the devil, and from the evil things which remain in me. Avoid thou devil
from me, that I may not know thee. And as thou art cut off from heaven, so the
holy Ghost cut thee off me: and as thou art far from all felicity, so be
far from me And as thou never desire God, so never desire to come to me.
Avoid devil from me the servant of God, by the sign of the holy cross.
Behold the lion of the tribe of Judah, and the root of David has gotten the
victory. Praise the Lord. And the blessing of God the father almighty, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. The cross of Christ descend upon me and
abide with me for ever. Amen. Our Father. Hail Marie.

9 To this epistle let me add a prayer to the cross, out of the hours of the
virgin Mari^, according to the custom of the church of York, in the 165.
leaf, in manner and form following. Signum sancte crucis defendat ^e a mortis
preteritis, presentibus and futuris, interioribus and exterioribus. Signum
sancte crucis a persecutione diaboli and omnium inimicorum meorum liberet me.
hoc signaculo persternantur omnes aduersarij mei and fugiant. per hoc signum
sancte crucis a periculis mundi liberet me dominus* that is, The sign of the
holy cross defend me from evils past, present, and to come, inward and
outward* the O forgetful S. Paul which entreating of christian armor, did
never think upon the sign of the cross.
sign of the holy cross deliver me from persequution of the devil and all
mine enemies. By this little sign let all mine adversaries be laid prostrate
and put to flight. By this sign of the holy cross, the Lord save me from the
perils of the world.

10 In the former hours of the virgin according to the use of Salisburie, in
the 69. leaf B. there is this title over the head of a prayer to God. This
prayer was showed to S. Augustine by revelation of the holy Ghost, and Make
much of this prayer, for it is something worth, if all be true that is promised
in the title.
who that devoutly say this prayer, or hyre red, or bears about them, shall
not perish in fire or water, neither in battle nor judgment, and he shall not
die of sodden death, and no venym shall poison him that day: and what he asks
of God hi^ shall obtain, if it be to the salvation of his soul: and when thy
soul shall depare from thy body, it shall not enter to hell.

11 In the same book the 71. leaf A^ there is this title over a prayer to
Christ. This prayer made the worshipful S^Beda of the 7. last words which our
saeu^our Jesus Christ spoke hanging on the cross, who that says it kneeling
devoutly neither the devil, nor wicked men shall not hurt him, and he shall
not die without confession.

12 In the next leaf A. there is this title and prayer following. These 5.
petitions and prayers made saint Gregory, and has granted to all them that
devoutly say these 5. prayers with 5. pater noster, 5. aue Maria, and acredo in
deum, 500. years of pardon. oration.

Aue manus dextra Christi
perforataplaga tristi
nos ad dextram iube sisti
quos per crucem redemisti: pater noster,
Aue Maria.
Aue plaga Jesu leua,
sic confixa manu s^ua,
nos ab eo malo leu^,
quos perduxit matter Eua. pater noster.
Aue Maria.
Aue latus lanceaium,
vnde fluxit flumen gratum
prebe nobis conducatum
ad eterne vite statum. pater noster. Au^
Maria.
Aue vulnus dextri pedis
cellam mentis pietedis
Dum adeum sepe redis
esto nobis spes mercedis. pater noster. A.
^e Maria.
Aueplaga, leave plant
qua virtutum crescunt plant
nos ab host supplantante
contuere post and ante. pater noster.
In all this rithme they do nothing but salute the right and left hand, as
also the right and left foot of Christ pierced with nails, and likewise his
side thrust through with a spear. They do only (I say) salute these members
of Christ thus wounded for us, with an All hail. Then which what can be more
ridiculous? For not to speak how childish a thing it is, to speak any thing
unto these members of Christ his material body, thus severally considered,
and that without any the like examples of the Apostles, even when they did see
Christ bodily present after his resurrection, both whilst he was conversant and
also when he ascended up into the heavens before them; it is also a very toye
to bid all hail, either unto them, or unto any other thing in the heaven.
For what is the meaning of All hail? truly either it is a phrase of wishing
well unto that whereunto it is spoken, or it exhorts to rejoice and be*
merry. In which therefore of the significations shall it be applied to those
members of Christ, or to any other thing already advanced unto heaven?

13. In the same leaf B. there is this title following over a prayer to all
the members of Christ. This prayer shall ye say in the worship of all the
members of Christ devoutly, and ye shall have 300. days of pardon for every
salve. Then follows the prayer it self in latin. But because I find it
somewhat enlarged in a new manuell service book pretended to be reformed by
the authority of the late council of Trent, and published by the commandment
of Pope Pius the fifth, anno dom. 1580. I will therefore here set it down in
that ample manner in which there I find it. The inscription of the prayer in
that book page 318. the volume being in 16o is this. Salutationes ad omnia
membra Christi, and suiipsius adeum commendatio. that is. The salutation of all
the members of Christ and the commendation of himself unto him, The prayer it
self in latin. Salve tremendum cunctis potestatibus caput Domini Jesus Christi
saluatoris nostri, pro nobis spinis coronatum and arundine percussum. Salve
speciocissima saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi facies pro nobis sputis and alapis
caesa. Saluete benignissimi Jesus Christi saluatoris nostri oculi pro nobis
lacrymis perfusi. Salve mellifluum os gutturque suauissimum Domini nostri Jesus
Christipro nobis fell and aceto potatum. saluete aures nobilissime Domine Jesus
Christi saluatoris nostri pro nobis contumeliis and opprobrijs affectae. salve
collum humile Jesus Christi pro nobis colophizatum, dorsumque sanctissimum
pronobis flagellatum. Saluete venerabiles Domini nostri Jesus Christi manus and
brachia pro nobis in cruce extensa. salve pectus mitissimum domini nostri Jesus
Christi saluateris nostri pro nobis in passione conturbatum. salve latus
gloriosum Domini nostri Jesus Christi pro nobis lancea perforatum. Saluete
Domini Jesus Christi saluatoris nostri, sacra misericordia genua pro nobis in
orationibus flexa saluete Domini Jesus Christi saluatoris nostri pedes adorandi
pro nobis clauis affixi. salve totum corpus Jesus Christ^ pro nobis in cruce
suspensum v^lneratum, mortuum and sepultum* salve sanguis preciocissime de
Corpore Domini Jesus Christi saluatoris nostri pro nobis effuse* salve
sanctissima Domini nostri Jesus Christi anima in cruce pro nobis in manus patris
commendata. In eadem commendatione tibi commendo hodie ac quotidie animam meam,
cor and corpus meum, omnes sensus and actus meos, omnes amicos, benefactores,
filios and consanguineos meos, animas parentum, fratrum, sororum, and omnium
amicorum ac inimicorum meorum, vt nos protegere liberare and defendere digneris
ab omnibus insid^is inimicorum nostrorum, visibilium and inuisibilium nunc and
in perpetuum. Amen. The same in English.

Good morrow, O head of the Lord Jesus Salve. is a word of salutation used
especially in the mornings, and therefore I have translated it Good morrow,
rather then otherwise.
Christ our Savior, which art to be feared of all powers, having been crowned
with thorns for us and smitten with a reed. Good morrow most beautiful face
of our Lord Jesus Christ, spit upon and beaten for our sakes. Good morrow most
benign eyes of the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, washed with tears for us.
Good morrow honey sweet mouth and most pleasant throat of our Lord Jesus
Christ, filled with gall and vinegar for us. Good morrow most noble ears of
the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, contumeliously and opprobriously handled for
us. Good morrow most humble neck of Jesus Christ buffeted for us, and most
holy back scourged for us. good morrow venerable hands and arms of our Lord
Jesus Christ, stretched out upon the cross for us. good morrow most gentle
breast of the L. No salutation of the belly of our Savior often pinched with
hunger for us, Math^. 2. and 20. 18.
Jesus Christ our Savior, greatly disquieted for us in thy passion* good
morrow glorious side of our Lord Jesus Christ, thrust through with a spear of
a soldiour for us. good morrow sacred knees of mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ
our Savior, bowed in prayers for us. good morrow, O feet to be worshipped of
the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior pierced Nothing is here for the thighs and
legs of Christ, though often by walking wearied for us.
through with nails for us. good morrow O whole body of Christ hanged on the
cross, wounded, dead, and buried for us. good morrow most precious blood shed
for us out of the body of the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior. good morrow most
holy soul of our Lord Jesus Christ commended upon This whole salutation is but
a plain mockery of Christ, there being no warrant thereof, or of the like in
all the Scriptures.
the cross into the hands of the father for us. In the same commendation I
commend unto thee to day and every day, my soul, my life, my heart and
body, all my senses and actions, all my friends, benefactours, children and
kinsfolk, the souls of my parents, brethren, sisters, and of all my friends
and foes, that thou would vouchsafe to protect, deliver, and defend us from
all snares of our enemies, visible, and invisible, now and for ever. Amen. This
salutation of the members of Christ, I have the rather taken out of their
service book lately reformed, that no man might think it to be of those
follies whereof some of the Papists themselves begin to be ashamed.

14 In the very next prayer in the same book made to the virgin Marie, they
give her the same titles which before in the treatise I have collected out of
their more ancient books. For they call her matrem orphanorum, the mother of
orphans: consolationem desolatorum, the consolation of the desolate: viam
errantium, the way of them that straie: salutem omnium in se sperantium, the
health of all that trust in her: fontem misericordiae, fontem salutis and
gratiae, etc. the fountain of mercy, health, and grace, and so forth as
before we have heard. In the same book, page 327. they commend unto her faith
and custody, and into the bosom of her mercy, to day, every day, and in the
hour of death themselves, their souls and bodies, yea omnem spem and
consolationem, omnes angustias and miserias, vitam and finem vitae: all their
hope and consolation, all their afflictions and miseries, their life and the
end of their life, etc. Since therefore they commend all these things into the
hands of the virgin, what do they leave to be commended into the hands of God?
In the very next prayer in the same book, besides other blasphemies, they
pray unto her to be their comforter, and thereunto they add these words, and
apud eundem tuum and dei natum v^ ^igenitum in die novissimo, quando cum omnia
and corpore sum resurrecturus, and de singulis meis factis rationem redditurus,
me digneris iuvare, vt perpetue damnationis sententiam per te pia matter and
virgo valeam euadere, and cum electis ^ei omnibus adeterna gaudia feliciter
peruenire: that is, that with the same thy son and the only son of God,
thou will vouchsafe so to help me, that when I shall rise again with soul and
body, and give account of every thing that I have done, by thee O godly mother
and virgin, I may avoid the sentence of eternal damnation, and with all the
elect of God happily come to everlasting joys. These things have I taken out
of their new and best reformed service books, that no Papist should make any
simple man believe that although their old books of service had some such
blasphemies, yet their new books were altogether purged of the^. For by these
few things, it is evident, that albeit they have ministered some physic to
their old service, yet has it not so wrought, but that it has left the
grossest humor unmoved, so that the substance of the chiefest impieties do
yet remain.

15 Now to return a little to the former old book according to the custom of
Salisburie, in a prayer to the virgin leaf 51. B. in some books, in some leaf
42. A. they call the virgin dominam gloriae, reginam letitie, fontem piesatis,
venam misericordiae, sanctitatis libertatem, iocunditatis amenitatem,
splendorem celi, dulcedinem paradisi, domiuum angelorum, sanctorum letitiam,
virginum gemmam, felicem and beatam dominam. that is: The Lady of glory, the
queen of joy, the fountain of piety, the vain of mercy, the freedom of
holiness, the pleasure of sport, the brightness of heaven, the sweetness of
paradise, the lady of angels, the rejoicing of saints, the pearl of virgins,
the happy and blessed lady. Then they commend unto her, totum corpus and
animam, totam vitam, quinque sensus corporis, omnia facta and mortem: that is,
the whole body and soul, their whole life, the five senses of their body,
all their works and their death: then they add, cum sis benedicta in eternum
and vltra: that is, forasmuch as thou art blessed The Papists have a time
longer ^h^ exernitie.
for ever and beyond.

16 In the 73. leaf A. of the same book, there is a pardon of ten hundred
thousand years for deadly sins, granted by the holy father John 22. pope of
Rome, to all them that shall devoutly say three prayers to Christ there
following, which were found written in the chapel of the holy cross in Rome,
otherwise called sacellum sancto crucis septem Romanorum.

17 In the 75. leaf there is this title to a prayer unto Christ. Who that
devoutly beholds The Papists obtain pardons not only by prayer but also by
bare looking.
this arms of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall obtain six thousand years of
pardon of our holy father S. Peter first pope of Rome, and 30. other popes of
the church of Rome successors after. And our holy father pope John 22. has O
that this pope John had still lived: for he was of good nature and full of
pardons.
granted to all then very contrite and truly confessed that say these devout
prayers following in the commendation of the bitter passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 3000 years of pardon for deadly sins, and other 3000. for venial
sins, and say first a pater noster and Aue Maria.

18 In the 78. and 79. leaf there is a long luxurius title of a prayer, wherein
to every one that shall say the prayer to Jesus devoutly, with a contrite
heart daily, is made this promise: Note that by popery, one in the state of
damnation, and therefore altogether without faith, may merit God his favor for
his discharge.
that if he that says that prayer be in the state of eternal damnation, his
eternal pain shall be changed him in temp^rall pain of purgatory, or if he
has deserved the pain of purgatory, it shall be forgotten and forgiven through
the infinite mercy of God.

19 In the 125. leaf of some books, of some other the 123. leaf, there are
these words over certain verses of the psalms. When S. Barnard was in his
prayers, the devil It seems to be no small honor for S. Barnard to be the
devil his scholar: yet Barnardus non vi(...) omnia.
said unto him, I know that there be certain verses in the sawter, who that
say them daily shall not perish, and he shall have knowledge of the day that he
shall die, but the fend would not shevve them to S. Barnard* then said S.
Barnard, I shall say daily the whole sawter. The fend considering that S.
Barnard should do so much profit to labor so, he showed him these verses.
Then follow these verses, entitled, versus sancti Beruardi. By these prayers
and pardons annexed unto them, such liberty is granted, as that popery
seems to commend nothing but prayer. For what good soever a man omitteth, or
evil soever he commits, pardon (ye see) may be obtained for the same, by
saying devoutly their prescribed prayers. It is likewise to be observed, that
if a man may have so large a pardon of all his sins (as before we have heard)
for saying some one prayer, then for saying all the prayers, what lets but
that he may have all the pardons before mentioned? And then also what
follows? forsooth either that Christ shall not need to come unto judgment; or
that he shall not come till all that time for which all those pardons are
granted be expired; or that purgatory shall continue after his coming.
Otherwise what needed pardons for so many hundred, so many thousands, yea so
many millions of years?

THE SECOND PART.
1 IN an other popish service book, like unto the former, called Portiforium
se^ Breuiarium ad vsum ecclesie Sarisburiens^s, castigatum, suppletum,
marginalibus quotationibus This book was printed at Paris, anno 1555.
adornatum: that is, A Portus or breuiarie, for the use of the Church of
Salisburie corrected, supplied, and adorned with marginall quorations, etc. In
this book I say to omit the like blasphemous prayers to the virgin Marie as
before have been noted. I find these special things following, not mentioned
in the former. For the translation of Saint Martin, there are these things read
for the second and third lesson.

Lectio secunda.

Anno sexagessimo quarto post transitum beati Martini, beatus Perpetuus
predicte sedis episcopus: corpus beati Martini, transfer disposuit,
conuocatisque vicinis Abbatibus and clericis, and cum hoc in kalendis ^ulij
agere vellent, vigilata prius vna nocte, per totam diem laborantes, nihil
proficiebant. Tunc quida^ ex clericis ait. Scitis quod post tridu^, natalis
episcopatus eius est: and forte in hac die nos transferr^se admonet.

Lectio tertia.

Quarta autem die accedentes non valebant mouere sepulchrum. Pauore autem omnes
exterriti vasculum terra cooperire cogit abant. Tunc apparuit eis veneranda
canitie senex, dicens se abbatem: and ait quid turbamini and tardatis? Nonne
videtis beatum Martinum astante^ vobis iuvare paratum: simanus apponatis, and
iactans pallium posuit manum cum alijs ad sarcophagim. Quod pratinus cum summa
leuitate commotum: in locum quo nunc honoratur tu^^ hymnis domino annuente
perducitur. Post haec requiritur senex, nec exite visus est, nec ibi inuenitur.

The second lesson.

In the 64. year after the death of blessed Martin, blessed Perpetuus bishop
of the sea A tale of Saint Martin read in the Church for a lesson.
aforesaid (that is, of Toures in France) determined to translate the body of
blessed Martin. And having called together the neighbor abbots and learned
men, when they would have done it the first day of July, having first watched
a whole night, they did also labor a whole day and did no good. Then one of
the learned men said, Ye know that after three days, is the birthday of his
bishopric, and peradventure on that day he admonishes us to translate him.

The third lesson.

But when they came the fourth day, they could not remove the sepulcher. Now
being stricken with fear, they thought to coue^ the vessel with earth. Then
appeared unto them an old man with a reverence, hoar headed, that called
himself an abbot: and he he said, Why are ye troubled, and why prolong ye the
time? do ye not see blessed Martin standing by you ready to help, if ye put
to your hands? And throwing away his clock he put to his hand with other unto
the sepulcher; the which presently with very great case being removed, was by
the favor of God, brought to the place, where now it is honored with hymns.
After this they sought for the old man: but neither was he seen to go forth,
neither did they find him there.

2 In the translation of Thomas Becket, many blasphemous prayers, and some
other Many blasphemous prayers in the translation of Thomas Becket.
things are in the same book mentioned. First of all thus they pray unto God,
Deus qui nobis translationem beati Thome martyris tui atque pontificis
celebrare concedis: te supplic^^ exoramus, vt eius meritis and precibus a
vitijs ad virtutes, and a carcere transferamur adregnum: that is, O God which
grauntest us to celebrate the translation of blessed Thomas thy This Thomas (as
our Chronicles testify) was put to death for treason, yet see how they honor
him.
martyr and bishop, we humbly beseech thee that by his merits and prayers, we
may be translated from vice to virtue, and from prison to a kingdom. After
that they say, apparuit ei dominus and dixit, Thoma, Thoma glorificabitur in
sanguine tuo ecclesia mea: that is, the Lord appeared unto him, and said,
Thomas, Thomas, my church shall be glorified in thy blood. In the sixth lesson
for his translation, they S. Thomas (...) miracles.
speak of many miracles that he did, namely that he restored sight to the
blind, hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, and life to the dead. Then
they pray again, Jesus Christ per Thome vulnera quae no^ ligant relaxa
scelera, etc. Jesus Christ by the wounds of Thomas loose the sins which do
bind us. Then they say in further commendation of him, Felix locus, felix
ecclesia in qua Thome viget memoria: felix terra que dedit presulem: felix illa
que fouet exulem. Happy is the place, happy is the church wherein remains
any memory of Thomas: happy is that land which gave him for a bishop, and
that likewise entertained him a banished man. Again, Thome cedunt and parent
omnia: pestes, morbi, mors, and demonia, ignes, aer, tellus and maria. Thomas
mundum All things obe^ Thomas and he fills the world with glory.
repleuit gloria: Thome mundus prestat obsequia. All things give place and
obedience unto Thomas: pestilences, sicknesses, death and the devils. The
fire, the air, the earth and the seas. Thomas has filled the world with
glory. The world yields humble service unto Thomas. Then follow the eight
and nine lessons for the said Thomas B^ckets day; the sum of which lessons is
this. A certain man desirous to visit his shrine, for prayers sake, meeting
with a carre upon Kainford (...). Thomas sa^eth a man from drowning.
bridge by London, was thrown into the water. He remembered therefore Thomas,
and prayed unto him, that he might not be drowned. Now although he suncke five
times to the bottom, and still came up again, yet he did earnestly protest,
that he felt no grief either in his mouth, or in his nostrills, but that only
in his falling, he took a little salt water He also added, that when he began
to be drowned, a certain bishop supported him, that he could not be drowned.
Then they note that the translation of Thomas was co^summated ann. 1220. in the
nones of July, about three of the clock, but whether in the morning or evening
they tell us not, in the 40. year after his suffering. After they say, Aqua
Thome quinquie^ varians calorem (that perhaps should be colorem) in lac s^mel
trans^^t and quater in cruorem. The water of Thomas five times changing the
heat (or rather S. Thomas his water turned into milk and blood.
the color) was turned once into milk, and four times into blood. Then they
add. Ad Thome memoriam quater lux descendit, and in sancti gloriam, cereos
accendit. For the remembrance of Thomas light descended four times, and
lighted the wax candles unto the glory of the saint. Then they pray. Tu pro
Thome sanguine, quem prote impendit, fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas
ascendit. For the blood of Thomas which for thee he did spend, cause some of
us, O Christ to clime thither, where Thomas did ascend. And after that to
Thomas himself they pray thus: Opem nobis O Thoma porrige, rege stantes,
iacentes erige, mores, actus and vitam c^rrige, and in pacis nos viam dirige.
Reach forth thy help, O Thomas unto us, gouernevs standing, raise us up lying,
correct our manners, our works, our life, and direct us into the way of peace.
Afterward they salute Thomas, thus: Salve Thoma virga iustitie, mundi iubar,
robur ecclesiae, plebis amor, cleri delitie, salve gregis tutor ecclesiae:
salve tue ga^dentes glory. Good morrow Thomas the rod of justice, the
sunne-beame of the world, the strength of the Church, the love of the common
people, the delight of the clergy. Good morrow O governor of the flock thy
Church: save them that rejoice in thy glory. Besides many foolish and
ridiculous things in these words that I have noted concerning the foresaid
Thomas, who sees not also many horrible and outrageous blasphemies, in that
that many things proper only to God and his Son Christ Jesus, are
attributed unto him whereby he is made even equal with God and with Christ
Jesus. In the feast of relikes, first reading these words, Matthew. 5. at that
tim^ Jesus seeing the multitude, went up into a mountain, and when he was set
his disciples came unto him. Then they make this gloss upon them: Mons in quo
sedit dominus mystice significat, maiora precepta iustitiae, quia minora erant
queiudeis data sunt, etc. Mystice etiam sessio domini incarnatio eius est, etc.
that is, the mountain in which the Lord did sit, does mystically signify the
great precept of justice, because they were the less which were given unto the
Jews. The sitting also of the Lord is mystically his incarnation. Is not this
clerkly done?

3 In the fifth and sixth lessons of S. Margarets day there is this history in
effect. S. Margaret being in close prison for the christian faith, prayed unto
God that cum inimico latente facie ad faciem haberet conflictum, that is, she
A notable fight of S. Margaret.
might fight face to face with the secret enemy. Arising therefore from
prayers she saw a terrible dragon, ready to swallow her up with his jaws:
but by making the sign of the cross, he brake in the mids. After she saw
an other devil sitting like a black man, and having his hands bound to his
knees: but she took him by the hair and laid him all along upon the earth,
and set her right foot upon the crown of his head. Then she prayed, and
suddenly light shined from heaven in the prison: and the cross of Christ was
seen even to heaven, and a dove sitting upon it, say, Blessed art thou, O
Margaret, the gates of paradise do look for thee. Then giving thanks to God,
she said to the devil, enarra mihi naturam tuam. Tell me thy nature. The
devil said, Take away thy foot from the crown of my head that I may tell
thee. This being done, the devil said, I am as one of them whom Solomon
shut up in a brazen Solomon a coniurer. Devils may be locked up in vessels.
vessel: and when the Babylonians came, they thought that it had been full of
gold and brake it open, and by this means we flew out, and ever sithence we
have laid snares for the just. After these and many other things the virgin
said unto him, Avoid O tempter Satan. Then the earth opened her mouth and
received him.

4 In the seventh and eight lesson next An other tale of the said Margaret.
following is added this history of the said virgin Margaret. The governor
Olymbrius having grievously tormented her, commanded her to be bound hand and
foot, and put into a great vessel of water. The virgin prayed that that water
might be made a fountain of baptism unto eternal life. Then was a great
earthquake, and a do^e came from heaven, and set a crown of gold upon her
head. By this sight, five thousand men were converted, besides women and
children, all which by the commandment of Olymbrius were beheaded: and he
seeing her constancy commanded her in like manner to be put to death. Being
brought forth therefore to the place of execution, she desired the hangman to
give her leave to pray. This granted, and her prayer made, that every one
that should write her sufferings, or read it, or hear it, or make mention of
it, might merit pardon of This makes well for me that write this history, so
also for all them that shall read it, etc.
his sins, etc. This prayer (I say) made to this effect, and more largely,
there were great thunders, and a dove came from heaven, saying, Blessed art
thou, O spouse of Christ Margaret; behold Christ has granted all thy
petitions, come therefore into the rest of thy heavenly country. Then she
lifting up her self, badde the hangman execute his masters commandment. But
he said, God forbid that I should kill thee. She answered, if thou do it
not, thou can have no part with me. Then he trembling, cut off her head, and
falling at the feet of the virgin, he gave up the ghost.

5 Many other like fabulous things are reported in the same book of other the
like saints: as of Saint Osmond, Saint Kenelme the King of the seven sleepers,
of whom they The 7. sleepers.
read likewise for a lesson in the church, that they fleeing persequution, and
laying them down in a cave to sleep, continued there sleeping 362. years.
Likewise of Saint Oswald the king: of Saint Laurence: Saint Dionis. and his
fellows: Saint Edward the king: of Saint Wenefred the virgin: of these, I say,
and many other the like saints, many fabulous things are there reported, which
I might here have added: but having been long already in these service
books, I dare not presume further upon he patience of the reader. For this
cause also I forbear further addition of many most foul and blasphemous
prayers in the feast of the exaltation of the cross, the rather also because I
have noted the like before.

6 Now it may be, some will here object against these things thus gathered out
of their service books, that albeit it be most true indeed that sometimes
there have been such prayers and such pardons annexed unto them, yet now the
church of Rome has utterly disclaimed and revoked them, and likewise reformed
such books as now especially they use. To this I answer first, that if there
be any such reuocation and reformation of the foresaid ridiculous toys and
horrible blasphemies, because they were ridiculous and blasphemous, then
thereby it is granted, that the time has been when the Church of Rome was a
foolish and blasphemous Church, and their religion likewise foolish and
blasphemous. For otherwise, what needed they to have revoked such things or to
have made any reformation of them? Secondly, I demand where this reuocation and
reformation is. They will perhaps wonder at this demand, since I my self have
before named their late book entitled, officium beatae Mariae virginis nuper
reformatum, and pij quinti pontificis maximi iuss^^ editum, that is, the
service of blessed Marie the virgin lately reformed, and by the commandment of
Pius the fifth high priest published. They will perhaps refer me to this book
it self, as pretended to be reformed; and especially to the preface thereunto
prefixed by the said pepe Pius, wherein is a kind of reuocation of some former
services of the virgin.

7 Touching the book it self, I do only repeat my answer before made,
namely that this book is but only said and pretended to be reformed, and not
reformed in truth at the least of the substantial points most to be regarded.
This is manifest by such ridiculous and blasphemous prayers, as I have before
noted out of the same book, still remaining therein. Therefore in setting this
title before the book, The service of the Virgin lately reformed; they do but
as many a false taylour does with the garment which he has marred in making:
and as some careless cooks with the meat which they serve unto their masters
table, not thoroughly roasted or boiled. As the taylour being blamed for the
fault of the garment, promises to mende it, and taking it home with him,
brings it again facing out the owner that he has mended it, when he never
did any thing more unto it then at the first, at least to any purpose: and as
the cook being rebuked for his negligence, oftentimes notwithstanding sends
in the meat the second time as better roasted or boiled, when either he never
did put it again on the spit or into the pot, or if he did that yet it had
never a turn more nor any more seething: even so the church of Rome being
justly blamed for the gross and foul blottes of their former service books,
have taken it again into their shop or kitchen, but yet returned it unto us,
or rather unto their mistress and lady, only giving this word reformatum,
reformed, that is, facing us or rather their mistress and lady, omnia esse
been, that is, that all things are well, when in truth the chief and most
principal absurdities and blasphemies do yet remain.

8 Concerning the preface unto the former book so pretended to be reformed, I
grant that therein seems to be a kind of reuocation or disanulling of some
former service The ancient popish service books before mentioned, are not now
disanulled or revoked by the church of Rome.
books, but not of such service books, as out of which I have gathered the
things before set down. For in the same preface, after the reuocation and
disanulling of their former service books which it does revoke and disanull,
follows a very large exception of three branches: the first, is of books
printed in the latin tongue: the second of books whose institution was
expressly approved and allowed by the Apostolic see: the third of books
that had been in use for two hundred years before. The reuocation therefore
and inhibition is only of books published in the vulgar tongue, whose first
institution was not allowed by the apostolic sea, and which had not been used
above two hundred years.

9 Now the books out of which I have gathered the former stuff, are not
within the compass of the said inhibition, but do still remain in force by
the former exceptions. For although the titles and pardons prefixed to the
prayers in them contained be in the english tongue, yet the prayers themselves
and the other subject matter of the said book is all in latin. Again their
first institution was allowed by the Apostolic see: otherwise they would never
have had such public use and sufferance, especially in Cathedral churches as
they had. Lastly although some few prayers (as one in king Henry, and an other
the pardon whereof was granted at the instance of Queen Elizabeth wife to
king Henry the seventh, and a few more perhaps (although I say some such
prayers of late edition, are here and there inserted, yet as touching the
principal substance of the books, that they have been in use, far above
two hundred years, it may evidently appear to them that will compare the
diverse books of diverse impressions together. Wherefore as I have heard that
some great men in their last will and testament, have sometime made a gift unto
their wife of all their household stuff, all their plate, all their golden
chains and bracelets, all their rings and jewels whatsoever, and yet afterward
have excepted so many of the former things, and given them to their other
friends, that their former gift to to their wife, has not come to any great
value, notwithstanding all the former great words: even so, although the
foresaid pope Pius the filt, see me at the first to make a large Inhibition,
yet the exceptions following make the former inhibition in a manner nothing
worth: because there were scarce any former service books, which might not
challenge their former use and allowance, by some of those exceptions. Now
further although in the same new book above mentioned, Pius quintus do also
admonish all constantly to believe, that in some former books not within chose
former exceptions comp^ised, many feigned prayers are interlaced, sub falsis
and confictis sanctorum nominibus, under false and counterfaited names of
saints, and that there is no certain authority of the church for indulgences
and pardons of sins granted unto them that say many of those prayers so
interlaced; although (I say) this admonition be given by that holy father, yet
this makes not against those prayers and titles by me before expressed. For
many of them are made to God or Christ Jesus himself o^ to the virgin Marie;
and the other (at least for the most part) to such saints, as whose names are
not counterfaited, but most certainly known to be such saints as the Romish
church has always worshipped. This therefore shall suffice to have noted out
of their books of common service.

THE THIRD PART.
NOw I come to note something likewise out of some of the principal popish
Doctors. Here I will do as the merchant does in selling his wines unto the
vintener. For as he gives not a taste of every vessel, but only assuring the
vintener the rest to be like unto those whereof he gives a taste; so likewise
will not I give the reader a taste of every popish vessel (for that were
infinite to me to write, and to him to read) but only I will deliver him a taste
of some few, that thereby he may see what all the rest are, being of the same
vintage, or at the least of the grape of the same country. But what? do I
compare popish books to vessels of wine, which is in price with all men, and
which is said to delight God and man? Judge. 9. 13. nay rather I may compare
them to vessels of filthy and fustie vinegar, whereby many have been and are
deceived, as the which they have bought in stead of most wholesome and
delectable wine. As therefore a faithful friend that would have his friend to
take heed of being so deceived, does not give him a taste of every such vinegar
caske, but only of some and those of the best, assuring him that such or worse
are all the rest: so likewise will I give the reader a taste of the doctrine and
writings of the greatest and most famous popish writers, whereby he may know
the other to be like or worse. Here first I will begin with the works of one
Bernardine de Bust^: and that all men may know that this man was no obscure
person, but of high account for an exceeding profound clarke, and his work
likewise in as great reckoning in the popish Church, before I go down into
the cellar it self to give a taste of the liquour in the vessels therein, I
think it not amiss to point the reader unto that, which for the drawing of
customers to buie the ware it self, is written as it were upon the do^e.

2 This writing is double. The inscription, or title written (as it seems by
the author himself,) and the approbation, allowance, and commendation thereof
by other. The first written with great letters, that all that pass by may read
the same, as it were running (as the Prophet speaks in an other matter) is
this. Mariale eximij viri Barnardini de Busti, ordinis seraphici francisci, de
singulis festiuitatibus, beat virginis per modum sermonum tractans, omni
theologia copiosum, denique vtriusque iuris authoritatibus, applicatum, and
art humanitatis effectum in omnibus allegationibus promptissimum. that is in
english. The Mariall of the renowned man Bernardine This work setmet^ to have
bin pu^lished anno dom. 1480. as appears by the date of the Apostolic
writing of Po^e(...)tu^ ^he 4. forth allowance o^ the ser^ice o^ the virgin
therein contained. see the 49. lease (...).
of Busti, of the Seraphicall order of Francis, entreating by way of sermons,
of all the feasts of the blessed Virgin, flowing with all divinity, and
finally with the application of authorities of both laws, replenished also
with the skill of humanity, and most ready in all allegations. In this title
the word Mariall signifies only a work made in commendation of the virgin
Marie, as it is manifest by the whole book following For although the whole
book being in a large quarto, and printed with a small letter contain 407.
leaves, which is above a hundred sheets of paper, yet through the whole book
is God skarse named, except only for the further magnifying of Marie. The word
Seraphicall, is taken for Seraphim, which signifies burning or shining,
attributed in the script^res to angels, to signify their excellency. Yea the
Papists making nine degrees of angels (as we shall afterward he are) do make
the Seraphims the highest degree of all. Therefore this tittle here attributed
to this Bernardine, does signify that he was not only such a doctor as they
accounted angels, but also such an one as they esteemed angelical and
excellent in the highest degree. All the rest of the words in this inscription,
put us in great hope of most profound learning of all sorts in the work it
self.

3 Thus much for the inscription. The approbation of the work by other is set
down in the end of the table, thus: Quia secundum constitutiones, etc. for
^on^it the whole latin, as being too long. The english the^of is this: Because
according to the constitutions of the Order of Minority friars, especially of
obseruants, no new work ought to be printed, except it be first diligently
examined and allowed by some learned and approved brother, specially thereunto
appointed by the general prelate of the same Order. Therefore the most reverend
father friar Angel of Clanasi beyond the mountains, by his l^tters has
deputed the venerable father friar Dominike de Ponzon of the same order an
apostolic preacher, to see and diligently to examine the work under written:
who having diligently read the same, has not only allowed it, but also
exhorted the author thereof to cause it to be printed, writing unto him these
verses underwritten, Bernardine ideo Bustina, a gente vetusta,
te tulit omnipotens veneranda ad septaminorum, etc.


The rest of the verses for brevity I omit. The sum of all is, to encourage
him to publish the learned work, and to assure him of everlasting praise
thereby throughout the world. After these verses follow other of the same
author to encourage all men to the reading of the book. By these things we see
in what acount both the man and the work is with the popish church.

4 In the work it self there are first of all nine sermons for the immaculate
conception of the virgin Marie, that is, to prove her conception without
sin. All these are so impious and blasphemous, that I cannot tell what
special thing almost to note, except I should set down the whole sermons. The
chief matter it self of these sermons being so injurious unto Christ Jesus,
and so contrary to all the scriptures, which with full consent condemn all
flesh of sin (Christ himself only excepted) how can the sermons themselves
be free from impiety? Notwithstanding even of these first nine sermons I will
give the reader a taste, that thereby he may discern the great divinity, and
other learning, both of the foresaid author, and also of the popish church
which so allowed of them. In the first therefore, the partition thereof being
learnedly made into three parts: 1^. oppositionis, 2^. responsionis, 3a.
confirmationis, in the beginning of the second leaf; afterward in handling the
third of those parts in the 7 leaf, at the letter L. he lays this ground,
that bonus fil^us tenetur diligere matrem, a good son is bound to love his
mother, and eam ab omnibus periculis and damnis secundum suampossibilitatem
liberare, and to deliver her from all perils and dangers according to his
power; then he sets up this piece of building upon the foundation,
Concludendum est, quod ipse cui omnia futura erant presentia, a cunctis malis
and damnis peccati originalis eam voluerit prescruare, vt boni silij debitum
adimpleret, etc. that is, it is to be concluded that he to whom all things are
present, would preserve her from all evils and dangers of original sin,
that he might perform the duty of a good son. Is not this learnedly
concluded? Nay what boie sees not how doltish and blockish an argument he
makes? For first of all, Christ was not the son of the virgin Marie till he
was conceived and borne of her: therefore neither was he bound to perform any
duty unto her till that time. Secondly Christ was not the son of the virgin,
as he was God, but as he was a man, and the mediator betwixt God and man. As
he had no father according to the flesh, so he had no mother according to the
Godhead. Again by the same argument he might have concluded, that Christ
should also have preferred her to the uttermost of his power in earthly things:
for this is also the duty of children as well as to keep their parents from
evils. Lastly so also he might have proved the virgins mother and other
friends to be conceived without sin. For children are not only bound to
their next parents, but also to their forefathers, and other kindred to keep
them from all evils, and to help them touching all good things what lies in
them to do, and so in the end it would follow that no flesh is conceived in
sin. For by progression we should come at length to the first parents not of
the virgin only, but also of all mankind, etc.

5 The second sermon being made of these words, psalm. 87. 1. fundamenta eius
in montibus sanctis, her foundations are in the holy mountains, and this
scripture spoken of the Church generally being applied unto, and chosen to
speak particularly of the virgin Marie: this second sermon (I say) is divided
into the very same three parts that we have heard of the former.
Notwithstanding to show his learning and rhetoric, he calls these three
parts by other names: Prima (says he) dicetur argumentationis. 2.
satisfactionis. Note his rheto^icall copia verborum. (...)
3. probationis. The english of these parts, as likewise of other such words of
art afterward, I leave to the learned reader. In the second of those parts,
thus he writes in the 9 leaf at the letter P. Licet propter peccatum
originale, clausa sit ianua regni celestis, tamen no^ seq^^tur necessario, quod
quicunque absque peccato original^ moriebatur an^e passionem Christi, deb^^et
illam nitare, quod sibi esset aperienda. N^m Hieremias and Iohannis Baptistam
vtero matris sanctifi^a^^, mortui sunt sine peecato originali, and non
intrauerunt tamen ianuam r^gni celestis. that is, Although by original sin
the gate of the kingdom of heaven be shut, yet it does not follow, that
whosoever did die before the passion of Christ without original sin did
enter therein; because it was to be opened unto him. For leremie and Jeremy
and John the Baptist borne without original sum.
John the Baptist being sanctified in the womb of their mother, died without
original sin, and did not enter into the gate of the kingdom of heaven.

6 The third sermon is upon a text out of the Macchabees. This sermon he also
divides as the former: but still he she weth his eloquence, as though he had a
well of words in his head. For thus he sets them down: The young scholar
may do well to note the great variety of Synonima in this doctor. Here for
brevity I have omitted certain authorities quoted out of their popish
distinctio^s.
1. dicetur contrarietatis 2. veritatis. 3. stabilitatis. In the third part of
this sermon thus he writes, Cum papa sit Christi vicarius, etc. and gerat
vicem dei in terris ex quo sequitur quod habet plenitudinem potestatis, etc.
and illud quod facit presumitur facere authoritate dei, etc. ideo ipso
approbante aliquid and nos approbare debemus. Immo ipsitis sententiamagis est
sta^dum quam sententie totius mundi. that is in english: Since the pope is the
vicar of Christ, and Gods vice gerent upon earth, from whence it follows that
he has absolute authority, and that which he does is to be presumed that he
does by authority of God; therefore that which he allows we ought to allow,
yea we are to stand more to his sentence then to the sentence of all the world,
etc. Then upon those premises he concludes the approbation of his service,
made for the immaculate conception of the virgin, etc. whereof I will also give
the reader a taste after that I have delivered him the taste of these nine
sermons.

7 The fourth sermon has the three parts of the former sermons, but set down
with new words (it a inexhausta erat huius doctoris eloquentia) thus: 1.
dicitur impugnationis. 2. defensionis. 3. corroborationis. In the first of
these he makes this objection against the immaculate conception of the
virgin. Omnis homo qui per concubitum viri and mulieris natus est, est in
peccatis conceptus. Every man that is borne by the copulation of a man and a
woman is conceived in sin. This he proves as by the testimony of Augustine
in the first place, so also in the second place, by the testimony of our
Savior Christ, Math. 7. every good tree brings forth good fruit, but an
evil tree brings forth evil fruit. Then he adds, that forasmuch as the
parents of the virgin were evil, therefore it must needs follow that she was
conceived in sin. How does he answer the former argument in the second part
of the sermon, which he calls defensionis? Alas poor signie, he is so
troubled with it that he cannot tell what in the world with reason to say to
it. For first he says that God that gave that law, that all that were borne of
sinful parents should be conceived in sin, might change that law about
some particular person; and this he proves by the testimonies of certain
former schoolmen: then he adds that the former testimony of Augustine
applied to confirmation of the former argument, is to be understood with this
caution, nulla special^ gratia interueniente, cui oppositum fuit in casu
nostro: that is, no special grace coming between, whereof the contrary is in
our case. But this contrary he only affirms without any proof at all, yea
without any one word more. Then he adds an other answer to the testimony of
Augustine, as fearing the former not to be sufficient. vel dicere possumus quod
Augustinus loquitur, de his qui concipiuntur interueniente concupiscentia
parentum, quali modo non fuit concepta matter dei: that is, or else we may say
that Augustine speaks of those which are conceived with the concupiscence of
their parents, in which manner the mother of God was not conceived. How also
does he prove this? forsooth he refers us to the second part of the work,
and the first sermon thereof, and third part of the first sermon. And what have
we there? verily nothing but a long tale out of the Legend of the virgin Marie,
to this effect. That her parents loachim and Anna having lived for the space of
xx. years without issue, did at the last vow that if God A pretty tale of the
manner of the virgins conception.
would give them issue, it should be the Lords. Afterward according to their
yearly manner, coming to the feast of the dedication of the temple, Ioachim
offered his offering. But the priest rejected it, and rebuked him for presuming
to come to the altar, being (...) man under the curse of the law, for want of
issue. Ioachim being put to this shame, returned not home but went a side to
his shepherds, where having stayed a while, the angel of the Lord appeared
unto him and comforted him, telling him that the former reproach was not well
objected against him, because God was a revenger of sin, not of nature: and
that when the womb of any is shut, God does it that he might open it the more
miraculously, and that that which is so borne, might be known to be divine
muneris, non libidinis, of God his gift, no^ of lust; this that angel proves
by the examples of Sara, Rahel, and mothers of Sampson and Samuel. In fine the
angel tells him that his wife should have a daughter, which should be called
Marie, and that she should be sanctified from the womb, and that according to
their vow she should be the Lords, not living abroad with other men and
women, but keeping always in the temple, and that she should also bring forth
a son which should be called Jesus, and which should be salvation to his
people, etc. This is the sum of that matter whereunto he does refer us. Now
what proof is this of that whereunto it is applied? First of all, this is
taken but our of the Legend of lies: and if it had been (...) truth, would not
the Scripture as well have mentioned the same, as it does matters of far
less importance? Again though it should be granted for a truth, yet it
makes no more for the conception of the virgin, without lust of her parents,
and without original sin, then for the like conception of Isaac, of all the
children of Rahel, of Sampson, and of Samuel. And by the same argument might
all those be proved to have bin conceived without original sin, as well as
the virgin Marie. Lastly if this tale were truth, then either the parents of
the vi^gin Marie brake their vow, or the virgin her self did not like of it,
or both. For the scripture teaches no such thing, yea it teaches the
contrary, namely that Marie lived not in the temple continually at Jerusalem,
according to the former word of the angel, and vow of her parents, but at
Nazareth in Galile, many miles distant from Jerusalem, Again if there had
been any such vow of the parents of the virgin, or any such revelation of the
angel, would the virgin have betroathed her self unto an husband? or could
she so do without actual sin. And if the angel had before told her
parents, that she should be conceived by the holy Ghost, and bring forth a
son, whom she should call Jesus, would she have so wondered at the second
declaration thereof by the angel Gabriel to her self as she did? Luke 1. 3.
would she have said, how shall this be seeing I know not a man? Thus much for
the learning of the great doctor in his fourth sermon of the immaculate
conception of the virgin.

8 For his fifth sermon, he seems to take four texts: 1. certain words of
Anselmus, Candor est lucis eterne, etc. 2. certain words Four texts for one
sermon.
of Ambrose, quid nobilius dei matre, etc. 3. certain words of
Ecclesiasticus, chap. 44. pulchritudinem candoris eius admirabitur oculus. 4.
certain words of Solomon (but I cannot tell where) Candor est, etc. then
proceeds to the parts of his sermon, saying, Super quibus verbatres
considerationes faciemus. primadicitur ostensionis. 2. testificationis. 3.
appellabitur figurationis. Are not these parts (O ye learned readers) learnedly
set down? and may not the learn dest of you all, learn some what by this old
learning? yea but mark as great learning also in the handling of every one of
these parts. For he tells us touching the first part, that the conception of
the virgin without sin, may be proved by 14. arguments. O wonderful; had
not a just dosen been sufficient, especially with one odd argument to have
bound up the rest together? But what are these 14. arguments? they are thus set
down. 1. dicetur appellationis. 2. equationis. 3. concessionis. 4.
filiationis. 5. salutationis. 6. verificationis. 7. verisimulationis. 8.
approbationis. 9. presumptionis. 10. nobililationis. 11. subiectionis. 12.
parturitionis. 13. liberationis. 14. superationis. Suitable also to these
terms of arguments, is the matter it self. For to omit other things, thus he
expounds and handles the seventh argument. Sexta (says he) dicitur
verificationis. vt enim verificentur, verba que dicuntur, in missa beat
virginis and habentur proverb. 8. necesse est dicere illam sine originali
peccato conceptam. Ibi enim dicitur in eius persona. Dominus possidet me in
initio viarum suarum. quod non esset verum, si in conceptione sua fuisset beata
^irgo a diabolo per peccatum possessa. Nihil enim potest per duos dominos sub
perfecto domino possideri. that is, The sixth reason is said to be of verifying.
For that the words may be verified, which are said in the mass of the virgin,
and are also in the 8. of the Proverbs, we must of necessity say, that she
was conceived without original sin. For there it is said in her person, The
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, which were not true, if the
blessed virgin had been possessed of a devil through sin in her conception.
For nothing can be kept in perfect government by two lords. Who sees not how
foolishly and blasphemously he applies that to the virgin Marie which is
spoken of wisdom? Might he not have eased himself of much labor about the
immaculate conception of the virgin, and by the same argument have as well
proved her not to have been conceived at all, but to have been eternal? it
cannot be denied. For in that place Solomon speaks of the eternity of
wisdom, by wisdom also understanding Christ Jesus himself, the wisdom of
his father. Yea this Bernardine himself also does so understand wisdom, in
his sixth sermon de anunciatione Marie, leaf 189. the first side and 35. line.
The like learning the same seraphicall clarke shows in the third part of that
sermon, where he proves the immaculate conception of the virgin by 12.
figures. The first whereof he makes the first woman in the first creation,
Genesis 3. inimicitias ponam inter te and mulierem and semen tuum and semen illius
and ipsa conteret caput tuum. I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed, she shall bruise thy head, etc. Where
(according to their manner) most falsely and impiously that which is spoken of
Christ, they apply to the woman, saying she shall bruise, for he shall
bruise. The third sign they make the ark of Noah. The fourth the arc of the
old testament, Exodus 25. the fifth certain words out of the 24. of
Ecclesiasticus, (Vbi (says he) in persona virginis dicitur, Quasi palma
exaltata sum, etc. I am exalted as a palm etc. The sixth out of the same place,
(...) quasi plantatio rose in Hiericho, and as it were the planting of a rose
in Ierico. The seventh out of the same place, quasi myrrha electa, etc. as
precious myrrh. The eight out of the song of Solomon, chap. 2. 2. Vbi (says
he) celest:s sponsus inquit de sponsa sua virgin benedicta, Sicut lilium inter
spinas, sic amica mea inter fi^^a^. where the heavenly bridegroom speaks of
his spouse the blessed virgin; like alilie amongst the thorns, so is my love
amongst the daughters. Where that which is spoken of Christ his whole Church,
they interpret only of the virgin, so making her both the mother and also the
wife of Christ. The ninth figure they take out of the same song, chap. 6. Que
est ista que progreditur, quasi aurora^ that is, according to their
translation, Who is she that goes forth in the morning? Here also they commit
the same fault that before. The tenth they take out of psalm. 192. dies diei
eructat verbum, etc. that is (as they speak) day speaks unto day. The 11.
figure is out of the same psalm, verse. 4. in sole posuit tabernaculum suum;
that is (as they also interpret) he has set his tabernacle in the sun. The
12. out of Number. 24. orietur stella ex Jacob, there shall arise a star out of
Jacob. Who reading all these things, will not admire their monstrous learning?

9 The sixth sermon following is of the same stamp, divided into these three
parts: 1. dicitur rationabilitatis. 2. authoritatis. 3. (...) vltima
appellabitur exemplaritatis. The reasons of the first part are ten: 1.
mendationis. 2. perfectionis. 3. reportationis. 4. concursionis. 5.
demonstrationis. 6. figurationis. 7. medicationis. 8. locationis. 9.
destinationis. 10. affirmationis.

10. For the 7. sermon he takes his text out of Genesis 1. God said let there be
light, and there was light. This and that which follows, and God saw that the
light was good, and God divided the light from the darkness; that also Ioh. 1.
5. And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. All
this, I say, he and many other whom he names (if he lie not, for I cannot
examine all his authorities) apply to the virgin Marie. Then he comes to the
division of his sermon, where of again he makes the three parts thus: 1.
dicetur fundationis: 2. operationis. 3. fructificationis. The arguments of the
first are as follows. 1. gratificationis. 2. desponsationis. 3.
preseruationis. 4 optationis. 5. punitionis. 6. mediationis. 7. exaltationis.
8. euitationis. 9. similationis. 10. actionis. 11. liberationis. 12.
debellationis. 13. coniunctionis. 14. deuiationis. 15. renelationis. In the
handling of the fifth of those arguments, thus he writes: Si beata virgo fuit
conceptain peccato originali, sequitur quod ipsa fuit plus odita a deopro illo
tempore, quam Ca^^ aut Judas vel quicunque alius damnatus, quod est impium and
nefarium d^cere. and probatur predicta conclusio, sequendo doctrinam
predictorum doctorum, etc. Nam quanto pena includens culpam est mayor and
grauior, tanto talis peccator a deo magis oditur, sed pena virginis fuit mayor,
quia plura bona perdidisset, and non propter aliud nisi quod deus ipsam in
peccato concipivoluisset. Igitur ^llo tempore illam deus plus quam alios odio
habuisset. Non enim est aliud odium dei quam subtractio gratie. Sicut dilectio
ipsius dei nihil aliud est, quam gratie communicatio, etc. that is: If the
blessed virgin had been conceived in original sin, it follows that she
was more hated of God then Ca^n or Judas, or any other that is damned, which is
impious and wicked to say. And the former conclusion is proved by following
the doctrine of the foresaid doctors, etc. For how much the punishment,
including the fault is greater and heavier, so much the more is such a sinner
hated of god. But the punishment of the virgin had been greater, because she
should have lost more good things, and for no other cause^ then because God
would have her conceived in sin. Therefore at that time God should have hated
her more then others. For the harred of God is nothing else but the withdrawing
of grace, as his love is nothing else but the communicating of his grace. These
things shall ^uffice for a taste of those nine learned sermons, the which in
truth have almost as many blaphemies as they have words.

THE FOVRTH PART.
1 AFter those sermons follows officium beat virginis, that is, a service
for the blessed virgin. This service consists of many dishes of meat made
ready for the virgin by the former cook. But before this service, according
to the manner of Princes, is sounded a trumpet of great commendation, by no
meaner person then the most blessed father Pope Sixtus the 4. For the foresaid
service being presented to his holiness, The service must be honorable that
has such a trumpet sounded before it, and that by such a trumpottour.
that he might appoint some other of his wisest and grauest divines to examine
the same, and upon examination taken to be tru^pettours for the proclaiming of
the praises thereof, he answered that he himself would do it. Having
therefore examined it, he allowed it, first by his word of mouth comma^ding it
to be published, and secondly by a short apostolical writing, ratifying and
confirming the same, with these word^ in the end of that ^a^ification and
confirmation, for the better credit thereof, Non obstantibus constitutionibus
and ordinationibus apostolicis, ceterisque contrar^is quibuscunque. The meaning
whereof is this, that no other constitutions and ordinations apostolical,
neither any other contrary services whatsoever, should let or hinder the same,
leaf 49. B. Then follows a^ other solemn commendation of that se^ uice in
the inscription or title thereof: and after all this solemnity comes ^he
serui^ it self to the table, the first dish where^ is this:

2 Dixit dominus dominemee, sede a dextr^ innocentie me: that is, The Lord
said unto m^^ lady, sit thou on the right hand of my innocence. Again,
Laudate pueridomina^ super omnes gentes in conceptu gloriosam. O children
praise ye the lady above all nations, gloriou^ in her conception. Again,
Letatus sum in (...) que dicta sunt mih^, concepta est hodie regina ce^^. I
rejoiced in those things that were said unto me, to day is conceived the
queen of heaven. Again, Laudate Jerusalem dominam, quia non fecit taliter
vlli nationi, sicut fecit dilectissime matri. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem,
because he has not dealt so with any nation, as with his most beloved mother.

3 The second dish is this. Dominus possedit me in initio viarum suarum,
antequam quicquam faceret a principio. ab eterno ordinata sum, and ex antiquis
antequam terra fieret. nec dum erant abyssi cum ego tam concepta eram. The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before he made any thing at the
beginning. From everlasting was I ordained, from of old before the earth was
made. There were no depths, and I was now conceived.

4 Betwixt these dishes and those that follow, our lady must have a little
music, and there is the hymn or song:

Gaude matter saluatoris
magni vell^s Gedeonis;
Rubus igne qui non vris
verum templum Salomonis.
Sponsa dei, stella maris
porta celi tu v^caris;
Mundi salus seuientis
caput cedens Holofernis.
Mare sicco call transis
currus mergens Pharaonis;
Inque S^on dominaris
pulsis inde Iebuseis.
Asuexi regis sceptrum
Caput tangens virgo tuum;
mori fecit laqueatum
Aman sanctis inimicum.
Babilonis rex in predam
non abduxit te captivam;
Philistei nec Golie
es transfixus pugione.
Sicut suum sol nitorem
nunqu^aem per dit nec decorem;
Primipatris sic tu labem
nullam sentis nec fetorem.
Tu soloccasum nesciens
Iunaque semper rutilans;
Tusydus lucem pariens,
delicti nubes profugans.
Nu^llus in te con^identes
vnquam vidit infelices;
Vere tibi nam deuotus
est necesse sit beatus.
Ad te ergo nos clamantes
in hac valle lacrymantes;
Adnuptias eternales
fac venire triumphantes.
Rejoice of Jesus mother dear
Thou fleece of noble Gedeon:
Thou bush that burnest not with fire,
Thou temple of true Solomon.
Of God the spouse, of sea the star,
Of heaven the gate thou called art.
To raging world thou did give health,
To Holofernes deadly smart.
In sea thou walk as on dry land,
Drowning Pharao with his rout:
In S^on also do thou reign,
By chasing Iebusites thence out.
The scepter of king Assuere,
Touching, O virgin, head of thine;
Did cause proud Haman hanged to be,
Who against thy saints did still repine.
Of Babylon the king in pray
Did not away thee captive lead:
No Philistine Goliath stout,
With sword could kill or lay the dead.
As sun his brightness does not loose,
But still his beauty keeps well:
So thou of first father no stain
Do feel, or any filthy smell.
Thou art the sun that go not down,
Thou art that moon which still giust light:
Thou art the star which always shines,
Thou clouds of sin driuest out of sight.
None such as once do trust in thee,
Did ever see unhappy man:
But he to thee that is devout,
Must blessed be as any can.
To thee therefore we loud do call,
And in this vale with tears do cry:
That to the eternal marriage
We may once come triumphantly.
5 Then follows an other dish with an other fit of mirth: after which
follow many other dishes, which they call by the name of lessons, because they
were to be read upon the several days of the feast of the conception of the
virgin, as we read certain portions of scripture for several lessons of
several days. These lessons I had thought to have set down both in latin and
english for the better credit of them, but because I see they would be too long
I will therefore make choice of some of the most dainty of them, and those al^o
I will set down but partly in latin, and wholly in english for brevity sake.

6 This therefore following was the fifth lesson for the second day of the
feast of her conception. Beatus Bern. post mortem suam, etc. that is in
english, Blessed Bern. an abbot after his death appeared all shining to one of
his brethren. Now all his apparel being The word translated brethren, may
also be tra^^^ted ^riars, etc.
white in his breast only there seemed a spot of a very black color. His
brother inquiring where he had received that black spot, he answered; I
thought good to appear unto thee with such a spot, because whilst I lived, I
was in an error, thinking the mother of our In quadam exti^^ non vir^ op^nion^
Lord to have received the Original stain. Therefore my son, tell unto the
faithful people, what things thou have seen.

7 The sixth lesson for the same day is this, In reuelationibus beat Brig^tte
habetur, etc. that is in english. In the revelations of b^essed Bridgit it is
reported, that a certain chaplin of hers, a famous doctor of sacred divinity
named Mathias, entreated blessed Bridgit, Si benedicta virgo Maria ab originali
fu^^ vi^io detur pata.
saying. I beseech thee, O daughter, vouchsafe to reveal unto me, if the
blessed virgin Marie were defiled with original sin. Blessed Bridgit
answered, I did once desire the most pure virgin to show me the manner of her
most holy conception, and she answered; Know that I coming of my parents
Ioachim and Anna^ was preserved from all pollutio^ of sins. The foresaid
brother hearing these things, presently laid aside his opinion, and yearly
preaching, he did most devoutly celebrate the feast of the immaculate
conception.

8 For the fourth lesson of the third day of her conception, they read this:
Legitur in quodam beati dominici opusculo, quod cum regularis esset canonicus,
etc. that is, It is read in a certain work of blessed Dominick that when he was
a regular Canon in the Bishopric of Tholossa, he disputed with certain
heretics, which affirmed many conclusions contrary to truth. Now amongst other
opinions they preached this unto the people, namely that the virgin was not
preserved from original sin. When blessed Dominicke saw that he could not
persuade them the truth, he took this order with them; that both sides should
put their conclusions together in a burning oven, and Taliter cum ^is conuenit.
that those should be accounted for true, which should not be consumed by the
heat of the fire. They put therefore their conclusions in the midst of the
fire, amongst many other things, saying that the virgin Mary was defiled with
original pollution. Blessed Dominick affirmed the contrary. Presently
therefore the devouring flame consumed the false conclusions of the heretics.
But the most true sayings of blessed Dominick, remained in the mids of the
burning flame, for three days together without any hurt at all, and no sign
of fire appeared in them.

9 For the fifth lesson of the same day they read this tale following. In regno
Vngarie quidam This might well herfor the papists have a thousand ways to
poison and secretly to murder their own catholic Kings* yea and their own
popes. Might not they therefore much more secretly take away the life of one
that so openly oppugned such a chief principle of their religion.
theology magister, etc. that is, In the kingdom of Hungary a certain
master of divinity, preached before the King against the co^ception of the
undefiled virgin, saying, that she was sanctified, but not conceived without
stain: who so soon as he had thus irreverently spoken these things, received
the punishment of this boldness, and presently gave up the ghost. In the city
also of Tholosa a certain friar feared not to preach in like manner. But
having ended his sermon, he came to a certain chapel to say mass. In this
chapel there was an image of the glorious virgin graven in marble. When
therefore the f^ier presumed to go up to the altar, the blessed mother of God
the virgin showed him a very terrible and angry countenance, and turned ( Was
this possible in the lady of pity. Here seem to want these words, from
sin: but this defect is in their latin it self.
) her face from him: and so she continues to this day.

10 For the sixth lesson of the same day, they read this, In ducatu Subaudiensi
iuxta mo^tem sancti Bernardi, etc. that is, In the duc hie of Subaudia, by the
mount of S. Bernard, a certain friar seeing the women going to the preaching
of the conception, rebuked them, saying, that the most pure virgin was not in
her conception preserved by her beloved son: and he adds, If it be so, I
desire this miracle to be showed upon me by the blessed virgin, that I may die
before the evening. So therefore it came to pass. For in the same hour the
other friars found him hanged by the feet and dead.

11 In the fourth days service for the fourth lesson, there is a trim tale
of a very eloquent friar in Tholosa, who for preaching against the conception
of the virgin, was presently rent in sunder and devoured of a wolf, etc.

12 In the fifth and sixth lessons for the same day, there is a long tale out of
Anselmus for justifying the immaculate conception of the virgin. This tale
being too long to set down word for word, I have thought good to set down
the sum only th^reof in this manner. The Danes taking it grievously that
William the Conqueror had taken England from them, and that so they were as it
were deprived of their inheritance, made all preparation that might be for
expelling the ^aide William and his forces. William the Conqueror therefore
hearing thereof, sent one Elfinus a man of excellent wit, abbot of the
monastery of Rhemes, into Danske to enquire the truth. This Elfinus having
dispatched his masters business, in his return homeward, was with his whole
company in great danger upon the sea. In the mids of which danger, having
commended themselves to the blessed Virgin, and expecting nothing but death,
suddenly amongst the waves nere unto the ship, they did see a very
Venerabilem virum pontisiciali insuls decoratum conspexere. The devil can
transform himself into the likeness of an angel of light, much more into the
likeness o^ a bishop.
reverend man, adorned with a Bishops mytre, who said unto the Abbat thus, Vis
periculum euadere? vis sanus ad patriam redire? will thou escape this danger?
will thou return in safety to the country? To whom when the abbat had
answered with tears, that that was his desire, then he that had so appeared
spoke further. Scias (in quit) me ad^^ a domina nostra Dei genetrice M^ria
directum, quam dulciter reclamasti: and si dictis meis obtemperare volueris,
sanus cum comitibus tuis euades seuientis periculum maris. Promitte ergo Deo
and mihi, quod conceptionem purissime virginis Marie solenniter celebrabis and
celebrandum predicabis. that is. Know thou (said he) that I was directed unto
thee by our Lady Marie God his mother, whom thou have sweetly called unto:
and if thou will obey my sayings, thou with all thy companions shall safely
escape the danger of the raging sea. Promise therefore unto God and unto me,
that thou will solemnly celebrate and preach to be celebrated the conception of
the most pure Virgin Marie. When Elfinus had promised to perform that before
enjoined him, presently the sea was calm, and he with his company safely
arrived in England.

13 For the service of the fifth day, and for the fourth and fifth lessons
they read these toys following. For the fourth lesson this, In pago gallico
canonicus erat quidam, etc. that This miracle is the 60. example in the book
of miracles: yet some difference there is betwixt the narration of it there and
here.
is, In a country parrish of France, there was a certain man, by order a
canonical priest, which was wont with no small affection to sing the night
hours of the blessed Virgin. This priest in a certain village joined himself
in fornication with another man his wife. Once therefore having satisfied his
sacrilegious lust, when in the dead of the night he made have to return to
the town in which he abode, being desirous to cross a certain sea, and
entering alone into a ship, in sailing he be ganne to sing the hours of the
blessed Virgin the mother of our Lord. Now whilst he said the inuitation,
Ha^le Marie full of grace, the Lord be with thee, and he was now come to the
mids of the stream, behold a multitude of devils Whether of these speak
truth? Bernardine that says he had deserved this, or the virgin which rebukes
these devils, as having dealt unjustly therein?
threw him and his boat headlong to the bottom of the sea, and so took his
soul (as he had deserved) unto torments. The third day comes God his mother
Marie accompanied with innumerable lights of the saints, unto the place where
those malign spirits did vex him with diverse torments, ( Estque talibus
iniquos demones conu^^iis all^cu^a. The virgin is not afraid to go down to
h^ll it self and chide and rate the devils at their own doors and in their
own houses.
) and with these reproaches spoke unto those unjust spirits. Why do ye
unjustly afflict the soul of one that served me? The devils answered, we
(said they) ought to have it, because we found it occupied in our works. If
(said the virgin) it be his whose works it did, then certainly it is manifest
to be mine, because it sang my matters when ye took him: wherefore ye are
guilty of a great crime, because ye have dealt so unrighteously toward me.

14 Then it follows in the fifth lesson, His itaque dictis, demon^busque huc
illuc fugientibus, etc. that is, The devils having heard these things, and
taking them to their heels, some this way and some that way, the most holy
virgin reduced the soul of that priest unto his body, and the man being
raised from both graves she took from the bottom of the sea, and brought him
to the port. But he being full of joy and exceeding gladness, presently fell
down prostrate at her feet. My very good Lady (said he) and most gracious
virgin* what shall I give unto you for the great benefits you have bestowed
upon me? I pray thee, said Marie God his mother, fall no more into the sin
of adultery, and declaring the feast of my immaculate conception, procure it
to be kept yearly with all solemnity. After that the most blessed virgin had
said these Ad ^thereas polorum seeds (angelis com^tata) prorexit. a lofty
phrase.
words, she departed (being waited on by the angels) into the heavens. But
that canonical priest living an heremitic all and single life, told what
things had befalne him to all that were desirous to hear: and his whole
lifetime he ceased not with special solemnities to celebrate the conception
of the virgin.

15 Many other the like iunkats follow in the same book, which I do the
rather here omit, because I purpose in the end of this book, to be so bold
with our lady, as to make the reader a short banquet with a few of the choicest
of her miracles, which I hope I may the better do, because I think they have
stood so long upon the table before her, and she has been fed so often
with them, that now she cares not greatly for them: or if she make any
account of them, yet there is such great store, that if there be never a blabbe
and pickthanke to tell her, she will not greatly miss the taking away of a
few of them: or if she do it, yet such is her liberality and bounty, that
she will not grutch them: yea such is her power and authority, that she can
quickly command new dainties as good as those for her service.

THE FIFTH PART.
1 NOw therefore leaving the service of the Virgin, I will here add some things
out of the rest of the book, namely out of the sermons following of her
Nativitie, etc. But first I will remember this one thing, before those sermons
in the 57. leaf, and second side thereof. O pulcherrima virgo, vulnerauit
formosit as tua cor diuinum: attraxit puritas tua creatorem, ad vterum tu^m.
that is, O most fair virgin, thy beauty What unchaste words are these to be
spoken unto the chaste virgin.
has wounded God his heart* thy pu^iti^ has drawn the Creator unto thy
womb. Then follow the sermons of the Nativity of the Virgin.

2 The first of these sermons has these three parts or mysteries. Primum
(says he) appellabitur necessitatis. 2. nobilitatis. 3. iocunditatis. The
necessity of the virgin he shows by three reasons: 1. reedificationis. 2.
successionis. 3. subventionis. In the third reason he has these words, Sicut
per mul^erem peccatricem a diabolo deceptam, etc. that is, As by a sinful
woman deceived and overcome of the devil, mankind was lost and dejected from
his state: so on the contrary by a woman being innocent, pure, and most hol^,
A mon^^trous blasp^emie.
and conquering the devil, it ought to be restored and repaired. Otherwise the
father himself of lies the devil should have gained by his lie; which ought
not to be. For none ought to have profit by a lie, according to those things
which are noted C. 1. ff. etc. In the third part of the same sermon, thus he
writes: Exal^abat Adam videndo lignum The virgin Marie is the ^ree of li^e
which Adam did see in paradise.
vite, scilicet Mariam disponi ad fructum producendum vite eterne in medio
paradisi that is, Adam rejoiced to see the tree of life, to wit, Marie
prepared to bring forth fruit of eternal life in the mids of paradise. A
little after are these words: Ipsa est fenestra celiper quam ^eus oculo suo
misericord^e nos respecit. The virgin the window of heaven.
She (he means the virgin Marie) is the window of heaven, by which God with
his eye of mercy does respect us. Aga^ne presently after, dicere autem potest
virgo benedicta, que est ost^ar^a, etc. that is, But the blessed virgin which
is the door keeper of paradise, The virgin is the door spoken of Ioh. 10. 9.
may say that which is, Ioh. 10. I am the dore^ if any man enter in by me he
shall be saved. Therefore, O ye sinners which are banished men from your
heavenly country, enter in by this gate. Go ye that are sick to the
physician. Come ye fatherless to your parent. Proceed ye that are blind to
the light. Make have ye afflicted unto comfort. Walk O ye virgins after the
glass of chastity. Make speed O ye mothers unto the mother of God.

3 In the beginning of the next sermon, he says, ipsa virgo beata deum iratum
placat, quia est nostra aduocata. The blessed virgin pacifieth God being
angry, because she is The virgin our advocate.
our advocate. To the same effect and somewhat more largely he writes in the
third part of the sermon. Sicut ipsa mediante sedata est lis, que est inter
deum and homines, ita etiam per ipsam terminantur questiones inter homines and
diabolu^. As by her mediation the controversy And our mediator both with God
and the devils.
between God and men is compounded, so also by her are questions determined
between men and the devils. This he proves by a most forcible argument,
namely by one of the miracles of the virgin, touching that great sinner which
in a vision was drawn A great disputation in hell betwixt the virgin and the
devil.
to the judgment of God, where the devil by many allegations proved him to
be his: but always by the virgin Marie wisely answering, he was foiled. But at
the last, the devil objected against him, that the evil things which he had
done, were more then the good things: when therefore at the commandment of the
judge, both his goodness and his evils were laid in a pair of balance, and
the skoale toward the left hand in which were his evils did ouerwaie the
other, on the sudden the glorious virgin put her hand to that skoale where
were his few good works, and drew it down to the ground, and by this means
made it ouerwaie the other Tune diabolu^ confusus abscessit.
skoale. So the devil went away with shame, etc. In the same part he says
that the virgin is the book mentioned in the right hand of God, Rev. 5. 1. In
the same part he says again, Hec benedicta virgo non tantum est liber
generationis, etc. that is, This blessed virgin is The virgin is the gospel of
Saint Matthew, etc.
not only the book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of God, but
she is also the book of the generation of all that are to be saved. And
therefore we may also justly say that which is written, Act. 17. namely, that
we are her generation. For the blessed virgin is our mother.

4 In the fifth sermon he shows ten conditions of the virgin Marie, which
he says every spouse of every great Emperor ought to have. These he sets
down by these terms. Prima (says he) dicetur, integritatis. 2.
virtuositatis. 3. generositatis. 4. formositatis. Dainty latin.
5. gratiositatis. 6. fecunditatis, sieve fertilitatis. 7. copiositatis. 8.
timorositatis. 9. pudorositatis. 10. and vltima appellabitur honestatis. If I
should note all things worthy to be laughed at, etc. I should cause all his
whole book to be new printed. Omitting therefore a thousand and ten thousand
absurdities and blasphemies in that great clarke, I will hereafter note the
most principal.

5 In this third sermon of the nomination of Marie, in the end of the fourth
excellency of her name, thus he writes. Quarto (says he) licet ad ipsam
appellare, si quis a dei iustitia se grauari sentit, etc. that is, Fourthly it
is lawful to appeal unto her, if any man feel himself oppressed with the
justice of God, which The court of Marie above the court of God. O horrible
blasphemiel
was signified in the 5. of Hester, where it is said, that when King Assuerus
was angry with the Jews, Queen Hester came to appease him. To whom the King
said, Although thou shall ask half of my kingdom it shall be given unto
thee. This Empress therefore figured the Empress of heaven, with whom God
has divided his kingdom. For whereas God has justice and mercy, he has
reserved justice to himself to be exercised in the world, and mercy he has
granted to his mother. And therefore if any feel himself grieved at the
court of Gods justice, let him appeal to his mothers court of mercy.

6 In the fourth part of the book, and ninth sermon of the graces of Marie, he
affirms, that she was able to heal diseases only by her word leaf 143.
and anon after, Marie able to heal diseases by her word only. She knows
the Mathematics and allother things.
that she has all Mathematical knowledge, yea that she knows all things.
For thus he writes. De scientiis quoque Mathematicis quod in beata virgin
fuerunt, probari potest secundum Albertum, etc. that is, Concerning the
mathematical sciences that they were in the virgin Marie, it may be proved by
Albertus, etc. for she was most perfect according to affection, therefore also
according to understanding. Since therefore she loved all things that were to
be loved, it is to be concluded that she knew all things to be known. The same
he amplifieth afterward by an induction of the particular mathematical
sciences, applying many sentences of the scripture and Apocrypha to the virgin
Marie, which are spoken only of the infinite knowledge and wisdom of God. In
the same sermon in the beginning of the 145. leaf thus he writes, Beata virgo
non solum totum hominem sanum facit in anima and corpore, etc. The blessed The
virgin heals the whole man, both in this life and after death.
virgin does not only make the whole man sound in soul and body, and cures
all incurable diseases (as appears before) but also after death she works
cures, and puts death it self to flight, and whom she cures she heals
to immortality. Therefore she excels all in the gift of healing, and
therefore she says in the 8 of the Proverbs: He that finds me finds life,
and shall receive favor of the Lord.

7 In the first part of the 6. sermon of the Annunciation of the virgin (which
is long after the former) which part he calls Determinabilitatis, in this
part, I say, he tells such a tale, as would make an horse (as we speak)
break his bridle to hear it. The tale it self is very long, but the sum
thereof is this, The fathers which died before Christ's coming in the flesh,
being in Limbo, and weary A notable tale.
of that place, because it was so long ere he came that should fetch them
thence, at length consulted among them selves, and at the last agree to send
an embassage unto An embassage by the fathers in Limbo sent to God in heaven.
God to entreat the hastening of Christ's coming. In this embassage they send
these 20; 1. Abel, 2. Noc, 3. Abraham, 4. Isaac, 5. Jacob, 6. Moses, 7. Joshua,
8. David, 9. Solomon, 10. Eliia, Elisha, Ezechia, and many other tarried perhaps
at home to keep Limbum.
Isaias, 11. Jeremy, 12. Malachias, 13. Aggeus, 14. Zacharias, 15. Abacuc, 16.
Job, 17. Ezechiel, 18. Daniel, 19. on the 19. name there is some error.
Ezechiel, 20. Ecclesiasticus. Every one of these urge God with several
arguments. Some with sentences of scripture, some with verses of Virgil, Ovid,
and such like Poets, and some with the authority of the civil and canon law.
But the devil understanding of this embassage, went also himself before God,
and pleaded hard against the former ambassadors, reasoning mightily from the
justice of God, etc. for their The devil said, Absit a Deo impietas.
continuance still in Limbo. God therefore (not that he needed so to have done,
but that he might give an example of righteous judgment) consulted with the
angels what was to be done. Then was there great silence in heaven for half an
hour, that they might the better deliberate what to say. The half hour
being ended, every order of Angels spoke largely their mind for the fathers
in Limbo. Then God having heard all their allegations, gave sentence,
approouing the counsel of the angels, and rejecting the suggestions of the
devil. Therefore he answered the ambassadors of the fathers very graciously,
telling them that he shortly in mercy would think upon them. The ambassadors
hearing this were filled with joy, as it is said of the Jews, Hest. 8. Then
the three persons of the Trinity consulted together, and concluded the sending
of Gabriel to the virgin Marie, etc. This briefly is the sum of the tale
which that great doctor Bernardine does handle far more largely, writing so
largely thereof, as being written again in latin without any abbreuiations,
would fill two sheets of paper. And was it not pains think you well taken?
yes, yes, without all doubt. For so we see more touching the sending of the
angel Gabriel to the virgin, then is contained in all the Scripture, or then
agrees with any truth. An hundred such merry tales their are in the same
book, the which I forbear to mention, thinking this to be sufficient for a
taste of the rest.

8. In the tenth sermon of the same matter, at the 209. leaf, about the letter
K, he commends the humility, fortitude, and bountifulnes of the virgin most
highly. For referring us to some one of his former sermons, thus he writes:
Probatum est quod super omnem creaturam fuit humillima atque fortissima, Yet
for all that she feared when Gabriel spoke unto her: but who ever read that
the angels feared any other creature.
^deo quod vicit mundum, etc. that is, It was proved that she was most humble
and valiant above every creature, so that she has overcome the world, God,
and the devil. Also she was most bountiful: for she has given the world
unto God, and the kingdom of heaven and God himself unto man.

9 In the second sermon of the visitation of Marie, leaf 234. at the letter V,
thus he speaks to the virgin Marie: Profecto si fas est dicere, tu secundum
quid maiora fecisti deo, etc. that is, Truly if I may be so bold as to speak,
thou in some respect have done greater things The virgin has done more for
God, then God for her and all mankind.
for God, then God himself has done for thee, or for all mankind. I
therefore will speak that, whereof thou in humility have held thy peace. For
thou did only sing. He that is mighty has done great things unto me: but
I sing and say, that thou have done greater things to him that is mighty. For
God formed man of the clay of the earth, but thou most blessed virgin have
brought forth God of thy most precious blood, and have covered and clothed him
with thy most pure flesh so that thou may say that of Ecclesiasticus, chap.
24. I have caused light to rise in the heavens that will never go out, and
have covered all flesh as it were with a cloud, and thy most pure flesh
excels all things in the world. Again God brought up man with the fruits of
paradise, but thou have nourished God himself with thy breasts full of heaven,
of which milk one drop is of more value, then all the trees in paradise, or
then all the fruits of the whole world. God also has clothed man with a
garment of skins, but thou glorious virgin have wrapped the son of God in
thy cloutes, and afterward did put upon him a seamelesse garment, which is
far more better then all the coats in the world.

10 In his second sermon, de festo nivis, leaf 290. after the letter N, thus
he writes: Cum beata virgo sit matter dei, etc. that is, Since the blessed
Virgin is the mother of God, and God her son; and every son naturally is
inferior to the mother and her subject, and the mother preferred unto and
above the son: it follows that the blessed virgin God inferior to the
virgin.
is above God, and that God is her subject in regard of the humanity taken
from her. In the same sermon the beginning of the 292. leaf thus he writes,
Legitur quod predicantibus Apostolis, etc. that is, We read that the Apostles
preaching but not being able to convert some, they sent them to the blessed
virgin who admiring the beauty of the mother of God and her most wise
speeches, were converted to the faith. In the same sermon leaf 294. a little
before the letter I, having compared, Marie to a ladder, and called her the
ladder of heaven, he brings in Bernard speaking thus to the Virgin, C^^
profecto scalae Dominus innixus est, etc. that is, The which ladder God used,
because God The virgin a ladder between God and mano.
would not have us to have any thing that should not pass through the hands of
Marie, and that none of our works are acceptable unto him, except it be offered
by the hands of Marie. Therefore that little that thou would offer unto God,
provide tho^ deliver it into the hands of Marie, if thou will not have the
repulse. Then he adds his own words, Hoc etiam patet exemplo quod legitur
in Chronicis nostris, etc. that is, This also is manifest by an example that is
read in our Chronicles, namely that on a certain day S. Frances did see two
ladders, one read upon which Christ stood, and an other white on the which
was the virgin. And when as by the admonishment of blessed Frances, the
brethren assaied to ascend by the red ladder, whilst they began to go,
many fell backward and could not ascend. At which thing S. Frances did grieve
with weepinge to whom Christ said, Cause thy brethren to run to my mother
The virgin a better ladder for heaven then Christ.
and to the white ladder, that they may ascend by it: which when the brethren
did, they were entertained of the virgin with a cheerful countenance, and
then with ease they went up to heaven.

11 In his second sermon of the 9. part of the book with this title, Maria
terra, leaf 303. at the letter R, thus he writes, Si quis querat quareoum
diabolus tempore Tobie 7 vii ros Sare strangulauerit, etc. that is, If any man
The word eum is superstuous, or else should be cum.
ask why the devil in the Time of Tobia did strangle the seven husbands of
Sara for their sin, as it is Tob. 2. and yet now does not kill all whom
mortal sins do give into his hands: I answer, that this proceeds from
hence, that God has given unto men this most mighty virgin, which has in her
hand The virgin given to keep men from the devils, etc.
a rod of iron to drive away all infernal beasts, and to put to flight the
devils themselves. Wherefore he says unto her in the 2. psalm. Thou shall rule
them with a rod of iron, and break the^ in pieces like a potters vessel. And
this power of the glorious virgin, is figured in the 7. of Exodus in the rod
of Aaron, which was turned into a serpent, and devoured the rods of the
inchanters. In the same sermon leaf 304. he applies many things spoken of
the power of God, of Christ, etc. to the virgin. As, Thou can do all things.
If thou will, thou can make me clean. Thou art The virgin is omnipotent.
stronger then all. He has delivered me from the mighty adversary. All
things are possible with thee. Neither is there any thing that is not in my
power. Thou rulest the raging of the sea, and the surging floods thereof thou
do mitigate. God has given him power over the things that are in the earth.
In Jerusalem is my power. Thy dominions is to the ends of the whole earth. His
authority is an everlasting authority from generation to generation. We have
heard the fame of his power, and wonderful is his power. All these things that
I say, and many other the like, partly blasphemously and partly foolishly he
applies to the virgin Marie. In the end of that sermon, he applies many
things also to her, that are spoken of the book The virgin is the book of
life, etc
of life, exhorting such as desire to attain unto eternal life to study this
book day and night. In the same sermon leaf 308. a little before the letter
G, thus he says, Beat igitur virgini quae omnes demones superauit and
debellauit, dici potest illud Isaij, vulnerasts dracones: and illud Apocal. 20.
Apprehendit draconem antiqaum serpentem. that is, To the blessed virgin
therefore which has overcome and subdued all the devils, may that be said of
Esai, Thou have wounded the dragons: and that in the 20. of the Revelation,
She took the dragon that old serpent. Again in the same sermon leaf 309.
Habet etiam solicitutudinem in custodiendo, quia sub alis, etc. that is, She is
also very careful of keeping because she keeps us under her wings, and
protecteth Her two great wings.
us from the snares of the devil, for she is that woman to whom are given two
great wings, Revelat. 12. one is the wing of mercy, under the which sinners
do fly, that they may be reconciled unto God: the other is the wing of grace,
under which the just do stand, that they may be preserved in grace.

12 In the fourth sermon of the same 9. part, all (almost) spoken in the
scripture of light, is applied to the virgin: so also that which is spoken of
the city of God.

13. In his first sermon of the Assumption of Marie, thus he says, Omnis
natura a deo est facta, and deus est ex Maria factus. Deus omniu^ factor se ex
Maria fecit, etc. that is, Every nature is made of God, and God is made of
Marie. God the maker of all things made himself of Marie.

14 In the second sermon of the same matter leaf 363. he tells us, that the
virgin standing at the feet of her son, desired him to show her the order
of the Angels and Saints in heaven, because (said she) Moses and alij
prophet de hoc nihil dixerunt. Marie desires to know more then Moses and the
prophets had taught. The nine orders of Angels.
Moses and the other prophets have said nothing of this matter. To whom the
son showed first touching Angels, that there were nine degrees or orders of
them, and that every order was ten times more excellent then other. 1. of
angels, 2. of archangels, 3. principalities, 4. powers, 5. virtues, 6.
dominions, 7. thrones, 8. cherubins, 9. seraphims. Here note before I proceed
any Repugnance between Bernardine and other Papists.
further, let the reader observe that this agrees not with that which some
other Papists write of this matter. For he says that Christ himself showed
these things unto his mother: but other Papists, and namely Saint Vincent in
his sixth sermon for the ninth Lords day after the feast of the Trinity,
says that Dionysius learned this divinity of Paul, and that to Paul it was
first revealed, when he was rapt up into the third heaven. After that Christ
had showed his mother these orders of the Angels, then he proceeds to show
her further the several places of the Saints, which were these ^t first, that
in the first order of Angels before mentioned, are placed those which shall
repent of their sins. In the second order of Archangels shall be placed, they
that over and above their repentance shall have actual devotion, which he says
is more then repentance. Thirdly that with principalities shall be placed, they
that are merciful in corporal and spiritual works. Fourthly that with
powers shall be placed, they that are patient, and which bear much adversity
patiently. Fifthly that with virtues shall be placed the peacemakers, and they
that as much as in them lies have peace with all men. Sixthly they with
dominions shall be made blessed, prelates as well ecclesiastical as secular.
Beatificabu^tur prelati, tam ecciesiastics quam seculares.
Seauenthly that with thrones shall be placed, they that perfectly for saking
the world shall observe wilful poverty. Eighthly that with Cherubims shall be
placed the wise teachers of souls, which shall not only live well themselves,
but shall also by their wisdom and doctrine bring other to eternal life.
Ninthly that with Seraphims shall stand they that shall be perfect in burning
love above all other, as the Apostles and other like unto them. When she had
heard all this she said further, Et ego fili in quo ordine collocabor? And in
what order, O son, shall I be placed? He answered, because thou art perfecter
then all the former, therefore thou shall not be in any of the former orders,
but shall be exalted above all angelical spirits. Nam due cathedre and seeds
fulgentissime sunt nobis preparate in celo, etc. for there are two chaires and
seats most fulgent, (or bright) prepared for us in heaven. One for me wherein
I shall sit as king of heaven, and an other for thee at my right hand,
wherein thou shall sit as the Queen of Angels, and of all the Saints, which
was figured 3. King. by Bathsheba and 1. King. 2.
Solomon, etc. These things are much more largely set down by him in his
book, then by me in this place, because I hasten to an end. Now who sees not
the vanity and folly of these mysteries?

15 In the first sermon of her coronation, leaf 381. thus he writes: O igitur
regina nostra serenissima etc. that is, O therefore our The virgins kingdom
universal and everlasting.
most excellent Queen, thou truly may say Ezr. 1 that, The Lord has given
me all the kingdoms of the earth. And we may say unto thee that Tob. 13. Thy
kingdom is throughout all ages. and psalm. 144. Thy kingdom is for all ages.
Psalm. 145. 3.
and Dan. 2. A kingdom which shall never be broken. Come therefore and take
thou the kingdom over us. Judge. 9. for of thy kingdom may that be said, psalm.
105. And his kingdom shall rule over all. and Luc. 1. And of his kingdom
there shall be none end, etc.

16 In the second sermon of her coronation, O how much ado is there of the
great singing in heaven by the angels and saints, etc. every one having a
several antheme? leaf 386. Afterward he tells us that she was crowned with
three crowns, as the Emperors are wont to be crowned. One crown is of iron,
in signum fortitudinis, in token of her fortitude and strength; the second was
of Her three crowns.
silver, ratione purit at is, in regard of her purity; the third crown where
with she was crowned, was of gold, ratione superioritatis and sufficientie, in
regard of her superiority and sufficiency. In the same sermon leaf 391. he
says, that in glory she does as much excel the nature of angels and men,
both being joined together, as the circumference of the firmament does in
greatness exceed his center; that is, (to speak more plainly) that her glory
is as much greater then the glory of the angels and of men, as the whole
highest heaven is greater then the earth. In the same lease thus he speaks
unto her, O femina ab omnibus and super omnia benedicta, etc. An heap of the
virgins titles.
that is, O woman of all, and above all blessed. Thou art the nobility and
preservation of mankind. Thou art the breadth of merit, and the perfect power
of all things created. Thou art the only mother of God. Thou art the Lady of
the whole earth, and the Queen of the world. Thou art the dispenser of all
graces. Thou art the co^summation of the whole world, and the beauty of the
holy Church. Thou art out worthy satisfaction before the giver of all gifts.
Thou art the incomprehensible greatness of all virtues, gifts, and graces.

17 It were infinite to note the cithe only of the foolish and blasphemous
speeches concerning the virgin Marie, contained in that one book so highly
allowed by the Popes holiness. To omit therefore the gathering of any more out
of this Bernardine, I come now to the sermons of Saint Vincent.

THE SIXTH PART.
THis Vincent was no obscure person, but like wise of great account in the
Romish Church. For he is not only called by the name of a Saint, but also in
the beginning of his Estivall sermons, he is called Divini verbi preco,
interpres and professor subtilissimus, that is, a most subtle or sharp
preacher, interpretour and professor of the word of God. In the end also of
the same book, he is called Iluminatissimus and acutissimus sacre theology
professor, a most illuminated and acute professor of sacred divinity. Let us
therefore see what precious ware this great merchant has in his shop.

2 First it is to be observed that as Bernardine did, so does this man also
begin all (or at the least most of) his sermons with a devout salutation of
the Virgin. Touching the special matter of his sermons, it is as follows. In
his first sermon for Easter day, he notes chiefly and principally three
points, wherein consists (as he says) all the practice of the blessed
resurrection of Christ. These three points he sets down thus, Resurrectio
Christi fuit celebrata affectuose, demonstrata gratiose, publicata virtuose.
The resurrection of Christ was celebrated with great affection, showed with
great grace, published with great power or virtue In the same sermon speaking
of the virgin Marie he says, that she had prepared against the resurrection
of Christ, cameram a chamber, and Camara is used for a cham^er by the same
author, ^erm. 2. pro Dominic. 1 post fe^^^^ ^nnitatis.
cathedram a chair: and that she said, Hic sedebit filius meus, and hic loquar
et. Here shall my son sit, and here will I speak unto him. What word is
there of any such thing in the Scripture? Then he adds, that when Christ and
his mother met, and Christ was set in the chair, he told his mother what he
had done in hell, how he had bound the devil, and showed her the holy fathers
which he had taken from thence, who did to the virgin great reverence. Then he
sets down particularly the words of Adam and Eve, of the Prophets and
Angels, etc. to the virgin Marie.

3 In his sermon for the fourth holy day of Easter, having read his text which
he said was the gospel for that day, and having saluted the virgin, he adds
these words: In sacro euangelio sunt quatuor moralia circa apparitionem quam
fecit Christus discipulus suis, scilicet, Occasio necessilosa, Operatio
miraculosa, Cognitio virtuosa, Refectio gratiosa. I leave the english to the
learned.

4 His first sermon for Dominica in albis he makes on this text Ioh. 20. Post
dies octo iterum venit Jesus. After eight days came Jesus again. These eight
days he does thus interpret in the beginning of the 19. leaf. Hic octo dies
sunt opera penitentialia, quibus completis iterum venit Christ us. Primus dies
est peccatorum cognitio. 2. cordis contritio. 3. oris confessio. 4. vite
oorrectio. 5. iniuriaru^ remissio. 6. debitorum restitutio. 7. fame reparatio.
8. eucharistie communio. that is, Here eight days are the works of penance (or
rather repentance) In his first sermon for the 14. Lords day after Trinity, he
speaks often penitential works.
which being complete Christ came again. The first day is the knowledge of
sins: the second the contrition of the heart: the third the confession of the
mouth: the fourth the amendment of life: the fifth the remitting of injuries:
the sixth the restoring of debts: the seventh the repairing of credit: the
eight the receiving of the eucharist or communion. Is not this a subtle, a
lightsome, and an acute or witty, and sharp manner of interpreting the
scriptures, according to the titles before given to this Vincent? and was he
not well worthy to be sainted for such interpretations? but let us see further.

5 His fifth sermon for the same day is upon these words, Noli esse incredulus
sed fidelis. Be not faithles but believe, Ioh. 20. Entreating of these words,
thus in the beginning of that sermon he writes: A principto mundi semper fuit
necessarium ad saluationem, habere fidem, etc. From the beginning of the world
it was always necessary to salvation to have faith, etc. but diversely,
quoniam tempore legis naturae, etc. because in the law of nature that explicit
faith was sufficient, which might be What faith Saint Vincent makes always
necessary to salvation.
had in the natural understanding with out any books, namely to believe,
first that there was one God, which may be known by natural understanding, as
the power of a lord is known by the building of a great house. Secondly, that
he is a just god and a rewarder, etc. Then for the time of the law of Moses, he
says that it was necessary to believe three articles of faith, namely the
former two, and for the third, that God would send his son to be a savior of
the world. And he adds, Alia secreta fidei non tenebantur scire, nisi magni
literati. The other secrets of faith none were bound to know, but only the
great learned men. Lastly now in the time of the law of grace, he says that
men must believe the 12. articles of faith, etc. Who sees not but that by this
doctrine, before the law of Moses a man might be saved, first only by natural
understanding without any other grace, yea without the help of any book:
secondly without any faith at all in Christ even to come. And then what needed
the Lord, Genesis 3. 15. and often elsewhere before the law of Moses to have made
any promise of Christ Jesus? yea how is it said that Abraham believed and it
was accounted unto him for righteousness? yea that Abraham did see the day of
Christ and rejoiced?

6 In his third sermon for the first Lords day, post octa: Paschae, thus he
writes, Nota quod Christus in cruce, etc. leaf 33. that is, Note that Christ
upon the cross did especially sustain sorrows in five parts of his body;
namely first in his whole body, when it lay upon the hard and heavy cross;
2. in nailing of his right hand; 3. of his left hand; 4. of his right foot; 5.
of his left foot. Here let the reader note, how wittily this great Saint
Doctor makes the whole body of Christ a part of his body.

7 To pass by many other things, for his first sermon of the body of Christ,
leaf 97. he takes this text, Ego accepi a domino quod and tradidi vobis. I
have received of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you. Then he shows
his auditors where he had this text, verbum istud habetur textualiter, 1. Cor.
11. etc. In the beginning of this sermon he has some pretty things indeed
worth the observation, as that he says, that the heart of man is not to
enlarge it self to believe more, nor the mouth to speak, nisi quantum habemus
ex sacra scriptura, but as much as we have out of the holy scripture. And
again, The holy scripture is the mouth of god, having two lips, namely the
two testaments: the upper lip is the new testament; and the nether the old
testament. But presently he returns to his old fashion, and shows the
common learning of those times, adding, Inter cetera mirabilia and secreta
huius sacrame^tisunt quing, principalia, etc. 1. est mutatio substantialis. 2.
operatio sacerdotalis. 3. habitatio sacramentalis. 4. perreptio sensualis. 5.
receptio vsuoelis. that is, Amongst other miracles and secrets of this
sacrament, five are principal, etc. The 1. is a substantial change, the 2.
the priestly operation, the 3. a sacramental dwelling, the 4. a sensible
perceiving, the 5. an usual receiving. In handling the second of these, and
magnifying the operation of the priest, by the place from whence he fetches
Christ into the sacrament; he sets down first diverse places from whence
Christ is not drawn into the sacrament, namely, nor out of the air, nor out
of the sphere of the fire, nor out of the heaven of the moon, nor out of the
heaven of Mercury, nor out of the heaven of Venus, nor out of the heaven of
the sun, nor out of the heaven of Mars, nor out of the heaven of the stars
(O wonderful eloquence:) at last he shows that he fetches him out of the
highest heaven. Then he adds his rhetorical acclamation, Ecce operatio
sacerdotalis: behold the priestly operation or working. Then follows this
goodly similitude. Sicut quod quando virgo, etc. For as when the virgin Marie
being saluted by the angel Gabriel, did give her consent and said, Behold the
handmaid of the Lord, Luke 1. at the last word heaven was opened, and the son
of God descended into her womb, and the angel and the virgin did worship him
in the womb, and as the mouth of the virgin opened heaven: so does the mouth
of the priest, and that in a more excellent manner, (it shall not offend the
virgin Marie if I speak the The priests work in the mass, greater then the
virgins in conceiving of Christ. Habuit dicere octo verba. Neither the virgin
nor Christ spoke any latin.
truth) because the virgin to open heaven had to say eight words, the 1.
Behold, the 2. the handmaid, etc. till she had said all, for then was heaven
opened and she conceived: but the Priest speaks five words only, and when
he speaks the last word. to wit, Meum, then is heaven opened, and Christ is
in the host. Again the virgin Marie did open heaven but once: but the priest
every day and in every mass. Again he descended into the virgins womb but
little, not so big as an ante, and passible also and mortal: but into the
host he descends as great as he is in heaven, and as he was upon the cross,
neither passible nor mortal, but glorious and impassible.

8 Near unto the beginning of the next sermon, leaf 99. thus he writes,
Sicut Christus fuit eleuatus and crucifixus inter, etc. As Christ was lifted up
and crucified between two thieves: so the host being consecrated is lifted up
by two hands, the right and the left, which signify the thieves. And as then
the body of Christ was white by shedding A fit and excellent smiliuda
forth blood: so the host is lifted up white. The former of these similitudes
is very apt, especially if in the application thereof, and likewise in the
interpretation thereof of the two hands of the priest, he had said which are,
and not which signify. For they are indeed two thieves robbing God of his
glory, and men of many a penie.

9 In the beginning of the fourth sermon of the body of Christ, he shows how
the mass is remembrance of Christ's death. This he shows thus: Altar
significat crucem, etc. The altar signifies the cross: the reason is, How the
Mass is a remembrance of Christ's death.
because on the altar the body and blood of Christ are sacramentally
consecrated: so upon the cross he was really sacrificed. The cup or chalice
signifies the sepulcher of Christ; because as in the chalice the body and
blood of Christ is contained: so in the sepulcher the body of Christ was
really contained. By the cover is understood the stone which was laid upon the
door of the sepulcher to cover it: so is the cover to the chalice. By the
corporal wherein the body of Christ is put, are understood the linen
clothes in which the body of Christ was wrapped. Is not this trim stuff?
what word is there in the scripture of an altar at the first institution of the
supper? Again here is no mention at all of the host: neither is the host put
into the chalice, as the body of Christ was laid in the grave. How also will
they prove that the cup that our Savior blessed at the first institution of
the supper, had a cover? Lastly the linen clothes whereof they speak, were
not used in the first supper, neither at the suffering of Christ, but after his
death, for the burying of the body, when the soul was departed from it:
neither was the body of Christ wrapped in linen clothes by the Apostles whose
successors they boast them selves to be, but by Joseph of Arimathea and
Nicodemus.

10 His first sermon for the first Lords day after the feast of the Trinity,
is upon these words, Habent Mosen and Prophetas, audiant ^llos. Here he
exhorts his auditors to salute the virgin, and says, First let us present
to the virgin Marie the ie well that she most Iocale.
loves, namely, Hail Marie, etc. then he shows what things are contained in
the text. Sctendum quod euangelium hodierum, etc. We must know that this days
gospel does declare 4. things very necessary to be known for our auisement. Et
sunt haec, Mundanalis Auisamento.
conuersatio, Diuinalis retributio, Infernalis dispositio, Scripturalis
confirmatio. And they are these, Worldly conversation, divine retribution or
rewarding, infernal disposition, scripturall confirmation.

11 The text of his second sermon for the same day is this, In domo patris mei
habeo quinque fratres. In my fathers house I have brethren, Luke 16. Then he
adds, that for declaration of the word House, we are to know that the whole
generality of creatures, as well heavenly as earthly, is called the house of
God. The reason whereof he makes to be this, namely, that as in the palace of
a great prince, above are chambers, Who ever saw any such palace?
beneath a stable for cattle, and underneath within the earth a prison for
malefactors: so in the house of God, above, that is, in the highest heaven are
chambers, to wit, By this reckning Christ has no friends in the world.
the 9. orders of angels, where dwell the friends of Christ, etc. beneath in the
world dwell beasts, seruitours, and clients; but the prison for male factours,
is in the heart of the earth, namely the infernal perpetual prison. After
Where is purgatory now become?
this because his text speaks of five brethren, he shows five fraternities
in the house of God, which are these, Fraternitas humanalis, and ista venit per
naturam. Fraternitas spiritualis, and ista venit per gratiam. Fraternitas
demonialis, and ista venit per culpam. Fraternitas angelicalis, and ista venit
per amicitiam. Fraternitas diuinalis, and ista venit per misericordiam. An
humane fraternity or brotherhoode, and this comes by nature. A spiritual
fraternity, and this comes by grace. A devilish fraternity, and that
comes by offense. An angelical fraternity, and this comes by friendship.
A divine fraternity, and this comes by mercy.

12 In his one sermon. In octava corporis Christi, he says, that he found that
Christ said two masses in his life time. One secretly with Christ said two
masses in his life time. Solenniter in pontificalibus.
his disciples when he ordained this sacrifice, the other solemnly and in his
pontificalibus on good friday. Of this he writes thus, leaf 109 Altar fuit
crux, mitra fuit, etc. His altar was the cross, his mitre the crown of
thorns, his rings on his hands were nails, his sandalls on his feet were
nails, his red hood Such hoodes would soon weary the popish priests.
was of his blood, his staff was the spear, the deacon was the thief on his
right hand, the subdeacon the thief on his left hand, his acolytes or waiting
men the virgin Marie and The thieves in higher office the^ the virgin Marie and
John.
John the Evangelist. Who will not wonder to hear these toys? yea, who will
not smile, or rather laugh right out? for what can be more childish and foolish?

13 In his first sermon for the second Lords day after Trinity, in the same
book the second side, having laid the foundation, he comes to build (as he
says) quatuor cameras, four chambers. Which are, Largitas gloriosa, Charit as
gratiosa, Equitas rigorosa, Pietas copiosa. the english of which terms I
leave to the learned reader.

14 In his second sermon for the same day, Three villages in the other world.
lease 112. he says that he found three villages in the other world according
to the scriptures, much differing in conditions. Prima est superius celestialis
and glortosa, Secunda inferius infernalis and tenebrosa, Tertia est in medio
purgatorialis and dolorosa. The first is above celestial or heavenly and
glorious, the second beneath infernal and dark, the third in the mids
purgatoriall and painful.

15 In his fourth sermon for the same day he notes three ways, after which
men go Three ways of^ going to heaven.
to heaven, leaf 155. Aliqui, says he, vadunt currendo vigorose, Aliqui
vadunt ambulando spaciose, Aliqui vadunt tracti rigorose: that is, Some go
running stoutly, some go walking largely, some go being drawn rigorously or
violently.

16 In his next sermon he tells us that he has found in holy scripture, that
by defect of love toward God, quatuor mortes venerunt generi humano, etc.
four deaths have come Foore deaths of mankind.
unto mankind, etc. Prima mors spiritualis quam debemus fugere. Secunda
corporalis quam debemus prouidere. Tertia gehennalis quam debemus precauere.
Quarta eternalis quam debemus horrescere. The first death is spiritual which
we must avoid, the second corporal which we must foresee, the third of hell
fire which we must take heed of, the fourth eternal which we must fear. The
2. last he does thus distinguish, making the third of the soul only till the
day of judgment: the fourth of soul and body for ever after the day of
judgment.

17 His text for the 7. Lords day after trinity is this, Misereor super
turbam, etc. I pity quiae triduo me sustinent. Poterit habere abundantiam and
prouisionem de omnibus sibi necessariis.
the multitude because they have sustained me these three days. His text
divided, etc. he says, quilibet cuiuscunque sit status, etc. Every one of what
degree soever, may have abundance and provision of all things necessary for
him, is he sustain Christ three days. The^ he notes 7. degrees of men, 1.
Domin^um, Seven degrees of men.
temporalium, of temporal lords. 2. prelatoru^, of prelates. 3. religiosorum,
of religious persons. 4. clericorum, of clerks or learned men. 5. coniugatorum,
of married persons. 6. viduarum, of widows. 7. virginum, of virgins. Then he
notes three days to be three virtues, which every one of those degrees of men
ought to have. 1. est iustitia generalis, generali Three virtues necessary for
every degree of men.
justice. 2. modestia personalis, personal modesty. 3. reuerentia diuinalis,
divine reverence. These are for temporal lords; for prelates he notes these
three, presidentia spiritualis, spiritual presidence. Providentia pastoralis,
pastoral providence. Sanctimonia personalis, personal sanctimonie. For
religious persons he sets down these three, Paupertas apostolicalis,
apostolical poverty. Castitas angelicalis, angelical chastity. Obedientia
vniuersalis, universal obedience. The fourth triduum, that is, the fourth 3.
days he makes these three, Dilige^ter officiare, to setue diligently. Deuote
celebrars, to celebrate devoutly. Honest conuersari, to live honestly. The
fifth three days he makes these three virtues, Amor cordialis, cordial or
hearty love. sides coniugalis, marriage faithfulness. sedulitas doctrinalis,
spiritual devotion. Afflictio corporalis, bodily affliction. Miseratio
fraternalis, brotherly compassion. The seventh three days are these,
Verecundia in facie, bashfulnesse in the face. Silentium in voce, silence in
voice. Obedientia ad parents in opere. Obedience in work to parents. To all
those that have these three virtues, he says that Christ will say, Misereor
super hanc turbans, quodecce iam triduo sustinent me, etc.

18 In his fourth sermon for the 9. Lords day after Trinity, he notes four
occasions Four occassons of falling into sin.
whereby devout persons fall into sin, leaf 160. B. Prima est per
diabolicalem tentatione^. 2. per familiarem affectionem. 3. per deliciosam
conuersationem. 4. per negligentialem operattonem. The first is by devilish
tentation, the second by familiar affection, the third by delicious
conversation, the fourth by negligent working.

19 In the next sermon but one he says, that as in an apple there are certain
houses wherein are the kernells: so in the four parts of the earth there are
four chambers. Prima Four chambers in the earth.
est infernus peruersorum. 2. est limbus pueronu^. 3. est locus purgandorum. 4.
est l^mbus patrum. leaf 136. A. The first is hell for the froward, the second
the limb or well of children, the third is the place of them that are to be
purged, the fourth is the limb or well of the fathers. Where find they this
divinity in the Scripture?

20 In the second sermon for the 11. Lords day after Trinity he says, that
he found the souls of purgatory to have four conditions Four differences
between us and them in purgatory.
very differing from us so long as we live in this world, leaf 174. A. Prima
est stabilit as in gratia. 2. est securit as de gloria. 3. acerbitas de pena.
4. paupert as nimia. The first is stabilitie in grace, the second is security
or certentie of glory, the third sharpnes of punishment, the fourth extreme
poverty. By the two first of All in purgatory, are beggars.
these, that is manifest that in my former treatise I have said in the
seventh argument thereof, namely that in peoperie there is no sound joy and
comfort. For what sound joy and comfort can there be without stabilitie in
grace, and certentie of glory? verily where these things are doubted of, there
can be nothing but fear.

21 HIs text of his first sermon for the 14. Lords day, leaf 189. is this,
Are there not ten clensied? Luke 17. In the end of this sermon he delivers
us this deep point of divinity. In his 1. sermon for Dom. in all is he
mentions but and penitential works.
As (says he) this word Innocentia or obedientia has ten letters: so this
word penitentia. Because as the form of baptism, Wherein innocence is given
to the party baptized, consists of ten words, and obedience in ten
commandments: so does penance in ten works of penance before mentioned:
therefore our theme says, Are there not? that is, ye acertenly there are
ten, to wit, that are clansed by the works of penance.

22 In the next sermon, that text being Go show your selves to the priests,
after the reading thereof, thus he writes For love of this word, I have sought
in the scripture, as well in the old as in the new testament, how many ways
God has observed for healing the leprosy: and I find he has cured it 5.
ways. Primo per ablutionem corporalem, by bodily washing. 2. per tactum
manualem, by touching Five ways of curing the leprosy.
with the hand. 3. per ostensionem visualem, by visible showing. 4. per
absconsionem sinualem, by bosom hiding. 5. per separationem personalem, by
personal separation. The third of these he says that his text speaks of.
Unto the fifth he applies the words of God unto Moses touching Miriam, after
that he had stricken her with the leprosy, Let her be shut out of the host
seven days, Numb. 12. where, upon the words seven days, he notes that by
them are understood seven things, wherein stands perfection of religion.
These seven he sets down thus. Obedientia generalis, general obedience.
Paupertas apostolicalis, apostolical poverty. Cast^tas angelicas, Seven
things in which stands the perfection of religion.
angelical chastity. Devotio in officio, devotion in service. In ore
silentium, silence in the mouth. Penitentia corporalis, bodily penance. Et
patientia virtualis, and virtuall patience. Will not any man think all this to
be profound divinity?

23 In his fourth sermon for the 16. Lords day after Trinity, leaf 209. A.
he has these words, Transeuntes primam and secundam custodiam, etc. When they
had passed the first Act 12. 10.
and second watch, they came to the iron gate, that is, to purgatory, because
as iron is harder and wood; so the pains of purgatory is harder then iron,
and the pain of purgatory exceeds the pain of this world. But there is
comfort for them, that this purging time being finished, they enter into the
city of paradise. Wherefore it follows in the foresaid authority, which
opened unto them by it own accord. Is not this as profound divinity as the
former? what comparison is there betwixt the iron gate where by S. Peter had no
pain, and purgatory, of the pains whereof S. Peter in purgatory.
the Papists do so often complain? Again if the iron gate were purgatory,
then Peter went through purgatory. Will the Popes bear this that Peter whose
successors they all boast themselves to be, should pass through the fire of
purgatory? Again how does this similitude agree with it self? for Peter had
first been in prison, and being released out of prison, he came unto, and
passed through the iron gate, whence it is evident that Peter had been in the
hardest condition before he came to the iron gate: but this great and learned
Doctor tells us the contrary, namely that the pains of purgatory are
greater and harder then all former pains. Lastly this iron gate was hard by
the city, whereby he understands paradise or heaven: but purgatory is as
far distant from heaven as the earth, yea somewhat further then the upper
part of the earth, because by their doctrine it is within the earth.

23 In the 2. sermon for the 19. Lords day he has this sweet latin, the
english whereof I do omit, as not being greatly material. Modo in vnaparva
summa, ego epilogavi omnes rations, quibus eleuatur and excitatur cor creature
ad confidendum in creatore, and sunt septem. Prima est fidelis integritas. 2.
cordialis puritas. 3. lachrymabilis vbertas. 4. timoralis serupulositas. 5.
misericordialis largitas. 6. doctrinalis sedulitas. 7. virtualis firmitas.

24 The like latin is in the first sermon for the next day, where he sets
down haec tria puncta multum notabilia. Primus est humilitas diuinalis.
Secundus est peruersitas humanalis. Tertius est indignitas meritalis.

25 The text of his third sermon for the 22. Lords day is this, Patientiam
habe in me, etc. Have patience toward me, and I will pay thee all, Math. 16.
In the end of this sermon thus he writes, Sciatis quod modo poterimus, etc.
that is, Understand that if we can pay him with ten works he will be content;
which is signified in this word patientia, wherein are ten letters: because as
we have offended against the ten commandments, so we must satisfy with ten
penitential works. Here to omit the divinity of the doctor in this place,
let the reader observe how foully he was deceived in Arithmetike, even in
numeration. S. Vincents arithmetike fails him in numeration.
For if he had remembered to have taken a stick (as men speak) to have told
the letters of patientia, he should have found but nine. If any shall answer
that he meant the accusative case patientiam, as it is in the vulgar latin
text, I object again, that he himself says not so much, but plainly sets
down the nominative case patientia: and further to the latin word, which is
arbitrarie according to the mind and understanding of the translator, I oppose
the original Greek word (which is most authentical) (...), where are twelve
letters.

26 Thus much shall suffice for a taste of such sour liquour as is in S.
Vincents vessel; yea let this suffice for a taste of all the rest. Such as we
have seen these two Doctors to be, such for the most part are the other
popish writers of that age, and of these times of popery. I had indeed
thought to have given the like taste of some other of their writings, but
because I think this already given to be sufficient (if not more then
sufficient, except the matter were sweeter and pleasanter) I will therefore
here spare the further pains of my self and of the reader.

27 These things I have thought good thus to write, for the avoiding of all
advantage against me by any actions of slander, for obiecting so much
ignorance (besides the blasphemies) to those times wherein popery did wear
the garland. If I had not thus laid down their own words, it may be many
would have thought, that there had not bin so high blasphemies, neither so
foul and gross absurdities with such rudenes and barbarism, as by these few
things I have showed, and might have showed more largely, if I had had
convenient leisure, and had thought the patience of the reader would have borne
the reading of more such unsavory stuff.

28 By these blasphemies thus discovered, far beyond the opinion (I think)
of all that understand not the latin tongue, and that have not bin acquainted
with these deep mysteries of the iniquity of popery, I wish all christians,
that as now they see popery to be more blasphemous the^ ever they had thought
it to have been: so For ever here after they hate all popery both the head
and the tail, both the substance and all the accidents, with a more perfect
hatred then they have done.

29 And because I do verily think, that many papists themselves did never
imagine so high abominations to be contained in popery, as having been
learned to believe as the Church believes, that ignorance is the mother of
devotion, and such other like principles, and having not therefore ever truly
understood the substance of popery: I do therefore also again earnestly
exhort them, as they love Gods glory, which now they see altogether impaired
and disgraced by popery so for the time to come, they loath this religion as
much as ever ignorantly they have loved it: and that they think it as beastly,
as filthy, and abominable, as ever hitherto, they being deceived have
esteemed it reasonable, amiable, and acceptable in the sight of God.

30 All such as love learning, let them in like manner abhor this Romish
religion. For although now all kind of learning do flourish by the means of
the gospel: yet if ever popery prevail as it has done, and recover the
former strength (as I hope it shall never do) doubtless all learning will
wither and decaie again. In the time of the Apostles, and in the age of the
primitive church, the gifts of Gods spirit did much more abound then now they
do: yet as popery spread it self over the face of the earth, so those gifts
decayed, until there was as much barbarism, as popery. Let the like
therefore be feared if popery should again ascend the stairs of her former
dignity.

31 If any shall object against these things that I have noted out of popish
writings, for the disgracing of popery, that in many of our books like wise
there are some vanities and absurdities: I answer that though this should be An
answer to an objection touching the former popish testimonies.
granted, yet first the matters are not so blasphemous, so gross, so rude,
and so ridiculous, as these that I have noted, and a thousand yea ten thousand
the like. Secondly the number of them is not so great. Thirdly the persons that
have written such vanities, are not of that credit in our whole church as these
and other are with their Church. Fourthly our men's books are not published by
such high authority and solemn allowance, as the books before mentioned and
other the like writings of theirs have bin.

THE SEVENTH PART.
IT remains now, that according to my promise, I make the reader a little
banquet with some of the Virgins miracles. Herein I will be the briefer, by how
much the larger I have bin in the former. I will not therefore take all,
neither the largest dishes, least I should leave her table bare: but I will
only make choice of the least but yet the daintiest iunkats, that so the
taking of them away may be the less espied. Yet what need I fear the missing
of any thing from her table? her power is such, that as they say of the cross
upon which Christ suffered, that whatsoever is taken from it, yet it is not
diminished, but remains as ample as it was at the first: so we may like wise
say of these her iunkats, that though we should take neuerso many of them, yet
her table would be nothing the barer. And therefore whereas the book, or
rather the closet and storehouse of her miracles (for so it is called,
Promptuarium discipuli de miraculis beat Marie virginis) contains but 99.
miracles, this may well be added unto them for an other to make up the whole
hundred, that whatsoever a man takes away, yet her table remains as fully
furnished as at the first before any dish was touched. And that no man may
think these miracles to have been of mean account in the popish Church, let
him first understand that both they were solemnly read in the churches for
lessons in their public service, upon such feastiuall days as they did
observe unto the virgin; as also the great divines of the popish Church did
commonly allege the^ in their sermons for authorities to prove and confirm
many of the points of their religion. Both these things I have made manifest.
Again, the gatherer together of these miracles, in his prologue to the whole
work, does commend the dainties following to be Omni melle dulciora, sweeter
then any honey. What is this but to compare them with the written word of God,
which is in like manner commended? psalm. 19. 10.

2. Now for the manner of setting down these miracles, I will for the more
breuities sake altogether omitthe latin (except now and then some special
word or phrase which I will put in the margent) and content my self only with
the english faithfully translated. And in case the whole miracle be very long,
I will only set down the sum thereof briefly. The contents of each example
or miracle shall be placed in the margent. And all this I will do so
faithfully, that no Papist whatsoever shall be able justly to charge me with
any false dealing.

3 To come then to the miracles themselves, I will pass by the first and
second example, and begin with the third, the text whereof is this. There was
a certain woman of honest conversation, who although being Marie delivers a
woman from damnation, whichin her confession wittingly concealed a great sin.
married she did wear a secular habit, yet she lived a regular life.
Notwithstanding in her youth she had committed a great fault, which for shame
she durst not tell any man. When she confessed her self to the priest, cloking
Palliato crimine sic conclusit. Reddo me culpabilem.
her sin thus she concluded. Of all that I have said or not said, I yield my
self guilty, and saying this, oftentimes she sighed grievously. The priest
perceiving this, did cunningly Calide tentabat^(...)^
try to draw from her that which lay hid: when he could not, he admonished
her to reveal her conscience to the Prior of the next Monastery; and he
advised him warily Et ipsc caute eu^ investiga^e persuasit. ^(...)^
to ask her: but neither could he wrest any thing from her. Notwithstanding
this woman was wont dailybefore the altar or the image of the blessed virgin,
with weeping to open her foresaid fault. At the last when she died in this
manner, and her daughter which dwelt in a village some what far of, was
looked for at her burial, she at the length coming with howling and mourning,
and her hair spread abroad, embraced the body of her mother, and cried out,
Alas mother why do thou forsake me a wretched creature? then with her
lamentation she moved the standers by: and the soul of her mother presently
returned, and waking as it were out of sleep, said, The Lord commanding I am
revived: One raised from ^he dead to confess unto a priest a sin before
concealed.
take away the things wherewith I am covered, and let me arise. When she was
thus set at liberty, a priest was called for, and the fault opened. And she
testifying that by the intercession of the blessed virgin she was delivered,
said unto all them that flocked unto the miracle, I being delivered to the
tormentours was drawn to punishment: but the blessed virgin succouring me
said, and asked the^ that did lead me, why they durst presume to lead her
handmaid, and bad them quickly Et us cito donec a domino sententiarer me
deponerent ai^. So the devils were very hasty to take her before sentence.
to let me go, until I had sentence of the Lord. The which being done, she
coming to her son prayed, saying, I pray thee, O son, let not that soul
be damned, which did so often bewail her sin before me. To whom the Lord
said, thou know mother, that without confession she cannot be saved: but
because I can deny nothing unto thee, let her return and confess, and so she
shall be delivered. An angel therefore being presently sent, has brought me
back again. Having therefore made my confession I will return. Quo dicto
figuans se, capite in sevetro inclinato spiritum exhalauit.
This said, she signed her self and bowing her head unto the beer, she gave
up the ghost.

4 The next miracle is said to be the third: but here the memory of the author
or of the printer failed. For the former was the third. And so by this means
there is an error in the number of the miracles following. For they are said
to be but ninety nine, whereas indeed if they had been numbered, they are a
just hundred, besides that which before I spoke of, namely, that take we away
what of, namely, that take we away what we will of them, yet the number will be
perfect. Now although this error have escaped the writer or the printer, yet I
will follow the same, that if it should please the reader to try my
faithfulness by having recourse to their own book, he might the sooner find
that which he seeks for. The sum of this twisethird miracle is this.

5 A certain woman with a strange dream, when she did awake was deprived
The wife of a soldier having lost her wits, is helped by the virgin.
of her sense, so that she thought that the faith which before she had, was
betwixt her paps and did continually issue out. Her friends being full of
heaviness for this misfortune, took her and lead her through the place of the
Saints, to try if by any means they could recover her. So they lodged in a
Church of the holy Trinity, but the holy Trinity would not restore health,
but reserved the gift for the virgin, etc. Then was holy water made adjured
with many coniurings, but the woman A woman the worse being put into holy
water.
put thereinto was the worse and madder then before. At length the year
coming about, and the feast of the Purification of holy Marie approaching, she
was brought to a certain Church built in the honor of the virgin, and in
fashion far unlike other Churches, yet good enough for the Heremit^ Satis
tamen congrua ad habitandum heremitis.
to dwell in. Whilst therefore she lodged here at the foresaid feast, she was
made as whole as if she had never been evil, etc.

6 The fourth example is of a certain monk that being much overcome of wine,
The virgin delivers a drunken Monk that had bin devout unto her.
and afterward recovering his senses, returning home ward was met withal by
the devil: first in the likeness of a great bull, secondly in the likeness of a
foul dog, thirdly in the likeness of a cruel lion. But always a certain
fair virgin with her hair hanging over The Papists make the virgin a friend
to drunkards.
her shoulders, being present chased him away, and the last time took the
monk by the hand and signed him with the cross in his forehead, and bad him
go to an other monk and confess his sin, and do whatsoever he should
enjoin him, etc. The fifth miracle is as follows.

7 There was a notorious and most wicked thief minding nothing but the service
A certain thief did fast the vigils of Marie, and he could not die without
the sacraments.
of the devil: yet this good he had, that he did devoutly fast the vigils of
blessed Marie with bread and water: and when he went about his theft, he
saluted her with the devotion that he could, desiring her that she would not
suffer him to die in his mortal sin. Now when being taken he was hanged,
for three days he hung and could not die. He called therefore to them that
passed by that they should bring him a priest. The priest coming with the
Judge and the people, he was taken from the gallows, saying, that the blessed
virgin had sustained him. So he was set at liberty, and a while after he
finished his life laudablie.

8 To omit the 8. next miracles, the sum of the 14. is this. A certain
devout woman Marie delivers the son of a certain woman from captivity.
Inconsolabiliter flebat.
had a son taken captive in war. She therefore wept most uncomfortably,
and made many prayers for her son to the virgin Marie. At length profiting
nothing, she said unto the virgin, O blessed virgin Marie, I have often
entreated thee for the deliverance of my son; and thou have not heard me:
therefore as my son is taken from me, so The woman cries quit with the
virgin.
will I take thy son from thee, and I will put him in custody as a pledge for
my son. Then taking the image of the child out of It was high time for the
virgin to help this woman to her son that she might recover her own.
the lap of Marie, she went home, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and
shut it diligently in her chest. And behold the night following blessed Marie
appeared to the captive young man and delivered him. So upon his return, his
mother restored the image of Jesus to Marie, etc.

9 The fifteenth is somewhat like the former, in this manner. A certain
Matrone very devout to the virgin, had a little daughter which she had put
forth to nurse (as it seems) Marie delivers a little girl from a woolfe.
in a village next by. It fell so out, that as this infant was playing in the
street, a woolfe came and ran away with it, neither could any man stay the
woolfe or save the child. News of this being brought to the mother, as she
sat at the table, she arose and went into the chapel and took the image of
our Savior out of the bosom of his mother, and with many tears brake forth
into these words: Thou shall never Nunquom rehabebis filium tuum, nisi mihi
restituas filiam meam.
have thy son again, except thou restore me my daughter. Upon this the
virgin commanded the woolfe, and presently some following the woolfe recovered
the child, etc. So the woman restored the virgins son, etc.

10 The sum of the 16. example is this Marie preserves a child from fire.
A certain woman that daily saluted the virgin with Aue Maria, one day having
none to send to the field with her husbands dinner, she was constrained to go
her self. Having therefore a little son, she left him at home, and saluting
the virgin with an Ave, she committed him unto her keeping. In her absence, her
house and all therein being burnt, at her return with many tears she
expostulated the matter with the virgin. Then they sought the child, and found
him altogether without hurt.

11 Here passing by the six next, the 23. Marie delivers an innocent woman
from death.
is this. A certain adulterer had an honest wife and much devoted to the
blessed virgin: but the miserable adulterer did hate her exceedingly. By the
inconstancy of her husband, she came to such want, that she was constrained to
nurse the child of a certain soldier. The adulterer for envy of his wife,
came very secretly and cut the childs throat, and departed early. When the
woman awaked, and would have given the child suck, she saw his throat cut. Then
she brake out into so great a cry, that all in the lodging did awake. But this
was unknown to the father and all in the city. The woman apprehended is
brought unto judgment: and when she was judged to die, having no body to
speak for her, she looking up to heaven, said, O Marie, thou know mine
innocence: to thee I commend my self. These words ended, Metibi recommendo.
there came one lady which did bear a fair boy, and with these words spoke
unto all; Stay your selves, O Judges: because this Sustinete vos iudices.
boy shall be judge this day. Then presently the child said unto the judge, So
ought judgment to be of a murderer; let the person murdered be brought, and
let the answer of the woman be heard. All men maruailed at the wisdom of this
child, and presently the child killed was brought. Then said the child in
judgment, Judge tighteously, O ye sons of men: and he said to the child
murdered, In the name of the Lord arise, and name him that killed thee.
Immediately the child that was killed arose, and having never spoke before,
then he began to speak, and with his finger did show the murderer. So the
woman was dismissed and the murderer apprehended. In the mean time the lady
with her child vanished away: and the adulterer being bound to an horse tail
most miserably died.

12 The sum of the 25. miracle is this. In a certain monastery of Nuns,
there was a very devout virgin named Bettres, which for her devotion being
Wardnesse, Beatrix facta nutrix.
did discharge this office so much the more devoutly, by how much the more
freely she did it. At length a certain priest entising her to filthiness, she
withstood him a long time. But being in the end overcome, she came to the
altar of the blessed virgin which there was Patroness, and resigned her keys,
as not being able any longer to abide the tentation: so she secretly followed
the priest. But within a little time he forsook her, by which means she came
to great poverty; and being ashamed to return to her cloister, she became a
common whore: and having lived many years publicly in that sin, at length
she came unto the gate of her Monastery in a secular habit, and asked the
portresse whether she knew Bettres sometime Wardnesse of that Monastery. To
whom the portresse answered that she knew her well, and that she was a good
lady (or mistress) and holy, and that without rebuke she had lived in Domina
proba.
that monastery from her infancy to that day. Notans sed non obseruans. The
virgin supplieth an harlots place for 15. years. All which time the whole
church of Rome erred in praying to her in heaven, she being here in earth.
This Bettres noting these words but not observing them, would have departed.
But the mother of mercy appeared unto her in the shape of a woman, and said, I
have supplied thine office for fifteen years of thine absence: now return
into thy house and repent, for no man has known thy going out. For in her
form and habit, the virgin the mother of God had executed her office, etc. so
she was restored.

13 The 27. in sum is this. A certain soldier a young man, dwelling with an
other soldier by whom he was maintained, being A quo infeuda.tu^ erat.
in his flourishing age, but flourishing more in virginity, by envy not with
standing of the devil, began to be grievously tempted and to burn in lust
toward his mistress. This in modesty he concealed a whole year, but at the
last ouercomming shame, he opened his desire unto her. She being honest and
faithful to her husband repelled him, whereby he was the more afflicted. Then
with tears making his temptation known to a certain Heremite, this holy man
faithfully answered, Fiducialiter respondit. Sound counsel against tentation.
that he would give him sound counsel, which was, that for a whole year he
should salute the virgin every day with an 100. Aue Maria. The young man
willingly performed this, and when he had done it the last time, as he came out
of the Church, he saw a most beautiful Matrone far excelling all the glory
of man, getting upon his horse and holding the bridle. He maruailing what she
should be, she answered, does my person please thee? then he said that he had
never seen one fairer then her. She answered again, I will be thy wife, come
unto me and I will give thee a kiss: she said also, Now is The Papists make
the virgin to love kissing.
the marriage begun; such a day before my son, it shall be finished. By
this word he knew her to be the Lords mother. From that hour he was freed from
the tentation: and he reported all this to the Heremite, who rejoiced greatly,
and said he would be at the marriage. The day coming, and the Heremite being
present, the foresaid soldier being in an agony gave up the ghost: and so
entered agonizans spiritum exalauit.
the heavenly brid-chamber to celebrate the promised marriage.

14 Now because I promised to make the reader but a short banquet, with these
iunka^s: A man delivered from cond^mnation for offering one candle to the
virgin.
I will therefore pass by many other, and come to the sum of the 49. which
is this. A certain soldier a young man, much given to the world, had a devout
wife that prayed often to the virgin Marie for his conversion. Now in a
certain night, her husband in spirit was brought to the judgment of God, and
there accused of all his sins. And being forsaken, the judge asked; if there
were none of the saints whom he had honored at any time. The virgin Marie
answered, that once in reverence of her he had given a great wax candle; so at
her request he was discharged. When therefore the devils would have laid on him,
with a burning candle he burned the, combussit eos, and viriliter se defendit.
and manfully defended himself. Thus with fear and trouble he labored and
swet mightily in his bed, and so howled that his wife Inuenit ontem haspidam
quasi corticem de arbore.
heard him. In the morning therefore she found his skin rough, as it had been
the bark of a tree, his hairs long, graie, and hard, and suspecting
adultery, she cried out. The servants running to their weapons, he awaking
could not speak, but made an horrible noise as if it had becne an ox. At last
recovering himself, he reported the whole matter, and was converted, etc.

15 The 50. miracle. There was a certain man in name only religious, but to
all things a drop of Christ's blood waieth more then all the sins of the world.
that concerned religion hard and negligent. This man not with standing
accustomed himself to piaie unto the virgin, and once a daic to say an 100.
Av^^ Maria. Being brought unto extremity, and taken into a transe, the Duclus
ad extrema, raptus est ad extasin.
devils presented him to the highest judge, craving sentence that he might be
judged as their own. God therefore knowing his sins many ways, said he
should be damned. In the mean time came the blessed virgin, offering The
virgin brings a writ of error to r^uer^e the former judge meant of her son.
the rolls in which were contained all his Ave Maria: desiring her son the
second time to proceed to judgment. But the devils brought many books of
his sins: so on both parts the books were put into the balance, but his
sins waied heavier. Then the blessed virgin seeing that she did not profit,
did most deuou^ly make supplication to her son, saying, Remember, dear
son, of my substance thou tookest substance, visible, palpable and passible:
and therefore give me one drop of thy blood which was shed for sinners in
thy passion. Then said he, It is impossible to deny thee any thing: yet know
that one drop of my blood waiethvp all the sins of the whole world. Take
therefore that which thou have asked. The which she taking put it into the
skoales, and it ouerwaied all the sins of the foresaid religious man, as if
they had been but light ashes. Then the devils departing consounded, Tanquam
savillam.
cried, saying, The lady is too merciful to Christians, therefore we fail so
often as she puts her self into the conflict. His soul therefore was
brought again to the body, and he recovering told all these things, and
Monkerie a reward of lying.
was made a monk.

16 Like unto the former is the 51. the The virgin a friend to encrochers.
sum and effect where of is this. A certain secular man occupied in country
business, as he was many ways evil; so in plowing of his ground he would
encroch upon his neighbors, and steal from them. Not with standing he had
sometime the virgin in his mind, and did often deuou^ly salute her. When he
was dead, the devils gathered them selves together hoping to have his soul.
The angels also were present, and she wed the good things that he had done: the
devils like wise brought forth his infinite evils. Here upon they triu^phed,
as thinking they had gotten the day: but one of the angels pleaded that he was
wont with great devotion to salute the virgin. The unclean spirits hearing
these things left his soul, and went away ashamed. So was his soul delivered
from the power of his adversaries.

17 The 53. example is of one that having learned of a virgin, that cuery one
that fasted How good a thing (...) is to fast on saterdaies in the honor of
the virgin.
on saterdaies in honor of the virgin Marie, should never die without the
sacraments, did therefore observe the same: and being beheaded, his head when
it was cut off cried, Confession, confession. The 54. is like unto this.

18 The 57. A certain soldier did daily salute the blessed virgin Marie with
an Aue One saved only by saluting daily the virgin Matir, without doing any
other good thing.
Maria, when he arose in the morning, and at night when he laid him down to
sleep. He did no more good, and by the grace of the virgin he was saved. Like
unto which is the 45. example of a notable thief that nener had done any good
thing, but only fasted on saturday to the blessed lady, and provided her one
mass, yet by the grace of the virgin he spoke five words at his end, by
which he was saved. The like is also in the 60. example, of a certain priest
that was a notorious sinner, and drowned as he went about his sin, or after
he had committed it: and yet saluting the virgin he was saved. But this was
mentioned before in the service of the virgin made by Bernardine de Busti.
Lastly, like unto the former is the 72. example, which is of a grievous sinner
that never had done good, but only saluted the virgin every day: and yet
being dead, and challenged earnestly by the devils to be theirs, the virgin
Marie rescued her, and saved her.

19 The sum of the 78. example is this. A priest desires to see the virgins
beauty.
A certain priest of Paris very devout to the Virgin, entreated earnestly to
see her beauty. At length he was certified by an angel that his prayers was
heard by the virgin, and that on such a day and hour she would come unto
him, and he should see her but withal that afterward he should be blind. The
priest was glad of this ridings, and willingly accepted the condition. But
after the departure of the angel, he began to think with himself, that if he
should loose both his eyes, he should be utterly undone, a miserable person,
and a beggar, as being unfit for any thing. There fore he determined with
himself to behold her but The priest coseneth the virgin.
with one eye, and to shut his other eye, and that if he might keep the sight
of one eye, that would be sufficient. When the day appointed came the virgin
appeared, and he put his hand before one of his eyes, and with the other did
behold her, seeing so much of her beauty and glory, as can be expressed with
words, or thought in heart. So he lost the The beauty of the virgin.
sight of one eye: not with standing he was so ravished with her beauty, that
he greatly lamented that he had not beheld her with both his eyes, and
reproved himself for shutting of one eye, wishing that he were wholly blind,
so as he might see her more fully. Wherefore he prayed more earnestly, that he
might see her the second time. The angel therefore was sent again to certify
him of the second coming of his lady. The priest said, that if he had a
thousand eyes, he could be content to loose them all for ever, upon condition
that he might see her again. Then the angel signified that he should see her
again, and that he should not only enjoy that eye which already he had, but
also have the other eye restored. And so it came to pass: whereby we may
consider how excellent the beauty of the virgin is, and how delectable a thing
it is to behold the same with our eyes.

20 The 83. example. A certain painter painted the devil with horns and
other Marie vpholdeth a painter from falling.
members as foully as he could, to make him the more horrible: but he painted
the image of the blessed virgin Marie, so comely and so fair as he could with
diverse colors. The devil therefore was very angry with it, and envied it:
and in all have came to the painter, and questioned with him, saying, Why have
thou made me so horrible and evil favored, and the blessed virgin Marie so
fair and so comely? He answered, because the thing was so in truth, as the
picture made, showed. The devil being angry, upon a certain day would have
thrown the painter down headlong from a lost, where he painted the image of
the blessed virgin Marie: and he brake the confregit ligna in quibus stabat.
scaffold whereon the painter stood. But as the painter was falling, presently
the image of vt casum petijt.
the most goodly virgin put forth her hand to the painter, and held him
strongly that he If her image be so strong, how strong th^n is her self?
might not fall: and so kept him from the devil.

21 The sum of the 84. miracle. In a certain church built to the honor of
S. Michael, in a mountain called the tomb of Michael, there was the image of
the virgin made of wood, with a veil on her head in manner of a mitre. This
church by lightning was once set on fire and burned. But when The image of the
father and the son no doubt were in that Church: might not they also as well
have been preserved?
the fire came to the place where the virgins image was, as though it feared
the image, it did not so much as touch the same: yea the white veil upon her
head had not so much as any savor of fire.

22 The 93. in sum is this. A certain ignorant priest that knew no mass but
the An ignorant priest suspended by a bishop.
ladies mass, being complained of to the Bishop, was by him suspended from
saying mass afterward. By this means therefore being after this in great
necessity, and praying for help to the virgin, she bad him go The
virginpatronizeth an ignorant priest: why then do puritans condemn such
ministers?
to the Bishop, and will him in her behalf to restore him to his office. The
priest objected that he was poor and a despised person, and that therefore he
should not be heard, neither have any access to the Bishop. Yet go (said the
virgin) and I will make the way for thee. But, said the priest, he will not
believe my words. She answered, thou shall tell him The virgin too kind to do
so much for a priest that had so little faith.
for a token, that in such an hour and in such a place, as he was sewing his
sackcloth, I held it on one side and help him; then will he presently believe
thee. In the morning therefore this priest went to the Bishop with this
message. The Bishop hearing it maruailed, and admitted him again to his place.
Let these dishes suffice the reader for a banquet: by these he may discern the
rest.

THE EIGHT PART.
I Have not gathered these, neither written any other thing of the devotion of
the papists toward the virgin, to disgrace her: far be it from me, and from
all other Christistians: whom God has commended as blessed, him or her must
no man disgrace. Yea, as God has pronounced her blessed above all other women,
in regard that he honored her with being mother to our Savior: so must all
men yield her that prerogative. Not with standing as we must not deny her any
thing that God has granted her; so also must we take heed, that we be not
more liberal unto her, then God himself has been. Especially we must
beware, that we make her not rich with the spoils of God. And this is the
great fault of the Papists, both toward the virgin and also toward her
saints, yea toward them that were never sanctified: yea sometime toward such,
as whom they can not prove by good demonstration, ever to have bin in the
world. All these they think that they never honor sufficiently, till they
take the crown from Gods head, and from the head of his son Christ Jesus,
and set it upon their head. And so, as they do most extreme wrong to God and
to Christ Jesus: so also they do not honor, but highly dishonor them, whom
they pretend most to honor. For what greater dishonor can there be then
mockery? and what greater mockery is there, then to give to any person
greater honor, then of right belongs unto him?

2 As this is manifest of them by many other things, so especially the same
appears most evidently by these miracles which I have here set down, and by
many other partly contained in that book from whence I took these, and partly
dispersed in other books, and not comprehended in the former. For we have seen
how they make the virgin a patroness of many notorious sins and impieties.
We have seen how they make her to make more account of one Aue Maria, and of
one wax candle offered unto her, then of all duties belonging unto God, in as
much as she has saved them (as they say) that have honored her, though they
had committed never so many, and never so great and heinous sins against God.
We have seen how they make God to be mutable, in as much as he has at her
word oftentimes reuersed his own sentence, and saved them who^ before he had
condemned. Finally we have seen, how flatly they contradict the Scriptures in
most of these miracles: for the Scripture expressly Luke 16. 26.
says, that betwixt heaven and hell is such a great gulf or distance, that
they which would go from one place to an other can not: but they make this to
be an ordinary matter, both for the virgin Marie, and also for the angels, yea
likewise for the souls of men.

3 Further concerning those miracles, which the Papists so falsely ascribe unto
the virgin Marie, they are to be considered, not only as a part of the matter
of popery: but also as a means and chief pillar whereby especially the
worship of the virgin in popery, has bin vpholden and maintained. The same is
likewise to be said of the like miracles of their other saints. For wherefore
have they read them, and preached them in their churches? has it not bin to
keep the people in the more devout worship of them, and to make them to think
them half as good at the least, as God himself? verily it can not be denied.

4 Now what use are we to make of all these things thus added to my former
treatise? The use of the ^ddicion.
Are we only to laugh at them, and to make our selves merry with them in a
carnal manner? It may be some will make none other use of them; it may be some
will buie this whole book, only for that purpose: but truly such shall
greatly pervert my meaning. We may indeed (as before I have said in the
treatise) laugh at them in some sort, so we do it in an holy manner with the
spirit of Eliah, as he skorned the foolishnes or rather extreme madness of the
priests of Baal: but besides this, we are to apply these things many other
ways, which I will only briefly note, leaving the further consideration of
them to the godly reader.

5 First therefore, since all these things do most lively show the extreme
folly, and high abominatio^ of popery: how ought all papists to be ashamed of
their religion? How ought all Protestants that sometimes have bin papists, to
be grieved for their popery? How ought they likewise to mourn for any of
their friends, yea for any other yet remaining in that estate, and yet shut up
in the shadow of death? How joyful likewise and thankful ought we to be, that
God has opened our eyes to see these things, that he has not sent his angel
only into our houses (as sometime he did into the house of Lot, to take him
and guide him out of Sodo^, before fire came from heaven to destroy that city)
but also has given us his holy spirit in our hearts, and thereby delivered us
from so ridiculous, so gross, and so horrible a religion.

6 Further we see by these things, how dangerous it is not to believe the
truth, and how blockish we are, if we be left unto our selves. Verily there is
no error so foolish, so absurd, so gross, so abominable, and so monstrous,
but that if God do forsake us, if he take his spirit from us, if he leave us
to our selves, we are ready to believe it as truth; yea to be zealous therein;
yea far more zealous, then any of Gods own children are in the truth.

7 O therefore let us not deceive our selves: late us hate popery as such a
monster ought to be hated: let us make that account of the truth, and give such
credit and obedience theru^to, that for our contempt and light account thereof,
God neither give popery any return again unto us. Let us earnestly pray, let
us keep watch by night and ward by day, let us always with all carefulnes
look unto our selves, let us take heed of all Jesuits, seminatie priests, yea
of all papists, and likewise of all other means, whereby we may be entangled
with this filthy and sottish religion, and be drawn thereunto. Let us delight
in the communion and fellowship of al them that love the truth, and are able to
confirm, strengthen, and help us forward in this religion which now generally
we profess; using all other good means commended unto us for the same end. Let
us take heed, not only of the maine stock of popery; but also of every bough,
branch, twigge, yea of every leaf; for there is d^ungerous (if not deadly)
poison in the least patch of popery. And as the whole substance of popish
doctrine was not hatched all at once, but now one egg laid laid and then an
other; now one chicken, and then an other; now one opinion and then an other;
until all the whole brood was come forth: and when it was thoroughly hatched
and brought forth, it had not all the stature, nor all the feathers, nor all
the strength the first day, but crept and got up by little and little: so the
devil being still as subtle as he was, and seeing popery now to be banished,
and grieuing that it is forced to live so long in exile, therefore daily
labors (as alas by too great experience we daily see) by little and little
again to win us thereunto. Privately indeed in many places of this land
(and it is to be feared in too many. I pray God also that it be not in too
great places, and with too great persons) he labors, where the whole body of
popery does remain, there to uphold it; and where it is not, there also wholly
to bring it in again. For we see many now to be Papists, even of both sexes,
yea some to be recusant papists, whose fathers: were little more then borne in
the beginning of the reign of her most excellent Majesty. But although Satan
the old adversary, where he thinks he may be bold, and where he has fit
instruments to work by, has in some private places, even in this flourishing
time and bright light of the gospel, drawn some to the whole doctrine and
religion of pope^ie: yet he will not as yet be so bold as to attempt this
publicly. Notwithstanding he goes about it by degrees, and by little and little
tunning (as it were) and filling his vessels here and there, one with strong
popish drink and an other with small, that is, one with a maine point of
popery, and another with a small point; yea not only tunning and filling the^
there with, but also tapping and broching the^ so filled, and giving of the
drink of the^ by whole kannes to other to drink. And this he does according to
his old subtlety, hoping the more easily to bring in and to broach all again
and so to make all drunke^ again with the cup of fornications that is in the
hand of the whore and strumpet of Rome.

8 Wherefore in the fear of God, and in the tender love that I bear unto the
souls of all, I do admonish all to take heed of this evil. Whatsoever has
bin accounted popery, and by good reason showed to be repugnant to the truth,
and common consent of all churches reformed held as erroneous and heretical:
let all diligently take heed they never conceive any good liking thereof again.
If we fear any more to embrace all popery, let us take heed that in the mean
time we never entertain any one opinion thereof, though never so little. If we
fear to be drunken with the stro^gest drink, or with many cups of popery, let
us refrain from tasting thereof. For as with them that delight in strong
drink, one cup draws on an other; so also may we fear it will be with the^,
which begin to smell of any one point of popery. It is dangerous, it is
dangerous to drink in any one error of popery, though never so small,
especially to persist in the liking thereof and to say when we have tasted it,
This is good: and most dangerous it is to commend the same to other, and to
make them to drink of the same cup with us: all this is very dangerous,
whither we do it for some good liking of the thing it self, or in regard of
our own estimation, or in any other respect whatsoever. For we may fear, least
the Lord harden our hearts, even to like of those errors which as yet our
souls abhor.

9 I write not this to gal or gird at any, or to disgrace any one particular
person (my heart hates all such hatred, and delights in love and peace, and
as well in the credit of other, as of my self) but in a general love, I do
generally admonish all to take heed in this behalf. The Apostle speaks in
the like general manner, not admonishing some only, but also every one to
take heed, least at any time there should be in any an evil and unfaithful
heart to fall away Hebr. 3. 12.
from the living Lord. Yea after that he had testified unto the^ that he was
persuaded good things Hebr. 6. 9.
of the^, and such as did accompany salvation; yet he speaks as generally,
exhorting the^ to take heed that no man did fall away from the grace of Hebr.
12. 15.
God. Adding further as a special means to take heed thereof, that they should
not suffer any root of bitterness so much as once to spring up amongst the^:
where by the root of bitterness all men know he means errors and heresies.
Finally he adds these reasons, fitst that such roots or root would trouble
the^, and secondly that it would defile the^. There is none therefore so strong
in the grace of God, but that he may fall (though not finally as has bin showed
in my treatise) if he be secure, and take not great heed (...) himself. There
is none so well (...) with the sweet and precious liquor of Gods truth, but
that he may become bitter, by suffering such bitter roots to spring up in his
heart. There is none at such peace with men and with his own conscience, but
that he may be disquieted, disturbed, and troubled. There is none so well was
washed and cleansed by the pure water of Gods holy spirit, but that he may be
polluted and defiled. There is none therefore that may think this mine
admonition of taking heed unto himself, to be superfluous and needles for him.

11 To conclude, I do again in all humble manner beseech all who^soeuer, both
all the reverend fathers and governors of our church, and also all other my
learned and good brethren, as well remaining under our mothers wings in the
Universities of Cambridge and Oxenford, as also already called forth to labor
in the ministry of the word in particular churches, all these, I say, I do
humbly beseech, and earnestly exhort, to be fervent in spirit in behalf of the
truth, and with all zeal to uphold, defend, maintain, and daily in the
places where we live, and in the hearts of the people over who^ the holy Ghost
has made us overseers, to further, to increase, and to enlarge that sound and
wholesome doctrine, which hitherto has bin taught by us, and heard like wise
and in some measure received by those amongst whom we have labored.

THE END.

