THE HEAVENLY CONVERSATION.

AND THE NATVRALL MAN'S CONDITION.

In two Treatises.

By JOHN STOVGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Emanuel College
in Cambridge; and late Preacher of Gods Word in Alderman-bury London.

Printed at London by T. G. for John Bellamie, and Ralph Smith, and are to be
sold at the three Golden Lions

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, HENRY Earl of Holland, and Baron of Kensington,
chief Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, chief Justice, and Justice in
Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Chases, Parkes, and Warrens on this side
Trent; Chancellor of the University of Cambridge; Constable of the royal
Castle of Windsor, one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Conncell, and
Knight of the most noble order of the Ga^ter.
Right Honorable,
A Debtor I acknowledge my self unto the Church of God by calling, and a
special engagement lies upon me, both of trust and promise to serve the
Church in this way, in bringing toward the furtherance of the building of it,
that which has been squared and framed to my hand by a wise Master builder,
who has showed himself approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed. This I do here humbly present unto your Honors protection; I may
perhaps from some, incur the censure of too much boldness in using your
Honors name, but your courtesy and sweet affability springing from your
native gentelnesse of disposition does secure me: and the rather since I
present this unto your Honor, not in my own name, but in the name and behalf
of the Widow, who though she may claim the privilege of her Sex from
appearing in Print herself, yet she is desirous that the living and lasting
Monuments of her dear husband should be brought forth for the good of Gods
Church, under the patronage and protection of your Honor, to whom the Author
was every way so much obliged; now I have no reason to doubt but that as your
Honor was pleased to take the Reverend and learned Author into the protection
of your noble family, for you will be pleased to countenance these his own
legitimate children, which are now sent abroad as Orphans deprived of their
father. Their own worth cannot but gain them esteem, but I know your Honor
will prize them the more for their fathers sake: who whilst he was alive did
secure your Honor by his Prayers which he did daily offer up to God, not pro
forma as a legal and dead ceremony, but pro Anima, as a spiritual and lively
sacrifice, in the behalf of your honor and happiness, and now that he is
dead yet speaks in these and those other Sermons of his which bear your
honors name. If you be pleased to patronize, countenance and peruse them, they
will reflect much brightness upon your nobleness, as they receive splendor
from it. Thus under your Honors protection I do present them unto the world,
humbly craving the privilege of your pardon for my boldness, and heartily
beseeching the Lord to make you still and still to do worthily in Israel and to
enrich your Honor more and more with grace here and glory hereafter.

Your Honors humbly devoted in all duty and observance, A. B.

To the Christian Reader.
GIve me leave with thy acceptance to do the office of a Timothy, in
bringing to thee the Parchmonts lest behind, by that worthy man of God Doctor
John Stoughton. These should have attended a larger Volumne, but other of his
Sermons having gotten the start of them, and being left alone, they are now
presented to thee in this little Manuell: They were left written with his own
hand, and Preached in one of the Schools of the Prophets, and so fitted for a
learned Auditorie. That which did sway with me in the Publishing of these, and
rhose other Sermons of his that are already brought forth into public view,
next to the desire of the public good, was the fear of wrong that both the
Church and Author might sustain by the publishing of more imperfect Coppies:
Those private and imperfect Coppies which passed from hand to hand, did run
the hazard of a surreptitious Edition, I clearly saw for some of them, and
had just cause to suspect it in the rest, that if I would not publish them
others would, they falling into the hands of some mercinary persons, whose
boldness is such, as that it is not restrained, eirher by the good of the
Church, or credit of the Author, whilst they look no higher than their own
private gain, which is all their godliness, though many times their
immaginary gain, proves their real loss.

What is here presented to thee, is entirely the Authors own, without adding
the least tittle to them, least my Addition should detract from them. They are
now published for the ingenious Readers benefit, and not the Critickes censure,
and are recommended not to a bare reading, but to thy practice. The blessing of
these labors I commend to him that alone must give the increase: and the God
of Heaven give a rich blessing to them for thy souls good.

Thine in the Lord; A. B.

A Methodicall Analysis of the chief heads handled in this Treatise, on Phil.
3. 20.
1. TExt: 1 Dependence of the words; they look back. 1 As part of a collation
to the immediately precedent verses. 2. As a ground of illation to the 17. verse.
2. The sense of them. The word (...), may be rendered. 1 Our city. 2 Our
municipall state and degres. 3. Our politic bent and aim. 4 Our political
and civil administration. 5. Our carriage and behavior as citizens.

1 Observation. The conversation of a Christian is in heaven. 1 There is
explained what it is, and how a Christian has his conversation in heaven. 1 In
affection. 2 In endeavors, expressed in much, 1 Alacrety. 2 Diligence. 3
Resolution.
3 In act: by a double Analogy and conformity with heaven.
1 Conformity of sanctity, which appears in his 1 Heavenly meditations. 2
Divine communications. 3 Conscionable operations, expressed in his obedience.
1 In the great things of the Law, such as are, 1 Delight in Gods Day. 2
Exercise of Prayer, and other works of Piety. 3 Helping forward the salvation
of others.
2 In the lesser things expressed in 1 Doing all 1 With the same care. 2 By the
same rule.
2 Drawing the practice of Divinity to his earthly Domestical and daily
affairs.

II Conformity of felicity. Two things make a difference betwixt a Christians
happiness here and hereafter. Mis^y: Sin: yet these do rather deprive us of
the 1. Degree, than truth, 2. Perfection, than possession.

1. Misery may 1. Eclipse, but not 2. Extinguish it.
2. Sin, does not 1. Separate us from Christ but, 2. Drives us closer unto him.


II. Here is examined, whether the life of ordinary Christians be according to
this Rule: Many bear, the name of Christ, and yet do not answer it; as 1.
Profane persons, whose conversation is in Hell. 2. Worldlings, whose
conversation is in the earth. 3. Hypocrites whose conversion is betwixt heaven
and earth.
III. Here is suggested the forceable motives that may persuade us to this
heavenly conversation: taken from 1. The excellency of heaven. 2. The vanity of
the world: consider 1. A great estate 1. Has scarce a shadow of happiness. 2.
Brings no inward joy, cordial contentment. 3. Hinders our speed in the race of
godliness.
2. A means estate 1. Puts us upon a necessity of seeking heavenly things. 2.
Is our best security against spiritual enemies.

3. Dignity of man; consider, 1. What dignity nature has conferred upon us
in the 1. Frame of the heart, 2. Fabric of the body, 3. Relics of nature.
2. What dignity is confirmed upon us by grace.
4. Brevitie of life which should make us, 1. Not to spend our precious time on
trifles. 2. To use all speed and diligence. 3. At least to do as much for
heaven as for earth.
5. Necessity. 1 Of our times, which should make us to be 1. Zealous for
Religion. 2. Zealous in Religion, expressed in the practice of 1. Serious
repentance, and sincere reformation. 2. Fervent and earnest Prayer.

2. Of our place and calling. 1. Christians they must not be all for the earth,
it is against their dignity and advancement. 2. Ministers they must not 1.
Bury their Talent but 2. Work for heaven: 1. Draw others to heaven by
diligence in preaching. 2. Go to heaven themselves by Holiness of life.






FINIS.

Errata.
PAge 28. line. 7. for was, Read and as: Ibid l. 26. for conversation,
communication, p. 36. l. 2. for when, then, p. 40. l, 16. for an, in: p. 57. l.
10. blot out did: p. 111. l. 19. for men, that may p. 112. l. 13. for man's is,
means: p. 113. l. 5. for faults, faculties: p. 120. l. 17. for bitter better:
p. 121. l. 22. for more appear, it appears more: p. 127. l. 3. for
comportures, compartners: p. 134. l. 17, for i, of, we, ibid. l. 18. for
absent, present: p. 135. l. 23. for cause, case: p. 176. l. 14. blot out quoad,
p. 184. l. 5. for law, lawgiver: p. 189. l. 26. for break, be only, p. 193.
l. 23. for once, one: p. 194. l. 8 blot out, by: p. 195. l. 18. read did not
actually: p. 146. l. 23, for loathsome in effects, the same in effects: p. 197.
l. 18. for If, I: p. 198. l. 21. for no, a. p. 202. l. 17 for Displicere,
Displeasure. p. 208 l. 25. for answer, am sure: p. 213. l. 20. for mouth, moth,
p. 235. l. 15. for most, not.

THE HEAVENLY Conversation.
PHIL. 3. 20. (...)

Our Conversation is in Heaven.

THe Learned Origin being at the Church in Jerusalem, was requested to Preach
there; but opening the Book for that purpose, he fell upon those words of the
Psalm; But unto the wicked, says God, what have thou to do to take my words
into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
Commandments behind thee, etc. which awakned more the memory of his sin,
which was this; He being apprehended, and put to his choice by his persecutors,
whether he would offer sacrifice to their Idols, or suffer his body to be
defiled with a most ugly Blackmore, (one he must of force) shunning the
latter, he yielded inconsiderately to the former: his conscience now as it
were thundering from heaven against him; he could not go on, but closed the
Book again, and sat him down with bitter weeping and lamentation; all the
people also out of a tender affection, and sympathy of his sorrow, giving, as
the Father speaks* a charitable contribution of (...).
tears toward the relief of his misery, and bearing a part in the burden of
his sad Song, and doleful Ditty, the brief whereof they had then heard and
seen.

Beloved, I fear that we must either close the Book, or disclose our own
shame; for this Text upbraides our times; and Saint Paul, for ought that I see,
is resolved, and speaks enough to shame us all. For where are the Christians
now that can say the Responsall after him, Our conversation is in heaven,
without blushing outward for shame, or bleeding inward for grief? Who can
behold the deformity of his Crystal life, in this Crystal glass without
tears, such as may truly be styled, Sanguis animae, the blood of the soul?

It is reported of one, that he was so lusty and quarrel some, that he was
ready to fight with his own Image so often as he saw it in a glass: let us
fall out with our sins, the spots that deface the Image of God in us: but God
forbid that any should pick a quarrel with the glass of Gods Word, by which
we may dress our selves to perfection of beauty: wisely Socrates, who
commends the use of a glass to all sorts, as if the friend in it gave
faithful counsel in all cases: Art thou beautiful and comely? Cave ne animi
improbitate corpus tuum dehonestes: Art thou homely, and deformed? Fac^ut
animus virtute corpus suum consecret: Art thou fair? take heed thy body be
not like an Egyptian Temple, stately without, but having within a soul as
black as a Gypsy with vice: Art thou foul? see that thy soul within make
amends for thy body without, being like a rich pearl in a rude shell.

But most true is this of this Glass, which of all other knows not how to
flatter: and who knows, whether there be not that virtue in this divine
speculation, to restore a man to himself as he that was transformed into an
Ass, returned to his own shape, when he came to behold himself in a Glass,
the strength of the charm being wholly evacuated.

Well then let us behold our selves here in this Glass, if not what we are,
at least what we ought to be. (...), Our conversation is in Heaven.



The words look backward to the former, and that ambiguously, either, as part
of a Collation to what is in the immediately precedent verses, if you read them
with the Adversative, (...), But, Illi sic, nos, autem non sic: They do thus,
But we do not thus: or as a ground of Illation to the 17. Verse, if you read
them with the Causall, (...), For, Nos sic, vos ergo etiam sic, we do thus,
and therefore do ye also thus; Be ye followers of me, and such as tread in
our steps, For

Our coversation is in Heaven.

The word (...), though it may be diversely rendered,

First, Our City, and so it suits best with the latter part of the 1.
Verse, wherein otherwise there will be an incongruitie of Language, if you
refer (...), from whence we look, a singular Relative, to (...), in the
Heavens, a plural Antecedent, which may be salved, if you refer it to (...),
as it may well stand in that sense.

Secondly, Our municipall state, and dignity, our Burgesship. 2.


Thirdly, Our politic bent, aim, and fetch, for I suppose (...) may 3.
signify the same in civil affairs, that (...) does in warlike.

Fourthly, Our Political, and Civil Administration, and managing 4.
of things.

Fifthly, our Carriage, deportment, and behavior, as we are 5.
Citizens, etc.

Yet I confine my self to the last, which I see our learned Interpreters have
expressed also, whose judgment and authority I willingly follow, not
troubling my self, or you, with any further anxious disputes, or curious
Criticismes: the stones were hewed and squared in the mountains, there was no
noise of hammer in the building of Salomons Temple, which yet was so compact,
they say, as if it had bin but one stone without any joynting or ciment.

The Astronomers cut the heaven into many circles, and plough up many barren
furrows by their suppositions, as lightly as the Mathematicians draw lines in
the dust: but we shall not need many Hypotheses to salve the (...), or
appearances of these heavens.

Observe also with me in the whole Frame, but one line which you see written
in legible Characters, as it were with a Sun-beame. The conversation of a
Christian is in Heaven.

In which notwithstanding it will be useful to consider, and distinguish three
imaginary Points.

First, (...), Conversation, 1.
the Axel-tree, upon which the whole sphere is turned. Secondly, (...), Our,
the 2.
inferior Pole, and Thirdly, (...), In Heaven, 3.
the superior Pole.
These shall be my Ecliptique Line, with in which, my Discourse shall bound it
self.

First, I will explain Quid sit, (...). what it is, and how a 1.
Christian has his Conversation in Heaven.

Secondly, I will examine Quale 2.
sit (...), Whether the life of ordinary Christians be according to this Rule,
or not, and

Thirdly, I will suggest Quantum 3.
sit (...), How forcible motives may provoke us to this Heavenly conversation.

First, Let no man say, who shall 1.
give me Elias Chariot, in which I may mount up to heaven (...).
here needs no change of place, but a change of mind, which may lift it self
up to heaven, while the body lies upon the earth, as Abraham went into the
Mount, while the Servants and Asses staid below in the Valley.

Let no man say, what must I be like the profane Giants, which heaped
mountain upon mountain to scale heaven (although the violent take the
kingdom of heaven by force, as our Savior speaks in another sense) or like
proud Lucifer who made his nest among the stars?

No, (...).
blessed is he who has a Low mind, in an high Conversation, God is high, as
Austin sweetly, and yet the more we lift our selves up, the further we are from
Him; the more we humble our selves, the nearer: the swelling leaven of pride
can never do it, the true growth and stature of Grace, and Virtue, makes a
Christian as high as heaven, makes him in heaven many ways.

First, Affectu, in affection. A friend of Cyrus in Xenophon being asked where
his treasure was which might enable him to bestow his daughter honorably,
according to his rank and place; made this answer (...).
Where Cyrus is my friend: and a shame it is for a Christian, if he either
know not, or profess not that his treasure is there, (...).
where the Lord is his friend. Where the body is, thither the Eagles, where
Christ is, thither sharp-sigh ted and lofty souls will resort: for according
to our Savior, Where the Treasure is, there is the heart also: and according
to the Philosopher, Animus est ubiamat, non ubi animat, the mind is where it
loves, not where it lives.

No marvel then, if in this respect, we say, The conversation of a Christian
is in heaven, though you see his person here upon earth: so you see the stars
sometime in the water, you see them move, which notwithstanding you know are
fixed above in the Firmament: so the Christian, though he seem to flote up and
down in the troublesome waves of the lower world, yet there is he fastened
with the Anchor of Hope, and thither is he carried with the sails, and oars
of desire: for Vt radi solis continguntquidem terram, sed ib sunt, unde
mittuntur: sic animus magnus sacer conversatur quidem nobis cum sedhaeret
Origin suae.
as the rays of the Sun touch the earth, yet still are there from whence
they are darted; so a lofty and pious, heart is familiarly conversant withus,
but remains fixed in his Original; as Seneca makes the comparison, where
being mounted like Saint Paul in Gregory Nyssen, d He lets fall a look c (...).
upon these lower things from a loft, not without some scorn; they seem
little or nothing in his eyes: and no wonder; for as heavenly things seem
small to an earthly man, as the stars to him that beholds them from earth,
appear but as a point, (a glistring point indeed, a golden point, and yet but
a point) so by a far better reason to a godly man, whose affections have
raised him to heaven, when he beholds it from thence, the whole earth is
contracted to a Point, or rather appears like as they call a shadow nigrum
nihil, a little black; and dark nothing: So a Christian indeed during the
time of his Pilgrimage, uses these earthly things as necessaries, though he
accounts them but as Accessaries; like the hairs upon our heads, they are but
an excrement, yet they are an ornament; and as Austin speaks of Mary's, with
which she wiped the feet of our Savior, Capiti quidem superslua, sed pedibus
Christi necessaria.
They were superfluous for her own head, yet they were necessary for the feet
of Christ. The Church in the Revelation has a crown of stars upon her head,
and the Moon is under her feet: The Spirit in the Acts descended upon the
Head (they think) of the Apostles, the Disciples cast the money at their
feet: Heavenly blessings, spiritual graces are the crown of a Christian,
earthly things he tramples under his feet, according to that of the Psalmist,
Blessings are upon the head of the righteous, that is, heavenly, Thou have put
all things under his feet, that is, all earthly: Heavenly blessings they are
Bona throni, the goods of the throne; Earthly, they are Bona scabelli, the
goods of the footestoole (as Austin terms them) in the account of a
Christian, who in this is like God himself, of whom the Scripture speaks,
Heaven is his Throne, and the earth is his Footestoole: for so a Christian
uses all earthly blessings but as helps, as a footestoole to climb into the
throne of Heaven: and this use is lawful; for as Tertullian says, a Christian
may make a Nose-gay of flowers to smell to, but he may not make a crown of
flowers to set upon his head: so God allows the sweetness of outward
blessings to his servants for a refreshing, always provided, they set them not
in the highest place, in the highest price. In a word, Res illi temporalis in
usu est, aeterna in desiderio.
Temporal blessings are for his use, but eternal, for his desire and
affection, as Gregory speaks.

Anaxagoras being asked whether he cared not for his country, with the ruin
whereof he seemed to be little moved; yes, said he, there is none of you that
cares more than I do for my country, pointing with his finger up to heaven,
as though heaven were his country: and so it is a Christians indeed: for if
the proposition of the Philosopher be true, Patria est ubicunque been.
that is our country where we have the best fare, and entertainment, then his
conclusion is infallible, therefore heaven is my country, without which I
cannot live well, for (...). Est quia non potuit dicere, dixit, erit.
there is a plenty of all good things. Let then the Philosopher comfort
himself that he was not banished (though out of his country) and that he was
not confined to any place, like a Snaile to her shell, because he was a (...).
free denizan, and a Citizen of the world; the Christian is not ashamed to
confess the whole worlds liberty to be but a banishment to him, who is but a
Pilgrim in a strange Land here, because he is a free Denizan, and Citizen of
Heaven. d (...).


Nay more, he stays in the world, as in some more free and noble Prison, where
you must pardon him, if he cannot be in love with his fetters, though perhaps
of gold: He is in the body as a child in the womb, in a (...).
walking Sepulcher, his delivery from thence shall be his Nativity, from whence
he means to begin the account of the term of his Life: To live with God is
the only life, to reign with Christ, the only liberty according to that of
Simeon, (...)
Now let thy servant depart, so that the body is as the (...).
Bridewell and Prison of our life, as Basil interprets it, this is that he
sighs and breaths after, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Meshech:
I desire to be dissolved and be with Christ; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: How
long Lord, for ever! Christ was borne in an Inn to teach him to make the world
but a throwfare, where if he take his rest, yet he must not set up his rest.

Secondly, Conatu, in Endeavor, without which affection is like Rahel,
beautiful but barren, (...)
neither does a woman without a man, neither does the Affection of hope,
produce any thing serviceable without Endeavor.

Pythagor as was wont to say that he had another errand to the Olympic games,
then the most that frequented them: some came for pleasure, and to pot it in a
knot of good fellows, which were like to meet there; some for gain, and to
vent their commodities at a good rate in such a fair of people; some for
Glory, and hope to be crowned conquerours, and win the Garland for valor, and
activitie in those sports and exercises; but he professed that he came only
as a looker on: pleasure, and gain and glory are the Trinity which the world
adores, and the behavior of the most is such, as though they came into the
world upon no other errand, but to scramble for some of these.

They smile perhaps when they see children so fond, and busy and eager about
their toys, making Houses, and Pies of dirt, kissing their babies of clouts,
blowing bubles into the air out of a shell, and running after them; and when
they read that Domitian the Emperor persecuted the poor Christians abroad in
his Empire, and persecuted the poor flies at home in his Palace, they would
take respit perhaps to decide the controversy, whether that act had more
cruelty, or this idleness more folly: but let them look to it, whether they
be not carius ineptis, haunted with a more tragical and costly folly, who
being placed by God in this August Palace of the world, where the Heaven is the
sieling, the Earth the floor, can find no better employment.

The carriage of a Christian I am sure has passed this sentence upon them
already, which is such, as though he repined that he was forced to be so much
as a looker on at these Apish Anticks: which in, a scornful silence he
checkes with the severitie of his frown, and confutes with the majesty of his
countenance, in which you may read his mind written in Hieroglyphicall
letters, that he thinks with Anaxagoras, that he was borne to contemplate
heaven, and observe which way he may get thither: and therefore he follows the
suite for these earthly things something coldly, and negligently as one that
cares not much which end goes forward, or rather generously and nobly, tanquam
Candidatus Caesaris, as a Favorite of Caesare (as they were wont to say at
Rome) and if he speed, enjoyes his conquests moderatly, using them, as the dogs
drink at Nilus; or as Gidions Soldiers, lap and away, lest if he should let
loose the reins, he might be guilty in the use of his lawful liberty, as a
man (they say) may commit adultery with his own wife; in a word, uses them as
though he used them not, tanquam aeternitatis Candidatus, as Tertullian
speaks, as one that is a favorite of eternity.

But for heavenly things (good Lord) what alacrity shows he! what diligence!
what resolution?

They report of Mahomet an ordinary Turk that this was the first step of his
advancement to the Empire, his Master Solomon the great, let fall a letter out
of a window, which while the rest to approve their diligence to their Lord ran
about for Ladders, he without any more deliberation, or circuit leapt out of
the window and returned presently: This is the nature of Love and Zeal to
overlook all danger, to forget themselves to please God, and these are they
that came to preferment, to be favorites in the Court of Heaven, when they that
are so wise to look before they leap, may look long enough before they rise,
and a fool he is that looks for any other ladder to climb to Honor besides
his Masters favor.

What diligent? The Ancients were wont to paint fortune taking Cities in a net,
for one Timotheus an Athenian Captain whom they drew sleeping by: but our
Timothy knows the new Jerusalem, the City above cannot be taken otherwise,
and therefore plants a straight siege about it with an army of virtues, plies
the battery with the ordinance of prayer, casts up mounts against it, giving
all diligence that he may add to faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, mountain
upon mountain as the Giants did, that at last he may scale heaven.

What resolution? the famous Artificer Phidias advised the Athenians, to make
the statue of Minerva the Tutelary goddess of the City, of Marble rather then
Ivory, alleging two reasons.

First, because Marble was more durable and this passed with allowance.

Secondly, because Ivory was more chargeable: at the mention whereof, with
infinite indignation they commanded him silence: base wretches, that study to
beat down the price of heaven, and will not deal, except they may have it
under foot: the ancients were wont to call an Holocaust prodigam hostiam, the
prodigal Sacrifice: but a Christian thinks it the best thrift, and most
saving bargain, when he can offer himself wholly to God a living Sacrifice,
pleasing and acceptable in his sight: and therefore resolves with David, I will
not serve the Lord of that which cost me nothing, and follows our Savior
whose counsel it is, Let not thy right hand know what thy left hand does, do
not anxiously compute the charge of a good work, as men do some Sum upon
the fingers end, consult not with flesh and blood, for what can be so bard,
that he is afraid to undergo? or what so sweet, that he is not resolved to
forgo, that he may gain heaven? The way is (...). Sic Clemens Alexandrinus.
straight and narrow, yet he will strive to enter, for the way to heaven is not
easy, he is like to meet scoffs, and scarres, and a Non est ad astra, mollis
e terris via.
thousand Scarcrowes (for many thwarting inconvenience, and discouragements lie
cross in (...).
the way to heaven) but he accounts these the glory of his triumph, (...) I
have fought the good fight, says the Apostle Paul as a word in a boasting; it
is a goodly thing to go to heaven any way, lame, maimed, or blind, even the
right foot, the right hand, the right eye, if it offend him, cut it off,
pluck it out, (...), it is a goodly thing. (...).
Burn my foot if you will, that it may dance everlastingly with the blessed
Angels in heaven, styled the Martyr in Basel nobly. He is a wise Merchant, that
can purchase heaven at any price.

To conclude, he knows this life is but a way to life, as the Spartan mother
comforted her son, who in a battle where he fought valiantly, had received
a wound, of which he was like to limpe ever after, that his halting would but
make him remember virtue every step: so the worst that can happen to him, does
but make him remember virtue every step, that every step may set him so
much nearer to heaven: he thinks he is placed in this world as in a royal
Theater: the Earth, the Stage, the Heavens the Scaffolds round about: the
spectators, God, men, and Angels, himself an Actor, his part, Piety; his
reward, Eternity; his conscience always prompting him behind the Curtain; it
skils not what the spectators think, or say, look to the Judge, (...), says
a Father.
be ambitious to please God who beholds thee: and therefore resolves Populus me
sibilat, at mihi plaudo.
though the world hisses me, yet I hear, I ear not, so I may hear a plaudite
from him, Well done good servant, enter into thy masters joy: O blessed
plaudite, he stirs his hands to clappe them, and drops a crown of life
from between them upon my head.

Thirdly, Actu, In act; for he cannot be out of heaven, whose conversation
makes that place heaven, wheresoever he is, and that by a double Analogy, and
conformity with heaven, of sanctity and felicity, of happiness and holiness.

First, Conformit as sanctitatis, a conformity of sanctity, which appears in
every part of his life, as the light of the candle breaks out at every side of
the Lantern, and as the leaven in the Gospel, which the woman put into three
pecks of meal, insinuates it self into his thoughts, words, and deeds, all
which it makes to rise and swell toward heaven: for what shall we say of his
Heavenly Meditations, in which methinkes he resembles a Bird of Paradise, so
called, which is reported by the Naturalists to fly continually without any
rest, and was never observed so much as to touch upon the earth: no more does
this blessed Bird of Paradise, but is always upon the wing in divine
medi^^tious, unless perhaps you may think he comes nearer the Phoenix, which
is said to beget her heir of her own ashes, to which she is resolved in her
bed of spice, her neast being nothing else but a pile of the most precious
spices of Arabia, curiously collected by her before for that purpose, and
kindled by the heat of the Sunnebeames: as a Christian kindles by frequent
meditation the sweet notes that he has collected in reading or hearing,
which like the Angel in the sacrifice of Manoach, carries him up to heaven in a
flame of heavenly affection, and leaves her self an heir behind of her own
ashes, a never failing succession of the like heavenly meditations.

I know this practice is not vulgar, or easy; for the Monk said truly, that
to be (...).
a Monk in outward show, was easy, but to be a Monk in inward reality, was
hard; it is no hard matter in comparison to make the outward man, the visible
man a Monk, immure him in a Cloister, and retire him from worldly
distractions: nor is it any easy matter to circumscribe the infinite liberty
of the inward man.

But a Christian labors to be the same without, that he is within, like the
beauty of a Diamond, not skin deep only, like the ordinary beauty; for if
you could have a window in his breast, you should see nothing within but
heavenly thoughts: he breathes not oftener than he thinks on God, according
to the Father: he climbs often into Mount Nebo, the mount of Meditation, for a
prospect of the land of Promise, from whence his blessed eyes of Faith and
Hope; like Calib, and Joshua, the faithful Spies, animate him to a noble
resolution by their happy tidings, The land is good, let us go up and fight
for it: and if he chance to step aside sometime among worldly affairs, you
must understand he is there, not as a Tanquam explorator, non ut Transfuga.
turne-coate Traitor, but as a wise Intelligencer, as a Spy: was the Spies
that went to Jericho to avoid being snared by any ambush, he returns by the
Hill-countrey, that is, as I interpret it, improves even humane occurrences to
some divine expedience, and reduces temporal occasions, to spiritual use:
Wherefore says Chrysostom very sweetly, (...).
The literal fowls of the heaven have wings, and these mystical fowls of
the heaven have wisdom to fly aloft, that the snares and lime-twigges of the
world may not entangle them; and surely in vain is the net spread before the
eye of all that has wings, as Solomon speaks.

Such in the second place is their Conversation, for as our Savior after his
Resurrection conversing with his Disciples, spoke of such things, as concerned
the Kingdom of God: and Moses descended from the Mount, where he had
conference with God, brought the Tables of the Law to the people: so the Law of
Grace is in his lips, and out of the Abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. As the posts of the door of the house without were sprinkled with
the blood of the Lamb which was eaten within; so the heart that is washed with
the blood of Christ, cannot be ashamed to have their lips painted with the
same. It is Nazianzens comparison; for this is the beauty of the Spouse in her
Lords eye, who like some elegant Lover, makes this a great part of her
commendation, Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet: this is the safety of
the Spouse, as the blood sprinkled upon the Posts, was the Israelites, as the
scarlet thread in the window was Rahabs; for with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation.

The Latins call the roof of the mouth, Coelum, Heaven, and the lower part,
Solum palati, the ground of the palate: The most men's speech is altogether of
earth, as though they had no heaven in their mouth, they dash all their words
against the earth, like the fish in the Gospel, either dumb, or nothing but
gold in their mouth: It is clean contrary with S. Paul's Christian, who not
content to be a silent, and dumb spectatour of heaven, like the fish so called
(...) and so to suffer the conceptions of his mind to die there, like abortive
birthes smothered in the womb, but labors to bring them to the light, and
deliver them to others, that they may also partake of his sweetness, and so
dividing himself between solitariness, and company, meditation and
communication, thoughts, and speech, that one may make the other profitable,
(...). 3.
the one being begun, and inducted into the soul by the Spirit, and the
other having instructed others in the way of godliness, as the Father has it.

See in the last place, his operation, for what is his whole life, but an
Angels work, a continual attendance upon God. The Church is, as the Father
styles it, an (...).
heaven upon earth, the presence Chamber of the great King: how often does he
wait there? with what devotion? like David, according to Saint Austins Gloss,
I will go into the house of the Lord, as Tanquam lapis, cre^ do in aedificium
dictum est.
a stone in his building, says the Father: like Christ himself, his parents
sought him in vain, in cognatione carnis, among his kindred, but found him
employed in domo Patris, in his Fathers house.

The Sabbath is the Lords day, our rest, and employment, then a short
abridgement of the long story of eternity is seasonable, how truly does He
call this Day his delight: how cheerfully does he welcome in? He comes
forth of his chamber like a Bridegroom, and rejoices as a Giant to run his
race: like the Jew, that was wont to put on his best apparel, to expect the
approach of this day, and hasten it forward, wooing with these words, Veni
sponsa mea, Come my Spouse; like the Spouse in the Canticles, rather, until
the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the mountains of
Myrrh, and to the hill of Frankincense: he has espoused his soul to the
beauty of holiness in these blessed ordinances; and therefore his eyes will
prevent the morning watch, that he may adorn, and prepare himself be times,
and meet these solemnities with the sweet perfume, and incence of meditation
and prayer.

Prayer, and the rest of the works of Piety are the Ladder to Heaven; how often
may you see him like the Angels in Jacobs vision, ascending and descending by
this? It is a received maxim in Philosophy, that Oration is Quantitas discreta,
but it is a certain truth in Divinity, that Oration debet esse Quantitas
continua, according to that of the Apostle, Pray continually: Too 1 These. 5. 17.
much discretion in the world has brought too little devotion, and unjustly
censured the heat of devotion, for want of discretion: But it is not either the
virulence of the tongue, or violence that can make a Christian intermit this
course. The Angel that strove with Jacob said, Let me go, for the morning
approaches, forsooth afraid, as the Rabbis would have it, that if he were
detained any longer, he should incur^e some censure of irregularity, or be
enjoined some penance for tardinesse at his Mattins: But a Christian says
indeed to his dear sins, Let me go, sollicitous to prevent all
intanglements, to shake of all impediments, which might hazard the least
interruption of his sweet intercourse with God in prayer.

And (to make no more particular instances) the heavenly Hierarchies of Angels,
are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall
be heirs of salvation? or is not this the very trade and occupation of a
Christian? the magnificence of Piolomaeus Philadelphus, I suppose gave
original to the phrase, in which all noble and magnificent works are called
opera Philadelphia: I dare say a Christian esteems that his most honorable
employment, when he may provoke the glory of God, in the good of his brethren,
especially in the matter of heaven and salvation, these are his opera
Philadelphia, works of Charity: For he holds the common truth in Philosophy,
Proprissimum opus viventis, est generare sibi simile.
the most proper work of a living creature is to beget one in his own
likeness, to be a certain truth in Divinity, the most specificall, and
characteristicall act of a living Christian is (at least to endeavor) to beget
another in his own likeness: to draw many to God, and therefore that which
Plato said divinely, was the end of marriage, that when out race shall be
ended, and we must ^radere Lampada, give up our borrowed light, we may have
those Vt Deo post nos Cultores relinquamus.
that may rise up in our place, that may stand up in stead, to serve God, that
the fire of his Altar may never go out: this may be truly said, the end of
all his commerce, and converse with others.

Neither is he thus in these great things of the Law only, but as careful in
the less Neque enim auri(...) tu (...)assas tollunt, sed and bract eolas.
men will not lightly lose the least ends of Gold: the least Commandment
observed, brings a great reward, and the least sin cannot be committed
without great danger: even the secret lusts, and motions of the heart which
cannot be discerned for sin (otherwise when motes, and atoms) in the tenth
Commandment, as it were in the Sunbeams: the point of the spear pierced our
Saviors side, so did the pricks of the thorns wound his sacred head: and
therefore though counterfeit Christians make no bones of lesser sins, make no
conscience of lesser duties, like Pharoahs Magicians, whose art could not reach
to make such things as were less then a Barly-Corne, and therefore failing in
the production of Lice were forced to acknowledge the finger of God, as the
Rabbis give the reason; yet a current Christian is the same in great and less
matters, in both like himself, if not like God himself, of whom Austin
elegantly, Ita magnus Artifex in magnis, ut minor non sit in minimis.
he is so great an Artisan in great matters, as that he is not lesser in the
smallest.

He did all with the same care, and by the same rule: the Jews have a Law,
which enjoynes them to take up any paper which they see lying on the ground,
and the reason is, lest happily the Name of God be written in the paper, and
ignorantly trodden under foot: the Christian is free from such superstitious
curiosity, yet full of religious care, observes every title in Gods Word,
least unawares he might dishonor the name of God, and trample upon any of the
least of his Commandments: and therefore he has respect to this in all his
ways; this is the Card and Compass, without this, (as there be few men that
can draw a straight line, or a circle, without a Rule or compass) none can
lead their life aright, or make straight steps to heaven: with this they may,
for as while one line of the Compass is firmly fastened upon the Card, the
other goes steadily the true circuit: So while the mind of man is fixed upon
the Word by contemplation and observes it, he may keep his life and actions
within compass, and run safely the way of Gods Commandments.

A man may huddle up a mudwall, a bank of earth in haste of that which comes
next to hand, says the moralist, but 'twere madness to attempt to build a
Palace, a Temple without choice stones, without line and levels: Now a
Christian by a holy life labors to build himself up a Palace for the great
King, a Temple for the living God, and therefore thinks he can never be
choice enough of the stuff, or workmanship, whereas any rubbish, trash, or
any slovenly slubbering over is good enough for another use.

Socrates was said to have called Philosophy down from heaven to earth, so does
he draw the practice of Divinity even to his earthly and domestical, and
daily affairs, and by this heavenly course rather then he should not be in
heaven, makes his house wherein he walks before God in the uprightness of his
heart, and sincerity, be it never so mean a Cottage (...).
a very heaven, as Chrysostom speaks.

To conclude this: That which the Ruffians in Seneca scoff at in the sober
young man, is true of him in a sense more divine Ita laborat, ita ludit, ita
coenat, ita votat, ita loquitur, ita vivit, ut qui ephemerides patri est
approbaturus.
he so works, so recreates him self, so sups, so drinks, so speaks, so
lives as one that is to give a just account to his heavenly Father, wherein he
would not fail or be taken tripping for all the world: and in a word, he
passes his life in this world, as in a royal Temple, which God has built for
his own service, (...).
the world is a sacred Temple to those that study perfection, the moralist
acknowledges, appointing man his Priest; every day of whose life is marked in
the Calender of truth, for an holy day, upon which all other work is
unlawful: this only we must labor, that we may serve our course, and keep
our (...), or turns so faithfully in the Temple of virtue here, that through
it we may assuredly pass and be preferred to the Temple of honor, which God
has prepared for us in heaven, to which (God has framed it so) there is no
access but by the former, as it was also signified at Rome in the two Temples,
which were so contrived, and so called.

Secondly, conformit as felicitatis. 2.
A Christian is an heaven by a conformity of happiness, which is so great,
that the Father calls it, (...).
an heaven, before we come to heaven, not without reason. There be two things
indeed, that make a broad difference, sin and misery, which we are subject
to here, but shall be from hereafter, and yet these two deprive us rather of
the degree, than of the truth of the perfection, rather than of the possession
of happiness. The present tense in Grammar is accompanied with the imperfect:
the future with the plusquam perfectum, and such is the condition of our
present, and future happiness; our future is more then perfect, our present is
imperfect indeed, but yet true happiness.

Misery may eclipse it here perhaps, but cannot extinguish it: they may kill me
said a Philosopher to the Tyrants, but they cannot hurt me: they may take away
my head, but they cannot take away my crown, says the Christian: and divinely
Tertullian, Nihil sen^^t crus in nervo, qua^do animus est in coelo.
the thigh feels not the pain in the sinew, when the soul is in heaven: the
heir of heavenly joys may pass through the veil of tears, and go mourning
all the day, going weeping all the way, scattering his precious seed with his
tears, but you know the saying, Haeredis fletus, sub persona, risus est.
an Heirs tears are laughter under his mourning clothes.

Sin is infinitely the worse of the two; and yet sin does not separate us
from Christ, it drives us closer to him rather, and he cannot be far from
heaven that is so near Christ, c For where Christ (...).
is, there is heaven, says the Father. Sin does not separate us from God,
who reconciled in Christ, beholds us, not as a Judge, guilty malefactors, but
as a father, weak children, and he is not far from heaven that is so near
God: for where the King is, there is the Court, is our common saying; sin
does not separate us from the communion of the holy Spirit, who dwells in us,
and makes us living Temples of God: and what difference I pray between the
Temple of God and Heaven?

To end this in a word: a Christian is in this world like Adam in Paradise,
which as some imagine was situate above the clouds, and therefore not defaced
in the universal Deluge of waters: in the Paradise I say of a good conscience,
the Garden of God, which is situate above the clouds of all misery, where the
Tree of Life, is continually watered with the Torrent of pleasure, which never
leaves running, till it ends his course in his Ocean of Eternity.

Such is the Conversation of a Christian in Heaven; but is Ours such? That was
the second Point we propounded.

2.

I am afraid that some may say after this character of a Christian, as Linacer,
when he had heard our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, Profecto aut hoc non est
Evangelium, aut nos non sumus Christiani.
Either this is not Gospel, or we are not Christians, our Savior asked who
touched him then when the multitude pressed about him: many throng about Christ
in profession, and a form of godliness, but few touch him to draw any virtue
from him, and power of godliness: many bear the name of Christians b to their
judgment, and condemnation, not to a Ad judicium, non ad remedium.
their salvation and remedy, as the Father speaks, to whom we may say, as
Alexander did to a soldier, who was called Alexander by his name, but played
the coward egregiously, either fight better, either live better, or else
presume not to usurp the glorious name: many fly to that of the Jews, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and think to take Sanctuary, and
save themselves there from all danger; as the Jews fable, that Og the King of
Bashan escaped in the flood by riding astride upon the Arc without; though
they never enter, as if they thought with Martius, that they could not possibly
be condemned within sight of the Capitol, the Temple.

For to point at these in a word, are there not many Profane persons, whose
conversation is in Hell? like the Demoniacke in the Gospel, whose abode was in
the graves: and how far are they from hell, think you, who will go rather
to an Alehouse, Whorehouse, Playhouse, then to the House of God? Vbi fuisti?
Where have thou been? apud Inferos, in Hell, says Erasmus merrily, comparing
Tippling Cellars to Hell. Her feet go down to death, her steps take hold of
Hell, says Solomon of the Harlot: Est de Ecclesia Dei, in Ecclesiam diaboli
tendere, de coelo quod aiunt in caenum, says Tertul.
to leave a Sermon to go to a Play, is to forsake the Church of God; to betake
ones self to the Synagogue of Satan, to fall from Heaven, to Hell.

And what are they, who do nothing else all their life, but war against
heaven; more properly than the barbarous Scythians, who thought they did it
valiantly, when they shot their arrows against heaven, which fell upon their
own pates, the true Antipodes of God, and all goodness? that by a new found
Art of memory, never remember the Name of God that made them, but in their
oaths and blasphemies, and by a new found Art of forgetfulness, seem to have
forgotten their own name, (as they say Messala did) that they are called
Christians: that rather than fail of sinning, with mutual emulation, like
unhappie boys, strive who shall go furthest in the dirt: Nolunt solita
peccare, says Seneca. Et pudet non esse impudentes, says Austin.
they think it a foul shame, to be ashamed of sin, and their ambition is,
who shall be most famous for infamy.

The Jews observe that the same word diversely pronounced, Bethsheba, with
(...) Shibboleth, signifies the well of Oath, and Bethsaba with (...)
Sibboleth, the well of plenty. I am sure, for Oaths the Land mournes, of
which there is such store, as if men by an easy mistake of the point, used to
draw and drop oaths (as it were) out of the well of plenty.

But I shall show you greater abominations then these, it is the Apostles
exhortation, (...), follow peace and holiness, without which no man shall see
God: the word indeed is ambiguous, and signifies sometime to follow, and
sometime to persecute: the Apostle delivers this with the right hand, and would
have us follow, and pursue holiness, as it were withdrawing our selves from
earth, and retiring to heaven, and that apace, for fear we overtake them not;
but many take this with the left hand, and running upon a wrong sent, follow
neither peace nor holiness; but break the peace by proclayming open war and
persecuting holiness, without which no man shall see God, the tongue is set on
fire on hell, and they set their mouths against heaven and blaspheme the Saints.

Good Lord, that ever the reformed Church should verify that which the Poet
wrote once of Rome!

Omnia cum licet, non liceat esse pium.
When it is lawful to be all things, but to be piously disposed, and these
times to be the prophecy of the moral Philosopher, when Quando vitio honos
habebitur
Honor is attributed to vice! Gideon received those for his Soldiers, that
bowed not the knee to drink, but lapt like a Dog, and Iephta made that the
trial of life, or death, if they could pronounce Shibboleth: and is not now
swearing a sufficient pasport for entertainment in the world, and
drunkenness, as good as letters of Commendation for preferment? he that is so
precise he cannot kneel to Bacchus, and carouse it so, he that lispes at an
oath Sibboleth, and cannot thunder them out thick and threefold with a full
mouth Shibboleth, dismiss him for a coward, he is an Ephramite, and as he was
wont to do, note him in your Calendar, for a Priscillianist, a Puritan, but
they that can do both, and with a grace, he is a brave lad, a true trojan, a
Gileadite: For those two (for the most part) are companions in evil, Simeon
and Levi, as though wine sprung out of the earth from the blood of the Giants
that fought against the Gods (as they in Plutarch imagined) so it arms the
Tongue against God and all his Saints, whose persons because they are out of
reach, they rend and tear their names.

Poor blind men, that offer violence to the Saints, as Sampson laid hand upon
the Pillars, to pluck the house upon their own heads: For this I fear will
be the end of this sport, and I would to God only the Princes of the
Philistims (as indeed they do) sat and laughed at this: the Poets say,
Jupiter never throws his thunderbolt, but when the Furies wrest it out of his
hand, I fear these Furies will draw Gods judgments upon us.

I know not what (...).
vain hopes, like false guides, which set a man out of the way, bear us in
hand, that we may go by sin and hell to holiness, and shut our eyes against
the light of the Gospel, and yet at last come to heaven: the way indeed to
hell is easy, for as Bias scoffed, the dead go thither blindfold, with their
eyes closed: but let no man think, any life will bring a man to heaven, as
though Christ sent blood out of his side to redeem us, and not water also to
purge his redeemed, and wash them from their sins? As though those, whom the
devil drives headlong to hell, as once he did the Gadarens hogs into the
deep, had any reason to conceive, they were mounting to the pinnacle of the
Temple, to some high place in heaven, who, if there were as many heavens as
there be days in the year, as the Basilidians foolishly dreamed, are not like
to come to the lowest point of the lowest, without more then ordinary
repentance?

Secondly, wordlings, whose conversation is in earth; who degenerate so far
from all noble thoughts that they had rather be Terrae filii, sons of the
earth, then heirs of heaven: which deface the Image of the heavenly Father,
stamped in the soul (not in their coins) with continual rubbing against the
earth. Worms and no men, that do not walk upright to heaven, but crawle upon
the earth: the seed of the Serpent, inheriting his curse, to creep upon their
belly, and lick the dust, and like that better then the choice delicates, the
food of Angels: like the Israelites of whom Tertullian, whose Quorum palato,
caepe magis sapiunt, quam coelum'.
pallats relish Garlic or an Onion of the Egyptian earth, better than the
Angelical viands of heaven: whom the earth hathwholly swallowed up, as once it
did Corah: who lulled asleep with the flattering blandishment, and fair
entertainment they meet with in the world, are nailed to the earth, as Sisera
was by Iael; and will not so much as lift their eyes to heaven, unless it be
as the moralist observes, that Hogs do, who go nodling down, and rooting in
the earth all their life, and never look upward, till being ready to be killed,
they are laid flat upon their back, and forced: so those men are all their
life scraping in the dunghill, and never think upon God or heaven, till
wrestling with the pangs of death, they are even overcome, and laid flat upon
their back, then they that were prone to earthly cares like Martha, like the
woman in the Gospel, that had a spirit of infirmity and was bowed downward,
and careless, and supine to all heavenly things are forced to think of
heaven: but perhaps can brook them little better then Cerberus did the light at
which he startled, and strugled so, when Hercules had brought him so far,
that he had well nigh twitcht him down back again to hell, if the hand, and
the chain that held him, had not been the stronger: or as the noble King
Richard, the first of the name, who when the rest of the Princes, and Gallants
travailing in the Holy Land, where they then warred, were come to the foot of
an hill, from whence they might view Jerusalem, the holy City (then possessed
by Saracens without hope of recovery for the present) and therefore put Spurs
to their Horses, every one in a youthful contention who should be the first,
and have the maidenhead of that prospect. He pulled down his Beaver over his
eyes, and would not gratify them with the vain pleasure of so sad a
spectacle; for God forbid said he, that I should be hold that City, though I
could, which though I would, I know not how to rescue: so is it but cold
comfort to such to think of heaven, whose life gives so weak evidence for
their Title to it, whose possibilities are so remote, upon I know not what
reversion, after such, and such, and such a thing done, which they find then
too late, that they are not likely to have either space, or grace, or place to
do.

Foolish men that lay the greatest burden upon the weakest horse, and leave
that one thing which is necessary to their bed, when they are fit to do
nothing: God called to them to hasten in their life, to day if ye will hear
my voice, harden not your hearts, then they were loath to forsake their sweet
sins, as Lot to go out of Sodom, till the Angel plucked him out: then they
answer coldly, as Austin reports of himself, Da Domine, sed non modo.
Give Lord, but not yet; then they devise a thousand shifts to delay: let
Solomon bid them remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, they are ready
to say (to think at least) as the Devils to our Savior, Art thou come to
torment us before our time? Whereas they are afraid, if they should begin too
soon in Religion, they might be Saints; and happy before their time: but when
death comes, they change their note, their pulse then beats quick, and faint,
a dangerous symptom of Death, O Lord make speed to hear us, O Lord make
haste to help us.

Then in haste the Minister, the Sacrament, their prayers, then Lord have mercy
upon me; and so like Gallants that have lost their time in the Alehouse, to
make amends, ride all upon the spur suriously, (right Jehues march) ready to
overrunne the sober traveller: so these run upon the speed at last, and
think to be at heaven before those who have traveled soberly thitherward all
their life: but what if God should answer their (...), it is not yet time in
their life, with (...), at their death: what if God should say to him, as the
Crabbe in the Fable to the Serpent, when he had given him his deaths wound for
his crooked conditions, and then saw him stretch himself out straight, At
oportuit sic vixisse; It is too late now, you should have lived so? What if the
sword of Gods Justice seize upon him? that flies so to the Sanctuary of his
Mercy, as Joab was slain even at the horns of the Altar? May not a man
receive unworthily, not discerning the Lords body, by the eye of faith (for
according to the Father, this is the food of (...).
Eagles, not of Dawes) and so eat damnation to himself? for in this case, it
Non cibus est, sed gladius.
is not meat but a knife, or sword, says Cyprian: The Emperor was poisoned
in the Hostie: and at last a man may die notwithstanding the Sacrament, as the
Israelites in the Wilderness, died with Manna in their mouths.

Basilides the Emperor of Russia refused a Celestial Globe of gold (wherein
the cunning Artificer, as it were in emulation of God, had curiously framed a
model of heaven, nothing was wanting of the number of the spheres, or of the
life of the motion) which was sent unto him as a rare present from the German
Emperor; for, said he, I do not mean to busy my self in the contemplation
of heaven, and in the mean time, did lose the possession of the earth, as the
German Emperors do daily to these Turks; it may be wisely: and a m^id laughed
at her master Thales, the great Astronomer, who gazing on the Stars on a
sudden fell into a ditch: (...) think justly: and the Jew is little pittled,
who let go the helm of the ship, which he steered at the first approach of
the Sabbath, and so suffered shipwreck, for ought I know, deservedly: For our
Conversation must he in Heaven indeed; but it is not a Jacobs staff, but a
Jacobs ladder will bring us thither; we must behold the heaven, but we may
hold the helm also, and guide our course the better, as Pilots do; we may
look to our estate, and walk in the labors of our calling with diligence,
and if we do this with conscience, every day is (...).
a Sabbath, as Clemens speaks: what then is to be done as Basil in a like
case? (...).
Let not all thy delight before earth, but mind also heaven: so here, we must
not be all for the world, nothing for heaven: Suffer not the world to take up
the best rooms in the heart, while Christ by that means, is shuffled into the
stable: but as the Ethiopian Indges in all their meetings, reserve the highest
seat empty for Felix domus, ubi de Maria, Martha conqueritur.
God: so do you seek the kingdom of Heaven in the first place. e That house
is happy, where wordly Martha complains of heavenly-minded Mary, says the
Father. Happy is that soul, which is so tempered, that though it run between
both, yet the by as is always drawing toward heaven, that abounds so much in
expressions of love that way, that the world may have cause to be jealous, and
complain of some neglect: that fears not the fear of the worlding, that if
he should follow holiness toofast, he should not be able to live by the trade,
like the Athenians, who in the Consulation, whether they should admit Alexander
the Great into their Calender, and Canonize him for a God, which he sued for;
at first were very zealous against his impious ambition, but were soon cold
upon the poli^icke suggestion of a crafty companion, who put them in mind of
the power of Alexander, and wished them to consider, Ne dum Coelum defendimus,
terram amittamus.
lest while they stood so much for Heaven, they were likely to lose earth: so
these had rather forgo heavenly, than undergo any hazard af the loss of
earthly thinga; but the Christian not so, but resolves, Viderit utilitas, let
the world look to that, let the world go as it will, I will do according to
the command of my Savior, and build upon his Promise; Seek the Kingdom of
God, and all these things shall he cast upon you.

Hypocrites, whose conversation is between heaven and earth: like Erasmus, as
the Papists paint him: like the flying Angel in the Revelation; which In
parabola ovis, capras sues quaerunt.
in the Parable of the Sheep, seek out their goats: under the cloak of
Religion, Gods Livery which they wear, as though they served him, do but
serve their own turn: like the Eagles which soars aloft, not for any love of
heaven, her eye is all the while upon the prey, which by this means, she spies
sooner, and seizes upon better: as Thales sometime contemplated the heaven for
no devotion I wist, but to pick some gain out of it, as he did indeed: for
re ading thus much in the volumne of heaven, that there was like to follow a
scarcity of Olives, he got all that he could into his hands, and so having the
monopoly, sold them at his own price.

Who would not have admired, and honored him as one sent from heaven, and Deo
de proximo amicum.
Gods near familiar, or intimate friend, according to the phrase of
Tertullian, who not content to fit in the Temple of God; unless he were also
pearcht upon the highest pinnacle of the Temple, were not the fetch long since
transparent to the world, that he is mounted so high, only for the love of the
situation and goodly prospect, it has of all the kingdoms of the world, and
to bargain with the devil for them, the Vicar of Christ, thought he was not
well advised to refuse so fair an offer at which his fingers itched: as
Gahazies teeth watered after the Talents and the change of raiment: and I
suppose he would not be troubled to wear the keys of heaven at his girdle,
but that he has found that they will open to him the Treasures of the earth:
and wherefore^ does he shroud himself under the shadow of Peter, but as they
did, sometime to heal, and cure diseases? so at least to hide, and obscure the
deformity of his swelling pride, and infinite ambition.

They say, when Astraea (Justice, and Piety suppose) betook her self from the
unworthy world to heaven, her veil fell from her, (or mask I know not well
whether) the only relic and monument, the earth can produce she once had her
abode among men: and you may remember when Elias was taken up, and rode thither
in his Triumphant chariot, his mantle dropped from him, and since that, how many
have masked under the veil of Piety, and cozened the world with the mantle of
Elias, (as the Devil once Saul with Samuels) as though they came from heaven,
or were left sole heirs to him: whereas God knows, they have not the least
part of the Spirit of Elias, they are nothing akin unto him: they never came
near heaven, but ascend out of the earth, as the counterfeit Samuel that
cozened Saul, the true devil under his mantle.

For what are their letters of credence? but fair shows, good words, cheap
ceremonies: pellucidae technae; shining and perspicuous juggling, who cannot
see thorough these tricks? the Jews observe, that the second temple came
short of the glory of the first in this especially, in stead of U^im and
Thummim, it had nothing but Bach Col, the daughter of a voice: and who sees not
the glozing of the tongue, how short it falls of the glory of truth of
sincerity? when one Alexander gave it out that he was Herod's son, Augustus
to discover the impostor, felt his hand, and by his hard rough skin, easily
found that there was no gentle blood ran in those veins, no noble spirit did
be at in that pulse, he was some handycrafts man, he was not his craftsmaster:
and who but blind Isaac would bless him for the first borne of God, the heir
of heaven, whose voice is indeed smooth, the voice of elect Jacob, but his
hands are rough with sin, the hands of reprobate Esau?

These Juglers cannot play their tricks so cleanly, but they are perceived:
they dance in a net, the world sees their dissembling, and accounts them but
like those Images which you see sometimes underpropping the beams of some
great building, they sweat, they stoop, and bow under the burden they lay their
hands upon their head as it were to ease themselves as though the whole weight
of the roof lay upon them, like to fall (you may make children perhaps believe
so) if they should remoove never so little and not support it: so these men are
so busy, so zealous, so hot, a man would think the Church, the truth, the
Gospel, all religion could not stand without them: when indeed they do no more
then these Images: like Atlas, whom the Poets feign (for his skill in
Astronomy) to bear up the heaven upon his shoulders: so every one of these
would make the world believe he were a Pillar, an Atlas of the Church: and so
he is indeed an Atlas, but according to the Anagrammatisme of his name, (...),
a miserable prop and pillar of the Church of God.

Miserable man in truth, whose dissembling, and doubling God sees, and will one
day unmaske to all the world: and can thou think foolish hypocrite to be
saved by thy book at that trial: yes, get a fair Bible, bind it in a Velvet
case, gild the leaves, make much of it, let all the world take notice of this
in the mean time, live as thou list without book; but know that book is not
subject to the Orators (...) to be flattered or bribed with such a simple fee,
not so much as to be silent: for though thou think to stop the mouth for
pleading against thee with such idle courtesies; and content that it should
countenance thee before the people, as Saul would have Samuel, as if it were of
this familiar acquaintance, whereas thou keep it shut at home, and muzzled
for fear it should worry thy darling sins; yet the books shall be opened
one day, and thou shall be judged by that book and condemned. Or will thou
hope to take sanctuary at the Church? yes no doubt, because thou have been
diligent there to play the part of a Christian in seeming devotion, and mock
God to his face: because thou have cheated the world in the Church with the
show of Piety, that thou might the better cheat them in thy shop, thou art
like to escape well enough: shall I tell you how? Xerxes destroyed the Temples
of the Grecians, because by building them, they seemed to overthrow the
infiniteness of God, and circumscribe him within the roof of a Temple: and God
will smite thee, thou whited wall, whose religion is circumscribed within the
walls of the Church, and goes no farther.

All these according to the common similitude of the ferryman, look one way,
and go another: they look to heaven when they are going to hell: though their
forces, and their footesteps seem to stand toward heaven, yet the devil
draws them to hell, when (...) that wicked one, as the Poets say Cacus used to
draw the Oxen he stole, by the tails backward into his men, that so men being
set at a nonplus in their search, by this sophistry his theft might remain
undiscovered.

3.

The third thing propounded, was to show the several motives which may provoke
us to this heavenly conversation.

First, The excellency of heaven. 1.


Jacob for the love of Rachel, covenanted to serve an apprentiship of seven
years to Laban; and when bleare-eyd Leach was thrust upon him, he refused not
her nor seven years more, that he might enjoy his beloved Rachel. God has
two daughters, eternal happiness the sairer, but the younger: and sineere
holiness the elder indeed, but not so lovely; because she is something tender
eyed with the tears of repentance, and the exercises of mortification, which
yet we must not refuse, if we love the other: The beauty indeed of
celestial happiness like Rachel first woves a man to the service of God: but
this is the Law of the place, the younger sister cannot be bestowed in marriage
before the elder, a man cannot enjoy beautiful Rachel, unless he be content
to embrace bleare-eyd Leah, a man cannot enter the joys of heaven, till he
have first passed through the valley of tears, neither is the condition hard:
I suppose Jacob buried all his cares at last in the bosom of his beautiful
Rachel, and forgot all his labor in her sweet embraces, as if he had tasted
a cup of Nepenthe, or drunk the whole River of Oblivion.

And how much more shall a Christian in heaven? They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of
the river of thy pleasures, or as the old translation has it Inebriabuntur in
ebrietate domus tuae.
they shall be drunken with the plenty of thy house, upon which Saint Austin
thus descants, Quaesitum verbum, and exquisitum, inebriabuntur.
it is a most requisite, and exquisite word, they shall be drunken with the
fatness of thy house. I, with this cup the Apostles were drunken, and
therefore being beaten with rods, they went away from the council, rejoicing
that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Christ, with this cup
were the Hebrews drunken, and therefore suffered the spoiling of their goods
with joy, expecting a City in the Heavens: with this cup were althe Martyrs
drunk, who therefore) as we say a drunken man will take no hurt) ran to meet
death, kissed the stake, sang in the midst of the flames, and felt no harm,
being far from fear or pain.

Euagrius in Cedrenus bequeathed three hundred pound to the poor in his will,
but took a bond before hand of Synesius the Bishop for the repayment of this
in another life, (according to the promise of our Savior) with an hundred fold
advantage; and the very next night after his departure, appearing to him in his
shape, delivered in the bond canceled, as fully discharged. Beloved, one day in
the presence of God, one day will make amends abundantly, abundantly for an
hundred years trouble: you will not ask my bond for this, I know you will
take Gods word: but then, according to the Arabic proverb, Obstrue quinque
fenestras, ut luceat domus, et qui sunt in ea.
shut your five windows, that the house and all that are therein may shine,
consult not with your senses, with carnal reason, which like Sarah laughs at
heavenly promises, looks only to earthly possibilities: and as the Sun whose
rising discovers the Terresttiall Globe to our sight, but hides the stars,
and the celestial: but believe these things, believe them firmly, and
meditate on them freequently: and as Antaeus overcome by Hercules, renewed his
strength, by falling to the earth: so let us quicken our selves to an heavenly
conversation, when we find the world has dul'd us, by raising our minds to
the consideration of the excellency of Heaven.

Uanity of the world. Quod hic facio? What do I here, said Monica, Austins
mother, when she had heard an excellent discourse, of the incomparable joys of
Heaven? What do we here say I, poring and losing our time about earthly
things, who are invited to heavenly? What do we, I will tell you, like the
young man at Athens, who fell in love with the Image of (...).
Good Fortune, an elegant statue that stood in the Senate house, and because
he could not obtain her for his wife of the Senate to whom he commended his
suit, set a crown, a garland of flowers upon the head of it, and put a rope
about his own neck, and so died: and they are not like to make much the
better match, who dote upon the glory of the world, scarce a picture, a
counterfeit, a shadow of true happiness.

For what true content can all the world afford a Christian? They say it is
not the great Cage, that makes the Bird sing: I am sure, it is not the great
fortune, the great estate, that brings always the inward joy, the cordial
contentment: therefore Qui vult securus gau^ere, i^lo gaudeat, qui non potest
perire.
he who would seriously rejoice, let him take comfort in that which will never
perish: many times great estates, like the Camels bunch will not suffer men to
enter the straitegate, no more than that creature can go through an eye of a
needle: and like long garments, a thousand to one, if they do not trippe up
the heels, at the least, if they do not hinder our speed in the race of
godliness, whereas a meaner condition makes us seek the way to heaven, and
secures us in it: for as we see at London, because they are straited for room,
they build more in height; and as soldiers are defended in their Tents, by a
trench dig'd round about, which is nothing else but an hollownesse, and want of
earth, as Parisiensis, whose comparison this is: so for the most part, want of
earthly things, puts us upon a necessity of seeking heavenly, and withal, is
our best security against our spiritual enemies. Glass keeps out the wind
and rain, but lets in the light, and therefore is useful in building; and a
moderate estate is not much unlike it in nature or use, and therefore is most
desirable, which is neither so mean as to expose a man to the injuries, nor so
great, as to exclude a man from the influence of heaven.

His left hand is under my head, and with his right hand, he shall embrace me,
says the Spouse of her welbeloved in the Canticles: and this is the dealing of
God with his Church for the most part, he bestows the blessings of the left
hand upon her in such a measure, as to support her from perishing with want, or
extremity, he holds her up by the other hand to keep her from drowning: his
left hand is under my head: but so still, that she may be kept hungry, and
longing for the blessings of the right hand, and account them the principal.

With his right hand, he shall embrace me: and while she is in this state, she
is so far from murmuring, that she sings this as a song of triumph: and will
be contentented, not troubles her self about many things, but in the words of
Solomon, Uanitie of vanities, all is but vanity, bids adieu to the vanity of
the world, and as the Father glosses upon these words, to rail upon them, and
chide, and rail them away.

Dignity of man: They that look toward the earth only, are but equivocall
men; c men in name, but (...).
not in mind, to use the words of Chrysostom: for what is there even in our
nature which does not lift us up to God, to Heaven: the frame and fabric of
our bodies so upright, that it compels us to tread, to trample upon the earth,
to look up to heaven, and for this purpose, Anatomists observe, that beside
four muscles in the eyes, common to us with brute creatures, there is a
peculiar one in man's to lift it upward; the head is therefore round, a fit seat
for the mind, and withal, that it may be put in mind to think upon heaven
whence it is, and whereof the figure is a resemblance: the heart is both a
triangle, and a Pyramid, a Triangle, because the world cannot satisfy it, no
more than a round can fill a Triangle, but there will be empty corners still,
only the blessed Trinity can fill the capacity of the heart, whose Palace
and Chamber of Presence it should be, according to the Initiall letters of the
Latin word COR, which makes Camera Omnipotentis Regis, The Chamber of the
Omnipotent Ruler, as some have seriously observed, and an inverted Pyramid,
narrow below, almost sharpened to a point, that it might touch the earth no
more than needs must, Tota in puncto, in Ieroms phrase, the whole stands in a
narrow point, and broad above to receive the influence of Heaven.

The Rabbis also have observed, that there be just so many bones in a man's
body, as there be letters in the Decalogue: and just so many joints and
members, as there be days in the year, teaching us to offer up a double
Holocaust of all our strength, and all our time wholly to God, in the obedience
of his commandments:

And the whole man is Inversa planta, a tree turned upside down, (as the
Philosopher has noted long ago) whose roots are toward heaven, from whence
it derives all the sap and juice of Grace, which makes the branches toward
earth flourishing, and be fruitful in good works: My welldoing extends not
unto thee, says the Psamist, but unto the Saints that do excel in virtue:
and therefore to conclude, this in a word (because I know these are but
allusions, and Symbolica Theologia non est argumentativa (...).
Theological comparisons are not Syllogisticall to enforce an argument to
prove) is a work most proper, and peculiar to the heavenly Jerusalem, Plant
even Christ himself, who is God-man blessed for ever in heaven, as Clemens
speaks.

And though the fall of man has defaced the Image of God in him, yet the very
relics of his Nature do testify, that he was framed for him, for heaven:
for as the statue of Olympian Jupiter was framed lying all along upon the
ground, out of that vastness of proportion and stature, that any one might
easily discern that if it were set upright, the roof of the Temple could not
contain it: so man, the Image of God, though his fall has laid him grovelling
on the earth, yet even so we cannot but perceive, that if Grace should please
to raise him, there is a royal capacity in him, for which all the world is
too little.

For if nature has not conferd so much dignity upon man, that he cannot
stoop to the earth without abasing himself: I am sure Grace has: Christ has
redeemed him with his own blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God; and
therefore it is not amiss before we be serviceable for the world to put
Alexander question to his follower that persuaded him to run at the Olympicke
games, Do Kings use to run at the Olympicks? and to follow the instruction of
the Philosopher to a Prince, for a direction how he should carry himself at a
banquet, in saying no more but this, Remember thou art a Kings son.

Fourthly, brevitie of life: we read in Salomons Ephemerides, there is a time
to be borne, and a time to dye; the time to live is so short as some observe,
that he skips it over, and vouchsafes not once to name it: The Philosopher
affirms, that man is therefore the wisest of all creatures, because he alone
can number, and they note this as an essential difference between them, that
Bruta non numerant; brute creatures cannot number; I am sure this is most true
of that divine Arithmetic which the Psalmist prays for, Lord teach us so to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, then we may not
spend our precious time upon trifles: the Italian proverb is, he that will
lodge well at night, must set out early and take up his Inn betimes. Beloved
we cannot begin too soon to set onward upon our journey toward the new
Jerusalem: the Jews tell of Ben Syra yet a child, that he begged of his master
to instruct him in the Law of God, who deferred it, and put him off; saying, he
was to young yet to be entered into divine mysteries: then he replied, but
master, said he, I have been in the Churchyard, and perceive by the graves
which I have lain down by and measured, and find shorter then my self that
many have dyed younger than I am, and what shall I do then? and if I should
die before I have learned the Law of God, what would become of me then master?
The consideration of our short life should cause us to make haste to learn to
know, and serve God, and to think we cannot begin to study that lesson too
soon, that can never be learned too well.

And withal to use all speed and diligence, lest so, as Chrildren have
usually torn their books, we have ended our lives, before we have learned our
lessons: let us therefore translate our care, and greediness from earth to
heaven, and as some do cut off their horses tails to make their backs
stronger, and fitter for burden, it is the Rabbis comparison which they apply
to liberality, so let us cut off all superfluous expenses of time, that we
may afford to be more liberal toward necessary and noble uses: lest if we
let much water go beside the mill, we spend much time beside the maine
business, as it was observed of Demosthenes, that his breast was too short for
his periods, so we find it true in a case of the greatest importance, that
the period of our days be ended before we come to the period of our desires,
the comfortable assurance of eternal happiness.

At least, let us not think much to do as much for heaven as we do for
earth. Percute qua aratrum, bestirre thy self as if thou were at plough, said
a father to his son Glaucus, when he saw him overcome by his Antagonist at
the Olympic games, where he had forced him to contend in hope of gayning
great glory, because he had observed great experiments of strength in his
ploughing: So may I say with the same diligence that men use in plowing the
earrh, if they would employ it that way, men might purchase heaven; why then
are we so foolish to refuse a motion so equal? a bargain so advantageous? why
do we stick to bid a point of Time to buy a Circle, a Crown of eternity:
especially seeing we cannot but know it better then the heathen Philosopher
did, that pronounced all that resolved it, Nisi ad haec admitterer non fuerat
operae pretium nasci.
Unless I had been admitted to partake of these, it had been no great matter
to be borne: unless we get a part of heaven, it was not worth the while for
us that we are borne.

Fourthly, Necessity double of ours times and place. 4.


First, Times; for send your meditations abroad as Noah did 1.
the Dove out of the Arc, and they will find no place to rest, but return
and tell you of an universal deluge of affliction, which has well nigh
overwhelmed the Church of God, unless as the Duke of Alva told the King of
France, who asked him, whether he had observed the late great Eclipse, no said
he, I have so much to do upon earth, that I have no leisure to behold the
heaven: so we are so busied in the world, that we think not on Gods kingdom,
or be so rude and barbarous to think the state of the Church is nothing to us
abroad, while we at home feel nothing. But what if our selves be in more
danger, the more secure we are? Have we any privilege above our neighbors?
May not God justly take away his Gospel, and his mercies from those that abuse
them? I read it observed in the Scriptures, that when the Israelites came to
eat of the fruits of the land, de frugibus terrae, the Manna ceased: Si
amicus tuus mel fuerit, ne comederis totum.
If Honey be thy friend, do not swallow all, says the Arabic proverb; Let us
take heed we abuse not the gentleness of God toward us, lest if we grow
earthly minded, God take away his heavenly Manna, Quo generosius vinum eo
acrius acetum. O (...).
the richer the Wine is, the sowrer is the Vinegar says the German, and c if
his love has been so unspeakeable toward us, his hatred of our lewdness
will be infinite like himself, being void of limits and bounds, says a
father, and how shall we prevent our own danger, or relieve the miseries of
our brethren? When Jerusalem was taken, there was heard (they say) a voice from
heaven, Migremus, Let us depart hence, let us do so, betake our selves to God,
to Heaven for help in these dangerous times, an heavenly conversation; lest
Gods judgments sease upon us, as the Soldier slew Archimedes while he was
drawing lines in the dust so busily.

First, Be zealous for Religion. 1. (...).


A Lacedaemonian woman delivered her son going to the war his fathers
Buckler, with this mothers blessing, either let me see thee bring H (...).
this back to me my son with life, and victory, or let me see thee brought
back again upon this dead with honor: either fight victoriously, or die
valiantly. The Serpent (say they) if he be so environed, that he must of
necessitle pass thorough one of them, will sooner adventure upon the flame, or
fire, then the shadow of the Poplar Tree: Let us resolve either to live with
the Gospel, or dye for the Gospel, and the faith of our Fathers, the Buckler
that defended them from all dangers: and let us fear more the black shadow of
Roman superstition, then the bright flames of a Marian persecution.

There is a prophecy reported in Telesphorus, that Antichrist shall never
overcome Venice, nor Paris, nor the royal city of London. But we have a more
certain word, and let us take heed we be not lukewarm in Religion, lest God
spue us out of his mouth.

Secondly, be zealous in Religion.

To this end let us then practice,

First, Serious repentance, and sincere reformation.

If the book of the Law chance to fall upon the ground, the Jews custom is
presently to proclaim a fast: why should not we do so, who have let the Law
of God fall to the ground many times, and trample upon it too by disobedience:
I have heard sometime that one of the wisest Statesmen that ever sat at the
stern of this Kingdom had this verse written upon his Study door. Anglica
Gens est optima flens, and pissima ridens.



The English nation is most healthful when it swimmes in tears, and more
dangerous to fall into a sickness, when it overflowes with laughter. The truth
whereof, our late experience has confirmed: In the Plague, what shows of
devotion? what fair promises? but some have well observed a double fault in
our nation concerning the state of their bodies, which may be better applied to
the state of their minds, that the English are not sick soon enough, and they
are well too soon: to correct both which let me give but one word of advice.
Let Currat Poenitentia ne prae currat sententia.
our repentance be swift and current, lest Gods decree outrun it; and let our
fasts be according to an old Canon, which defines their continuance, even Usque
dum stellae in Coelo appareant.
until the stars appear in the Firmament; and let us humble our selves
betimes before the decree come forth, and let us go thorough still with the
work when it is begun, and resolve with Jacob, I will not let thee go,
until thou bless me.

Secondly, Let us be servent and earnest in Prayer.

The Jews have a blasphemous fable, that our Savior found out the right
pronounciation of the name of God, the Tetragrammaton, and that wrought all his
miracles; but the right invocation of the name of God will indeed work
miracles; and do we think much to ask and have?

There was one at Rome offered the book of the Sibyls to sale entire and
whole: a rare monument, but set a round price, which the King would not
adventure upon; then burning the half of the books, and doubling the price of
the whole for the remainder, he made a second offer, and that was also refused:
he made no more ado, but burnt again the half of the half, and doubled
again the whole price of the whole, and so once more he offered the relics
the third time, and then the King at last (bethought himself, and) bought.

Beloved, God offers us now his Gospel, his son, with peace, and prosperity)
all blessings are as it were let down from heaven to us in the sheet which
Peter saw) and that at no great price, our prayers only: if we make nice and
dainty to purchase these blessings when the Lord is so willing to make sale, I
fear the time will come, when we would be content to bid tears, and sweat,
and blood, and our very souls for the least part of them, and yet may go
without: Let us pray earnestly then for our selves, for our brethren, let us
not think much to weep for them, that bleed for Christ. The Jews have a
saying, that since the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, the doors of
Prayer have been shut: but the door of tears was never shut; Filius
lacrimarum perire non potest.
a son of tears cannot perish. Let us knock at that done. Our place and
Calling.

It is one of Ieremiahs Lamentations, that they that are brought in scarlet,
should embrace the dung; and the Lapwing is made an Hieroglyphicke of
infelicitie, because it has as a Coronet upon the head, and yet feeds upon
the worst of excrements: it is a pitiful thing that any child of God
redeemed, and washed in the blood of Christ, should bedable his scarlet Robe in
the stinking puddle of the world: but most lamentable it is that the fowls of
the heaven, by the enchantments of the world, should be metamorphoz'd into the
beasts of the earth: that they should degenenerate so low, whom God has
advanced so high, as to be his Ambassadors; and more, to be Kings and Priests
to him, in a more peculiar manner.

I will be sanctified in those that come near Me, says God himself: (...).
The souls of priests must be purer than the Sunbeams, says. Chrysostom:
when I am lifted up, says our Savior, I will draw many after me: The Minister
is not like to draw many thither, unless himself be first lifted up to
heaven. Let us then leave the plough, as Elisha did to follow Eliah; leave the
nets, as the Disciples did, to follow our Savior: cast off the cares of the
world, that we may be free for the Lords Work. They say, Swallows will lade
and clogge their wings with dirt, that with it they may build these neasts: and
Falconers do this with their Hawks, sometime clippe^ their wings (Ierre in
the phrase) to impe out their trains: I wish many did not so spend their
excellent wits and parts, which as with wings they might fly to heaven, by
doing Gods faithful service in his Church, to nothing but that they may heap
thick clay together, and sit warm in their nests at home, or go sooping in a
silken coat, and Ruff, with a goodly train after them in the street: they
do not remember, it seems, that the Peacocke has the more painted plumes,
gayer train, and yet the Eagle is the Queen of Birds, they say, because she
flies nearest heaven.

Divines contend earnestly that Decimae debentur jure divino.
Tithes are due by the Law of God, and I blame them not, but then methinks,
they should not contend so earnestly, that the Sabbatum observatur jure humano.
Sabbath is observed by the law of man, lest the world think they play fast
and loose; fast for themselves, and loose for God, when they would have the
people tied to their pay, and would not themselves be tied to their pains:
(...).
to muzzle the truth in silence, is to bury gold under ground, is most true in
our case, and a fearful crime you know it is in the Parable, to bury the
Lords Talent in a Napkin: it is our duty Plantare verbis, rigare lacrimis,
alere exemplis.
to plant with Instruction, to water with tears of Repentance, and nourish by
Examples, as Austin excellently, to preach in season, and out of season:
Inveniat me stantem Christus, and praedicantem, said a worthy Bishop of ours, I
pray God, that when Christ comes to judgment, he may find me standing, and
preaching. Beatus servus, Blessed is the servant, whom his master when he
comes, shall find so doing.

Let us then draw others to heaven by diligence in preaching, and go to heaven
by holiness of life: methinkes, Austin is affectuall Surgunt indocti, and
coelum rapiunt, and nos cum doctrina, etc.
the unlearned arise, and take heaven by violence: and shall we perish with
all our Learning? who if we seek not heaven in the first place, are like of
all other to lie lowest in Hell.

But better I go like a Candle, so that I leave a sweet farewell, though all
you burn daylight: I will rather therefore put my self upon your wisdom,
and end hastily, then presume upon your patience, and not seasonably.

FINIS.
THE NATVRALL MAN'S CONDITION.

OR, THE ENMITY OF THE NATVRALL MAN TO GOD.

AND THE ENMITY OF GOD To the Natural Man.

By JOHN STOVGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, and Late Preacher of Gods Word in
Aldermanbury LONDON.

Printed at London by T. G. for John Bellamie, and Ralph Smith, and are to be
sold at the three Golden Lions near the Royal Exchange. 1640

THE NATVRALL Man's Condition.
2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.
I Have made choice of this place of Scripture to make the groundwork of my
Discourse: In which, to let pass the former part, which has been handled in
another place, in another manner, and to another purpose, I come to the latter
part: We pray you in Christ's stead or in Christ's name be ye reconciled to God:
wherein three principal parts may be observed.

First, The condition of man by nature, and this is but employed in the word
Reconciled, and may be thus expressed; Every man by nature is an enemy of God,
for reconciliation imports so much.

Secondly, the duty of man in this condition, if he will escape the misery of
it, The only way is to reconcile himself to God.

Thirdly, The office of the Minister, who must urge man to the performance of
this duty, we pray you in Christ's stead be reconciled to God: I might add
something concerning the first estate of man in integrity for the term of
Reconciling supposes, first an agreement, secondly, a falling out, and then
thirdly, the restitution from the latter jarring to the former agreement: but
because that is not so necessary for my scope I will rather omit it: But in the
second point it will not be amiss to distinguish two things for more
perspicuitie.

First, the medicine, in those words (...).

Secondly, the application in the maine duty, he ye reconciled: And then in
recompense of this increase I will leave out the third point altogether,
concerning the office of the Minister as not so pertinent to my scope: so shall
there remain in the words still three points.

First, the misery of man, who is by nature the enemy of God.

Secondly the remedy of that misery, which is Christ our mediator.

Thirdly, the fruit of that remedy our reconciliation with God: The first
point which I shall only insist on is this:

That we are by nature enemies of God: For the further explication of which I
suppose the meaning of the Terms, as facil and easy, and conceived by every
one in this place, to be this.

The first word, We, or Man, which is the Subject of the Proposition to be
generally understood in the utmost extent of the nature of mere man: The
sons of the mighty, and the men of the earth, as the Psalmist terms the^ by
way of disparagement: Filii (...) and filii Enos, filii viri, and filii
hominis, be they but filii Adam, the sons of Adam descended from him; All men
are by nature Gods enemies.

The second word by nature, the qualification of the Subject, not by force of
the principles of nature, qua homines, but by participation of corruption
superadded to this nature, qua tales: not by nature as primitive and created by
God, but by nature as derived corrupt from Adam: All men came out of his loins
by natural generation, before supernatural regeneration, the stock of Adam
being not transplanted into Christ the second Adam, All men are thus by Nature
Gods enemies.

The third word Enemies, Gods enemies, the predicate in the Proposition
attributed to the Subject, because it implies a relative disposition between
two: and Inimicitia, Enmity, as you all know, is nothing else but the
reciprocal affection of a moral opposition, viz. Hatred between two persons
in a reasonable nature: in which there must concur those three Conditions.

First, that it is between two.

Secondly, that it be reciprocal; for if the hatred be but on the one part,
not on the other, it is truly hatred indeed, but it is not properly Inimicitia.

Thirdly, that it is only between persons in a reasonable nature for the same
reason, because among them only can be found the reflection of the like
affection of Hatred: for a man may hate a toade, or some such creature, and
that by a secret antipathy, yet that is not enmity, by reason of the defect of
that condition: therefore this word Enemies I understand both Actively and
Passively. We are enemies to God and hate him, and God is an enemy to us and
hates us; and so in both respects. All men are by Nature Gods enemies. Now to
handle both these briefly.

First, jointly: The ground, of both is a dissimilitude, which is between God
and us, as we are by nature, we are men of polluted hearts, and polluted
lips; God is a God of pure eyes that can behold no iniquity: We are wholly
infected with sin and corruption, but God is He to whom the Cherubins and
Seraphins, do most justly cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabboath: and if
the Trinity were multiplied by it self, that (...), were thrice three times
redoubled, as ye have it nine times written in Plantines Edition in the fourth
of the Revelation, yet how far were it from that which the Saints acknowledge
in God, who are said there not to rest day nor night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God Almighty: and how much more short of the infinite holiness in God,
whose Attributes are himself, and therefore he is even Holiness it self. No
marvel then seeing there is such dissimilitude between them, nothing on man's
part but sin and pollution, nothing on Gods part but Sanctity and
perfection, no marvel seeing such a dissimilitude, if we say there is such
dislike that they are mutual Enemies: for if the moral maxim which is most
true be received, this cannot be avoided which follows out of it by an easy
consequence, according to the Law of contraries, Similitudo est matter amoris:
But Secondly, by the opening of these distinctly, This will better appear, and
first for the former.

We are by nature enemies to God.

Perhaps some will say to me here: and do we hate God? How can that be, that
he should be hated, who is the perfection of Beauty, the pitch of Nobility,
the pattern of Wisdom, the Idea of all Virtue, in a word, who is goodness
it self, whereas the Object of hatred is some evil always: And do we hate God
who has made this world, this all, and us in it a a little world, (...), as
they called Athens the principal of all the rest; and as it were an All in
all: who governes all things by his providence, and by whose favor we have
all that we have, In whom we live and move, and have our being: so that if he
had not bound us to love him by the transcendent excellency of his nature, yet
he has even brought us by the infiniteness of his mercy toward us, and can
we repay all this Love with Hatred? And do we hate God? Scientia neminem
habet inimicum nisi ignorantem; say the Heathen, that have not known his
Nature, hate him, but as for them that live in the bosom of the Church, that
have sucked milk out of the breasts of the Spouse of Christ, they cannot choose
but draw in the love of God their Father, with the milk of the Church their
Mother. And do we hate God? Or do not you rather like some (...), an hater of
mankind; say mankind is an hater of God, and fasten a false accusation, a
slander upon them all unjustly?

Indeed (to answer this, if I speak this without the warrant of the Word of
God, then say, if you will, that my tongue is noslander: but if I bring that to
avouch so much as I have said of every unregenerate man; consider well whether
I have not slandered them with a truth: I need not put you in mind of this
place which (as I observed before) says it in effect: but I will produce a
parallel place, which will give better light to this, and greater strength to
the matter in question, Col. 1. 21. And you that were sometimes strangers and
enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled: Where you
see you have the same phrase of reconciling, and lest men signify this
obscurely; you have further, you that were strangers and enemies in your mind,
(...), where that was but intimated and insinuated only in the former wotd is
literally and punctually expressed. And that there are some indeed that hate
God that are his enemies, appears generally out of infinite places of
Scripture, where there is mention made of Gods enemies; and more particularly
in the 139. Psalm, 21. Uerse. Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? And
am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a
perfect hatred, I count them my enemies. And tell me what man's is that title of
honor, that Elogium that Paul gives the Heathen and natural men in the
Catalogue, Romans 1. where he has heaped up the most of them together,
Backebiters, haters of God, despitefull, etc. there you have among the rest
(...), haters of God: And if that be not plain enough, I think the eight
Chapter of the Romans speaks home enough to this purpose: where you shall
find these words in the seventh verse, (...) (...): where according to the
stream of our interpreters, the subject is emphaticall, (...), not the
inferior faults, as the Papists would have it, but the highest, the most
refined portion of the unregenerate, (...): and the predicate is emphaticall
(...) the abstract for the concreat, as though there were no composition of
substance and quality, of constitution and corruption, but all were turned into
mere and simple enmity (...). The wisdom of the flesh says the old
translation, the carnal mind, says the new, is enmity against God: and if
the common axiom be true, men's cujusque, is est quisque. I think it may be
thus resolved at last, The carnal man is an enemy to God: And what do they
want think you of being Gods enemies, or what injury should a man do them if
he called them so, of whom the Apostle speaks, in 2 Timothy 3, 4. that they are
(...), Lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God: do not you think that they
love God much, that love pleasures more: If there were yet need of further
testimony to this truth, I might confirm it with advantage out of the third
Chapter of the Pilippians and the 18. verse. For many walk, of whom I have
told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the
Cross of Christ: Here be enemies, and many enemies, and that of Christ (which
is more I think then of God) and that of the Cross of Christ, which is more
perhaps than of Christ simply: of whom the Apostle told the Philippians, and
told them often, and told them weeping. But I think by this time it is clear
enough out of Scripture that so it is, that we are enemies of God, and hate
him: Now to answer the objection distinctly, and show how this may be, that God
may be hated as an enemy, seeing he is goodness it self, and the object of
hatred is some evil: You must consider three things.

First, the degrees of hatred which are three.

First, the first is not to love so much as we ought, or not so much as some
other: and so the beloved Wife, and the hated are distinguished in the Law,
where is not meant that she is absolutely hated, but not so much loved as the
other, and from this degree may arise this distinction of hatred, that is,
either absolute or comparative.

Secondly, the second degree is, where there is no love at all, and in this
case this is sufficient from this negation, to conclude an affirmation of the
contrary, for between love and hatred in respect of God, there is no Medium
abnegationis, according to our Saviors speech: He that is not with me is
against me: And from this degree you may frame a second distinction of Hatred,
that it is either Negative or Positive.

Thirdly, the third degree is a positive ill will or hatred, where there may be
conceived a great latitude, and so many degrees likewise: but it will be
sufficient to declare the nature of it, if you observe but one distinction: for
this positive hatred may be either explicitly such, or implicitly, either
formaliter, or interpretative: by the former I mean such hatred as a man
entertaines against any thing wittingly, and upon actual consideration and
intention: by the latter, such as (although the former be not seen) by which a
man does the same things in effect, as if he did purposely hate a thing: He
that sins against me hates his own soul, says Wisdom, Prove. 8. All
they that hate me love death: not that any man hates his own soul expressly
or purposely: for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 5. much less his spirit, his soul: neither does any man love death in
that manner: but they that do those things which proceed indeed from hatred
(though they intend not so much) are said to hate interpretative: So the Wise
man says, He that spares the rod hates his son: because if he hated him,
he could not do him a worse turn: And thus you have a third distinction of
hatred, that it is either of Ignorance or Malice.

And this is the first thing to be considered, the degrees, or if you please,
the several acceptions of hatred.

Secondly, the second thing is the degrees of Corruption which is to be found
in a carnal man: which be two, according to the two kinds Original and
Actual,

First, Original is equal in all men: for it contains in it all sins, and
all degrees of sins, tanquam in origin, and that I may so speak, tanquam in
ratione seminati: but

Secondly, Actual is diverse in diverse men; in some more, in some less, and
that not from any special, which is in one man more then another by nature,
for all (as I said) are equally poisoned and infected with the bitter root of
Original sin, but from the General Grace of God, who in his providence does
bridle and restaine that unlimited boundless disposition of sinning, as it
seems good to his own wisdom, by civil education, and moral instructions
and the like; and does not administer those occasions which should serve to
educe it into acts, which if they were applied to all alike, all would be
alike, as rank in sin one as another. And this is the second thing, the
degrees of corruption.

Thirdly, the third thing to be considered, is concerning the Object of love or
hatred, Good or Evil: which are of two sorts.

First Absolute, as they are in their own nature: and so every creature much
more; God is good and cannot be hated, and no creature, much less God, is
evil.

Secondly Relative, in respect of some other thing: and so we see there is a
natural hatred or opposition between some creatures, which is properly called
Antipathy, where the cause is secret: not because such a nature is in it self
evil, but because it is evil to it: and the first of these kinds may be
called simply Bonum or Malum, the second perhaps, bitter, conveniens or
inconveniens, Congruum or Incongruum: and that which is bonum may not be
conveniens: And these two are to be found in God, who according to his absolute
being is (...), but according to diverse respect to diverse creatures, may have
diverse aspects of convenience or unconvenience? these three things being
premised according to the faculty, and the degree of corruption in it, and the
object with the kinds of good or evil in it, and the affection or habit of
hatred, in the degrees of it, it is not hard to answer the question, and
declare how it comes to pass that man by nature should be Gods enemy and hate
him: and thus you may take it.

All men, that are yet in their original corruption, be the degree of their
actual, what it will, more or less, cannot choose but hate God in all the
degrees of hatred, Comparative, Negative, Positive: though in some more
appear, in somelesse: in those namely whose actual corruption, is improoved
more through Gods just judgment, there it appears more foul, and more
clear, and more explicitly, who harden their forehead, and with set malice
fight against God: in those whom Gods bridle of restraining grace has curbed,
more or less, and but implicitly, according to that explication which I gave
before: and the ground is manifest out of that which has been said before in
general; now, not for any evil that is in God, but for that good rather,
because they being evil, there is no congruity or convenience between them
and it: And as there be two things in them First A Love to Malum Culpae, and
secondly an Hatred to Malum Poenae: and two things in God, clean opposite to
those, first an Hatred to their Malum Culpae, and secondly a Love to their
Malum Poenae, supposing the other: the former flowing from his Holiness, the
latter from his Justice, they must needs hate him in both respects: As Author
legis prohibiting all Malum Culpae which they love, by severe laws, and as
ultor peccati inflicting upon them Malum Poenae which they hate, vindicating
their Malum Culpae by sharp punishment: and these are so predominant in them,
that they cast an aspect of deformity upon other the most lovely attributes of
God, an aspersion of bitterness upon the most sweet among them: so that his
infinite perfection, and incomparable mercy, are so far from altering and
enchanting them, that they drive them further from him; because though they can
see in them (...), yet not finding (...): they see perfection of beauty, but
they cannot see affection whereupon to ground propriety: And therefore they
think they do, as indeed they do, make so much the more against them: and
hence it is, that though they cannot hate God for them directly, yet they hate
him with them, and indirectly for them; as infinitely aggravating by accident,
the heinousness of their crime, as well as the grievousnesse of their
condemnation: And thus you see the truth is salved, and the objection
satisfied: which if it be not sufficiently opened out of the testimony of the
word, and the general ground of man's sinfullnesse, I will further show how
that makes a man enemy to God.

And first you may easily understand it out of the general nature of sin:
which standing so opposite to God, the love of it must needs argue the hatred
of God: for as our Savior requires obedience as a trial of the truth of his
Disciples love to him, If you love me keep my Commandments; Then the Argument
will be as strong to conclude backward, If you keep not Gods Commandments ye
hate him. But this has been intimated already: the second more particularly,
Sin is enmity to God, and that two ways.

First, Immediately in himself, Secondly, Mediately.

Immediately, against in all those three degrees of hatred; which I mentioned
before.

First, Comparative Hatred; which is, when something is preferred before God in
our affection, and prized above him: and this is done in every sin, otherwise
how could it come to pass that we should cleave to it, or any inferior thing
rather then to God, nay forsake God to cleave to it? How could we disobey God
to obey a filthy lust: and that this is truly hatred, appears by that of our
Savior, Matthew. 6. 24. No man can serve two Misters, for either he will hate
the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the
other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, nor God and pleasure, and the like:
Where you see such an opposition, that if we love any thing beside God, so as
to be a servant to it, we are beside the love of God that should make us his
servants, we will hate him: we must be so far from serving any thing before
him, that we have no liberty to serve any thing beside him, if we mean to stay
in his service, this Text excludes not only all superiors that may outstrippe
him, but all equals that may compare with him, yea all comportures and
competitors with him in our love and service: If this be not plain enough then
that is, Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not
worthy of me: compared with Luke 14. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not
his Father and Mother, and Wife and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea
and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple: Whence it appears that
remisser love is but hatred, and so to love any thing more then God, is to hate
him; and the reason is plain, both in general because if those two so
unequally loved should come to thwart one another, then to show the love to the
principal, they would not stick to do real acts of hatred against the
other, and so discover themselves: and in particular because of the infinite
eminency of Gods goodness above any other thing, and so of our obligation to
proportionable love: But I need not stay long in this: it being so plain that
men by nature are wholly averse from God and convert themselves to the
creature, and therefore enemies and haters of God.

Secondly, the second degree is of Negative hatred, namely, where there is no
love at all: and this is easy to be observed in all natural men toward God:
for whereas it is the nature of love wheresoever it is rooted to have the
command of the whole man, and sway it as it lists, all other affections, and
faculties, and parts giving attendance to it as their Queen and Sovereign:
and in the love of God this is to be seen in a peculiar manner: and therefore
we are commanded to love him with all our heart, and all our soul and all our
might; and all our mind: The understanding, the will, the affections, all the
faculties of the soul together, with all the powers of the body, must be
wholly taken up with this love, you shall find that none of these in the
carnal man, are any thing of kin to the love of God. Love is busy in:

First, Not his understanding, the mind and thoughts will be always running on
the party beloved; dies inoctisque ^ames me, me desideres, me somnies, me
expectes, de me cogites, me spires, me te oblectes, mecum tota sis, meus fac
sis postremo animus, quando ego sumtum. You know who said it, and in this case;
and in this respect the common saying I think is verifyed, especially animus
est ubi amat potius quam ubi animat. Where it loves rather then where it lives:
But is there any such thing in the wicked toward God? No surely, All things
concerning him are mere strangers with them, and very unwelcome guests, that
mar all their mirth.

The wicked will not seek after God, God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.
4. And if God offer himself, as he does many times, And be found of those that
sought him not, they will not stick to say, either with the fool, in their
heart there is no God, or with them in Job 20. 14. That say unto God depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Again, Love is learned in the knowledge of all the commendable parts, and
perfections in the party beloved: But is there any such thing in the wicked
toward God? No surely, the Book of Nature lies open before them, and will not
suffer them to look off it, though they would: and yet they will not vouchsafe
to look on it though they ought, and read a noble story of the Power, and
Wisdom, and Goodness, and Magnificence and Beauty of their Creator, but
seal up their eyes with a sullen ignorance, which would feign feast themselves
with the sight of of their blessed Maker, and bury their talent of
understanding, which would feign be employed to his use, and improved to his
honor, with this profane Epitaph, (...).
The sweetest life is to understand nothing.

Lastly, Love is witty in devising means to enjoy the party beloved: if
wanting to procure it, if gotten, to perpetuate, if lost, to rerecover union
with him.

But is there any such thing in the wicked toward God? No truly: For my
people (says the Lord in Jeremie, 4. 22.) is foolish, they have not known me,
they are sottish children, and they have no understanding; they are wise to do
evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. I might enlarge this, but I must
pass to that which is behind: for though we have viewed the intellectual
part of the carnal man, and can observe no footsteps of the love of God, yet
perhaps his will and affections are better, which are indeed the proper reason
of Love; but if there be so little light in the understanding, I am afraid
there is little heat to be expected in them; What the eye sees not, the heart
rues not, is so of sorrow, a and a liking is derived (...).
from looking; and who knows not b Ignoti nulla cupido: The will moves when
the understanding gives the watchword, and depends upon it, as the Verdict of
the Jury upon the Judges information: and that as we have seen that his
understanding has no tang of the love of God in the first place, so it must
needs follow. Secondly in the second place, Not his will and affections
neither, which you shall understand, if you run over in your mind, but three
kind of affections.

First, such as are conversant immediately about the good we love, either
absent, as Desire, or present, as Joy; where there is no joy in the presence of
God in the light of his countenance, nor desire of it; where there is no
delight in his Ordinances, nor desire to them which should lead us, as it
were, by the hand to him, to hear him speak in his Word to us, or to speak
in our prayers to him, to walk with him in obedience of his Commandments:
where there is no cheerful intertainment of messengers that come from him; no
delight or desire to hear of him, which is evident of the natural man to God,
you shall pardon me if I believe not that there is any here.

Secondly, look upon such affections as are occupied about the will, that are
contrary to the good. 1 of love: either absent, as fear; or present as
grief; where there is no fear of the loss of the former good even now
mentioned, or grief, if through our fault or negligence we have lost them; I
think my caution will not deserve blame, if I dare not trust with such a rich
Jewel, such a precious grace, as the Love of God is, without better security
than their simple word, a better pawn than their bare profession.

Thirdly, look upon their anger, a mixed affection, the object it self being
evil indeed, but the motive good, whereby the mind rises against some evil
of difficulty, that hinders it in the prosecution of some good: where there is
not an holy anger, a zeal, an indignation against sin or Satan, the world,
or the flesh, that either diminishes the good of God or derogates from his
glory, as we love him for him self, amore benevolentiae, or desturbs our
union and conjunction with God, as we love him for our only happiness, amore
concupiscentiae: in this cause it is true that Phavorinus in Collins, says of of
anger in great wits, (...).
It is well neigh, or almost a noble passion: and where this is not to be
found, at least in some measure (and it is impossible it should be found in
wicked men and carnal) that is true, which Austin says in a like case, Qui
non zelat non amat: and you may conclude, The love of God dwells not in him.
You see then how a natural man does not love God (...).
with all the mind; (...).
nor with all the heart: and perhaps it will be needless to touch the third,
(...)
with the whole strengh, because as the understanding composes the Ditty, so
the will chants the Song: and after these, the rest of the powers and parts
will dance: yet we will mention this too, as we have done the rest, and but
mention it, and that may note the highest intension of the other, that they
must be set at the highest pegge and pitch that can be, and that both in actu
primo and secundo: but we will take it now for all other things by which the
former do use to manifest their love: and they are three.

First, a man's tongue: secondly, the rest of his members: thirdly, his goods.

All these, how willingly will they be employed about that we love? with what
dexterity, what diligence, what expedition will they behave themselves
therein? Well might Plato descant upon the word (...).
Whom men call Love, the immortal call winged: for love has two wings when,
it is to go to or for the thing that is loved: but on the contrary, what
dullness, what deadness, what difficulty is there for a carnal man to
perform any service for God; which is an evident argument there is no love:
but I do but name this. I should come to the Positive Hatred, which I
principally and only intended. My purpose is not to repeat any thing that
has been said concerning those two degrees of hatred of God, which are to be
found in every natural and unregenerate man Comparative, whereby he comes
short both of that which he owes him, and that which he bestows most freely
upon other things: and Negative, whereby he denies him that love that he
requires in all particulars, (...); neither loving him with all his mind, or
all his heart, or all his might: neither will enlarge any of them: but proceed
rather to show

The third degree, the positive hatred, that every carnal man has toward
God: and as this is most properly Hatred, so it is principally to be
considered: for though that be a pitiful condition, man, in whom the Image of
God is, should so far degenerate from his nature, as to prefer in his
affections the creature before the Creator, and as the Apostle speaks, (...).
Romans 1. 25. They worshipped and served the creature before the Creator, who is
God blessed for ever: and that yet worse, to yield him no love, no service at
all: yet to harden the forehead, to profess open enmity, to proclaim war
against him, to make our understandings, or wills and affections, our tongues,
together with all our members, which ^hee has formed and fashioned, with all
our outward good things which his providence has fastened upon us, to make all
these as so many weapons of unrighteousnes, to fight against him; I know not
whether I should say that it stirs more misery, or more madness, but this I
think you all conceive that it is the top and height of both: But so it is
with every son of Adam, in his natural condition, by the same reason that he
is the Heir of Original, and the Father of Actual sin, his soul and all
the powers thereof, being but a shop of sin, his body and all the parts of it
tools of sin, his life and all his actions of both soul and body, a trade
of sin, by the same reason.

I say he is (...), and Gyant-like, does fight against Heaven and against God:
I must desire you here to remember only the distinction, which I propounded
when I spoke of this last degree of positive hatred, that it is either
explicit, when it is purposed and intended, upon actual consideration; or
inplicite when the same thing is done which we would do, if we did purpose and
intend hatred against God, the use and ground of which I then showed you out of
some; places of Scripture.

Secondly, remember the difference of the degrees of corruption in men: for
though all men be equally infected in regard of the root and original of
sin; yet it does not equally break forth into actual, but in great variety,
according as they be more or less bridled and curbed by Gods restraining
grace: which makes that though all men have the seeds of all sins, and all
the degrees of sin in them, yet they do not bud and bring forth fruit in
all alike; These things being remembered, I shall easily clear the point in
hand, which in plain terms is this.

That Sin (in which all men are natural) is direct enmity to God, and hatred
of him: And so consequently, all men as they are in this estate of sin (in
which they are all naturally) are direct enemies and haters of God.

To Illustrate this you may consider

The definition of Love, and so compare hatred with it, according to the nature
of opposition; and that is this, as you have it in Aristotle (...)
To love is to will to any one the things be thinks good for his sake, but not
for his own sake, and to practice them according to his ability: and others
say the same in substance: in which description there be three things
observeable especially.

First, the affection it self, the willing of good to the party we love.

Secondly, the ground and formalis ratio of this affection, not for our own
benefit, or any good that redounds to us therefrom, but sincerely for his sake.

Thirdly, the effect or fruit of it, which is a forward disposition and
endeavor, to procure the good we wish him, so far as it shall lie in our
power to do it: and the contrary to these three will shadow forth unto us the
nature of hatred, which has therefore three things in it.

First, a wishing of evil to the party hated.

Secondly, not for any injury of his offered to us, but simply for himself.

Thirdly, a disposition to endeavor so much as lies in us, to bring those
evils upon him which we wish unto him: for though the second condition be not
so necessarily required, to make up that hatred which the Schoolmen call odium
immicitiae but rather makes that other kind, which they use to call odium
abominationis, which is not needful to find in sinners toward God: yet
because it does indeed agree to them, and therefore to set it out so much the
more fully; and because it then agrees better with the description of love
alleged out of Aristotle, and therefore to parallel it more fitly, I would
not omit it. Now that all three are in the carnal man,

First, A wishing of all evil to him.

Secondly, and that not for any injury done to him, or good that would redound
to him for his evil.

Thirdly, and both with a disposition and endeavor to bring the evil upon
him, so much as lies in him, it were no hard thing to show distinctly and
severally, if I did not fear I should exceed the time, and exercise your
patience too much in a tedious discourse upon one and the same argument: and
therefore were not forced in a manner to contract as much as I may
conveniently: I will insist therefore only, which vertually includes the rest,
in the last: and make it plain, how natural men study and labor to the
utmost of their power, to bring all evil upon God.

It Is true indeed that he by reason of the excellency of his nature is not
capable of any suffering in that kind, and therefore as he answered them that
told him the company laughed at him, (...).
These men scoff at thee; but I scoff not, said he again: so though these
men wrong God, he is not wronged: yet no thank to them, for they doing their
good will to do it, though it succeed not for another reason beyond their
reach: nay, so far are they from hurting God, that it reflects all upon
themselves: as the big and boistrous waves, swollen as it were with pride as
well as exhalations, rushe furiously upon some solid rock, thinking surely to
overturne it, or eat it up, and swallow it presently: but what is the issue,
the rock remains unmovable, and they do but dash themselves in a thousand
pieces: so it is with the wicked that rise up against God; and yet this does
not excuse them: nay more, God has such an overruling hand in all their
actions, that what is done by them to his hurt, is directed by him to his
honor: non fit praeter Dei voluntatem, quod fit contra ejus voluntatem, says
Austin: And again, Non sineret omnipotens fieri mala, nisi sciret de malis
bonum facere: the wicked in breaking his command, fulfill his counsel, in
opposing his will they do but accomplish it; and yet this does not excuse
them: for though the hand that acts whether it will or not, be an instrument of
God, yet the wicked mind which aims at another thing quite contrary, makes
them culpable though the execution must needs suite with his decree, and cannot
cross it, yet the wicked intention, whereby they would feign, makes them as
guilty before him: Jason had little cause to thank his enemy, that meant to
kill him by shedding his blood, though he chanced to cure him by opening his
Imposthume, which the Physicians could not do. As little thank may Judas
look for at Gods hand, for betraying his Lord and Master, the Lord of life,
though he did that which God had determined: And the Jews as little as Judas,
who crucified Christ, (...).
Him have ye taken, being delivered by the determinate counsel, and
foreknowledge of God, Act. 2. 23. and all sinners as little as the Jews: for
the wages is given according to the work indeed, but the work is judged
according to the will of him that does it: so that the wicked doing those
things whereby they bring evil to God as much as they can, it must be imputed
to them, as if they had indeed power to do it, and had done it. And thus I
come to the point, which is this.

That all natural men do wish and work all evil to God, and therefore are
direct enemies and haters of him.

Now because we cannot conceive any thing of God almost, but in some proportion
that we find in the creature to him: Removing all imperfections: I will
instance in three good things, wherein they go about to wrong God.

First, In the content and tranquillity of mind, or if you will, his pleasure,
by displeasing him.

Secondly, In his good name, and honor due to him, by dishonoring him.

Thirdly, In his Riches and possessions, by dammaging him, yea even his
Kingdom it self, in a manner de-throning, and deposing him. I will but
briefly give a touch of every one of these, because otherwise I shall not
compass to dispatch so much as I desire.

The first then is the displeasing of God: Without faith it is impossible to
please God, says the Apostle, and so it is impossible for the unregenerate man
butto displease God: their best actions stink in his nostrills, The prayers of
the wicked is abomination to the Lord; in the Proverbes, My Soul abborreth
your new Moons and appointed feasts, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to
bear them, as the Lord himself complains of the Jews, by the Prophet Esaias
1. 14. But my purpose is not to show how much the Lord is displeased with them,
because I shall have better opportunity for that in the next point, but how
much they displeased the Lord: it is their whole course, and study so to do
almost; I know says Moses to the Israelites, that evil will befall you in the
latter days, because ye will do evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke him
to anger through the works of your hands, Deuteronomy. 31. 29. And the Prophet
threatens in Gods name, 1 King. 14, 15. The Lord shall smite Israel, and shall
root him out of this good Land, because they have made their Groves to provoke
the Lord to anger: and Ieroboams sins, wherewith he sinned against God are
termed in the same Book 15. 30. His provocations wherewith he provoked the
Lord God of Israel to anger: And in the second Book, 17. 17. Where you have a
Catalogue of the sins of Israel, this concludes all: They caused their sons
and their daughters to pass through the fire, and used divinations, and
enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to
provoke him to anger. Therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and
removed them out of his sight. Out of which places you may see what is the
issue of the sin of the wicked, what the scope, upon which their wit, and
will, and ways, are wholly set, namely to provoke the Lord to anger: and that
sin in this respect is enmity to God, and sinners enemies, I think it is
plain enough: for is not this enmity to do all things, that we know will
thwart and cross a man, and to omit and neglect any thing, that might in any
sort be to his liking: to delight to grieve, and vex, and fret him? which the
wicked do in sinning against God.

Secondly, I might further illustrate this, from another peevishness, which
the Apostle Paul has observed in our nature, which is such that the Law of
God, which should be a bridle to restrain and curb our lawless luft, is a
spur to provoke and prick it forward to run more violently; the more God
forbids sin, the more we bid for it, the more greedily we desire it, Sin
says the Apostle, Romans 7. 8. Taking occasion by the Commandment wrought in me
all manner of concupiscence: for without the Law sin was dead, for I was
alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived and I
dyed, And the Commandment, which was ordained to life, I found to be unto
death, for sin taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it
slew me: As if we did sin upon purpose, so much the more, because it is
offensive to God, to displease him, and as you had it even now, to provoke him
to anger: and if God had need to deal with us, as he did in the story, who was
wont to command the contrary, when he would have any thing done, because he
knew they would cross him, and as the Philosopher cousend Alexander, who
thinking that he would make suit to him to restore his Country, which he had
ruined (from which he was utterly averse) when he saw him come toward him swore
he would deny whatsoever he should desire, and he therefore demanded the clean
contrary of what he intended, that he would not restore his Country, and by
that wile sped in his suit because he did not speed.

Thirdly, I might further press this, because our disposition is such
naturally toward God, for the most part, as we will be most refractary, in
those things which he most earnestly requires at our hands: if there be any
service more pure to him, any performance of ours more precious then other in
his sight, any duty that he delights in, we are more awkward and untoward to
that, as if we did it of purpose to displease him, and to provoke him to anger,
and I could instance here particularly, in the Sanctifying of his day, in
private and frequent prayer, and many other the like, but this that has been
said already may suffice concerning the first, the displeasing of God, to show
that it is a character of enmity, a badge of hatred: and as it is said in the
Gospel of the Tares, sown while the husbandman slept (...), an enemy has
done this, so the wicked that do this continually, may be branded in the
forehead with this mark, and known to be an enemy.

Secondly, the second act of enmity whereby the wicked men seek to bring evil
upon God is by dishonouring him: which they do in sinning many ways, both in
conceiving very meanly and basely of him in their mind, or else they could
not sin, and so speaking diminitively of his Majesty, yea, blaspheming his
holy Name; as also in the very sin it self, which as it brings a deformity
upon themselves is dishonorable to him as the Creator, and as it is a
difformitie from his holy Will, and disobedience thereto is dishonorable to
him, as the King and Governor of all things; for as the mangling and defacing
of some noble Pictures, robs the Artificer of his deserved praise, and so tends
to his disgrace: and as the disobedience of the Subjects is a dishonor to
their Sovereign: so we blurring and mangling of our own souls with sin,
and the Image of God in them, do impair the glory of his Wisdom and
Workemanshippe of which he made them to have been Statues and Monuments, and
rebelling against him, deny him the glory of his power and Soveraignetie, and
make both his Wisdom and Power to be called in question: the defects that be
in us, redounding in some sort to the discredit of him that made us, as though
he wanted either power or wisdom to have prevented, or to redress it. Now
ye know that God made all things to his glory, and he is most tender of his
honor, and therefore to deprive him of that is the greatest indignity we can
offer him, and must needs proceed from the greatest enmity: We cannot add
any thing indeed to the glory of God, who was all glorious in himself before
the world was made, and stands not in need of the creature; much less can we
dim or diminish it, but we are said to glorify him, and he takes it so, and
rewards it so, when we do according to the prescript of his Will, the proper
end of our creation: and then we dishonor him, when we transgress and
swerve from that, as much as lies in us, though God cannot sustain any loss
in this neither, because he is able to correct our active injustice, by his
vindicative justice, and so reduce them to his glory, and then when we will
not glorify him, yet he will be, and is glorified by us: Now both this and
the former, the displeasing and dishonouring of God argues the deeper hatred in
us, because they are joined with contempt.

First, in that we do these things and sin, notwithstanding Gods command,
his promises, his threatenings, is not this open contempt, as Aristotle defines
it: (...).
Disdain is an action of glory about that seems nothing worth.

Secondly, in that we do it in his presence, and before his face, as it were.

Thirdly, that we do it upon such beggarly terms, for so little advantage to
our selves: The first sin, was it not for an Apple; and are we any wiser
Merchants, who exchange God and his favor for as small trifles for a little
brutish pleasure, for a little red earth, for a shadow of honor, etc. which
argues infinite contempt of the infinite Majesty.

But I pass to the third. Thirdly, evil which carnal men labor to bring
upon God, which is of loss and damage, and that of his Kingdom: Thou Lord
God Almighty art King of Saints, Revel. 15. 3. and there God reigns in a more
particular manner, where his Laws are obeyed; but they that disobey him, cast
off his yoke, and acknowledge no subjection to him: and they rebel and fight
against him, and so are enemies in all properties, and he accounts them so, as
you see in the Parable, Luke 19. 14. But his citizens hated him, and sent a
message after him, saying, we will not have this man to reign over us: and the
noble man at his return, says, v. 27. But those mine enemies which would not
have that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me: yea,
they do not only break their allegiance to God, and break out into
rebellion against him, but even depose him, and set another in his throne: they
make themselves the worst part of themselves, their flesh their God, nay, the
sins of their flesh their master, For know ye not, says the Apostle, Romans 6.
16. that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are
to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness: now carnal men obey the law of the flesh, the law of sin,
and it they follow, therefore that is their Master, their Lord, their God.

Secondly, the world is their God, and therefore covetousness one principal
part of the worship of the world is styled Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. which may be
proportionably accommodated to any other thing that is predominant in our heart
and affections.

Thirdly, the Devil is their God, and so the spiritual enemies of the
regenerate man are called, Principalities, and Powers, (...), Ephesians. 6. 1. and
it is said of wicked men, 2 Cor. 4. 4. In whom the God of this world has
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God should shine unto them: and they are
dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. Wherein in times past ye walked
according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of
the air, the Spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. And is
not this enough to make it true that man naturally is enemy to God and hates
him, when they thrust him out of his Throne, and thrust the Devil, the World,
the Flesh, into his Throne, to do all service and homage to them? And this
leads me unto the last Consideration, whereby we may discover their hatred to
God; for you may remember that I told you the last time, that we might take
notice of their affection, both as it respected God immediately; which we have
hitherto treated, and mediately as it is carried to some other thing: and that
is of two kinds, the enemies of God, and the friends of God: for Amicorum
omnia sunt communia; but more especially they have common enemies, and common
friends: And therefore hence we know the hatred of carnal men to God, first,
in that they love Gods enemies, the Flesh, the World, the Devil, and all such
men as yield their service and obedience to them, and that in so high a degree,
that they rob God to pay them, that which they never owed them: They make them
their King, they honor them, they please them: they love them with all their
heart, and all their mind, and all their strength: which are due only to God;
like some impudent whores, that bestow all their Jewels which they had received
as love tokens, from their loving husbands, upon their lustful lovers; As the
Lord also complains of the Israelites, by the Prophet Ezechiel, 16. 17. Thou
have also taken thy fair Jewels, of my gold, and of my silver, which I had
given thee, and made to thy self images of men, and did commit whoredom
with them. And tookest thy broidered garments and covered them, and thou have
set mine oil and mine incense before them: My meat also which I gave thee,
fine flower, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou have even set it
before them, for a sweet savor: And thus it was, says the Lord God: As
Eudocia the Empress, unwittingly incurred her Husband Theodosius his
displeasure, by giving a fair Apple which he had given her, to Paulinus, who
ignorant of the matter, presented it again as a rare one to the Emperor: and
this was an Apple of strife between them: So both our first Parents gave the
Apple to Diod as it were, and we all give all those precious graces of mind
and body, and estate, which God has given us, to the service of Gods enemies,
and so discover our hatred to him.

The Friendship of the world, etc. is enmity with God. John 4. 4.

Secondly, As this appears by our love to Gods enemies, so by our hatred to
his friends: The Apostle John says, 1 Ioh. 4. 20. If a man say I love God, and
hates his brother, he is a liar: for he that loves not his brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? Now this is perpetual,
for wicked men to oppose and hate the children of God. Ponam inimicitiam, etc.
says God himself, I will put enmity between thee and her, and between thy
seed and her seed, the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, the seed
of Satan, and the seed of Saints: And in those words, as one said, Incipit
liber bellorum Domini, the Book of the wars of God begins: and as there is
an hatred in general, so

Secondly, Those are most opposed of the world, and worldly men, which have
most similitude with God, which is most like their heavenly Father, and
resemble him most in all gracious carriage, all holiness of life and
conversation: And those who in that respect are most dear to God: those
especially, do wicked men shoot at, with reproaches and scorn, and slander:
That garment of righteousness, parti-colored with all variety of graces, is a
great eyesore to them, and makes them maligned, as Joseph was of his Brethren,
for some such testimonies of his Fathers special love toward him.

Thirdly, those that have more near and special relation to God, as his
servants, in peculiar title, His Messengers, his Ministers, they are sure to
have a large share in the worlds hatred: ^^^ecially if they chance to come
within a man's walk, if they come near them, then they will be sure to blurt
it out, though they smothered it before perhaps, and say as Ahab to Elias, Have
thou found me, O mine enemy? All which do argue that natural Antipathy which
is between a natural man to God; for this is a certain conclusion, that they
do inwardly hate the Saints of God: And that is a certain evidence that they
remain still in their corruption, even as when we can say with the Psalmist,
All my delight is in the Saints upon earth, those that excel in virtue, when
we love the Brethren, that we are passed from death to life. 1 Ioh. 3. 14. And
this is a certain consequence, if we hate Gods children, we hate God himself:
And now beside our aptness to the hatred of God, directly confirmed, I might
strengthen the same with the consideration of our aukernesse and averseness
from all reconciliation to him: I have stretched out my band, says Wisdom,
Prove. 1. 14. And no man regards, Yea all the day long, says the Lord in the
Prophet, to a rebellious people: We are not willing to hear of a parley, much
less of a peace: and this place is proof enough of it, where you see how
far the Lord is forced as it were to condescend and yield to our
untowardnesse, when his Ambassadors, to whom he has committed the word of
reconciliation, say thus, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech
you by us. We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. But it is time
to pass to the second point; and having showed the enmity of man to God, to
show now in like manner the other part of this relative and reciprocal
affection. The enmity of God to man.

The point then is this, that God is an enemy to all men, as they are by
nature, and hates them. Before I proceed any further in the declaration of this
truth, it will not be amiss I think to remove one objection, one scruple lest
some may happily stumble at it: and that is this.

How can God whose essence is himself, who is a most pure and simple Act, and
therefore (...), etc. be said to have any affection, or be that granted, how
can God who is said to hate nothing that he has made; and whose (...) is
tender love to mankind, is particularly commended by the Apostle, Tit. 3. 4.
be said to hate men? or admit that too de posse, that it may be, how can this
appear true de facto esse, when as without controversy the elect of God, whom
he loved from all eternity, never fall from that love, no not while they are in
the state of nature, and for the Reprobate, God bestows many favors upon them
in the things of this life, and offers freely and truly to them, at least many
the participation of eternal life and happiness; and so that it is their
fault that they have it not? There be three branches you see of this objection,
which I will answer as I can, briefly and orderly.

First, for the first, there is no great difficulty: The answer consisting in
two things.

First, God is to be considered two ways. First, as he is in himself, and his
own excellency. Secondly, as he has revealed himself, and so as it were
bowed himself down to our capacity, in the former consideration, as in
himself he is a simple essence, and pure act, without any composition of
matter and form, and without all distinction and variety of qualities, he is
only that which he is, and thus we cannot at all apprehend him but in the
second as he has revealed himself, so we may distinguish many attributes in
him, which he has taken to himself: That what we could not graspe together,
we may by parts in some sort lay hold of: As Cyrus passed the river Euphrates
by dividing it into many small streams.

Secondly, the second thing to be considered, is that among those things that
are attributed to God from the creature: some things are simply perfections,
some involve some imperfection in them also, or perhaps better, some thing in
them is conceived as a perfection, to which notwithstanding there cleaves some
imperfection also: here we must sever the one from the other, and ascribe the
perfection to God, but proscribe and banish the imperfection: As in this case,
Hatred is attributed to God, being taken from living, especially reasonable
creatures: as it imports a dislike of evil, so it notes a perfection; but as
it connotates a dislike by way of passion or perturbation, as it is in the
creatures, so it has a mixture of imperfection: in the former sense it is
properly given to God, in the latter it cannot: thus you see the first part how
hatred agrees to God: as an Attribute taken from Analogy to the reasonable
creature, being a simple dislike, and aversion from evil without any motion or
perturbation,

The second is, how God can hate any of his creatures, especially man.

I answer, man may be considered two ways, first as created, and so; God saw
all things that they were good, and loved them, and above all, man, whom he had
made according to his own Image. Secondly, as corrupted and defiled with
sin, and God, who is a God of purest eyes, who is not a God that delights
in iniquity, cannot choose but abhor him.

The third is something harder, and so the place, though it be alleged but out
of the Apocrypha, God bateth nothing that he has made, may be satisfied: not
simply in it self and for it self, but yet he hates Sin in man, which is
not of his making, and man secondarily for his sin.

Thirdly, the third is somewhat harder. How this is true, since neither Elect
nor Reprobate are hated by God, though in the state of corruption: for the
Elect I answer they may be considered two ways, first according to Gods
eternal counsel and secret will toward them, and so he is unchangeable, he
loves them from the beginning to the end, from eternity to eternity, Whom God
loves once, he loves to the end: Job. 13. 1. (...)
For the gifts and calling of God, are without repentance, Romans 11. 29. There
is no interruption of this love, much less blotting out of the Book of life.
Nulla litura in deretis sapientum, as the Stoickes were wont to say. I have
blessed him, and he shall be blessed, as Isaac said of Jacob. Quod scrip si
scrip si, that which I have written, I have written, as Pilate said to the
Jews.

But secondly the elect may be considered according to Gods revealed will, and
so during the time of their corruption, he reveals no other, but that he hates
them: And he may be truly said to hate them in two respects, or with a double
hatred.

First, as they are in themselves, Odio paterno, as a Father may be truly
angry with his child, and during that state be said to hate him.

Secondly, as they are in Christ, Odio inimicitiae and proprio, as one does his
enemy: the former may be conceived in three respects.

First, Ex quoad part termini, that I may speak so, because he sees nothing
in them which he can love, being all overspread with sin and corruption,
nothing but what he may most justly hate:

Secondly, Ex part effectus, because he gives no signification of any thing
but displeasure and hatred, neither causing the light of his countenance to sh
ine upon them, not so much as giving them a good look, much less bestowing
his favors upon them in that manner that he does where he loves; but on the
contrary in token of displeasure many times sharply correcting and chastizing
them.

Thirdly, Ex part sensus, which follows from the former two, because he
behaves himself toward them, that they gather no comfortable assurance of
love toward them, but evident tokens of wrath: and thus he may be said to
hate them, as they are considered in themselves with a fatherly and improper
kind of hatred: but secondly, as they have Christ their surety, so he hates
them indeed and properly, so that he will inflict the utmost punishment upon
that their sin, justice does deserve, which being considered as suffered and
undergone by them in the person of Christ their surety, then his love toward
them is grounded upon a new title: for besides his free mercy of
predestination, he loves them now in justice, as just by virtue of Christ's
purchase and Redemption.

Now secondly, in the second place for the Reprobate, I say that God does
absolutely and simply hate them in the state of natural corruption: neither
does his favors of this life temporary conferred upon them, nor eternal of a
better offered unto them prove the contrary: for the favors of God are of two
sorts.

First, Common, which are indifferently distributed to all out of his general
bounty and liberality.

Secondly, Special, such as are proper and Peculiar to his elect, both those
are of the former kind, and all such gifts as in Gods Decree have no necessary
and infallible connection with everlasting life, and so no marvel if the
Reprobate have part in them as well as the Elect or rather: God causes his
Sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon the evil and the good, the just and
the unjust, Matthew. 5. 45. for these are such things, as a man cannot know love
or hatred by them, Eccle. 1. 9. The Papists abuse this place to prove that no
man can know whether we be in the state of grace or no; but Solomon affirms
not that, but only thus much at the most: no man can know it by all that is
before them, as our Translation has it, that is, by outward and common
favors; for Iunius reads it clean otherwise, only those are special
favors, and tokens of Gods special love which are conjoined with everlasting
life, as faith, and other saving graces, and those belong only to the Elect.
And thus having removed this dead Amasa out of the way which might have
hindered our march; I go on to the proof of the Point: That God is an enemy
to all men in their natural corruption, and does hate them: I will not trouble
you with many places of Scripture heaped up, because all that have been
produced in the former Point, do give witness to this also, the term Enemy,
as I then showed importing a reciprocal affection of hatred between two: two
or three shall suffice: and first, that place I think is most pregnant in the
Ephesians 2. 3. We were by Nature children of wrath, even as others; where the
Apostle says, that both the regenerate and others, even all men are children
of wrath: which implies two things.

First, that we are subject and obnoxious to the wrath of God and the heavy
effects of that eternal condemnation, for both, I think, are included in the
word wrath.

Secondly, that we are borne so, which is the meaning of the other word, sons
or children of wrath; and to set that down yet more expressly, there is another
word joined with it, by nature, We are by nature children of wrath: Again,
Romans 5. 18. By the offenceof one the fault, as the old Translation supplies the
Text, judgment, as the New, came on all men to condemnation; and in the 12.
verse, By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death
passed upon all men for that all have sinned: Again, Gal. 3. 10. For as many
as are of the Law are under the curse, for it is written, Cursed is every man
that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to
do them: and supposing that all are borne in sin, you have a plain and
literal testimony, Psa. 5. 5. Thou hate all workers of iniquity: But this
will be more clear in laying out the ground of this hatred, which in general
has been already opened the last time, to be that dissimilitude which is
between God and us: he is (...), according to the acclamation of the Elders,
Rev. 4. which the Etymologists derive from the privative Particle and (...),
earth, in whom there is no earth, no pollution, but all heavenly purity: and
we are according to that proclamation of God, Ier. 22. 29. Earth, earth, earth,
our understanding and will, and affection being altogether earthly, no purity
in them, but all earthly pollution: He is the King of Saints, as you had it out
of the Revelation 15. the holy one of Israel: but we are the slaves of sins
and Satan, and by going a whoring from God, and committing folly with the
creature, we are become every one of us, as Tamar told her brother Ammon like
one of the foolies in Israel. we are an adulterous seed, and he is a jealous
God, and no marvel if there be adivorce of our affections: For what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6. 14. And can two
walk together except they be agreed, says the Prophet: but more particularly,
as I said before, that man's hatred to God arose from two things.

First, Because he forbids the evil of sin, which they love as an holy Law,
and

Secondly, because he inflicts the evil of punishment, which they hate as a
just Judge, and so crosses them in both respects, for in the former they see he
is not like them, in the latter they perceive he likes them not: so
proportionably there is a double respect in natural men as sinners upon which
Gods hatred to them is a ground.

First, sin as it is sin, by reason of which they are not like to God.

Secondly, sin as it is hatred to God, by which it appears they like not God:
for there be two causes of love principal, as Gregory de Valentia notes, the
first is the goodness of it; the second is the good inclination toward us:
goodness of it self is attractive, (...) from (...) and (...), from (...),
because it does as it were invite and call to it, and every man is willingly to
run after it, but love is more lovely and more forcible, magnes amoris amor,
as they say: the reason is because that seems to give us some propriety in
this thing, so that we love it as our own, and this is enough to recompense
the want of the other, yea to make it seem to be where it is not, Suum cuique,
pulchrum, the Crow thinks her bird the whitest: and as it is in love, so you
must understand it contrary, in hatred: there are two causes: first, evil in a
thing: secondly hatred too, and these two things are in wicked and carnal men
by nature: for which God is an enemy unto them, and hates them.

First, Sin, Esaias 59. 2. But your iniquities have separated between you and
your God, and your sins have bid his face from you. Sin makes the wall of
separation between God and his people: Sin is the veil of covering that
hinders the plople from beholding the Holy of Holies: and in the second of the
Ephesians you have natural men, styled (...).
the children of disobedience; in the second verse, and in the third, it
follows, (...).
the children of wrath, to note that our disobedience is that only cause of
Gods displeasure: and you shall observe it through the whole course of
Scripture, that God was never angry with Israel, but Israel first provoked him
by his sins: and therefore offense to note the connection of both these
signifies both sin and anger, and this appears sufficiently out of all other
places that have been alleged.

The second ground of Gods enmity to us for our sin as it is hatred of him,
is contained in the former, and needs no further explication: But now for the
further illustration and confirmation of the whole Point, that God is an enemy,
and hates men as in the state of sin and corruption; three things may be
considered, out of which will appear, both that it is, and what it is, and
wherein it consists, and what are the fruits of it.

The first is the filthiness of sin, Secondly, the second the holiness of
God. Thirdly, the third, the grievousnesse of the punishments that God inflicts
for sin.
The two former I will pass over now, because I mean to make use of that
which I think needful and pertinent in them, in a more oportune place: only
remember what has been delivered in the former point, that may help to the
understanding of them.

I come to the third and last of them, the Punishments which God in his just
wrath against sin, and hatred of it does inflict upon sinners: which if you
will see how great and grievous they are, take but a view of them three ways.

First, in some particular and remarkable examples.

Secondly, in the general nature and kinds of them.

Thirdly, in one singular, which has both undergone, and overcome them all,
our Savior Jesus Christ. And by this, Gods detestation of sin, and sinners for
sins sake, will be sufficiently manifested; and as I declared man's hatred to
God by the effects of it, so the same course is more fit here, and more
necessary, because there is no such affection to be conceived in God, but in
relation to those effects, which he produces like unto those creatures which
are, and when they are so affected.

To speak first of the general nature and kinds of punishments, as man
sustaines for his sins; Punishment is nothing else but some evil inflicted,
for some fault committed; and therefore includes two things.

First, the sufferance of some evil, and this is as it were the material of
it.

Secondly, the reference to some fault precedent, and this is the formal as it
were; which makes it properly punishment, which otherwise would break malum
naturae: as suppose Adam, had been, blind or so before his transgression, that
blindness would have been evil to him indeed, but only malum naturae, but
because it was not inflicted by justice for sin, it would not have been malum
Poenae, a Punishment: for Justice shows its dislike to sin two ways.

First, before sin committed by prohibition.

Secondly, after sin is committed by punishment: I might perhaps add another
clause, and say, there must be a third condition to make an evil, a
punishment, that it be inflicted with a mind of punishment, and so maketwo
kinds, or two significations of punishment.

First, Proper, where all those three conditions are found.

Secondly, Improper, where the last is wanting: the evils that God brings upon
the wicked, are properly Punishments, because they are evils, and they flow
from Gods justice against sin, and that with a purpose of punishing that
sin, the evils that Gods children suffer, are improperly punishments, but
properly chastisements, because though they be evil, and laid upon them for
their sin, yet they are not so much animo puniendi, as animo corrigendi, not
as from a Judge, but as from a Father, not to revenge, but to reform them: or
rather they may be distinguished, not from the persons upon whom they are
inflicted, but from themselves: for Punishments may be considered, either as
intermedia or as ultima: the intermedia, etc. Chastisements of their own
nature, intended for the amendment, both of the wicked and godly, upon
whomsoever they fall: but Supplicium ultimum, because it cannot be conceived as
medicinal at all, but as Poenall only that is properly and simply Punishment:
so in Commonwealths, all other Punishments inflicted upon the delinquent party,
are medicinal, for the recovering of them to honest life, according to the
laws, but the last of Death, which is the last that the Magistrates power can
extend it self unto, is only Poenall, and cannot be conceived as intended in
love, for amendment of the malefactors.

But this shall suffice to have pointed out the nature of a Punishment, now to
conceive distinctly of the kinds of punishments in general, which God in his
just wrath, and indignation against sin, inflicts upon sinners: I think you
must take the whole extent of the material of them, namely Evil: for man
having offended against Gods justice, which is infinite, cannot be satisfied
unless all evil be brought upon the sinner, which he is capable of: for in
civil Courts of Justice, indeed a punishment in the same kind that the offense
was, at least in one kind of evil, will make sufficient satisfaction: but
where the offense is against God, it is not so: for though it be exparte
principii, but one fault, yet it has ex part objecti, an infinite guilt.

Nay, Secondly though it be ex part principii, but one formaliter in that
self, yet even in that respect also it is all virtualiter, in the seed, in so
much as the offender in that once offended against God the Author of the Law,
and so against the whole Law, according to that in the Apostle James 2. 10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all. For he (...) said Do not commit adultery, said also do not kill.

And thirdly, though it be but one actually, yet it is interpretatively by all,
because the same party has a mind and will to commit all, if there were the
like occasion, now as God accepts the will for the deed, when: there is a
willing mind, so he imputes; And though we do not say that God will de facto
punish the wicked for all the sins that they would have committed (as some
fondly would have infants predestined either to life eternal for the good,
or to condemnation, for the evil which he foresaw they would have done, had he
lent them longer life) because then all should have equal punishment; whereas
there are degrees, and that no doubt according to the degrees of their actual
sins. Yet it is no error to say, that God may de jure, punish any one sin
with all kinds, and all degrees of punishment, not for sins they would have
committed, to speak properly, but for that one which deserves all in strict
rigor of Justice, as well as if all were indeed committed, and that for this
reason, because that contains all in it, and is as much as all in the mind of
the sinner that committed it, though he were hindered, that they did actually
break forth: and as this is true of all sin, so properly of original, which
is all: so that to make the fault and the punishment equal, we must divide
punishment by the evil, and make it all evil that a man is capable of.

The whole laitude of evil, then you shall take by a threefold distinction:

The first is this, the first evil is either Damni or Sensus, as they use to
distinguish punishment: either a loss and privation of good, or a position and
feeling of some evil, privative or positive: for this distinction must not be
restrained to eternal punishments, as the School seems to do, but is
general to all, as you easily do and shall perceive: and this distinction is
taken from the adjuncts or affections of evil, or at least we will take it so
without scrupulous inquiry for the present.

Secondly, the second is taken from the causes or integrall parts: and so evil
is loathsome in effects, that death, as it is generally used in Scripture, and
by name, in that of Genesis the intermination of God, 2. 17. In the same day
that thou eatest therereof, that is, of the forbidden tree, thou shall die
surely: where according to the meaning of God, there is a Synec doche of one
eminent kind of punishment for all the rest; and if the signification of the
word be extended to all the particulars there under comprehended, there must
needs be a metaphor in regard of some: for both the separation of the soul
from God is so called Death by the trope, and eternal death has the same
reason: now to lay out the parts in some order: as if divided the good of man,
in the explication of Happiness; and it was either Summum, the favor of God:
or secondly, Subordinatum, and that again two fold; first, Internum, with the
essence of man, as it were; or secondly, Externum, without him. Internum again
twofold, first, in the Understanding, secondly, in the Will: first, in the
Soul, secondly, in the Body. In the Soul again twofold, so it is contrary
here, which you may reduce to these five.

First, the displeasure of God, and enmity with him.

Secondly, darkness of the Understanding, and ignorance.

Thirdly, perverseness and crookedness of the Will.

Fourthly, Distemper and diseases of the body.

Fifthly, Crosses in the outward estate, want, and shame, and all the rest: And
let no man look back to the scope of this Discourse, which was to show how
God shows his enmity to sinners, and hatred to sin, in bringing those
punishments upon them for it, and than look upon this Catalogue and wonder, to
see both man's sin which is in the third, the untowardnesse of the will, and
Gods wrath, which is the first of them: to be brought as punishments: for there
is a double consideation of these two.

First, for the rise of them, and then the order of them is thus. Man's sin is
the first which provokes Gods displeasure, which brings all other punishments
upon man.

Secondly, for the continuation, and then it is thus: God being provoked,
justly suffers man to continue and go on in his sins, which continually
adds fuel to the fire of Gods wrath, and that being the principal link
draws the chain of all plagues along with it: So that you see in this
respect, both the continuation of sin, and of Gods wrath, arises from Gods
wrath provoked by the first sin, and so are mutual causes one to the other:
and this is the second distinction.

Thirdly, the third is from the effects, and contains the Species of
punishment, which are two; first Temporal in this life; secondly, Eternal in
the life to come: and the principal differences between these two are
threefold:

First, in regard of the intension of them for the punishments that God
inflicts here, are not in the highest degree that they may be, but in a more
remiss, mingled with the fruition of many mercies.

Secondly, in the Extension: for all punishments that make up our full misery
are not inflicted, no not upon the wicked here, but in the life to come they
are.

Thirdly, In duration: for punishments suffered here by the wicked, are neither
continued without intermission, but have many Lucida intervalla, nor continual
without end, but are all concluded in death, which brings a change of this
estate: but the punishments of the life to come, are to endure without ease or
end. And the reason is, because this life is the time of Gods patience and long
sufferance, and gentleness toward sinners; wherein he does either win them by
his blessings bestowed, or leaves them without excuse, by reason of his
blessings abused, and so manifest both the inability of nature to help it
self out of its misery, which it is fallen into by sin, and the equity of
his judgments which are so sweetly tempered with many mercies, before they are
excluded, and therefore all Gods dealing toward men here is medicinal, though
in it own nature it prove mortal, through the corruption of the wicked: but
the other is supplicium ultimum, etc. And those are the three distinctions of
Evil or Punishment: where the first must be in the second; and the affections
in the parts; and both first and second in the third, as in the kinds. For
example, in the distribution into integrall parts.

The first was the Displicere and wrath of God: where you must understand a
double punishment, both Poena damni, the loss of Gods favor, and Poena
sensus, the feeling of his displeasure, and so for all the rest; there is both
the privation of some good conferring to our happiness, and the Position of
some evil conspiring to our misery.

So likewise in the third Distribution, which was into Species or kinds, but
in the first of Temporal, you must apply all the particulars of the second
rank by the parts of punishment (of which I named them as principal) and that
both privately, and positively according to the first: and in the second
eternal, you must do the like, only adding those differences, which I
mentioned before to their kinds.

And now if I should go about to rehearse the particulars, it would fill a
large Volume which would be written Without and within, lamentation and
mourning and woe: like that which the Prophet Ezekiel saw, 2. 10. If I should
muster them all together, under their several Colors and Ensigns they would
make a mighty army, the Army of the great Lord of Hosts: and it would appear
by them, I think how highly the Lord is displeased with Sin, how terrible an
Enemy he is to Sinners, and how he hates them. You may read a copious
enumeration of many particulars, especially of external punishments, which are
therefore set down, not because they are the greatest, but because carnal men
are most sensible of them, Deuteronomy. 28. and this is also evident out of that
place, that all those are brought upon a man in Gods just hatred and anger for
the transgressions of the Law: Who can tell the misery of man, when God does
not only withdraw the light of his countenance from him, which the Psalmist
accounts the only good; Many say, who whill show us any good, but Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, as you have it diverse times
repeated, Levit. when it is, as Job speaks, 16. 12, He sets me up for his
mark, His arrows compass me round about, he cleaves my reins asunder and
does not spare: he powers out my gall upon the ground, he breaks me with
breach upon breach, he runs upon me like a Giant: and Chapter 6. verse 4.
The arrows of the Almighty are with me, the poison whereof drinks up my
Spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me: when as the
Prophet Jeremy complains, Lament. 3. 12. He has bent his how, and that like
an enemy. Chap. 2. ver. 4. He stood with his right hand as an adversary, and
set me as a mark for the arrow: he has caused the sons of his quiver, as
the Hebrew Text has it, the arrows to enter into my reins.

Secondly, Again, what a misery to be struck with such blindndsse, that we
cannot find the way to heaven, no more than the Sodomties that groped for, but
could not find Lots door where the Angels went in, no, nor see the plainest
truths that concern that way, not the fundamental and Elementary principle,
no more than blind Sampson could see the pilla's of the house, but was feign to
have a guide to lead him to them: but live in more than Egyptian darkness,
and are given over to most gross errors by the just wrath of God against
sin, as it was, and is in many Nations at this day, and in the Church of
Rome, where Antichrist, in 2 These. 2. 9. whose coming is after the working of
Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceive
ableness of unrighteousness in them that perish: and the reason follows,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, for
this cause God has sent them strong delusions, that they should be leeve a
lie, that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.

Thirdly, What a depth of misery is it, that man should degenerate below the
brute beasts in brutishness, which notwithstanding is a just effect of Gods
wrath for sin, as it may appear out of the first to the Romans, 21. Because
that when they knew not God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened, etc. God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their
own hearts to dishonor their own bodies: And again, ver. 26. God gave them
up to vile affections: And Again, ver. 28. God gave them over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things that are not convenient.

But what Arithmeticke can count the number of those miseries that attend man
in regard of his body and outward man; deformity, aches, diseases, death,
dishonor, poverty, famine, pestilence, war, and the rest: If the Cabalists
count be good, there be so many precepts in the Law, as there are Letters in
the Decalogue, and as many as are included in the numerall Letters of the word
(...) namely 611. of which there are 365. Negative as many as there be days in
the year: Affirmative 246. as many as the Anatomists number bones in a man's
body: I answer, there be more punishments for every joint of a sinner, with
which he has transgressed every part of the most holy Law of God, than there
are days in the year: And all these are the just effects of Gods enmity to
sinners, his wrath against sinners: And yet ye have not all, for what is all
this, though we had called every one of those particular plagues by the name,
as Cyrus could have done all his Soldiers, and set them all in battle array
against you, to that which is behind: the torments of hell, the blackness of
darkness, the Rivers of brimstone, the fire that never goes out, the worm
that never dies, the breath of the Lord kindles that fire, and the wrath of
the Lord feeds that worm, the apprehension of which gnawes the conscience:
That weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Nomina vel ipso pene tremenda
sono, that I may not tell you of that banne of Proscription, that bill of
Divorce, by virtue of which they shall be separated from God, and cast out of
his blessed presence for evermore: Excommunicated as Adam was out of Paradise,
and banished for ever out of Heaven, from the beatificall vision of God, from
beholding of Christ Jesus, from the society and Quire of Saints, and Angels,
which sing perpetual Hallelujahs to the Lord, and to the Lamb that sits upon
the throne: while they go cursed into everlasting fire, which was prepared for
the Devil and his Angels; in a word, into everlasting condemnation: O
Eternitas, as he cries out, O Eternitas in bonis infinitum bonum in malis
infinitum malum!

I list not to play the Rhetoritian, upon the consideration of Eternity.

But which of you can think upon it, and weigh those words inserted, for Ever,
without horror and astonishment? And now perhaps if you could but repeat those
words sometimes with your selves, tormented for ever, and so often as you were
about to be angry with God, to sin against him, as he counseled Augustus to
repeat the Alphabet when he was angry, if you could rehearse that for ever,
you would take heed how you ever sinned. Dives thought his brethren would
believe, if some were sent from hell to tell them the torments of the place,
and to take heed that they near come there: Believe ye Moses, and the
Prophets, believe the Law, and threatenings of God: Believe an humbled
Christian, for he comes from hell scorched with the flames of Gods wrath: and
believe me that these argue Gods hatred against sin, his enmity to sinners.

And thus much of the first things I propounded in general, to illustrate the
wrath of God against sin, from the nature and several kinds of punishment
which a sinner does incur.

Secondly, the second thing was (as you may remember) the consideration of some
remarkable particulars.

First, let the first be of the Angels.

The Angels, for one sin as most think, and it is probable, The Angels which
kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved
in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day,
Jude 6. The excellency of their nature, which bare that Image of God with the
nearest resemblance, and are therefore called the Sons of God in a singular
manner: their multitude, the good that might have come from their preservation,
their service and praising of God; the evil which was like to follow upon the
contrary, the fall of man, their eternal blasphemies could not move God to
compassion: but if Angels sin, even Angels shall smart for it: And now as it
is Job 4. 18. Behold he put no trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged
with folly: How much less on them which dwell in houses of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust: which are crushed before the mouth; that you may
learn from hence how great the hatred of God is to sin.

Secondly, for I must but name those things that remain: Look upon the first
sin of man, our forefather: w(...) though some ignorantly have thought it so
small that they called in question God justice in punishing it, and the proud
Pope blasphemously concluded, that if God were so angry for an Apple then he
might be justly much more for a Peacocke, which he missed at his table, yet how
has God showed his detestation of sin in that; in that for it man was
deprived of that glorious Image of God, in which he was created, and cast out
of Paradise, contracting also that guilt of eternal condemnation, and lying
under the curse of God, the slavery of sin, the tyranny of the devil, and
not himself only, but with his 100000. of souls that were in his loins,
even all his posterity.

Thirdly, a third may be the Universal deluge, wherein God, the God of mercy,
without mercy or compassion to man, of what condition or sex, or age soever;
to beasts, to plants, to any creature, the workmanship of his own hands,
swept away all, and defaced the beauty of the world, reducing all to the first
Chaos. When the Earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the
face of the deep, rather then not to revenge himself upon his enemies, the
sinful men of those times: As though he had blotted that out of his titles
which he says of himself, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquities, and transgression, and sin: And now
took up that Emperors Motto, Fiat Iustitia and pereat mundus.

A Fourth, may be the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha with fire and brimstone
from heaven, which before are said to have been like the Garden of Eden, the
Paradise of God, and perhaps the fruits like the tree of Life: but now is
famous for the dead sea, which will admit of no living thing, and the fruit of
Sodom, or apples are said to be nothing but dust or ashes: and of these, as the
Apostle Peter reasons, 2 Pet. 2. 4. If God spared not the Angels that sinned,
but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into the chains of
darkness to be reserved unto judgment: and spared not the old world but
saved Noah, the eight person the Preacher of righteousness, bringing in the
flood upon the world of the ungodly, and turning the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrha into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample
unto those that after should live ungodly. Then as he inferres, The Lord
knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished:
Then say I, you see how God shows himself an enemy to sinners.

I might tell you of the strange plagues of Egypt, and above all, the
lamentable destruction and dispersion of Gods own peculiar people; the Jews,
and their calamities which they have undergone, the ten Tribes for more then
two thousand years, the two for almost 1600. so great, as one of their own
Rabbis concludes from thence, that their Messiah must needs be come, and they
must needs suffer so much for killing him, and so also the Apostle Paul, Romans
11. 22. Behold the severity of God in their fall.

And I might add something of the last conflagration of the world, when by
reason of the filthiness of this latter age of the world, it shall be so, that
it cannot be washed with water as the old world was, God shall waste it with
fire: When the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein
shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10. but I will pass to the third, and but name
that neither.

Thirdly, the third thing then in which we may behold the wrath of God and
hatred against sin, is one singular example, which have both undergone and
overcome all punishments due for our sins, namely, our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: In which if you will consider three things.

First, who it was that suffered. Secondly, what he suffered. Thirdly, for what.
The two former are excellently expressed, Philip. 2. 6. Christ Jesus, who
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and
was made in the likeness of man, and being found in fashion as a man he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross:
Christ Jesus then the Son of God, equal with God was the person: And his
sufferings were,

First, his Incarnation, whereby he became in the form of a servant: laying
down the glory which he had from all eternity, with his father, he abhorred
not the womb of the Virgin.

Secondly, in his whole life, he humbled himself and became obedient.

Thirdly, in his death, and that the most shameful, and painful death of the
Cross: if you will but read the Gospel, and go along with our Savior, in
every passage of his infinite sufferings, and then consider something in your
mind, which you cannot see with your eyes, even the pains of hell, which he
suffered, as our best Divines think, and gather from his bloody sweat, arguing
more then outward suffering, the apprehension of the wrath of God, and his
exclamation, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? arguing a kind of
separation of God, which makes the principal substance of hell torments,
though he did not suffer them as the damned do, for in the greatest Paroxysme,
when he complained, why have thou forsaken me, even then he called him My God,
My God: But think withal this is the Son of God that Created the heavens and
the earth, that suffers this by vile sinners, his creatures, and for vile
sinners, his enemies: And then consider if here be not a most incomparable
demonstration of Gods hatred against sin: and that in three respects.

First, in that it appears by this, he will not be appeased without
satisfaction, so great is his anger, for ever then his nature inclined to
mercy, yet he would not hear of it till his justice were answered, and though
he purposed in his Counsel to receive some sinners to grace, yet he will have
the whole debt paid: and though it be curiously disputed, whether God might
not have freely pardoned sin without such expiation, yet it is sufficient for
us to know that he did not, nor would not.

Secondly, he requires an equivalent ransom, ex rigore justitiae: if not more
than justice required: for suppose we could imagine a term of eternity in
which sinners should have suffered that would be a full satisfaction, but the
suffering of Christ the Son of God is far more than that would be, so far
as the Creator surpasses the creature in infinite degrees of excellencies; now
because the suffering of any creature, or all creatures could not countervaile
the wrong done to his Justice, rather than that full restitution should not be
made, he would have it made by him, who could not choose but pay it with
overplus, if he did it at all, by reason of his infinite dignity.

Again, if all the world had been redeemed by the suffering of Christ,
whereas the greatest part is not, he need not have suffered more than he did,
but that would have been enough, ex rigore justitiae, nay, for all the devils
too, if there were not another defect of a condition, rather propriety in that
nature that suffered (he not taking upon him the nature of Angels) then
sufficiency of the sufferings themselves, nay, for another world too if there
were another world imagined, it would be sufficient for that too: so that God
rather than he would depart one jot from his justice, he would revenge
himself to the full, in taking a full discharge for all our debts, if not
more, as has been said.

Thirdly, rather than that should fail, he took it not of the debtors but of
the sureties, and that though he were in so near relation to him, His only
begotten and beloved son in whom he is well pleased, and so as God said to
Abraham. Now I know that thou love me, in that thou have not spared thins
only son Isaac: so we may say to God, not only now we know, O Lord, that
thou love us, since thou have not spared thine only son Jesus; but also,
Now we know that thou hate sin, seeing thou have not spared thine only
son, but have given him to die, rather than that should go unpunished,
unpaied to the utmost farthing.

It remains now only that we come to make some use of that which has been
delivered, and so conclude the first Point: but as I have done in the rest
hitherto, so I shall here also propound many things briefly, rather than
press any thing, and prosecute it fully: one general use I purpose to commend
unto you,

For Instruction; We may from hence take notice of the miserable condition of
every natural man: And this is not the least part thereof, that we are not
sensible of it: it is Satan's course to deal with his captives, as the
Philistines dealt with Sampson tyrannically, first, to put out their eyes; and
all sinners are possessed with a spiritual kind of drunkenness which makes
them see no danger when they are in most, as Solomon describes the corporal,
Prove. 23. 34. Thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the sea, or
as be that lies down upon the top of the mast: they have stricken me, shall
thou say, and I was not sick: they have beaten me, and I felt it not: and so
it will not be amiss to awaken the enemies of God with an alarm from heaven,
to cause an heavenly light to shine round about them, as it befell Saul in his
furious march to Damascus, and I know not how it may be better done than by
collecting the beams of those truths divine that ye have had already (as they
do the Sun in a burning glass) and casting them in their faces: for they, I
think will effectually discover the desperate misery they are in; for misery
being opposite to happiness, as that is a state of Good, so it is of Evil,
and evil being of two sorts, Evil of sin and punishment, it appears by
that which has been said, That a natural man is deep plunged in both these.

In sin by the first point, where it was showed, That man is an enemy to God
and hates him: in punishment, where you heard, That God is an enemy to man and
hates him: now can there be any greater height of sin, than that man should
become an enemy to God? Or any greater weight of punishment, than that God
should be an enemy to man? Or can there be any greater depth of misery, than
both these joined? For though some may think perhaps according to the strict
acceptions of misery that it is only in penal evil, and includes not sin;
yet there must be a concurrence of both: for

First, it is impossible that there should be any misery properly where there
is not sin: nay, it is sin that makes the thing which is but a natural
evil in it self to be a mortal evil to the sinner.

Secondly, as there is required both an (...) and an (...), to happiness, so
contrary to misery, nay, as well doing is the principal in Happiness, so is
doing evil in misery, rather than suffering evil: to speak then a little of
both.

There is none of us but would defy any that should say that we are Gods
enemies, to be haters of him: and would account him a most profligate and
forlorn wretch that should profess himself to be so: even that little spark
of conscience left in corrupt nature shines in the midst of darkness, and
discovers so much, that that must needs be a miserable estate to be so far
forsaken? and would not every one be ready to say to the Preacher that tells
him such a thing, as Hazael told to the Prophet that foretold him of his
cruelty, Am I a dog that I should do this thing? But you have heard that
every natural man is an enemy to God many ways, and labors to do him all
the mischief he can in displeasing him, in disobeying, in dishonouring, and as
much as lies in him in dethroning him: and setting up another in his place,
even the world, the lusts of his own flesh, the devil, the basest things, the
most bitter enemies of God that are: and imployes their mind and soul and
strength to advance their kingdom; bring that cursednesse home to themselves,
and make much of it: but to lay out unto you the vileness of the natural man
in this respect; consider some sew circumstances in it more distinctly: and to
omit that filthiness with which itdefiles the nature of man, and many other, I
will name but two: first, the universality: there is scarce any so bad almost,
but he mislikes some that are given to other vices than himself or more, and
thinks himself some body in that he is not so bad as he: but if there were
one that were infected with all vices, in the highest degree, how would they
which are bad enough themselves, deplore his case as lamentable, and bless
themselves an hundredth times that they are not so: and I pray tell me what sin
is there which is not included in this to be an enemy to God? What would such
an one stick to commit? But I pass from this.

Secondly, The iniquity: for

First, there is no reason for this hatred of God: as the Apostle Paul speaks,
2 Cor. 7. 2. Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we
have defrauded no man: might not the Lord challenge entertainment in our
hearts and best affections by the same reason? nay, does he not expostulate the
matter with the Israelites, Iere. 2. 5. to this purpose, Thus says the Lord,
what iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me,
and have walked after vanity, and are become vain: if the Lord should make use
of his Prerogative, yet shall the clay say to the Potter, what do thou? yet
he never does so. But it were well if this were all: but

Secondly, there is great reason to the contrary why we should love God, and
you may conceive that; especially threefold.

First, for that excellency that is in God: how does beauty entice the
amorous, and gold the covetous, and honor the ambitious, every thing that has
but any luster of good in it, breeds in us a lust to have it; the least
appearance of it, is a loadstone of our affections, and is attractive: and how
comes it to pass that the Ocean of goodness and beauty that is in God does
not draw us to him? nay, rather drives us from him; for then this to say truth
is the height of our misery, that we are sofar from loving God, that we loath
him for his goodness: this is the ground of the quarrel between us, as I
showed in handling the Point before: and who does not detest in his heart such
a perverse nature, and hold it accursed? but this is not all yet, for

Secondly, God is not only good in himself, for if he were so, and withal,
averse from us, and cruel to us, there were sistence of love (though even in
this case we should say with Job, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him,
yet will I love him) but it is not so, for God is also good to us; and may say
too, as our Savior once to the Jews, many good works have I done among you,
and for which of them do you stone me? I have created you of nothing, partly,
and partly worse almost than nothing, the dust of the earth, and that according
to mine own Image. I sustain and support you, In me you live, and move, and
have your being; I have made you Lords of the creatures, all do service to
you, even my glorious Angels have I made ministering spirits for your good, not
a day passes in which you receive not from me, a thousand remembrances of Love,
a thousand love tokens, both positive and primitive graces, provision of good,
and preservation from evil; I have sent my beloved Son out of my bosom to
die for you, so did I love the world, and when you had cast me off, how often
have I offered conditions of peace, and how often would I have gathered you as
an hen gathers her young under her wings, and ye would not. Would ye have any
more yet, Behold I, even I beseech you, I have made heaven and earth, that
touch the Mountains and they smoke, the Earth and it trembles, I beseech you
by my Ministers to be reconciled. All this have I done and much more, if you
were not your own enemies in being my enemies, O ye Sons of men: and for
which of my good works do you stone me, for which of them do you hate me, O
ungrateful Children! Is this your kindness to your friend? to your
benefactor? to your Creator? Hear O Heaven, and harken O Earth, for the Lord
has spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me: The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but
Israel does not know, my people does not consider: Isai. 1. 2. Perhaps that
which has been said, will make you to see something into the misery of a man's
natural estate, and like it something the worse: For who is most ready to
condemn an ungrateful wretch, and they are such in such measure as you see:
but this is not all neither: for

Thirdly, God beside his essential goodness, and his actual graciousnesse to
us, may allure us to love, or at least scare us from hatred, by his infinite
greatness and Power; Who would not fear thee O Lord? Rev. 15. 4. And so who
shall not love thee O Lord and glorify thy name? if not for piety, yet at
least for policy; Who does not pity those simple nations, that when it
thunders, gather together and shoot their arrows to heaven, as who would say,
to war and fight with God? who does not pity those men that run themselves
against stone walls, and the like, as thinking to bear down all before them?
As Ulysses his companions told him, when he would needs provoke Polydimus
(...) may not we say so to them much more that will needs provoke the Lord of
hosts? if that be true any where, I am sure it is here: dulce bellum
inexpertis: let them that know not the weight of Gods hand, vant of their own
strength, and desire him for their adversary: but let them know the Charots of
God are twenty thousand, etc. which he will bring forth against his enemies,
and see their own nullity, send Ambassadors before and desire peace: If God be
with me, as David once said, I will not be afraid for ten thousand that shall
camp round about me: but if God be the enemy, all the armies in the world
cannot secure me. Therefore this argues the desperate misery and madness of a
natural man, that will wage war with God: this might be wonderfully
enlarged, and that not only from his power, to love us, but to do good unto us
also

I might use this as a passage to the second consideration, but I shall omit
that, because the vileness of our condition, does appear sufficiently out of
this, that we are enemies unto God, in our sins by nature, though our hearts
abhor almost to think that any should be such, it is so foul; and it appears
the more, if we add that this enmity to God includes in it an universal
pollution of Nature, because he that hates God, will not stick to do any
thing against him: yea the more, if we consider that this enmity is most
unjust, upon no reason, which is extremely barbarous, yea it is against many
reasons, as the incomprehensible excellency, and beauty, and goodness of Gods
nature, the unspeakeable multitude and value of his graciousnesse and
blessings, the incomprehensible omnipotency of his power, in rewarding or
punishing, and in all which we cannot choose but give sentence against our
selves, for the horrible baseness and vileness of our nature.

FINIS.
A methodicall Analysis of the principal things contained in this Sermon.
Doct.

THat we are by nature enemies of God. 1. Explication of the Terms. 1. The
subject of the proposition: We. 2. The qualification of the subject: by
Nature. 3. The predicate, Enemies. 1. What conditions concur to enmity. 1.
It must be between two. 2. It must be reciprocal. 3. It must be between
persons in a reasonable nature.
2. How it is here understood. 1. Actively, we are Enemies to God, and hate
him. 2. Passively, God is an enemy to us and hates us.



These are considered. 1. Jointly: in the ground of it, Dissimilitude between
God and us. 2. Severally. 1. We are by nature enemies to God. 1. Proved by
Scripture. 2. Demonstrated. 1. By the degrees of hatred. 1. Not to love so much
as we ought: Hatred is, 1. Absolute. 2. Comparative.


2. Not to love at all. Hatred is, 1. Negative. 2. Positive.


3. Positive ill will or hatred, which is, 1. Explicit, 1. Formal.
2. Implicit. 2. Interpretative.





II. By the degrees of corruption. 1. Original. 2. Actual.
III. By the object of 1. Love 1. Good.
2. Hatred 2. Evil. 1. Absolute. 2. Relative.


IIII. By the nature of sin. 1. In general, it is so opposite to God, as
that the love of sin argues a hatred of God. 2. In particular, sin is enmity
to God. 1. Immediately, in all the degrees of hatred. 1. Comparative, to love
any thing more than God is to have him. 2. Negative, the love of God has no
command in him. 1. Not in the understanding, if it were it would be known by
these. 1. The mind and thoughts would always run on the party loved. 2. Love
is learned in the knowledge of all the perfections of the party. 3. Love is
witty in devising means to enjoy its love.
2. Not in the will and affections, expressed in three kinds of them. 1. Such
as are conversant immediately about the good we love, as 1. Absent. 1. Desire.
2. Present. 2. Joy.

2. Such as are occupied about the will. 3. Mixed affections.
3. Not in the whole man: not in, 1. Tongue. 2. Rest of the members. 3. Goods.


3. Positive haired: where is 1. Promised 1. Distinction of hatred, 1.
Explicit. 2. Implicit.

2. Difference of degrees of corruption.
2. Proved that sin is direct enmity to God: which is, 1. Illustrated: by
the nature of opposition, as 1. Nature of love: 1. Affection it self, willing
good. 2. Ground of it; for his sake. 3. Effect or fruit of it.
2. Nature of hatred, which is opposite. 1. A wishing evil. 2. For himself.
3. Endeavor to bring all that evil upon him.

2. Confirmed: in this proposition.



2. That natural men labor to bring all the evil upon God that they can. 1.
Consider by way of caution. 1. God is not capable of any injury. 2. The hurt
reflects upon themselves. 3. What is done by them to his hurt is directed by
him to his honor.
2. By way of proof. They wrong him, 1. By displeasing of him. 1. Their best
actions are displeasing. 2. The more God forbids sin the more they desire it.
3. They are most refractary in those things God does most earnestly require.
2. By Dishonoring of him. 1. By conceiving basely of him in their mind. 2. By
speaking Diminitively of his Majesty. 3. By the deformity of sin it self. 4.
By the contempt. 1. Sinning against 1. Commands. 2. Promises. 3. Threatenings.
2. Sinning in his presence. 3. Sinning for so little advantage.


3. By damaging of him: making 1. The flesh, 2. The world, their God
3. The devil, I. Mediately. 1. They love the enemies of God. 2. They hate his
friends. 1. All the children of God. 2. Those that have most similitude with
God. 3. Those that are in more near and special relation to God.

II. God is an enemy to all men as they are by nature, 1. Explication. 1. How
can God whose essence is himself, be said to have any affections. 1. Consider
God. 1. As he is in himself. 2. As he has revealed himself.
2. Consider that amongst those things attributed unto God, 1. Some things are
simply perfection. 2. Some involve some imperfection in them.

2. How can God hate man: man is considered, 1. As created. 2. As corrupted.
3. How can this be since God hates neither Elect nor Reprobate, though in the
state of corruption? 1. Elect may be considered, 1. According to Gods eternal
counsel. 2. According to Gods revealed Will. 1. As they are in themselves. 1.
God sees nothing in them which he can love. 2. He gives no signification of any
thing but displeasure. 3. Expresses many evident tokens of wrath.
2. As they are in Christ.

2. Reprobate, favors of God, are, 1. Common. 2. Special.



II. Proof. 1. By Scriptures. 2. Grounds of Gods hatred: 1. Sin as it is
sin. 2. Sin as it is Hatred.
3. Our special evidence of it in the punishment of sin. 1 The general
nature of punishments. 1. Material of it: sufferance of some evil. 2.
Formal: reference to some fault. 3. This inflicted with a mind to punish. 1.
The kinds of punishments, comprehended in that word Evil. 1. Evil of loss.
1. Privative.
2. Evil of sense. 2. Positive.

2. The causes or integrall parts, comprehended in the word death. 1.
Displeasure of God. 2. Darkness of understanding. 3. Perverseness of will.
4. Distemper of body. 5. Crosses in outward estate. 6. All evil is included if
we consider, 1. The rice of them. 2. The continuation.

3. The effects in the species of punishment. 1. Temporal. 2. Eternal, which
are differenced, In regard of 1. Intension, 2. Extension, 3. Duration.






2. Some remarkable examples of the 1. Fall of Angels, 2. Fall of Adam, 3.
Universal Deluge, 4. Destruction of Sodom and Gomorah. 5. Plagues of Egypt, 6.
Destruction of the Jews, 7. Last Conflagration of the world.
3. One singular example, The sufferings of Christ. 1. Explication of his
sufferings. 1. Who it was that suffered. 2. What he suffered. 1. In his
Incarnation, 2. In his whole life. 3. In his death.

2. How Gods hatred is demonstrated in this: In that 1. He will not be appeased
without satisfaction. 2. He requires an equivalent ransom out of the rigor of
justice. 3. He took it not of the Debtor but of the Suerty.



II. Application. 1. Instruction of the miserable condition of every natural
man: being deeply Plunged in 1. Sin, 2. Punishment. 1. In general. 1. There
can be no greater height of sin than to be an enemy to God. 2. No greater
weight of punishment, then to be hated of God. 3. No greater depth of misery
then both these joined.
2. In special, To hate God is extremely sinful. 1. In respect of the
universality of it. 2. The iniquity of it. 1. There is no reason for it. 2.
There is great reason to the contrary: if we consider that excellency that is
in God. 1. His Essential goodness, 2. His Actual graciousnesse, 3. Infinite
greatness and power.











FINIS.

