A FORM Of Wholesome WORDS; OR, AN INTRODUCTION to the Body of Divinity: In
three Sermons on 2 TIMOTHY, 1.13.

Preached By JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Immanuel
College in Cambridge, late Preacher of Aldermanbury, LONDON.

ROMANS 6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of Doctrine which was
delivered to you.

LONDON, Printed by J.R. for J. Bellamy, H. Overton, A. Crook, J. Ro^^well, R.
Sergeir, I. Crook, D. Friar, and Ralph Smith. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Sir RICHARD YOUNG, Knight Barone^ the Worshipful,
Mr. GILBERT HARRISON, Alderman; M^. ROBERT EDWARDS, Deputy of the R^
Worshipful Company of Merchant Adventurers* M^. H^^H WINDHAM, M^. EDWARD
FOORD, Mr. HUMPHR: BERINOTON; MERCHANTS: And the rest of the worthy Inhabitants
of the Parish of Aldermanbury, LONDON: Saving Health, true Riches, and eternal
Happinsse.
Right Worshipful, Beloved, and Christian friends*
AS it was in the building of the Temple, many hands were employed in the
raising of that glorious Structure: Solomon did raise a tribute of men for the
work, and they were all employed according to their several abilities; some
did work in gold, in silver, in brass, in iron, in purple and blew silk; some
did hew and square, others did bear and carry the stones and timber, to the
raising of that sacred pile: so it is in the Church of God, of which that
material house was a clear representation; there is no man so mean, but may be
some way useful to the house of God; those that cannot work in gold, and
silver, and silk, yet may cut and hew; and those that can do neither, yet may
carry burdens. This latter is the task that I have undertaken; v^z. To serve
the Church, in bringing forth this provision which is here presented to you, of
another man's cost indeed, yet not without some labor and care of my own, to
prepare the table, and set things in order before you. I am the rather
encouraged in it, because I know that God can as well serve himself of my
labor in this, as of the skill and ability of the learned Author: and if in
this I may be a helper of the joy of Gods Church, I have wherein for to rejoice.

These ensuing Sermons were first preached unto you, they were yours in the
delivery, and are yours of Right, as conceived and brought forth for you; and I
know not how you should lose your Right in the publishing of them, but rather
owe Patronage, Apology, Harbor and Recommendations; therefore I have made bold
to prefix your Names before them, and so to publish them for the good of the
Church; being well assured, that you will not grutch this communication, of
your own right and interest in them, to others.

For the Author, he needs not my Candle to light his Sun, nor my Pen to make
new impressions of honor and love in your hearts, who have so fully known his
Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience,
Humility, etc.

I may say of this posthume Birth, that the Author died, as Rachel, in travel
with it; and it may well be called Benjamin, the son of his Right hand: whilst
he was a carrying of you up into the Mount, to show you the land of Promise,
God took him, and by Invisible messengers, carried him to the fruition of
Eternal Blessedness: he is taken out of your sight, and if you desire to
find him, you must aspire unto the heavenly Paradise, by walking in that tract
which he has in his Doctrine here chalked out unto you; and in those steps of
his religious and zealous conversation, which he has walked in before you.

But lest you should let these things slip; this book may be your continual
Remembrancer, in this, he being dead, yet speaks. But his labor will be
lost, and my undertaking fruitless, except you be pleased to make the practice
of these things your trade, and the meditation of them your Recreation.

Here you may see wherein true happiness does consist: the right placing or
misplacing of happiness is the Ruder of a man's life, the fountain of his well
or ill doing; according to which, men take their marks, and shoot right or
wrong, in all the actions of their lives: you will be mistaken, if you seek it
in these outward things, it is only to be found in God; there is no other
independent good, neither is there any other good that can be communicated to
all the heirs of Blessing, but only God; that which all must possess, and that
together, must needs be some infinite thing. It will then be worth your while,
to call off your affections from the world, and to abate of your eager pursuit
after the things of this life: you are not made for Riches, but they are made
for you: the Be will forsake the Flower that yields her no Honey; the fruit
that the World affords you, is but like that which grows upon the banks of the
dead Sea, a fair apple, which under a red side, contains nothing but dust: it
will be your wisdom, not to cumber your selves about many things, when one
thing is needful: the saying of the Roman General to the soldier that kept
the tents, when he should have bin fighting in the field, Non Amonimium
diligentes, will be used of God, if when he calls us to seek after true
Happiness, yet we busy our selves only about things of an inferior Alloy;
God will not like such busiebodies: our chiefest care and pains should be
bestowed, in the attaining of that which is our chiefest Happiness; if you be
industrious in this, your labor will not be in vain: you must think of
Religion as of trading, which will bring no gain, unless diligently follovved
and practiced: Arise therefore, and be doing, and the Lord will be with you.

Give me leave to tell you, first, that God has done much for you, exalted you
to heaven, in regard of the means: It is true, your eyes have seen worthy
Lights, shining in their life and Doctrine, and by death extinguished; and yet
your loss has not been more bitterly lamented, than in a good measure
graciously supplied; the causes of your hope and joy, have been in a good
proportion equivalent to your grief and loss.

Secondly, GOD looks for much from you; viz. an adorning of the Gospel, and
walking worthy of it, in a holy, fruitful and obedient conversation: such
favors bestowed, must needs raise great expectations; and this expectation
frustrated, doubles the judgment. But I hope better things of you, and such as
accompany salvation.

You did receive the Author with so much love and honor, as that you cannot
but countenance this Posthume Birth, which was first conceived, and brought
forth for you; and your selves being witnesses, contains no other things, than
what you have heard and learnt: and so, though others should deny it, yet you
must give unto it, Harbor and Intertainment. Therefore I have, in the name of
the Widow of the Reverend Author, entitled you unto it. If it shall be approved
useful to the Church, fruitful to you, and beneficial to any, I shall
rejoice; my prayers shall be for their success, and for your happiness.

Yours, in the service of your Faith, A. B

To the Christian Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
ACcept, I pray thee, from the hands of one of the meanest of the sons of the
Prophets, this ensuing Treatise. I know, it might have been tendered unto thee,
by the hands of some more eminently learned, and better known in the Church, on
whose judgment thou might more safely have reposed thy self; yet well
knowing the worth of it to be such, as that it will discover it self, I rather
choose to let my meannesse appear, than not to perform the debt I owe to the
memory of the Reverend Author. I am not ignorant, that this undertaking of
mine, together with the Sermons themselves, will be exposed to many censures;
some there are, whom no Sermon pleases, longer than it is in hearing, or
otherwise than it is extant in their own broken notes: but these forget, that
respect should he had unto the public good; there are many precious labors of
godly men, that are not fit to vanish into the air, or to be buried in
obscurity. Others take offense at the imperfection of them, because not left
written by the Author, but only taken from his mouth; I confess, if the
Author had published them himself, they would have come forth more refined, and
better digested than now they do; yet the good they may thus do, prevails more
for the sending of them forth, than some imperfections (that usually accompany
the taking of other men's Sermons) may do to suppress them. If my judgm^nt fail
me not, there is so much compleatnesse in them, as that though the Author might
have uttered Plura, more in lines; yet be could not have said Plus, more in
substance and effect, to any point that he has handled. Others will except
against them, and accuse them, as Lucilius did the writings of Fabianus
Papyrius, because they are so plain; to such I shall, in the behalf of the
Author, borrow that Apology that Seneca made for him, Mores ego non verba
composui, and animis praedicavi, non auribus: Epist. 100. They are indeed so
plain, as that the simple may understand them; and yet not so unpolished, as
that the friendly, and judiciously curious may scorn them: what is here
presented to thee, is expressed in the Authors own words (without adding to
them, or detracting from them) as well as it could be taken from his mouth; it
is published by, and compared with the exactest copies that could be gotten.
The methodicall Analysis, prefixed before the Sermons, was left under the
Authors own hand, as it is here tendered unto thee: though he did for the most
part write all in Latin, yet this Analysis was left in English, which you have
inserted in the Margent, answerable to the several particulars treated on.

Let not any prejudice forestall thee; I shall only say unto thee, as Philip
to Nathaniel, Come and see, read and consider, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things.

Thine, in the service of the LORD, A. B.

The ANALYSIS Of the Chapter, and of the Observations; as it was made by the
Author, and left under his own hand, for the help of memory.
2 TIMOTHY, 1.13.
1. Analysis. 1 General. 1 Of the Epistle. 1 Circumstances of 1 Persons,
written 1 To Timothy. 2 By Paul.
2 Time, 1 During bands. 2 Before dissolution.

2 Substantial scope.
2 Of the Chapter. 1 Entrance. 1 Salutation, verse. 2. 2 Introduction, contains
his love, 1 Great; proved by 1 Prayer for him 1 Night and day, 2 Without
ceasing, 3 With thanksgiving.
2 Desire to see him, 4.
2 Grounded; approved from his 1 Tender love to Paul; tears, 4. 2 True faith to
God, 5. 1 Lineall, 2 Cordial.
3 Growing; improved, to impart by writing 1 Scope, Sum, 6. Stir up grace. 2
Reason, 7. Given for courage.


2 Continuation; where a double 1. Admonition. Be thou not 1 Negative; 8.
pressed from 1 Nature of Gospel; 9, 10 1 Ashamed of 1 Testimony. 2 Me.
2 Afraid.
2 Condition of Paul; his 1 Cause of suffering, 11, 12. 2 Confidence, 12.

2 Affirmative. 1 Hold, 13. 2 Keep, 14.
2 Provocation, from example of 1 Inconstant Deserters, 15. 2 Constant
Adhaerers, propounded with Prayer, Praises. 1 First, 1 Prays mercy to
household, 16. 2 Praises, 1 Charity, 2 Constancy, 3 Zeal, 16, 17.
2 Second, 18.




2 Special. 1 Prays mercy to soul. 2 Praises ancient kindness.

2 Observation. It is a matter of great consequence, for all, to have and keep
a form of sound and wholesome words, in the grounds of Religion, as a sacred
depositum, and rich treasure.

1 Explication. 1 Proposition. 1 Object, in 1 General. 1 Words; 2 Wholesome,
for 1 Substance of matter. 1 Truth. 2 Use.
^ Form of words.
3 Form; 1 Matter entirely collected. 2 Method aptly digested.

2 Special. 1 Divine. 2 Fundamental. 1 Sum, Christ. 2 Parts. 1 Faith
apprehensive. 2 Love active.



2 Act; 1 (...) have them 1 Written. 2 Printed. 1 Copy of them. 2 Original
laid up in treasure of 1 Memory. 2 Understanding. 3 Affection.


2 (...), keep them. 1 Patronize, with 1 Ability, Cautiously. 2 Authority,
Courageously.
2 Practice, sincerely; 1 Fruitfully, 2 Constantly. 3 Propagate, seriously by 1
Planting. 2 Watering.


3 Manner; as a 1 Sacred depositum, (...) 2 Choice treasure, (...).
4 Persons. 1 Paul. 2 Timothy. 3 Christian.

2 Proof. 1 Scripture. 1 Examples. 1 All the Epistles. 2 Hebrews 6.1.
2 Testimonies.
2 Reason. 1 Necessity. 1 Romans 12.6. 2 Timothy 2.15. 3 1 Pet. 3.15. 4 Romans 6.17.
2 Utility. 1 Band of Unity, Verity. 2 Bar against Heresy, Controversies. 3
Key of Understanding. 4 Lock of Memory. 5 Help of Use, to 1 Profit by others. 2
Profit others.


2 Application. 1 General. 1 Justification of observers of this Rule. 1
Persons, with other; 2 Manner wherefore, by 1 Paul. 2 Timothy. 3 Church. 1
Public 1 Creeds. 2 Confessions.
2 Private writings for 1 Unlearned catechists 2 Learned bodies.
3 Reason. 1 Fidelity. 2 Zeal. 3 Wisdom.


2 Reprehension of the 1 Perfidiousnesse. 2 Negligence. 3 Folly.
3 Exhortation to 1 Church 1 Care; provide for 2 Caution; let it be 1 Learners.
1 Children. 2 Yongmen. 3 Fathers.
2 Teachers. 1 Choice. 2 Close. 3 Charitable. 4 Changeable.


2 Ministers 1 Expound; 1 Historical Truths. 2 Dogmaticall Truths.
2 Expatiate,
3 Christians 1 Force to duty. 2 Fear not difficulty.


2 Particular. 1 Generals. 1 Promise nothing. 1 Perfect; for both 1 Matter. 1
Prudentiall. 2 Tolerable. 3 Indifferent. 4 Different. 5 Comprehensive.
2 Method; but in a way
2 Pleasant. 3 Particular of Divinity; 1 Too Scholasticall. 2 Comprehended
already.

2 Desire of 1 God. 2 You.

2 Specials. 1 Instruction; 4 Truths; 2 Errors; 3 Doctr; 2 Expedition; 1 Whole
work. 2 A point, a day.







An exact Systeme of Divinity, PRESENTING
1 A Porch or Frontispice, premising four general heads or titles, concerning
1 The mark and scope which we must eye, and aim at; namely, the true 1
Happiness. 2 Religion.
2 The line, by which we must level at that mark, viz. the right knowledge of
the 3 Church. 4 Scripture.

2 The fabric or edifice it self, presenting matters of
1 Faith, to be known and believed, 1 General, concerning 1 God, his 1
Internal nature, as he is in himself in the 5 Unity of essence. 6 Trinity of
persons.
2 External operations, as he has manifested himself by 7 Creation. 8
Providence.

2 Man in specie, and the reasonable creature in genere, where some things 1
Fundamentally to be premised, concerning 1 The subject capable of happiness,
viz. the reasonable creature, 9 Angels; good, evil. 10 Man; Immor: sou: consc:
2 The ground and rule of all process with him toward happiness, being only
the wise-good-pleasure of God, appointing 11 Covenant. Seals. 12 Law. Sanctions.

2 Formally to be considered: Humane actions, whereof the 1 Roots and
principles, from whence they arise and issue, 13 Free Will; acts, habits. 14
Grace.
2 Branches and kinds, dividing themselves, and issuing from these roots, 15
Sins; vices. 16 Good works; virtues.



2 Particular, in respect of the diverse 1 States of Man, differing in the 1
Substance of the Covenant of Works or Grace, the state of 17 Innocence by
Creation. 18 Fall and corruption.
2 The form of Administration only, and dispensation of circumstances before
and after Christ, the state of the 19 Old Testament. 20 New Testament.

2 Acts of Gods perfecting our salvation by degrees, and translating us from
the state of 1 Sin to grace, by steps and acts, 1 Fundamental preparing it for
us by purpose and purchase, 21 Predestinat: Reprobat: 22 Redempt: Incarnation.
2 Formal co^veying it to those who have interest in the former, by 23 Vocation
effectual. 24 Justification actual.

2 Grace to glory, 1 Inchoate here in a sweet taste, continual and perpetual,
by 25 Sa^ctificatio^, Privileges. 26 Gubernatio^, Exercises.
2 Co^summat in the full draught, and perfected in the life to come, by 27
Resurrection, Judgment. 28 Glorificat: Condemat:




2 Life, to be done and practiced, which may be reduced to 1 Duties to be
performed by the strength of grace and virtue, more 1 General; and those
either more 1 Primary and predominant, directing in duty to God and Man, 29
Theological. 30 Philadelphicall.
2 Secondary and concommitant, under which I comprize the virtues 31 Cardinal.
32 Circumstantiall.

2 Special, regulating our lives, in respect of several 1 Parts and
conditions; 1 Parts, teaching how to govern aright both our 33 Hearts and
affections. 34 Words and actions.
2 Conditions, ordering and directing us according to our several, both 35 Sex
and age. 36 State and condition.

2 States and relations, whether more 1 Private, in a single or sociable life,
alone or in company, 37 Ethicall. 38 Oeconomicall.
2 Public, as we are parts or members of a Church or Commonweal 39
Ecclesiastical. 40 Political.



2 Helps to be used, in regard of our 1 Universal conversation, 1 Principal,
public; the use of 1 Means instituted by God, for our continual reparation
and improvement, 41 Word of God, hearing. 42 Sacraments, receiving.
2 Times constituted by God, for our effectual renovation and inforcement, 43
Sabbath. 44 Fasting.

2 Additionall, private exercises, which are either more 1 Contemplative, and
looking more immediately toward God and heaven, 45 Reading, Meditation. 46
Prayer, Thanksgiving.
2 Active, improving our converse with men in the world, in our holy carriage,
in our 47 Co^mun: of Sts, Confer. 48 Particular vocation.

2 Particular condition, as we are either 1 Travelers itinerant, if 1
Strangers yet, and aliens, to bring us into God, and force our 49 Ingress,
Examination, Resolution.
2 Domestics and children, to build us up in God, and further our 50 Aggresse,
holy Life, Death.

2. Soldiers militant, to 1 Strengthen our weakness in the 51 Congresse,
Spiritual warfare.
2 Quicken our dullness in our daily 52 Progress, with proficience to
perseverance.






The form of wholesome Words, SER. I.
OR, An Introduction to the body of Divinity. In Three Sermons,
2. TIMOTHY, 1, 13, 14. VER. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have
heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ JESUS. That good thing which
was committed to thee, keep, by the holy Ghost which dwells in us.
I Have hitherto treated on several Texts of Scripture, in several Arguments;
which I conceive will be useful, having dependence one upon another. My
purpose (as I partly intimated formerly) is hereafter, to treat upon Arguments
that shall hold a connection together; to deliver, according to the words of the
Text, and to my own intention, a form of sound words; even the body of
Divinity: and I shall choose out several Texts of Scripture for the several
heads, and have now made choice of this Text of Scripture, to make entrance to
the Discourse; which contains an Injunction and Exhortation, from Paul to
Timothy, to take care of that; that he keep, or hold fast a form of sound, or
wholesome words.

Before I enter into the particulars, I shall a little acquaint you with the
general; both what concerns 1. The whole Epistle, and 2. This Chapter:
And so proceed to one main observation out of the words, passing by many
others which would offer themselves, but different from the scope which I drive
at.

1. To say but a word concerning the Epistle in general, you may consider both
1. The material circumstances of it. 2. The substantial scope and drift of it.


1. The material circumstances are such as concern both 1. The persons. 2. The
time.


1. Concerning the persons: in one word, it is an Epistle, written by Paul the
Apostle, to Timothy an Evangelist, as most Divines conceive.

2. For the material circumstances, which concern the time: in one word also,
the time was

1. During the bands of Paul, while he was a prisoner for the Gospels sake; and
in that respect to be had in precious account, and so much the rather,

2. Because it was not long before his desolution: which he foretells in this
Epistle, which seems to be (as it were) the last words, the last Dictates of
a dying man, yea a dying Martyr.

2. The substantial scope and drift of it, was to quicken, and strengthen
Timothy, in the faithful discharge of his Evangelicall Ministry, against all
discouragements and hindrances that might any way abate his edge, and take off
his vigor in it; as you may easily see in the whole course of the Epistle.

2. But to pass by all other things, and only to give a general draught, and
delineation of this Chapter, to make way to the words whereon I intend to stand.

There be two things which are mainly and principally contained in this Chapter.

1. We have the first entrance into the Epistle.

2. The continuation, or some part of the prosecution of the drift and scope of
it.

1. In the entrance (to omit the salutation, verse. 1, 2. which is ordinary in
all the Epistles of Paul, and therefore I forbear to speak any thing of it.)

2. The Introduction, by which the Apostle falls upon his scope, and upon his
work that he has to do with Timothy in this Epistle; it contains a sweet
expression of the tender love and affection which Paul bears to Timothy; and
this he shows 1. To be a great love. 2. To be a well grounded love. 3. To be
a growing and continuing love.


These three circumstances are specially observable:

He proves, that it is great; and though it be great,

He approves it to be well grounded.

And in the last place, he does improve it, and makes use of this love, to stir
up Timothy to an improvement in all piety.

1. The greatness of the Apostles love is expressed, and proved, and
demonstrated by a double fruit of it.

1. We have one fruit of this excellent love of Paul to Timothy, in the third
verse, immediately after the salutation contained in the two former: and it is
an earnest prayer for the good of Timothy, remembering of him in his absence;
though he were distant far in place and person, yet there was a soder that held
him to Timothy, that joined him to Timothy, and made him to present him to God
in his prayers continually: if you will read the verse, you have it very
emphatically expressed in three very choice circumstances; I thank God, whom I
serve from mine Elders, with pure conscience, that without ceasing, I have
remembrance of thee in my prayers, night and day.

1. He prays for him night and day, in the latter end of the verse.

2. Night and day, without ceasing, without interruption or intermission: and
he does it with so much strength, and tenderness of affection, (as Chrysostom
upon that place observes) (...); it is a very hyperbolicall love which the
Apostle shows to Timothy, in that he does bless God that he prayed for him;
I thank God: and he blesses God, which is an Argument of very sweet love, and
tender affection of his heart, working toward the good of Timothy, remembering
him continually in his prayers.

2. There is a second fruit of this love* by which the Apostle demonstrates the
greatness of his love, and that is in the fourth verse, Desiring to see thee:
there is a strong attractive between Christian and Christian, that do know one
another, that draws them strongly together, and prevails against all
distance of place; so as they do not only remember, but they do make out
toward the enjoyment one of another company: and this Paul demonstrates to
Timothy, and it is expressed emphatically, as though much of Paul's comfort, and
much of the happiness and sweetness of his life, did depend on the enjoyment
of Timothy, that I may be filled with joy: as if he should say, he should be
full of joy in his presence: and this is the first circumstance, viz. the
greatness of his love, expressed by his prayers for him, and his desire to see
him.

2. But then secondly, this is not an inordinate love, a misplaced love, or a
mere natural and carnal affection that Paul had to Timothy; but it is a
spiritual, and subordinate love, which is grounded upon very great reason,
which is (as you know) the other circumstance: now this he approves to be a
well grounded love, which he bears toward Timothy, from a double consideration:

1. First, his tender love to Paul, expressed in his tears, v. 4. Magnes amoris
amor, love is the loadstone of love; and therefore he said right, si vis amari,
ama: the most effectual charm to draw love is, the sense and experience of the
love of an other toward us: He is of a very barbarous spirit that will not
reciprocate and answer love with love: and thus the Apostle intimates as the
first ground of his love, the tender love, and tender affection of Timothy
toward Paul, and therefore if it were for nothing else, but for his love
toward him, he loves him and that is intimated in the 4 verse remembering thy
tears: I refer it for the present (and so I conceive it very reasonable) to the
last parting of Paul and Timothy, now to those that are united together in
strong affection it is death to part: It is like a child that is to part with
the nurses breast and must be weaned, there is a great deal of mourning, and
pining and languishing away to think that he must be weaned from his breast,
from whence he has sucked so much sweetness and nourishment: Such an
affection there seemed to be stirring in Timothy toward Paul, at there
parting: Now Timothy having long enjoyed the sweet, and comfortable communion
of Paul, and the happiness of his fellowship whence he had sucked so many
instructions, so much edification, so much of his establishment, now upon the
apprehension of parting with him, he apprehends he must be robbed of all this;
the thought of this like a child made him break forth into tears: so that is
the first ground of Paul's love to Timothy: Timothyes love to him.

2 His true faith to God which was lineal, Cordial; this is another ground,
which the Apostle produces to prove the groundednesse of his love, and that
was Timothyes desert, having that which was worthy to be beloved. There be two
things say the Philosophers that are the fountains of love; A man loves either
(...), or (...).
i. e. either because the thing is his own; or else because the thing is worthy
to be beloved: a man loves his child, though it be not so fair, or so witty,
or so commendable as many others are, yet he loves it, because it is his own;
and those that are our own, that are made ours, are also made love worthy, for
that is a good ground of love (...): But yet the highest ground of love; is
(...). i. e. worthiness of love; and this ground of Timothyes worthiness, as
the ground of Paul's love, the Apostle mentions in the 5 verse. you shall find it
there fully expressed: When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in
thee, which dwelt first in thy granmother Lois etc. The lineall and cordial
piety of Timothy; the piety of Timothy which Paul knew, and was persuaded of,
and had experience of, was the great bond that tied the heart of Paul to
Timothy: and that is so much the more commendable because it was piety laid in
the right line; he was descended from a pious family, from pious parents; he
mentions his mother and his grandmother, which is a circumstance that adds
some beauty, some gloss: it is a sweet thing to see the children, and
grandchildren of those that have been in covenant with God; of those that have
feared God, to see them tread in their parents steps, to continue their piety,
that it does not fall to the ground; but to perpetuate it, and carry it to
another generation; it is a thing that much commends, it is a very great shame
when it is not so, and a very sweet thing when it is so: But all this were
nothing, if he were descended from a Godly family and himself not so: therefore
the Apostle commends him to be (...) i. e. of sincere faith, of which he was
persuaded not only in respect of his relation to the religious family of which
he was; but for the grace which was in himself: being assured that it dwelled
in him also which is the second circumstance, it was a great love, and a well
grounded love: It was a continuing, or rather a growing love: and therefore the
Apostle infers upon this thing, this very love of his toward Timothy was the
ground of his writing to him; and therefore what ever came from him now, it
arised from his love, and was a fruit of it, and therefore might make it more
welcome, and acceptable to him, and considerable by him, to whom it was
written: and in that particular is expressed.

1. The whole scope of Paul in this Epistle: and the sum of it, wrote to him
for this purpose, out of his love: knowing his Godliness and piety, he takes
occasion to build him up, and encourage him more and more in it, and therefore
to put him in remembrance that he stir up the gift of God that was in him verse
6:

2. The reason of it in the 7 v. because that he had not received the Spirit of
fear, but the spirit of love, and power: It was given him for that purpose to
stir it up; God bestows no grace upon any that it should lie only sleeping
in the ashes, that he should suffer it to be stifled, but all graces are given
as tallents, to be employed; and set aworke for our Masters advantage: But I
fear this is a little to far off, and therefore I pass it. Thus far we
have the entrance into the Epistle: wherein the Apostle Paul lays his
foundation of his discourse upon his love, to make all that ever he should
write to be more effectual with Timothy, that it might work more upon him.

2. The rest now is the continuation of the material passages of the Epistle,
and I will go no further in it, then it reaches in this chapter: and in it,
the remainder of it, has these two things done by the Apostle.

1. We have first of all a double admonition given to Timothy.

2. A double provocation for the receiving and practicing of this admonition.

There is a double admonition.

1. A Negative Admonition. 2. An Affirmative Admonition.
The Negative Admonition is expressed in the 8 verse, and there be some
particulars in the Admonition it self, besides the prosecution, which I will
but touch.

The sum of the Admonition lies in two things:

1. That Timothy should not be ashamed, either of the testimony of the Lord,
the witness bearing to the truth of the Gospel; nor of Paul, that was a
prisoner for this: the bands of Paul should not make Timothy to blush, or be
ashamed; but rather that he should compose himself, and not be unwilling to
suffer with Paul, and suffer with the Gospel, yea to share with him in his
sufferings. That is the sum of the Admonition, and there be three branches of
it,

1. That he should not be ashamed of the testimony given to the Lord, to the
truth, to the Gospel.

2. That he should not be ashamed of it the more, because Paul was in disgrace
for it, was a prisoner for it.

3. And lastly, that he should take part and share with him, even in his
sufferings; should be partaker of the afflictions that Paul was engaged in,
for the Gospels sake.

And as there be these three branches of the Exhortation, so there be two
Arguments which the Apostle does press for the several branches of this duty,
proportionable to the difficulties of it.

1. He had no reason to be ashamed of the Gospel; and the reason is expressed
in the 9 and 10 verses. From the condition and nature of the Gospel: it is the
Gospel which contains the treasures of all truths, prepared long ago, but
revealed to the servants of GOD in latter times; by which we are made partakers
of the high, holy, and precious calling, by which all good, and all happiness
is conveyed unto us: and therefore in regard of the nature of the Gospel,
little reason for any man, for Timothy, to be ashamed of that, in which he
should glory, and in which was contained all the happiness that ever he, or
any other was, or shall be made partaker of.

2. Consider the condition of Paul: there was no reason that Timothy should be
ashamed of Paul, though he were a prisoner for the Gospel, under a cloud, and
under disgrace for it; that he should not shrink from him in that respect, and
be loath to own him: and that is expressed,

1. If we look upon the cause of his suffering. it is not suffering, but the
cause of suffering, that casts disgrace or dirt upon a man, that makes him
contemptible, because he suffers, as the saying of old in this case was, Non
paena sed causa facit martyrem: nor it is not the punishment, but the cause that
makes a malefactor; and so makes a man liable to shame and reproach: if a man
suffer for a good cause, it is honorificall, not shameful and reproachful; if
Paul had suffered as a malefactor, his friends might have hanged down their
heads, and hid their faces, and have counted it as a disparagement unto the
family of Paul, and all his friends and all those that were in relation to him:
But to suffer in a noble and good cause, not as a malefactor but as a martyr,
for the Gospels sake, there was no reason that any followers of his should be
ashamed of him; and the Apostle expresses that in the 11 and 12 verses: of
which I am made a preacher, and Apostle and teacher of the Gentiles; For the
which cause I also suffer these things, but I am not ashamed etc. as if he
should say there is nothing can be cast in my teeth, and however I be under a
cloud and in disgrace, yet there is nothing can be laid against me, but that I
have brought this upon my self, by discharging my office faithfully, which is
so far from being despicable that it is honorable.

2. As his cause was good so was his confidence, this is the other branch of
the encouragement; not only not to be ashamed, but even to be willing to suffer
for the Gospel, and to take share and part with him in it, and this the Apostle
expresses in the 12 verse, as his cause was good, so his carriage and
confidence, his own temper and disposition in his suffering was such, as that
no man that well considered it, had reason to be ashamed; I am not ashamed my
self, and indeed, why should any man be ashamed of another that suffers for
that thing, of which he rather has cause to glory, than be ashamed. Nay he
adds, I am persuaded, and believe that he (viz. God) is able to keep that
which I have committed to him, (that was his soul, though it is not expressed,
yet it is supposed, intimating his belief, that God would keep his depositum,
his soul, which he had committed to him) against that day: now in such a case
as this (as the saying was) it is a wrong to a martyr, to pity him, or to weep
for him, (I will not say, as some add) to pray for him. It is a wrong to a
martyr, to be ashamed of him, or to mourn for him, especially when the martyr
himself is courageous, and glorious in his cause, and God has so mightily
supported his spirits, and set them so high, that he can feel nothing, but bear
all easily: I say, when God has exalted his spirits, and elevated them thus,
it is an incongruous thing for others to be cast down, there is no congruity in
it.

And this is the first of that double precept of Paul, verse 2 the Negative
precept, wherein he commands Timothy not to be ashamed, which the Apostle
propounds in the first place, least that should be a rub in the way; least the
consideration that he was in prison, in disgrace, in bonds and afflictions,
might make Timothy cold, and shrink away from him.

2. He adds another to that, and that is an Affirmative one in the verses
which I have read, and this precept too is double: hold fast, in verse 13, and
keep in the 14 verse.

In a generality only I shall express those things now (and reserve
particularity till I came to my point) But now in the generality, either of
them both these three things are observable.

1. There is the act that is enjoined in one verse, hold fast, in the other
keep: the same properly, though expressed variously.

2. There is the object expressed in one verse, a form of wholesome words,
expressed in the other that good depositum, or that worthy thing which was
committed to thee; which was the very same thing, that same form of wholesome
Words, which was deposited unto him.

3. And there is the manner of performance of both these; in the former
intimated, hold fast in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus, though I
confess and shall touch afterward, that it may admit of another
interpretation, and that in a very good sense, yet I think that is part of the
Apostles meaning, to express the manner, how he should hold fast a form of
sound and wholesome Words verse 2 in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus:
they are the two hold fasts) and the latter is expressed, but more deeper, and
from a higher ground and stronger head, and that is by the spirit of God which
dwells in us; he must keep those things that were committed to him by the
spirit of God; and indeed that is the spring and root: our grace does
immediately lay fast hold on these things that are committed to us from the word
of God; but it is the spirit of God that breaths in us that grace whereby we
lay hold, and which supports us, and enables us continually; and it must be his
strength that must enable us to hold steadfast, and constant, in any good thing.

There remains now but one thing, and so I shall dismiss the general
delineation of the chapter: you have heard the double Admomonition; there is
likewise in the latter end of the chapter, from those verses that I have read,
to the end of the chapter,

2. A double provocation, by which the Apostle Paul does labor to press and
enforce Timothy upon this duty, and both of them taken from Examples.

There are 1. Evil Examples; and 2. Good Examples:
By both which the Apostle spurs Timothy on, and provokes him to this duty, by
the indignation of the evil, and by the emulation of the good.

1. The evil Examples are of inconstant Desertors, expressed in the 15 verse,
Thou know (says Paul) that all that are in Asia, have deserted me; declined
me, turned away from me: which is no new thing for a man that comes to suffer
for the cause of God, though he do it never so discreetly, though he do it with
never so much constancy, nay though he do it never so honorifically, for the
public good, and the public cause: I say it is no new thing, to have many
turn their backs upon them then, to count a man for a fool, and so to leave
him: it was Paul's case, he did meet with such, all that were in Asia, turned
from him, and forsook him: as they that (it may be) cried Hosanna before, were
ready now to cry out, Crucifige, crucify him. Now he was under a cloud, and
under a storm, they were afraid of him, and now they would not look on him,
they shrink back from him: and the Apostle presses this consideration on
Timothy, not to dishearten him, or to put him in the same course, but to oblige
him so much the more to stick close to him in the cause of Christ, because of
the neglect of it. There be so many that fall off from the servants of God,
when they are in their afflictions, that those who are sincere, they had need
to perform their duty so much the more closely and sweetly, to keep to them,
and recompense all the discomforts, and discouragements which they do meet
withal, from false friends, and false professors. There is a great necessity,
and so a great obligation lies upon godly persons, on those that are truly
such, out of the consideration of the treachery, and perfidiousnesse, and
cowardice of the wicked, so much the more to show themselves, to stand by, and
comfort the Saints of God in their sufferings.

2. The good examples are, of constant Adhaerers: and there is one thing in it,
which I shall note by the way; viz. the great difference of the Apostles
propounding of the one example, and of the other; he propounds the bad example
with a mere bare mention, all have forsaken me; without any passion, without
any bitter harshnesse, or railing against these men, he forbears this, and
passes by all that, and covers it: but he cannot forbear, when he propounds
the good example, but does it with a great mixture of affection, and it is very
emphaticall, home, and full, omitting no circumstance that might add any
commendation, or set any beauty, or gloss upon it. The good example is that,
though there were many that forsaked Paul, deserted him, even all that were in
Asia; yet there was one that durst own him, when all the rest left him, and
that was Onesiphorus: and this example of Onesiphorus he propounds very
emphatically;

1. With a mixture of prayers to God for him, and by way of recompense (as it
were) having engaged God to be his play master.

2. With a mixture of praise, and commendation, in an ingenuous acknowledgment
of his fidelity and constancy, in adhering to him; and you may find this
mixture in a double degree:

1. In the first place, we have praying for him, that God should be merciful
to his household, The Lord be merciful to the house of Onesiphorus, in the 16
verse. And with that is mingled,

2. The praise, and commendation of the constancy and fidelity of Onesiphorus,
in these circumstances:

1. His charity and mercy to Paul in general, in his constancy to him in
afflictions, often refreshing him, in sweetning of his spirits, and cheering
him; he did not do it at other times only, but in his bonds, he was not
ashamed of his bonds.

2. Nay, more than so, there was yet something more in special; he did it more
tenderly, and cheerfully, yea and more carefully in his bonds, than he did
before, when he was at liberty, when he was at Rome, (as it is in the 17 verse)
he sought him out very diligently; he did not only when Paul met him, when he
did meet him (as it were) in his dish, and then give him a cold complement, and
salute him; but whereas he might have declined Paul, he sought him out very
diligently, very carefully, hazarding and engaging himself in this cause for
the comfort of Paul.

2. Then there is a second setting of it out, for the Apostle could never have
done with this: but there is a second mixture in the 18 verse. There is again

1. A repetition of prayer for Onesiphorus, that had so carefully sought him
out, and never left till he found him; viz. That the Lord would grant unto him,
that he might find mercy, when he sought it, in the most needful time, in the
great day, in the day of the LORD. And withal,

2. There is again a repetition of praise, for he cannot take off his hand,
cannot say enough (as a thankful spirit, and an ingenuous spirit will not let
fall any good received, nor keep back any praise that is due to it:) and this
Paul expresses in the very last clause, and latter part of the verse; he comes
in there with a new supply of praise, What he did, in how many things he
ministered to me at Ephesus, thou know very well: he remembered his ancient
kindness, and makes mention of it here to his praise. And if there were no
other thing in the world (though a man had no other reward) it were enough to
encourage a man, to engage the prayers, and to deserve the praises of a Paul;
to be praised by Paul, and to have Paul as a Remembrancer at the Throne of
Grace: to get the prayers of those that are faithful, and to deserve the
praises of those that are faithful; were there no other recompense in the
world, it were enough (and they that would have a share in the reward of a
martyr, must have a share in the affliction of a martyr) however (if there were
no other reward) it were (at least) no contemptible thing, to be paid in
prayers, to be paid in praises, especial from such as are as Paul.

I now come to the place which I have pitched upon, and I shall forbear all
observation which might be raised out of the context and pass by also all the
particulars which might be severally raised (and that naturally enough) out of
the particular words of the text: There is but one thing that I shall pitch
upon, and in that one observation take occasion to explain so much of the
words of the text as may be any way needful.

The point, or observation which I shall commend to you out of these words, it
is this*

It is a matter of high concernment for all, Doctrine.
to have and keep cautiously, as a sacred depositum, as a rich treasure, a form
of sound, and wholesome Words, especially in Divine, and fundamental truths:
that shall be the observation which I shall only propound, and prosecute out
of the words, and I shall so much the rather propound it more fully and
largely, because I would comprehend in it, so much as might give me a hint to
explicate all the words that are necessary to be opened in the text.

I conceive it takes in all the whole substance and scope, of that which the
Apostle does here commend to Timothy, and that which suits very well with the
scope of the business we have in hand:

There be four things, which I shall briefly open for I will not be large in
the point.

1. The object of the duty, specified. 2. The act of that duty, enjoined. 3.
The manner of performing the duty, intimated. 4. The persons who are obliged to
this duty.
And every one of these is couched in the proposition I named, and has some
necesity, and usefullnesse in the point it self.

The Object.
1. The first thing considerable in the point is the object of this duty; and we
have it propounded in the words of the text, and therefore I shall go no
further.

For the explication of the object, I shall propound it in a more general, and
in a more particular way: the whole is generally propounded, and particularly
circumscribed in the words of the text.

Generally propounded.
1. In the general proposition there be these three distinct branches
observable: and I shall give but a brief touch of either of them.

1. Words. 2. Sound and wholesome Words. 3. A form of sound and wholesome Words.
In a word I shall say so much as is necessary for the understanding of the
meaning of all these; What is meant by Words?

What is mean by sound and wholesome Words, for so the original has it, (...):
i. e. sound or wholesome Words.

And what is meant by a form of sound Words (...), as the word is, a
dilineation, or plat form of wholesome Words.

1. For the former, what is meant by Words, Words.
a word will serve the turn. It is not bare words, letters and sillables, that
the Apostle speak of, but divine truths and Doctrines expressed and couched in
words: I say divine truths and sentences, grounds and principles, which are
here called words; because they cannot be expressed but by words: and this
thing is so familiar among all sorts, that I will not add any thing more.

2. Sound and wholesome Words
But then for those sound and wholesome words that are recommended here to his
custody, what is the meaning of them.

In few words for I will not expatiate, but circumscribe it in a narrow
compass, Words and truths, principles and Doctrines, they are sound and
wholesome when they are so.

Both 1 For the substance of matter: and 2 For the form of them in which they
are expressed, and conveyed.


Which I might have taken, from the former words; but I rather take it in that
place. For the Substance of matter.


1. There is a soundnes, and wholsomnes in respect of the substance of matter;
which the Apostle does enjoin every man to take care of, especially Ministers,
that the things which they deliver, be sound and wholesome, in regard of the
matter; and that is the main thing, as I conceive.

Now there be two things most principal, to make the matter of words that are
delivered, wholesome and sound.

1. The soundness of truths, of holy truths.

Soundness of Use.
2. The soundness of use, and profitablenesse.

And they are here chiefly recommended to Ministers, and in due place to all:
to have a special care of having, preserving, and keeping very charily such
sound words, and truths, as that

1. There may be no words, no Doctrines, no principles delivered in the Church
of God; but such as may be full of certain, and holy, and pious truths, such as
are agreeable with truth, according to the word of God, according to the
analogy of faith; that is the first, the soundness of truth.

2. But the other kind of soundness, or a second branch of it, may be a
soundness of use, that their words may be such as are fit for edification.
There may be many things true, but there may be so little substantialnesse, so
little solidity, so little materialnesse for any use, so frivolous and so low,
that there may be no great advantage, or benefit which can come to the Church,
by hearing or receiving them: therefore the Apostle includes this, that as
there should be a care, that nothing but the sound and wholesome truth of God
should be delivered, so that it might be such solid and substantial truth, as
may be very conducible for the building up, and edifying of the Church of God;
not frivolous, and vain, and curious disputes and questions, which rather make
men swell, and puff up, and rather make contention and jangling, but such as
are solid and substantial, necessary and profitable truths for edification:
that is another branch.

2. But then besides the soundness of the matter, there is the soundness of
the manner, Soundness of manner,
or form of words, in which these things are delivered; they must not be
delivered in an affected language, in a (...), as the Apostle oftentimes in the
Epistle expresses; not in a vain tinkling sound of words, tickling the ear, to
please men's fancies, and to draw men's carnal delight, in the hearing of the
words that are delivered: but grave and sober expressions, such as may be
subservient to the matter, to conveigh substantial truths, in an edifying and
profitable way, it must be such a form of words: and indeed there may be a
great failing, and a man may be to seek a language, if he will affect a
curious, and neat contrivance of words; and having found it, it will be far
from the gravity of the business. And truly, if we were (as we should be)
rightly affected, when we come to the house of God, and have to deal with
divine things, we would not look after the dress of words, and the tire of
words; which is the poorest, and the meanest that can be, and scarce worthy to
be looked after, unless it may be in a wholesome way, to conveigh wholesome
words. It is a base and poor thing, to come in public places, to gape and pry
into this woman's dress, and the other woman's toy; this fashion, and the other
fashion; and more basely sordid, in the house of God: and it is as base (in the
kind of it) for a man to come to Gods house, where he comes to seek food for
his soul, and to hear the oracles of God, that God should not be able to please
him, unless he speak tinkling and tickling words, to fancy and humor him. Is
it meet for God? or does it become the majesty of God, to speak in such a
language as is not befitting him? Majesticall language, noble language, sublime
language, is the proper language of GOD, to conveigh divine things. It may suit
well with a Courtier, to affect some scrapings of language, but not with a
King; for (as they use to observe) there is a difference between a pedantick
style, and a majestic style: a boy that has but his Academicall learning, he
may in his orations affect, and it may be more tolerable for him, to affect
pen and Inkhorn language, and (as they term it) to affect a flourishing sound
of words: but for a Prince, it is besides his decorum (I say) for a Prince on
his Throne of Majesty, to speak curiously, it becomes not the majesty of the
place; and much less does it become the majesty of Gods ordinances, that there
should be any thing so curiously in the dress of words, as to draw men's eyes
and ears so, that they do not mind the things, but the words, and are carried
away with petty phrases: but I must not be large.

There is another thing: words, and sound and wholesome words, of truth and
profitablenesse; and wholesome, for the manner of delivery, in a grave and sober
manner, such as becomes the oracles of God.

3. But what is that same (...), A form of sound words.
that same form of sound words? this one thing that the Apostle intimates. I
shall afterward, when I come to the Application, express more particularly of
it; but for the present I shall comprehend all in these two things, which I
conceive are enough.

A form of sound and wholesome words: The matter entirely collected.
I conceive the Apostle means, the matter entirely collected; a collection of
the principles of Religion, and the principles of Divinity; a sufficient and
entire collection, and drawing together, and imbodying (as it were) of the
necessary principles of Religion; which every Minister should have a care to
conveigh to the people, and every people, care to treasure up. In the matter, I
say, an entire and sufficient collection; I know there be many degrees of it,
but I shall touch that afterward; for the present, I express it only in the
general, a sufficient entire collection of the main truths, and principles of
Religion, to take care to conveigh them very solicitously to the hearing of the
people.

2. But then again (though this be the main in my apprehension) that the
Apostle here intends, yet I will not exclude another thing too, which seems to
be included: viz. Method aptly digested. Method aptly digested.
Some care must be of the method, as well as of the matter: that there might be
a sufficient collection of all fundamental principles, and that it might be
digested (as well as collected) in some useful method: the word it self,
(...), according to the genuine signification of it seems to aim at this, for
it is no more but a general delineation, or draught; and the truth is, it is
impossible that where there is a multitude, but that multitude must be
regulated by some order; if multitudes of principles be delivered without an
order, it is without its beauty, and it will be a great prejudice and
hindrance, both to the understanding, and attention of them; and to the memory,
and retention of them: and therefore I suppose this is here likewise
comprehended; the words seem to import it, however I say not that the Apostle
fully intends this, because it is but accidental; yet I do not exclude it, but
think that a fit method and order, for conveighance, is somewhat necessary.

So that now we have in general, the substance of the Apostles precept, which
is, that there should be a care had by Timothy, (and by such as are as Timothy)
to conveigh words, that is, divine truths, such as may be sound, sound for the
matter, sound for the manner of conveighance of them; to conveigh them entirely
collected, (in a body, as it were) and digested in some artificial and set
order: and this is that of which we say, it is a matter of great concernment.
Time has prevented me, and therefore I shall but mention some things in a word.

2. Here is a more special circumscription of this object (besides this
general) in two things which I will but mention, The special circumscription
of the Object.
by way of question; as,

1. What those truths are, that we should have a special care to deliver in
this manner? and the answer is,

1. Divine truths, such as thou have received from me; such as are the oracles
of God, Divine truths.
and received by divine revelation from him; but that we have expressed already.

2. Such as are fundamental truths: there should be a special care had of
seed corn, of that which will bring the crop: Fundamental truths.
if men will have a continuation of corn, they must have a special care for
seed corn, ordinary corn will not serve the turn; it may make good bread, but
it may not be good for seed: we must have a care therefore of the fundamental
principles of Religion; although we must have a special care of every truth,
yet of these especially: and these are here spoken of.

The sum of them is Christ.
1. The sum of all, is Christ: faith and love in Christ, is here showed, that
Christ is the very kernel of all; and in truth, all fundamentals of Religion,
(Religion it self being nothing else, The parts are, faith and love.
but to bring us to God in Christ, and to reduce us home to our happiness that
way) the whole work and foundation is nothing, but to bring us to God in
Christ; a clear and full conveighance of this, is all that is fundamentally
necessary.

2. The parts are, faith apprehensive, and love active: which I shall express
in the second question;

What are those truths that are fundamental?

Answ. Those truths are most properly fundamental, Sum of all, is Christ.
without which we cannot be made partakers of Christ, nor be enabled to do
that, by which we may be made partakers of God in him: and so the sum of all is
particularly mentioned here in this phrase, by faith and love, which is in
Christ Jesus (I gave an intimation of another sense before, but I conceive this
is properly meant in this latter clause, by faith and love, which is in Christ
JESUS) which is an intimation, that the main part, Parts are
the principal part, of the foundation of the principles of Religion; yea all
the whole truth, and foundation of Religion, Faith apprehensive.
may be reduced to matters of faith, and matters of practice; to a lively
faith, working by love: Love active.
all that is requisite, and required, may be brought within the compass of
these two.

Many Expositors do apprehend, that this is the principal meaning of these
words; not to import the manner, how we should keep, but to import a
circumscription, wherein those truths chiefly consist; and that they consist of
these two, faith and love: faith, in apprehending of the truths of God, and
adhering to them; and love, in practicing of these duties that do depend upon
that.

Thus much for the explication of the object.

SERMON. II.
(...)


2 TIMOTHY 1.13, 14. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard
of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

That good thing which was committed to thee, keep, by the holy Ghost which
dwells in us.


WE entered upon this Text the last time, and observed an observation out of it,
(intending to handle but one) and it was this:

It is a matter of high concernment for all, to have and hold fast, as a sacred
depositum, a form of sound and wholesome words, in divine and fundamental
truths.

In the handling I began with the explication, and propounded to explicate; 1.
The object of the duty: 2. The act of the duty: 3. The manner of performing it:
4. The persons obliged to perform it.
I only at that time dispatched the first, namely the object; I come now to the
rest.

2. The second thing therefore is the Act. Act.


And for the opening of it, I shall only speak of two things, that we may see
clearly what the Apostle enjoined Timothy, and in him all Christians: Now it is
expressed by a double word, which our translation does not distinguish, but the
original does.

1. The first is (...) have them.

2. The second in the next verse (...), preserve them.

(...) have a form, Have them.
(I shall but very briefly express what I conceive may be comprehended in
this.)

1. Have a copy of them about thee written; The copy of them, Written, Printed.
and if possibly printed, as the word signifies; for the very same word that is
used for printing, is made use of here (...) which is a kind of stamping: So
that the Apostle would have Timothy to have a copy of the collection of
wholesome words, aptly digested, written, and printed: but this is without, and
therefore

(...) Have them too within, have the original laid up in the treasure of

1. Thy understanding, laboring to apprehend, The original laid up in the
Understanding Memory,
and to grasp, and know divine truths:

2. Thy memory, that thou may retain them and hold them there: Have them
ready at hand, that they may not only be kept as some great men's estates are,
they have great and large estates, but little of it to command themselves, not
numeratis pecuniis (as they say) ready at hand; in ready money: Have them not
to seek, but at hand, and fresh in memory.

Affection.
3. Thy affections, closing with them, and embracing of them, and holding of
them there; which is the best hold-fast that can be: for though we do
understand them, and remember them yet neither of these is worthy of the name
of having them, if a man be an alien and a stranger to them in his affections;
or do remurmorate and rise against those truths, not closing with them, and
embracing them in his affections: for the soul which is the principal thing,
and the utmost thing, is not master of it, has not these things, nor any of
this nature, till he embrace them in his affections, and close with them.

2. But then in the second place there is another thing, Keep them.
and that is (...), keep them; preserve them, which is the second act.

I shall express what is meant by that very briefly: There may seem to be
intimated three particular duties in that, which are necessary for the keeping
and preserving of divine truths: for though a man have them settled in him, in
his understanding, and memory, and affection, yet there is something more
required for the keeping and preserving of them; and which adds something to
the former, which in these three things as I conceive (as I said) may be
comprehended.

1. First, patronize and own them, Patronize the^ with
and defend these divine truths against all corruptions, against all
alterations, and all prevarications, which might pervert that form of sound
and wholesome words: which must be done,

1. With our best abilities and studies courageously; we must set our wits upon
the tenters, Best abilities courageously,
raise them to the uttermost pitch, to maintain, and uphold, and defend, and
preserve the sound and wholesome words that are delivered to us from God.

2. We are to use not only our best abilities, for so every private man must
do; but public persons, Authority cautiously,
they must engage their authority charily, by censure of law, by fencing and
fasting of them with bounds, setting an hedge (as it were) about them, that
none may pluck them up, or deface them, or play legerdemaine concerning them:
That is the first, they are to be patronized, and owned, and defended against
all oppositions, whether violent and by insolency; or cunning, and by subtilty;
by wit and authority, even by our best abilities, and best authority.

2. We must keep them, not only by patronizing and defending them, for
profession may reach so far: but also Christians must labor to keep these
divine truths by practicing of them sincerely, Practice them sincerely,
fruitfully, and constantly.
fruitfully, and constantly: I say by putting them in practice: For although
we have them (as I said before) locked up in the treasury of our memory,
though we understand them, and have some kind of affection to them, all this
will not be a safe custody of them; The best way to preserve spiritual gifts,
and so spiritual truths, is to preserve them by practicing of them: and they
that do not conscientiously practice those truths they know, are in the ready
way to lose the truths themselves. It will not long hold out, that a man should
retain his integrity of judgment, if he admit of any violation of those
truths, in a contrary practice: Corrupt practice will corrupt a man's judgment:
though his judgment were orthodox and sound, though he had them there, yet if
he did not practice them, the nature of the thing is such, that his judgment
will reflect upon his practice, and so be ready to defend what he practices,
out of pride, and Gods just judgment: for when a man does not love the truth,
and show the love of it in his practice, God gives him up to errors, and so
to lose that truth, which otherwise they formerly maintained, and would
otherwise have happily held and kept fast.

3. So far as this injunction reaches to Timothy, and such as he, and so
far as it concerns any other degree too, but especially them; there is
another thing too, another duty comprehended under this keeping: and that is to
propagate them, Propagate them seriously, by planting, watering.
studiously by planting and watering; I say propagate this truth: For as it is
with corn, the best preserving of it is to cast it forth: You cannot preserve
it long, lay it where you will, it cannot be long preserved in the fields to
stand there; when you bring it home and house it, and put it up in the garner,
it will not last for ever there; nay if you put it into your bellies, it will
do some service for the present, but not always be preserved there: but if
you take these grains, and cast some of them as seed into the earth, then you
may preserve it always by propagation. God has given this in nature, that there
is no creature in the world that of it self is perpetual; but God has given
it an existence and being, and not only so, but a way of propagating to every
thing, and to mankind as well as to other creatures, to increase and to bring
forth: the which though the particular be Gods gift, yet the thing is
propagated into form (though not the thing it self) by the creature
instrumentally: In this case there is some similitude; the best way, the most
safe way, yea the most grateful and acceptable way to preserve divine truths,
is by an endeavor, studiously and carefully to propagate it, that I do not
hide my talent in a napkin, that I do not bury any divine truths: aurum celare
and veritatem, are both alike: we must not conceal any truth, but manifest it,
and propagate it to others, and so, as that though my self should miscarry,
yet the truth of God might be preserved.

Thus you have the object which is specified here, and the act of the duty:
there remains now,

Manner, as
3. The third thing is the manner of the performance of this duty how it must be
done: And in a word, we should not slightly do it, or carelessly, but with all
diligence and industry, and watchfulness, labor to get and to keep divine
truths: there is so much intimated in the second style that is given to those
divine truths, they are called in the 13. verse a form of sound, or wholesome
words; and in the 14 verse, that good thing, or that rich thing; in the
original it is (...): Now there be two things required to make us choice and
chary of getting and keeping divine truths, and both may be taken out of the
words.

A sacred Depositum,
1. Because they are a sacred depositum: we are not propriators, but
depositors; they are not our own to do what we will with them, to squander
them away as we list, but they are Gods, and he does deposite them to us, lays
them up in us, as committing of them to our custody, and requiring them again
of us, that so we should not see them imbezzelled, or corrupted, or abused,
because God has committed them to us as a (...), as a sacred depositum.

And then again, is (...), not any ordinary depositum, but a choice treasure:
if it be but a bag of dust, or a bag of stones, that a friend commits to his
friend, A choice treasure.
and wishes him to look charily to; his friend will not look into it to
examine what it is, but keep it as his friends depositum: nay more than so, if
his friend tell him, he has committed to him his richest Jewel he has, as a
most rich Pearl, or a company of them; This does increase a man's care and
diligence in preferring of them, not only as his friends depositum, but as a
depositum of such a choice nature, and so is this: It is not only (...), a
depositum, wherein is required the trust and care of a friend to be discharged;
But it is (...), that same good thing, that same choice thing, that same
beautiful thing: There is not a choicer treasury that is committed to the
Church of God, than those divine truths, that God has been pleased to reveal
and commit unto us; they are such as the glory of God depends on them, and the
salvation of a man depends on them, two of the most important things the
Church, nay, that the World has: and therefore we should keep them, as we have
respect to the glory of God, or as we tender our own salvation, which is more
than our lives; I I say, Gods glory, and our salvation, which is much more than
our lives, is committed to our trust, when those Divine truths are deposited
with us,

The Persons.
4. The Persons that are obliged; that is the last thing to be explained: whom
this injunction concerns.

Here is but one directly expressed, and that is Timothy; but yet we may extend
it, and that with good analogy, and upon good ground and reason further: as

Paul.
1. Paul he must have a care of it; of keeping of it himself, and committing it
to the care of others, and stirring up and provoking others. It concerns Paul,
they that are highest and most principal in the Church, it concerns them
principally, and originally, that they should have a care of them; they should
be the the first wheels, the primum mobile, that set all the others on work,
and have a grand care of keeping this depositum.

Timothy.
2. All Timothies, all the ministers of Gods Word, who are Gods (...), his
dispencers, his stewards, and whom God has reposed special trust in: It is
committed to their care in an especial manner, and they should look to it.

Every Christian.
3. The whole Church of God, and every Christian, as this is a depositum, though
committed personally to some, yet not merely for their personal good, but for
a public and an universal good: Divine truths, and the integrity, and
purity, and soundness of them, is a thing that concerns not only, (though
chiefly) the Ministers, but it concerns the whole Church of God, and all Gods
people, that they should be preserved without violation, without contamination,
being given for a public good, and the public good of all and every one in
particular depending on it: so that it concerns all and every one in their
places.

Thus of the explication.

2. The Proof. Proof,


I shall come now briefly so far as the point will extend, and the thing be
requisite, and convenient, to demonstrate and prove the truth of it: and then
to descend to the application, as far as will concern my present scope.

First of all premising this, that I shall not endeavor (no not so much as
meddle with) the proof of every particular, or press the confirmation of
every particular contained in the explication (as being not so requisite) but
to carry the maine sum of the point.

We see this to be a clear and a divine truth, that it is the duty of all,
especially Ministers, (whom God has especially entrusted) to look to the
preservation of the purity of a form of sound doctrine, of sound and wholesome
words, we may see it I say, 1. By Scripture, and 2. By ground of reason.


1. Out of Scripture, besides this place, wherein it is punctually and fully
expressed, By Scripture,
and no wonder, because the injunction belongs in a more especial manner unto
Ministers, and there being not in many places this charge committed, and
particularly directed to them, but in this Epistle of Paul to Timothy, wherein
it is principally set down: but yet it is diverse times repeated in Scripture.
And I shall give some other places which warrant the same thing.

1. The Apostles recommend this to us by their own example. Examples,
I will give but one general instance in that kind, and one particular.

The general instance of the duty is this: you shall find that almost every
Epistle of Paul, and in some proportion it is observable in all the rest of the
Epistles, I say almost in every Epistle there is an (...), i. e. there is a
delineating, a drawing of a platform of wholesome words, according to the
substance that is here mentioned; and according to this object faith and love,
(For all matters of religion are matters of faith, or matters of love, in the
practice and exercise of faith) and this is commended to us in all the
Epistles: the former part and the greater part of all the Epistles is to
deliver matters of faith, to rectify men's judgments, and season them rightly
with the knowledge of divine truths necessary to salvation; and the latter part
of the Epistles, is, to descend to practical duties, to the fruits of faith in
the matters of love, which is the compass of all Christian duty: And amongst
others, that first Epistle of all is to this purpose; which was not placed
first for order of time, because first written, nor so much for the order of
dignity, because the Romans were the principal people in the world, it is not
therefore (I say) placed first of all the Epistles; but because it contains
this more fully, and expresses a form of sound and wholesome words; there,
doctrines of faith, and duties of life, that issue and flow from faith, as
fruits of it, are more clearly distinguished, and more fully expressed than in
any other, although it is in some sort in all. Now besides this general
instance, I shall give but one particular instance, and that is in Hebr. 6.1.
Therefore leaving the doctrine of the beginning (or principles of the doctrine)
of Christ, let us be led forward to perfection, not laying again the
foundation of repentance unto dead works, and of faith toward God. There is
expressed both what the principles are, and what that same form of sound or
wholesome words is; the doctrine of Baptism, as in the next verse, laying on of
hands, resurrection from the dead; There are some few heads repeated, which are
as milk for babes, the form of sound words, which are (at least) for
beginners, in the first beginnings and rudiments of Christianity, and those
that are the first points in religion: The Apostle gives for babes a form of
catechizing, a form of sound and wholesome words: And there is intimated in
that place, that as there is a shorter and briefer form of sound and wholesome
words, for a manuduction or entrance to beginners; so there must be a larger,
fuller form, and more complete, that did extend farther, and comprehend more
in the knowledge of Religion, and the things that belong to it, for those that
are come to more perfection and ripeness of years.

2. But besides these examples, there be diverse testimonies which seem to aim
at the same thing; Testimonies.
I will mention two or three.

In Romans 12.6. the Apostle there begins to direct every one for the discharge
of their duties, in their several places in the Church, according to the right
manner; and among the rest the rule that is given for those that are Ministers,
called there (in a general sense of the word) Prophets, he says, Let him that
prophesies, prophecy according to the analogy of faith: (...): I know there
may be some disputes what may be the true and exact meaning of the analogy of
faith: For present I take that which is not contemptible, nor from a
contemptible author, viz. Calvin's interpretation, which is, that by faith is
meant there, the prime and fundamental axioms of faith; the fundamental
truths of Religion, and all doctrines that are delivered in the Church must
hold analogy, hold proportion with those prime and fundamental truths, which
are the form of sound and wholesome words, by which al other must be regulated
and squared, that they may hold analogy and proportion with that. And in this
same Epistle, the next Chap. 2.15. he says, Study to approve thy self to God,
a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth:
now this seems rather directly to aim at, or at least directly to suppose that
there should be a form of sound, or wholesome words: in the delivery of which
a man should approve himself so, as that he needs not to be ashamed, and
according to the analogy of which, he should divide the word of God aright,
holding proportion with it: though I confess there may be another
interpretation (though it seem not so suitable to that place) as, to be able to
speak a word properly to every one as it may concern him, to the weak to
strengthen them, to the strong to build them up farther and farther; to the
tempted to arm them: so some would have the meaning of it to be: but this
seems not to me to be the right, for, the dividing of the word of truth
aright, seems rather to intimate a dispensing of it, in such truths and
soundnes as may agree with the form of sound, and wholesome words. And in the 1
Pet. 3.15. the Apostle there requires, not only of Ministers, that they should
have a form of sound and wholesome words, and that they should be able to
deliver themselves in that fashion; but he seems to require there so much of
people, of Christians, by that precept that he does injoyne them there, that
they might be able, or ready to give an account, or reason of their hope that
is in them: that is, to be able to apologize for it, and to stand up in the
defense and maintenance of it: Now if a man be not well grounded in a form of
sound and wholesome words, if he understand them not, remember them not, nor be
versed in them, he will never be able to give a reason, an account of his
faith and hope; much less will he be able to maintain and defend it, against
the heretical and superstitious cavils and objections that will be raised
against it, which every Christian is bound in some degree to aim to get an
ability of: and indeed it will be the foundation of his steadfast standing, for
no man can be steadfast in that which he knows not, nor feels the bottom of.
Therefore we should be versed in the grounds of Religion, in a form of sound
and wholesome words, that contains the principles of faith, and that we may be
able to know what is our duty. And there is something to the same purpose in
the Romans 6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine, which was
delivered to you. But I shall omit that for the present, and I shall give the
ground of this.

2. The ground and reason of it, that which makes this appear to be a truth,
and a considerable truth, that we should all labor to get, Reason.
and hold fast a form of sound and wholesome words, even the sum of religion; is
because

1. There is a great necessity of it; Necessity.


1. Not only in regard of the Commission and injunction that lies upon us, and
the trust that God has committed to us (as I did intimate before) we are but
depositors, and God has committed this to our care and charge; charged us with
it, and expects our faithful discharge in it: not only because of this I say,
but

2. In regard of the manifold oppositions, and danger of corruptions of divine
truths, by the subtilty of Satan and his instruments, and their malice: If
Christians and the Church of God did not thoroughly acquaint themselves with it,
and bottom themselves on it; they could never be able to justify the ways of
God; and the truth of God, nor to vindicat that, from the many subtle
windings, which the Serpent will use to corrupt and pervert the truth. I
purpose not largely to expatiat, but only to give a hint of things, and
therefore I shall but add a second: Utility.


2. It is of great utility, as there is a great necessity of it, if we would
not have the truth overwhelmed, nor errors to be spread over, and overgrowne in
the face of the Church: So there is an infinite benefit, and advantage, and
utility that redounds to the Church of God by this course of having (both in
general and in particular by every Christian) of a form of sound and wholesome
words: there is, I say, an infinite benefit and utility (besides the necessity
of it) that would redound to the Church of God in general, and to every
Christian in particular by this; Let me name but some few, and but name them:

A Band of
1. Those truths, the main truths of Religion being preserved pure, and sound,
and uncorrupted, will be a great band of Verity, Unity, and Unanimity.


Verity,
1. Of verity; it will be a band to hold together all the truths of God, if the
main ones be kept, if the fundamental principle be purely kept, it will be a
band to hold and soder together all the other truths, and to rectify them, if
there should be any swerving.

And as a great band of verity, so it will be a band of unity in the Church of
God, Unity,
and unanimity: Unanimity.
For herein lies the unity of the Church of God; not that every man agree in
every particular opinion, concerning every particular thing; but if they do
agree in the main foundation of Religion, in those things which are sufficient
to salvation; and such are sound and wholesome words; such as that all that are
to be saved, are to be saved by believing and practicing of them. If they be
retained, (though there be other differences, yet) this will be a band of
unity, to make them close and soder together.

2. But then secondly, as this will be a band, so it will be a bar too: A bar
against Heresy and Controversy.


It would be a bar against heresy: Heresy.
This will be as it were a bar of fortification to keep out the entry and
incroaching, and prevailing of heresy. If we stand upon our guard, and upon
good ground, in the maintenance and defense of the maine truths, there will be
no breach for heresies to enter in then, it will much keep them off: But the
neglect of our watch and guard in this work, our slacking of our care about
the preserving of this, takes away this bar, and gives advantage to the
envious man to sow his tares, and to the corrupt man to bring corrupt doctrine
in; because we neglect our care in preserving divine truths, making it a matter
of no consequence: but I say the preservation of this would preserve the Church
of God from heresy: It would be a bar to heresy: and as to heresy, so

It would also be a bar to controversy; To crontroversies.
it would preserve the Church from very many controversies too. Whereas it is
true there are many controversies in the world, and matters of doubt and
difficulty even among the godly and the learned, who otherwise agree in the
maine: for we must distinguish between controversies, which are of two sorts.
There are controversies real, and verbal, which
are but (...) janglings about words.

And ye shall find this by experience, I mean those that are versed in those
things, (I dare be bold to say it) if they will but consider it, that the
greatest part of the controversies that are among the godly and the learned,
are not so much real controversies, where there is a keeping close to a form
of sound and wholesome words (for that will keep off those) but they are
verbal controversies: Now I say those controversies would be prevented, if a
form of sound and wholesome words were had in the Church carefully, and so as
that it might be publicly and generally known; for then men know one
another language, in what sense they speak, and how they use words: for the
greatest differences that are amongst us, are because that men understand not
one another, the language of Babel is still retained among us, so as we
understand not one another, and therefore we differ: as about justification by
faith, one takes it in one sense and another in another sense, and so it makes
them differ and jangle one against another, when indeed it is but the
difference of words: so that I say, who ever will take a view of the many
controversies that are, he shall find, that the greatest part by far are but
mistakes of words; which a form of sound and wholesome words established and
settled in the Church, and publicly known, would exceedingly prevent: for
that would determine and limit the use of words in which they are to be taken,
and men should be bound to use them that way (especially when they speak
controversially and exactly) and not in another way, which alone breeds
dissentions and controversies.

3. This would not only be a band and a bar (as I have already showed) but a
key: A key of understanding.
It would be a very excellent key of the understanding, to increase and
facilitate a man's apprehension and understanding of all particular truths. If a
man were but well acquainted with a form of sound and wholesome words for the
maine truths, it would lead him (as it were) by the hand to the understanding
of other truths more remote from the foundation; he might grow and arrive to
the knowledge of them, being led (as it were) by a divine light, from that
light he has by a form of sound and wholesome words, leading to the knowledge
of things which are more obscure and remote, advancing and wonderfully helping
the understanding, if there were nothing else: For it is in this case with
truths as it is with coals: coals when they lie single, they do not glow or
shine and heat men; but when they lie together, the very lying together does
increase the life and light of every one of them: and so the body of sound and
wholesome words, he that understands them, that very understanding and
comprehending of them all together, it gives light to other truths; whereas if
men would take them single, without that borrowed light it receives from
another, they would be more obscure. There is nothing does more facilitate the
understanding, than to have a form; the very comprehending and having of them
in a man's eye and memory, it will help him, and guide him to understand every
other particular truth, he having all of them in one form, which would not be
so clear of themselves alone, as they are all together; and for all others
that are deducible from them, but farther remote, it will facilitate a man's
understanding of them.

A lock of memory.
4. Again, it will not only be a key to open the understanding, but a lock
also to lock up the memory, to keep the treasury of the memory fast and safe.
There is nothing in the world does help memory more than method and order, and
to have things (as I said before) comprehended in a form, entirely collected
and aptly digested, I say to have an (...), it would exceedingly help the
memory and it for two reasons.

1. Because, whatever helps the understanding, must needs help the memory: A
man does not remember those things that are obscure; those things in reading or
hearing, which the understanding perceives not well, the memory closes not
withal: for that which is locked up in the memory, must enter in by the door
of the understanding, or else it will never get in the inner treasury of the
memory; and that which is a key to help the understanding, will be a lock to
help the memory.

2. Because of the harmony and sympathy that one truth has with another. It
does wonderfully help the memory, if a man does but catch any one thing for the
whole, for by that he has a hold-fast to catch also any other particular that
he has lost; if his memory catch one particular, that will help to bring all
the rest. As for instance, if a man have a chain of many linkes, though he let
go many of them, yet if he hold fast any one of them, that will draw all the
rest up again: so if a man has gotten a form of divine truths linked
together, aptly digested, if his memory let slip one link, and another link,
yet if he do remember but any one particular, that one link will help to
draw in all the rest again.

5. A form of sound and wholesome words had, A help of use to
will be a wonderful help at all times to a Christian, in the knowledge he
should have of any divine truths. I shall instance only in two.

1. A man shall exceedingly much more profit by others then he does. Profit by
others.
Suppose a Christian come to hear the word of God, hear a Sermon, this
Minister or the other Minister, let us put the difference thus; there comes one
that is a mere stranger to these truths, all that is spoken will be novelty to
him: but there is another comes, who has the grounds of Religion laid in him,
that has in his mind and memory a form of sound and wholesome words; this man
will be able to profit more by a Sermon, than the other that comes in a
stranger upon a sudden to it, having no former grounds: As before a dye that is
perfect and durable there must be some preparative that makes the ground, (if
you would have it a good color) if you put your cloth to receive it at first,
the first tincture (though it be that which will properly give the dye) will
not do it, if that it be not prepared before: so it is in this case, if a man
have not some form of sound and wholesome words, if a man have not laid some
foundation, all things will be like an Island in the sea, and he cannot come
near it to comprehend it: But if he have laid a groundwork before, he can
reduce what he hears to that, and so by the help of it, standing upon his
form as on his bottom, he can come to reach and comprehend all other
particulars.

To be profitable to others
2. It helps a man (to mention no more) as to profit by others, so to be
profitable to others: and this is a thing which concerns not only Ministers,
whose office it is to teach and instruct others; but it also concerns every
one in their place, thou shall teach thy children, and thy family, Deuteronomy. 11.19.
There is some teaching and some conveyance which every Christian is bound unto
in their place. Now how shall any man teach, that has not learned? He that
never was in a shop, cannot set up at first upon the score, but he must have
something of his own: and it is impossible for him to teach another well, that
has not himself some acquaintance with the platform of sound and wholesome
words, that has not taken some pains, and made some progress in that, it
will be impossible to teach, I say (at least) judiciously, or profitably to
convey any thing to another. But this now if a man had, it would be a
continual treasury, a storehouse to furnish a man on all occasions, to be
communicable profitably to others, and withal not make any diminution at all
of his own store, but rather add to and increase it.

To come now to the Application. Application.


There be two things that I intend to do in the application of this point.

First to draw those inferences out of it (according to my ordinary course of
application) which naturally arise from the consideration of the point: and
that being done,

In the second place to take the limit and occasion (for you know I take this
text to be as a porch and entrance to the discourse that I desire to prosecute)
to acquaint you in the general with the whole platform, to carry it as it
were over the stage, which if God grant life and liberty, (which I do not
promise) I intend to go through: only before I will acquaint you generally, I
say, with the whole view and prospect, General.
(as it were) as Moses he had a prospect of the land of Canaan from mount Nebo:
so though happily I shall not live to be able to carry you to all the
particulars in the whole platform; yet to set you (as it were) in sight, to
carry you on the mount, to let you see the view and description of all that
which I intend to go through, if God give ability and life: which thing I
conceive will be very useful and profitable to make way to that which I
intend to handle in the particulars: but I shall purposely omit this till the
next time, and only for present dispatch the general application. And in a
word there be these three things I shall infer hence.

Justification of observers of this rule: Persons, whether Paul, Timothy, or
the Church.
1. Here is a justification of the observers of this Rule, and that is,

1. Of persons, whether, Paul, or Timothy, or the Church. If this be so, then
this justifies the wisdom, and fidelity, and zeal of all the Churches of
God, and all godly men, Paul and Timothy, and others in all times, that have
been careful to establish and preserve the form of sound and wholesome words,
that it might receive no tincture of any corruption; But (as the Apostle Jude
gives an intimation, (and an item to Christians) did contend for the faith
once received. Secondly, of the manner of observing of it, for this has been
the care of the godly in all times, who have been careful to walk according
to this rule, Manner whetherby:
and have had plat-formes, and that in many kinds. I will give some taste of
some few in a word: It has been more publicly observed in their Creeds and
Confessions: Publik Creeds, Confessions.
Hence it was that the Church of God did gather together, and compile as it
were in a bundle, in the short compass of the Creed, the sum of faith, as
the epitome of those things they believed, and the ground work of those things
that are to be believed as necessary to salvation (according to the measure of
those times, and the light and growth of those times) judiciously and exactly:
for it is not to be supposed that the Apostles themselves did it, but some
others. And this has been the ground, that there is no Church of God, but
generally has had; and usually have their confessions of faith, the sum of
what they profess in their doctrines of Religion compiled together in so many
articles, as their wisdom thought meet, to comprehend the most necessaries
in, and so to discharge that which the Apostle injoynes them, to preserve a
form of sound words. More privately, Private writings for*
it has been the care of men, (and a commendable care) according to this rule
to deliver a form of sound words, Unlearned in Catechismes.
both to unlearned and beginners in a way of Catechism, expressing the
fundamental things of Religion to the unlearned; and in a systematicall way
for the learned proficients, Learned in a Body of Divinity.
to compose a body of Divinity, in as narrow a compass of substantial, and
pithy principles, from the top, to the bottom as they could. This has been
the care of all the Churches publicly and privately, they have discharged their
fidelity in this charge; by their faithful care, that there might be still
preserved and kept in the Church of God, a form of sound and wholesome words:
And it has it been their wisdom to do it, for by this care they have not
only built up the godly with a trowell in one hand as it were, and withal, as
with a sword did cut down, and stop the gap by which heresies would creep in:
and it has been their praise to do it with zeal: if it be such a sacred
depositum, such a choice jewel, they are not (at least) to be blamed that
Sacrifice themselves for it, who may as David, say, The zeal of thy house has
eaten us up: that have spent themselves in defense of it, from all errors, and
heresies what soever.

Reprehension of
2. But then secondly, this may be a just reprehension to all, that either

Perfidiousnesse.
1. Perfidiously deal with the truth, instead of taking care to preserve sound
truths, do sit upon their desks, and beat their heads in studying, how they
may cunningly pervert sound and wholesome truths; and how they may bring in
dark errors and corruptions to poison the people of God, instead of wholesome
and sound words, use a poisonou language: This reproves their perfidiousnes:
they are far from this: or,

2. They that neglect this; Negligence.
any that have bin too remiss, though they have not bin perfidious, and yet
even in this cause, as the Lawyer speaks, lata negligentia dolus est: He that
is grossly negligent (though he go noe further) I say he that is grossly
negligent, it argues there is foul play; when he is so negligent, that he
winks and lets all corruptions creep in, he cannot but be perfidious: He that
is negligent is justly reprovable. Folly.
I might take occasion here to reprove the folly and simplicity of weak
Christians and ordinary people, that think all this to be but superfluous care
and doings, which the Apostle sets so high a price on, and is so frequent in
pressing Timothy to have a care of.

3. But in the third place; Exhortation to
This may be a ground of exhortation: And because the time has prevented me, I
shall but express them briefly, and that in this order.

1. Humbly to the Church. 2. To the Ministry. 3. To every Christian.
1. First, I might humbly suggest here to the Church, that they would take
care; that there might be a special and choice care taken, The Church To take
care
to provide a form of sound and wholesome words, For learners.
not only for learners in general, but in a threefold rank: It would be
necessary to be done in three ranks and degrees, as there be three ranks of
persons: which is not mine own, but the Apostle John's distinction, which I
noted before, and will make use of now.

The Apostle John ranks men into 3 sorts.

1 John 2. There be 1. Little children, or babes. 2. Young men: 3. Fathers.


And according to these for institution and instruction, it would be necessary
to have several distinct forms, of sound words for all these.

Children.
1. For the institution of children, babes, beginners in Christ, the first
Catechism of the lowest form; which should be such as should comprehend only
the plain, and necessary, and saving truths, and go no further, but forbear
all meddling with the knowledge of other truths. It is enough for them not to be
over burdened; it is better if they suck but the milk that will nourish them
to eternal life, they being capable but of milk, and being but babes in
Christ.

Youngmen.
2. There must be another platform more full and large, (for men will not be
always children, not always babes, not always fed with milk; they will in
time be young men, and they must have stronger meat,) they must have a more
full form, and pattern, comprehending not only these things that are
absolutely, and immediately necessary to salvation, but such as have a kind of
connection with those that are necessary; such as are near of kin to them:
and so to enlarge the bounds and pale of the Catechism, according as their
capacities are enlarged.

3. Men grow still, Fathers.
and they are not at a standing state, they come to be Fathers, there is a rise
and growth: young men may get strength by such a middle Catechism, that
comprehends all the necessaries, and something more then that which is
absolutely necessary, for further improvement: But there is a third rank of
fathers, who are grown to the greatest perfection, that ordinarily Christians
may grow to, who are to have, not only for themselves, but for others, as
parents to convey to their Children and Families; and therefore for these,
there ought to be a fuller and a compleater form, that may have a compleatnesse
in many other things, which though it be not absolutely necessary for the
second rank, or this (absolutely I say) yet it is very profitable and useful
in this third degree. Now as there should be had a plat-forme for learners in
these three rancks; so there should be a plat-forme for teachers, for Ministers
of the Word: If there were such a full and complete form of Divinity, as
comprehends enough for Ministers to know, judiciously and soundly, and soberly
composed, it would be an excellent establishment and settling of all men in the
right way; it would exceedingly advance all those other ends (which I mentioned
before) for which this is profitable; hereby would appear more clearly, some
things that were more obscure before.

Caution.
2. Let me ad this Caution, which is, that this had need to be done,

Let it be Choice.
1. With the greatest Choice of abilities and parts; the most grave, the most
pious, the most judicious had need to be employed about the composure of this
form: It is not enough for every private man to contribute his own private
form, but it must be with the public judgment, and current consent of the
most ancient, and of best worth in the Church of God, and thereby it will (as
it should) be done a great deal more useful, and substantial.

Close.
2. Every one must keep close to the pattern and language of the Spirit of
God, to deliver, as near as possibly he may, those things that are to be
converted to the Church of God, according to the language of the spirit of God,
that nothing may be delivered but the Oracles of God, and in the language of
Gods Oracles.

Charitable.
3. That there should be no peremptory pressing and urging of everyone to all
the particulars: It is enough that a man receive the Body, and agree and
profess the same maine body of truths; there should not be a tyrannical
pressing every man to hold all the particulars, but all tenderness must be
used in the Church as by a mother.

4. Fourthly that these things what ever they are, they must not be always of
a perpetual tenor; Changeable.
Though they should not be lightly changed, yet they should not be
unchangeable, but there should be room for more: And it we^e not amiss that
such things should be often imprinted, and at every reprinting there might be a
revising of it, by the most learned and eminent, that there might be (if need
were) an Epidosis, a continual growth and increase of light, as indeed there
is: for to instance, there is a great deal more light in these times, then
there was an hundred years ago, at the beginning, at the dawning of the day
of reformation: And therefore what ever was done then, though they did it with
their best wits and abilities, yet it is but weak in comparison of those
times: Though that we be but children to them, yet by standing upon their
shoulders we may advance and further our selves to see further then they; And
see in proportion time after time, thete should be a laboring to make it more
accurate, clear, and perspicuous; and to correct and rectify some of them
that may swerve and did slip a little for want of light; and in a word, to make
use of those gifts which God is pleased to vouchsafe to communicate to his
Church more and more every day; by virtue of which they may do more then
others that have gone before.

2. And in the second place (to pass from our humble exhortation to the
Church) for Ministers, this might be an exhortation to them, Ministers to
that as they should take care of all other parts of Divinity, so they should
take care of this, to ground themselves in, and withal, communicate to others,
a form of sound and wholesome Words: not words only, but wholesome words, and
a form of wholesome words, to load the people through the maine things, not
one, but all: to deliver the whole truth of God, as the Apostle speaks, though
in somewhat a different sense. Time has prevented me: in a word therefore,
there be three ways of ministerial exercise, (as I humbly conceive) which
might be most advantageous and useful if they were used.

Expound.
1. The first thing that I would have done, which might be exceedingly useful
(though not so well regarded) is, a course of the mere and bare Exposition of
Scripture; to go through a whole Chapter, or some part of it, and so to
explicate it, and deliver the full sum: It would be wonderful profitable
and necessary, to acquaint the people with the whole Chapter, and the maine
scope and principal things that are in it, and go no further, not to descend
into every particular in it, only by this interpretation to make the people
acquainted with the Scripture. This indeed is the lowest degree.

2. And then there is another thing which I would have them to do, to take
another course like that of ours, viz. Expectation. Dogmaticall,
preaching upon several texts, and several points, but yet so as these
several points might hold connection, to be made up in a body of Divinity, for
the comprehension of all things necessary to be known (which we now intend)
and that is another way.

3. But then there comes in a third thing, Historical truths.
as the first should comprehend the explanation of the Scriptures; and the
second should be for all the doctrinals; so if there were a third thing added,
which is a course to comprehend all the exemplary historical parts of the
Scripture, part by part, treating in them not of every particular part of the
Text, but of the most remarkable examples in them: As, how God has governed
and preserved by his providence the Church in all ages from the very beginning
of the world till the flood, and from that till the promulgation of the Law;
and from that till the building of the Temple; and so till the Nativity of
Christ: and so carrying all along, this would be an admirable thing to
strengthen religion, by seeing how God in all ages has managed his Church; how
he has gone along with it, and supported his truth, and showed his goodness and
mercy in a sweet and gracious way: and so in all the Scripture to mark out all
the singular passages and examples of Gods providence. These would be best
altogether, although every one of them be good in particular.

3. To all private Christians: this may force them to their duty; the
exhortation that I should press on them, should be in a word, that,

Private Christians.
1. They would not think this to be a thing out of their sphere and walk, and
therefore that they would labor, and aim not only to have some scramblings
and scrapings, Force to duty.
some broken ends of knowledge; to harp upon this point, and that point; But to
labor and strive to come to the knowledge of a form of sound and wholesome
words, to the whole body and frame of Divinity (at least) according to their
capacities, every one according to their form: If he be a child in years, and
apprehension to have the lowest kind, labor to come to the lowest form: and so
for young men, and fathers to carry it along through all degrees: So that let no
Christian think this without the compass of his duty, or unprofitable for
him, for he shall gain by it abundance of benefit and profit: He may gain
all the benefit I mentioned before; It will help his understanding, and his
memory; and his performance of duty, make him receive more profit by others,
and make him more profitable unto others, it will every way advantage him:

Fear no difficulty.
2. And let no man think that there is an impossibility in it for him, and that
it is only for the learned; for besides that ordinary blessing that God has
vouchsafed us in letting us have the Gospel; he has vouchsafed more
extraordinary ways of knowledge in our times, than in any other: As it is with
trees, they are sometime so laden with fruit, that they do even bow down to
the ground again, so as that a child may gather from them: God has so filled
this age with knowledge, and so plentifully vouchsafed it, that it bows down,
that it offers it self to us, and that so familiarly and facily, that none of
ordinary capacity (it being in our own language and tongue) but may attain
unto it, even children: and withal the difficulty will be taken off, if we
consider, that it is not required in the highest degree, but according to the
degree and capacity of every one; God does not require the highest form of
those that are of the lowest; but only the highest of the high, and the low of
the low capacity: And there is no Christian, but in some form or other, at
least, is capable of it: It were worth the while therefore to set our selves
about it, to labor to attain the sum of divine truths, and to carry it as a
rich treasure about us; to make us exquisite for every practice and discourse.

SER. III
(...)


2 TIMOTHY 1.13, 14. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard
of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

That good thing which was committed to thee, keep, by the holy Ghost which
dwells in us.


We observed out of these words, one main point, viz. It is a matter of high
concernment for all to have, and to keep cautiously, as a sacred depositum, as
a rich treasure, a form of sound and wholesome words in Divine, and fundamental
truths especially. We have dispatched the explication, and confirmation, and
application. There remains nothing now, but that which I promised to
discharge; viz. to acquaint you according to this rule, and my present scope,
(it being my purpose to enter on a form of sound and wholesome words, even to
comprehend the whole body of Divinity, at least the substantial and maine
truths, that are necessary to be known and believed to salvation: but) before I
enter into any particulars, which will be several and many, I will give you at
first a prospect of all* a general delineation of the whole compass and
course, which if God permit life, and liberty, I intend to go through: I was at
a stay a long while with my self whether I should do it or no, their seeming no
beauty or profitablenesse in a mere beholding of a bare Skeleton, a naked
anatomy of the sum of Religion: But I consider with my self that we spend
many hours, hours after hours, week after week here in Gods house, and if we
do spend this hour in this way, it will be opere pretium worth the while,
Premise.
as I conceive for many respects which I will not now enter into but leave to
the consideration of others, and therefore as I promised to do it, Generals
so I now intend it. I will only premise those two things.

1. I do not undertake, Nothing.
nor you must not expect that I should presume to deliver any thing that will
be absolutely perfect, Perfect.
or that I will warrant perfect; For matter.
there being many done in this nature of this kind already; and the Church of
God having abundance of help and furtherance this way; and quot capita, tot
sententiae, so many men, so many minds, and so many forms:

There be some different ranks of men, their being some leading men, and some
followers: As in a flock there is a Ram, or a Weather, that is as it were a
leader among the rest: some are leading, and some are following men; and there
is scarce any man that has any parts, (though not to be a leader, yet not to
be a follower: a mere follower) but will digest his own form, and cast it in
his own mould, and go his own way: but I conceive there is no offense in
regard of the thing, for any or every one to contribute what he has in him to
the public good; and use his own course, according to his proportion, though
there may be difference in the forms, and particulars, where there is a
consentaneous agreement in the substance and maine: this I premise in general.

2. But more particularly conserning that form I intend now to speak of, Or
Method.
I shall desire to acquaint you thus much.

1. It is a frame that I digested many years ago. The truth is, when I first
entered on the service of God in the course of the Ministry, it was one of the
first things that I did bethink my self on, such a frame: and had digested and
ordered for substance according to that, which I intend now to present, I
thought to have undertaken it from time to time, but some passages of Gods
Providence hindered me. And my intention was then, and is now to propound it,
But in away. Prudentially.
not in a way of artificial method accurately; but rather in a prudentiall
way, such as may be more beneficial for use, though not so accurate for art:
For I consider with my self, that the greatest part of men whom I have to
deal withal in the tractation of it, are vulgar people, which are not such as
are capable of a most accurate form: nor cannot discern of it, neither will it
suit with them: For this is the difference between an artifitiall method, and a
prudentiall method; between a method of art, and a method of prudence, as the
Masters of Logic speak in this case.

An artificial method propounds all homogenialls, nothing but that which is
directly belonging to that art, or Doctrine that is delivered, and that
intrinsecally and substantially to make it up: it propounds nothing but such;
admits of no hetterogenialls, nothing but that which is within the compass of
that doctrine: it cuts of all others, and withal keeps a down right order, a
down right method, handling the most general things first, and the most
special things after, by a straight line, cutting (as it were) by a thread.
Now this I see might not altogether be so profitable, and so useful (at least)
for ordinary people, who are not capable of it, not being able to judge of
hetterogenialls and homogenialls, neither knowing indeed what is form, or what
not. And therefore I choose rather to go in a prudentiall way: for I will not
decline many hetterogenialls, though I will not mention many, (because for mine
own part I do not think, that they belong so properly to Divinity or Theology
in a rigged consideration) but such as are useful for Christians to know
(though they be not so artificial) and only those, though I say they make
not so much for method and art, for I have not such a desire to keep so
curiously to a perfect method; all that I shall aim at* is, to propound things
both for the substance of them, in the particulars contained under them; and
for the method of the things, in such a useful way as Christian prudence shall
acknowledge to be so, and such as may be profitable for the Church of God.

2. I shall add but another thing, which I desire to give an account of; I
shall propound it in such a way, as may be accommodable to all those several
ranks, or forms, whether of teachers, or learners: that I mentioned before,
so that it may be either briefly contracted into a narrow compass for children
and beginners, who have but narrow capacities: or a little larger for young
men: or more fully and completely for Fathers: as occasion shall serve: I shall
go in a middle methodicall way; in such a way, as may best agree to any of
these forms.

3. Lastly, this is all I will say concerning it, and all that I will premise
concerning it, (though I can say no great matter) to recommend the form that I
shall propound; and have no intention nor thought to press it on any man, but
let every man do according to the nature of their apprehension in the degree
of their education wherein they have been nourtered, and to which they have
been brought up already. I will only give this general rule, Any form is
Tolerable, though Indifferent.
any form is better than no form: any tolerable form, though indifferent, or
defective in some materials, and in a methodicall way, yet if it keep close to
any tolerable form, it is better than no form, and it may serve him in many
things usefully, though not altogether so well as if it were better: this is
Different.
This I will say concerning my own in humility, that whosoever considers it
with judgment, shall find thus much, Comprehensive.
that it is more comprehensive (as far as I know) than ever any yet that has
been presented; though I have seen and perused a great many, and that of the
best note and worth that as yet the Church of God has extent: and I conceive,
if they do view, and consider, and take measure of the compass of it, will
find that it contains more than any. I will instance only in one observation
that may give some light to this: I have always apprehended that it is a very
good way (though it be somewhat defective among the Protestant Writers, who
have not comprehended diverse of those things of the Schoolmen that were great
searchers in Divinity, however their faults and failings were, and however they
were in the blindest and darkest times; and therefore I have nothing to say for
the magnifying or justifying of them: yet I desire to go in a middle temper,
which may not only comprehend those things which ordinarily we know, but take
in likewise those things of the Schools, (Scholasticall things which are of
use) which I say I have ever apprehended would be a very good way, and of very
much use and purpose: Now you shall find that all the doctrines belonging
either to speculative Divinity, and to searching Divinity in the Schools, or
else to practice Divinity; I say you shall find more of them as I conceive in
this platform, that I shall now suggest, than in any that I yet saw: to which
premising only one thing more, I shall come. I premise therefore, and I hope
that no man will expect or think that I presume I shall prosecute it, but only
I desire to discharge my duty according to that measure of strength and life
that the Lord shall vouchsafe me: which makes me do that I now intend, viz. to
give you a brief delineation of all. But I desire you not to expect that this
can be done with any mixture of pleasure, Not pleasant,
or that it will be over easy or over facile to apprehend; only I shall now
run briefly through the whole: as if a man should present you with the Scelleton
or body of a man, without either skin or flesh, there is no beauty or
pleasantness in such a sight, yet there are all the substantials whereof the
body is made, there are the bones that are the very upholders of the fabric
of the body: or as it was in the case of Ezekiels vision, when he was carried
into a field, where there was nothing but dry bones, there was no beauty in
that sight: but the beauty was afterward, when those bones began to stir and
move, and came every one to their place, and did close up with the flesh, and
the spirit of life came on them, then it was a beautiful sight. So now here,
in the mere naked demonstration of the thing, you must not look (neither
indeed is it propounded with that apprehension) that it should be very
delightful, or that there should be any thing in it to move that way: but
rather merely for the profit of it: because it may be a good guide for the
comprehending, and going on with through all. As if a man be in a journey, and
has his compass with him, by which he may know where he is; it is but only
for profit, and therefore I hope men will bear with that, dispense with the
other, viz. pleasantness: though it seem but rough to propound merely naked
bones, without any beauty or comeliness.

Now briefly to present the frame that I am to go through. I told you that
long ago I made the frame, and then I intended to make the frame so, to order
it so, as to bring it within the compass of fifty two heads, that is one for
every Lords day in the year: or if a man would make briefer dispatch of it,
he might take two or four heads at a time, and so go through the whole in
less time. I shall propound it the same way.

There be but two things by which I shall make the division of the model or
frame.

Frontispice.
1. There is first of all a frontispice, or porch: and,

Secondly, there is the fabric it self, the whole pile and edifice.

There be four things which I desire to propound in the very porch and
frontispice, in the entrance into all the matters of Religion, and things to be
known; because they are of general importance and use, as being the very
first and most sensible inquiries that will be made in the entry into this
profession. The two former of them lay down to us the mark that we should
aim at: The two latter, the line or rule by which we must level at that mark.

Happiness.
1. The first inquiry will be concerning happiness, which is the very end and
scope to which all that we are taught in the matters of Divinity, even all the
whole scope of Divinity tends: that whereas there be several arts and
vocations in the world* for the maintenance of this temporal life; Divinity is
that art which directs us in the way to get and attain eternal life, and to
the true happiness of a man: all the lines of Divinity meet in that center,
and nothing is taught but for that: and therefore this will be the first
inquiry, wherein the true happiness of a man lies: And to omit the particulars
that will be in that, the resolution and upshot of that inquiry will come to
this, (which will draw in the second) that

2. However men's thoughts wander about their happiness, yet all the world
cannot effect it; neither the quintessence of any, nor the concurrence of all
these worldly things, can make a man a happy man: the only happiness that is
true and real, is only in our conjunction with God: which is attainable only
by our knowing, worshipping, and serving of God according to the true religion;
which is the upshot of this first inquiry, and leads to the second general
thing in the porch

And that is the true Religion: True Religion.
the first inquiry is of the true happiness, the second is of the true
religion. But now there be many Religions in the world, I will briefly name
them.

There is the heathen religion, which does not acknowledge the true God, but
worship a false god. There is the Jewish religion, which acknowledges the true
God, (and therefore differs from the heathen) but does not acknowledge him in
Christ. There is the Mahumetane religion, which acknowledges the true God, and
acknowledges Christ too, but does not acknowledge Christ as the Messiah and
Savior, but subordinate to their Mahumet, and therefore false in that. And
lastly, there is the Christian Religion; and so the upshot of all, is, there is
no other religion true, but the Christian religion which is professed in the
true Church of God:

3. And that leads me to the third thing in the inquiry. The first was,
wherein lies true happiness; the next, what is the true religion which will
lead to this happiness; and because that is said to be in the Church of God,
therefore the next inquiry will be, which is the true Church of God. True
Church.
There be many pretenders to the true Church, there is a Greek Church, a great
and large Church, that professes the doctrine of Christ: there is the Roman
Church, that professes Christ: there be many other by-slips of Christians, as
Anabaptists, Separatists, and all kinds of sects and schisms, which all
profess Christ. But it is none of these, not the Greek Church, nor the Roman
Church, nor any other sect; but there is a Church of the Protestants,
consisting of Lutherans and Calvinists, and this will be the upshot of the
inquiry, that the Church of God which are either Lutherans or Calvinists,
(though different in some opinions, yet) both of them are within the compass
of that which is to be acknowledged the true Church of God: and the issue of
this inquiry will be, How we may understand and come to descerne which is the
true Church: and the answer is, by their adherence to the Scriptures:

4. Which is the fourth head in the inquiry. After the inquiry of the true
happiness, wherein it lies; of the true Religion that will lead us to that
happiness; of the true Church wherein we shall find that Religion: we must
inquire of that which must be the rule of all, which is the Word of God, the
Scriptures, Scriptures.
that shall be the fourth.

These are such general, and such sensible inquiries, that I did think good
in a prudentiall way, as I said, to place them in the frontispice. The two
former show the mark we must aim at, viz. the true happiness, and the true
religion. The two latter show the line by which we should level, viz. the
Churches steps in some measure, but absolutely the oracles of the Scripture,
the Word of God, which must be the measure of all things which are to be done
or known in the whole compass of Divinity.

2. To come now from the frontispice and porch, to the building it self,
Edifice.
to the fabric of the whole body of Divinity, I shall only present it in the
nature of a building, because I have mentioned the metaphor* yet I will not
keep close to it, because I will not spend time to be curious in words.

The building I shall present, consists of two stories, and no more; and in
either of those two stories, two rooms. I will mention no more.

In the first story briefly I shall comprehend all the things that are to be
known and believed in the course of Divinity.

In the second story all things that are to be done and practiced.

For all things in Divinity are either matters of faith, or matters of life.
This is the general therefore of the two stories. Matters of faith being as it
were the lowest story, and matters of life being the superstructure on it: and
either of these have two several rooms.

Things to be known and believed
There be general things to be known and believed concerning God, and Man.


And there be some things more particular in regard of some particular
relations; and so likewise there be in the other.

Concerning God.
But first for the former; things to be known and be learned by a Christian
concerning God and man:

I propound them either More general, or, More special, according to some
special relations.


In the general, first concerning God: there be two things which I shall
propound, and either of them will have a double title, upon which I will make
the second four, for four were in the porch.

Concerning the nature of God, and thereon two heads or titles. His nature,


1. All those things that are to be known concerning the unity of the
essence, Unity of essence,
that is the one God, and his glorious attributes.

2. And all those things that are to be known concerning the Trinity of the
persons, Trinity of persons.
in that unspeakable mystery of the glorious Trinity.

2. And in the second place, besides the nature of God, there are to be
considered the works of God: Works of God,
in which I shall propound both the kinds and the species of the operations of
God, Kinds and species of them
and the special objects or effects of those operations.

The species or kinds of the works of God that are to be known by a
Christian, for the comprehension of what is necessary to be known in
Divinity, and taught by a Minister, may be expressed thus.

There be two great works: his works of Creation, Creation.
and of Providence. Providence.



And there is the principal objects or effects of those operations, Objects of
them.
take them which way you will.

There is in general, Reasonable creature.
the reasonable creature which is capable of happiness, and which is to be
guided by a rule to the attaining of happiness. And there is the animal.

And so there will be two titles concerning Angels, both Good, Angels, Good,
Bad.

and Bad.


Man.
And concerning Man; wherein the principal thing will be to speak some thing
of those things that are of general necessity in Divinity, the most necessary
of all others, viz. the immortality of the soul, Immortality of soul,
Conscience.
and the Conscience of man, which is as a judge, and to which a man must give
account of all he does.

Having laid this concerning God, his nature, and his works of creation and
providence, and the special objects of those works, Angels and Men, we will
come to follow all the rest concerning man: for Divinity is the rule of guiding
man to his happiness, and therefore we must go along with it.

Concerning man, there are two things that are fundamentally to be considered
or premised: And two things formally to be considered.

Things fundamentally premised.
There be two things fundamentally to be premised.

First, (which will be the next head) concerning the covenant between God
and man; Covenant.
and the seals of this covenant in a general way, Seals of them
though there be a particular place for the particular: for this will be the
foundation of all that I can give toward happiness for the attaining of it;
it depends upon the covenant made by God with man: and so that will be the
first fundamental thing, the covenant made between God and man.

The second will be the law that God imposes on man, to regulate him in his
course, Law.
with all the sanctions of promises and threatenings. Sanctions.


And then there be two things formally to be considered, Things formally
considered.
(this being fundamentally premised) which will make up four heads more.

Formally there are to be considered the principles of humane actions,
Principles of human actions.
which actions are the way and steps to eternal life.

Now there be two principles very considerable.

The one without us, and from God, viz. Grace of God^
the grace of God; and here we shall see how far that is necessary, and the
nature of it; but I will not enter into particulars, but only now point out
things.

And then there is another principle of action, and that is within us, viz.
our own free will, Our free will.
and there we shall see how much we have of that, and the nature of it, and
of all humane actions and habits in a generality. These are the principles of
action, grace and free will: the nature of which, and the truth of which are
to be cleared in the application of these heads. These are the principles and
the roots.

The fruits that grow from these,
But then the fruits that grow from these, are,

On the one side, on the better hand, when men's wills are assisted by grace,
Good works.
good works; where we will take a brief consideration of virtues too,
which are the root of good works, the habits and dispositions.

Sins, or evil works.
And secondly, sins, or evil works, with all the penalty and punishments
that belong to them, where also concerning vices, to which we are
inclineable.

These are the things that are generally to be known and believed concerning
God and man.

There be some things in particular, and I shall be very brief in them.

Things particularly to be known concerning God and man,
The things that are particularly to be known concerning GOD and Man, are
either,

1. In regard first of all of the different states and conditions of men, that
they either are, or have, or shall be in.

2. In regard secondly of the acts of God in perfecting man's salvation.

In regard of the different states of men,
1. In regard of the different states or conditions of man first.

Now they may be different two ways; all that I shall speak of them shall be
this.

They may be either Substantially different, or, Circumstantially different.


The two former estates differ in the covenant, the covenant is not the same.

The latter two agree in the substance of the covenant, Substantially different.
but differ only in the form of administration: and so these will be the
four heads.

1. The state of innocence by creation, State of innocence.
with the first covenant of the law and works, which would then bring us to
heaven.

2. And the state of the fall, Of the fall.
where we consider the covenant of grace.

These are substantially different in the substance of the covenant.
Circumstantially different,
But the two other states are but circumstantially different, differing in the
administration of the covenant, yet all belonging to the state of grace.

The administration under the Old Testament. State of grace, Under the old
Testament, Under the new.


And the administration under the New Testament.

But then besides the diverse states of man, the second things to be known and
believed in this particular, are the several acts of God, Several acts of God.

Perfecting our salvation.


(give me leave to make use of words, because I have not so fit at hand) those
degrees by which God,

Does adduce a man to the state of grace, and having done so, From the state of
sin to grace by acts
by which he

Does afterward perduce a man from the state of grace to glory.

And in either of these there be two heads, or titles, which make up four
more, whereof there are

Fundamental: by purpose.
Two fundamental things, which are the roots and foundation of all.

Predestination
First of all Gods eternal predestination and reprobation, Reprobation,
and those things that belong to it.

The second fundamental thing is the work of redemption by Christ: Redemption.
where will be touched the incarnation, and all things that belong to that.

These are the fundamental things toward the bringing of us to the state of
grace: there must be a purpose in God to bring us to it, and a price: By
purchase,
and so our two heads are election and redemption.

Formal,
But then there be two things in which it formally consists, as the means whereby
it is brought about.

Vocation effectual.
First, the act of vocation: by which God calls a man, and settles a man in the
state of grace.

Justification actual,
The second is justification, which is the very formality of the state of grace,
in that league between God and man, when he calls him home to himself.

And these are the degrees by which we are brought to the state of grace; but
being there,

There be other degrees, by which God does carry us to the perfection of grace,
From grace to glory
as well as to the state of grace: as,

Partly in the continuation of the grace of God, Incoate.
which continuation is in two heads.

First, the work of sanctification, Sanctification privileges.
wherein I shall comprehend all the privileges of a Christian, that believe in
God and Christ.

And secondly, the work of gubernation: Gubernation exercises.
as the spiritual sanctification, so the temporal gubernation: wherein I will
comprehend all the exercises of a Christian (not only all his privileges, but)
how God leads him in a way of exercise; and although it vary from the ordinary
course of Divinity, yet I conceive that it is very necessary to be considered.
Now these do continue the work of grace.

2. But then for the consummation, Consummate.
there are two more: God continually sanctifies, and continually governes, and
manages a man, by his regiment, and the rule of his providence over his
servants in an excellent way all our life. But then I say there be two other
degrees that give the consummation; which make up the other four heads.

First of all, the resurrection: Resurrection.
and therein I shall take along the last judgment, Judgment.
for there is some difference, but not so much but they might go together.

Secondly, the excellent state of glorification; Glorification.
that superexcellent state of glory: wherein I shall comprehend the contrary
state of the damned. Condemnation
This is the last and highest degree.

These are briefly the heads of those things that are to be known and believed.

There are twelve in general to be known and believed concerning God and man.

And twelve in particular according to the several states of man, and acts of
God.

Now then the other things that follow, are things to be done and practiced in
matters of life: Life, to be done and practiced.
and so there will be comprehended under this story (as under the first) two
rooms.

There will be duties to be performed first.

And second, I will add some helps that are to be used for the performance of
those duties.

And so I shall comprehend all the practical part of Divinity, adjoining help
to perform duties; whereby I shall give a more large form (as I said first)
then as yet we have had, for ought I know.

Duties to be performed, by the strength of grace.
The duties to be performed, are either more general, and of a general nature:

Or more particular, according to our particular states and conditions, or
relations of men: as you shall see. General,


In those general duties I will do thus; I may comprehend all duties under the
name of gracious virtues, for so it will be more brief; wherefore I will so
do. Primary and predominant in duties to God and man.


There be the primary and predominant virtues; and those I will begin withal:
as,

First, virtues Theological, such as do order, and set the spirits and heart
aright, Virtues Theological,
in a right frame toward God.

And second, virtues Philadelphicall; Philadelphicall,
such as order aright our carriage and deportment toward man, our brethren;
and these comprehend the sum of duty in both the Tables of the Law.

But then I shall add two more, Secondary and concomitant virtues,
as secondary and accessories to those principles.

There be,

1. Virtues, Cardinal,
which the Schools call cardinal virtues, as prude^nce, justice, temperance,
fortitude, and courage: which as they make use of, so we might make use of them
also, as being very considerable in the way of a Christian, I say, cardinal
virtues.

And there be,

2. Circumstantiall virtues: Circumstantiall.
as suppose (to give a taste that you may understand) those concomitant virtues
which are not so much the particular species of virtues themselves; as
companions to all virtues, and must go along with them: as suppose now
syncerity, and humility, and zeal, and constancy, which are general and
necessary qualifications to accompany and attend all other.

So that now there be Theological and Philadelphicall virtues, to order our
carriage toward God and man: And Cardinal and Circumstantiall virtues,
prescribing the manner of the former carriage.

This in the general.

Special. Regulating our lives in the
But secondly, there be some more special and particular.

In regard first, of the several parts and conditions.

And secondly in respect of the several states and relations in which a
Christian lives.

Now there will be required virtues more special for the managing of us in
the way of duty in both these.

Parts,
1. Virtues in regard of the parts of a man's life, they must be brought to the
true rule of virtue, in the government of a man's life.

Heart, Affections, Words, Actions.
First, virtues to rule the heart and affections.

Secondly, virtues regulating a man's words and actions.

We must seek how to govern these in a way of duty and virtue.

Conditions, in respect of
But then again for our several conditions; I shall name two more, which will
comprehend all that I desire.

Sex, Age,
First, virtues to regulate every age and sex: the particulars are, men and
women, young and old, every sex and age.

Estate, Condition.
Secondly, virtues for the ordering of every state and condition; rich or poor,
learned or unlearned: and in proportion to order us in every several state and
condition, in affliction and prosperity.

And these are the second branch of the first of those specials that are
recommended: two special virtues required in respect of our several
conditions, as there were two before in respect of our several parts.

But now in regard of our several states and relations, in which men are,
States and relations,
there be four more.

The first two of which are to order us in a more private way. More private,


The second two to regulate us in a more public way.

As we are single persons, In a single and solitary life. Vertuess Ethicall,
living in a solitary life, there are moral ethicall virtues, which must order
our conversation suitable to the rule of duty.

And then as we are public persons in a family; these are oeconomicall
virtues, More public in a family. Oeconomicall.
to order families in the particular relations thereof, husband, wife, parents,
children, masters, servants, guests, and hoasts: There be ethicall virtues, and
oeconomicall virtues, for the ordering of a more private way.

And when we come more public, In a greater community,
to be parts of a greater community, there must be virtues for that.

Now there may be a double community which we may live in, and in which we
should have virtues to carry our selves as we ought to do in such places.

There is a community Ecclesiastical, Ecclesiastical,
a Church society and body.

And there is a community Political, Political.
and Civil; and there are suitable virtues required, to carry our selves as
members of these bodies either Ecclesiastical or Political.

There remains now only the second branch of things to be done and practiced,
Helps to be used in
viz. the helps.

We have gone through the duties general and particular: I shall in a word
recommend in the last place those things that I comprehended under the name of
helps to the performance of duty.

And they are either,

Universal conversation.
More general and public: or,

More particular and private.

Public means,
The more public helps are the due and conscientious use of the ordinances of
God appointed: as,

Hearing the word* Receiving the Sacrament. Times,
First, hearing of the word.

And second, receiving of the sacrament: And the due observation of times
instituted by God, and constituted by him.

Sabbath,
First, the observation of the Lords day, in its continual course.

Fasting,
Secondly, of Fasts in a Christian way.

These are the more public helps; and yet there may be some relation to
privatenesse in these.

Private,
But now more privately as a man's face is toward God: or,

As a man's face is toward the world; there are helps for those duties.

As we must labor to converse with God, or as we must converse with men;
toward God.
which way soever we turn our faces, there may be, and are helps for the
ordering of our life in both. Now the help in private, Contemplative,
in regard of a man's converse with God, are,

First, Reading, Meditation.
diligent reading and meditation upon the Word of God, and divine truths.

Secondly, another part of our communion with God, Prayer,
is the continual exercise of prayer and thanksgiving. Thanksgiving.


Then as we stand in relation toward the world, and are conversant in the
world, Toward man,
there be two other helps.

First, Active,
the conscientious use and improvement of the communion of Saints. Communion of
Saints.


Second, our fidelity and conscientious carriage in our particular vocations;
Particular vocation,
where there will be many other things.

But in all those the maine will be, how all these may be done, that they may
be most useful, in the advancing of a most christian course in the use of the
Word and Sacrament, and Sabbaths, and fastings, and reading, and meditation,
and prayer, and thanksgiving, and the communion of Saints, and the
conscientiousnesse in a man's vocation: I say, how we may do all these, so as
they may be most useful to further us in the way of duty.

These are the more general helps.

There are some more particular, according to the particular cases of men: I
will propound but four maine cases, Particular condition,
to which I will reduce all the rest.

First, some things to help a man in the ingresse into the way of Religion. I
am feign to make a word or two (for memories sake.)

Secondly, in the aggresse.

Thirdly, in the congresse.

Fourthly, in the progress.

You shall see more plainly what I mean by and by.

In the ingresse,
There be helps to bring a man that is not yet in a way of godliness, to come
into it. Wherein the principal thing will be, the due examination of what is
the right way, and a man's own estate, Examination, Resolution.
whether he be in that way or no: and that being made clear, we must consider
the helps that will put a man on to resolve on the entry into that way, and to
use the helps that may set him upon it to enter it: which is the ingresse or
entrance.

Aggresse.
Secondly, in the aggresse, or setting upon a Christian course, there will come
in helps and directions how to lead a holy life, Holy life. Death.
and dye a holy death; how to order a man's time, and manage his days and
hours in Christian and holy courses, so that he may both in life and death,
carry himself as becomes a Christian, and be in such a state as a Christian
may be: that is for the aggresse or setting upon the work.

Congresse,
Then thirdly, in the congresse, wherein is to be treated of our spiritual
warfare: helps to direct us to carry our selves in time of distress of
conscience, and in matter of Satan's temptations, Spiritual warfare.
which every Christian more or less will have, and meet withal.

Lastly, in the progress, help for perseverance, Progress, Perseverance.
how to hold out in daily proficiency, and perpetual perseverance to the end.

These are all the heads: whereof,

There are four in the porch and frontispice; and four times twelve in the
pile and edifice, the rest of the building.

Twelve generals concerning things to be known and believed of God and man in
general.

And twelve concerning God and man in particular, according to their particular
states.

And twelve for matters of life, duties to be performed.

And twelve helps that are to be used to help us in the performance of those
duties.

And thus you have the whole building; and according to the words of our text,
an (...), or a form of sound and wholesome words.

FINIS.

