PART OF THE HARMONY OF KING DAVID'S HARP.

Containing the first XXI. Psalms of King David.

Briefly and learnedly expounded by the Reverend D. Victorinus Strigelius
Professor of Divinity in the University of Lypsia in Germany.

Newly translated into English by Rich. Robinson.

Brief contents of these 21. Psalms. Of Doctrine. Psalm. 1. and 14. Of
Prophefies. Psalm. 2. 8. 16. 19. 21. Of Consolation. Psalm. 4. and 12. Of
Thankesgeuing. Psalm. 9. and 18. Of Prayer. Psalm. 3. 5. 6. 7. 10. 11. 13. 17.
20. Of Obedience. Psalm. 15.


Zachar. 12. I will power upon the house of David, my Spirit of Grace and of
Prayer. VBIQVE FLORESCIT.


LONDON. Imprinted by John wolf. 1582.

G. C. To the Translator.
Firm friendship fears no feeb le foes, faith triumphs over all:
It may be tossed and wrapped in woes, but down it cannot fall,
Did Christ disdain for friends to die, their fatal doomes to pay?
Even God for man, just for unjust, his soul to pledge did lay
Look then on frendships force, to foes, and see it more abound:
In his triumphs we victors were, and riches great have found,
Some captains of his host, and some his guides and prophets are:
And some Apostles for to plant, of watring some have care.
Muse not therefore, that Prophets speak dark speeches which be wise:
In husks most tart, and shelles most hard, the pleasant kernel lies.
Could greater secrets be conceiude, then lurk in David's songs?
Unknown to purblinde Jews, to whom of right the law belongs.
S trigelius tells them plain, to those that latin language knows:
Deep mysteries in terms most plain, to studious heads he shows.
Even he the husk and shel has broke, to kernel you may come.
I know his speech all cannot reach, he speaks but to some.
Exchangde for english pleasant phrase, he has his romish style.
Sincerely Robinson has dealt, the vulgar speech to file.
Therefore praise God as author chief, for to reveal the same.
Esteem the Princely Scribe, whose pen these suered songs did frame.
Thank Strigell for the light he gave to darkesome speech of Harp
Count Robinsons endeavors such, as M^^^us may not carpe
How great a sign is this to thee, the friend of God to be:
Revealing of his secret will, and gifts bestowed on thee,
If servants may not know the will, and masters treasure great:
Sure friends and sons enjoy them both, they feed on daintiest meat.
Thus have thou treasure, lock and key, at will to take and choose:
In wretched state thou art enthralde, if thou such gifts refuse.
F Friend Robinson thou have a friend, if thou like faithful be:
E Even God and Christ thee to defend, against all loquacitie,
A All tinckling Cymbals cease your sounde^, vain heads and minds to please
R Rest curious workmen of vain arts, your salve helps no disease.
E Eggs of the Cockatrice you lay, and weaue the Spiders cloth:
G Goodly to view, no gain to use, but shame and poison both
O Only Gods will to know and teach, is wisdom, joy and bliss
D Down with vain toys, exalt all hands, and hearts that brings us this.
G G^^ch not good will, its virtues me ede, let laboring bees be fed:
C^^ the drones that spend yt sweet, that toyling bees have bred.
FINIS,
To the Right Honorable and Virtuous Lord, AMBROSH DVDLEY, Earl of Warwick,
Baron Lisle, Master of her Majesty's Ordinance, Knight of the most noble Order
of the Garter, and one of her Highness most Honorable Privy Counsel, Grace
mercy and peace in the Sacred Trinity.
IN Extolling Religiously the consonante unity of the Trinity, as the sacred
harmony of the heavenly deity (Right Honorable Eatle) Aurelius Augustinus
that aunciente Orthodoxus, meriteth Christian commendation and memory not
only for those his six books De Trinitate greatly edifying the church of God,
in faith united, and in concord established, but also for that his learned
travel in Libro de Incarnatione Domini, contra Iudaeos: Endeavoring to win the
way ward Jews, unto God, and his church: as by that similitude especially
where he says, Iudaee cytheram respice vt musicum melos sonisque dulcibus
reddat: Tria pariter adesse videntur. etc. Allegory of the Deity in Trim^^
For, as he biddes the Jew behold the Harp, what musical melody it has, and
in sweet tunes, by those three cecurrentes, videlicet, Ars dictans, Manus
tangens, and Chorda resonans (which altogether working make consonant concord
in Music:) So, thereby allegorically figuring Monochordium Deitatis in
Trinitate personarum, as The unity of Trinity in Deity, One God, and one
Church.
He means none other thing, but to di^wade the Jew from ignorance of God, to
the knowledge of him, from incredulity to belief, and of an enemy unto God
and his church to become an embracer of him and a member of his mystical body
whereof S. Paul truly reports, as in I. Cor. 12. True worshipping of God.
There is one God which works all in all. etc. And again Romans 10. One God
over all, rich toward all, that call upon him, (whether they be Jews or
Gentiles,) none which believe in him shall be ashamed etc. Also as in the 12.
Romans and in 4. Ephesians the lively members and benefits of his church are at
large described. These things then thus framing, what more sacred substantial
Instrument, then The Essence of God, as in his holy word revealed, and of us
acknowledged? videlicet John 1. There are three which bear witness in
heaven: The Father, The Word, and The Holy Ghost, and they three are one. One
God of divine essence, spiritual eternal and omnipotente: (says David
Chytr^us) in regula vitae. And what more sacred consonancy of heavenly harmony
in Deity, then The will of God, as in his word revealed and of us
acknowledged, in a three fold benefit toward mankind? videlicet,

1 Touching our Creation. Genesis 1. Let us make man after our own similitude
and likeness. 2 Touching our Redemption. Ephesians. 1. By Christ we have redemption
in his blood, and forgeuenes of our sins, according to the riches of his
grace. And 3 Touching our Sanctification. Ephesians. 1. We are sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise which is the pledge of our Inheritance. Which Essence
and Will of God as the heavenly instrument and sweet sound in his benefits is
only apparent by his sacred word published to the Patriarchs, Princes, and
Prophets, and in the Gospoll of Christ Jesus, and doctrine of the Apostles:
Concord of Christ and his Church.
Like as our Savior himself concludes the same consonant concord of God and
his church, when on this manner he prayed unto his father for the same. John
17. That all which believed in him, might be as one: That they might be one,
like as his father and he was one: I in them, and thou in me (says he) that
they may be made perfect in one. This verily is that du^cer Harp whose
consonante concord S. Augustine so highly commending would have the Jews to
be hearers of this music in the church of God, by faith, followers in unity
of Religion, and fullfillers in life and conversation: Accordingly also as that
Princely Prophet David swetely played upon and song to his Harp this divine
Harmonicum Hemystichion. Psalm. 68. A God making men to be of one mind in an
house. verse 6. And again as that wise son of David, King Solomon has it in
his Canticles of the true unity and loving concord between Christ the spouse
and his church, the spouses singing. One is my Dove, one is my Darlinge.
Cantica canticorum. cap. 6. Gene. 1. 1. John 1.
Thus then (and in this church, the glory of God and his inestimable benefits
sounding toward men) what more dulce and delectable Decacorda Cithera, what
more profound Fidicula, then whose first string is the eternal Word of God.
The Ten stringed Harp of the true church of God.
Secondly, what better corner stone then Christ Jesus? Ephe. 2. Thirdly what
better operation then the Holy Ghost? Ephesians. 4. Fourthly, what better builders
then Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, 1. Cor. 12. Fifthly, what
better building then Faith in the promises of God? Matt 16. Sixthly, what better
church, then Worshippers in Spirit and Truth? 4 Ioh. Seauenthly, what
profounder pillars, then True Religious Princes, and True Godly Pastors? Apoc.
3. Eighthly, what brighter lights, then Sincere godly livers? 1. The. 5
Ninthlye, what heauenlier virtue then louinge concord in the Truth? Ephesians. 4.
Tenthly and lastly, what greater joy, then Life and Blessedness everlasting?
John 16. But contrary wise as our Savior Christ Jesus himself found the
ignorant, incredulous, iarring and indurate Jews a figure of Satan's
Synagogue, misunderstanding his words. John 6. The iarringe Harp of the
Jewish Synagogue.
Murmuringe against him and his miracles. John 7. 9. Malignantly minded to
mischief, cap. 10. and 12. Because observing the Laws of Moses, using
supersticious circumcision of the flesh and worshipping abominable Idols, (as
Esaias cap. 6. says) They had their hearts hardened, their ears stopped and
their eyes shut up: So even these 1. Honoring Moses and hating the Messiah,
2. Loving the Law and l^athing the Gospel, 3. Following the flesh, defying the
Spirit, 4. Addicted to darkness, leaving the light, and 5. Fancying figures
not affyinge in the truth, 6. Bondage embracinge more then freedom, 7. Death
more then life, and 8. Transitory pleasures more then joys eternal. No
marvel it was if this godly father S. Augustine (findinge the Jews in his
time, of like iarringe incredulity, ignorance and induracy) Iudaee Cytheram
respice vt musicum melos sonifque etc.
Labored to bring home the lost sheep unto Christ's fold with the fatherly
advertisement of this so Grande Doricum: not as Mutus but Musicus Hypparchyon
thus soundinge unto them. And as thus these iarring Jews, like unto Cainites
have been rather worse and worse Malignan^ Church.
after admonishment so in all ages the members of the malignant church of Rome,
as Tirantes, Hipocrites, Epicures, Sophisters, Papists, Atheistes,
Anabaptists, Jesuits, Sectaries, and Scisiatickes, are those Jews and
Judasites, touching whom the holy Doctor S. Ambrose super Lucam 15. cap.
says: Dominus impios quaesiuit, qui eum non quaesiuerunt. And this he does of
his great goodness and merry toward sinful mankind to the greater increase of
his church, kingdom, and glory: But contrary wise like subtle serpents they
stop their ears, as deaf work he never so worthily by his wisdom and
wonders unto them: approving this proves true in themselves. Asini Lyrae
auscultatores, Whereby very well appears in them this sentence of S. Ambrose
also in lib. De Abel and Cain. Nihil grauius quam errantem a Deo deseri vt se
reuocare non possit. Which thing no doubt as it increases the kingdom and
church of God, by the decay of the kingdom or Synagogue of Satan, so with
toothe and nail he labors to hold fast, that he fall not, according to
that saying in the Revelation 12. Therefore rejoice ye heavens and ye which
dvvell in them: VVo he unto the Inhabitants of the earth and of the Sea,
because Satan is come down unto you having great wrath, Knovvinge that he
has but a small time. And therefore of late this Ninus of Babylon as he still
not only confirms at Rome abominable idolatry bringing forth Beel, Baal
and Beelzebub (says Nicolaus Lyra. in 14. Sap.) Antichrist and his whelps.
his whelps of the same bloody brood: but also disperieth them into sundry
kingdoms and countries to disturb the sweet concord of the church and
Gospel, and altogether hindering the conversion of others like themselves, do
seek their own and others utter subuertion. To be short (how secretly s^
ever some of those he^lhoundes arriving in england have hid Enemies intent
has evil event.
themselves) and how subtly soever like sci^^natiekes they purposed by intent
to build Thebes with Orpheus: yet the event falls out that they rather
practiced with Thales to sow discord amongst the Lacedaemonians: But as the
Lord neither slombereth nor slep^th which keeps Israel, Psalm. 121. verse. 4.
so it is he which turns their mischief upon their own pates, and it is
his Son Christ Jesus our Mediator, which (against the siftinges of these
Scism^tickes) Luke 22.
has prayed unto his father for us, That our Faith should not fail us. Making
mild Moses to ouermatch the Musicians daunsinge about the Calfe. Exodus 32.
Zealous Phineas to find out the Madianiti^h fornicators, Number. 25. Godly Judith
to behead the Philistian Holophern^s. Judith. 13. Good Helyas to reprove the
wandering people and also to be revenged upon Baals priests. 3. Reg. 18.
Faithful Paul and Barnabas to reprove the false Prophet Bariehu subuerting the
Lords ways. Act. 13. Godly learned Ambrose and painful Prudentius by divine
assistaunce to confute these blasphemies and scisines. Finally, and neither yet
will just True Prayer ^ictorious.
Jacob leave wrestling with the Angel, until by prayer he obtain the victory
and bear away the blessing. Genes. 32. With which Harp and harmony of Prayers
(annexing thereunto Confession and Thankesgeuing) as the threefold sacrifice
most acceptable to the eyes and most delectable to the ears of the heavenly
Jehovah. (Right Honorable) As those same xxiiij. Elders worshipping the Lamb
with their Harpes and golden Vyals in the universal, true, Catholic,
Prophetical and Apostolical Militant and Triumphant Church of God, from the
first age of the world hitherto always Have honored the Lamb as most
vvoor^hy of Power, and Riches, of VVisdome, Fortitude, Honor, Glory, and
Bles^inge everlasting. Revel. ^.
So likewise (as members of the same universal church and heirs of the
kingdom of Heaven in this latter age) manifold causes have the Churches of
England and Irelande (considering the time of their blessed visitation, under
the gracious peaceable and prosperou^ government of our most honorable Hester.
Virtuous Judith and divine Debora, Queen ELIZABETH) with that Princely
Prophet, Sacred Psalmograph, Incomperable Captain and Invincible Conqueror
King David (the chosen Instrument of Gods Mercy and Truth everlasting, To
rule over Israel and Jerusalem, 1. Reg. 16. To feed Jacob his seru^unt and
Israel his Inheritance. Psalm 78. verse. 71. To shine in his throne as the Sun
in the Lords sight, and the Moon perfect for ever. 2. King. 7. Yea and be a
faithful vv^^^^es^e in heaven for ever. Psalm. 89. verse. 38.) Every one
continually confessing our infirmities and the manifold mercies of God: To
praise the Lord with the Harp and voice of Psalms. Psalm 98. And so with
the Tribes of the Lord to go up to Jerusalem, To pray for her peace and
pr^speritie. Psalm. 122. Yea for the collection of her outcastes, And the
healing of their ^riefes. Psa. 147. And finally (with thankeful David as
thankful Israelites) to laud the Lord before his arc all the days of our
life in holiness 1. Sam. ^.
and righteousness according to his good pleasure and measure of his grace
bestowed upon us. Where amongst many far more meet members for this
purpose, in acknowledginge my self to be Little Laodocus in art magna, not
any thing like count^^uaileable to Nicostratus in re parua magnus: yet putting
to my pressed best good will. Amongst those I say (Quos Musicen docet amor and si
sint indocti prius.) Whom Zeal teaches knowledge: though they be unlearned
before. Which love well learning and have but little themselves, which tender
the welfare of Gods Church, and yet are no divines. Which labor for*
learning and lack living: And which imitate other men's works to instruct
themselves. So in experience of translatinge (as my Summum Singular and
Speciale Bonum, Animi, Corporis and Fortunae donum, to profit my self and
others) I chauneed lately upon these Expo^itary Sch^lia of the Godly Learned
and Reverend D. Victorinus Strigelius a singular Professor of divinity in
these our days yet living: very briefly, godly, learnedly and profoundly
expounding the whole book o^ King David's Psalms. Out of which whole volume
(containing two Coins) I have tran^la^ed only* The first one and twenty
Psalms and expositions thereof: but specially the verse according to the
Latin Exemplar, being of the Geneua translation, after the Hebrew sense, and
(so near as I could imitate the authors meaning therein) nothing dissonante
from our vulgar and usual translation daily read in the Church of England:
Not without the help of a rare well disposed divine and learned Achates
(scintillas graecas ob^curioresque theologicas locutiones excudens) as Virgill
says: Of ^^home (being sometime my Scholefellow under the Reverend M. Robert
Ba^ter Schoolmaster even then of Ne^^ arc, deceased) as I may now say with
Plutarck, Plus Didimus hab^^it, Plus Philomelus habet, recomp^ing what I then
was, and what he now is. I here have by Gods help and his, performed
(perhaps Velut demulsor minor in re magna) my not v^polished altogether, nor
yet unprofitable translation as I trust in God. According to my humble and
hartye prayer beseeching the most beneficial goodness of God to turn and
transpose the same to good purpose of public utility in his chosen church, as
seems best to his glory, my Princes honor, and commodity of my native
country. Whereas, especially in the Royal Court of her Princely Majesty God
by his gracious providence has of long time prosperously planted and
replentshed your honorable good Lordshippe with rare and excellent indumentes
of body and mind as true godliness, perfect virtue, grave wisdom wholesome
counsel, constant fidelity and noble magnanimity, with a sincere supportant
^eale to true Religion, godliness, virtue, and good letters to the aduauncemente
of her Majesty's Royal Regiment, and profit of the weal public in her
Highness dominions. So on my poor behalf, In testimony of a Christian weal to
Gods glory, loyal heart to my Princes honor, earnest good will to the weal
public of my native country, but specially of true hearted Synterisin and
Proerisin toward the heavenly country of the hiest Jehovah, that celestial
Jerusalem. I have withal humble and duetiful regard adressed this my poor
travel unto your Honors most noble patronage, as one whose Heroical virtues
in patrociny counterpoysable to the Princely protection of the first noble
patron that Honorable Augustus High Marshal of the most sacred Empire that
now is. Your Honor assuredly shall by Gods grace, of your godly ^eale adorn
both patrones and expositors godly purposes, advance the honor of God, your
Prince, and country: not a little adu^^brating by your accustomed clemency the
true and unfeigned goodwill of me the Translator. Who humbly beseechinge your
Honorable Lordship to accept in good worth the same my good will and duetifull
endeavor in this respect, do rest continually and faithfully, prayinge unto
the Almighty and immortal God to preserve your Honor with the Honorable Lady
and Counte^^e your loving Spouses, with long life prosperous health, increase of
honor and perpetual fruition of life and blessedness everlasting, in, the
eternal kingdom of God and his Son Christ, that Root and of spring of
David the bright shining day star, Apoc. 22. To whom with the Holy Ghost,
three in person and one eternal God be all dominion, power, praise, honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen

Your Honorable good Lordships most humble and duetyfull Orator in the Lord.
Rich. Robinson, citizen of London.

The Exposition upon the first Psalm.
Beatus vir, qui non abijt in cousilio.
THE ARGUMENT.
NO greater beatitude there is, then to be a Citizen of the Country most
praiseworthy of all, ( The Church) that is, of that congregation unto whom God
has made himself known by his word, and excellent testimonies, for whom he
created all things, whom he redeemed with the blood of his Son, and
sanctified with the holy Ghost, whose head and captain is the Son of God,
unto whom the Angels show themselves Ministers. Finally, in which God shall be
for ever and for ever all in all.

This beatitude does the first Psalm describe, also teaching which and what
manner a one, and where the true Church of God is, and who be lively members of
this Congregation. For what so is said as touching the whole body, the same
in like manner may be spoken touching every particular member. Therefore it
clerelie and manifestly affirms, that Congregation to be the church of God,
which hears, learneth, and embraces the Gospel, all fanaticall opinions and
worshippings of God, devised by man's boldness, being utterly rejected and
forsaken. For the pure voice of the Gospel is the proper token and infalible
badge of the church, which being pronounced from the bosom of the eternal
father, the son of God through his manifold goodness has made known unto
mankind: As it is said in the 10. chapter of John. My sheep hear my voice.
And in the 14. of S. John's gospel, If any man love me, he will keep my
commandment. And to keep his commandment, is to embrace the true doctrine
with faith and good conscience, and the same to profess and set forwards.
Therefore this Psalm contains doctrine chiefly necessary, and most sweet
consolation. It teaches, as I said, that those are the members of the church,
which embrace and love the true doctrine, and not the enemies or contemners of
the doctrine.

Moreover, it adds a peculiar promis of the true Church. The Church shall be
like unto a Palm tree, never wanting fruit, and it shall have prosperous
success, yea though the gates of hell grudge and repugne against it. Also let
us persuade ourselves that this most sweet sermon pertains unto us, and let
us include our selves into this saying. Let us know that we also are
flourishing and fruitful palms, if we be faithful hearers and keepers of the
doctrine of the gospel. In the end he compares the true Church with the
multitude of the enemies of the gospel, and of hipocrites, by a contrariety
opposite, and unto this ungodly multitude (at continual enmity with the true
church) does he denounce in felicity of their counsels and euentes, and an
universal overthrow and destruction. For the true Church stands immovable,
as the very Rocks in the sea.

Vt pelagirupes, magno veniente fragore,
Quae sese multis circumlatrantibus vndis
Mole tenet, scop^li nequicquam and spumeae circum
Saxafremunt, laterique illisa refunditur alga.
As Rock or huge sea bank (which sousing tide
With roaring waves rush on) does firm abide.
Nor rock nor foming stones do fret or fume
But flag or reed itost toth'shore, consume.
Contrariwise, the ungodly enemies of the church are like unto grass on the
house sides, which before it be plucked up withers away, as it is said 129.
Psalm. And in 58. psalm, the vain enterprises of the ungodly are described
in five similitudes. 1. They shall pass away swiftly as the water. 2. They
shall shoot their shaftes and not hurt. 3. They shall wax dry as snailes in
the shelles 4. They shall die, as the untimely borne fruit. 5. They shall be
taken away as young thorns, before they be grown. Or as the text says.
Before that your thorns become sharp pricking, That is, ere tender thorns
become great and sharp. But the whole meaning of this Psalm is
paraphrasticallie expounded, and excellently set forth in the 119. Psalm.
Therefore let the godly confer this brief example with that more ample
explication there set forth, that they may see what difference there is
between a little running river, and a main flood: That is, between
Dialectica, which is to be thought as a brief and stricte eloquence, and that
same right eloquence which they take to be Dialectica dilatata, or enlarged
manner of disputing.

Verse. 1. Blessed is the man which has not walked in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of scorners.
Verse 2 But whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law will
exercise himself day and night.
IT is an usual thing, in definitions which are more ample and elegant, not
only to contein the affirmative sentence, declaring what the thing is, but
also the negative removing from the subject things opposite and contrary. So
in this place, this psalm describes negatiuelie and affirmatiuelie the true
members of the Church, that the speech might be more full, and large. They
(says he) are Citizens of the true Church, and the dwelling places and temples
of God, which fall not into the furies of Epicures, or into other fanaticall
errors, neither establishe Idolatry, nor further the cruelty of the enemies
of the Gospel, but with all their heart abhorring the society or company of
the contemners, and enemies of the doctrine, delivered from God, do hear the
pure word of the gospel, and embrace the same with faith, and good
conscience, and the same do profess and advance. Then are not the Saduces,
Pharisees, Bishops of Rome, and their champyons, members of the church of God,
yea though they bear a Title and sway in the world, which do defend profane
and idolatrous furies: such as are, prayer unto the dead, a manifold
profanation of the Supper of the Lord in their masses, and the Percian pomp:
wherein the bread is carried about, against usual manner, and is worshipped
contrary unto the use of the Sacrament: The law of single life, which is the
original of greatest mischiefs, and which S. Paul calls plainly, The
Doctrine of devils: Perpetual doubting of remission of sins: Wicked foul
errors of contrition, confession, and satisfaction: Pardons for money: The
fable of purgatory: The snares of man's traditions: Finally, the cruel
salaughter of honest persons, whom they kill and slay, only for that they
disalowe these foul and manifest errors, and do prosesse the truth. These
being clean contrary unto the eternal and immovable rules of Gods word:
Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Exodus 20. Gal. 1.
Also, Eschew Idolatry. Again, If any man teach any other doctrine, let him
be holden accursed. It is plain, that the defenders of those are not the
members of the Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, but the instruments of the
devil, and vessels of wrath, as Paul calls them. But because in other
wrytinges the whole place touching the church, is plentifully expounded, I will
now be content to admonish, That the beginning of this Psalm is to be
adjoined unto the other descriptions, which are every where recyted in the
scripture.

Verse 3. And he shall be like the tree planted by the River side, which shall
bring forth her fruit in due season: and his leaf shall not wither away, but
all things that he shall do, shall have prosperous success.
HItherto has he delivered doctrine touching the greatest matter of all,
namely, which, what manner a one, and where the true Church of God is. Now does
he effectually comfort us, against all temptations, and trials which all the
godly ones do suffer. We see the barbarous cruelty of the Turks daily further
to spread. We see hurly burlyes to arise betwixt Christian Princes amongst them
selves, hurtful unto the Church. The matter itself does declare, that the
maynteiners of Popish Idolatry do burn with most bitter hatred against the
godly, because they forbid the Gospel to be published, and cruelly kill and
slaye many honest persons. What other thing in these shows may man's reason
conceive, but that shortly both the true doctrine it self, and the studies of
the same should utterly perish? But against this humane reasoning, let us
oppose the most sweet consolation, which affirms, That there shall shall
always some true Church remain, yea though the Devil labor to extinguish
the same. And that the Son of God shall reign for ever, and that the labors
of such as teach and learn shall not be in vain. As elsewhere S. Paul
maynely cries out, Your labor shall not be frustrate, in the Lord. Which
things since they so 1. Cor. 15.
be, let every man diligently travel in his vocation, neither let him cast it
of for any terrors, hatred, imuries, nor dangers. But let him with faith look
for help of God, and hope for prosperous euentes, according to the most sweet
promise in this place delivered, He shall be like a tree planted by the river
side, which shall bring forth her fruit in due season. For where as the
circumstances in this verse declare that David alludeth unto the nature of a
Palm tree, to the which in the 92. Psalm the Church is compared, The just
shall florishe as the Palm tree. verse. 12. I will repeat a few words (out
of the 13. book of Pliny) concerning the nature of the Palm tree, and I will
apply the same unto the Image of the Church. The Palm (says he) grows not,
but in the warm country: and it is not fruitful in any place, but in the
hot country. It increases in a light and grauelly ground, and for the
most part in a saltie ground. It also delights in a waterish or moist ground,
and all the year long loves to suck humiditie. Also some think that doung is
hurtful unto it. We have said, that saltilhe ground is brooked well of this
Palm tree. Therefore where no such soil is, they sprinkle salt, not at the
roots, but a little from it, etc. These after the same manner may be spoken
concerning faith, and the Church. Faith springs in the grauelly and saltish
ground, that is, in a contrite or broken heart through acknowledging of sin,
and as the Palm trees have need of warmth and moisture, so says is kindled
by the holy Ghost, and is watered by the ryuers of the Gospel. And it is hurt
of doung, that is, by corruption of doctrine, and the wounds of the
conscience. Furthermore as the Palm tree is fruitful, so faith is not
fruitles, but effectual by love. And as the Palm tree bears waighte of any
thing laid upon her, and the more she is borne down, so much more hyer she
ryseth again: so faith is the vanquisher of sorrows, and amidst afflictions
specially shines. Finally, the leaves of the Palm tree never fall of, so the
fruits of the teachers are everlasting, as in the 15. chapter of John it is
most comfortably said: In this is my father glorified, if ye be made my
disciples, and that you bear much fruit, and that your fruit do continue.

Verse 4 So shall not the ungodly do, but as the chafe shall they be, which
the wind drives to and fro. Verse 5 Therefore shall not the ungodly abide in
judgment, neither shall sinners stand in the congregation of the righteous.
EVen as he compares the godly ones, which are the members of the true Church,
unto the flourishing and fruitful Palm tree: So does he compare the ungodly
contemners or enemies of the Gospel, unto a most light and vile thing, namely
chafe which is tossed with the wind. But as the first figure is full of
consolation, so this other is fearful. And were not the multitude of the
ungodly ones more sturdie then the rocks standing in the sea, and not
persuaded in any age, although they are beaten upon with continual waves,
undoubtedly beholding this heavy and sorrowful figure, they would earnestly
quake for fear. But the profane security of the ungodly is signified in the
48. chapter of Genesis: Thy sin shall lie or rest till it be revealed. For
the ungodly feel not fearefulnes and humbling of themselves, till being
suppressed with plagues, they fall headlong into eternal destruction, and as
it were vain chafe, shall be cast into never ending torments. As Saul,
Pompeius, Crassus, Cato, Nero, Iulianus, and others innumerable, had tragical
ends: and death is unto them a way unto eternal misery. What can be
imagined more doleful then this Image? And yet notwithstanding vain chafe do
bear sway, and carry stately countenaunces, until that they be thrown
headlong from the top of their glory into present and euerduring calamities.
But although Origin (being deceived with the subtlety of this figurative
speech, Therefore shall not the ungodly stand in judgment, wrested these
words of the Psalm unto a strange and false opinion touching the particular
resurrection of the dead in the universal judgment:) Yet we omitting to
confute Origin hear, (which we purpose in another place to do) will recite a
simple and natural interpretation of this fifth little verse. Certain it is
that the name of judgment is often times taken for a function or office. This
is therefore the sense, that the ungodly ones, as Annas, Caiphas, and others
which bear a sway in the world as Pharisees and Saduces (ever warring with
God, and holding battle with the true Church, yea although they seem notably
to be sensed with princely powers against all chances of fortune) yet they
shall be cast out of their stations, and shall be separated from the true
Church, as those which are accursed of God. And although now and then
punishments are deferred, and God does not by and by execute this judgment:
yet as it is said, Sera tamen tacitis, paena venit pedibus. Although late, yet
punishment steals on. For God does at length judge between the conflictes of
the true Church, and hypocrites, the blasphemous part extinguished: as the
heretics of all ages are subverted, the Church remaining unmoueable, not
shrinking out of place, nor yet out of order. For the peculier glory of the
Church, is the preservation of the whole body, yea though in some part or
member she be afflicted, or persecuted.

Verse 6 Because the Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way of the
ungodly shall perish.
MAny Psalms are like unto Epigrams, wherein some sentence being propounded,
afterward follow amplifications, and lastly is added the conclusion. So in
this short Psalm after a determinate proposition (which, and what manner, and
where the true Church is) do follow two amplifications; A similitude of the
fruits, and success of the true Church: and an Antithesis of the difference
between the true Church, and that furious multitude which the devils stir up
against the Church Therefore in the end is added the conclusion containing the
effect of the whole Psalm, The Lord knows etc. Philip. 2.
That is, he not only approves, but also helps and aydeth the vocations of
the godly ones, according to that saying of S. Paul, God works in you to
will, and to perform. That is, he draws your wills, and then not only
helps forwards those desires, but also governs the euentes, and gives
success thereunto. So did he stir up in Samuel good motions, and after that
helps the same, and therewith in his hard government, gave unto him force
and strength, that he might endure those travels, and gave him prosperous
success. Contrariwise, Achas and other hypocrites not craving nor looking for
help from God, are unhappy, and are overwhelmed in their course, before they
could see or attain the haven. This is the sum of this first Psalm,
which contains a description of the true Church, and of all the godly. But
that our affection may accord with David's harp, I will annexe unto this
Psalm, in stead of a conclusion, this prayer.

A prayer consonant with David's verse.
I Give thee thanks, O eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou
have brought me silly sinner out of the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom
of the light of the sun, and have separated me from the company of Idolaters,
and manquellers, which night and day meditate and practice this one thing, to
subvert the truth, and the godly ministers of the Gospel, and destroy Princes
which nourish the godly studies of true doctrine. Grant that henceforth for
evermore I may eschew the infection of impiety and cruelty of the enemies of
the Gospel, and that I may say with David, I will not sit in company with
the wicked. I will wash my hands amongst the innocent, and will walk about
thine altar. O Lord, do not destroy my soul with the ungodly. Psalm. 26.
verse. 6. verse. 9.
Make me, O Lord, a flourishing and fruitful Palm tree in thy Orcharde. Make
me a vessel of thy mercy, and an instrument acceptable and profitable for
thee, and not only for thy Church, but also for my own soul. Neither cast me
away amongst the vessels of wrath, or chafe ordained for eternal fire.
Finally, suffer not the light of thy doctrine to be extinguished, but inflame
in our minds and many others, true invocation and prayer: and for thy glory
sake in thy most just wrath destroy all Epicures, and such like, which count
it wisdom to scorn and deride the word of the Gospel, as it were a fable.
Such furies, O God eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, creator of
mankind and of thy Church, vouchsafe I pray thee, every where utterly to
subvert and destroy. Amen.

OF THE II. PSALM. The second Psalm, and the exposition thereof.
Quare fremuerunt Gentes etc.
THE ARGUMENT
THis is life eternal (says the Son of God) that they acknowledge thee the
true God, and Jesus Ioh. 17.
Christ, whom thou have sent. But the true knowledge of God consists in
acknowledgement of the Essens, and will of God. For so as touching the Essens
of God, let this doctrine be always before us, which says that there is one
Divine Essens and three persons: The eternal Father, the Son, which is the
word and Image of the eternal Father, and the holy Ghost. Secondly touching the
will of God, let us assuredly hold that that is the only will of God
concerning our salvation, which the Son has declared out of the bosom of
the eternal Father, and showed in his express word, and that there are not
contrary wills of God. The promise is universal, which witnesses, John. 6.
that All which flee unto the Mediator, are received. This is the will of my
father which sent me, that every one which sees the son, and believes in
him, might have life everlasting, and I will raise him up at the last day.
We must not therefore imagine, as concerning the will of God, that pardon is
outwardly offered unto all men, but that there is inwardly an other will
included, which vvil not receive some fleeing unto the Mediator. But true
acknowledgement of Christ comprehends two articles, one of the person, an
other of the office. Touching the person, we must most firmly hold according
to the heavenly revelations received in the vvritings of the Prophets and
Apostles. That in this son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, borne of the
Virgin, for us crucified and raised again, there are two natures of the
deity and humanity. The Divine nature is the son coeternall and
consubstantiall to the eternal Father, which is called, The word and
express image of the eternal father. This son was intercessor for mankind,
and is ordained a Mediator, and at the time appointed took upon him nature of
man, in the Virgin Mary. And these two natures are so united that they are one
person. The names of his offices are, Mediator, Redeemer, Savior, King,
Priest, Pastor, etc. Let us therefore acknowledge a Mediator, Redeemer,
Savior, King, and Priest, this Christ, God and man, and let us give thanks to
God for this infinite benefit, that he would his son to take on him man's
nature, and would this son God and man should be the Redeemer, Savior, and
head of the Church, which perfi^^^th all things. Of his wisdom which is life
eternal, in this second Psalm clear and famous testimonies are expounded.
For concerning the unity of the essens in the Father and the son, it is
said: Against the Lord, and against his Christ. For as he that honors the
son, honors the father: So he that despises the son, despises
the eternal father. Moreover these words do evidently distinguish between the
father and the son, The Lord said to me, Thou art my son, this day have
I begot thee. I (says he) this day, that is, from everlasting have begot
thee, to say, in a true generation of my substance. Besides this, touching the
will of God, this Psalm does evidently, and not obscurelie preach unto us,
Blessed are all they which pur their trust in him: it clearlie affirms that
this is the will of God, that all which believe in the Son should have life
everlasting.

Furthermore of the divine nature in Christ, most assured and most excellent
testimonies may be taken out of this psalm. For, first the psalm makes
Christ thus speak: I will preach of the decree which the Lord said unto me,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. This verse does the Epistle
to the Hebrews in the first and last chapters plainly expound: Unto Hebr. 1.
which of the Angels said God at any time? Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee. Again, Jesus Christ Hebr. 13.
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Natural birth is one thing, and adoption
is another thing. For the son which is adopted, and not begotten of the
father, is taken into the right of the family: But he which is begotten by the
father is natural. Neither would the Prophet hear teach any other thing,
then him unto whom the Lord spoke to be his son, but in far other manner
then the other saints. For others whether Angels or men, are made the
sons of God by grace and favor. But this is his son by birth. Therefore is
he sometime called of S. John, The only begotten. Moreover the eternal father
urges Ioh. 1. and 3.
his only begotten son in this speech, Ask of me, and I will give thee
nations for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession.
And he says in the prophet Esaie, I will not give my glory unto another.
Therefore Esai. 42.
the imparting of this glory or kingdom, is a firm and excellent testimony
of the same substance between the father and the son. Thirdly, the Psalm
adds, Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice to him with trembling. Here he
ascribes to the Messiah a name, which is proper unto God, and commands that
woorship be given to him, whereof it is said in the 6. of Deuter. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Finally a conclusion
is Mat. 4.
annexed: Blessed are all they which trust in him. For the saying of Jeremy is
true, Accursed is every one which trusts in man, and makes flesh (...)me.
Blessed is the Cap. 35.
man which puts his trust in the Lord, and whose confidence, is the Lord.
Seeing therefore this Psalm distinguishes the Messiah from the children of
adoption, and gives unto him society of the kingdom and name of God, and
wisely requires, that all men should worship this Lord in true fear and
faith: undoubtedly we must confess, that the Messiah is by nature God, and
begotten of the substance of the father.

But the humane nature is signified in these words, I have established my king
over Sion. That is, I will have Christ to be the head of the Church. Hereupon
in the Epistle to the Hebr* the 2. Chap. he does learnedlie dispute, that,
Christ is not only God, but also man. He which (...), and they which are
sanctified are all of one. For the which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren, saying: I will declare thy name unto my brethren. And again, John.
17.
I and my children which God has given me. Because therefore children are
partakers of fieshe and blood, he also himself is made partaker of the same,
that in all things he might be like unto his brethren.

Lastly, not only the offices of this person are described in the names of
King, Priest, and Pastor, but also the doctrine of faith is recited, which
transferreth and applies unto us the benefits of this Lord. He is wisely
called King, by the voice of theternall father. I have appointed my king, etc.
The office of his priesthood is signified, when he says, I will preach of the
Commandment. For to teach is a part of the priest. What, that he is also
called a shepherd. Thou shall feed them with an yronrodde. Finally of faith,
applying unto us the benefits of the Messiah, this psalm cries out, Blessed
are all they that trust in him. There are therefore in this psalm excellent
testimonies of the Essence and will of God, of the person and benefits of the
Messiah, and of faith whereby the good things of the new testament must be
received. And yet neither nakedlie, nor without figures are these set forth,
but there are intertexed rebukings of the enemies and despisers of Christ,
threatenings of punishments, whereby God punishes the contempt of his son,
and exhortations to the end al men may serve and obey the son. This is the
sum of the psalm, agreeing with the saying of Christ, which I have recited
in the beginning.

Verse 1 Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vain things. Verse
2 Kings of the earth stood up, and Princes came together, against the Lord,
and against his Christ.
Always when we interpret, lot us hold this rule, that the Scripture of the
new Testament is a special light of the Prophets: Neither in the exposition of
Moses, of the Prophets, and the Psalms, ought we any thing to decline
from that purpose or meaning, which even the same son of God, or the Apostles
do show us, because the same spirit spoke by the Prophets and Apostles, and
it is the Son which expounds unto us. For as the Lawmaker is the best
Interpreter of his own Law. So the Son of God, which is (...) the word, can
most rightly expoun^e his oracles or speeches. Then, following this rule see
(if it please you) with what reason the Apostles Act. Cap. 4. do interpret
this Psalm. For so writes Saint Luke in the same place. O Lord thou God,
which have made heaven and earth, the sea, and al things which are in them,
which through the holy Ghost, by the mouth of our father David thy servant
have said, Why did the Gentiles rage, etc. For in deed, they gathered
themselves together in this City, against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou
have anointed. Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel to do whatsoever thine hand and counsel had determined to be done.
etc. It appears plainly that the beginning of this Psalm is properly and
principally to be referred unto the history of the passion of Christ. For in
deed the Jews and Gentiles defiled themselves by joining together in the
murdering of Christ, and in their cruel counsels. Neither is there any one of
us, which (as Esaias in Cap. 53. at large declares) has not added somewhat unto
the passion of Christ.

But although this is the proper and natural meaning of this Exordium, yet
notwithstanding, it is not absurdlie applied unto the dangers of the Church in
all ages. Because Christ and his Church by a certain affinity and likeness of
suffering, are joined together according to that saying, Romans 8. Whom he has
chosen, them will he have to be like unto the image of his Son. Therefore as
in a sudden casualtie of fire, or in a City surprysed, there is great fear:
so kings and their counselors when the voice or the doctrine of the Gospel is
heard, do tremble for fear, and do mortally hate the same as the firebrande
of sedition in a commonwealth, and as the lousnes of discipline. The slanders
of Celsus, Iulianus, and others are well known, which have written that the
Gospel does take away Magistrates, Discipline, Laws: Finally, all the
sinews of civil society, and that it does grant infinite liberty unto all
mischiefs. But why do I repeat the slanders of old time, when as our age
yealdeth examples too many, which declares how great the ^^^^ltie of hatred of
many and mighty kings and (...)ainst the reformed dectrine of the gospel, by
th(...)e of the reverent Father D. Martyn Luther. Neither in deed would
politic persons be so extreme cruel and furious against the Lord, and
against his Christ, but that they are set on fire of obstinat hipocrits, which
with tooth and nail hold fast their errors, least their opinion should go to
wrack, or least it should any thing impair their aduantag. To thend therefore,
that we being discouraged with fear of their hatreds and of dangers, should not
cast away from us the profession of the true doctrine, this Psalm does
comfort us, affirming that all the endeavor of the enemies, so far as
touches the effect of the matter, shall be in vain, and to be scorned. For
although Dioclesian and his fellows do cruelly rage, and seem to devour
the universal Church: yet notwithstanding in midst of their race, their
cruelty is restrained, and the Church is delivered.

Verse 3. Let us burst in sunder their bonds, and cast away their cords from
us.
IN this verse the holy Ghost explaneth before our eyes the effect of all the
Counsels or purposes which the enemies of the Gospel put in practice. For as
Archers do aim their arrows unto a certain mark, so the enemies of the
Gospel bend and bestow all their endeavor unto the subversion of the true
doctrine, and of the true Church of God. But think with your selves (I pray
you) how great a madness it is, to call the most sweet sentences of the Gospel,
such as these are. ( Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, and I will
refresh you: Mat. 11
Again, So God loved the world, that he sent, etc. John. 3.
) Bonds and cords: But as they that are grieved with some disease in their
eyes, see not in deed those things which are before their feet: so the
enemies (...)spell being vexed with scorching flames of f(...)nde and body,
do not any thing con(...)stand how great good things are expressed
(...)pell, namely, true invocation upon Bod, and firm consolation to their
minds, and a rule of life: which things are not to be reputed amongst bonds
or fetters, but amongst the chief blessings and benefits of God. Wherefore
it is doubtful whether this madness of the enemies of the Gospel be more
worthy of hatred or bewayling.

Verse 4. He that dwells in the heavens, shall laugh at them, and the Lord
shall make them as mo^king stocks.
Doubtful it is not, but the minds of the godly, in such rage of the enemies
do sorowfully seek where the Church shall be, and where the light of the
doctrine, and purity and voice of the ministry shall remain. Wherefore we
shall remember this most sweet consolation, let us know that God laugheth to
scorn ye pract^ses of the enemies, (which thus far tend, that the church,
and light of the true doctrine might be extinguished): and that the ministry
of the Gospel shall still continue, yea though the world should be chrushed
together. For saying The gates of hell shall not be able to overthrow the
Rock, Math. 16.
whereupon the Church leans as upon his foundation; they shall never bring
to pass that which hye priests and kings wickedly endeavor, whose change is
more easy, then of the fly that most swiftly flies. And whom the holy
Ghost in other psalms compare unto chafe, dross, smoke, young thorns and
hay on the house tops, then which things there is nothing more frail and
momentany. It likes me to recyte in this place the verses of Hesiodus, which
teach, that he plays a foolish part, who strives against a more mightier
person then him self, when as he can neither be the better, and yet adds
unto his own misery derision and mockery. Imprudens vero quicunque velit cum
poteutioribus contendere, victoriaque priuatur, atque pudorem doloris patitur.

Verse 5. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and in his fury he
shall destroy them.
A Horrible threatening denouncing punishment to these enemies of the Gospel
which are incurable. God will not for ever deride the most foolish practyses of
frogs and mise which assail the Church: But shortly after like a Storke or
Curlewe, he shall devour these little frogs and mise, turning vpside down
their common welthes and kingdoms. But the efficacy of the words in this
threatening must be diligently waied of us. He shall speak unto them in his
wrath. Compare here the wrath of man, be he never so mighty, with the wrath of
God. For man's wrath we may escape, either by fleeing away, or by seeking
refuge, or by death it self. But Gods most just and most severe wrath, no man
can escape. First, because God is every where, as it is said in the 139.
Psalm, ver. 7. Whether shall I go from thy Spirit, or whether shall I flee
from thy presence? If I clime up to the heaven, thou art there, If I make my
cowche in hell, lo th^^ art there also. If I take unto me the morning wings,
and shall dwell in the farthest parts of the sea, yea there also shall thy
hands guide me, and thy right hand shall hold me fast. Moreover, since God is
light, there can no darkness take us away from his eyes, according to the saying
in the same psalm. verse. II. And I said perhapes the darkness shall cover me,
and the night was as the day light about me. Because darkness are no darkness to
thee. But the night shines as the day, and darkness is all one with thee as the
light? Finally, because this Lord is the judge of the quick* and the dead,
not death in deed it self is any remedy for us against the wrath of God.
Which things since they are so, it becomes all creatures thoroughly to tremble in
thinking on the wrath of God, and to fear the judgment of God which is a fire
consuming al flesh as it were grass, and all the glory thereof as the little
flower of the field. But least that any man do think the wrath of God to be
vain, and should with gyantlike boldness scoff at all threatenings of God, as
vain bugges to fear us with, and as fables either devised by painters or
Poets. Let him call to mind the histories of all ages, which are plentiful
witnesses, that the threatenings of God are ratefied, and that man's contumacy in
most mischeuous and heinous trespasses is always revenged with most horrible
punishments. For who knows not the hystory of Pharao, Senacherib, Nero,
Maximinus, Iulianus, and others innumerable, which procured unto them selves
and to their common welthes plage and destruction, by their ungodly practices
in oppressinge the church of God. For the word of God is not a vanishinge
voice, but in deed and s^quell is confirmed, as it is written Psalm. 32
He spoke the word, and they were made, he commanded, and they were created.
Although therefore some sitting in the threnes of humane happiness, do most
proudly contemn these thunderclapes of the voice of God: yet a little after
they shall often have in their mouth thie verse. Discite iustitiam moniti and
non temnere Diuos. Learn ye justice being admonished, and not to despise
Virgil.
the Gods.

Verse 6. But I have anointed my king over Syon my holy hill.
THe narration follows the exordium, wherein first of all the persons are to
be considered. The eternal Father cries of his Son, I have anointed or
appointed my Son to be king over Syon. That is of the church gathered of the
Jews and Gentiles. For although the Jews have this prerogative, that, Christ of
the seed of Abraham, and of David, was borne according to the flesh, and in
Judea both taught and wrought miracles; Yet notwithstanding by this blessed
seed of Abraham and of David not only the Jews but also the Gentiles are
blessed, seeing the same is Lord of all, and rich toward all that call upon
him. Romans 10
But seeing the Son is appointed of the Father to be king and head of the
church, and the will of God is eternal and immovable, according to that in the
46. of Esaias. My counsel shall stand. and my will shall be done. etc. can we
doubt, but this king with his kingdom together with all the power thereof
shall endure for all eternity? Let us strengthen our selus with this most
sweet consolation, and let us believe that the church of God shall endure not
only amongst the decays of kingdoms, but also (if the world should come to
an end.) And in this confidence, let us defend and propagate the scriptures and
doctrine delivered us from God. Which wheresoever it is rightly preached let us
know that there is the church of God in deed: and let us express true
invocation and other godly duties. And although man's help shall be wanting,
yet notwithstanding, let us crave and look for help and defense from God the
eternal Father of our lord Jesus Christ, which has constituted the kingdom
of his son, which allows and defends it, and which has made known him
self unto ma^kinde by publishing so many promises, concerning the
preservation of his Church. But here let us remember the godly and profitable
admonition which is given us by D. Martin Luther, in this exposition upon these
last words of Dauides. If any man understand this, that he do see in the
writings of the Prophets, whereas any one person of the Godhead speaks of
the other, or unto the other, that is to say, So as not one person only, but
more are signified: To him now shall it be easy to discern, which in those
places is the person of the Eternal Father, and which is the person of the
Coeternall Son. Now, whereas of these two persons mention is distinctlie made,
there also is the third person signified of the holy Ghost, speaking namely by
the scriptures, as it is said in the Creed. This judgment of the difference
of the three persons in Godhead, being thus concluded, let us way as in equal
balance, the weight of the words in this verse. The kingdom of Christ is the
gouernmente of Christ, collecting unto him his Church by the Ministry of the
Gospel in all ages of the world, and delyuering the same from sin and
eternal death, and sanctifying the same in giving his h^ly spirit, that it may
be his everlasting inheritance, and defending and governing ye same
marueilously in this life, that it would truly call upon him, and acknowledge
prayers heard through him, and to worship God, raising from death to life, and
eternal glory. Let us therefore not only discern the person of this king
from Cyrus, Alexander, Augustus and such like: but also the kingdom of Christ
from all Common wealths and Gouernmentes. For although it be certain that
mighty Princes (by whose wisdom and virtue kingdoms are ordered) be styrred
up and helped by God, as Herodotus rightly speaks of the Persian king, That
the kingdom of Persia increased under the government of God, and the kings
themselves redilie following him. Yet Cyrus, Alexander* Augustus and such like,
were miserable men, subject unto sin and ^eath, neither did the Godhead
mingle it selse with their naturs. But we which are instructed in the Church by
testimonies of Gods word, do believe in Christ, not only that he is man's
Nature, but that he is the divine nature of the Son of God, whom S. John
John. 1.
calls The Word, and who is the express Image of the eternal Father.

Now consider how great a benefit it is, and how evident ^ testimony of his
great lone toward us, that the Eternal God has sent unto us the Coeternal
Son his Image, taking upon him the nature of man, wherein wholly shines God the
Son, in a league immutable. But alack, too frozen hearted are we in
considering so great matters. Therefore we must pray unto God that he would
stir up in us (through his holy Spirit) motions by all means agreeable unto
so great a gift: Namely, Faith, Thanksgiving, Confession and such like. Thus
far I have spoken a few things, touching the difference betwixt Christ and
other kings: Now let us distinguish ye kingdoms of Christ from other
kingdoms by evident bounds, as it is in the Law of governing territortes. For
they differ in form of government, in benefits and stabilitie. For other
kingdoms are fortifyed with riches and armies, and dee punish offenders with
the sword or with corporal force: but Christ's kingdom is governed by the
voice of the gospel, by yt which God is effectual, and does regenerate many
unto life everlasting. Moreover, in other kingdoms the chief things are
peace of body, and external discipline. But the treasures or riches of this
kingdom, are remission of sins, the h^ly ghost, and life everlasting.

Finally, other kingdoms have their fatal periodes, as Plato in the 8. book
of his common wealth disputes That, Commonweals are changed for Celestial
causes, which make certain interchanges of States in Cities and gouernmentes:
And the Scriptures oftentimes cries out, that ye fall of Empires is caused by
the (...) of men, and that there are punishments for heinous offenses, as it
is written in Syrach, cap. 10. The kingdom is translated from nation to
nation, for the iniquities and deceites of men. But no limite or space of time
can conteyne the kingdom of Christ, for as much as it is spiritual and
heavenly, as the Angel says profoundly in the 1. Chap. of S. Luke, He shall
reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be none
end.

But although some dispute why the hill Sion is called holy: yet the answer is
simple and plain, that the church is sanctified of Christ the king, who is
given of God to be our Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, and Redemption: 1, Cor.
1. And Christ sanctifyeth his Church with his word, his blood, and with the
holy Ghost, as it is written John 17. Father sanctify them in thy truth, thy
word^ is the truth. And again. Heb. 13. Jesus suffered without the gate to
sanctify the people by his blood. Ephesians. 5. Christ loved his church, and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify it, washing it with the fountain of
water in his word. Joel. 2. I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh. etc.

Verse. 7. I will preach of thy commandment, the Lord said unto me, thou art
my son, this day have I begotten thee.
THe Son of God affirms in this verse, that he will preach and set forth
the doctrine beside the law namely this sentence. The Lord said unto me,
thou art my Son this day have. I begotten thee, ask of me and I will give
the Nations for thine inheritance. Therefore shall he observe the ministry of
teaching the scriptures and studyes therein, and does approve these studies in
those which learn the Gospel. For this verse comprehends the whole effect
of the Gospel, as: D. Mart. Luther, interpreting upon the 3. cap. of Iohel
says, For what other thing does the Gospel teach, then that Jesus was borne
of the virgin Mary, is the Son of the eternal Father, and came in this
flesh, that he might first teach us concerning the merciful will of his
father. Secondly, that he might make satisfaction for our sins, upon the
cross, and give his holy spirit and everlasting salvation. With this
doctrine are our minds (through the holy Ghost) enflamed, that first they
might truly love God: for we see him to burn in so great love toward us,
that for our salvation, he spared not his own only Son. Moreover, that our
minds might embrace the son as a sufficient sacrifice for our sins,
wherewith only the Father would be pacified. By this faith we obtain
remission of all our sins, and willingly obey our Redeemer, calling us unto
Baptism, unto his word, unto his supper, and exhortinge us unto love. And we
are assisted by the holy spirit, that our hearts being changed, do begin to
hate sin, and not to nowrish sin any more, or be therewith delighted as
before time, and with all industry might bestow their whole life in the true
obedience of God. So are we by faith in Christ justified before God, and we
receive the holy Ghost which begins obedience in us toward God. But
although this be never perfect in the flesh, by reason of the remnant of
sin, in us, yet notwithstanding whatsoever blemish is therein, the same by
faith in Christ is utterly wiped away. Thus far D. Luther. And this verse
contains also evident testimony touching the person of the Messiah, and
teaches that this king and priest of the church is the Son of the eternal
Father, begotten of him, and the Creator of all things with the eternal
Father, and the holy Ghost, wi^ly says the eternal Father, Thou art my Son,
This day have I begotten thee. In these words is signified a natural birth and
not the adoption, for the son which is adopted, not begotten of the Father is
grafted into the milie, but he which is begotten of his Father is his natural
Son, and these are declared before (...) the argument. But some man perhaps
would (...) in this place, whether the deume nature be alone in (...), or no? I
answer, there are many causes why the Mediator is god and man, whereof I will
now recyte some. The Mediator is God, to thend he may deliver our prayers and
worshippings unto the Father and enter into the secret counsel or the
godheade. For God as touching his majesty, 1. Tim. 6.
dwells in a light vnaprochable, and is a consuming fire. The same Mediator
is man, to the end he might talk with us familierly, and show us the Father,
because we are not able to abide him speaking in his majesty. Furthermore this
Mediator is man, by reason of the conflict and passion which he suffered, and
he is God by reason of the victory and tryumphe in his resurrection and
ascension. For the alone nature divine can not suffer nor dye. Also the alone
nature human is not the over commer of the world, that is, of sin, death
and the devil. Finally the Mediator is man, to the end he may do the office of
a priest, which perteyneth unto the doctrine and sacrifice. The same mediator
is God, to the end he may do the offices of priesthood touching intercession,
and of a king, touching victory triumphs, gifts, and government of the
church. And although these cases cannot thoroughly be seen, and are more nearer
beholden in that same life eternal: yet notwithstanding it is needful that in
this life we think upon the beginninges of this wisdom, (that the admiration
and desire after the fellowship with God) might be inflamed in us, and that as
thankful unto him we should praise him in these great benefits that the only
begotten Son of the eternal Father took upon him nature of man, to overcome
death, and restore to us life, and gather together his eternal Church and be
an intercessor for us.

Verse. 8. Ask of me and I will give the Nations for thine inheritance, and
the costs of the carth for thy possessions.
SO great plenty and abundance of doctrine is there in this psalm, that it
cannot be comprehended in many volumes of comentaries. Therefore I shall be
contented to entreat upon the special places. And there are in this verse
three chief and notable places. The first a Testimony of the divine nature of
the Messiah. The second a doctrine of the calling of the Gentiles. And the
third a difference of the kingdom of Christ, and other kingdoms touching
these places, I will be brief, least that my comment grow too great.

Therefore like as the Epistle of S. Paul. Hebr. 1. Heb. 1. et 1^
does excellently urge the efficacy of those words in the next verse, to
confirm the diumitie of Christ. To which of the Angels said God at any time,
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee? So we both may and ought to
apply this verse to confirm our selves, and confute the Arrians, To which of
the Angels said God at any time? Ask of me, and I will give thee nations
for thine inheritance, and the costs of the earth for thy possession. For in
deed the Angels are not Lords over mankind, but are created for the service
of God and his Church. But this Lord is heir of all things, because by him,
and for him, all things were created. Let us therefore remember this
testimony, and let us adioyne the same unto the other sentences, which
confirm the divinity of Christ, and confute blasphemers. Moreover so often as
we speak of the calling of the Gentiles, let these three things be chiefly
considered: First, how great the force of the mercy of God is, gathering his
Church of the miserable mass or heap of Heathenish men, which are Idolaters,
defiled with wicked slaughters, lusts, theft, lyings, periuries, and finally,
with such filthiness, as my tongue both trembles and escheweth to speak of. And
it is profitable in these histories to consider the greatness of the mercy of
God. We use to marvel less, that God revealed this Gospel unto the Jewish
people, amongst whom had remained some doctrine touching God, and with whom
there was some honest discipline. But let us compare Rome in Neros time, unto
Nazareth. First, the true God was altogether unknown at Rome, most men every
where were Athe^sts or godless men: the residue wickedly worshipped idols.
Secondly, the whole City was full of most filthy lusts, which were thought
to be pleasures, permitted, not worthy of punishment. Thirdly, money, bribing,
and vsuries, were had in price of praise. Lastly, no reverence toward God, no
shamefastness, neither regard of any truth and justice. And yet God
commaundes his Church to be gathered unto him even in such a City, and such
then were the manners almost throughout all the world. In this example is the
greatness of Gods mercy seen, that unto such persons where as discipline was
so utterly extinguished, even the word of God does ^ounde, calling them unto
repentance, and offering them salvation. And at first it was thought a matter
unworthy amongst the Jews, that the Gospel should be preached and dispersed
amongst those cursed people, which lived in great filthiness, without all
discipline or good order. Here upon happened those conflictes of Paul, when he
affirmed that the Gospel pertayned to the Gentiles, and that free remission of
sins, for Christian sake, was offered unto all them which did repent. A great
and wholesome consolation is it unto the godly, to think upon this greatness
of Gods mercy, which is specially seen when we consider how God disperseth his
Gospel amongst th^se monsters of men, as then were the heathen, and as now are
many. Let us know that this mercy of God is taught unto us, so often as
mention is made of gathering a Church, from among the Gentiles.

Secondly, the calling of the Gentiles is an excellent Testimony touching the
whole effect of the Gospel, which consists in the universal preaching of
repentance, and in an universal promise of grace. For, as God calls all men
unto repentance, so unto all which repent, and believe in his son, does he
assuredly give remission of sins, and requires of us that we believe this
voice of the gospel, and call upon him, in this faith.

Thirdly, the calling of the Gentiles teaches us the abrogation of the law,
and confuteth the opinion of the Pharisees, which imagines that men are just,
through the law, and the ceremonies of Moses: But there is no discourse equal
unto the greatness of things which the doctrine touching calling of the Gentiles
comprehends. Therefore I am now more brief, and do proceed unto the third
place.

I have declared before, that the kingdom of Christ differs from other
kingdoms, in form of government, in benefits, and in stabilitie. Now (if it
please you) let us add the fourth difference, which is taken as of the ends.
For in deed other kingdoms have their limits and bounds, as the kingdom of
Rome in the time of Augustus stretched unto Euphrates. For the Romans never
had any success in their wars with the Persians and Parthians, and other
people of the East parts, as the Histories of Crassius and Iulianus, and
others do witness. And yet although the Romish Monarchy contained many
Provinces, yet was she not the Lady of all Nations. But this our king has most
ample bounds, because he rules from sea to sea, and from the floode unto the
end of the world, as it is written in the Psalm 72. But to what end is all this recital of the bounds of the kingdom of Christ? Forsooth to this
purpose, that we may understand, that the Church is not as a common wealth
tied unto certain kingdoms, and comprised within certain limittes. But all
persons whatsoever they be, which call upon God in faith and in true
acknowledgemente of Christ, and do flee from idolatry, are the members of
Gods Church. Then are not the old, neither yet the later Donatistes to be
heard, which comprise the Church within narrow limits or bonds. For as
Donatus and they which proceeded from him, have prescribed ye church within the
only bounds of Aphrica, So the Pontifical Doctors cry out, that the Church
is bound unto an ordinary succession of Bishops, and that there is no true
members of the Church out of their Pontifical government. But let us so
surely persuade our selves, that the Church is a congregation of the godly
ones, dispersed throughout the whole world, which are tied to the word
delivered by the Apostles, and that there are the members of the Church,
wheresoever any do embrace the pure doctrine of the gospel. So at this day
under the Turks government, and under the government of other kings and
bishops, enemies to the pure doctrine of the gospel, there are some godly
persons dispersed every where. But peradventure some man would say, that all
nations are not the heritage of Christ. Neither that Christ does hold all men
under the yoke of his government. There is nothing that we can so easily
absolve. For Christ is either Lord and Ruler of the gentiles in this respect,
that he might restore unto them righteousness and life, either else is he the
fearful judge of the wicked and disobedyent. Therefore, they which will not
embrace Christ as a Savior, ought to fear Christ as the Judge over quick and
dead. But it is now time that we come unto the Exposition of those verses which
remain.

Verse 9. He shall bruise them with an iron rod, and he shall break them in
pieces like a Potters vessel.
ALthough this verse may by a subtle reason* be applied unto the ministry of
the gospel, whereof Christ speaks. John 16. Cap. The holy Ghost shall rebuke
the world of sin because they believe not in me: and of righteousness, because I
go unto my Father, etc. Yet notwithstanding, the meaning of this verse is
plain, that all the enemies and contemners of the gospel are like unto an
earthen vessel, which hitting upon an iron hammer is broken and dashed in
pieces. For as the holy ghost compared in the first Psalm the wicked unto most
light chafe so in this place he compares the same with a most frail and
brittle vessel of all others. And as the wind by his blastes scatters the
chafe, so is iron the confusion and destruction of any Vessel, of glass, or
of earth. This Similitude, as also many others, Esaias in his 30, Chapter
borrows of David, when he says: Because s^deulie, when he looks not for
it, shall his confusion come upon him, and he shall be shaken in pieces, as the
Potters vessel is broken with a mighty strike, and there shall not one
shearde be found of his fragments, wherein so much as a little fire may be
carried out of the Furnace, or a little water out of the Spring. This
Similitude not only paynteth out the frailty and brittle power of the enemies
of the gospel, and also the strength and stabilitie of the kingdom of Christ:
but also it afterward she wesh how reprobate unto every good work the
enemies of the gospel are, as it is written 1. Tit. So the Jews being broken,
and bruysed with this Iron mallet, have none use neither publicly nor
privately, and are vessels of Gods wrath. But would to God that our adversaries
would look well into this example, which stiffly strengthen Idols, and that
they would learn Jstice being admonished, and not to despise the gods, as it
is said by Virgill.

Verse 13. Now O ye kings, understand these things, be wise ye that judge the
earth.
Hitherto has the Prophet full of the holy Ghost, descrybed the king Christ
and his kingdom: now he makes a Sermon commendatorie, wherein he exhorts
all kings and gouerners to acknowledge and reverence the person and office of
this king Christ, and not as bewitched with the love of their own wisdom and
power, they do not despise this king anointed and appointed of the Eternal
Father. For this king is the king of kings, and Lord of Lords: and not that
only, but also is a Teacher, and Master, whose hearers and disciples we ought
to be, and not as controlers or Judges. But how few kings and Princes have
heard this Teacher S. Paul, with a sorrowful complaint, 1. Romans 1. shows in
these words. Take heed unto your vocation Brethren, because not many wise
men, after the flesh, not many mighty personages, not many noble men, but the
foolish things of this world, haih God chosen, etc.

Verse 11. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in him with trembling.
THe chiefest effects or stinges which the preachings of the gospel leaves in
the hearts of the hearers, are fear and faith. For as fear is opposed against
the security which contemns Gods judgment: so faith is the ouercommer of
doubting and desperation. Wherefore if a man will comprehend the effect of a
christian life, let him so define the same, that fear of God may be joined
with faith, which amids fears reuyueth and comfort our mind, draws near
unto God, and asks, and receaueth forgeuenes of sins. This description is
evident, and may be understood in our daily exercises. Contrition without
faith, is an horrible fear and sorrow of the mind, flying away from God, as
in Saul and Judas. Wherefore it is not a good work. But contrition with
faith, is a fear and sorrow of the mind, not flying away from God, but
acknowledging ye just wrath of God, and truly grieved that it has neglected
or contemned God, and yet approaches unto God, and craves pardon. Such a
sorrow is a good work, and a sacrifice, as the Psalm says. The Lord is well
pleased in those that fear him, and in those which trust in his mercy. When
this faith first shines out, new obedience (is begun in the governing of our
private life and vocation) and in sorrows, which pleases God for Christ's
sake, and is a worship of God: that is, a work wherein God deemeth himself to
be honored of us.

Verse 12. Kiss the Son, least he be angry, and you pearishe in the way.
Because sodenlie shall his anger wax whote, but, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him.
THis last verse uses a most sweet word, wherein he commands his Son to
be heard. Kiss (says he) the Son, that is, he shall come unto you and shall
lovingly and sweetly embrace you, giving you a kiss, and an embracing,
Reconciliation, and life Eternal. He loves unfeignedly, which gives a sweet
kiss from his heart. Therefore the Son of God loves us, proferinge us a
sweet kiss from his heart. The Eternal Father loves us, whiles he will have
us sweetly to kiss the lips of his Son. But in this place we must
consider a contrariety. The ungodly are not delighted with the kis of Christ,
but spit upon him, and with all manner of cruelty defile the face of Christ.
Unto these does this Psalm threaten punishment. But as touching the others
which are delited with his kiss, he says, Blessed are al they which put their
trust in him. These words do teach what kis is here required: Forsooth,
faith, or confidence calling upon God for Christ's sake. This faith, (when we
shall with invocation or prayer, exercise) then shall this psalm be more
manifest approved in us, and we shall find that this promise is not in vain,
but that it is thus truly kept. Blessed are all they which trust in the Lord.

The Prayer of the Apostles repeated out of this Psalm, and needful to be
exercised in these our days.
O Lord thou God, which have made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in
them, which Act. cap. 4.
through thy holy Spirit, have said by the mouth of our father David thy
servant, Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vain things. Kings
of the earth stood up, and the Princes came together against the Lord, and
against his Son Christ. For in deed they gathered themselves together in
this city against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed: Herod and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, to do that which thy
hand and Counsel have decreed to be done. And now O Lord, behold their
threatninges, and strengthen thy servants with all confidence in thee, to
preach thy word. Grant this, O Lord, we beseech thee, to the honor and glory
of thy holy name, Amen.

The third Psalm.
Domine quid multiplicati sunt. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe rule (which Hilary sets down in his books of the Trinity) does well
like me, That we must from the causes of speakinge, borowe the understanding
of things spoaken. But the Title sufficiently declares what occasion
constrained David, to write this Psalm. For although it grieved David, to be
thrown out of his kingdom, and to have sedicion stirred up by his Son,
whom he greatly loved, and himself bereaved of that glory of wisdom and
justice which he had: yet notwithstanding, these were not his chief greefes.
An other far more great vexed him: in that he saw his own sin was the cause
o^ so great mischiefs and transgressions, wherein many which were holy
perished. Herein he judges himself to be the plague of the Church and of Gods
people, and did feel such a huge burden of his sins, that he acknowledged him
self, not able to bear the same. Therefore he feared, least that God had
utterly cast him away, as Saul, and other Tyrants, which were the vessels of
Gods wrath. With this fear and sorrow had he no doubt been utterly quailed,
but that he did inculcate into him self the words of forgiveness which he had
heard of the Prophet 2. Reg. 12.
Nathan. viz. The Lord has taken away thy sins. In this voice of God settling
his heart at rest, he reuyued, and began to call upon God. Therefore although
he wrastled with the tentation of casting away: yet by faith he strengthened
him self, and overcame both all doubtfulnes, and despair. Which things since
they so be. Let every one of us which repent us of our sins, return unto
God with confidence of reconciliacion for Christ's sake. Neither let us despair
by the greatness of our fall, but let us hold that the mighty power of the
Son of God is to be preferred before the sins of all men: neither to our
other offenses, let us also add blasphemy, which accuses God of Lyinge, and
denies forgeuenes of sins, let these suffice, to be briefly spoken of the
Argument of this third psalm, which sets down necessary consolation, that
God will not have us despair although we have horribly fallen and offended.
Because when, David was an adulterer and a murderer, and repented him and fled
unto God, he not only received him into favor and grace, but also restored
him afterward unto his kingdom, as in the rightful recovery of that, which
before he had lost.

Verse 1. LOrd, how are they increased which trouble me, many rise up against
me.
HE begins this Psalm, from a sorrowful complaint, wherein he bewaileth the
great force of his troubles, and, the concourse of his calamities, For who is
able to express in words with how great floodes and storms of sorows, David
was tossed by reason of his adultery. First was his daughter deflowred, after
that followed the slaughter of his son. afterward sedition being moved by his
son, their wives was defiled, the Citzens were slain, and the father put to
flight and it was a less thing for David to be thus spoiled of his kingdom,
then to be bereaved of the great glory of the power, and favor of God.
Amongst so great miseries and sorrows, he truly felt, Inward fears, outward
fyghtinges. 2. Cor. 7.
Yt is some help when sin meets not with mischiefs. That is truly said:
for sorrow increases, when we acknowledge that we procure our selves calamity
through our own transgression, and when for grievous sins, we feel the
wrath of God.

Verse. 2. Many say unto my Soul, there is no salvation for him in God.
THis voice signifies no light grief. But of one wrestling with temptation of
casting away. I lament not for my banishment and loss of my kingdom, but for
an other far more lamentable mischief, because I feel the wrath of God, and
acknowledge that I have given the cause thereof by so many my sins and
offenses which have followed my fall. For my sake (says he) God being angry
with me, has suffered sedition to be stirred up, even of my own Son. After
the sedicion followed the defyling of my wives, and much slaughter through out
my whole kingdom, and many other mischiefs which accompany civil discordes,
and innumerable souls oppressed with eternal wrath of God by means of the
sedicion. Many of the saints because of offenses dyed for sorrow, and also
many of the saints through contagion of sedicion have shaken of the holy Ghost
and are oppressed with the eternal wrath of God. Neither is it doubtful but
some of my wives are even dead for very sorrow. Thus I beholding so huge a
multitude of evils, (says David) do think my self to be the plague of Gods
Church, and a vessel of his wrath, and peradventure am for ever cast from Gods
favor.

Verse. 3. But thou O Lord art my defender, my glory, and the lifter up of my
head.
EVen as in the nature of things, there are chaunges as of the day and of the
night, of summer, and winter. So in the breasts of the Godly ones there is great
interchaunge of temptations and consolations. Wherefore as the next verse
discribed a most sorrowful temptation: So this verse painteth out faith,
wherein he assures himself, he was not forsaken of God. But truly received,
heard, and shall feel help, mitigation and deliverance from God. And
although not only mine enemies cry out, that I am forsaken and cast away of
God, but also my conscience accuses me by the Law: Yet notwitstanding I do not
swerue away from thee, but I flee unto thee, craving and expecting delyuerance
or surely mitigation. For I know, that prayer made in faith of the Son of
God, is not in vain, as Epicures do think: for as much as thou have both
given us commandments of prayer, and a promise of hearing.

Verse. 4. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his
holy hill. Verse. 5. I slept, and slombered, and awaked again because the Lord
did comfort me.
A Consolation taken from the very deed. Thou have often times preserved me
callings upon thee. Therefore I nothing doubt but henceforth thou will save
me, calling upon thee. And with this verse agrees that saying of S. Paul. 2.
Cor. 1. We have received in us the answer of death, to the end we should not
put confidence in our selves, but in God which raises up the dead, which has
taken us out of so great dangers, whereupon also we do conceive hope that it
shall come to pass, that he will hereafter deliver us also. Therefore being
confirmed with these examples of deliverances, let us be more fervent in
praying, and let us cr^ue that our determinatio^s and the euentes thereof may
be governed by God. For as Romans 10.
says S. Paul. He is the same Lord over al, and rich toward al, that call
upon him. For as without respect of any person, he is angry with sin in
all men, so he receives all men equally which flee unto his Son the Mediator.

Verse. 6. I shall not fear many thowsandes of people which encompasse me
rownde about.
IN the whole Book of Psalms, this order is to be observed. He being tempted,
Prays: Praying he is delivered: and being delivered he gives thanks. So in
this place David being delivered from fears (which are the feelinges of Gods
wrath) does now with a cherfull voice give thanks unto God for his consolation
and victory, and witnesses that faith is not an idle knowledge, but a
confidence settled in God, and from an hye dispysing the furtes of the world
and of the devil, according to that saying. 1. John. 5. This is the victory
that ouercometh the world, even our faith.

Verse. 7. Arise O Lord, save me my God: because thou have smitten all mine
enemies upon the iawe bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly.
HE mixeth a prayer with thanks giving, as S. Paul knitteth these together in
the 1. Thessal. 5. without ceasinge pray, in all things give thanks. Neither
in deed is it obscure, why God requires thanks giving. For first he will have
us assure our selves that good things are not given us by chance, but that
God does truly care for us, and that he hears our prayers, and that we are
helped of God. Moreover he will have this our confession, to be a witness
before other men, of his providence, and he will that others should be
confirmed, that they may truly believe that God has care over man's affairs,
and that the prayers of the Church are heard of him.

Verse. 8 With the Lord there is salvation and, thy blessing is upon all thy
people.
IN conclusion he prayseth God that this name is not a vain thing, that he
does not neglecte men, but truly hears such as unfeignedly pray unto him in
the church, and keeps his promises. He discribeth also his church from other
nations which blaspheme Christ, affirming his blessing, (that is to say)
promise of the forgeuenes of sins, and of life everlasting is no where to be
found but in his church. With this consolation or comfort, let us confirm
our selves against the thunder boltes of the Popes unjust excommunication, and
let us believe, that God blesses, when our enemies unjustly curse us.

The fourth Psalm.
Cum inuocarem exaudiuit me Dominus.
THE ARGUMENT.
SEeing there be many things which can disturb the godly mind from his quiet
state: Then even specially does that tentation trouble us, when we consider
our own miseries, and the prosperity of the ungodly. For the thing it self,
and the event thereof shows, that the Church, and all the godly ones are
burdened with greater multitude of calamities, then the other filthy skome of
mankind. And contrariwise, we may see the ungodly puffed up with fortunes
favor, and despising a far of, the miserable and sorrowful societies,
obseruers of the heavenly doctrine. These sorrowful spectacles do often move
the godly ones, to think that in vain they bestow so great study and
diligence in expounding and defending the doctrine delivered from God, and that
they are much wiser, which follow pleasures and whatsoever pertains thereunto,
with all care and travail. For they which singularly love the studies of
heavenly doctrine, not only neglecte worldly matters, but also are proudly
derided and trodden under foot by the wicked, and are cast out to all
torments of Tirantes and Heretics. But unto this no light stumblinge block
is opposed a strong conclusion, drawn from a comparison beetweene benefits
spiritual and corporal. And though riches and honors are the gifts of God,
yet they only serve but to the use of this mortal and fickle life, neither
are they that principal good thing, to the which man's nature is specially
ordained: For what is more uncertain then wealth. Cum Irus sit subito, qui
modo Craessus erat? When he is soon made a poor. Irus, which was erewhile a
rich Creslus. What is more vain then honor, when it is either feigned, or not
of continuance. When the ungodly therefore have lost their slender and
transitory good things, they lie in their miseries without God, without
consolation, without calling upon God, neither see they in their mind any
remedy for these evils. Pompey fleeing from out of the hoaste at Pharsalia,
was not only forsaken of his friends, but also was slain by the
commandment of the Egyptian king. In this so great calamity, no riches, no
pleasures could afswage Pompeis sorrow, but this mighty personage being
destitute of al comfort, perished even like a silly poor Sparrowe. So Cato
and Brutus being utterly broken with greatness of calamities, and with the
sudden change of their former good fortune, killed themselves. But the godly
ones acknowledge Gods will in calamities, and submit themselves to God, after
a certain sort, when he punishes them, but yet they crave of him mitigation
of punishments, and they find that their prayers are heard, and they truly
feel in their hearts a joy ouercomming sorrows. These good things are proper
unto the Church only, and do far excel all victories and triumphs of
Pompey or Julius Caesar. Let us therefore learn to apply this Psalm unto our
vfe, and the good things which the gospel brings unto us, (seeing they are
permanent and eternal,) to prefer them before the shadows of pleasures and
other commodities, wherewith those abound, which are untruely thought to be
blessed. But how hard a matter it is to withdraw the mind from these
shadows, unto the true good things, and in them to settle our hearts,
(whether we have or lack corporal commodities) it may be known by
experience.

Verse 1. WHen I called, the Lord of my righteousness heard me.
GReat is this benefit which the church enjoys, and (as the Grecians say) The
best possession, in that it retayneth a certain order how to call upon God,
and has his promise to be heard. For other Nations know not after what sort
God is to be called upon, and they stand in doubt whether they be heard,
because they have not the promises of God understood nor known, neither know
they the Mediator, who delyuereth our prayers unto God. Let us therefore give
God thanks, so much as our souls can conceive, for that he has made him
self known in his Church by publishing his promise touching the Mediator,
that we may assuredly hold, why and wherefore (man's nature offending) may be
received into Gods favor, and be heard of him. And many were wont to ask of
us, why David spoke thus. God, my righteousness.

We must borrowe the declaration of this particle, from that place wherein the
doctrine touching Justification is sincerely expounded, God is our
righteousness, not as Osiander declaimeth (dwelling in us effectually according
to his divinity, and working or mouinge us to do justly.) But justifying us,
that is, forgeuing us our sins, and imputing unto us righteousness: (and if
we shall speak more amply) receiving us, and reconcyling to him self for his
Sons sake our Mediator, crucified for us, and raised from death to life. For,
although we deny not that God dwells in us, and that he is also effectual
in our hearts: Yet notwithstanding, not in such manner is he our righteousness,
and so called (whereby he dwells in us as it were in temples:) but so far
forth as he absolueth us from our sins for his Sons sake. As in another
place it is more amply said, and as he pronounces us just, and coadopteth us
into the society of his everlasting blessedness. But omitting to refute
Osiander (which to do is not our purpose now) let us show why the Psalm
makes mention of the Righteousness of God. Neither is there any thing in deed
that we can so easily manifest* For, as Danyel in his 9. cap. prays, We come
unto thee, not in confidence of our own righteousness, but of thy great mercy,
hear us for the Lords sake. So David teaches us by his example, how we may
come unto God, and crave benefits of him, since it is evident that we are
defiled, unworthy, and diverse ways guilty: and surely the bitter remembrance
of this unworthiness in us, is a great impediment unto our prayer. I cry unto
thee (says he) and believe that I am heard, not for my righteousness, which is
either none at all, or surely vnpure: but for thy righteousness sake promised in
the gospel. For I believe that when I flee unto the Mediator, I am just: that
is, I obtain remission of sins, also reconciliation and acceptance to the
life eternal. Here is to be repeated the whole doctrine of Justification,
which is delivered else where more at large.

Verse 2 Thou have set me at liberty, when I was in trouble.
Another good benefit of God given to his church, is Firm Consolation, which
not only heals up the scarres, but also the wounds. For what are the
comfortes of Philosophers? but (...) or delectations in time of adversity as
Virgil says of Aeneas: Dictis moerentia pectora mulcer. He comfort
sorrowful hearts with words. For neither does phylosophie show the benefit
wherein our minds before tossed with storms of calamities, might as it were
in a quiet haue^ be settled at rest. But the Gospel shows us the will of God,
not casting away his church because of calamities, but exercysing her in this
wrestling, lest that the light of faith and of invocation should be extinguished
in idleness. For it promises the help of God delyuering us, or surely
mitigation of calamity, to the end we may be able thoroughly to abide the same.
But here we can not at full speak concerning difference of the places of
philosophical and christian consolations which is else where oftentimes
expounded of us.

Also let the younger sort consider the most sweet figures, which David used
in discribing both his sorrows, and consolations. Zar. signifies with the
Hebrews. A seege laid to any place. To which is compared the persecution of
the Church. For there can no City be so sharply assaulted, as the Church is
assaulted of Deuiles and their instruments. For, tyrants with open vyolence
endeavor to extinguishe the Church: and heretyks with ungodly dissimulation
and craft undermine the foundation of doctrine: yea what offenses and
confusions is there in the Church it self. Finally most true is the saying of
S. Paul touching the universal Church, and of 2 Cor. 7.
all the godly ones. Inward fears outward feightinge. Rachab signyfieth an
enlarging, to the which rightlye and worthily is compared consolation and
deliverance. For as when a seege is broken up, they which latelye were in great
distress, and were shut up as in a prison, do afterward walk abroad at
liberty and rushe out that way which is next unto them: So the Church
perceyueth and feels the sorrows of her heart to be well ealed and assuaged,
so often as she is either conforted with inward consolation, either else
feels delyuerance ready pressed before her eyes.

Verse. 3 Have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.
Like as in other affairs the mind which is fervent in affairs, oftentimes
rehears^th one sentence by garnishing of the same, so David, in changing the
words, does repeat the same thing in the end of his verse which he had said
in the beginning. A little before he cra^ed to be heard for the righteousness of
God, touching the which righteousness the Gospel does at large entreat. Here he
prays to be heard, by the mercy of God. But although the law discerns Gods
righteousness from his mercy, yet by the phraise of the Gospel, righteousness
and mercy are both one thing in God. For God justifies us by mercy promised
for his sons sake and for the righteousness or obedience of his Son through
his great mercy receives us. Wherefore, there is no difference between these
two forms of speakinge, viz. Hear me oh God of my r^ghteousnes: And Hake
mercy upon me, and hear me.

Verse. 4. Oh, ye Sons of men, how long will ye dispyse my glory?
THis first part of the third verse grieueously rebukes the vngodlyones
s^^^^ing and subuerting the studyes of heavenly doctrine, For we may see many
so light of disposit o^ and so boldly bragging, that they doutt not to compare
the sayings of the prophets and of the apostles with Democritus his
disputa^yons. Who (as Cicero says) taught with great Authority, greatest
vanities or tryfles. And Bembus who was after wards made Cardenall, when he
came unto Sadoletus, and had perceived that he bestowed some travel in
expounding Paul's epistie unto the Romans. Leave of (says he) these toys,
such foolish tryfles are unfitting for such a grave person as you are. Italy
is full of such like Judgments, where, when some do enter into their
Churches, they say they come unto a common error. Others although they judge
not of the Gospel, as of a vain tale, yet they abhor the native meaning or
effect thereof, as it were a firebrand of seditions and the confusion of
policies. Some being bewitched with lewd opinions, do curse the wisdom of
the Gospel, as the corruption of good manners, and the lousnes of discipline.
These ungodly and profane judgments does David with a grave speech
reprehend, calling the Gospel his glory, like as S. Paul says: I am not
ashamed of the Gospel which is the power of God unto salvation, to every one
that believes. And in John. 15. In this is my father gloryfied, if you be
mademy Disciples, and that you bear much fruit The wisdom of the Law is a
certain magnificent and glorious thing whereby common welthes are governed,
and this human socyetie is kept in good order. But a more necessary and
wholesome matter is the true acknowledgement of the Mediator, which is
understood by the Gospel, and which is the right way leading unto life
everlasting. Let us therefore learn to magnify this glory, and to prefer the
same before all humain matters. Yea although we be proudlye deryded of
Epicures, politic men and of hypocrites.

Verse. 5. You love vanities and seek after leasinge.
THis particle of the second verse may rightly be applied unto the doctrine and
life of the ungodly ones. For what are the opinions of other nations touching
God, but sclaunders, tryfling toys, and fables. That I may use Paul's words.
And neither are they only so, but many are the open erroures in such as
worship Idols, as the examples of Ethnikes, Turks, and Papists do show,
which since they be known unto all men, I think them not nedfull for me to
remember the^. And I tremble in each part of my body so often as I think upon
the multitude of the gods which the Ethnikes have, with such madness imagined,
of their manner in sacrefysing of men, of the wicked and damnable confusion of
their lusts. But I beseech God to repress the rayginge devil and not to
suffer such furies to be seen in the Church. And if a man turn him with mind
and consideration to behold the life of the ungodly ones, he shall find al
things full of vanities and foolishnes. The ungodly seek after pleasures and
such like things thereto pertaining.. But how much vanity there is in these
things, what wise man understands not? For, man's body is weak, his beauty
frail, his health uncertain, his life short, his hououre vain, pleasure
corrupt, wisdom small, virtue seeble, and his affections boisterous. Finally
all these faide away quickly like flowers, and their change is more easy,
then of the swiftest flee that flies: wherefore it is evident that not only
the doctrine of other nations, but also the life of the ungodly is most full of
vanity and foolishnes.

Verse. 6. Know ye that the Lord does deal wonderfully with his holy one.
IN the third verse, he begins a consolation which is to be opposed against
sorrows, which the godly endure. But hear, as I consider this verse, I
remember the elegant and learned Paraphrasis, wherewith Eobanus Hessus, opens
this same verse. Mirificas Domini tandem cognoscite leges
In quibus exercet quos amat ipse suos.
Depremit vt releuet, premit vt solatia prestet
Enecat vt possint viuere and esse super.
The Lord his marvelous Laws at length know ye,
Wherein those whom he loves, he does train:
He brings low, unto the end that he,
May them comfort, and eke relieve again.
He gives grief, and solace sends often
He killes that they may live, and dwell aloft.


But peradueneure same man will say, It goes well with the Just. John Baptist,
S. Paul, and such like are Just and holy, therefore it must needs be well
with them. This Psalm meets with this objection, and answers orderly unto
the propositions. Although (says it) the Mayor be true, That it ought to be
well with the Just, and after this life all good things shall be given and
bestowed upon them: yet not withstanding, God in his secret and wonderful
counsel, deferreth rewards and punishments in this life, and more straightly
exercises the chief members of his church, then others. The causes of this
his connsel are manifold, whereof some are recyted in the doctrine of the
Church. For the calamities of ye godly are either (...) That is, punishments
for certain offenses, as the banishment of David was the puninshme^t for his
adultrie. Either else they are (...) trials or exercises of their faith, as the
imprisonment of Joseph, or else they are (...) that is, notable and evident
testimonies of the kind of doctrine, and of judgment to come. Furthermore,
touching the Minor, he answers, The holy ones in this life are Just, through
Imputation, for the Son of God his sake, and some obedience is begun in them.
But as yet they are not endued with sincere newnes of life, and agreeable
strength touching the Law of God, wherewith they shall be adorned after death.

Wherefore, while as yet in the immortal body they carry about with them many
sins repugnant unto the Law of God, as for example, security, pride,
distrust, impatience, and diverse wandering motions: it is needful that the
flesh be mortifyed, and that the old leaven be purged out, which can not
otherwise more fitly be done, then by death, and other great miseries which are
the admonishers and rebukers of sin, and of Gods wrath, and do repress
lewd and vicious desires. The meaning of David this word ( chased) does
witness, which signifies as not without fault, or without sorrow, but
sanctified and justified by grace.

Verse 7. The Lord hears my prayer, when I cry unto him.
HE makes not mention so oftentimes in vain of prayer, and hearing, but with
great advise does he repeat these. For David after his example will have the
Church to teach, that prayer or Invocation is the moderator of dangers in this
life, and most special defense in this misery of mankind. Like as it is
written in the 18. chap. Proverbs: The name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
unto this shall the righteous flee, and be delivered. And it is commanded us in
Psalm. 49. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, etc. Moreover, this sentence
witnesses, that prayer is not a vain sounding or noise: but that it is
assuredly heard, and that it obteyneth delyueraunce, or mitigation agreeable
with the will of God, touching the which thing, else where in the Church it is
declared.

verse 8 Be angry, and sin not, commune with your hearts in your chambers,
and be still.
Unto the former consolation now adds he a precepte touching christian
patience, which is, to obey God, in tollerating calamities, according to our
vocation: so that we swerue not away from God, or be angry with him, or
contrary to his commandementes dee any thing, when we are broken with sorrow,
but that we should moderate our sorrow with acknowledgemente of the will of
God, and with hope of his divine help. Concerning this virtue, there are set
down many sentences every where. As 1. Peter 5. Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalte you in time convenient. And in the 46.
Psalm, Prove and see because I am the Lord: That is, Seek not unlawful
remedies in time of your calamities. As Saul before his last battle (fled for
help and remedy unto the witch) But settle your hearts in God, whose hand is
able and (...) both to debase and exalte. Think with your selves that the
Church is not ordained for idleness and pleasures, but ^^^ a sharp and fierce
warfare, which can not be endute^ but with great virtue. Call unto your mind
the Son of God, who since by assured prouitence of God he suffered most bitter
calamities, it were a thing contrary unto all right, and unequal, that we
should covet such pleasant idleness, especially when through our offenses, the
wrath of God is provoked. Set before our eyes the examples of mighty
personages in the Church: which were in greatest miseries, yea behold well the
whole creation of things which is horribly profaned of the ungodly, and
suffers this abuse holding this assured persuasion, the day will come, that
after a while, it shall be together with the children of God delivered from
these molestations. Considering these and many other in your minds, be still,
and bridle your affections, that they burst not out beyond their bonndes, and
seeing it is a most difficult matter to perform this obedience, Crave of God
that he would give you his holy spirit the governor of your mind, will and
heart, according to his promise. How much more shall your heavenly Father give
you his holy spirit, when you ask it of him. Mat. 7.
Thus far have I briefly and simply recyted the meaning of the fourth verse,
agreeing with the whole substance of this psalm. It follows that I now
speak of that r^eaning or sense, whereunto S. Paul has rightly and finely
applied this verse in 4. cap. Ephesians. For Paul geuinge admonition touching
moderation of anger, and pardoning injuries, alleges this verse. Be angry
(says he) and sin not. And straight way, he adds. Let not the Son go
down upon your wrath: Give no place unto the devil. But although it seemed
unto many in times past, that Paul recyted this verse abusyuely, yet let us
keep still the rule delivered us by Christ. The second commandment touching
love, is like unto the first, for the virtues contained in both tables are
nedeful by necessity of the commandment, and of the duty: and are the
worship due to God, that is, works whereby God judges him self to be
honored, when they are done in acknowledgment of the Mediator. Finally, the
obedienc contained in both tables beholds the same principal object, namly,
God. Wherefore, there is no absurdity in that, whereas S. Paul applies this
precept touching suffering injuries amongst men. For although the obictes are
external in great diversity, about the which that excellent virtue, patience
is exercysed, as there is one object in the punishment of Paul, another in the
exilement of David, before Saules death: yet notwithstanding there is one and
the same object inward, or principal, whereupon is reposed this moderation of
sorrow. Let these suffice to be spoken of us here concerning the place cited
by S. Paul, least any man swerue into that opinion that he think Paul
unlearnedly used testimonies of the scriptures, as some men cauell at the
worthy commendation of that testimony out of Genesis viz. Abraham believed God.
etc. Concerning which we Romans 4.
will speaks of else where,

Now let us deal with that which is in hand, and see if we can gather remidies
of immoderate anger, out of the word of God, and the wrytinges of
Philosophers. For what a mischief unbridled anger is, and how hard a matter
for an angry man to restrain him self that he thereby pass not measure, the
sainges and examples, (whereof the number weary me to speak) sufficiently ^o
show. Pindarus says, Anger so troubles wise men, that they sin. And
Iuuenal says, But reue^geme^t is a commodity more sweet then life it self.
in the Proverbs it is said, Man's wrath works mischief. with these sentences
do agree very many examples. But we for brevity sake will be content with a
few. Theodosius the Emperor, when he was by nature very furious, commanded a
multitude of ye base people at Thessalonica, (their cause not heard) to be put
to death, by reason a few soldiers were slain in an vproare. Hierom the
ecclesiastical writer, by reason of the fond contentions touching Origin, so
poured out all liberty of anger, that he all to bad, reproched his friend,
Ruffinus, with whom he had lived very friendly for thirty years spare, and set
forth books of bitter speeches, which are yet extant against that man of a
right opinion touching the effect of controversy.

And although private men living in idleness and vanity can gallantly dispute
of courtesy and humility, (yet the government of them selves (be it great or
small) shows what every one is, and opens, and manifests the very deep
secrets of man's heart, which is covered with many subtilties, and as it were
kept close under certain coueringes of dissimulation. For they living in the
face of the common weal, are not only sharply assaulted of their enemies,
but are often times provoked of their sociates and fellows, that they may
gratify their ungrateful affections of anger. Here is required, courage to
cast the golden rain of Palaces bridle upon the neck of untamed Pegasus: and
by Medeas medicine made with the blood of Prometheus, to cast the fiery
fominge Serpent in a sleep, and as I may say in one word. To cast Sibels
med^inall soppe unto ba^ king Cerberus.

And there are six causes, why anger must be moderated* least that she do any
thing against justice, or other virtues. The first is, the commandment of
God. which most severely commends us to this moderation, as in this place. Be
angry and sin not. It is natural in man to conceive hot flames of anger,
where the heart is so framed, that it flees and fears and strives to deprive
evil things: But it is the property of the devil to burn with desire of
revenge, and to carry about unappeasable hatred against a citie^ of the
samecontrie. The second cause is, for that revenge is the honor due to god
above, according to that saying. Mine is revenge, and I will reward. ^ 32.
For the law is more ruler over our goods, then we ourselves are. The third
cause, is the acknowledgement of our own frailty, and of our own filthiness,
for it is properly a point of foolishnes, to see other men's faults, and to
forgete her own. Whereas if we would consider how great our own faults are,
and what filthiness we our selves yet bear about us, we should easily bear
with other men's infirmities, and very well tolerate them which are not punished
by the laws: as Seneca says, He easily pardons other men, who has need of
pardon himself. The fourth cause, is the remembrance of Gods pardon and
forgiveness, touching the which our daily prayer admonishes us. Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And the most severe
parable is well known in the 18. of Math. of the two servants. Unto which
parable this Epiphonema or conclusion is added. So shall your heavenly Father
do unto you, if you do not every one of you forgive his brother, from the
bottom of your heart. For although free remission of sins consists not in
the nature of any work, yet God so earnestly requires our forgiveness, that
he denies our sins shall be forgeuen us, except that we also be confirm
the forgetfulness of evils done unto us. The fifte cause is, that true
Invocation or prayer unto God be not thereby hindered. Therefore S. Paul
admonishes us, 1. Tim. 2. Pray without wrath or doubting. For when hatreds
increase in the desire of revenge, the Spirit of grace and of prayer is shaken
of, without the which there can be made no true prayer. And what greater
wretchedness may be imagined, then man living without God, to be cast out to all
the darts of the devil? Wherefore, if there were no cause of private
forgeuenes yet this alone is both able, and also ought to bend good minds to
the moderation of anger. The sixte cause, is longest of all, which S. Paul
recyteth in these words: Ephesians. 4.
Give no place unto the devil* For through private contentions, the doctrine
which we profess, is evil reported of, the Church is troubled, many godly
me^, by this occasion are entangled with desires of factions, others are hurt
by our example, and finally, other affairs more necessary are hindered* All
these evils does S. Paul comprehend when he says, Give no place unto the
devil. So David, when he might by great right slay Saul that lay in wait for
him, yet he spared him, least he should blemish his profession, or trouble
the church by moving matters unnecessary, or should be the author of an evil
example unto the people of God, in killing or slaying of kings. After the same
manner let every one reframe them selves, thinking surely that the devil,
spinneth a long web of sins and punishments, and through one offense, a
great ruin of the church or common wealth may ensue. Unto these heavenly
remedies, let certain sayings of the Philosophers be annexed, which do
gravely admonish us to moderate anger.

Xenophon Lib. 5. de reb. Graecis, hereupon says: These miseries (so far as
I am able to judge) ought to be admonishers, and exhorters unto us, concerning
moderation of anger. For if the householder himself so long as his anger is
whote, ought not to punish his family: when as it is euindent, that angry
masters have often times procured themselves more hurt thereby, then they have
done unto others, may we doubt whether we may encounter with our enemy, not
by the instigation of anger, but with counsel or aduisement? For anger is a
certain blinds and rash thing. But reason not only applies her self unto
this purpose, that she hurts the enemy, but takes greater care and heed,
that she hurt not herself.

Seneca in lib. 3. de Ira, says: Whilst we are amongst men, let us embrace
humanity, let us not be a terror nor a danger unto any man. Let us despise
detriments, injuries, raylinges and backbitinges, and with a valiant courage,
let us bear discommodities. Because, while we look about (as they say) and
busy our selves, immortality is at hand. But let us now come to the
expositions of the verses following.

Verse 9 Offer unto God the sacrifice of righteousness, and put your trust in
the Lord.
THis verse is a most pleasant exposition or garnishing of the former precept
as touching suffering calamities. For he beautifieth this virtue with a most
ample dignity, calling it the sacrifice, that is a work enjoined by God,
wherewith the Lord judges himself to be honored, when it is referred unto
this end, that we obey him. Morouer it distinguishes Philosophical from
christian patience, by two tokens, whereof one is borrowed of the object, the
other is taken from hope of Gods help. Socrates gave place unto reason in
sufferinge his calamities, and neither craved, nor trusted for help from God.
David being exiled, obeys the will of God, and yet asked of God mitigation or
deliverance. This difference is evidently and not obscurely delivered in the
said verse. Offer unto God the Sacrifice of righteousness, and put your trust in
the Lord.

Verse. 10. Many there be that say, who shall show us any good things? But
thou O Lord show us the light of thy countenance.
OF all things which learned men dispute of, undoubtedly, there is nothing
more excellent, then how plainly to understand, what good things men ought
specially to desire. This question cannot philosophy sufficiently expound, by
reason of ye darkness of the mind. But she doubts of the end of good things,
and leaves others in doubtfullnes. Seeing therefore Philosophy does confess
her darkness, it is needful that kind of doctrine be embraced which God
himself delivered, which does make manifest so great matters. For there are
three chief and special good things of man, which are showed in this heavenly
doctrine. The first is, True acknowledgment and calling upon God. The second.
Firm consolation in calamitics. The third is. The order of our life. These
good gifts does this psalm comprehend, when it says. But thou O Lord show
us the light of thy countenance. That is, s^ing that man's reason is ignorant of
God, and of true invocation, neither has in her self any firm consolation,
and is much more seeble, then that she can direct her life and vocation
(amongst so many snares of the devil, and in so great a heap of buysines and
dangers) I beseech thee our Lord, that with the Gospel, and with the holy
Spirit, thou would illuminate in us that wisdom, which truly knows God
and calls upon him a right, and that thou would strenghthen our hearts
with firm consolation, and govern the whole course of our life, and vocation,
unto the glory of thy holy name, and salvation of the Church universal.

Verse. 11. Thou have made me to rejoice in my heart, whiles they have plenty
of wine and Corn.
THis verse sets out the degrees of good things, although says he: The
benefits pertaining unto this* life are the blessings of God, and are to be
craved of God, yet notwithstanding both when other earthly benefits rise and
fall too and from us, we have an inward consolation worthily fixed and
established in us an other way, and we prefer this consolation ^a^ beyond al.
sweet pleasures of this sl^tting and vanishing life wherein all things as it
were hang by a ^^ale third, Ethings which have been of force, by soden change
come to naught. So in the 45. Psalm it is said. All the glory of the kings
daughter is within. etc. (that is to say) the proper beauty of the Church, is
joy of the holy ghost kindled in the heart of the faithful, ouercomminge all
fears of death, and dangers of hell, and beginning in us eternal life.

Verse. 12. I will therefore lie down in peace, and take my rest.
PEace in this place and in other places often signifies tranqu^itie of heart,
springing of faith, hope, and good conscience. For, faith holds not only
that a man is acceptable unto God through the Mediator, but also that obedience
new begone pleases God, through this hye Priest, bringing our worshippinges
unto his Father. Hope looks for delyuerance in time to come, according to
Gods providence, whether it change in this life, either else after the
resurrection from death. For although we obtain not always corporal
delyuerance, yet we surely know that there shall follow an universal
delyuerance of the Church after the resurrection wherein God shall wipe away
all tears from the eyes of the Godly. Conscience sets her self at rest in
goodness of the cause, whereof God is the author, approuer, and defender, as
Teucer ^aith in Sophocles. In a good cause, it becomes us to have a good
courage. These three, namely Faith, hope, and good conscience, are the causes
of peace, touching the which this last verse mencioneth. I will therefore lie
down in peace and take my rest. Because thou only oh Lord have made me to put
my trust in thee.

The fifte Psalm.
Verba mea auribus percipe Domine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe fifth psalm is a fervent prayer against ungodly teachers, whose minds
are defiled with mad worshippinge of Idolles, their tongue with blasphemies,
their hands embrewed with the blood of the godly, and their other members
stained with wicked lusts. These teachers (as furies sent out of hell to
trouble the church) prays to be destroyed, and that the purity of doctrine
and therewith his church also, might be preserved and defended: There may also
be observed in this psalm a manifest figure of the ungodly doctrine, and of
the ungodly councels, which tend hereunto, that true invocation and prayer
used in the church might utterly be extinguished. And because every prayer
conceived by the holy ghost has effect of promise, let us not doubt, but God
will help us, to the end the ungodly may be confuted, which say. where is now
their God. Psalm. 114. Ver. 9.

Verse. 1. INcline thine ears O Lord unto my words, consider my meditation.
Verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my prayer, my king and my God, because I
will pray unto thee.
THere are two differences of true and false Invocation, viz. whereof me must
continually consider in reading of the Psalms. The one is, touching the
essence of God. The other touching the will of God. So often as a man begins
his prayer, let him consider with himself what he calls upon and what God he
is, which he calls upon, or prays unto. After that also, the Will must be
considered, what manner God he is, and why he does hear us. So in this place
David discerns by the same Invocation or prayer, the true God, from
counterfeit and false gods. For, Iehoua is a peculiar name, whereby the Church
alone of the fathers, and the Israelites called upon God. And there is a great
Emphasis or force in the words. My king and my God. As if he said, Thou which
truly beholdest and curest my grief, thou which truly receiuest and hear
me, for thy Sons sake the Mediator, which is the king of the Church.

This admonition of the difference of true and false invocation, is in another
place largely delivered, which in deed ought to be considered upon in all our
Invocation and thankesgeuing. Also, let that be considered, that true
Invocation is of two sorts. The one, which works by cogitation of the mind,
and with confidencies illuminated or enlightened in the will fleeing unto God,
inwardly craving and expecting Gods benefits. The other, which with the voice
or tongue expresses those motions of the heart, and consents with the heart.
Because god requires the express voice also, and that others may be
instructed and confirmed, yea to the end that the very devils, when they hear
the true god called upon, might tremble for fear and flee away. Finally, let
there be observed ardent affections of words, wherein he earnestly urges to be
heard, as thus: Hear me, consider me, And Give ear unto me.

Verse 3 O Lord, thou shall hear my prayer, betimes I will stand before thee
early in thy Court, and in thy Congregation.
ALthough God is not tied to any places or times, and always hears them that
call upon him, (enlightened with acknowledgement and faith in the son of God,)
yet notwithstanding the morning season is deemed most meetest for meditation
and prayer, when our bodies are neither ouercharged with meat, nor with fumes
of stomach, and a most earnest intention may be in an empty stomach. And it is
not amiss said of a certain ancient writer, That, Prayer is a most hard
work, because not only the intention or earnest mind is required, But also,
a consideration of the revelations or testimonies of God, and a difference from
heathenish invocation, as also a thinking upon Gods promises, and faith.
Therefore David uses here notable Metaphores, ( I will stand in thy Court,
and in thy Congregation,) to signify unto us, that it is no slender or base
work to pray unto God. For there is a difficulte attention in recyting the
prayer, and it is needeful that there come together a true cogitation of God,
and motions of the heart toward him. And there is enflamed a sharp conflicte
in all earnest prayer, or invocation, when we reason in our minds, whether,
and why we are received unto God, and our sighinges, and prayers are heard. Our
sins accuse us, and our trembling and amazed minds flee from God: but in
this doubtfulnes and flight, must we not cease from praying. Wherefore, against
this accusation we must oppose the words of the gospel, which affirms, that
although we are sinful, yet we shall be accepted unto god freely, for his
sons sake. But concerning this conflict, I have been more brief, least my
exposition should be too long.

Verse 4 Because thou art the God, not pleased with any wickedness, and the
evil man shall not dwell with thee.
I Said a little before, that in every our prayers we must consider well, who,
and what a one god is. He therefore teaches in this verse, what manner a one
god is, Namely, Wise, Bountiful, lust, True, a Judge sincere, Free, and
Merciful. For, god is such a one as he expresses him self to be in the Law,
nothing delited in murdering, wandering lusts, theft, lyinges, and other
mischiefs: but rather punishes these evils which are repugnant unto his law.
For god oftentimes affirms that he neither will, nor does allow sin, as in
the 8. Chap. of Zacharias, it is expressly said of sins. These are the
things that I hate, says the Lord. Seeing then god is true, we must most
firmly believe that god is not the effectual cause of sin in men.

Verse. 5. The proud furious fools shall not stand in thy presence, thou
have hated all those that work iniquity.
WIth this verse agrees that notable sentence which is extant in the book of
Job, chap. 13. Hipocrites shall not enter before his presence. For, god hates
and detesteth nothing more then the arrogancy of hypocrites, which challenge
unto themselves praise of righteousness, and extol themselves above other
sinners. So is it written in the 16. of Luke. Whatsoever is glorious in the
world, is abominable in the sight of God. (That is,) whatsoever is glorious
without the acknowledgemente of god, and fear of god, that is confounded.
Therefore happens so great ruins of mighty persons, which not only excelled
in worldly power, but also in prowess.

Verse 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasinges: The Lord abhors
both the bloodthirstie, and the deceitful man.
WE must deligently consider the efficacy of the word, wherewith the Psalm
reprooueth bloodsucking Sophisters, when as it so says, The Lord abhors
both the bloodthirstie, and the deceitful man. For, the word ( abhors)
signifies not only a plain reiection of the persons, but also a grievous
displeasure to light upon them, mixed with some sorrow. Let the grieuousnes of
this word terrify us, not only from wrongful murders, but from every
Sophistical, subtle, or deceivable doctrine, when as falshode and leasinges
are more dangerous (under the color of truth) then those be which are
manifest. For as the devil is both a liar, and a murderer, so ungodly
teachers are not only the crafts masters of plausible lyinges, and of
corruptions of the true doctrine, but also are the prouokers of kings and
Princes unto cruelty: As a certain Monk in a public Sermon in the hearing
of the Emperor Charles the fifte, said: That God would not be merciful unto
him, except the Emperor did first wash his whole arm with the blood of the
Lutheranes. I quake to mention this saying, so cruel to hear: For was there
ever so savage barbarousnes at any time, wherein was so great cruelty, and so
great thirst after civil bloodshed, as there is in these Hipocrites, for none
other cause, but that we agree not with them in their opinions, but, this
little verse admonishes us, that we be not polluted with their company, which
strive by might and maine against the truth, and most cruelly kill the godly
ones, for prosessinge the true doctrine. For, it threateneth unto those
sophisters and parricides, a tragical destruction saying. Thou shall destroy
them that speak leasinges. etc.

Verse. 7. And I in the multitude of thy mercy, will enter into thy house, and
will worship thee in thy holy place, in thy fear.
Always when we pray this most grievous objection troubles us, that no sinner
is heard of God. John. 9. God hears not sinners. All men in this our vile
nature, are sinners. Ergo no men are heard. This objection is not to be
expounded as a thing sclender, neither yet of small effect, least that it do
discourage us from invocation or prayer. Therefore we must first answer unto
the mayor, by distinction: Some are sinners which earnestly repent them, others
are sinners not repenting. Albeit therefore, the mayor is true, if it be
understood of those which do not repent. Yet it is false, if it be understood
of those which repent the^, or turn unto God. Moreover the minor is also to be
distinguished. All men in this our vile nature, are sinners, but after a diverse
manner. Some are without repentance, these are not heard. Some are converted
unto God. For even in the converted there yet remain vices, or leude affectes,
or flames of lusts, which they resist notwithstanding, which are called
venial sins, or sins pardonable. But therewith they retain not the
purpose of sinning: and it is sure, that these are received into Gods favor,
and are heard of him. Unto this resolution, does this vii. verse allude, naming
fear and confidence in the mercy of God. For, fear signifies a true
contrition or sorrow, and a good purpose in obeying God. But so often as
mention is made of the mercy of God, faith is to be understood by relation,
whereby we believe that mercy happens unto us. Therefore the meaning of this
little verse, agrees in all p^^^^tes, with that prayer of David. cap. 9. To
thee O Lord belongs Righteousness, but unto us confusion and shame: wherefore
not in our righteousness do we pour out our prayers before thy presence, but in
thy manifould mercies, hear us for the Lords sake.

Verse. 8. O Lord direct me in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies, make
straight thy way before me.
THe express petition of divine government which is opposed against that
heathnish versicle, Fortune, not wisdom governs life of man. Wherefore
suffer us not O God, to be drawn away of the devil, unto ungodliness and other
mischiefs, Defend us against the snares of the devil, govern us with thy
light, and with thy counceles, suffer us not to fall as deceived in our
erroures, or as driven thereunto by ^^becilitie of the flesh. Great and
meruelouse was the wisdom and virtue of David: and yet we see, that he was
now and then driven of the devil, and other whiles by human error
deceived: as when he commanded the people of Israel to be nombred. Seeing
therefore, that the infirmity is great in all men, vouchsafe thou, O eternal
God Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. govern us, and give unto us wholesome
councels for performance of private, and public affairs, and confirm our
hearts with thy holy spirit that they may obey thee that we be not instruments
of wrath, but instruments of mercy and profitable to thy Church.

Verse. 9 For there is no truth in their mouth their hearts practice
mischief, their throat is an open sepulcre, and they flatter with their
tongues.
THis notable description of ungodly teachers must we diligently consider. For
there are four proper tokens discerninge godly teachers from the ungodly ones.
For the godly ministers of the church do cure the wounds of the consciences,
that is, of doubt, and of despair. But the false prophets do both doubt
themselves of Gods will, and also leave their auditory in doubting, as the
Areopagites in the council of Trident, do bid all men to abide in
doubtfullnes, and do wipe out all this article in the Simbole or Creed. viz. I
believe in the forgeuenes of Sins. yea (say they) believe thou not, but doubt
thou. And this doubtfulnes which is not vanquished by faith, brings forth
heavy raginges against God, and also disperation. Moreover godly teachers are
not the trumpetes of seditions, and fyerbrandes of civil broils but with a
sound and sincere religion, both love and nourish peace, as much as in them may
be done. Contrary wise false prophets, exasperate cruelty in Princes, and
study to kindle civil sedicions, and to have such and so ^any motions
distroyed so many honest Matrones and so many infantes slain, and an
everlasting spoil and deuastacion of churches. Men say, there is nothing more
cruel then Panthers or Tygres, and yet notwithstanding we read that Panthers
have often times spared even the holy ones in a street, as it were with a
certain reverence. The rage of the ungodly teachers does far pass these,
which so spare no sex nor age of person that they had rather bring Heaven and
earth together, and defile there contrie with civil bloodshed, then to lose
their opinion, honor, pleasures and riches. And that these are true, the
history of this our age from the year 1517. until this present time evidently
shows. Which because it is known unto all men, I shall not need to make any
reheresall thereof. Thirdly, Godly teachers do render a reason of their faith,
with all mildnes and fear. as S. Peter says, and speak those things which
are true, standing with gravity, and which are Just, sincere, friendly, and
laudable, according to that rule delivered by S. Paul. Philippians. 4. But
contrariwise, the throat of the ungodly is an open sepulcre, brething out
blasphemies against God, and filthy raylinges against honest men, slanders
and most impudent lies. As Eaius with a most filthy mouth disaloweth marriage of
Priests, and calls so many honest and godly matrons, as are ministers wives,
she wolves. So Piggliras durst be so bold as to utter this most filthy speech,
which is extant in his writings. That Priest ( says he) less sins which
polluteth himself with whordome, then he: that marieth a wife. These speeches
do sufficiently declare with what spirit the Sycophantes and Pharasites of the
Court of Rome are possessed.

Finally, the speech of truth is plain. But an evil cause has need of
counterfete colowred medicines, which S. Paul calls in 16. Romans. Sweet
and flattering words, deceyuing the hearts of the innocents. For ungodly
doctors do imagine collusions, and fained or colored meetinges, where unto
many give good li^ing. But Sycophantes flatter themselves too much, if they
think that they can so dally in the Church, and escape scotte free. To wrappe
up the truth trimly, and gloss up their erroures cunningly. Let them look for
the same end that Judas had, whom they imitate. For as he betrayed the Son
of God with a kiss: So these endeavor to extinguish the Gospel with a
certain deceyuable outward show of holiness.

Verse 10. Make them a destruction unto themselves, O God, destroy their
devises, confound them for their manifold iniquities, because they have
provoked thee.
HOw much God hates lewd corrupting of the heavenly doctrine, this precepte
teaches: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. And God
threatens both elsewhere oftentimes, and also in this place, that he will
punish blasphemies against his name, and also reproaches against his true
doctrine. Therefore let us think it is a great felicity, that we are
delivered from those counsels of the Bishops of Rome, and from the league of
the devil, which as it blasphemeth God, to the end it may destroy very many,
so it inflameth those bishops, and stirs up Tirantes to establish mad
worshippings of Images, and other mischiefs. Nothing can more grievous be
spoken, then that which S. Paul says: If any man teach any other Gospel,
let him be holden accursed. All bitter curses does he comprehend in the word
Anathema, which signifies a matter wherewith God is angry without any
pacifying, and which is ordained for death and destruction. Therefore so does
Paul and David in this place bid us to be persuaded as touching the enemies of
the gospel. And in the exhortations of the Prophets oftentimes this
threatening is repeated, as in Esaias cap. 5. Woe be unto them, which count evil
good, and good evil: darcknesse light, and light darcknesse.

Verse 11 And let them all be glad, which put their trust in thee, they shall
sing praise unto thee for ever, and thou shall defend them, and they shall
rejoice in thee, which do love thy name, Verse 12 Because thou, O Lord, shall
bless the righteous: as with a shield shall thou defend him, and erowne him
with loving favor.
I Have oftentimes said that the Psalms have most excellent lights of
Figures, which it is not enough for us once to have seen, but wherein the
Reader may dwell, and never be able to fill his mind with looking upon them.
He said briefly in the third Psalm: With thee Lord there is salvation, and
thy blessing is upon the people. Now does he adorn the same sentence, and
diversely beautify it, with copy of speech, and with excellency of matter.
For, what can be more finely said, then that he compares the blessing and
help of God, unto a Tabernacle covering us against the force of storms and
tempests: and, unto a shield, defending us from the assaults of our enemies.
These most excellent Figures must we somewhat diligently peruse and explane.
The first Figure is taken out of the history which declares how the people of
Israel wandering in the wilderness, dwelt in Tabernacles, and was by gods
providence preserved. So let the godly ones always know that they are
defended, and preserved, not by man's help or sauegarde, but by god: as it is
said in Oseas chap. 1. I will save them, not in strength of bow nor sword,
but in the Lord God.

The other Figure is taken of warfare. The chief defense of a Soldyer is a
Shield or Buckler, which bears back the enemies weapons. So Faith in time of
Spiritual conflicte repelleth the devils weapons, or instruments. For faith
enuyroneth us with the presence of Christ, who helps us, that the enemy is
not able to subdue us, even when we are greatly ouerlayed, and repelleth the
insulting enemy. As the devil laid sore at David, and went about to subdue
him, as he did Saul, but David stood to him, not in his own strength, but in
faith: (that is) in confidence of gods presence, of whom he was strengthened,
least he would have fallen. And he believed that he was not de^^late, nor cast
from out of gods favor, nor forsaken of god: but that he was received and
preserved under gods defense, and that he should be delivered from all evil,
and enjoy the socyetie of gods Elect in the life eternal. And neither was he
satisfied with the names of Tabernacle and Shield, but he adds moreover the
Metaphore of Coronation, or Crowning, because he would signify that God both
helps them which fight in a good cause, and also gives them the victory,
whose badge is a Crown, according to that saying: No man is crowned, but he
which strives ^awfullie.

Furthermore, what force the blessing of God has, and what joyful gladness the
acknowledgement of the presence and help of God stirs up in the hearts of
the godly ones, the heap of words after a certain sort declares. They are
(says he) glad, and they shaell sing, etc. Finally, they triumph as
Conquerors, deuyding rich spoils: but the peace and joy which the holy ghost
stirs up in the^, cannot be expressed in words Therefore I am more brief as
here, and for a conclusion, I ad herunto a prayer agreeable unto this fifte
Psalm.

The Prayer.
ALthough thou, O eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which art
just, and seuerelye punishest sinners, yet notwithstanding in confidence of thy
great mercy promised for thy sons sake Jesus Christ our Mediator, I flee
unto thee as a petitioner. And crave of thee with fervent prayers, and with my
whole heart, that thou would mercifully take compassion upon me, and
govern me with thy holy Spirit, that I swerue not from the rule of thy holy
word. Deliver thy universal Church, and me silly sinner, from the manifest
violence of Tirantes, and ungodly subtilties of Sophisters, which bend and
practice all industry and force of their kingdom, unto our destruction. Be
unto us a strong Forte and Shield against all cruel enterprises and assaults
of the enemies of thy Gospel, and unto us (environed with thy favor as with a
Crown) grant and give the victory, through thy only Son our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, our Mediator, our Propitiator, and our hie Priest, Amen.

The sixte Psalm.
Domine ne in furore, etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis Psalm is full of doctrine concerning greatest matters, as, of sin, of
the wrath of God, of punishment, of repentance, and of faith embracing
forgeuenes of sins, and mitigations of punishments. For the Prophet
acknowledgeeth his imperfection and deformity, and feels the wrath of God
against sin, and fears eternal abiection. This tentation in the godly
ones, is much more sharper then death it self. Neither in deed is it proper
unto a vain and careless mind, to enter into reasoninge with it self
touching the greatness of sin, the wrath of God, and faith embracing
forgeuenes of sins. But this is the proper and secret wisdom of the Church
of God, neither is it learned, but in an unfeigned conflicte, and true wrestling
of the mind, and in true Invocation upon god. And as in every conversion there
are two motions, Mortification, (that is) Contrition: and Vivification, (that
is) Consolation, which is wrought by faith: So in this Psalm there are not
only most bitter complaints, and feelinges of the wrath of God: but also
Comfortes, wherein the Spirit with inexpressible sorrow craves help, and
wrastleth thorowlie. These are all and singular the conflictes of the godly
ones, wherein themselves discern the greatness of their sin, are in great
fears and tremblings, which no tongue of man can express at full. But least
they should utterly quail with sorrow, they are again raised up with Faith
and Invocation, whereby they crave Gods favorable mitigation of afflictions,
and do pray for the universal end and Consummation of the same: Whose
examples are proponed in the deluge, in the burning of Sodom, in the
destruction of Genesis 7. Genesis 19. Exodus 14. and 15. Number. 21. Number. 14. and 26.
Aegypte, and in the subversion of the Cananites. So ^aith Hieromie in his 10.
Chap. Correct me, O Lord, but yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury, least
I be consumed, and brought unto nothing. And Abacuck. cap. 3. Lord, when thou
art angry, remember thy mercy, etc. With such like sayings do the Prophets
crave mitigation of punishments, and do also witness that their sins deserve
greater punishment. But that God does spare and bear with our infirmity,
which cannot abide so great indignation or wrath. Which things since they so be,
let us not without sorrow, (nor without fear of Gods horrible wrath.) Look
upon our sins, which publicly and privately do abound in mankind, but
let us think to feel smart therefore, and let us crave mitigation thereof.
For there is no doubt, but through true repentance, and ardent prayer, both
public and private punishments are mitigated.

Verse. 1. Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chastize me in thine anger.
THis most sorrowful prayer springs not in the mouth of the secure or
careless person, neglecting or despysing the wrath of God, but in the godly
heart, which considers how great a thing sin is, how great a thing the
wrath of God is, and so unfeignedly sorrowing and trembling, when he feels
himself accused by the Law, and tastes y^ wrath of God against sin. Such a
heart unfeignedly craves forgeuenes of sins, conjoined with mitigation of
punishments. For he knows that in God there is goodness surpassing, which
asswageth and mitigateth al just displeasure, as he himself says in the 11.
of Ose. I will not execute the fiercenes of my wrath, because I am God, and not
a man. That is, albeit I am horribly angry with sins, and do threaten
grievous punishments unto the disobedyent, yet I lenifie with immense
goodness, this great displeasure, and I assuage the punishments unto such as
truly repent them, because I will not that my creature should utterly pearish,
and the knowledge of my name to be utterly extinguyshed upon earth: but it is
my good pleasure that my Church have her countenance, and that there become
many fit and necessary persons for the vocations of this life, and of the
Church. I will therefore spare a multitude, to the end they may b^ able to
endure this warfare. These sentences and such like, let us daily set before us
in praying, when as we are to fall in reckning of public and private
punishments for sin, and mitigation of the same is to be craved of us. Let
us therefore cry with David, and with the whole Church: Lord rebuke me not in
thy furye, nor etc.

Verse. 2. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, because I am weak, Heal me, O Lord,
because my boones are bruysed.
THe first reason of the Proposition is taken of our infirmity, which is the
cause obiectiue. No father is so grievously sorrowful when he sees the great
calamity of his loving Child, as God does earnestly sorrow when he beholds
our evils and miseries: which thing surely many testimonies do teach us, which
are recyted in the Prophetical histories: as in the 11. of Ose. it is said:
My heart is changed within me, my repentinges are kindled within me, etc. We
are persuaded hereby that we may more willingly flee unto God, when we believe
that he is moved with our sorrow. And seeing then this feeble nature of man is
not able to bear the greatness of Gods wrath, if it should so burn as our
sins do deserve. The Prophets do crave some mitigation thereof, least that
our infirmity should utterly quayle us. As in the 64. of Esaias it is said. And
now O Lord, thou art our Father, but we are clay: and thou art our Creator, and
we all are the works of thy hands. Be not over angry with us, O Lord,
neither remember our iniquities. Behold, look upon us, we all are thy people,
etc. Let there also an Antithesis be considered in this place. Man's comfort
cannot in great and unfeigned sorrows refreshe or joy our minds, as it is
written in the 5. of Ose. He could not help you, nor case you of your pain.
But the gospel shows effectual remedies, which truly heal the sorrows of
our hearts, as the same Prophet saiih Cap. 6. Because he has smitten us, and
he shall heal us: He has wounded us, and he shall bind us up again. Let us
therefore acknowledge our infirmity, and let us crave of God for Christ's
sake, to have our sores healed.

Verse. 3. And my soul is sore troubled, but thou O Lord how long?
THis repetition of the complainte shows after a sort the greatness of his
sorrow, and submission. But although the force of these affectes can not be
described in words: yet notwithstanding this seems to be the meaning of the
third verse, saying thou oh true and living God art faithful, and suffer
no man to be tempted beyond their strength, grant that without longer delay
I may feel thy presence with me, thy help also, mitigation and delyuerance
from alll evils. Bis dat qui cito dat. He gives twice that gives quickly.
Seneca.
Therefore least I faint in such infirmity and be vanquished of the cruel
enemy, come thou to me with speed, come strengthen me thus weakened and that
with speed. For it is evident that many have been broken and bruised with
continuance of calamities. Here are applied those sentences in the psalms,
which with the counselors at law we may call peremptory citacio nes. Lord
make have to help me. etc.

Verse. 4. Turn the oh Lord, and deliver my Soul, save me for thy mercy sake.
AN other reason is borrowed from the cause impulsive, which is the mercy of God
promised for christ's sake. as if he said. I bring not unto thee, deserts of
mine, but confession of my fault, and as a peticioner I flee for succor unto
thy mercy: neither doubt I, but according to the rule of thy promise thou will
receive me. For so is it said in the 2. cap. of Joel. Be ye turned unto the
Lord your God, because he is gracious and merciful and mitigating punishment.
And in Nahum. 1. The Lord is gracious and a strong hold in time of trouble,
and knows those that trust in him. But because touching this matter many
things are spoken in an other place, I now do pass on to the other verses.

Verse. 5. Because in death no man remembers thee, and in hell, who will give
thanks unto thee?
THe third reason is brought from the cause final, (as if he said) therefore
deliver me, to the end I may be a setter forward, and a witness of thy
doctrine, and that I may spread thy worthy praise. For in as much as they which
are brought unto nothing can not worship God, it may be easily understood, that
life is needful, yea and such a life wherein are not ever during sorrows,
which may hinder the worshippinge of God. So in an other Psalm. 88. ver. 11. and
12.
Psalm he says. The dead shall not praise thee oh Lord, nor all they which
go down into the neathermost pit. And in every place by readinge the
propheticalldoctrine, we meetewith like prayers which do crave delyuerance for
the glory of God.

Verse 6. I have labored with groaning, all the night long have I washed my
bed, and watered my couch, with tears. Verse. 7. My courage faints for
heaviness, and is sore changed, while they all trouble me.
David here with most choice words and most grave sentences both Retoricallye
enlarges and adorneth the former motion of conversion, which most usually is
called contrition or Mortification. For he again feels in himself three
signs of true and not fained sorrow, namely unspeakable syghes, plenty of
tears, and saintnes of courage in the face. As says the Poet. Expletur.
lacrimis egeriturque dolor. For it is true, that with syghes and tears the
sorrows of men's hearts are eased. Also that is manifest true, the like
change or resolution and faintnes of courage is the companyon of ingent
heaviness, so as all lively vigor being consumed, the skin scarce cleaves to
the bones. Pausanias mencioneth in Phocaice that at Delphos there was an image
of Hyppocrates like unto a pined or consumed body wherein the (flesh being
dried up and consumed) the lyneamentes of the benes being so covered or skinned
with a very thin skin, did evidently appear through the same. Very near
unto the similitude of this image aproche those persons, which wrestle with
trial of objection, and think them selves to be forsaken of God and damned.
Let this suffice to have put you in mind of this verse. For no affections,
specially more vehement for the greatness may be discribed in the words. Like
as the example of Timanthus which Plinius recyteth in his 35. book and 10. cap.
Timanthus was even a man of very much wisdom. For his history of Iphigenia, is
greatly commended of Orators, who standing before the altar ready to perish
when she had painted all of sorrowful gesture, but specially her father in
law, and so had full finished all show of sadness, then did she uncover her
fathers face which worthily she could not manifest.

Verse. 8. Depart from me all ye that work wickedness, because the Lord has
heard the voice of my weping. Verse. 9. The Lord has heard my complainte, the
Lord has received my prayer. Verse. 10. Let them be ashamed and mightily
confounded all mine Enemies Let them be sore ashamed and confounded quickly.
NOw recoueringe him self from out of a vehement and grievous plonge, whereas
no sorrow may be compared, he begins to render thanks to God for that he has
heard his prayer. For these words testify that these former sorrows and
sythes proceed from a mind praying unto God, and in time of prayer resistinge
the devil which went about to distroy David, as he had destroyed Saul. But
when as faith like a sheeld is apposed against the weapons of the devil, they
are repulsed, because faith takes hold upon Gods promises and verily believes,
that we are cared for, are heard, and preserved of God. and affirms that we
are governed by the hand of the Son of God present with us, like as by the
hand of God. Moses was led through the standing waters, as says Esayas. cap.
63. And as the former verses discribe mortification: So the last verses largely
express Vivification. that is, Consolation which is wrought by faith. For in
every sound conuertion of man, God mortifyeth and reuyueth, he leads down
unto hell, and brings back from thence, as the example of Jonas declares.
Jonas. 1. and 2
For although Jonas was swalowed in the devouring belly of the whale, he came
yet to that consideration, as, that he was forsaken of God, and cast out of his
favor: notwithstanding he was within three days by a wonderful means
delivered, and safe recovered from perishing. This is the scholehouse of Gods
power, and the wrestling place wherein the holyones are exercised, tasting both
death and life, hell, and heavenly paradise. But these so great matters are
not learned with a vain knowledge or insight, but with true and fervent
conflictes of the conscience struglinge with the wrath of God, with the law,
sin, death, the devil, and hell. But (as the Apostle says) Thanks be unto
God which gives us victory against our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
^. Cor. 15.
For although bitter cogitations come into the minds of men, wherewith the
devil turns out and plucketh away many from God: yet as the Prophet says He
that is in us, is stronger then he that reigns in the world with force and
fraud. So that we may well say with S. John 1. etc. This is the victory that
ouercometh the world, even our faith. And so verily with the Apostle. S.
Paul. Romans 8. If God be with us who shall be against us?

The seventh Psalm.
Domine Deus meus etc.
THE TITLE.
The ignorance of David, which he song unto the Lord, because of the words
spoken against him, by that Ethiopian, the son of Ieminus.

HE calls it Ignorance, which the Graecians call Apologian or defense of
innocence, and truth. This Psalm is a learned and grave defense opposed
against the slanders of Semeus. For it is far unlike, that David would
stain himself with such wicked mischiefs, as are laid against him by
Semeus, which he never once conceived in his mind. But with what words Semeus
the Son of Ieminus went about to blemish or deface David being in exile, the
history teaches in the 16. cap. of the second book of Kings. So spoke
Semeus, when he reproched the king. Come forth, Come forth thou blood sucker
and child of Beliall. The Lord has revenged upon thee all the blood of the
house of Saul, because thou have invaded the kingdom. etc. Therefore it was a
two foulde slander which Semeus spoke. The one that David was the causer of
the destruction of Saules family. The other, that he possessed by tyrannical
and seditious means the kingdom taken from Saul. But both these were
notorius false, and need not long refutation. For David had suffered many
and great injuries done by Saul, who gave his wife unto an other man, and
violently drove both him and his father and mother out of his contrie, and for
his sake slew the Priests and with a great host pursued him, to take away
his life from him. But although David wanted none occasions, to destroy Saul,
and might just lie have dispatched both the ensnarer and his enemy: yet he
spared him, least he should amongst the people of God be author of the example
to put kings to death, which thing others afterward through ambition would
have imitated. And as touching the other sclaunder, it was manifestly known
amongst all men, that David possessed not his kingdom by sinister menes or
sleights. but that he was called by God, beyond all hope of man's counsel and
devises unto the kingdom of Gods people. But so great is the impudency of the
devil and of all sclaunderouse persons, that they doubt not to call, Light
darkness, and darkness light. Wherefore there is no remedy against the stinging
of a Sycophant, but that God himself with horrible plagues does stopp and
sh^^te up the mouths of sclaunderers* And to the end that God would administer
this remedy unto the most vile diseases, we must not only use an Apology
which conteyneth a testimony of our innocence, but much more must we be
earnest in prayer, wherein we may crave, that God for his glory sake and
doctrine, would utterly vanquish and distroy such Sycophantes.

THE ARGUMENT
ALthough the title declare the argument: yet before we interpret the psalm we
must speak of the apt applying thereof, and we must confute certain
objections. The enemies of the Gospel at this day accuse us most cruelly and
lay in our dish the most detestable crimes of all others, as of moving
seditions in the Church and heresies, and call us both scismatikes and
heretics, neither may it be expressed with words how much the honest person
is vexed with these railinges who will not be seen as the plague and
destruction of mankind. Yet it were more easy for many to suffer most bitter
torments of body, and to be bereaved of life, then to hear these
sclaunderous speeches. But least that these rumors should break our hearts or
dismay us from profession of the truth, we must hold still true and not
sophistical causes, because it is needful that we differ in our doings from
the defenders of unjust cruelty and erroures. Let us also (against these
sclaunders) recyte this psalm, which contains a two foulde answer there
unto. Namlie utter denial and prayer for deliverance. But here the ruder sort
dispute or reason touching patient suffering and allege the saying of Christ.
If any man smite thee upon the right cheek, turn thou also the left unto him.
This (say they) does not David observe, because he speaks not in silence, but
reasons the matter with Semeus the sclaunderer. This cauillation will I
refute, because of the ruder sort: both virtues is prescribed, confession and
patience. For as it is need full to defend a truecause, specially of doctrine,
by a clear confession, so therewith ought we to be prepared in mind to suffer
violence, if the Magistrate be either negligent or cruel in doing his office.
Neither in deed is it patience to be silent, and as it were to confirm the
adversaries false and wrongful cause with keeping silence. Nay rather
confession of doctrine ought to be perspicuous or clear, as it is written. He
that confesses me before men. etc. So David performs them both. He
affirms that he is not guilty of the crimes which were objected by Semeus,
and suffers grievous reproaches, without desire of revenge. As in the 2. lib.
Reg. cap. 16. it is written. Let him go, that he may curse. etc. For the Lord
has commanded him to curse David. O wonderful patience which was persuaded
that not by hap, we are afflicted, but by the knowledge and sufferance of
God. And although afflictions come of the devil, or from the cruelty of men,
yet this patience knows that they are suffered by some determination of God,
and that there is prescribed them their limits, beyond the which neither can
the malice of the devil nor of men rage in cruelty. This example in many
affairs of our life, it is profitable to follow. If any man hurt or
hin(...)er thy good name* it is not necessary for thee to keep silence, but
thou may innocentlie excuse thy self, and refute thine adversary. If he
give no place being refuted, neither the arbitrators or judges defend thee, as
they ought, David, by his example does comfort thee, that thou may know why
thou must have patience, and after what manner it pleases God. I do also
understand how it is by David reasoned in the 8. verse thus. Judge me O Lord,
according to thy righteousness. But the application of this saying with other
sentences is easy and familier unto him which understands the bounds of
humility and of glory. Glory is the testimony of our own conscience
iudginge others rightly, and of other men's judging us rightly. Humility, is a
virtue wherewith acknowledginge our own infirmity, we give God the Glory,
and in our vocation live obedient with confidence in Gods help, and in time of
punishment, confess that we are justly punished. Even as therefore humility
has commendacion so often as we either have to do with God, with our selnes,
or with our friends: So glory, whereof I spoke before, is to be opposed as a
Gorgon against the slanders of our adversaries. So David rightly, and without
arrogancy, declared that he took not the kingdom and Jurisdiction upon him
perforce, but was obedient unto the calling of God, and that he exercised not
private desires in ruling, when as Semeus objected, that David for government
sake, both violated the Law, and godliness. This also may be answered, that we
must make a difference between the righteousness of the person, and the
righteousness of the cause. For albeit that the person (before god) is just by
faith alone, yet in the reconciled ones, righteousness of good conscience is
necessary, both for other causes, and specially for this, that we may therein
rest and settle our selves as in a safe haven, when surginge storms in the
troublesome sea appear: that is, in time of slander and reproach, which
endeavor not only to stain our person, but also to blemish and contaminate
our doctrine. In such a chance, most true is that saying of Horace: Hic murus
ahaeneus esto, nil nonscire sibi, nulla palescere culpa. That is, As brazen
wall impregnable stand here: (If guiltless thou) let no blame change thy
cheer. But hitherto have we spoken sufficiently of the Title and Argument. Now
let us come to the Psalm.

Verse 1. O Lord my God, in thee have I trusted save me out of the hands of
all them that persecute me, and deliver me. Verse 2. Least as a Lion he
greedelie catch my soul, and devour her, and there be none to deliver me.
HE cries not out as the tyrant in the Tragedy: I louinge solitarines, do
perish in despair: But as forsaken of friends, and destitute of visible
defenses, yet he craves help of the true God, which made himself known
unto the people of Israel, nether once again suffers he him self to be
dismayed from prayer, as one guilty by evident tokens, wherewith he was by
Gods will beset round about. For he knows, and by all means holds it for
assured, that God alone is his firm and faithful friend, and most sure defense
in all calamities, according to that saying: My Father and Mother forsook me,
but the Lord took me to his tuition. Psalm. 27. verse 9. With this example then
being admonished, let us learn to flee unto God, and crave benefits of him,
yea though creatures forsake us, and strive against us. But how hard it is
for us to retain the light of Faith in such force of storms, and concourse of
calamities, experience teaches us. All men (so long as they can) seek for
visible helps and preseruations. When they deceive them, many are broken in
mind and receive no comfort. But let us (since all things humane rise and
fall) have all our confidence of safety reposed in God alone: and let us cry
out with Job: Yea if he shall kill me, I will yet trust in him, and he shall be
my Savior. That is, Though I lose all things in this life, and this same
corporal life also, yet I know it is the will of God, that I should keep
still this Faith, that I should have care of my self, that I am received into
gods favor, that I am an heir of eternal salvation, and in this faith and
hope dee I comfort my self. I know that calamities are not the tokens of
reiections, neither do I judge of the will of God, as of my miseries, but as
of his promises. For although I acknowledge my self to be a sinner, and
guilty in the judgment of God yet having confidence in his promise and
mercy, I believe that he will be my Savior.

The second verse admonishes us of dangers which are more and greater then
that they may be comprehended in words. The Church always so lives, as
Daniel sitting amongst the Lions. The devils are always laying snares for us,
and afterward often times destroy many. Ungodly persons always threaten cruel
attemptes against the Church: Against so great dangers let us with great
diligence, and prayer unto Christ our preserver, more carefully seek our
defense.

Verse 3 O Lord my God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my
hands. Verse 4 If I have rendered evil unto him that has done me good, If I
have spoiled mine enemy without causes Verse. 5. Let the enemy persecute my
soul, and lay hold upon me, and take away my life upon earth, and lay mine
honor in the dust.
ALthough (says he) by reason of other offenses, I bear about with me the
manifest tokens of guyltines, and confess that I am justly punished: yet as
touching the slander of Semeus, I know my self to be altogether innocent, and
unworthy of reproach, and do constantly set against them the testimony of a
good conscience, neither think I to the contrary, but I should both be
accursed of God and man, if I be such a one, as this most impudent Sicophant
would have me accounted to be. For all the whole multitude of the people of
Israel well know, that I have been favorable unto Saul, and for a public
peace sake have forgeuen private injuries, and thereupon have taken great
sorrwe without simulation, when word was brought me of the miserable death of
Saul. But if these things be true, which are reported by Semeus, I wish and
desire, yea, I pray unfeignedly and not dissemblingly, that the enemies host
which pursues the charge and safecondite of my son, may not only take me,
and carry me away captive, with triumph over me: but also take away my life
from me, and spoil me of all the glory of those things which I have done for
the welfare of gods people. For the sorrow which the loss of his glory brought
unto David, was far sharper unto him then death it self. So Athanasius when he
was often slaundered with grievous crimes, so acquyted himself, that he not
only persuaded the Judges, but also showed them and declared his innocence,
as it were before their eyes. For in deed so many enemies as Athanasius had,
and so mighty, could not prove any one dishonest point by him. For as the
froath of the sea dashing upon the rocks, does again fall of, when the Rocks
themselves stand immovable: So is truth the vanquisher of all calamities,
and cannot be utterly oppressed.

Verse 6. Arise O Lord in thine anger, and exalte thy self against the furies
of mine enemies, and restore unto me judgment which thou have appointed. Verse
7. That the Congregation of the people may flock about thee, and for this
cause ascend thou on hie.
Hitherto does he answer Semeus by way of denial. Now because prayer is the
special defense of a godly mind, in so great sorrows of this common life. He
craves of God with unfeigned sorrow, that he may be defended against the furies
of his enemies, and to be restored into his kingdom, not for vanity and
pleasure sake, but for his Church sake. (To whom he knew) his government was
acceptable. For in deed so David warred against his enemies, as, that boys
and gyrles at home, in the Church, and in schools, might be perfect in
learning, might read the Law in Moses, and here the Interpreters of the Law
and of the promises, wherein God had made himself known. Unto this rue do
few Governors bend their endeavor. Julius Caesar warred because he would not
be spoiled of his dignity by the enuyous. Anthonius warred to the end he
might devour that which another had gotten. But in the Church of God, all
godly governors ought to foresee that good end and purpose, how the policies
thereof ought to be car^^ for, defended, and preserved, that in them the
knowledge of God might be advanced. For in deed to that end are men created
unto society, that in this their often ass^n^blie the knowledge of God might
shine soorth amongst them, and that God might be honored and called upon, and
that some by others might be edifyed in that doctrine which plainly opens the
way unto eternal joy and fellowship with god. Unto this special work, namely
(the advancement of the doctrine) ought all policies and degrees of life to
serve. For as a Lantern without a light in it, serves to no use in darkness:
So Cities (wherein the knowledge of God, and doctrine of his benefits is
extincte) are unprofitable momuments. Neither in deed are these words to be
so read by the way, as if that the Sinagogue of the people should flock about a
man. But let che conflict in David, even with his own affections, be
considered of us. For not without great motion of the mind was this final
cause of his reduction or recovery of Gods favor, pronounced. He prays that
he may be reduced, and is therewith prepared unto obedience. He is willing to
obey gods will, yea though he be not reduced, and yet does he not cast away
faith touching sorgeuenes of his sins, neither prescribes he any manner of
time. Yea, he wishes not to be reduced again, if he might deliver his son
from eternal damnation: rather then so reduced, that thereby he should for
ever and for ever destroy his son, and a great multitude of his Citizens.

This manner of deliverance grieved David more then the loss of his kingdom.
But he knew that when God brought him back again, he must obey his will, and
that through zeal toward God and his Church, our affections must needs be
vanquished. So Religion in us, and piety toward God and his Church,
vanquysheth other motions of the mind. But where he speaks (of the ascending
of God on high) that may be understood by relation, and not absolutely so in
deed. For then is God exalted in our sight, when he is known of us aright,
called upon, and worshipped according to his word delivered, and when we
reject all false opinions, and worshippinges which are wide from the rule of
his divine Institution. Wherefore, seeing that studies after the heavenly
doctrine, in tune of tumultes wax more fainte, and the due honor of God might
so be hindered, David, being very careful for these special benefits, with a
godly zeal craved restitution into his kingdom, not to seek after vanity and
pleasures, but that he might again gather together and restore the Schools
and Churches scattered and defaced with civil wars. So Athanafius being
driven into exile by the faction of those Arrians, prayed to God to be restored
into his state again for the Churches sake.

Verse 8 The Lord judges nations. Judge me^ ^h Lord according to my
righteousness, and according to mine Innocence.
THe sentence of nature and of the Law written, is known, which forbids him
to give judgment, who defends the contrary part of the controversy. 1.
Tim. 1.
Wherefore David neither arrogateth unto himself authority of judging in this
controversy, neither yet grants he the same unto his enemies, but he
appealeth unto the Judge in whom there is no respect of persons, and which
beholds thoroughly the deep secrets of man's heart. But he, in this Court,
alleges the righteousness, not in deed of the person, but of the cause, and
sets against those false forged slanders, the testimony of a good
Conscience, as a Gorgon or Shield to terrify his enemies withal. Furthermore,
many are the causes which exhort us to defend the integrity of our Conscience.

The first, is the commandment of God, 1. Tim. 1 Fight the good fight,
keeping faith and good Conscience. Also, The end of the commandment is love
from a pure heart, and good conscience, and faith unfeigned. Let these sayings
be fixed in our minds, and guide us, that we do not any thing against
conscience. (That is) that we wittingly break not the law of God.

The second cause is, that faith may be retained: for there are two
contradictorie or gainsaying affectes. To do willingly and wittingly against
Gods commandments: and to have a desire to repent, without which, faith
cannot be. An evil conscience, therefore, and faith cannot be in the heart both
at once.

The third cause, That true prayer might be performed of us. For he that has
still an evil purpose of mind, calls upon God in vain: Nay, he cannot pray
at all, because he comes unto God without repentance and faith. Now let a man
consider what a wretchedness it is to live careless of God, (that is) not to
be able to crave and hope for the help of God, but to be forsaken of God, and
enthralled of the devil.

The fourth cause is, Confidence in the help and protection of God. This cause
ryseth of the former causes. For he that with a good conscience endeavors
himself, has ever a good confidence, which is the sweet Nurse of old age.

The fifth cause is, Tranquillity of mind* Touching this cause, let us hold
fast that most sweet saying of Gre. Nazianzen. No thing so much rejoices us,
as a pure conscience, and a good hope.

The siste cause is, The mitigation and deliverance in calamities. For surely
some help it is, when sin and mischiefs meet not together. For these causes
and such like, we must endeavor our selves that our conscience in all actions
agree with the word of God, neither that we do or allow of any thing against
conscience: And when we retain such integrity of conscience, the mind is at
quiet, it holds fast faith, and remains in favor with God and man.

Verse 9 Let the wickedness of sinners (I pray thee) come to an end, and save
thou the just, O God, that searchest hearts and raynes. Verse 10 My help
comes of the Lord: which preserves them that be true of heart. Verse 11 God
is a just Judge, and a God which is angry every day.
GOd will be acknowledged and discerned from all other natures by certain
properties, because we can not feel or embrace him in our corporal arms. And
these properties in every our prayer must we think upon, that we may discern
the true God from all natures and false gods. For it is needful a man know to
whom he speaks, where god has here made him self known what manner of God
he is, whether and why he hears us. In this place David recyteth while he is
in praying, three notable and clear properties. Whereof the first is
Omnipotency. For it is only proper unto the Omnipotent nature to look into
all men's hearts, and to discern true sorrows from dissembling sorows. And
seeing this property may not be attributed unto any creature, it must needs
be a clear thing, that we ought not to make our prayers unto men that are
dead.

The second property in this place recyted, is The Righteousness of God, who is
angry against al sins and wickedness which are opp^gnant to his law. Of
this property we have spoken more in the fifte Psalm.

The third property is The goodness of God, which helps those that are true
of heart. (That is) truly calling upon him in Spirit and truth without any
other causes incident, So happened it with Adam and Eve after their fall, when
they could not be helped by angels, nor by their own policies, neither yet by
any other creature. Then comes God from his secret throane, and received
sinners to his favor, and geues them life. Let our mind therefore behold this
true God, which made himself known by sending his son, publishing witness of
him, by raising from death to life, and other miracles done. And let our mind
therewith think that this is the true Creator and helper, which is wise, which
hears us, and is both true, bountiful, Just and sincere, punishing also
wickedness and sins which are contrary unto his righteousness.

Verse 12. If the wicked will not be converted, he has sharpened his Sword, he
has bent his Bow, and prepared the same. Verse 13. And he has made ready for
them, weapons of death, and he has prepared for them whot burninge arrows.
THe godly Reader (without any Expositor) well understands Hypoteposis.
how gallant a Description this is, and how fearful unto the ungodly
multitude. For he paynteth out as in a Table, how God is armed with his
Sword, purposely prepared, and with his Bow, not unbent, but ready bente, whose
Arrows miss not the mark, but hit home surely, and cast down whatsoever
they are leuelled at. Beholding this Similitude, let us acknowledge the most
just wrath of God, and let us crave with un ayned repentance for his Sons
sake, that he would assuage the same. Undoubtedly, if we were not of hearts
as hard as Iron, this heavy sight would thorowlie move us, and would leave
the pricks of repentance in our hearts. But we are too frosen hearted to
think upon so great matters: Wherefore let us cry ^ut and say with Hieremie
Cap. 2. Turn me O Lord, and I shall be turned: Correct me O Lord in thy
judgment not in thy fury, least I be brought unto nothing.

Let us also learn the difference of chastisement toward the godly, and of
punishment toward the wicked. For of the godly it is said in another Psalm:
I will visit their sins with the rod. This Fatherly chastisement is not a
token of reiection, but an exercise of godliness. And unto this trial of faith
may those little verses of Mantuan be rightly applied, Sit licet in Natos
facies austera parentum,
Aequa tamen semper men's est, and amica voluntas.
Though Parents cast their countenance stern
upon their children, yet
An equal mind and friendly will
always they use most fit.


But of the ungodly ones Amos recyteth a heavy sentence. All sinners shall die
with the Sword. (That is) shall fall out of present punishments in this life,
unto eternal torments. Which things (since so they be) let us with David
earnestly pray for their destruction universally. (And for the godly) Lord
reprove me not in thy wrath. (That is) cha^^en us as a Father, not with a
Sword, but with a Rod, which within a little while after is cast into the
fire.

Verse 14 Behold, he has conceived unrighteousness, and is great with sorrow,
and brings forth vanity. Verse 15 He diggeth a pit and delueth the same,
and is fallen into the pit which he made. Verse 16 His labor shall be turned
upon his own head, and his iniquity shall rebound upon his own pate.
HEre are notable descriptions of the vanity of such devises as are put in ure
by the enemies against the godly ones, which truly call upon God. For though
the ungodly bend and practice all their counsels to the subversion of the
Church, yet (so much as to the effect of the purpose pertains) they bring
forth vanity, and fall into the same pit which they dug for the godly.

Finally, the^ mischievous practices (whereby they endeavor to subvert and
destroy the godly ones) red^u^d upon their own pates. The histories of
Senacherib, Iulianus, and others, are known, which in midst of their race
have been overthrown by the hand of God, and could not go through with the
web that they began to spinne. Unto these Histories I will annexe an Epigram of
Absalon, hanging upon the Dake. Degener immerito rapuisti sceptra parenti
O Iuuenis Patriae pestis acerba tuae.
Digna tuis ceptis sed pena secuta vagantem
Frondibus Arboreis implicuere comae.
Hasta Ioab maduit forti vibrata lacerto.
Sanguine, transfixo pectore tincta tuo.
Has scelerum penas pulso dedit ille parente
I nunc et patrijs insidiare bonis.
Causles have thou, O Child degenerate
and Impe, destruction (of thie countreie) dire
Deprived thie Parents of their royal state
but (fleeing thou) foundst guerdone due for hire.
When Oa^en bows thie bushie hair fast held
and Ioab in thie blood imbrued his lance
Thie body through: For Parents so exilde
go now and work thie Countreies hinderance.


verse 17 I will magnify thee O Lord according to thie right^onsnesse: and I
will sing unto the name of the most high.
THe last verse is a thanksgeuing for deliverance. But seeing in other places I
have oftentimes spoken of this virtue, I am now more brief. And I heartily
beseech God, that he would vouchsafe to consute these slau^ders and
sicophancies of the enemies of the Gospel, as he confounded those in the
Deluge, in the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, in the Genesis 19. Exodus 14. and 15.
destruction of Egypt, and in the subversion of the Cananites.

The eight Psalm.
Domine dominus* etc.
THE TITLE
THe Learned sort do reason what may be signified by the word Githith. Which
if we will follow the true signification, we shall find that this word
imports the same that Torcular, or a vain press, does, But seeing the proper
significacion thereof little purporteth the meaning of the psalm, let us be
content with the opinion of them, which suppose the word^ Githith, to be
borrowed of a musical instrument, resembling some similitude of a wine press.
For in such reasoninges or disputations, this notable saying of Varroncayrbe
commended. It is the part of a Good Gramarian, to be ignorant of certain
things.

THE ARGUMENT.
THere is one proper and principal meaning of the scripture, which the common
order of the phrase or speech, and scope of matters or argument brings
forth, neither mustwe imagine that the scripture is like unto soft wax: which
some time represents the figure of Mars, sometime of chaste Minerua, Now,
Venus, and now Cupide. For that speech which has not one simple meaning,
teaches no certain matter: and this reason or method of Interpreting, (which
seperateth out the Oracles of God, into diverse meaninges) weakeneth the
authority of the scripture. Which things sith so they be, we will not apply
this psalm unto our creation and to the knowledge of God, which we gather by
the workmanship or creation of the world: but we will follow the right
course and prophesies of the Son of God, who in the 21. of Mat. interprets
this Psalm as touching his kingdom. Of the same effect or meaning is the
Aucthor of the epistle to the Hebrews. 2. cap. Therefore is this 8. psalm a
prophecy of the kingdom of Christ gathering unto him an everlasting Church,
out of all mankind by the ministry of the Gospel, and delyuering her from
the tirannie of the devil, and from eternal death, and sanctifyinge her with
his holy spirit. Finally raising the same from death unto the glory and
life everlasting. But as the best moneys are not esteemed by their greatness or
quantity but by their massines and weight: So this psalm in a meruelouse
brevity conteyneth many notable places. As in respect of the word of God, of
the publishing thereof, of the sending of the Son of God into the world, of
the calling of the Gentiles, of the efficacy of the Gospel, of the passion and
resurrection of Christ, of the glory of Christ, and of the eternal Church.
Concerning these so great matters, I will speak, not so much as I ought by
duty, but so much as I understand, and shall be able to do.

Verse. 1. OH Lord which art our Lord, How marvelous is thy name over all the
earth: which have set thy Glory above the Heavens.
THe beginning is taken from an Admiration. I says he, as astonyshed, do much
muse, thinking of the unspeakable. Fatherly love of God to mankind, which
thing he would not for ever have hidden in an unknown light, unto all
exeatures. But commingeforth of his Heavenly throne, made him self known not
only by making all things of nothing, but by sending his Son, bestowing
upon mankind his Gospel, by which the holy Ghost is made effectual, and
regenerateth many from amongst the Jews and Gentiles, unto life everlasting.
For the word ( Name) here signifies, the knowledge or acknowledgment, and the
worship and invocation upon the name of God. For by right who would not
marvel that by the dispersed voice of the Gospel the kingdom of God should
be begone in many men, and that the kingdom of Satan horribly raiging in
mankind, should be utterly destroyed? Certain I am more moved with
consideration of this wonderful work, then with that same creation of all
things. For think ye well, what a matter it is, when Ethnickes or Heathen
people polluted with worshipping Idolles, with sacrifice of man's flesh, yea
with vile confusion of lusts and other furies, are called unto the
acknowledgment and worshipping of God. But because, as touching the calling of
the Gentiles. I do seem to speak sufficient largely in the 11. psalm. I come
now to the verse followinge.

Verse. 2. Out of the mouth of infantes and sucklinges have thou fastened thy
strength, hy reason of thine enemies, that thou may overcome the enemy and
the auenger.
WHat seems more absurd, then that a few feeble persons furnished with no
power, as it were wanderers, some running one way some an other throughout the
whole world, should establish mutation of religion, and should promis men
eternal benefittes, when as themselves are in greatest miseries distressed?
This objection touching the absurdity and difficulty of so great providence,
does our present psalm beforehand deal with: commanding that the Apostles
and other doctors do follow their captain Christ, and surely trust that this
Lord will incline the peoples minds, to enlarge the Gospel, and that he will
bridle the cruelty of tyrants. God (says this psalm) stirs up base and
feeble persons, to preach the Gospel, yea though tyrants withstand the same
and great rulers of the world. In this saying there is set down a double
consolation. For first we are admonished, that being moved with the
imbecillitie of these teachers, we do not contempne the gospel, nay lest our
own weakness move us to forsake the ministry of the Gospel. Again, here is
help promised. When it is said, That God makes perfect his praise. For God
helps these teachers, as it is said in the* 51. cap. of Esaias. I have put my
word in thy mouth, and the shadow of my hands shall protect thee, that I may
plant the heavens. etc. Great are these premises which far exceed all human
devises and all the strengthes of men. Therefore are they deryded beyond
measure of the ungodly wise wordlinges. But let us in the Church of God know
that this true consolation of necessity ought to be inculcate into every one
of us, that our minds might be confirmed in private and public life against
hazardes or dangers in professing of the Gospel.

And although the importance of things which this verse conteyneth can not be
conceived, yet notwithstanding let us diligently consider the efficacy of the
words. For when he says ( Out of the mouth) he discerns the principal
Cause from the isntrumental cause, as if he said, Christ is of power able and
effectual by the ministry of the Gospel. The ministers are only, Earthen
vessels wherein is carried about great treasure, that it may be the power of
God, and not ours 2. Cor. 4. For he which planteth is nothing, neither is he
any thing that waters, but it is God which gives the increase. 1. Cor. 3.
And Christ says: It is not you which speak, but the Spirit of your father
which speaks in you. Mat* 10. Hither unto pertayneth that most pleasant
saying of Nazianzen. Nos linguam commodato damus Spiritui sancto. That is, We
give our tongue to the holy Ghost bestowed upon us.

But after that he has showed the difference of the cause principal and
isntrumental, he declares plainly, not obscurely, what manner instruments
they be which God uses in gathering of his Church together. God has chosen
(says Ludouicus Viues in his 2. book of Christian doctrine) unto so great and
wonderful work the Apostles, private men, base, feeble, unskillful, and
Infantes, then whom none could seem to be less fit for the purpose. But he
chose the weakelinges of the world (as S. Paul says) to confound the mighty
ones. 1. Cor. 1. It is the point of a most skillful and most expert Artificer,
to work that in a bad and simple instrument, which another man can scarcely
do in a most apt and most likely for the purpose. Like as men say Apelles
with a cole taken out of the fire, did so lively paint out him, of whom he was
bidden to Ptholomeus his dinner, that all men there acknowledged the same
guestesbidder even at the first shadowing. But it is not to be marueiled, that
God perfourmeth what pleases him, in likelye and fit instruments, who
needs none instruments at all, whatsoever he purposes to make. Therefore
sent he a very few unto very many, the rude to the skilful, he sent children
unto most exquisite and most eloquent persons, he sent the simple to the
subtle ones, the unarmed to the armed, the weaklinges to the warriors, and the
pore he sent to the rule and domination over the people of Rome. For it was
convenient that at the beginning such a lowly and base state should be in the
founders of this building, least they should attribute any thing unto humane
strength and cunninge, or repose any trust or confidence in them, but utterly
distrusting their own infirmities, should depend wholly upon the help and
sauegarde of God. Both least any man might attribute any thing of those things
which were wrought, unto man's power: and also, least that the same Apostles
might contemn or despise any humility or base estate of others, being mindful
of their own. Thus far Viues.

But as touching that which I have spoken of the Apostles, the same may in like
manner be said of all teachers in the Church, For so Paul cries out: For
these things who is fit or meeter? Namely, to expound the doctrine, to
judge and decyde greatest controversies, and to bear rule in the Church.

But what do these infantes and sucklinges bring to pass? Are they only
infeebled with vain contention, which neither profits themselves nor other?
No (says he) the labors of the godly Ministers in the church do not only
profit men a short time, but the fruytes are everlasting of them which teach,
who do gather unto God an eternal church, and are themselves enriched with
eternal rewards. This Consolation, is most oftentimes repeated, as Paul
says 1. Cor. 15. Your labor shall not be frustrate in the Lord. And in the 1.
Romans The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to so many as believe. That
thing also is most worthy of admiration, that the Apostles persuaded both the
learned and unlearned of their time, in so profound matters, and far passing
the vigor of man's wit, when as Philosophers could hardly persuade others in
moral things, more hardly in natural things, being furnished and prepared
with knowledge, eloquence and use. But that the kingdom of God (as Paul
^aith) consists not in words, but in power. 1. Cor. 4. The history of most
worthy memory shows which is recyted of Ruffinus in the 10. book of the
Ecclesiastical History. A certain old man in the Council of Nicene, smally
learned, and of little knowledge, but a constant confessor of Christ, was not
afraid to encounter with an eloquent and witty Philosopher, and with him to
dispute as touching the verity of faith. Neither in deed alleged he
delusions of subtle and crafty speech, but an evident and plain meaning of
truth. Hear nie (says he) Philosopher, There is one God, the Creator of
heaven and earth, and of all things as well visible as invisible, who created
all things with the efficacy of his word, and with his holy Spirit
established the same. Therefore this Word, whom we call the Son of God,
being merciful toward mankind, which led their life in errors like unto
brute beasts, was content to be borne of a woman, to be conversant amongst
men, and for them vouchsafed to die: and he shall come again to judge of all
those things which have been done by every one in this life. That th^se
things are and shall be thus, for a truth we believe, neither inquire we
cur^ouslye upon any part. Do not thou therefore weary thy self in vain with
searching for reasons and demonstrations of those things whose protection is
faith: or with busy questioning by what manner or means, any one of these
things may either seem possible to be brought to pass, or not brought to
pass: But answer me demanding thee, beleeuest thou these things? The
Philosopher being thoroughly touched to the quick, said, he believed him, and
rejoiced to see himself conquered, professed and held the same opinion in those
things, as the old man did, and persuaded others that they would be of the
same mind with him, protesting solemnly that this was done by Gods providence,
to the end he might be converted to embrace the Christian Religion. For so
long (says he) as by words the matter was handled with me, I answered again
words for words, and what so was spoken with cunning of speech, I labored to
confute. But when for words, virtue proceeded out of the speakers mouth: words
could not withstand virtue, neither could man withstand God.

The universal church is full of histories of such like examples, which
declare that God, when we are weak does use courage and strength for us.
Omitting therefore longer recytall of examples, touching the latter part of the
second verse viz. That thou may destroy both the enemy, and the auenger, I
will now speak a few words.

We bear about with us a doctrine hated of the world and we seem not any
thing able therein to do good, because mighty kings are against our
proceedinges, and there are many impedimentes, as poverty, famine, and fear
of most cruel punishments. Amidst these mischiefs, let us think upon the
promise set down in this Psalm. That thou may destroy both the enemy, and
the Auenger. And let us trust not only to find defense, but also felicity in
gathering the church of God. So did God unto Abraham promise defense, rewards,
and good success, saying, I am thy Protector, and thy reward is great. Genesis
14. and 16. For the enemies of the gospel are restrained, either by sound
conversion unto Christ, either else by universal coufusion, as in this age some
be, when they read Luthers works, not in deed with zeal of godliness, but to
catch matter, wherein busily stirring, they bestow their infamous speeches:
but being vanquyshed with the euidencie of truth, they have yealded up the
victory unto Christ, and of very enemies are become most vehement and earnest
defenders of the doctrine of the gospel. But Iulianus and other Tirantes
unrecoverable, are like little clouds clean vanished away by Christ, sitting
at the right hand of his Father. These things since they so be, let us every
one of us more zealously and fervently in his vocation learn and teach the
gospel, and let us daily adioyn our prayers to this end. Let us call and cry
unto God by the Mediator our lord Jesus Christ, that he would govern, defend
and, preserve us, and either call back the enemies of the gospel, unto sincere
doctrine, or else utterly to confound and destroy them.

Verse. 3. Because I shall see the heavens, the works of thine hands, the
Moon and the Stars which thou have framed.
IN reading the Prophets, we must diligently consider what sayings are spoken
touching the accomplishment thereof. Therefore as the next verse before
specifyeth of the original beginning and preaching of the gospel: by which the
church is congregate: So this verse descrybeth the accomplishment which shall be
brought to pass in the whole church, when as raised from death, she shall
possess eternal life: The example whereof in deed, the Apostles saw in the
chief head, and in the members thereof, when they were beholders of the
resurrection and ascension of Christ. For therein saw they mortality quite
abolished, they saw a new nature shining in the light of heaven, yea, a new
righteousness and a new life. So does Esaias describe the kingdom of Christ, in
his 65. Chap. For, speaking of the original and free preaching thereof, he
says: Behold I go unto a nation which know me not. And of the fulfilling of
this kingdom he says moreover: Behold, I make a new heaven and a new earth,
cap. eod. Revel. Ioh. 21.

Verse 4. What is man, that thou art so mindful of him? Or the Son of man
whom thou so regardest? Verse. 5. Thou have made him not much inferior unto
God, and with glory and honor will thou crown him.
THe fourth and fifte verses describe the calamity and delyuerance of Christ.
A great and unspeakable misery it is which is set down in the 8. Chap. of
Matthew Foxes have hoales, and birds of the air have nestes, but the Son of
man has not whereon to lay his head. And it is said in the 53. of Esaias: He
was despised and abhorred of men, he was such a man as had good experience of
sorrows and troubles. But a far greater misery is it to be seen forsaking
of God, as it is said in this verse of Tyrt. Non Exul curae ducitur esse Deo.
The Exile is not thought
Of God, to be cared for ought.


Christ feeling this misery, spoke that most sorrowful sentence which is
extant in the 22. Psalm. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? As if he
had said, I lament not for the rending of my body in pieces, or for the death
that. I suffer, but for another far greater mischief, that thou forsakest me,
because I feel no joy at my heart, which other holy ones do feel, whom thou
comfortest Nay, I feel that thou art horribly angry with the sin. of
mankind, by reason whereof I am now condemned is this death before thy presence,
I say before thee. It were no bitter torment unto me to be cruelly handled by
the judgment of the world. But to feel thy displeasure is a heavy case.

And although it is true, and the church has always so taught, that the nature
divine neither departed from the body nor from the soul of Christ, no not
after death. Yet the nature divine united to the body and the soul (by a
wonderful and unspeakable means) ceased: So as nature of man in him might
both suffer and die, Like as Ireneus says: (That is) He did not put forth all
his strength, but obeyed unto his eternal Father in this humility.

This secret wisdom shall be learned of us in the life everlasting. Now (as
it is delivered us in the word) we must embrace it by faith, neither can it be
comprehended in man's cogitation, or expressed in words. But as the Son of
God before the glory of the future Sabbath, rested in death, and in the grave:
So the whole Church has her beginning from the like rest or surceasing, that
is, from death: Wherein albeit we seem to be forsaken, yet we shall assuredly
be raised again from death unto eternal life: Wherein we shall see God in his
presence, and have the fruition of his wonderful great wisdom.

Thou will crown him with glory and honor. Hitherto has he expressly
declared the wonderful and inspeakeable humility which Christ performed in
suffering the wrath of God, as if he had been polluted with mine, thine, and
the sins of all men. Now follows a description of the glory of Christ in
his resurrection and ascension. This Lord remained not in death and in the
grave: but being risen from death to life, ascended up into heaven, that he
might give gifts unto those which call upon him: Namelye, the holy Ghost, and
life everlasting. But who can express the greatness of this glory, whereas unto
Christ God and Man, all power is given in heaven and in earth* Whereby in deed
he overcomes death, destroys sin, gives righteousness, rayseth from death
to life, gives his holy Spirit and life everlasting to all believers. This
glory ( Paul in 2. Philip. describing) says: God has exalted him, and given
him a name which surpasses all names: that in the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow, in heaven, earth, and hell. And all tongues shall confess that
Jesus Christ our Lord is in the glory of his Father.

Verse 6. Thou have ordained him above the wo^kes of thy hands, all things
have thou laid under his feet.
A Notable Expolition or pullishing of the meaning of Christ's glory,
proponinge both doctrine and consolation. For it teaches that Christ is the
king of Kings and Lord of Lords, Judge over quick and dead, vanquysher of
sin and death, and the Rostorer of righteousness and life. And the restriction
or Limitation added by Paul unto this universal point, is well known as he
says 1. Cor. 15. He has made all things subject under his feet. And where
he says he has made all things subject under his feet, no doubt besides
him, who has made all things obedyent unto him.

Moreover, he comfort us and byddeth us by faith to crave and look for
help of Christ, who not only wit but also can help those that flee unto him,
for as much as he has all things in his power. Whether therefore, fears
within us, or fright without vex us, let us always depend of this Lord, and
let us repose all our hope of salvation in him, which hope truly shall not
disapoynte them that so trust in him.

Verse. 7. All Sheep and Oxen, yea the beasts of the field, Birds of the
air, and Fish of the Sea, which walk in the paths of the Sea.
THat which a little before he spoke universally, now does he amplify by
parts. For even as in Adams fall we lost the Lord over all living Creatures: So
in Christ we receive our lost inheritance, for we are partakers of all the
benefits of Christ. This place also teaches, that good gifts corporal are
to be craved by us of Christ, in as much as all things are in his power.
Finally, he confirms christian liberty in use of meats, For as Paul 1. Cor.
10. out of that saying in 24. psalm. ( The Earth is the Lords, and the fulness
thereof) learnedly groundeth this sentence, viz. Whatsoever is sold in the
Shambles, that eat ye, questioning nothing for Conscience sake. So we may
apply the same consequence out of these verses.

There is mentioned a certain History worthy of memory in Lib, 1. of the
histories Tripartite, and 10. Cap. Of Spiridion a Bishop of Cyprus, unto whom
when a Guest came upon a fasting day, and that accustomed provision of meat
could not such a day be upon a sudden made, he commanded the fleshmeate which
he had in his house dressed, to be set upon the table. The Guest seeing this,
said: I will not this day eat any of this meat, for I am a Christian. Then
said Spiridion, And even for this cause it is meet that thou eat, because
thou art a Christian. For every Creature of God is good, and not to be
rejected, which with thankesgeuing is received. The Gueste yealded to his
purpose, and gave God thanks, considering upon the liberty given us from our
Lord Jesus Christ, by means whereof we are not only freed from the Laws or
Limittes of these meats, but much more from other far grievous bonds, and
fastened the Law unto his persecution, because he would not condemn us.

Verse. 8. O Lord which art our Lord, how marvelous is thy name over all the
earth.
THis last verse is a repetition of the first, putting us in mind that the
proper worshipping of God in his Church, is Confession of our sins,
Thankesgeuing^ of his benefits, and the preaching of the gospel, wherein the
glory of God, and of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, is advanced, and the
life everlasting illuminated in many persons.

The ix. Psalm.
Exaltabo te Domine. etc.
THE TITLE.
A Great obscurity or darcknesse is there in the Titles of the Psalms.
Wherefore, if we cannot in all places touch the truth, let us yet be content
with that which abhors not from the truth. I know that certain
Interpreters apply the word Almuth, unto that phrase which they commonly
call Bassium, as in my Grammar explication is set down of the fifte Psalm.
But because it is the most bold and constant way, (as the Grecians say) I will
enter here the beaten way, and I will understand Almuth Laben to be signified
of the Church, which is a beautiful and flourishing youth, and yet in secret
manner, (That is) not in utter appearance to the eyes of the ungodly, who judge
this Congregation to be a company of old wives, telling tales at their
distaffe.

THE ARGUMENT.
THe state or condition of this psalm, is to show forth the universal
works of God, persecution and deliverance of his Church, and preservation of
the body thereof, yea, although in some part she be cruelly dealte with: and
also either the Conversion, or else the Subversion of the enemies of the
gospel. All wise men marvel, why the Church is in this life subject unto so
great miseries, and they do reason what manner of counsels or determinations
those are which God, uses in governing his church.

Again, whether the Church shall (amiddes the ruins of kingdoms) have any
being, or no. Concerning these secret and marvelous matters, does this nienth
psalm admonish us, and teaches the principal lights of the Church how to
suffer great calamities, by the assured providence of God, and that this Church
(which publishes the word of true doctrine) shall not altogether be oppressed
at any time, albeit every member thereof be exercised with diverse calamities.

Finally, it shows that the cruelties of the ungodly (which now and then
rage against the church) are by notable examples punished: Like as Pharao, the
Cananites, Jews and Aethnickes, whose cruelty was great. Let us also
thankfully with David celebrate or solemnize this everlasting conservation of
Gods Church, and let us fix in our minds the words of his promise, viz. Let
them all trust in thee, which know thy name, because thou forsakest not them
which seek for thee.

Verse 1. I Will give thanks unto thee O Lord with my whole heart, I will
declare all thy wondrous works. Verse 2 I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I
will singe unto thy name, O most High.
TO give thanks with all the heart, (says D. Luther) is neither to boast of
your self in prosperity, neither yet grutch against God in adversity: but in
both states to thank God, with like true, and not famed praise. Which thing to
do, how hard and diffyculte it is, experience sufficiently shows. For
albeit in prosperity commonly the words of thankesgeuing be usual with us:
yet in adversity seldom times are such speeches heard of us. The Lord has
given, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. Job. 1. and
3*
But how fervent Dauides mind is here in such giving of thanks, the
circumstance of the words declares evidently and not obscurely. I will give
thanks (says he) I will declare, I will be glad, I will rejoice, I will
singe. Q. D.

Hereby, not only the mind and tongue do worship God, but also the other
members do show a token of thankefulnes. And although the works of God
cannot be expounded in words, yet in the godly ones there is such a feruencie
and earnest desire to worship God, that this saying of Virgill may be borrowed
well, touching them. Possunt, quia posse videntur. They can, because they
seem to be able.

This may also be spoken exclusiuely in such manner, that the universal part
may be reduced unto a certain likeness, and of others the exclusive signified
Q. D. as thus, I will declare nothing but thy marvelous works. That is, thy
marvelous government and defense of the Church against Tyrants, fanaticall
reachers, and other their mischievous mates. For in deed, a great miracle is
the conservation perpetual of the Church amidst so great downfals and
deuastations of Imperies: As in the Deluge, all other opinions and sects were
overwhelmed ( Noah and his Family only preserved) and that even by Gods
manifest help in deed.

Verse 3 Because thou have turned mine enemies backwardes, they shall fall, and
pearish from thy face.
AS if he said, great and weyghtie is the cause, why I should with heart and
mouth render thanks unto thee. For that thou subduest and subuertest the
enemies of thy Church, and not only preseruest some privately, which know thee
aright, but also safegardest other congregations publicly, and the
ministry of thy Gospel, and some habitations for exercise of godly studyes.
But this speech ( They shall perish from before thy face) seems to be
borrowed out of the history which is recyted in the 14. of Exodus, viz. And
now approached the Morning watch, and behold, the Lord looking upon the Tents
of the Egyptians, through the fiery and clowdie Pillar, slew the host of
them, and overthrew their Chariots, and they were thrown into the Sea. For the
face or beholding of the Lord, signifies a divine terror, by means whereof,
in their amassed minds they fled when no man pursued them.

This terror is called a divine inward fear, whose notable example Iouianus
Pontanus recyteth in his ^. Book of Fortune, cap. 15. When Theodosius Augustus
with a very small power of Soldiars, waged battle with Arbogastus, Francus, and
Engenius, a storm suddenly sent from heaven, gave help unto him and his. For,
such a vehement whirlinge wind bet upon the backs and faces of his enemies,
that their own weapons sent from them, rebounded vyolently upon themselves,
and their strokes were quyte aueyded, and enforced them cowardly to retire back
again. This matter Claudianus remembering, says. O nimium dilecte Deo cui
fundit ab antris
Aeolus armatas acies, cui militat ether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
Oh thou so much beloved of God,
whom Aeolus from caves
Whole armed hoastes sendes forth,
and in distress thine honor saues.
With whom when Firmament does fight
in battle force amain:
The bustling winds to win thy weal,
their Trumpets sound again.


So then Theodosius overcame his seditious enemies in a mighty battle: of
whom the one Arbogastus Francas (with his host scattered) procured his own
death in the slight like unto Saul. The other, being Eugenius was commanded
to be slain, and to dye for it according to the Laws.

Verse 4. Because thou have performed Judgment unto me, and my cause: Thou
have sit upon thy throane, O Judge of righteousness.
THe conflicts of the Church cannot be ended by men in Princely authority, nor
by the policy of Magistrates, as other public controversies touching Civil
affairs are ended and taken up. For the perverse and blasphemous Papists do
not yealde, though they be conuicte by their own, and by the immovable
Testimonies of Gods word. Therefore does God at length confute the wilful
obstinacy of the ungodly by some notable example, utterly confounding all the
whole faction and pack of them, as he confounded Pharao, Jerusalem after the
preaching of the Apostles: the Manycheis, the Arrians and others.

Furthermore, God alone is a just Judge, because he sees the deep secrets
of man's heart, and is equal in dealing with us, not using partiality, and
has strength or power against the ungodly. But men either sin in their
judgment by error, or else be partial in judging, either else are not able to
execute punishment, being destitute of strength and power. Wherefore,
Magistrates must be forgeuen offenses which are not notorious. Like as Jason
Phereus says: That he which altogether looks after righteousness, does in the
mean time committee many unjust things in smaller matters, which are to be
forgeuen him that defends the state of government, and preserves the rule of
the common weal, with the judgment and laws thereof. And Euripidis says
unto this purpose: that it is profitable to bear with ignorances of great men
in authority.

Verse 5. Thou have rebuked the Nations, thou have destroyed the ungodly: Thou
have extinguished their name for ever and ever.
GOd by sundry and diverse means, rebukes Nations. For, first, by preaching
the Law and the Gospel, he accuses the sin of all mankind, as Paul
says, Romans 1. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, etc. Moreover, God
reprooueth sin, with horrible and grievous punishments public and private,
which are (as it were) the voice of the Law showing us of the wrath of God. But
(whom with the voice of the Ministry preaching the Law and the Gospel,
neither with signs or tokens of their guyltines, she cannot incline to
acknowledge their sin) them does he now and then shake with unspeakable
terrors, wherein the wrath of God is surely set. Aegesippus in his first book
and 8. Cha. Decla-reth how Aristobulus king of the Jews, through sorrow for
that he had slain his own Brother, fell into so great a sickness, that he
cast out blood from himself, which (as yet but a Child) when the Kings Page
earyinge away, and vnwittinglye poured upon the blood of the kings brother
slain, an horrible fear came upon Aristobulus, which both increased his
grief, and took away his life. O tragical example in deed, which declares
that God so strikes men's hearts with feeling of his wrath, and so rebukes
the ungodly which are incurable, that they fall utterly into everlasting
destruction. But some man will in this place obiecte, that the name of the
ungodly is never rased out of the memory of men, when as in histories every
where it is mentioned of Tyrants and others which have also stained themselves
with ungodly and mischievous wickedness. I answer: It is one thing to speak
with commendation, and another to keep in memory, which all wise men have
hated and detested. The Sodomites were so destroyed, that not only their
bodies and souls were eternally damned, but also the name and fame of them
evermore hateful to all men. For who is not horribly afraid to hear Sodom
spoken of? So Judas, Pilatus, Herod, Nero, and Iulianus, like Cattes taking
their heels, have left an cuill smell after them, as I may so say with
Aristophanes.

Verse 6. The strength of the Enemy is fallen away for ever: thou have
destroyed their Cities, the memory of them is also with them selves perished.
THe euentes of things which are read in Histories, be witnesses of this
Psalm. The persecution of the Church by the Babylonians, stinted when Babylon
was taken of Cyrus, and Balthazar was slain, as Xenophon writes in his 7.
book of the education of Cyrus, Yea, the City and whole Empire of Babylon (as
Pliny in his 6. book and 26. Chap. witnesses) being the head of all the
Caldean Nations, became a desolate place or wilderness, when that in deed it
had before contained in length threescore thousand paces within the walls,
which were in heyght two hundredth feet, and in breadth fifty feet. But what
so as touching the Monarchy of Babylon, I have here said, the same let us
suppose may also be employed concerning other kingdoms.

Verse 7. And the Lord shall reign for ever, preparing his seat for
judgment. Verse 8. And he shall judge the world in righteousness: And shall
give sentence upon all Nations with equity.
IN the Psalms there is an usual conference of man's infirmity, and of the
power of God. Wherefore, as in the Verse before going, he said, that the
change of humane state is more ready, then of the most swiftest flying flee: Now
he adioyneth the contrary part, as an Antithesis, The Lord (says he)
together with his word and Church cannot by any force be wakened, nor moved
out of place. More safer is it therefore, and far better it is to trust in God
only, then to put confidence in a thousand Princes amongst mortal men, whose
mind, or pleasure, or fortune, or life may be changed. And what so are here
spoken touching the judgments of God, the same may be reser^ed, first in
deed unto the ministry of the word, wherein the holy Ghost rebukes the
world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. After wards they may be
applied unto the final judgment, wherein the secrets of all men's hearts
shall be brought forth to light, and the damned sinners shall be thrown into
eternal torments. Of this judgment (are testimonies) natural knowledges,
which witness that there is a God, and what manner of God, and that he will
judge the world. For in vain had God made a difference between honest, and
filthy cogitations in men's minds, were it not but that afterward sollowed a
punishment of the same difference confused.

Moreover, impossible it is, (seeing there is a God) that there should be no
providence, and no difference between the wicked, and the godly. The wicked
flourish here, the good are oppressed: Ergo, Needful it is that there do
another life remain, wherein the difference shall be. For, in so much as God
declared that he had care over Abel, Ionathas, Esaias, and Ieremias before
their death, if he afterward did neglect them, that should not in deed stand
with providence and righteousness. It is manifest therefore, that they which
deny there remains any other judgment after death, do derogate from God
both providence and righteousness, touching a great part of mankind, yea, even
of them which here excel in righteousness. For, if God both now neglecte his
servants, and afterward no immortality remayn, surely I scarcely
understand, how either providence or righteousness might be attributed unto
God. But these things are in another place, more largely declared at full.

Verse 9 And the Lord shall deliver the oppressed: Yea, in time convenient
will he deliver, and in Tribulation. Verse 10. And let all that know thy
name, put their trust in thee: Because thou forsakest not them that seek thee,
Oh Lord.
THis most sweet promise and consolation let us oftentimes consider upon, and
let us know that it is not given us in vain. God assirmeth that he will never
forsake his Church, which truly acknowledges, inuocateth, and worshippeth
him. He also shows what manner of Congregation the true Church is, Namelye, a
poor and feeble congregation, and which trusts in the name of the Lord (as
Soph^nias in his 3. Chap. says) Neither in deed does this Psalm vainly
interpose the clause of help and deliverance, unto this promise, viz. (in
times conuenyent) but with great providence speaks to this purpose. It lies
not in us to prescribe God a mean and time, but these are altogether to be
commended unto his Providence, because God (after another manner, and at other
time delyuereth, then either we in this our imperfection do think or wish
for. Of this rule there is extant a notable example in the history of Judith.
Cap. 8. When Judith had knowledge that the Priest had appointed God the space
of five days, (She chyding the Priest) said, Who be you that thus tempte God?
This speech provoke more the wrath of God, you have set God a time to help
us, being ignorant both of means and time to help our selves, therefore let
us have God before our eyes, and of him crave acceptable event in silence and
hope. And that I may let pass other examples, which declare that God is both
present with his Church, and does vnfayuedly hear the sighinges and prayers of
the godly ones. Yea certainly, even in our tune, God preserved in safety the
noble Prince John Fridericke, Duty of An. 1534.
Sarony, both in his wars and in his captivity, and also afterward
restored him to live prosperouslye with his wife and children.

Verse 10. Sing unto the Lord which dwells in Sion, Show forth his loving
kindnesses unto the Nations.
HE clearly affirms, that there is the Church and House of God, and there
does God dwell, where the promise of grace, and life everlasting is preached,
which God has revealed peculyarlye: For the Ethnickes do know the Law after a
sort, but for this are they not the children of God. But that congregation is
the Church of God, wherein sounds the voice of the Gospel, as I have often
said else where. But after we have learned which is the true Church, let us
know the commandment of God is, with mind, will, prayer, and confession, we
adioyne our selves unto that Congregation, wheresoever it be. Which when we
do, we are then the children of God, sociates of the true Church, and callers
upon God in confidence of his Son our Mediator, we are unfeignedly heard,
governed, and preserved of God. With this doctrine touching the Church we being
confirmed, do seek refuge in the same Tabernacle of God, as the Psalm
witnesses in another place, and (as it were) have hid us by the Aul^ar. Let us
know also there is diverse calamities set before our eyes, but in these, let us
crave and look for help from God. For (that the Church is burdened with
great calamities) by the verse following it may be understood, where it is
said, that god will haus an account made him touching the blood of the godly
ones.

Verse 12. Because he will have an account of their blood, He has remembered
it, and forgets not the cryinge of the poor.
Hitherto has he recyted doctrine of the judgment of God, and concerning his
church, and what manner a one it is: Now makes he mention of the persecution of
the holy ones, which is a Testimony of the future judgment. For, impossible it
is that God will then neglecte those, whom he before showed himself careful
of, by notable testimonies: As that John Baptiste and Paul did please God,
manifest testimonies do show. Needeful is it therefore, that there follow
another judgment, wherein God will make a difference between John Baptist and
Herod, between Paul and Nero. With this consideration of the death of the
holy ones, let us fully confirm our selves touching the exaltation in the life
to come, and let us assure our selves that the godly ones are not created for
these miseries only. For, although (when as the Son of God shall again
openly show himself unto mankind,) the undoubted and open punishments of all
the ungodly shall shall be seen in their effect: Yet notwithstanding, even in
this life, are their examples set before all men. Herod, who put John Baptist
to death, not only received a great overthrow by the host of Areta, king of
the Arabians, but also was carried away captive into perpetual exilement unto
Lions in Frannce. This misery happened unto him almost ten years after he had
beheaded John Baptist. So Herod Agrippa (as S. Luke tells in 12. chap.
Acts) After very great griefs in his inward parts, dying the fit day, was
worthily punished for his cruelty wherewith he raged against the first
Church in Christ's time. But it were long to rekon up al examples, which
declare that God will have account of the blood of the godly ones, yea even in
this Psalm. 116 verse. 15.
life, and that Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.
Unto this history let us a^^ex the parable of the s^ow Judge, and of the
Widow, Luke. 18. Will not God be aduenged for his chosens sake, which cry unto
him night and day, and will he be patient in their miseries? No, I say unto
you, he will speedily be reucnged on their behalf.

Verse 13. Have mercy upon me, behold my affliction by reafon of mine enemy,
thou that liftest me up from the gates of death. Verse 14. That I may show
forth thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion. I will rejoice in thy
salvation.
MAny are the causes why God has burdened his Church with persecution, but the
special cause is, for that he will have his presence evidently seen, when as
he either preserves or restores them which are destitute of second causes.
As in 2. Cor. 1. it is said: We have received in our selves the answer of
death, least we should put confidence in our own strength, but rather in God,
who reuiueth the dead, which has taken us out of so great dangers, that
thanks might be rendered unto him not of many men's mouths.

And a notable testimony is there in the first example, of Adam and Eve, which
manifestly teaches, that God does only help mankind, without any second
causes or other means. Adam and Eve could not after their fall be helped
neither by Angels, nor by their own d^uyses. Here comes God forth of his
secret Throane, receives transgressors into favor, and gives them life: So
after the example of Adam and Eve, follow innumerable examples of Gods
benefits (besides ordinary means in helping mankind. As when God preserved
Noah in the Deluge, when he preserved Joseph, Genesis 7.
whom his brethrene purposed to kill, Genesis 37. When he made a way for the
Israelites through the red Sea, Exodus 14. So defended he David against Goliath,
and others, 4. Reg. 17. So preserved he Daniel amongst the Lions, Dan. 6. and
14. Jonas in the Whales belly, Ion. 1. and 2. and in our time, 1534.
that noble Prince John Friderike Duke of Saxony and Elector, in his wars
and in his captivity. And all men which rightly call upon God, may repeat
some of their deliverance, whereas they are manifestly preserved by God without
second causes or other means. And therefore does God hear our prayers,
govern and preserve us, that we again should duelye worship him in his
power, goodness, and mercy, and with word and writing magnify the same. What
else besides is there, which we can render unto God? Wherefore let us inculcate
or beat into our minds the benefits of God, and commemorate them amongst
others. Let us publish it abroad when we are helped and delivered, that others
also may be inuyted unto the acknowledgement, ^^ocotion, and confidence upon
God.

Verse 15. The Nations are sunk into the pit, which they made, In the net
which they priuelie laid, is their feet taken. Verse 16. The Lord is known
to have done judgments, In the works of his hands is the ungodly man
taken, with meditation, Sela:
HE alludeth unto the History in the 15. of Exodus where it is written that the
Egyptians were sunk down in the Sea like Lead. For it is a Verse prouerbiall,
agreeing with the most elegant figures borrowed in the seventh Psalm. Also, it
has been used in this place to be questioned of, what might be coniectured of
the Particle Higgaion. There be which deem this saying to be as much
effectual, as the word Sela, and that it is the sign of a certain great and
rare affecte or motion, as the Poet says. Non vidisse semel satis sit, iuuat
vsque tueri,
In hijs here, in his habita, haec meditare*
Its not enough this once to see, it vayles we view it still:
In these stand, in these abide, and-minde these with goodwill.


Other writers (amongst whom is the Reverend Doctor Luther) do understand
it, touching the exercise of th ministry of the word, whereby, as with the
sword of the Spirit, great matters are accomplished in the Church. For unto
us are weapons given, not brazen pieces, but The word of God, and Prayer. By
the word, we give the Devil the foil, as Christ gave him the foil, when he
opposed this word against him: Avoid Satan, It is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Mat. 4.
So, with the Testimony of Gods word, do we refute Heretics, and other
ungodly sects. And with Prayer do we confound the violency of Tyrants. When
Moses prayed, the Hoaste of the Israelites got the upper hand. Exodus 17.
When we teach and preach the Gospel, both Devils and Tyrants are
overthrown, that they are not able to wage battle against us, nor make
horrible spoils, (which to bring to pass) they enforce themselves with a
certain outrage of theires.

Verse 17 Let the ungodly be turned down into Hell, yea all Nations which
forget God.
Unto the discourse as touching the Church, he mixeth a rebuke, wherein he
reprehendeth this great mischiese and sin, that a great part of men either
know not God, or despise him: And inuenteth opinions touching God and
worshippinge of him, after man's beastly boldness. This sin (which is the
fountain of all other sins, and which (where it abides) no virtues are
acceptable unto God) does the holy Ghost rebuke by David, when he says: Let
the Nations pearishe which think not upon God. And in deed with a great
zeal are these words pronounced of the glory of God, For, what is more vile
then man (who is created to the end he should know and worship God
indoctrine and obedyence) either altogether to be ignorant of God, and divine
matters, or else with Gyantlike or Cyclopicall barbarousnes to scorn the true
Religion? But the filthynes of this so great a mischief, is more then either
the tongues of Angels, or else of men may possibly utter. Therefore I am brief
in this, and with the like brevity of words, I pass through the residue of
the Verses following in this Psalm.

Verse. 18. Because the poor man for ever shall not be forgotten, The hope of
the poor shall not pearish for ever.
Unto extreme diseases (says Hypocrates) must we lay extreme remedies. So
the holy Ghost, unto the fury of Epicures and Academicall dubitations does
oppose a clear affirmation of the doctrine of Gods providence. For although by
a certain secret determination, God deferreth and prolongeth delyuerance of
his Church, from these enemies: Yet, as I may so say with S. Hierom. He
withdraws not his help, so there be any to embrace or abide it. To the same
purpose pertain the sayings which are read each where as in the 55. psalm.
The Lord will not suffer the just man to pearish for ever. And in the 49. of
Esaias. Can a mother forget her own Child? Though she forget the same, yet will
not I forget thee. Again in the Prophet Abacuc. 2. cap. If the Lord tarry any
time, wait and look thou for him, because when he comes, he comes
speedily, and will not linger.

Verse. 19. Arise O Lord, let not man have the upper hand, Let the Nations be
judged in thy sight. Verse 20. Appointe thou an vmpier unto them, O Lord, that
the Nations may know they are but men.
A True saying it is, whereas not God, but some mortal man bears rule, there
can be no escape from mischiefs and miseries. Most wisely, and most truly are
these spoken of Plato. Historyes of all ages give us hereof examples. When
Augustus reigned, the world was sweetly and peaceably governed: Because God
would for a season have peace, laws and discipline restored, and therefore he
assisted Augustus. Under Augustulus, or the young Augustus, and such other
Princes reigning, there arose new scateringes or divisions, and infinite
heaps of miseries. Let us not therefore be so Cyclopicall blind, as that we
think this miserable life may be ordered in so great darkness, and in in so
great infirmity of our strength, without a gouernoure or scholemaster, that
is, without the holy Ghost, Hierem. 10.
like as Hieremie says: I know O Lord, that man's way lies not in him to
dispose. That is, in so great weakness of man's nature, and in so great
dangers wherein we live, in so great difficulty of accomplishinge affairs,
in so great deceits of the Devil, man's strength is not able without the holy
Ghost, to order or govern his vocation and manner of life.

Therefore, so oftentimes cries David, Psalm 119. Verse 34. Give me
understanding. And again, psalm 119. Verse 124. Deal with thy Seruante
according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy righteousness. Let us therefore
acknowledge our imbecillitie, and let us remember that we are men, and with all
our hearts let us crave that the holy Ghost would vouchsafe to be present with
us as our Governor and Helper, which thing when we shall do, experience shall
teach, that we are undoubtedly governed and helped of the holy Ghost, Amen

The tenth Psalm.
Vt quid Domine, etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
THere are two parts of this tenth Psalm. The first is a notable portrature
of Antichriste, who (as Paul says 2. Thest. 2.) is the man of sin, and
Son of perdition, extolling him self above all that is called God, or
godliness. Yea, placing him self as a God, in the Church of God, and
boastinge himself that he is a God. This same terrible picture of Antichrist,
let the Reader more diligently look upon, and afterward cast about his
eyes upon that congregation, which is called the Church of God, and let him
consider specially, where he finds such confusion of doctrine, of Religion,
and of manners. Certes (I looking upon this image) suppose, that no confusion,
man of sin, nor tirannie, more like resembles the same, then the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, whose mind is polluted with mad
worshippinge of Images, whose tongue with blasphemies, whose hands with cruel
bloudshedde of the holy ones, and whose other members are defiled with filthy
lusts.

The second part of this psalm, is a feruente prayer, wherein the Church
with unfeigned sighs and tears prays, that God for his glory sake, would
destroy all Idolatry, all popish erroures, and abominations, and in many
men's minds inflame the light of the Gospel, and true Invocation upon God,
and that he would frame our hearts unto true obedience, that we may
thankfully honor and worship him in all eternity. In these two places, or
parts, consists the effect of this psalm.

Verse. 1. WHy stand thou a far of, Oh Lord? thou hydest thy self in
time of trouble. Verse. 2. The poor man smarteth in the pride of the ungodly
Let them be taken in the devises which they have purposed.
THe beginning is a sorrowful complainte of the Church, struglinge with
temptation or trial of abiection. For the Church (seeing the slender number of
her flock, with the miseries and deformities therein. Again, the power and
horrible fury of Antichrist, which endeavors all ways, as partly by open
cruelty, partly by privy sleightes and deceites, to oppress the purity of
their doctrine) oftentimes falls into this cogitation, that she thinks God
has both forgotten her, and forsaken her. In such a struggling (unto which no
sorrow may be compared) does David cry out: Oh Lord, why stand thou a
far of? And as the Prophet Esaias in his 63. Chap. says: How is it that thy
jealousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy mercies, and thy loving kindness,
will not be entreated of us?

Like complainte does Abacuck make in the first Chap. How long, Lord, shall I
cry, and thou will not hear, even cry out unto thee, for violence, and thou will not help?

These and such like complaints, by some means, show the greatness of grief
which the Church bears about her, by reason of the idolatry, and blasphemous
errors of Antichrist, against God, and hurtful unto men's minds. But although
the godly which disagree with Popish tyranny, are laid forth as open prays
for all chances of sudden dangers: Yet most true is that sentence of the holy
Ghost, touching the ungodly ones: They are caught in their own deuyses which
they practiced. That is, The mischievous enterprises which they subtillie and
craftelie prepared for the destruction of the Church, reboundeth back upon
their own pates. For consider what a downfall of the Popedom followed after
the martyrdom of John Husle, and again after the unjust condemnation of D.
Luther? But because these Historical matters are known unto all men, for me
to make further mention of them, they are not necessary.

Verse 3. Because the ungodly man boasts in the desires of his soul: And
the covetous man blessing him self blasphemeth the Lord.
HEre the holy Ghost begins a large description of Antichrist, whose marks
and tokens are all evidently seen in the Popes Jurisdiction, and sway. The
first mark is Impiety, by which name are comprysed worshipping of Idolles,
and heresies. Manyfeste erroures are there in the Popes doctrine, quite
contrary to the foundation of Gods wo^de, as else where often I declare. There
are also in this Jurisdiction, most grievous superstitions, worshipping of
Saints, prayer unto the dead, and a manifold profanation of the Supper of
the Lord. These apparent furyes does the Bishop of Rome confirm as cruel as
ever Nero was against honest and godly persons.

The second mark is Covetousness, which as the root of all mischief, raging
in the world, spreads unrevenged in the dominion of Antichrist. For the
Bishops of Rome fight not for maintenance of Religion, but for men's wealth or
riches. That is, with insatiable co ^eteousnes hunt after dignity, wealth, and
pleasures, and support false opinions, because they are the strengthes and
maintenance of wealth.

The third proper mark of Antichrist, is Blasphemy, For as his mind is
polluted with idolatry, so is his tongue defiled with blasphemy. Of this
Mark, Daniel in his 11. Chap. says: He shall extol himself above all Gods,
and he shall speak marvelous things against the God of Gods. For, no man is
ignoraunte with how great impudency, the Pope places himself above all
authority of Canonical Scriptures of the Church of God, of Sinodes, and
finally, of all judgments; whereas in deed God alone is.

I let pass here these other blasphemies, which my tongue both shunneth, and
shiuereth with horror to name.

Verse 4. The ungodly in respect of the pride of his wrath, cares not: There
is no God (thinks he) always in his heart.
THe fourth mark of Antichriste, is his detestable Pride, which is accompanied
with unbridled Wrath. Christ in humility and meekenes, surmounteth all Angels
and men, as it is said Mat. 11. Learn ye of me, because I am meek and humble
of heart. But the adversary of Christ, far passes all devils in pride and
greedye desire of revenge. That this Affirmation by proof is most true, the
Histories of Emperors do witness: Of whom, some even for trifling matters
were excommunicate, others trodden under foot, and others most unworthily
handled by the Bishops of Rome.

The fifte Mark which declares Antichrist, is Epicuriall Contempt of God. For
it is manifest true, that the Court of Rome is nothing else, but a School of
Epicurisme: wherein al honest opinions touching God, his providence, the
judgment of God following after this

Verse 9 He lies lurking in secret places, like a Lion in his den, That he
may catch the poor, whiles he snare him in his grinne. Verse 10. And he
humbles himself, and crowcheth down craftelie, that in his strength he may
cast down the poor.
THe nienth and last Mark of Antichrist, is his Nerolike cruelty. For, as the
Devil the Father of Antichrist, is both a Liar and a Murderer: So the son
follows the Fathers example: who sith he is the enemy of the true doctrine,
is bent to al occasions of hurting them which teach a right. And where he can
overcome with manifest vyolence, he slays many, but where he cannot use his
violence, he does most subtilely lay snares for the godly, and provoke
Princes to hatred. Now let a man consider what a monster Antichrist is, puffed
up with these vices and mischiefs, viz. By reason of his ungodliness,
Coueteousnesse, Blasphemy, Pride, Desire of Revenge, Restles business, Profane
security, Sophistry and cruelty.

Verse 11. For he has said in his heart, God has forgotten all: He hides
his Face, and will not see for ever.
ALl beastly cruelty of Antichrist ryseth of a Giantlike and Cyclopical
barbarousnes, which stands in no fear of the heavenly God, but consecrateth
his sacrifice unto the greatest Belly God. For, wherein this persuasion
rests, that God is nothing, that there is no providence, that all Religions
are forged and frivolous. In these appears a deuillish confusion of all
wickedness, and mischiefs. O god vouchsafe to ^uerte this plague far from
us.

Verse 12. Arise, O Lord God, and let thy hand be exalted, Do not thou forget
the poor.
THe second pare of this Psalm is a Prayer, wherein the Church craves of God
that she may be delivered from the tirannie of Antichrist. For neither is
there any more grievous Monster, nor any plague more cruel, neither fury
which more provoke Gods wrath in the flooddes of hell, then the Popes
tirannie, full of snares, guyle, vyolence, and Epicuriall security. And
because every our prayer received from the holy Ghost, has effect of promise
and of prophecy, let us confer the euente with the foretokening thereof. For
in this last age of the world, D. Luther, being by God inspyred, reuealsd
Antichrist, and reformed the doctrine, and called back the Church in his time
unto the fountains of verity: He showed the difference between the Law and
the Gospel. He made manifest the righteousness of faith. Took away errors
touching the doctrine of repentance. Distinguyshed the true worshipping of God,
from the hypocrisy of man's traditions, and showed the use of the Sacraments,
which are by God instituted. (Touching which matter well considering,) it
becomes all the godly throughout the world, to ioyn together their prayers
and sighs, and to crave with fervent hearts, that GOD would vouchsafe to
confirm this that he has wrought in us for his holy temple sake.

Verse 13. Wherefore shall the ungodly blaspheme God? For he has said in
his heart, Tush, thou will take none account.
THe reason of his prayer is taken from the cause final. As if he thus said.
Defend and deliver thy church and repress the furies of the enemies of the
gospel, that their blasphemies may be refuted, and that all men may know there
is a God in deed, upon whom the Church of Christ cries and calls. It
lyketh me in this place to repeat a short form of Prayer, which D. Luther
prescrybed in his book of the Turkish war: Look upon us O God our Father,
and give us remedy. For, the Devil, the Bishop of Rome, and the Turk, are
more thine adversaries then ours, when they scourge us, they also scourge
thee. For the doctrine which we preach, is thine, and not ours. But Satan
cannot abide this, and will be worshipped in thy place, and thrustinge thy
word out of place, he practyseth vyolently to thrust upon us false doctrine
and lies.

Awake therefore Oh my God, and thy holy name which they pollute and defile,
thou thy self revenge, and suffer not this imurie to be wrought any longer by
the^, which punish not our offenses and sins: But endeavor to extinguish thy
word in us, and so far bend their force that thou should not reign at
all, neither that thou should have any people which might worship and
honor thee.

Verse 14 But thou see this, because thou considerest his labor and sorrow,
that he may be delivered into thy hands: Unto thee is the poor man left, Thou
art the helper of the Orphane.
Unto the rest of his petition are added promyses, which are opposed unto the
Judgment of Epitures, and affirm that God will judge and punish the
ungodly: and will preserve and deliver the godly, yea though a season they
seem to be as forsaken and Orphans. Thou (says he) considerest my travel,
and my pain. For as the father takes pity upon his Children: So the Lord
is merciful unto those that fear him. And surely the holy ones being
confirmed in former benefits received, do wholly depend upon God, and yeald
them selves, and all that is theirs, by faith, into the mighty hands of God.
For unto thee is the poor man left, and thou art the helper of the Orphan.
That is, (They which being destitute of second causes or ordinary means) call
upon thee. And it is profitable that we have in redynesse many sayings, which
affirm, that God will then unfeignedly help us, when we are forsaken of
mortal Creatures, as the verse in the 72. Psalm: My Father and Mother have
forsaken me, but the Lord has taken me up. Let us also set before us examples,
and not f^rren only, but of our own country and Inhabitations. Now often has
God driven away, or else mitigated great mischiefs from thee, me, and every one
of us, which by man's help cannot be tolerate? Therefore all deliverances be
they others which we read of, or our own, which our selves find experience
of, let us know that they are examples of Gods promyses, and being admonished
both with promyses and with examples, let us learn to call upon God, to crave
and look for help of him, and let our faith and confidence become by little
and little, stronger. Let our hearts be settled in hope and in expecting Gods
help. So by use shall we learn this verse, Unto thee is the poor left, Thou
art a help unto the Orphane.

Verse 15. Break the arm of the ungodly and Evil man, his ungodliness shall be
sought for, and it shall not be found.
WE must both in this place, and also in others, oftentimes discern the
beginning of the matter from the ending. Antichrist surely is slain with the
Spirit of Christ's mouth. (That is) with the sinceere ministry of the
Gospel. But he shall be altogether then abolished, when the Son of God shall
come unto us again to judge the quick and the dead as Paul witnesses 2 Thessalonians. 2. Then shall that man of sin be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall
slay with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the foreknowledge of
his coming. And as touching the throwing down of that Antichrist, into the
place and country of dainned souls, no doubt) it is) John speaks of it
Apoc. 19. And the Beast was taken, and with her the false Prophet, and these
two were sent alive into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where
they are tormented day and night world without end. Apoc. 20

Verse 16. The Lord shall reign for ever and world without end: The Nations
shall pearish out of his Land.
A Consolation taken of the Conclusion. The thing will show it self that
Christ shall reign, when all the Enemies, Gog, the Beast, and the false
Prophet shall pearish. With this hope of future redemption let us comfort our
selves against the power and furyes of the Enemies. For although Tirantes,
Fanaticall teachers, and their Champions, now and then presumtuouslye do bear
sway, and carry stately stomachs, as if they were Lords and Rulers, called
of their ownest le: Yet after a while, this Soil or Possession shall be taken
from them, as from unthankful Vassales? For, The Earth is the Lords, and
alithe fullness thereof. Psalm 24, verse 1. And again it is said Leuit. 25.
The Earth is mine, you are but Strangers, and my Husbandmen.

Verse. 17. Lord thou have heard the petition of the poor, thou will confirm
their heart, thine ear will be pressed. Verse. 18. To judge the Orphane and
oppressed, that thencefoorth man rage no more upon earth.
IN the end of this Psalm is repeated The Promise and Final cause of
delyuerance. For this cause specially is the Church delivered, that the most
holy name of God be not for ever polluted, neither that his Doctrine be
extinguished, but that always there should remain upon earth both Teachers
and Scholars, celebrating the benefits of God in his Church, or Scholehouse,
and to be therein true witnesses of his Doctrine. This cause is oftentimes
inculcate to our ears, as in the 79. Psalm. Help us O Lord our Savior, for
the glory of thy names sake and deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins,
for thy names sake, least they say among the Nations, Where is now their God?

The eleventh Psalm.
In Domino confido. etc.
THE ARGUMENT
I Am not ignorante that certain Deuines of excellent wits, and excquisite
learning, have interpreted this psalm Allegoricallie, as touching corruptions
in Doctrine: which are the enuenomed darts, wherewith the hearts of the simple
sort are wounded. And although I mislike not this Interpretation: Yet I do
better allow of the simple meaning and effect, which the propriety of the
phrase bringes forth. Therefore this Psalm contains a Figure of the Church,
which is like unto a silly bird cast out of her neste, and laid forth for
all manner perilles and dangers of death. For in very deed, the Church lives
as an exile in this world, and setleth her abode in troblesome dominions, as it
were in Medeas bosom. And neither lives she in exilement, and wandereth
without any certain resting place, but is as an open pray unto all hazardes of
sudden dangers. For she is partly oppugned by manifest violence, and partly
by guilefull snares, subtillie devised of the enemies. But perhaps, some man
would ask the question, wherehence comes such and so great bitter hatred,
into the minds of the ungodly ones against the church, which keeps and
retayneth the heavenly Doctrine? This question does this psalm in one verse
at full resolve. The foundations are destroyed, what has the Righteous done?
As if he said, The Church suffers not this beastly cruelty of the enemies
hatred, by reason of their grievous sins, troubling the Civil society of
men, but for the Confession of the true doctrine, which is joined with just and
necessary reprehensions of Errors, Idolatry, and Abominations, which strive
with the Foundation. For neither can it be, but that the Church which sets
forth the true meaning concerning the essence and will of God, should
therewith also reprehende the Confusion of Opinions and Worshippinges, which
with a malignante countenance, (that is) by all evil show are repugnant to the
manifested will of God. For God has called his Church unto this function, to
the end we should build up and firmly plant those things that are true,
and utterly destroy, and root out such things as are unto them contrary.
When, therefore, the Devil, enemy to God and his Church, cannot abide the
building up of his works, he enforces Tirantes and their Champions to prepare
and practice all the industry of his kingdom, unto the destruction of the
true Church, and of the Doctrine which she professes. Of this perpetual
warfare, was God the Vmpier in paradise, saying, I will set enmity between
thee and the woman etc. And Genesis ^.
all the Children of God in their Baptism, do denounce a perpetual warfare
unto the Devil. In certain words conceived they promise, that they will
never walk into the tents of the enemy, but to do all things which
pertains unto the destruction of the kingdom of darcknes. By reasonwherof,
it is evident plain, what the cause is that moves the Devil and his
Instruments to strive against the Church. But although the Church be
exercised in so many and great dangers, yet she is not discouraged in mind,
but comfort her, self in the confidence of Gods presence and help, and
doubts* not but that the wicked enemies shall after a while fall headlong
into eternal destruction. For, (that God both cares for, and regards that
Society which retains the Doctrine by him delivered) that same thing does
his promise in this psalm cleerelie testify. Truly, as touching the
punishment of the enemies he says: It shall rain snares, Fire, and Brimstone
upon the wicked, etc. Let us therefore, learn to apply the meaning of this
psalm, unto the use of the matter, And in so great variety of dangers, which
hang over our heads nights and days. Let us crave and look for defense (from
these Enemies) of the Eternal Father of Christ Jesus our Redeemer. Hitherto
have I expounded the Argument of this xi. psalm. Now (if it please you) let us
more diligently look upon every Verse.

Verse 1. IN the Lord I put my trust: why then say ye unto my Soul, Fly
hence unto the Hills, like a Bird?
THe beginning consistes in an Enthymem, or Silogisme, whose Antecedent is the
voice of Faith: The Consequent is a reiection of that Clamor, and Commination
which the wicked ones use. He says: In the Lord put I my trust. As if he
annexed, Who has in this first Commandment made a League with me, that he
will take care over me, and look upon me, yea, help me, hear me, and both in
this life, and after this life preserve me. Seeing therefore I am fortiffed
with such defense and sauegarde, why do you threaten and denounce unto me
banishment and punishment? Know ye not That there are many Mansions, or
dwellinges in my Fathers house? For although I must here in this life suffer
exilementes, great calamities, and diverse deaths, yet notwithstanding, I know
that I shall in heaven have everlasting life, joy and gladness, yea, euerduring
glory, with the universal Church.

With this most sweet and most strong comfort, do I strengthen my self
against the outcryinges of the enemies, and I bear about with me, both in
heart and mouth, the saying of the Apostle S. paul Romans 8. If God be with us,
who can be against us? Sure I am that neither banishment, nor punishment,
neither any thing else has such effect and force, that it can pluck me away
from the Fatherly love of God in deed. This thy aboundante knowledge, O God,
we beseech thee seal in our hearts, with thy holy Spirit, so that we may be
able to obey thee in suffering calamities, which daily fall upon us for the
confession of thy sincere Doctrine.

Verse 2. For behold, the ungodly have bended their Bow, They have prepared
their Arrows upon their stringe, that they may priuelie shoot at them which
are upright of heart.
As Tirteus the Musition says: Est miserum, patria amissa laribusque vagari
Mendicum and timida voce rogare, cibos
Cum natisque errare tuis, and coniuge mesta,
Et cum matre pia, cumque parente seen.
A wretched case, thy Country left,
to wander coasts unknown.
With trembling tongue and crave thy food,
not having of thine own.
And with thy children wander so,
and with thy woeful wife:
With good old Sire and Matrone mild
All leading Exiles life.


But much more heauyer a case is it to be nights and days conversant among the
darts of the enemies, and every moment to look for present death* And such
altother is the state of the church in this life. For as Aeneas speaks of him
self: That he a Stranger and in misery, being driven out of Europa and Asia,
wandered through the deserts of Libia. The same may much more be said of the
Church exiled in this world. For, how often are the great multitudes of godly
old men and Matrones with their Children and servants, driven out of their
native Cities, and for them troops of horsemen sent in, which have trodden
under foot the multitudes of miserable distressed souls. Surely, Maximinus
(that I may omit other examples of cruelty) made his decrees to be graven in
brazen Tables, whereby the Christians were cast out of all Towns and Villages.
Neither in deed are the members of the Church only persecuted with
banishmentes, but also are with most cruel torments taken out of this life.
Upon these dangers of the Church (the Reader now looking) shall more easily
perceive that she is a Figure or representation of a ^illy bird shaken out of
her poor nest, and flyinge amongst the darts of her enemies.

Verse 3. Because the foundations are destroyed, what has the righteous done:
THe third Verse expounds the cause why the church is d^str^^^ed with so
huge a multitude of calamities. For although she be like the Dove which has no
gall, hurtes not with her bill, and has harmeles dees: Yet for this cause is
she hated of the world, for that she truly and simply publishes the word of
God, and sharply reprehendeth lewd opinions and profane worshipings of God,
which s(...) to overthrow and utterly to deface the foundation l(...)y God. The
Church warreth not for riches, she seeks not for promotion by mouinge
seditions, she rages not in slaughters and other mischi^es, which trouble the
societies of men: But she gathers together the pure graynes of sound Doctrine,
and plucketh up the tares out of the field. This Extyrhation cannot the world
away withal, being bewitched with love of his own wisdom and righteousness.
Therefore draws he his Sword against the Church, therefore blustereth he out
fire and lightning against her, as histories of all ages declare the same.

Verse 4. The Lord is in his holy Temple: The Lord has his seat in heaven.
His eyes do behold all things, and his eye liddes shall try the sons of
men.
THe fourth Verse opposes against these furies of the enemies, the promise of
God, which assures the god ly ones of protection and sauegard. We are (no
doubt) destitute of man's help and defense, neither seems there here to remain
any State of Churches and Schools, which is by Gods benefit now stablished,
wherein the light of the Gospel is restored: But such a State shall remain
yet, yea though the world and the devil withstand the same, as Christ
himself says in another place, The gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the Church. Mat. 16. And because many are the impediments thereof, the Psalm
in this Consolation, plamly shows who he is that shall help this Church. It
affirms that God will be present when we pray, and that he will hear us,
govern, help, defend and deliver us. Therefore let us not be discouraged,
that we at any time forsake our profession, no although many there be which
are against us, and many impedimentes chance unto us.

Verse 5. The Lord allows well the just man's doings: But the ungodly man
and his speedy violence does his soul abhor.
HE amplifyeth the Consolation, with an Antithesis or contrariety of the true
Church, and the rest of the skimme of Mankind. God (says he) by manifest
testimonies shows that he favors the true Church, because he calls
her, and gives his word unto her. This notable testimony of the love of God,
toward his Church, does the 147. Psalm foreshewe in this manner: Verse 19.
Which gave his word unto Jacob, and his righteousness and judgments unto
Israel. Verse 20. He has not dealt so with every Nation, nor has not made
known his statutes unto them. For as the Princes benevolence toward a base
and mean person, shyneth not. nor is more apparante in any thing, then in
familiar communication together: So the love of God toward us, may chiefly by
this testunonie be esteemed, whereas he coming from his secret throne,
speaks familiarlie unto his Church, and gives her his assured and express
word.

But the other multitude of Mankind (which hears not this word, but
defends ungodly opinions, and ungodly worshippinges with too too open
cruelty,) does God most bitterly hate, and most specially abhor, as above in
the fifte Psalm he says, Verse 5. Thou art not a God that deliteth in
wickedness, For as Lucilius says, (if I so may use his words,) A virtue it is to
give honor that to he is due,
As enemy eke the enemies, and evil men to puisue.
Again defender for to be:
Of good men, and manners godly.


Verse 6. It shall rain snares, Fire and Brimstone, upon the ungodly: And
whirlewindes shall be the portion of their cup.
THe sentence of this most sorrowful Commination, is not obscure, if we
consider the examples. In the History of the burning of Sodom, it is expressly
said: The Lord raineth Fire and Brimstone from the Lord.

Here is mention made, both of the eternal Father, and of his Son, So as all
the Posterity might consider so great a matter to be done by the singular
determination of God, and not by any casualtie, and that we should know, al
men, and all Nations in the world are warned by this example. Without al doubt
great is the wrath, when the self Son of God, is the Minister or Officer to
execute this horrible punishmente. So in the 16 of Numeri it is said of the
punishinge of those seditions persons. There went a Fire from the Lord, it slew
two hundredth and fifty persons.

But why do I collecte Examples of present punishments in this world, when
as in the 20. Chapter of the Revelation of Saint John, it is most evidently
said concerning the euerduringe punishentes for that same Antichrist and the
Turks, ordained: And a Fire came down from God out of the Heavens, and
destroyed them, and the Devil which seduced them, was cast into the lake of
Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast, and the false Prophet are tormented day
and night, world without end.

Verse 7. Because the Lord is just, and has loved Righteousness: The
countenances of them hane seen his equity.
THis last little Verse D. Luther expounds thus, They are not broaken or
squashed with persecution, but persiste constantly looking for the promises of
Righteousness: Therefore do they find by experience, that God loves
righteousness.

The xij. Psalm.
Miserere mei Domine. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
ALthough this pitiful moan is (touching the small number of the godly ones)
applied unto the state of all ages: Yet does it chiefly pertain unto the
last old age of the world, wherein Antichrist bearing sway, greater is the
confusion of opinions, of worshippinges, and of men's lives or conuersations.
For touching this doting old age of the world, Christ says Luke 18. Think
ye when the Son of man comes, that he shall find faith upon Earth? And in
the 24. of Matthew. Because iniquity then aboundinge, Charity of many shall
wax cold. For, faith toward God being extinguished, and love also toward
our neighbor, what godliness can there be, what holiness, or what equity?
But because it is needful that in mankind there be always a Church remaining,
God affirms, that he as yet does reign, and that he will be aduenged upon
the tyranny of Antichrist, in the behalf of his chosen ones, by stirring up
godly Teachers, which shall both reprehende Idolatry, and publish true
doctrine, and consolation unto the Church. When as therefore great were the
darcke clouds in the Church not many years since, and that the light of
the Gospel lay oppressed with the Sophistical laberinthes of Sentenciaries
with the superstition of Chanons, and Monks, and sundry worshippinges of
Idols: Luther being by God inspired, and illuminate reformed the state of
doctrine, and called agai^^ the church unto her fountain, showed the difference
of the Law and of the Gospel, made known Justification of Faith, took away
erroures in Doctrine of Repentance, distinguished true worshippings of God,
from hypocrisy of men's traditions, and showed the use of both Sacraments
which God has instituted. For this so great a benefit, let us give thanks
unto God the Eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with fervent hearts
let us crave of him, that he would confirm that which he has begun in us.
Psalm. 68. ver. 29.

Verse. 1. Help me O Lord, because the holy man pearisheth, because the
Faithful are minished from among the Sons of men.
THe first Verse descrybeth an unspeakable moan or Lamentation of the Church,
oppressed with Tyrannical Rule of Antichrist. For as Moises, when he was
brought back into the Straites of the hills, and of the red Sea, cries not,
but groaneth, and with his heavy moan fills the ears of God, So the
remnante of the godly ones in the last old age of the world, toyne together
their prayers and groaninges for delyuerance from the kingdom of Antichrist,
and for wholesome reformation of Doctrine, and worshippinges of God. Thou feast
(say they) Oh God, what and how great a confusion there is of their wicked
opinions and Idolatryes. Restore thou therefore the true kind of Doctrine, and
true worshipping of God.

This most fervent Prayer of the Church, was not made in vain, but obtained of
God the Reformation of the same doctrine, through the Ministry of the
Reverend D. Martin Luther, which again cast out* from the Evangelical
Fountains, the filthy dregs and poisons of popish doctrine, and restored
pure and sincere Doctrine unto the Church.

Verse 2. They have spoken vanity every one unto his Neighbor: They do but
flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their double heart.
THe second verse may be understood as concerning doctrine and manners. For
first of all, the Clyents of Antichrist, sophistically excuse manifest
Idolatry, and with a certain flattering fair show, endeavor to extinguish the
Gospel. The Oblation which is made in the Mass (say they) is not meritorious
to forgive and redeem sinners, but an Application. Where ^re, whereas it is
read in the Canon of the Mass, that Sacrifices are offered to redeem souls,
let us understand that they are not now offered up of us, but that God is
called upon of us, so as (for the Sacrifice which of the Hie Priest himself,
Christ being offered then redeemeth Souls) he would hear us. So, when very
hardlye they would forgo Satisfactions, they moderate the name and they will
have them to be called Chastisementes used in the Church.

With such toys endeavor they to set forth absurd opinions, neither do
they that to the endo they would reform errors, and heal the diseases in the
Church, but under new pretenses to retain still the strength of their faulty
and lewd worshippinges of God, and under a plausible outward show of holiness,
commend the corruptions of their doctrine unto the people. Moreover, (with how
many wilye sleightes of dissimulations the lives and conuersations of the
Enemies of the Gospel is covered) the Examples of Faber and Alphonsus Diasius
do show. For as Judas betrayed the son of God with a kiss: So these suckblood
Sophisters with a flatteringe show of friendship seek to ensnare the lives of
godly persons.

In the Conuention at Spire, which was in the year 1529. one Grimeus, after
his coming from the University of Heidelberge, by fortune made his abode for
a time with D. Philip Melancthon. There when he had heard Faber Bishop of
Vienna, defend in his sermon certain filthy erroures, he followed him goinge
out of the Church, and reverently saluted him. Afterward, he shows him
that he is not moved upon any malape^rtnes, but of a good zeal, to speak two
or three words with him. Faber delayed not to hear his talk. Then Gryneus
said, He was sorry, that he being a man so well learned, and of so great
authority, should openly confirm blasphemous erroures against God, and which
it is most evident, that they might be refuted with manifest testimonies of
Ecclesiastical antiquity. Faber again answers him, that he would yet say
more things, and asked him his name. He nothing at all dissembleth, but
friendly confesses that he is called Gryneus. Faber was (as many men know) one
wondrous fearful to enter into disputations with learned men. Wherefore, in
so much as he now feared the learning and eloquence of Gryneus, he made him
believe that the king had called for him, and that as then he had no leisure to
go through with that disputation. He bears Gryneus in hand that he is very
desirous to be acquaynted with him, and to have longer conference: and that
both for his own sake, and the Commonweal sake, he begins to request him the
next day to come again unto him, he shows him his lodging, and sets him the
hour certain. Gryneus thinking these words to be spoken in good faith,
grutcheth not to promise him his desire. But Faber, (to let pass other
matters) accuses Gryneus unto the King, and at the Kings commandment,
sends forth Purseuantes to bring Gryneus into prison. And of truth, such
was the expedition of the Purseuantes, that had not Gryneus been sh^elded and
succored of Gods Angels he had never been able to escape their hands.

This History D. Philippe Melancthon faithfully testifyeth in his Commentary
upon Daniell the 10. Chap. The other history of Alphonsus Diasius, a Murderer
of his own brother, who so will, may read in the 17. Book of John Sleydones
Commentaries.

Verse 3. The Lord shall destroy the lips of al Flatterers, And the tongue
that speaks proud things.
Seeing God is a lover of most simple truth, he hates and punishes lies,
whose Author the Devil is. For he will have a love of the truth, and hatred
of falsehoode to be confirmed in the minds of the godly ones, to the end we
may consider and discern him (what manner a one he is) from those devils. As
therefore Andromacha bitterly cursed those crafty Juglars, saying: O ye
Spartanes, most worthy of hatred, and of all men to be accursed, ye false
friends, Crafts masters of lienge, and falsifiing, ye guilefull wretches,
which can play Jack on both sides, speaking one thing, and thinking another,
evil may ye fare. So in this place does the holy Ghost threaten punishments
unto these subtle Sophisters, and says with Esaie, Cap. 5. Woe be unto them,
which count good, evil, and darkness for light. These Thunderclappes do
thorowlie move us unto the love of truth, and that we may beware the enemies
sophistry. Let us with greater care apply our selves unto the studyes of true
doctrine, and let us beforehand instruct and fortefie our minds with sound
opinions.

Verse 4 Which have said, we will extol our tongues, our lips are our own,
who shall be Lord over us?
HOw truly Daniel has spoken of Antichrist ( that he shall extol and
magnify himself above all things) the most impudent forgeries of the Pope
do well show, which are extant in his decrees and decretalles. For in deed,
filthely and wickedly, with most great rashness and impudency, does he prefer
his own authority before the Canonical Scripture, before the church of god,
all Synodes, yea and finally, all sound judgments. But for so much as in a
certain other place, I have set down these paltrie petegrees of Antichrists
arrogancy, from thence, or rather from the self same decrees, and
Decretalles, who so list, may take for his purpose.

Verse. 5. Because of the spoil of the helples, and the outcrying of the
poor, Now will I rise says the Lord, and will send him help that shall
breathe upon him.
THe hauock and misery of the poor, may not only be understood as touching
the enthraldome of their bodies, but much more of the butcherie of their
consciences, which in the popes Jurisdiction is very rife and bears rule.
For, who knows not the bloody crueltye of Popish penance, wherein is required
sufficient Contrition, and a scrupulous numbering up of sins, and satisfaction
to be made for sins by certain works of men.

Furthermore, who knows not what manner snares to men's consciences has been
hidden in their Doctrine, which bids men always to stand in doubt of Gods
favor, as also their fable of Purgatory and their law of single life? With
sight and beholding of these mischiefs, God does in this verse affirm that
he is vehemently displeased, and promyseth his medicine to be laid unto the
most grievous diseases, namely, the instauration or restoring of the Ministry,
which shall accuse and condemn lewd opinions, and shall show the safe Haven
and refuge unto perplexed consciences. But (what does this manner of phrase
signify? Insufflabit ei) I doubt not, but by the word breathing or blowing,
may be^signifyed the efficacy of the Ministry. For, as the winds have great
force in blowing up trees by the roots, So the Ministry mightily destroys
the works of the devil and of Antichrist, and pluckes them up by the roots,
out of the minds of the godly ones. And ceries me thinks Paul in 2. Thest:
2. has respect unto this place, when he says: And then shall Antichrist be
revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the breath of his mouth. etc. As
if he said: The renewing of the Gospel in the latter age shall not be a sound
heard in vain, but it shall be so effectual, that it shall destroy idolatries,
and the abominations of Antechrist in many men's hearts, and gather an
everlasting Heritage unto the son of God. But because I have eftsoons
elsewhere spoken to this effect, I am now more brief here, and do proceed
unto the verse following.

Verse 6. The words of God are pure, like the silver tried in the earthen
Vessel, and purified seven times.
THis verse may be understood after a twofolde manner. First in deed, in the
respect of God, and afterward in respect of our selves. For it is manifest
plain, that amongst all the Godly ones, Gods promyses and threatninges are
ratifyed and most assured.

Moreoner, the thing if self shows that the light of faith increases in the
exercises of repentance, in fears, in persecution, and in Consolations.
Neither is it an obscure comparison, taken of the nature of silver. For as when
lead by the Fire melting, vanishes quite away: and the silver remains, and
the more often it is melted so much more pure it is: so in temptation or trial,
man's traditions fall away, neither can they comfort the mind at all. But
faith which climeth unto the word of God, is the vanquisher of all fears and
doubts, and as the Pummise stone being cut with hard Hatchettes does from the
Iron take his bitterness and value.

Verse. 7. Thou shall preserve them, O Lord, and shall keep us safe from this
Generation for ever.
HEre is a most sweet promise, which witnesses that the Church of God shall
remain not only amongst the ruins of kingdoms, but even if the world should
utterly come to an end. Let us therefore comfort our selves with this
consolation, and in this hope let us maintain and propagate the scriptures and
doctrine given us from God.

Verse. 8. The ungodly walk every where, when even so vile, they are exalted
amongst the sons of men.
THis last verse amplyfieth the promise with an Antithesis or contrariety. For
where God preserves not the Ministry, nor eftsoons refourmeth the Doctrine,
there do infinite errors creep in by stealth: As when the Ethnickes had lost
the doctrine touching true worshipping of God, they afterward devised
monstrous opinions without end. The same thing happens unto Heretics,
Mahometistes and Papists, which go about to take away men's sins by Masses,
require help of dead persons, etc. So in all the whole race of mankind, there
would vninersall dark mistes appear, were it not but God now and then dryueth
away some part of them, by preserving and restoring the ministry of the
Gospel, whereby God is effectual worker, and calls and sanctifyeth men unto
eternal salvation.

The xiij. Psalm
Vsquequo Domine in aeternum?
THE ARGUMENT.
THere is in the Church a twofolde kind of temptation or trial, as Paul
says, Within fears, without strife. The external temptations oppugn men's
bodies and worldly habilities. As when the godly ones are berefte of the
benefits which pertain unto this life, are cast into prison, are driven into
exilement, and suffer punishment. These temptations, or rather exercises of
faith though they be not slender (yet when we feel an inward joy in our
heart, by reason of the presence and favor of God) we are then the less vexed
with those externe sorrovves. For the joyfulness of the heart over comes that
fearefulnes: In that it persvvadeth us that it is acceptable unto God, and
beholds eternal life, and doubts not but that she shall pass unto the
presence of God, and to the fellowship of Christ and all the holy ones.
Herehence cries Paul: I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. 1.
Phil. 1. And Steven rejoiced when he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of
God. Act. 8. But there are either temptations or trials, inward and
spiritual, wherein is perceived the wrath of God against sin, and our hearts
conceive most heavy cogitations, as if we were forsaken of God, and cast
away from him. Unto the bitterness of this sorrow, no punishment nor yet any
vexations be they never so horrible, may be compared. For how much the force or
strength of mind, is greater then of body, so much more grievous are felt the
passions of the mind, then of the body. As therefore the eleventh psalm
describes the outward persecutions of the Church, to wit, banishmentes and
punishments. So in this psalm does David expres horrible fears of the mind
wrestling with trial of abiection. For although we are then wont to be
steadfast and strong, what time the Spirit triumphs over the Flesh: Yet
notwithstanding, when incredulity assaulteth our hearts, we straightway wax
fainte, and scarcely do we retain one spark of Faith, which Paul calls An
unspeakable sythinge of the holy Ghost. Neither in deed are fears only or
amazednes of mind here described, but also consolations of the mind, which
vvrastleth at full by reason of the waves and storms of temptations, and
solemniseth the victory of faith against desperation. And therefore are these
things put in writing, that by the example of the universal Church, we might
be comforted so often as our mind is drenched or vvhelmed into like
temptations. For like as David, Job, Ezechias and other holy ones, by means
of their great plunges of calamities, savve and enjoyed the Port of quietness
and tranquillity. So no doubt, even we shall (by gods help) be conquerours
over Satan Death and Hell, as Saint Paul says: Thanks be to God, which has
geeuen us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 15.

Verse* 1. HOw long, O Lord, will thou forget me, for ever? How long will thou
hide thy face from me? Verse. 2. How long shall I look for help in my soul?
How long shall mine enemy rejoice over me?
THe Complainte so oftentimes repeated, shows the bitterness of his sorrow,
and the difficulty of his conflicte. And as the order of man is in threefold
manner. The first toward God, the second toward himself, and the third
toward others, either friends or enemies: so he descrybeth three most fierte
conflictes. In the first of which three, he sorroweth that he is neglected and
cast away of God: For in deed the most sure signs or tokens of neglection and
indignation, are forgetfulness and turning of the face another way. And so often
as Consolation and deliverance is deferred, we fall down into this opinion,
that we think we are forsaken of God, and cast away from him.

After this he wrastleth with him self, purposinge diverse matters in his
mind, wherewith yet he can neither be helped nor relieved. For the wounds of
the heart cannot be healed, but by the help of God.

Last of all he encountreth with his enemy the devil, which casts such
illusions before his eyes, that he seems straightway to escape his danger
which wrasteleth with him, and to triumph over him. But I will make no longer
discourse of this matter. But let the godly ones in time of their sorrows, and
when they read the Psalms, and prophetical History, consider well these
most special matters, whereas the descriptions of such sorrows are extante to
teach and comfort us.

Verse 3. Look upon me, and hear me, O Lord my God: Illuminate thou mine
eyes, least I sleep in death. Verse 4. Least mine enemy say, that I have
prevailed against him, And they that trouble me will rejoice, if I shall
fail.
TRue Invocation or Prayer is the chiefest sauegard of a godly mind in such
sorrows which elsewhere are named, the sorrows of death and dangers of hell.
Therefore (unto this most strong Tower, flyinge) he says: Look upon me, and
hear me. Illumine thou mine eyes, etc. Least mine enemy say, etc. But let the
Reader in this place consider how aptly every remedy is given for every
disease. He said before, that God was estranged from him: Now, ouercomming the
heavy and sorrowful temptation, he persuades himself that with Gods favorable
countenance, he is looked upon, and is most assuredlye heard of him. Whereby we
learn what manner enterchanges of tryalles and Consolations there are in the
godly ones. He adds moreover, Illumine thou mine eyes. These words are
opposed unto the little clause: How long shall I look for help in my soul?
For the light of the phrase in this Scripture signifies Consolation and
gladness, which is the ouercommer of death: As if he said: With man's
councelles and comfortable helps could I not be helped, but when thou shewedst
me remedies for my sorrows, I have felt delyuerance, and in thy goodness have
I found rest. Finallye, he craves victory against the Devil, which is wont
gloriously to triumph ever silly souls, plucked away from God: Neither is it
obscure in what respect these things be spoken.

Verse 5 But I have trusted in thy mercies, My heart shall rejoice in thy
salvation, I will singe unto the Lord, because he has done me good.
LIke as they which get the victory, do singe Paeana, or song of solemn
praise to God: So the godly ones, feeling the destruction of the works of the
Devil, and the utter overthrow of Satan under their feet, have these words
always in mouth and mind. We render thanks unto thee, Eternal, living, and
most true God, that thou suffer not the just man to pearish for ever, nor
art delited in our destruction, but geuest us at length after sorrows,
gladness: and grauntest us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. With
these testimonies of heavenly deliverances, we being confirmed, do acknowledge
and honor thy mercy and thy presence in thy Church. etc.

The xiiij. Psalm.
Dixit Insipiens cord suo.
THE ARGUMENT
THis psalm is a sorrowful Sermon, accusinge, and bewailing the lamentable
corruption of mankind: That is, the darkness of man's mind and his will,
sliding away from the will of God, and the contumacie of his heart, in that he
is neither made obedient, nor can be made obedient unto the law of God. For
the thing shows, that this weak and wretched nature of man, continually
carries about with her, darkness and doubtinges of God: Security, not
regarding God: Distrust, flying away from God: And Inclinations, whereupon
many wandering motions of the mind arise contrary to the Law of God. But God
will have these great mischiefs to be always perceived and acknowledged,
that men may know theie cannot satisfy the Law of God, neither by discipline
are just before God. But let them seek for remission of their sins by the
Mediator. Therefore in the end of the Psalm is added a prayer touching
deliverance of the church, by the Messiah:

Verse. 1. THe foolish man has said in his heart* There is no God. Verse 2.
They are become corrupt, and abominable in their cogitation, there is not one
which does good.
GHe Root of all evils is the obscurity if man's mind. For as a sincere and
^irme acknowledgement of God brings forth Fear, Faith, and Love toward
God: So the lack of this kno^edge in man's mind, bringes forth ^oubtinges of
God, and of his preuidence, and a blind security, whereby it comes to pass,
that men do not fear the judgment and wrath of god: as also love of our
selves, whereby we serve more our own pleasure and glory, then the glory of
God. For in deed al men are not altogether godles persons and Epicures. But
yet oven they also which live most modestlye of others, retain still
doubtinges in their mind. As who say, Will God take care over us, will he
punish us, will he receive us into favor, will he hear us, will he help us,
will he give us life everlasting, and eternal blessings? These doubtinges are no
slender mischiefs, but are the fountains of lewd Inclynations in the will
and heart of man.

Verse 3. The Lord from heaven beholds the sons of men, to see if there be
any which understands or seeks after God.
THis perspicuous or clear affirmation is opposed to to the first Verse. The
ungodly ones deny that there is a God, or in deed doubt of the same: But the
word of God cries, God from heaven beholds the sons of men. He is truly a
God, yea he is the Creator, the Searcher, and Judge of mankind. For, to look
upon, signifies not at all a vain beholder, but him that makes him self
known by his word, and testimonies, and which instituteth the ministry of
teachinge in the Church, and one that by manifest examples punishes all
grievous sins.

Verse. 3 They have all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
unprofitable and vile, there is not one that does good, no not one.
Certain subtle persons do altogether trifle with the universal meaning, and
say it is the figure Sinechdoche: that is (part interpreted for the whole) All
have gone out of the way, (that is) many in all orders or decrees. But in the
mean time they contend that others are not to be accused which live honestly.
This Sinechdoche is a filthy and horrible lie wherein the severity of Gods
judgment, and the greatness of his mercy are obscured. For it is needful that
there be a difference seen between the law of God and politic laws. The
law of God accuses not only external sins but also lewd disposicions in
the heart. But the Laws politic are in manner of a bridle whereby external
discipline is governed, and they only accuse external offenses. Also by the
corrupt doctrine are pharisaicall opinions touching righteousness confirmed
which imagine that men are just by discipline. Therefore that Sinechdoehe must
be rejected, so as the Psalm it self refuteth it, by the universal part so
often times repeated and put into our heads, but the efficacy of the words
must be considered. There is not one that understands nor seeks after God,
they have all gone etc. That is, all persons carry about with them in their
minds filthy erroures touching God, they fear not God truly, they love him
not truly, neither rightly call they upon him, neither trust they in Gods
help, but have many flames of lewd desires in them. These evils are not only
in epicures which profess themselves before all men to beprophane persons, but
in others also which live honestly. It follows in the text. They are become
unprofitable. That is, they are corrupted and become sinners: as if he said,
the light and integrity of nature is lost. Now are there darkness and erroures
in men's minds and the will and heart of man have in them vicious desires
without measure and end, by course of nature runninge headlong against Gods
will.

Verse. 5. Do not all workers of iniquity know this which devour my people
eating them up as bread and have not called upon the Lord?
Hitherto with great severity of words, has he described the welspring and
root of al evils, namely original sin. Now describes he the little floodes
and fruits thereof: That by considering upon the wrath of God against both
mischiefs we should tremble for fear and seek for reconsiliation through the
mediator. Most heavy sighs and shows are there in mankind, to see horrible
examples of wise men and those in virtue excelling, (which being moved by the
devil) become the practizioners of huge mischiefs, they establishe idolatry
and exercise Cruelty upon the church, as Pharao, Diocletian, Julian, and
innumerable others. Touching all these, he says: They have not called upon the
Lord. That is, they devise themselves opinions and religions after their own
judgment: They retain not the word of God: And this impiety of their
hearts, bringes forth ungodly counsels and cruelty, which (...) exercise in
killing and slaying the holy ones.

Verse. 6 There trembled they with fear, but the Lord is in the generation of
the just.
THis little verse do I understand as concerning punishments due to the
ungodly. For it signifies, that the wicked ones at length shall be paid home
with horrible punishments, shall be destitute of al good haps and shall be
fast snared with inextricable mischteses, like as Pharao, Saul, and the Jews,
after they had crueified Christ were over whelmed in great mischtefs wherein
they found no succoure nor consolation. Therefore pearished their souls into
eternal desperation, and eternal torments. So did their punishments in this
life heap sin upon sin, which thing happens so often, as men without light
of the Gospel, are overwhelmed with punishments. But why adds he the little
clause The Lord is in the generation of the Just? Because he would discern
the Church from the rest of the multitude of mankind, which heapeth up
Idolatrous seruinges of God, and manifest fancies. For that the whole huge
multitude of mankind should not be damned altogether. God has chosen out some
part of salvation, namely, the members of the true Church. These do truly
worship God, they retain the doctrine of the Gospel, call upon him in faith,
give thanks unto him, obey him, and in all eternity worship him. Unto the
same meaning pertayne the words which straight way follow. The Lord is his
trust and confidence. That is, The true Church, though it have not man's
sauegardes or defenses, yet she has reposed all hope of her salvation in God,
and is marueylouslye preserved and defended by God.

Verse. 7. You have made a mock at the council of the po(...)t the Lord is
his trust.
THe council of the needy and poor congregation, and yet putting their
trust in the Lord (that I may so say with Sophonie.) No doubt he calls the
word of God as in the 119. Psalm. Thy testimonies are my joy, and my
counselors. This wisdom of God (says he) is contemned of profane persons as
if the same were dreams of them which dote. Of politic worldlinges as if it
were the firebrand of sedicions, and finally of the hipocriticall crewe, as the
corrupt doctrine of good manners, and the evil liberty of discipline.
Concerning these wicked judgments where with the word of the Gospel is
condemned, seeing else where I have oftentimes spoken my mind. I am now more
brief, and come to the last verse of this Psalm.

Verse. 8. Who shall give salvation out of Syon unto Israel, when the Lord
shall turn away the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice and Israel
shall be glad.
IN the end he adds a promis of the Messiah which shall come, and of
publishing the Gospel from out of Sion, to the end he would show by whom this
lewdnes of nature must be taken away and the captivity of sin, and of death
abolished or adnihilated. But some man would perhaps say: why do you transform
or change the prayer into a promis or prophecy. The rule is known, most
worthy of marking. Every prayer of the holy ghost has effect of promis.
Because the holy ghost asks things congruent with the will of God, as paul
in 8. Romans witnesses. But in that he understands by salvation, to be the
Messiah. It is not obscure unto any man reading that verse of Symeons song,
which says. Because mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have
prepared before the face of all people. Furthermore what the name of the
Savior, or of Jesus foresheweth* Saint Matthewe in his first Chapter
teaches. viz. His name shall be called Jesus because he shall save his people
from their sins. But he saves after a twofolde manner. First by paying the
randsome for our sins. After that by distroying sin and death, and
restoring us to righteousness and to life everlasting. The which thing is in
this life begone, by the gift of the holy ghost, and shall be fully and wholly
finished in the resurrection of the dead: For then (being delivered from sin
and death, and being adorned with new and perfect light and righteousness) shall
we rejoice and be glad: as the Psalm in this place says.

The XV. Psalm
Domine quis. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN all ages there is an accustomed Hypocrisy which arrogateth unto her self
praise of righteousness, by reason of her profession and ceremonies: as the
Jews would seem to be holy men because they were skillful in the law, and
observed certain ceremonies. So now many kings and princes think they please
God by means of their profession, when they hear mass and observe certain
ceremonies, and by this diligence (think they) do they deserve remission of
sins. This eroure most deeply rooted in the minds of Hipocrites, does this
XV. Psalm reprehende, and sets forth true religion. For it leads the
Reader not unto ceremonies, but unto moral obedience, and affirms that this
pleases god, by this foundation laid, (that is) acknowledging the the Mediator
and that for his sake remission of our sins and reconsiliatio^ with God is
purchased. For works without faith acknowledging the mediator (and whereby for
his sake we receive forgeuenes of sins) are, as the Grecians say.

etc. And the Latins. Hostium dona non sunt dona, and non sunt vtilia. That is
in inglish: The gifts of enimyes, no gifts at all be, and nothing avail our
state or degree. Scipio was in deed a man just and upright in government and
a man of chaste life amongst his friends and cuntrie men: But because he had
not the true opinion or knowledge of God, but was ignorant also of the
Mediator, neither did his person please God neither yet his moral virtue of
obedience to man's laws. But after that we are freely received of God for the
Mediator sake, and reputed just, even then and therefore also (the obeydience
begun in us) pleases God, although many dregs of sin are in us
remaining, as else where more copiouslie is said of the same.

Verse 1. LOrd who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy
holy hill? Verse 2. Even he that enters without spot, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth from his heart.
HE begins his discourse touching good works, from a most weighty question,
which and what manner a one the true Church is, which shall worship god in an
everlasting society and gladness, and unto whom he himself will communicate
his light, wisdom, and Righteousness in all eternity. Touching this question
he answers, That Congregation is the true Church, which publishes the
Gospel, and word of God delivered unto the Prophets and Apostles, and
worshippeth the Father in spirit and truth, (that is) in true motions of
repentance, of fear, faith, and confidence, beholding Christ, and finally,
perfourmeth moral obedience, according to the Decalogue or Table of Gods
commaundents, to the end it might declare thankefulnes unto God, and show the
will of God unto others. The same description of the Church is in the 119.
Psalm. Blessed are the undefiled in the way. (That is) which are not polluted
with any error of Doctrine, or ungodly Religion. Such are not Hipocrites, but
for the most part favor idolatries, and errors, repugnant unto the gospel,
and use counterfette worshippinges of God, which Paul calls Voluntary
serving of God, preferring them before ye works by God commanded. But although
some profes the true religion, and be not polluted with external Idols, yet
in their hearts they are secure and without repentance, without fear of God,
and without true faith, and do more love their own sensualities and wealth,
then God. Such a great multitude is there always in the church, yea where the
true doctrine is preached, like as the Parable of the seed sown signifies.
Therefore let the word Thamyra be referred unto purity of doctrine, and
religion, but let the word truth unto affections not feigned, which agree with
the Law of God.

Verse 3. Which with his tongue has spoke no guile, nor done evil unto his
Neighbor: Nor has not slaundered his next Neighbor, Verse 4. In whose sight
the malignant person is despised: But makes much of them that fear the Lord,
Which promises his neighbor, and disapointeth him not. Verse 5 He which has
not lent his money upon usury, And has not received rewards to deceive the
Innocent.
LIke as the second Verse infreateth of works pertaining to the first Table.
So the rest of the verses conteyne the necessary virtues pertaining to the
second Table.

And in deed the first virtue is Truth, which of right and deseruingly, is
called the foundation of other Virtues. And it is a certain firmenes in the
will of man, or a steadfast sound purpose of well doing, perfourming congruence
in opinions, in words, and utter appearance with effect, neither through
error, malapertnes, desire of hurtinge any man, to think one thing and say
another.

The second virtue is Justice particular, which for bids hurting of other
men's bodies, wives, gooddes, and good fame.

The third virtue is Justice distributive, which at trybuteth unto all persons
conuenyent reverence. Like as Lucilius says, whose verses touching this virtue
are known, viz.

A virtue it is to give to honor that to her is due: As adversary and enemy
eke, evil men to pursue. Contrariwise, good men and eke good manners every
where: (Next to their Countreies weal) always to deem as things most dear.
The fourth virtue is the religion, or profound mystery of taking an oath. For
an oath taken is an affirmatio^ of a thing possible and lawful, made with
invocation of the true God, wherein we crave yt he be witness of such things as
are spoken, and that he would punish the parties breaking their promise by oath
made, and we bind our selves unto ye punishment, God himself witnessing the
same according unto his threat^ing, as if we reproved him of untruth, if he
punish not ye breakers of their oath made, like as in ye 3. precept he says,
The lord will not hold him guiltles, whosoever takes his name in vain. This
definition shows how terrible a bond an oath is, and what a mischief is ye
violation or breaking of ye same, because ye violatio^ by manifold wa^es is
reprochful unto god, seeing he is called upon to be witness and revenger. The
violatio^ deni^th him to be a true witness, despises his revenge, and reproves
him of un truth. Such reproaches does ye true and just god sharply punish, and
in expres words has delivered his sentence touching punishment due to the^,
and confirms ye same daily by horrible examples: and it augmenteth ye
grieuousnes of yt offense, for so much as we bind our selves by oath unto ye
punishment. These must be ofttimes considered of us, not only to ye end we
should not break our oaths, but alsothat we should not be light or unadvised in
taking our oaths. Like as that lightness is reprehended in the 5. of S. Mat.

The 5. virtue in this place commanded, is Justice in bying and selling, which
in making of bargains keeps equality, and eschueth vsuries, and other
unjust means of getting money. And yt it is a thing unjust to ask and receive
usury, the law of god witnesses in the 25. of Leuit. Thou shall not take usury
of thy brother, nor more the^ thou have given. And Christ says. Lend ye one to
another, not hoping for any thing therefore. That is, not asking again above
measure. Let us embrace and put in practice these divine testimonies, and let
us know y^ vsuries do indeed displease God, neither let us seek cauillatio^s
to excuse manifest vsuries as many men do And let us observe y^ saying of
Arist. who in ye 1. book of his Pol. condemns vsuries in these words. Usury
is justly hated, because money is used, for a merchandise, and out of that
(which nature makes not profitable) takes profit. But money is made for bying
and selling, it is then especially against nature, that money is made a
merchandise.

The last virtue whereof mention is here made, is co^stan ^ie. (That is) a
perseuera^ce in true purpose, which is neither vanquished with hope of commodity,
nor broken with fear. This virtue did Thucidides ascribe unto Perycles in his 2*
book, where he says: Pericles was endued with such faith, that he seemed
impossible to be corrupted with money. But how hard a thing it is for such a
man to be born, which with hands feet and mind is by all means faithful and
uncorrupted, ye saying of Simonid. techeth, which Plato in Prot. recites.

Verse 6. He that does these things shall not fail for ever.
A Perspicuous sentence it is, which for good works promises not only corporal
and spiritual rewards in this life, but also in ye life to come. After the same
manner touching rewards in both lives, does ye son of God pronounce in ye 10.
cap. of Mark. He that forsakes house for my sake, and for the gospel, shall
receive an hundred fold now in this life, with persecution, and in the world
to come life everlasting. And in the 1. Epist. unto Tim. cap. 4. it is said.
Godliness is profitable unto al things, having promises of this life present,
and of the life to come. But in the saying of Christ, it is expreslye added,
with persecution, to the end we may know yt both of these promises are true, yt
rewards shall for good works here, be given, and that ye church in this life
for many causes (of which we will in their due place entreat) is subject unto
persecution. How these do agree in truth (they which are instructed aright in
the doctrine of the gospel, may rightly judge.

The xvj. Psalm.
Conseruame. etc
THE ARGUMENT.
LIke as gold excels all other metals, not only in brightness but also in
effect, seeing it both gives courage unto the heart, and enfeebleth the
beginninges of leprie that they can not spread further: so in the whole book
of Psalms there are excellent Psalms which contain prophecies of the
passions and resurrection, and of the eternal kingdom of Christ. For the
whole scripture prophetical and apostolical is chiefly directed unto this
bound or limit. That we should believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God
and that we so beliuing might in his name have life. For it is said. John. 20.
If any man in the reading of the scripture do not seek Christ crucified. etc.
risen from death to life and now reigning at the right hand of God the father,
this man must needs be in a great error, and in the ignorant of the
chiefest matters, as the Prophet Esaie speaks of the blindness of the Jews.
Chap. 29. And the vision of all the Prophets is become unto you as the words
of a book that is sealed up which men deliver to one that is learned saying,
Read thou in it, and he says I can not, for it is sealed, and the book is
given to him that is not learned, saying read thou in it, and he says I am
not learned. Wherefore saying this Psalm entreats of the death resurrection
and everlasting kingdom of Christ, it is not vainelie nor unadvisedly called
a golden gift. And least any man doubt of this meaning of the Psalm let him
hear the discourses of the Apostles which are extant in the 2. and 13. Chap.
of the Acts, For so Peter full of the holy Ghost, cyting the testimony of
this 16. Psalm, says: Men and Brethren, may I boldly speak unto you of the
Patriarch David, because he is dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with us
until this day. Therefore seeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had
sworn unto him by an oath that fruit of his loins should sit upon his seat,
he with foreknowledge spoke of the resurrection of Christ, because he was not
left in the grave, neither shall his flesh see any corruption. And S. Paul in
the 13. of the Acts says: David in his generation when he had served his
time, by the will of God, slepte, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw
corruption. But he whom God raised from the death, saw no corruption.

After that it is determined upon, what person speaks in this psalm: Let us
consider the parts of this psalm, which are two. The former is a fervent
prayer, wherein Christ feeling not only the scourgings, and torments of his
body, but also inspeakable fears and astonishmentes of the mind: prays
that the wrath proceeding from his Eternal Father, might, (being pacified by
this his obedience) satisfy the righteousness of God: and that his Son might
rise from death to life, and reign in eternal fellowship with his Father
Eternal, and there to give unto his heritage everlasting life and salvation.

The other part of this psalm is a thankesgeuing of Christ risen from death
to life, and glorified: wherein he honors the present help of God, and his
marvelous deliverance. This sum of the Psalm is first to be considered:
afterward let the parts or members thereof be looked upon.

Verse 1 Save me O Lord, because I have trusted in thee: I have said unto the
Lord: Thou art my God, for thy sake it is not well with me.
SVffer me not to pearishe in this most great agony of all, the like whereof
never any man has nor shall suffer: but help me wrastlinge with death, and
deliver me, and restore me into that glory which I had with thee in the
beginning, before the world was made. But some men perhaps ask the question,
Why does Christ make this request, when he says in another place, that he
will yealde up his life, and take the same again, Why does he ask that which
is in his own power? Again, when he knows the euente hereof, why faynteth
he, as in a doubtful matter? These questions unwillingly I do but touch by
the way: for they rise but from vain and profane minds. But I will answer
briefly. First, the times must be discerned in the History touching Christ. At
this time of his passion, the divine nature ceased in him, as Ireneus speaks,
and he unfaynedly suffered not only natural fear of death, but also another
far greater and more unspeakable sorrow. For that in deed he felt the
wrath of God against the sins of mankind, which was poured upon him, even as
if he had defiled him self with the sins of all men. These although they be
unspeakable griefs, yet are they signified, when it is said: For thy sake it
is not well with me. (That is) by reason of thy marvelous and secret
providence of redeeminge mankind, not for any sins of mine. Unto the second
question we may more easily answer. Although Christ knows the event of this
matter, yet he knows his infirmitye: and the greater his wisdom is, so much
the more understands he, what a thing the wrath of God is, and knows how
the same may not be borne without the help of God. Therefore craves he both
help and delyuerance of his Father.

Verse 2 All my delight is among thy Saints: and with them that excel in
virtue upon Earth.
HEre follows the final cause, why he required help and delyuerance. This
agony of mind (says he) is therefore by thee ordained, that this my obedyence
might satifise thy righteousness, that thy most heavy wrath might be pacyfied,
sin might be extinguyshed: also a great part of mankind restored unto
righteousness and glory everlasting, and that God might have an eternal Church
or Congregation, of whom he might be acknowledged and worshipped. For, let us
always remember these words, that we rightly believe, that the Son of God
was also made a sacrifice for us, and made intercession for us, and also
applied his sacrifice for our salvation in these words. Among thy Saints is
all my delight, etc. That is, these things suffer I for the holy ones sake,
and them do I love unfeignedly. But let us here understand and know, touching
this application, that it must be taken of us by faith. Christ applies his
Sacrifice unto all persons, but namely he says, ( Unto the Saints.) That is
(as John interprets the same) to all true believers. For so will he have his
sacryfice to profit thee, if thou by faith beleeuest the fruit of this
Sacrifice pertayne unto thee, if thou beleeuest, by reason of the same
sacryfice, the wrath of God is surely pacyfyed for thee, and that thou art
certainly received into grace or favor, art heard in thy Prayer, and saved by
his means. Therefore says S. Paul Romans 3. We are justified freely through his
grace, by redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has appointed our
Mediator, by faith in his blood. So is he (says he) thy Propitiator, when
thou beleeuest, that because of his death, God is pacyfyed with thee. This
doctrine of Applycation let us always and with special care remember, and let
us consider both points, namely, where Christ has applied for his Sacrifice,
and how all men ought to apply the vtility or fruit of the Sacrifice unto
themselves.

Verse 3 But they that run after another God, shall have great trouble. Verse
4 I will not offer up their sacrifices of blood, neither will I take the name
of them in my lips.
AFter that he has spoken of the Application and of the true Church, he adds
an Antithesis of the difference of the true Church, and of other Sects, which
heap up Gods wrath by despising this so great a benefit, namely, the
Sacrifice of the Son of God. Christ loves his Church only which embraces
the Gospel, he loves not other sects, machometistes and heretics. Likewise
again the Church acknowledges Christ her only Mediator, and embraces his
doctrine only: neither has she defiled her self with the opinions or
ceremonies of other sects. As therefore he said a little before: In the holy
ones which are upon earth, and with them that excel invertue, is al my
delighte, etc. That is, the congregation which hears me. For their sakes in
this my passion do I bestow all these my labors: All my functions are to this
end ordained, that I may help them. For this congregation am I careful, for
this do I labor, and make intercession, the same do I govern, defend, and
preserve:) So now adds he, That he condemns the sacrifices and Prayers of
them which will not hear him. I will not (says he) offer up their
sacrifices, neither will I take their name in my lips. That is, I will not
make mention of them, I will not make intercession for them unto the Father.

These sayings and such like discerninge the true Church from other Nations,
and true Prayer, from hypocrisy, Let every one of us diligently meditate in
our minds. For they both in godly manner instruct our minds of things
necessary, and they illuminate in us faith and invocation. For the first part
of this psalm, agrees with the Prayer of Christ, which in the 17. of S. John's
Gospel is recited. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for those
whom thou have given me because they are thine. Finally, the Interpretation of
them nothing offends me, which accommodate or apply the Antithesis unto the
abrogation of Leuiticall Ceremony, and the reiection of the people of Israel
not acknowledging the time of their visitation.

Verse 5. The Lord is the portion of mine Heritage and of my cup: It is thou
which supportest mine inherytance. Verse 6 My lotte has fallen unto me in a
pleasant place: For in deed I have an excellent heritage.
HE returns unto the description of the true church, which he calls his
Heritage. For what can be thought more sweet a thing, then that the church,
gathered from amongeste mankind: is called an excellent and singular Heritage
of the Son of God? For although the Son be made heir of all things
universally (as the Epistle of S, Paul Chap. 1. witnesses) yet has he
redeemed no part of his Heritage with his blood, but the Church, amongst
mankind.

Therefore let us not doubt but that the love of Christ toward us is true and
fervent, like as S. Paul in the 5. Ephesians. witnesses thus. Christ loved his
Church, and gave himself for her, that he might sanctify her. etc. Also that
particle is to be observed, where he says, that the Church shall be supported by
the eternal father, amongst so great ruins of kingdoms and so grievous
confusions of opinions, religions, and manners of men. Let us also set before us
this consolation in this our age wherein so many mighty Kings do threaten
that they will utterly destroy the true ministry of the Gospel and the true
church.

Verse. 7 I will magnify the Lord which has provided for me, yea moreover in
the night season shall my raynes teach me.
THis verse which is the beginning of thanks giving does the epistle of S.
Paul to the Hebrews. cap. 5. very well interpret in this manner. who in the
days of his humanity offering up his prayers and supplications with a mighty
clamoure and with tears, unto him which has power to save from death, was (by
reason of the true obedience and humility of his mind) heard of his father:
And surely seeing he was the Son of God, yet by those tribulations which
suffered, did he learn obedience and was made perfect. etc. This clearly
affirms that Christ powered forth his prayers with a fervent soul, and was
heard of his father by reason of his obedience and received great fruit of his
miseries, even the same obeydience wherewith God rejoices more and is more
delighted then with sacrifice. For like as when we are tempted, we pray, and
render thanks for delyuerance according to that. Call upon me in the day of
tribulation and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. So Christ
being by all means tried, like as we are tried (sin always I except) called
upon his father, and rendered thanks to him for that he heard his prayer as in
this place he says. I will magnify the Lord which has provided for me. And
as we learn many things in time of calamities. So (Christ being taught even
in his passion) learned to bear with our infirmities as in the 4. cap. to the
Hebrews. is written.

Verse 8 I have set the Lord in my sight for ever* because he is on my right
hand, that I shall not fail. Verse 9 For this cause is my heart glad, and my
tongue has rejoiced, yea and moreover my flesh shall rest in hope.
HE recyteth two good gifts (where into lookinge) he comfort and confirms
him self. The one is the will of God. The other is hope of a new glory in
his resurrection. The son of God knew that he was made a sacrifice by the
singular and unspeakable providence of God, and that this his sacrifice was the
randsome for all mankind. After this he looked for or hoped after a
resurrection and tryumphe over sin, death, and hell, and with this hope did
he mitigate his distressed state. But let us remember this example, that we
also in calamities may perform obedience, and learn partly with
acknowledgment of Gods will, and partly with hope of delyuerance to lenifie and
mitigate the greatness of our sorrows

Verse. 10 Because thou will not leave my soul in hell neither will thou
suffer the holy one to see corruption.
NOtably says S. Augustine. Mayor est huius scripturae authoritas, quam totius
humani ingenij capacitas. That is, Greater is the authority of this scripture,
then the captivity of all the wisdom of men. For here men do inquire of the
article how Christ descended unto hell, what that discending may be? First some
men understand that before his death his discending unto hell was signified in
that agony of his death wherein Christ felt the horrible taste of Gods wrath
against our sins: Some again understands the same his death and burial to
be his discending into hell. But let us simply believe, that Christ in deed
raised the fathers from death to life (as Peter says) He preached unto the
souls which were in misery. This manner of visitinge the fathers after Peter's
saying do I understand to be his discending into hell, neither will I curiously
dispute upon the matters, but let the modest and godly persons consider
certain secret mysteries of the death and resurrrection of Christ (which the
fathers that were raised from death to life hoped after) to be signified in
Peter's saying which are more playner recyted in any place. Let the reader seek
for a larger exposicion of this little verse in the commentary of D. Martin
Luther where he expounds the 42. cap. of Genesis.

Verse 11 Thou have made known the ways of life unto me, filling my
countenance with gladness, there is pleasure at thy right hand for ever.
THe last verse by notable limits distinguishes this short and frail life
from that which is only to be called a life in deed. For what is this life
but a continual Consumption and passage unto death as in the verse of Manilius
it is said, Nascentes morimus finisque ab origin pendet. That is, Newborn
into this world we dye, our death from first day of life draws nigh. Moreover
in this life God always nere unto one good hap distributeth two evil,
neither is there any delectation or gladness of our mind so perfect or sound
but it is corrupted or sowred with some bitter sorrow. But that life whereunto
after a while we shall be raised up and revived, shall be the true and not
failing life, but most plentiful of joy and gladness, which we shall receive by
the sight and presence of God, and his everlasting joy, whereof in deed (that
the eternal father would together with his Son and holy Ghost make us
partakers) let us al with our whole hearts continually pray. Amen.

The xvij. Psalm
Exaudime Domine iustitiam. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
SO often as we think in our minds upon filthy opinions, which with horrible
boldness, Heretics and Fanaticall teachers in all ages, have spread abroad
touching God, it cannot be but we must with all our hearts abhor the same, and
make our prayers, that the Son of God would with his light, govern our
minds, and with his holy spirit illuminate and confirm in us true
acknowledgemente of God. And truly, me seems no doubt it is, but that David
(recyting these words of praiet Direct thou my goinges that my footesteppes
fail not) gathered in his mind the furies of all ages, which the devil has
dispersed in mankind, because he seeks all means he can to blaspheme God,
and since he is one that rejoices in mischief, is delighted with the horrible
misery of men, after he has forciblie destroyed them whom he has plucked
away from God, and snared in his errors. Let us therefore (thinking of these
furies) continually recite this psalm, and with fervent prayers let us
beseech God that for his Sons sake, he would with his holy spirit,
illuminate in our minds the Doctrine manifested from him, and also true
Invocation or prayer, Neither that he would suffer us to go astray from him,
but that for his glory sake he would govern us so as we may truly
acknowledge, and call upon him: which, that he may effectually work in us, with
my whole heart, I beseech him, Amen.

Verse 1. Hear, O Lord my righteousness, give ear unto my petition: With
thine ears receive my prayer, proceeding not from deceitful lips.
LIke as the Ship with prosperous wind is spedely carried in her course, so
our prayer is more profounde, and is better heard when the mind is fervent
with some desire, as in the verse it is said: Dole tantum, sponte disertus
eris. That is: Only sorrowful if thou be: thou art distressed willingly. Nec
Lachrimis tantum expletur, sed etiam verbis egeritur dolor. Neither with tears
is sorrow expleate: But also with words becomes more great. Wherefore seeing
David thrice repeateth one and the same prayer, it is clear, what ardent
motions the most sacred breast of the Prophet did feel. For, not a more
sharper sorrow is felt in the minds of the godly ones, then that which is
conceived by the corruptions of doctrine, which do blaspheme God, and bring
plague and destruction unto the Church.

And before in the eight psalm I said, there is a two fold manner of
righteousness, the one of the person, the other of the cause. He therefore in
this place craves not that his righteousness, but that the righteousness of his
cause might be heard, as if he said: For thy names sake even for thine own
names sake, do thou this that blasphemers may be confounded. This argument
does he use in many Psalms. For we must pray for our defense for the glory of
Gods sake especially: But why adds he ( Not in de^eiptfull lips?) because
he would discern hypocrisy from true prayer which is made in spirit and
truth. I do not trifle it (says he) with delusions of words, I do not with
cunninge sieightes, and merye toys, cast a mase before thine eyes, of that
which is impossible to be done. But (thy self being witness, which see the
secrets of man's heart) I truly, and without dissimulation pray thee, that the
purity of doctrine may be preserved, and that opinions and worshippinges
delivered without the word of God, may be utterly taken away.

Verse 2. Let my judgment come before thy face, let thine eyes behold the
thing that is right.
THe Church is in this world as a widow, and as an Orphane, and has no Judge
but only God. Neither the controversies touching religion, are not by man's
authority ended or taken up, because the ungodly adversaries will not seem to
be convinced by the testimonies of Gods word. Needful it is then that the
conflictes of the Church should be adjudged and decyded by God, to the utter
extinction of blasphemies. The greater part of the princes and people of the
Jews would never allow of the Apostles doctrine: and therefore God refuted or
vanquished them by destroying their common wealth, And with this execution (as
I may so say) of his judgment, made he an end of that discention. But in the
mean season, the Apostles were slain by the Princes of the Jews: So let us
wait for the judgment of God, and in the mean time let us know that we shall
endure the enemies cruelty.

Verse 3. Thou have proved my heart, and visited me in the night season: Thou
have tried me with fire, and have found none evil in me: I have determined
that my mouth shall not offend
He amplifieth the little clause of the first Verse ( not from deceiptfull
lips.) Thou see, and altogether have approved the same, that my heart
agrees with thy word For, as the heart is enflamed with light and love of God,
so the tongue manifests the divine motions of ye heart. False therefore is
the rebuke of my adversaries, which cry out, that I not for the glory of God
and souls health, but for a certain curiosity, or some lewd desire, or blind
wilful frowardnes, do retain and propagate a kind of doctrine manifested
from God, yet the thing it self purges me. For I could have lived in worldly
vanity with promotion, if I had been free from this cause: but now for that
with great labor and great danger of life, I profess the true doctrine, and
prefer the same before life, it appears sufficientlye, that I seek no
riches or worldly dignity. So are both these matters perceived in Paul's
miseries, that namely, he bare about with him the Gospel for profitte and
pleasure sake because he for the doctrine which he taught sustained great
miseries when he otherwise amongst his contry men in great reputation might
peaceably have lived. Moreover, that David in truth and earnestly believes
this doctrine is true, he confirms it by that, because he had rather suffer
death, then to cast away his profession of the Gospel.

Verse 4 From the works of men, in the word of thy lips, have I marked the
ways of the murderer.
THis little verse shows clearly, for what purpose this Psalm was made. For
it discribeth the conflictes of the church with heretics and fanaticall
teachers which are in very deed thieves and mnrderers like as Christ in the
10. of S. John's Gospel says. All they which came before me, are thieves and
murderers. That is, all those which came without my Gospel, spread abroad
false doctrines, and established diverse manners of worshipping idols. These
works of men have I marked and eschewed (says he) not with man's wisdom, but
with the wisdom of God which in his word is delivered. Let us therefore love
and reverence the exercises of his heavenly doctrine that we may rightly
acknowledge and call upon God, and be able to eschew the confusion of fond
opinions and traditions of men. For they which refuse and despise these
exercises, are like reeds, tossed hither and thither with every wind of
doctrine, as in the 4. of S. Paul. Ephesians. is written.

Verse 5 Direct thou my goings in thy paths, that my foot steps fail me
not.
SVffer us not to be drawn away by the devil unto impiety and other
mischiefs, defend us against the deceiptes of the devil, govern us with thy
light, and with thy councils, suffer us not to perish, deceived by our own
erroures, or moved by the imbecility of the flesh. Great was the wisdom and
virtue in Aharon chief priest over the people of God: and yet we see this man
was moved by the devil to make and set up a golden calfe to be worshipped.
Seeing therefore great is the infirmity of all men, vouchsafe thou O eternal
God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to govern us, and show us thy wholesome
councels in private and public affairs, and with thy holy spirit confirm
our hearts that they may obey thy will, that we be not instruments of wrath
but instruments of mercy and profitable members of thy church.

Verse 6 I have cried unto thee, because thou will hear me, incline thine ear
unto me, and hear my words.
HE repeateth the prayer, to show that he did not coldly but with an ingent
motion of mind, crave of God the preservation of sincere doctrine and
subuertion of idolatry. Neither in deed (any thing doubtinge of being heard)
prays he, but without all distrust beleneth his prayers are received and
heard. So Paul. 1. Tim. 2. biddes us to pray without wrath, and without
doubting. Let us therefore withstand all doubtfulnes, and vanquishe the same by
faith that we may come unto Godand call upon him. For this special worship of
God horribly hindered, when and so often as our minds are tossed and shaken with
waves of doubtfulnes, as experience teaches, whereby it is evident why it is
needful that the decree made in the council of Trent should be refuted, which
confirms error touching doubtfulnes in praying.

Verse 7 Deal wonderfully in thy mercies, which preseruest those, trusting in
thee from them that resist thy right hand.
ALL the godly ones have need of spiritual wisdom interpreting the promises
of God: God perfurmeth his promises, but other wise, then man's reasonne
thinks. Moses did not think that he should wander forty years in the
wilderness: how many in mean time despaired, and cursed Moses as a deceyuer
of the people yea as a seditious and tyrannical person? And yet God at the
length performed, that which Moses promised them, and had begone by his decree.
So was the preservation of the church promised unto the Apostels, they and
their auditories were put to the sword: and yet in mean time the Church was
furdered and more and more flourished. These matters are to be learned of us
that we may prefer the word of God before all events, yea all our own
counsels and cogitations. David therefore craves that God would (by wonderful
means not comprehended in man's reason) preserve the church, a^de his cause,
and with his mighty right hand defend him against the furies of his enemies.

Verse 8. Keep me as the aple of thine eye, hyde me under the shadow of thy
wings.
HE does most plesantly painte out the defense of the church setting before his
eyes the si^^litudes of the eye, and of a hen. But although these
comparisones are most easily understood, nor do require long circumstance:
yet I will set down the words of Cicero (touching the eye l^ddes,) which are
extant in his second book De natura Deorum. For what workman besides nature
(then whom nothing can be more subtle,) could perform such perfect art in
the senses? Who first has couerd and fensed the eyes with most tender skins,
which skins she first framed lightsome that we might see by them, and of
strength that they might ndure. But nature made the eyes to roll and to stir,
that they might readely discern if any thing did hurt the^, and also might
easily turn their sight whither they would, and the light it self of the
eye, whereby we see (which is called the aple) is so small, that she easily
escheweth those things which may hurt her. And the eye liddes which are the
coueringes of the eyes, are most soft and most fitly framed, least they (with
touching the same) should hurt the eye sight, and are made to shut and open
upon the aples of the eyes that nothing should fall into the eyes, and is
circumspecte that the same may often times be done with great celeritie. And
the eye liddes are besette as with a valley of little hairs by which (the eyes
being open) any thing that might fall into them, is put away: and these
shutting together when we sleep, when we have no need to see, that they as it
were roulled up should rest. For first the upper parts being covered with the
eye breees, do keep of the sweat running down from the head and the
forheade. Moreover the corners of the eyes being below are defended from thy
nethermore part: And the nose is so placed as if it seemed to be a wall
settled between both the eyes. Thus far have we heard Cicero philosophically
reasoning upon the first similitude. Now if it please you let us hear the same
man touching the second. For so in his second book De natura Deorum he says:
Now hens and other birds both require rest, and place wherein they may hatch
their young ones and buyld their byding places and nestes and the same make
they so soft under them as they can possible, that their eggs may with ease
be saved: out of which when they have hatched their young ones, they so keep
them as with their wings they may foster them, that they be not hurt with
cold, and if there be heat of the sun, they oppose them selves to shadow
the same. But when their chickinges or young ones can use their wings, then
their dammes following their flight, are delivered of ^urther care. By this
commemoration, are the most sweet resemblances (of David here proponed) easily
thus understood.

Verse 9 From the face of the ungodly, which have afflicted me, and of mine
enemies which have encompassed my soul round about. Verse 10 Their fatlinges
have concluded among the^ selves, their mouth has spoken proudly. Verse 11
In our ways have they now encompassed me, they have bent their eyes so, that
they may cast us gr^ueling upon the earth. verse 12 Like unto the lion prepared
to his pray, and like the lions whelpe lurking in secret places.
THe four verses following conteyne a description of the wily deceiptes which
ungodly teachers lay for the subversion of the true church. For as the devil
is the same lion which seeks whom he may devour. So the 1. Pet. 5.
instruments of the devil are the whelps of the lion, and seek all occasions
how to devour and distroy the godly teachers in the true church. Neither is
the meaning of these verses obscure unto him which considers the dangers
wherein both of old time and at this day the church has been and is exercised.

Verse 13 Arise Lord prevent him and cast him down, deliver (from the ungodly
man) my soul, which is thy darlinge
I Do not know whether this verse may better in any thing be verifyed then in
the history of Alexander bishop of Constantinople, who when both by report
and heresay, he understood it would come to pass, that Arius (contrary to
his will) should be brought into the church and jurisdiction, Beseeched God,
that either he would call him out of this world, that while he lived his church
might not be infected with the poisoned doctrine of Arius: either else that from
the omnipotency of God he might find some remedy for this so great
mischief. After this manner craving help, and aid in a true confidence of the
son of God, when he had watched and called upon God a whole night long, and
besoughte Christ of his protection and sauegard, in the morninge he knew what
had happened unto Arius coming thither at midnight. For the greedy faction of
this man, troubled the church that or ever the day light was espied, he went
forward in that which they had purposed to bring to pass. But behold as
Arius was going to the^ he began to fainte and sat him down upon the next
siege or priute to ease his belly of that burden, in what place he dyed
wret^hedly, and thereupon so dead was carried home. These does Athanasius in his
first oration against the Arians plainly declare. Augustinus lib. de heret.

Verse 14 From the man of thy hands oh Lord from the men of this world,
their felicity is in this life, thou fillest their bellies with treasures,
they have increase of children, and the rest of their substance leave they
unto their Children.
MEn of the hands of God are they, which saying they fear no judgments of
man, at length are caught by the mighty hand of God, to due punishment: like
as Antiochus, Herod, Julian, Arius, and many bishops ruling the roste in
kings courts. Children of this world are called they which seek nothing but
pleasures and their exercises, he therefore craves not only delyuerance from
the tyranny of such men, but also sequettration from the opinions and
affections of these corrupt nature which loves more riches and pleasure, the^
God, as that fellow (whereof Plautus mencioneth) sateth. I had rather, that
the woman loved me then God. This plague (O God) we pray thee auerte from us.
Suerly riches and children are the gifts of God: but when the ungodly ones are
like swine in their lives and conversation, these benefits are given them as
for acornes wherewith they do but fill their bellies, till they be killed. We
therefore beholdinge this figure, let us with our whole heart abhor their
conversation and let us beseech of God, That he would give unto us the best
part, which Marie did choose and which may in no age at any time be taken away
from us. Luc. 11.

Verse 15 But I in thy righteousness shall see thy face when I shall awake I
shall be satisfied with thy presence.
THe hope of eternal life is a consolation principal which asswageth al other
miseries and is together contained in all other consolations. S. Paul endured
great unseries and vexations beholding the end, which he knew was laid up in
the life everlasting. But in mean time he suffered calamities and punishments
because he should obey God. So we although we are despised of Epicures, and
made as open prays unto the practices of tirants, yet in hope of life
everlasting (wherein we shall be adorned with a new light and righteousness) let
us suffer the short and frail calamities of this life. For as S. Paul says.
A small time of tribulation brings great treasure of glory everlasting. 2.
Cor. 4. Amen.

The xviij. Psalm.
Diligam te Domine. etc*
THE ARGUMENT.
THe argument of this Psalm is most evident partly by the title, partly by
the scoape of the history, for both the title declares that David rendered
God thanks for defense against the violence and fraud of his enemies: and
also the order of the history sufficiently shows that this Psalm is David's
swannes song, a little after called unto the end of his life. For like as
swannes do singe when they dye: So David and all the godly ones before the
flitting out of this life, do worship God, with prayer, thankesgeuing, and
confession. And that the readinge of this Psalm is more sweeter and shorter,
let the godly ones consider with what variety David's enemies behaved the^
selves. For first he was more sharply assaulted in battle by Saul who burned
with ambition, and sorowed sore to see his servant David to be advanced before
him and that valiant warriar his son Ionathas. So that burning with desire of
revenge he not only laid subtle snares for David but also shows priests
which gave entertainment unto David, and all their retinew also. Therefore in
purpose and event did he comprobate the sentence of Polinices the tyrant which
Seneca makes mention of. Proregno velim Patriam, parents coniungem flammis
dare imperia precio quolibet consta^tbene. In inglish thus: So I may rule: both
country, parents, wife and all would I, burn and destroy. To rule (oh brave)
no price too dear can buy. Moreover continual battles were sought by David
with the nations lying near him: as with the Palestines, Syrians, Edomites,
Amalechites, Ammonites and Moabites: as afterward in the 60. psalm he
writes the Nations by name, which were enemies unto the people of God.
Thirdly, he felt the domestical wound made by his son Absolon, then which
nothing could be thought more bitter: as Sophocles says: Nullum atrocius
vulnus est quam defectio amici. No wound more grievous nor more great: Then
when a friend does frendshippe break. Finally, he found by proof, the
falsifying of Cebas faith, and of others most troblesome Citizens, touching
whom it is written in the 2. Reg. cap. 20. Therefore who marueileth by right,
that David could amongst so many and so great impedimentes, govern his
kingdom for that forty years. But he was (as D. Luther used to say) A king
after faith in God, and the promis of God toward him. That is, with the word
of God, and with faith he overcame the devil and the world For as says S. John
1. epist. 5. cap. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our
faith. But although this acco^modation of the psalm no doubt is most true,
touching the history of David's battles and his deliverance: yet because
between the head and the other members in man there is great difference. The
interpretation has no absurdity, which applies the meaning of this Psalm
unto Christ. Therefore was Christ and his church assaulted of the Jews,
tirantes, heretics and false brethren, and yet are they not utterly
overthrown: but thy Christ, and his church shall remain for all Eternity, as
it is written: The gates of hell shall not prevail against the most strong
rock, whereupon the foundations of the church is builte.

Verse 1 I Will love thee, O God my Fortitude. Verse 2 The Lord is my defense,
my Castle, and deliverer: My God and my Rock. Verse 3 My Shield, yea the
throne of my salvation is he, and my Exalter.
THis number of Epithets or names of God, is a lightsome Paraphrase of the
first precept, Exodus 20. I am the Lord thy God, etc. That is, truly receiving
thee, and caring for thee, giving thee, not only benefits in this present
life, but also righteousness, and life everlasting for thy Mediator sake. Ego
sum (...) tuum, I am thy keeper and thy defense. I bring thee wealth and health
when thou art forsaken of all Creatures. But no discourse of words is like the
efficacte of those matters which the doctrine of the first precept conteyneth.
Therefore I am now breefer, and do proceed unto the verses following.

Verse 4. I will call upon the Lord who is praised, and I shall be safe from
mine enemies.
LIke as the complete harness nothing profits the Soldyar, except he put it
upon him, and use his armoure indeed for the defense of his own body, and
his weapons to foil therewith his enemies: So the prom^se of the first precept
is not auayleable to the hearer, except by faith he embrace the same, and apply
the same unto use in prayer, and petition for present and eternal benefits.
He therefore affirme^h that by faith he will call upon God, whom he has
hitherto praised, and magnified him with so great copy of most sweet
appella^^ons, or Epithetes, that he might obtain defense of his life present,
and also the benefits of eternal life. Let every one follow this example,
seeing in deed it is set forth to be followed, and let them not doubt that they
shall receive both necessary and wholesome benefits.

Verse. 5 The cords of death encompassed me: And the flouddes of Beliall sore
troubled me. Verse. 6 The cords of hell encompassed me: the snares of death
prevented me.
A Declaration of ingent fears and sorrows, which cannot be descrybed ^^
words, for when (as Saint Paul says) there is, within us. fears, without
strife concurring: It cannot besaide, what burning heat the heart of man
feels and abides. But because in the thirtenth Psalm I have somewhat spoken
as touching these astonishmentes, I will not so oftentimes whet the edge of my
hatchet.

Verse 7 In my trouble did I call upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, and he
heard me out of his holy place, and in his sight, entered into his ears.
IN the fifty Psalm there is a precept given us, touching Invocation or
Prayer, whereunto is adjoined a most sweet promise of God, that he will hear
us. Of the same rule in this place is an example set down. For he shows
clearly by what means, and why he is delivered: Namely, calling upon the
Lord. But I will not stay longer in this so evident and plain a sentence, which
oftentimes elsewhere is repeated.

Verse 8 The earth was moved, and quaked with fear: And the founda ions of
the hills were troubled, and did shrink, because he was angry therewith.
Verse 9 There arose a smoke in his wrath, and a fire from before his face
burned: And coals were kindled thereat. Verse 10 He bowed the heavens and came
down, and a darkness was under his feet: Verse 11 And he was carried upon the
Cherubins, and did fly upon the wings of the wind. Verse 12 And he made
darkness his secret place in the compass of his Tabernacle: A dark water and
thick Clouds. Verse 13 From lightning in his sight, there passed away his
clouds: Hail and coals of fire. Verse 14 And the Lord thundered from heaven,
and the most highest gave forth his voice, hail and coals of fire. Verse 15
And he sent his arrows, and scattered them* He increased lightninge, and
troubled them. Verse 16 And the welspringes of waters opened, a^ the
foundations of the whole world were disclosed, at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the
blast of the breath of thy wrath.
THese ^yne verses which follow, conteyne a Figurative description of an
horrible tempest, such as is that whereof Virgill speaks 1. Georg. Ipse pater
media nymborum in nocte, corusca
Fulmina inolitur dextra, quo maxima motu
Terra tremit, fugere ferae and mortalia corda
Per gentes, humilis strauit pauor. etc.
This Father then in stormy midnight late
With his right hand gave forth fierce flashing fire
Whereby the earth did tremble sore and quake
Wild beasts away fast run and eke retire
Men's hearts were mazed through nations far and nier.


But when David expressly says (He sent his arrows and scattered them) it
appears sufficientlye unto what end this manifest description may be
referred. For without all doubt he signifies thereby the majesty of God,
whereat the enemies of David were stricken with a sudden terror. And if we may
be so bold as with sacred histories to confer profane matters, not unlike unto
this case, seems the history of Anniball and the Romans, which Liuius
speaks of in his sixte book and 3. Decade, on this manner. In the 8. year of
the second battle fought at Carthage, Anniball removed his Tents unto the
flood Anien, three mile from the said city. Lastly, passing over the River
Anien, he set all his hosts in battle array. Neither did Flaccus and the
Consuls prolong time from fight. When both their hoastes were redely prepared
for the purpose (unto that hazard of handstrokes, wherein the city of Rome
might become due salarie unto the Conquerors) a great shower of rain mixed
with hayle, so troubled both the hoastes, that scarcely could they betake them
into their Tents, with their armor and weapons in safetye, nothing less then
with fear of hostility. And the next day even in the same place, this same
tempest scattered those hosts once more prepared. Who when they had go^ to
themselves again into their Tents, there arose a marueyleus cleerenes of
wether, with a calmenes. The matter amongst them of Carthage was turned into
an Oracle or Prophecy, and it was noysed, that Anniball should himself say,
sometime his own mind discouraged hi^* and sometime his fortune failed him to
conquer the city of Rome.

But what do I recite examples of the Ethnikes, when as the ecclesiastical
history sets down unto us like deliverances? For so Eusebius in his 5.
book writes. In the days of Antonius the Emperor, histories do record,
that his brother Marcus Aurelius going to wars against Caesar, the Germans
and Sarmatyans, when as with drought and exceeding heat, his host was
welneere perished, being in doubt, and seeking what way was needful to work,
they found in a certain band of men Christian Soldiers, who (as it is also
our use) bowing their knees, and praying, God did unfeignedly hear their
petitions, and suddenly, contrary to all their hope, poured down most large
showers of rain, so that the hoaste which in deed was near peryshing, and
for whom the Christians prayed) had their drought refreshed or allayed: But the
enemies which approached upon them with deadly foade, were put to flight by
lighteninges and fearful flashinge flames of fire, often times sent from the
heavens. But touching the Earthquake, although Physicians do say, that
vehement spirits of wind blowing in the earth, are the cause: yet the
heavenly doctrine of Gods word adds another cause, for it says: That by
Gods working therein, this windy spirit, Inflation, and shaking of the earth,
are so wrought, that they may signify the punishments in the world to come.
Therefore it is notably said of Plinius in his 2. lib. 48. cap. And it is not
simply an evil, neither in the moving it self is there so great danger, but
it signifies a like or greater wonder shortly ensuing. The city of Rome
never quaked, that it did not foreshew some strange thing would follow. So
although Physicians do say, that the windy inflations of the earth, when they
wrap themselves within a dark cloud, and when they have got into every most
thin part thereof, do divide and burst in sunder the same, and that very
often and vehemently so they do: Then cause they both lightning and thunder.
But if out of the ra^^nge of the clouds, an express heat do issue, that is
the thunderbolt. Yet unto these Physical causes, the Scripture adioyneth God,
giving both thunder and lightening, seeing it stands not with reason that
such great matters are brought to pass by the alone force of Nature.

Verse 17. He sent from an high and received me, and took me from out of many
waters. Verse 18. He took me away from my strongest enemies, and from them
which hated me: Because they were too mighty for me. Verse 19 They prevented
me in the day of mine affliction: And the Lord became my Protector. Verse 20.
And he brought me forth at large: And saved me, because he had a favor unto
me.
THese Verses describe gods mighty deliverance, whereby David was taken out of
the hands of Saul: For so is it written in the 23. Chapter and 2. Book of
the Kings. Saul sought after David all his life time, but the Lord delivered
him not into his hands.

Verse 21. And the Lord shall reward me according to my righteousness: And
after the purity of my hands, shall the Lord do unto me.
OF the twofolde kind of righteousness I suppose I have spoken sufficiently in
the 8. Psalm.

Verse 22. Because I have kept the ways of the Lord: And have not been wicked
unto my God. Verse 23 Because all his judgments are in my sight: And I have
not repulsed his righteousness from me. Verse 24 And I shall therewith be
undefiled, and will keep me from mine iniquity. verse 25 And the Lord shall
reward me after my righteousness: and according to the integrity of my hands in
the sight of his eyes.
THe perfect pullishing of the next verse before, is in these 4. verses,
declaring what righteousness he will foreshew. For he says that Saul hated
him for this cause, and therefore was he beset with the practices of his
enemies, because with a simple faith he obayed, God calling him. For the word
Via, or way, most commonly signifies a vocation. Therefore is there in this
place a necessary and most profitable admonition set down.

First that we should not follow our own imaginations or devises. But in all
manner of our delyueraunce from dangers, we should consider the commandment
and calling of God

Secondly, because if we hear the commandment and calling of God, and that
our will observes his will, and studyeth to perform obedyence unto God, then
are we not idle nor contemptuous.

Thirdly, let us require help of him even for this cause, for that we endure
the labors enjoined us of God, which are pertaining unto his glory. This
admonition reprehendeth both those vices, that is, our idleness, and the
confidence in our selves: and commands us that our diligence be set forward,
and that therewith in true faith and hope we should crave and look for
protection, help, and good success from God in all our affairs

Verse 26 With the holy thou shall be holy: and with the Innocent person thou
shall be innocent. Verse 27 With the chosen thou shall be chosen: and with the
froward thou shall be froward.
HEre is the reason of David's deliverance, because in God there is wisdom,
discerning both right and wrong: And again, a will in him, desiring that which
is right and forbidding the contrary: also with an unfeigned indignation, both
repelling and destroying the same. But whereas it is here objected, God seeing
he is just and good, can not be perverted, that may easily be refuted, for such
a one God is as we are, (not in deed touching essence) but touching effect
and applicacion. For as he rewards the godly with good things and with his
strong hand preserves them in dangers. So the disobedient and contumacious in
heinous offenses and such as contemn his word, does he hale perforce unto
punishment by wonderful means. But God preserved David here, according to that
saying: The Lord knows how to take his holy ones out of trouble. And
contrary wise he destroyed Saul in his last battle with tragical calamities.
Let us learn therefore to fear God, whose hand is strong for either
effect, both to deliver and also to distroy.

Verse 28 Because thou shall save the people which are brought low, and thou
shall destroy the eyes of the proud. Verse 29 Because thou lightest my candle,
O Lord my God, lighten thou my darkness.
Hitherto has David spoken of his defense from God against Saul. Now does he
commemorate his glorious victories whereby the pride and insoleny of the
nations near unto him, was tamed and subdued. Read the history in the 2.
lib. and 8. cap. of the kings, concerning the Syrians, Moabites, Ammonites,
Palestines, and Amalachites whom he conquered.

Verse 30 Because in thee shall I burst through a huge host of enemies, and
through my God I shall leap over a wall. Verse 31 From the undefiled way, the
words of the Lord are tried with fire, he is the defender of all them that put
their trust in him. Verse 32 For, who is God, besides the Lord? or who is
strong but only our God? Verse 33 God has girdid me with power, and has
made my way undefiled. Verse 34 Who has made my feet swifte, as the feet of
hearts, and setting me up on hie. Verse 35 Who teaches my hands tofeight, and
mine arms, that I may break even a bow of steel.
THese six verses which follow require no long exposition. But are easelie to
be understood by a comparison between the heathen or ethnickes war^^oures and
souldioures of David. Mighty and profitable pesonages to their country were
Fabius and Scipio, but how much more excellent had they been if in those
their so great exploytes they had called upon God, and believed that he had
been their present protector and guide in so great battles. Also if they had
exployed their victories to set forth the doctrine of God, of prayer unto God
and of eternal life. By right therefore do we extol David as far
incomparable above these warriers, when well knew that he was by Gods
inspiration armed with his valiencie, and in those his wars called upon God,
and fought his battles for defense of true religion.

Verse 36 And thou have given me a sheelde of my salvation, and thy right hand
comfort me, and with thy meeknes do magnify me. Verse 37 Thou have
enlarged my goinges under me, and my foot steps, are not weakened. Verse 38
I will persecute mine enemies, and I will overtake them. And I will not return
till I shall destroy the^. Verse 39 I will bruise them, that they shall not be
able to stand, they shall fall under my feet. Verse 40 Aad thou have
foregirded me with strength unto battle, and thou have overthrown them that
rise against me, under me. Verse 41 And thou have made mine enemies to turn
their backs unto me, and have scatered them that hate me. Verse 42 They
cried, and there was none to save them, even to the Lord, but he heard them
not. Verse 43 And I will beat them to pieces, like the dust before the face of
the wind, as the claye in the streets will I distroy them.
Saul being slain and David now having peace with the nations adjacent there
arose a domestical fire kindled by his son Absolon, whereby David him self
and almost his whole kingdom were in great ^eoperdie. For that saying of
Pindarus is most true. Facile est ciuitatem mouere etiam deterrimis, sed iterum
in sua sede eam collocare difficile est, nisi deus adsit principibus
gubernator. It is an easy thing to move discord in a city even among the
worst persons but to setle the same again in her former quiet it is a hard
thing except God as chief ruler be present with princes. Therefore David
boasts not as Timotheus the Son of Conon did: who in a certain speech
vauntingly said* This have I done and not fortune. But he ascribes unto God
the restoring of his kingdom into her pristine peace and tranquillity.

Verse 44 Thou shall deliver me from the gainesayinge of the people, thou shall
set me in authority over nations, a people whom I have not known shall serve
me. Verse 45 With attentiu^e ear shall they obey me, strange Children have
dissembled with me. Verse 46 Strange children are worn away, and they have
trembled in their adversities.
LIke as Paul oftentimes repeateth a complainte of false brethren which openly
can flatter, but secretly (if at any time occasion serve them) can power out
their poison. So David here applies the like complainte touching his factious
Citizens, such as were Seba and many others. But he foresheweth that these were
not only discomfited, but that he had such a tryumphante victory as in
stead of ungodly and false foresworne citizens afterward nations themselves
yielded unto him and began zealously to obey him. Neither in deed is it a
matter difficill to apply the meaning of this little verse unto Christ, whom
the hye priests, princes and great multitude of peoples in his country with
horrible fury persecuted and practiced to put to death. But for these false
citizens the church was gathered and joined unto him from among the gentiles.
And he is truly the chief head of the nations, that is of the church
universal gathered from out of the seed of Abraham and the gentiles giving
life everlasting unto the same, which David could not by any means do.

Verse 47 The Lord lives, and blessed be my strong God, and let the God of my
salvation be magnified. Verse 48 It is God that reuengeth my cause, and
brings people in subjection under me. Verse 49 Thou art my deliverer from
mine enemies, and from them that rise against me, shall thou exalt me, and
deliver me from the ungodly person. Verse 50 For this cause will I magnify
thee, among the nations, oh Lord, and will singe a Psalm unto thy name. Verse
51 Thou that exaltest the welfare of the king, and performest mercies unto
David thine anointed, and unto his seed even for ever and ever.
IN conclusion he affirms he will render this thanks, that he will celebrate
or solemnishe these benefits to the end the presence and glory of God may be
in his church acknowledged, and that many may learn to fear God and call upon
him. For unto this end specially are thanks geuings to be referred, that
others being encouraged by our testimonies touching the benefittes of God might
be in the same faith confirmed toward him, and truly believe that God is
present in his church, that he punishes despisers of his heaueuly doctrine and
word, and that he unfeignedly hears, receives, and helps which convert
unto him, and call upon him.

The xix. Psalm.
Ceeli enarrant gloriam. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
EVen as the xvilj. Psalm may be interpreated two ways, first in deed
historicallie touching David, and secondly allegatorie touching Christ. So
the first part of this Psalm may either be expounded concerning the glory of
God which shines and is perceived in the workmanshippe of the world, either
else of that true glory, which the doctrine of the gospel shows for: both
meaninges are true and have in them very much erudition. But if any man had
rather embrace that meaning which is referred unto the only advancement of
the Gospel I will not any ways be against him. The second part without
doubting entreats of the efficacy of the gospel, and discerns the same not
only from philosophy, but also from the law which commands that which is
right, and forbids that which is wrong. For philosophy can not heal the
wounds of the conscience nor call back men's souls from hell, seeing it
teaches no certain thing touching the will of God, nor our salvation. Be it
much less to purpose then that the law may be a haven or succoure for our
conscience struggling with sin and death, when it wonderfulie increases our
fears and astonishmentes with her threatening thunderbolts. Therefore the alone
preaching of the gospel has force and efficacy that it may raise up or
comfort and confirm our consciences so wrestling, and as it were to call them
back from death to life. The third part is a prayer agreeing with doctrine of
the gospel. For as the preaching of the gospel discribeth the mercy whereby
God receives and preserves wretched mankind flying unto the Mediator: So in
fine it craves forforgeuenes of sins, and clearly discerns sins of
ignorance and negligence not wilfully performed, from transgressions against
good conscience. Concerning this difference (as I am inexpounding) I will say
more.

Verse 1 THe heavens declare the glory of God and the firmament shows his
handie work.
GOD has many properties, (contained in the phrase of glory) which do shine
in the workmanshippe of the world. The order of the bodies in the world, in
the heavens, in the elements, in things growing and in the same mind of man
as a difference between good things and evil does show the wisdom of God:
For seeing it is imposible that this bewtifull order of things may by chance
or hap appear or remain, needful it is that a skillful workmaister must
then be the principal cause of the worlds creation. Moreover the power of God
is plainly seen in the greatness of the heavenly bodies and swiftnes of their
moving. For who is not amassed at the consideration of the Sun, which not
without cause is of Plato called Oculus mundi, the eye of the world. For
although the Sun (as the Mathematistes affirm) is a hundredth sixty and six
times greater, then the circuit of the whole earth, yet this great body daily
from the rising unto the setting thereof (by the most mighty hand of God is
carried about, when as in deed if he should take his course on earth, he
passes in his circuit every hour 225. Germain miles. And the goodness of God
toward mankind is here perceived, because all things which are in this world
are made and ordained for man's sake. I will not add mo arguments to confirm
this sentence, because the whole nature of things is a notable testimony
touching God the workman, and his wisdom, his power and goodness. I might
rather add a complaint and that the blindness in many Athistes is to be
lamented, which contend that all bodies above and below are of meats as it
were so wrought and made, and that all things are suffered of us by chance.
Notably therefore says Cicero 2. lib. de natura deorum. All this description
of the Skies, and this so great beauty of the heavens may they seem unto any
wise man to be made of bodies running hither and thither by chance and without
aduisment? or could any other nature having wit and reason bring these
things to pass, which not only that they might be brought to effect have
wanted reason, but without great reason can not be understood what manner
things they are? Again: for who would say that he were a man who when he saw
so unfeigned mouinges of the heavens, so firm orders of the skies, and all
things so connexed and fitly framed would deny any reason to be in these, and
would say these are done by chance, which by how much providence they are
done, so by no capacity can we attain the same? For although that nature be
wholly created, to make testimony of God, that he is wise, mighty, bountiful,
and a friend unto mankind: yet full and perfect glory can not be given unto
God, without acknowledgement of the son of God. And then it is attributed
unto God, when we learn the word of his gospel, and by faith do acknowledge
the son. It is needful then that there be other heavens, that is Prophets
and Apostles to preach this word. Glory be to God on hye: that is, God is not
only just, horrible punishing sins and wickedness, but also good and
merciful, and preserving all them which flee unto the Mediator. Wherefore let
the glory (touching which the dispositions of the heanenes most constantly
working yearly alterations, with great welfare and preservation unto all
things, does bear witness) be descerned from that glory, touching which,
Angels and all godly teachers in the Church do joyfully singe, and let the
knowledge of God, illuminated by the voice of the Gospel, be preferred far
before Physical wisdom, which is borrowed out of the workemanshippe of the
world.

Verse 2. Day unto day utters out speech, and night unto night opens
knowledge.
I Said that the first part of this psalm may not only be with a sound
Analogy or rule of says interpreted deuinely, but also philosophicallie. I
will therefore recite both the meanings, and I will refer the judgment unto
the Reader. As for that which apperteyneth unto the knowledge of philosophy,
Cicero says notably in his 2. book d^ natura Deorum: But what is man's reason?
Has it not pierced up to the heuens? For of other living creatures we only
know the rising, course and falling of the Stars. From mankind is the day
limited, the month and year. By whom the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon also
are known and foreshewed unto all posterity, what manner ones, how great, and
when they shall happen. Which things (the mind beholding) receives from
these the knowledge of God, whereupon ryseth godlynes, unto which is Justice
joined, and the other virtues, whereby appears a blessed life.

I will also set down the words of Ptolomeus, which are extant in the I. book
of his Mathematical Instruction. The consideration (says he) of the heavenly
motions does very much profit the manners of men. Because it shows in things
divine, perpetual likeness, excellent order, proper aptnes, and obedyence
without contumacie: This makes us more circumspect, and stirs up a zeal or
good will in us to imitate that divine excellency, and inureth our inflamed
minds, to moderate our actions after a right order. But touching the
Theological meaning of this verse, it is thus: Day unto day utters speech,
and night etc. That is, in all ages even unto the last day of the world, shall
the Gospel he published and advanced, neither in any age of the heavens. That
is, (of the Apostles, and others teachinge in the Church) shall the voice or
sound thereof cease, but shall gather unto God an everlasting Church.

Verse 3. There are no speeches nor languages, whose voices cannot be heard.
Verse 4. Their sound went forth into every Land: and their words into the
coasts of the whole world.
LIke as he spoke a little before touching time, so now prophecyeth he touching
circumstance of place, not only in all ages of the world, but also through all
parts of the world shall the voice of the Gospel be spread, inuyting all sorts
of men unto that same great supper, That is, unto the fellowship of the life
^clestiall, and full of blessedness. And with this prophecy agrees the saying
of Christ in effect and event approved, Mat. 24. This Gospel shall be
preached throughout all the world, as a testimony unto all Nations, and then
shall the end come. For the Apostles went about preachinge the Gospel in the
most famous Provinces of the East, West, and South: but now by the exceeding
goodness of God, the pure word of the gospel is published in the Provinces lying
Northwardes. Pigris vbi rara campis, Arbor aestiua recreatur vmbra: Quod latus
mundi nebulae, malusque Jupiter vrget. In english thus: Where the tree seldom
is refresht with summer shadow in slow growing woods, because the end of the
world, the clouds, and the evil planet holds it down. Let us therefore
render thanks unto the eternal, living, and most true God, father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that he illuminateth the light of his Gospel amongst us, and
gathers unto him his Church from among these nations, and let us pray
feruentlye with all our hearts that he would confirm this work begun in us.
But yet if a man will apply those verses unto philosophical knowledge, the
application shall not be hard. For there is no nation, neither any so uncivil
nor so brutish, which hears not the sound of the heavenly bodies and motions
bearing witness of God. And because I have now and then in this Psalm used
Ciceroes words, it shall not grieve me to repeat one notable place for this
purpose, Ex prima Tusculanorum disputatione, of the same Author.

When we see the beauty and first cleerenes of Firmament, after that, so great
swiftnes of the vanishing thereof, as how much we are not able to conceive.
Also, the Interchaunges of days and of nights, the fourefold alterations of
times or seasons in the year to ripen the fruits of the earth, and ^itte for
the temperature of our bodies: And when we see that the Sun is the Moderator
and Comforter of al these: And the moon by increase and decrease of light as
it were noting and signifying the days appointed for several effects. Again,
in the same heavens distinguyshed in 12. parts, that there are also 5. Stars
carried, most constantly keeping the same courses with unequal or several
mouinges, and the nightly beauty of the heavens with Starry skies every where
garnished. These therefore and other innumerable when we behold, may we doubt
yea or no? but that there is some one Creator and Causer of these? If (as Plato
supposes) these be natural. (Or if as Aristotle says they be continual) but
that there is a Moderator, Guyder, or Ruler of so great a werk and benefit.

Finally, let us observe or mark here a pleasant Metaphore borrowed of the
art of buylding. For like as Carpenters when they build an house do use a
small line to measure the platte and frame of their buyldinge withal: So the
Apostles and other doctors, teachers etc. building the Church of God, direct
and level all their doings by the rule and line of the Gospel (Christ Jesus
being the head corner story) as it is said in the 2. Ephesians. The same
Metaphore excellently descrybeth the efficacy of those heavenly bodies. For as
Aristole in 1. Meteoris, says: Of necessity is this world continually
inferior unto the heavenly motions, so as all her powers are governed from
above. For that thing which is the principle, or original of moving, the same
is also unto others the cause of their mouinges.

Verse 5. He has set in them a Tabernacle for the Sun. Verse 6. And he
himself like a Bridegroom coming out of his chamber: Rejoices as a valiant
Captain to run his course. Verse 7. His course is from the high heavens, and
his recourse unto the utmost ends thereof: Neither is there any can hide them
from his heat.
CIcero in his 2. Book de natura Deorum, recyteth a Philosophical sentence of
the Sun, in these words. The Sun (through whose hugenes by many parts, the
earth is ouerspread, fetches his compass about the same, and he rising and
falling distinguishes the day from the night. Also he now coming toward us,
and afterward goinge from us, makes every year two contrary returns from
the end of the world, by whose distance, he both as it were with a certain
sadness makes the earth heavy, and also again makes her glad, as when she
seems to be comforted by the bright heavens. And what is more excellent then
to compare Christ unto the Sun, unto a bridegroom or a husband, and unto a
valiant Captain. Touching these comparisons I will speak a few words for the
instruction of the Reader.

Like as the Sun with his light beneficially comfort all the world: So the
Son of God reaches his benefits unto all men, so that they will receive
them thankfully, and not refuse them disobedyently. Morreuer, as the sun is the
welspring of lively power: so Christ gives life euelasting unto all believers.

Thirdly, as the sun when he ryseth obscureth the light of the skies, and
dismisseth them, so the righteousness of faith, which for Christ's sake is
imputed unto us, does vanquish the darkness, and as it were dryueth away the
night of the glory of men's works.

Fourthly, as the sun when in the midst of the day he is most highest, is then
most whotest: so persecution is the companion of ye pure and vncorrupt Religion
of Christ.

Fifthly, as the sun with his brigh^nes dryueth away clouds and foggie mistes:
so the Son of God sittinge at the right hand of his Father, is the conqueror
of Tyrants and heretics.

Sixthly, as the sun in winter when he is most far thest of from the Pole, is
most nearest the earth: so the son of God is most near unto the godly ones
in misery, and gives them help and salvation. But it were too long to go
through with all parts of this comparyson, I do therefore make speed to the
exposition of the other Similitudes.

Like as the Bridegroom or husband bears a seruent love unto his spouse or
wife: so is there in Christ true love, not feigned toward his Church, which is
testified in that he took upon him nature of man. For seeing he has coupled
this nature unto him by that secret and marvelous league. Let us not doubt
but he does love the like nature of mankind unfeignedly.

Secondly, as the husband loves his wife only, and wandreth not out of the
bounds of wedlock: so Christ loves his Church only which imbraceth the
Gospel, and loves not other sects Mahoinetical nor heretical.

Thirdly, as the husband with a frank heart communicates all manner benefits
unto his wife: so Christ bestows upon his church his righteousness and life:
turning unto himself the sorrows of his Church, and became a sacrifice for
our sins.

Fourthly, as it is the husbands part to maintayn the welfare of his wife: so
Christ evermore defends his church, repressing devils, tirants, and heretics.

Fifthly, Christ gives his word and holy Spirit, whereby from time to time
new members are begotten into the Church. But this is done in the ministry of
the Church, who as a mother, fostereth and brings up her children. This
conference to think upon is profitable, because not in vain said S. Paul
Marriage was a great mystery. Namely, a figure of the League which is between
Christ and his Church. 3.


Lastly, Christ is compared unto a valyant captain, which cheerfully finisheth
the race that he runs in arms. But this comparyson seems to be taken out
of Genesis, whereas the Messiah is called Schylo: That is, Fortunate, unto whom
all things do yeald, and all things obey. For this Lord was not only prompt
and ready to the battle, but also with a marvelous and heavenly felicity
overcame our enemy the Devil, and destroyed the works of sin, and death it
self. Unto the consideration of this Figure does the Son of God bring us,
Luke. 11. When a strong man armed keeps his house, those things which he
has, he possesses in peace: But when a stronger then he comes upon him: he
overcomes him, hetaketh away all his weapons wherein he trusted, and
distributeth his spoils unto his own soldiers.

Furthermore what a promptitude was in Christ to finish the course of our
salvation (the words by himself recyted) in the 14. of S. John's Gospel do
well declare. viz. The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me:
But that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father
commanded me, so I do, Arise, let us go hence.

Therefore all our life long let us remember, that Christ is the shining sun
of righteousness, also the husband of his Church, and the invincible Captain:
So that we may crave and hope for of him, present and eternal benefits.

The second part of this Psalm.
Verse 8. The Law of the Lord is perfect: Comforting souls.
ALthough the former part of this Psalm may be expounded two ways: yet of
this part there is one and that a simple meaning, which contains a
commendation of the Gospel, borrowed of the same form of doctrine, and from
the effects thereof* But this true and not dissembling praise, is opposed
against the judgments of the world. The world cries out wickedly that the
Gospel is a vain ^able, and the firebrand of public discord. Yea, some men
cry out that the doctrine of the Gospel is the corruption of good manners, and
the looseness of discipline. These ungodly udgementes of Epicures, politic
persons, and hipocrites, does David with a constant affirmation refute, when he
says: The Law of the Lord (That is) the doctrine of the Gospel is perfect
wis^ome, far excelling the disputations of all Philosophers touching God. For
although the more sounder Philosophers so believed, and so reasoned that God
was an eternal mind, and the cause of goodness in Nature: Yet they neither
know the essence, or being of God distinct in three persons (The eternal
Father, the eternal Son, and the holy Ghost:) neither yet the will of God
touching forgeuenes of sins, but lived in miserable and lamentable ignorance
of these most special and mystical matters. But we in the church, which do
hear the Gospel preached and taught, do learn the perfect doctrine
concerning the essence and will of God, Unknown unto man's reason, and all
other creatures, until that it was published from the secret bosom of the
Eternal Father, by his Son. We know not only what difference there is in the
persons of the divinity: but also the will of God touching forgeuenes of
sins to be granted us for the Sons sake our Mediator. Of good right
therefore, and by good cause, is the Physical knowledge of God called both lame
and dumme: But the Gospel named the sound and perfect wisdom. But as the
first Epithet or name is taken from the same kind of doctrine: So the other is
taken from effect in working. And this indeed enterchange of their proper
names must also be observed in the other Verses.

Most truly said it is, that the Gospel refreshes, and comfort our
souls: But Philosophy is only a meditation of death. But the Law is the
power of sin, That is, sin were not so cruel, were it not armed with the
Law. For by the Law sin is made sin mightily. Seeing therefore remedies for
our sorrows can neither be required of Philosophy, nor yet of ye Law we must
confess that the only doctrine of the gospel does effectually heal the wounds
of the sore, as in the 6. cap. of Esaias. Christ says. The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, therefore has he anointed me, that I may heal the broken or
contrite heart. etc. For as it is also said Of them which being ready to dye
of the Apoplepy are saved and as it were brought out of the jaws of death when
as they hold the juice of wormwood unto their nosestrilles. So these most
sweet consolations. ( So god loved the world. etc. John. 3. And again, Come
unto me all ye that labor. etc. with many mo such like, are the vanquishers
of death and of desperations. David when he lived in exile and by his son
Absolon was driven out of his kingdom felt this effect of the Gospel
working in himself, and with remembrance of his own sins was not a little
tormented. The same felt also the converted thief. Finally no doubt even all
the godlyones find by experience that they can enjoy no comfort in any place
but in the Gospel, which is the ministry of the Spirit and of life.

Verse. 9. The testimony of the Lord is faithful, giving wisdom unto the
simple.
THe third Epithet or name of the Gospel, agrees with yt saying of Christ.
Sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is the truth John. 17. That is, the only
doctrine delivered by the Son of God, by the Prophets and Apostles is the
truth touching God. Besides this the doctrine of all sects touching God are
deuilish furies, they do not publish God, nor sanctify men's minds. This
saying therefore descerns the Church from all other sects, and condemns all
strange opinions touching God which are contrary to the gospel.

The fourth Epithet may be understood in the sentences of Christ and of S.
Paul, considered of us. For so Christ in the 11. of Matt. says. I thank thee
O Father of heaven and of earth, that thou have hidden these things from the
wise, and have revealed them unto the simple ones. And again S. Paul. 1. cor.
1. Not many wise men after the flesh. etc. But the folishe things, of this
world has God chosen. etc. But they are the simple ones, which have no vain
ostentation or trust in their own wisdom and righteousness, but acknowledge
their own infirmity and their corruptions, and carefully seek to put
remedies unto the wounds of their conscience. In such persons is the voice of
the gospel effectual, leaving in them the pearcing persuasions of that
wisdom and righteousness which pleases God: but others swelling or puffed up
with pride or love of their own righteousness and wisdom remain in extreme
erroures and blindness yea and in the ignorance of greatest matters.

Verse 10 The precepts of the Lord are righteous rejoicing the heart, the
commandment of the Lord is pure, giving light to the eyes.
THe fifth Epithet is referred unto the equallitie of the gospel, because it
accuses all men without respect of persons, and again promises and brings
the grace or favor of God unto all them that flee unto the Mediator. For both
phrases of the effect of the gospel are vniuersalll viz. The preaching of
repentance: And the promis of grace. But of this sentence else where it is often
spoken.

The sixth Epithet agrees with the second, and requires no long exposicion
because the godly know, that The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
peace and joy in the holy ghost. Romans 14.

The seventh, is opposed against corrupt doctrine of true invocation, for no
nation nor sects (forsaking this word delivered by the son of God, the
prophets and Apostles) has pure doctrine of god and inuocacion of the true
God.

The eight, let it be understood by an Antithesis. The whole nature of men is
blind, because she carries about her darkness, namely, doubtfulnes of God,
carnal security, distrust, false invocation of the mind, doubting and
fleeinge from god, and other innumerable motions straying away from the law of
God. But this blindness does not the world understand. No he is in love with him
self and extolleth himself by reasone of his small shadow of external
discipline. But the church being by the word of the gospel admonished of
sin, acknowledges and bewaileth her mishaps, and craves of god new light,
righteousness and life.

Verse 11 The fear of the Lord is pure abiding for ever: The judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether.
THere rises in deed by the law, a fear but not sincere, that is a servile
fear without faith, which flees from God, and does not attribut praise unto
god when man is justly punished: but by the gospel ryseth a sunnelike fear
joined with faith, which among sorrows reuyueth and camforteth the mind, and
draws nere unto God, yea beseeches and receaueth of him remission of sin.
This faith makes a notable difference between a servile and a sunnelike fear.

Verse 12 More to be desired are then gold, and far above pearl or precious
stone and more sweeter then honey or the honey comb.
Ungodly persons seek after riches and pleasures, and yet notwithstanding in
great abundance of riches and pleasures are they pore and wreched, because
these good things at length forsake them. As when Pompey was overcome, no
pleasures did assuage his sorrow. But David being driven into exilement and
destitute of all humane helps retains this firm consolation. He knew that
he had his sins forgeuen, he knew that he had a merciful god, and he rested
in god, he knew he should not utterly perish. This consolation taken out of
gods word is more excellent then gold and sweeter then any honey. I will add
here for declaration of the Antithesis, the versicles of Solon. For what so he
said touching virtue, this more truly may be applied unto the word of God.
Multi improbi sunt diuites
Et boni exiguas opes habent,
Sed nos non mutabimus cum ipsis
Virtutis possessionemque sola firma est,
Nam opes subinde mutant Dominum.
Many evil men, of wealth have store,
And good men, they are very poor.
But we with them no charnge will make,
Of virtues possessed, nor them forsake:
Which virtue alone kydes firm with men,
For riches their Lord change now and then.


Verse 13 Yea thy servant is admonished by them, in keeping them, there is
great reward.
Manifold profit is there in gods word. For it not only teaches, but also
admonishes, it rules and helps us with counsel, it governs the labors
of our vocation, and sanctifies us unto life everlasting. But the effects are
largly expounded in the 119. psalm and are easily understood of the godly,
which know the exercises of faith, and invocation.

Verse 14 Who can comprise his faults: Cleanse me from all secret sins.
THe last part of this Psalm, is a prayer, wherein there is a plain petition
for remission of sins. He says not as hypocrites do who has sins or
trespasses, but he asks what man is he which considers the burden of sins
sticking in the nature of man. But this verse is rightly opposed against the
counterfeit ceremony of Monckes touching scrupulous numbering up of sins,
which is neither commanded by god, neither is possible to do, but leads
godly minds into doubtfulnes, and enfeebleth their faith.

Verse 15 And from presumptuous sins keep thy servant, that they have no
power over me, so shall I be undefiled, and shall be cleansed from the greatest
sin.
MOst rightly out of this place is borrowed the difference of sin reigning and
not reigning. Sin not reigning is the original evil and motion stryuinge
with the law of God, which man's will notwithstanding resists being helped of
the holy ghost that we should not obey that wicked motion, against all
conscience and this will, (by faith) craves and believes that this infirmity
is forgeuen us for the Son of Gods sake making intercession for us. Unto this
degree and step pertain negligences and ignorances not wilfully performed.
Sin reigning in the fall after conversion is the breaking of Gods law against
conscience (which taking place) the person is made guilty of eteruall
punishment, except again in conversation forgeuenes be had. And in this degree
or step, we comprehend sins of wilful negligence, that is, wilful
negligence in duty and wilful ignorance.

Verse 16 And the words of my mouth shall be such that they shall please thee,
and the meditation of my heart is in thy sight, oh Lord my helper and my
redeemer.
THe holy ghost is not in vain called the spirit of grace and of prayer. For
as he bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of god, so
does he stir up and provoke our hearts unto prayer. So David, when he had
asked of God forgeuenes of his sins, made humble pentions that god would
receive his prayer, confession, and thankesgeuing as a reasonable serving of
god, seeing there is nothing else which we are able to render unto God, for his
great benefits.

The XX. Psalm.
Exaudiat te Dominus. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
PRayers of the church are most worthy of diligent consideration, not only
because they ask things necessary and wholesome, of god, but also because
they instruct us of great matters. So this Psalm sith it prays for the
Prince or chief magistrate, teaches the reader as touching politic order,
very profitably. For first it plucketh out of men's minds an unjust
imagination, which discerns not between government and spoils, like as that
Pyrate said to Alexander. Why is it more lawful for thee to spoil upon the
land, then for me upon the seat? For seeing the scripture so often commands
prayers to be made for the magistrate that government may remain unharmed and
be established, needful it is that thing be good and acceptable unto god, and
not any sin, because we must not pray that sins should be established. But
of this praying there are precepts extant in the 24. of Jeremy. Pray ye for the
kingdom of Babylon because in the peace thereof, you may also have peace. He
biddes them pray for the empire which at that time was the harbor or succor
of the church. And in 1. Tim. 2. Is delivered a precept full of erudition. I
exhort you that prayers and thanks geuinges be made for all men, For kings
and all which are in authority under them, that we may live a quiet and
peacable life, in all godlynes and honesty. Hereupon it is clear what
difference there is between ruling and robbing. For rulinges or gouernements
are the ordinance of god, and these must we obey for gods cause, who is the
author of this ordenance. But robbings or spoilings are the destructions of
gods ordinance, and the furies of the devil wherewith God is horribly angry.
Secondly this psalm teaches, that governments are not preserved by fortune
or by the counsels of men only, but by god who is not only so the author of
politic order, that he allows of lawful governments but also by this
means. Because like as both by his providence he ordained the course and
mouinges of the stars, and also by his power preserves the same. So also
politic order is the work of God, and how much soever of this ordinance
abides in the confused state of human nature, is by God truly and
effectually preserved. For the devil would altogether destroy honest
society, but that God represseth his furies and did protecte part of
mankind. And that God is the preserver of this ordniance, the punishments of
seditious and rebellious persons do not only show, but also that same burden
of affairs and dangers which man's wisdom (without God) is not able to
endure. Most truly therefore is it said of Plato lib. 4. de legibus.
whereasnot God, but some mortal man bears rule, there is none escape from
mischiefs and miseries.

Finally he reprehendeth the pride of man's mind, which imagines that great
matters and profitable things are governed by our wisdom and virtue. Like as
Timotheus the son of Conon, said of a matter happily exploieted. This did I
and not fortune. And Ajax in Sophocles said. Dasterds and s^uggards had need
of Gods help, but he even without God was able to overcome. Let this therefore
be in us persuaded, and let us altogether hold it approved, that man's alone
diligence is not sufficient for the weighty charge of government as in the
history set down by Herodotus lib. 7. Xerxes rightly said. That the
kingdom of Persia increased under the government of God, and the kings
themselves redily following him. For a weighty and hard matter it is the
government of a commonwealth, neither can it be ruled by the alone diligence
of man, the which thing these heavenly sayings do teach, Jeremy. 10. I know
O Lord, that man's way is not his, neither is it in man to direct his own
footesteppes. Again. Psalm. 127. Except the Lord do keep the City he
watches in vain that keeps the same. Which things (since they so be) let us
fervently beseech of God, that God would govern the counsels, and success
of godly Princes, or Magistrates, which give succor unto the Church, and unto
learning: and which also are the obseruers of the works of God, as of the Law
of righteousness, and of peace.

The disposition of the parts of the Psalm.
THere are three parts of this Psalm. The first is a fervent prayer for
prosperity of the Counsels, and success in governments, which are the
succoures of the Church. The second part is a Thanksgeuing for preservation and
defense of the prosperous estate of gouernmentes. The third part contains
doctrine of faith, whereunto is adjoined a reprehension of confidence in
human helps.

Verse 1. THe Lord hear thee in the day of troble: The God of Jacob be thy
defense.
THe Church is not conversant in kingdoms, as an unthankful Guest: but
rendereth most ample thanks unto her Nourses. For, she prays for those
Magistrates of whom she is cherished and nourished, as Abraham prayed for
Abimelech the king. And Jacob blessed Pharao, king of Egypt who received from
Joseph the doctrine of true prayer unto God. But although the ungodly do
deride these gratulatorie benefits: Yet is there nothing more effectual
toward retayning the mean estate of policy, then the prayers and solemn
petitions of the godly. For, that riches, whole hoastes of men, and leagues,
are weak preseruations of gouernoures, not only the sacred histories but also
wise men, living without the Church, do witness. The saying of Cicero In 9.
Epistolarum is known. Thou understand how that Gneius Pompeius was not
preserved neither by the glory of his name, nor of his exploites, neither yet
by the suites and services of kings and nations, whereof he was wont to boast.

The name of God then (as Solomon says) Is a strong defense, Pro. 18. That is,
Invocation upon the Lord. To this who so flees, finds help and deliverance.
But therefore he wisely says in this verse: In the day of ^^^ble. That he
might signify the burden of bu^^^es, and dangers which good Princes endure
in time of peace and war. For the devil is enemy unto prosperous
government, and by manifold ways hinders the same, by seditions moved,
making wars, and working other means. Upon this horrible hatred, and fury of
the Devil (we thinking) let us cry out with Iosaphat the king of Judah:
Surely there is not so great* fortitude in us, that we are able to strive
against this multitude which rushe^h upon us with so great assault. But when
we know not what to do, that is remaining unto us, even to cast our eyes unto
thee, O God alone. Wherefore, when as our Princes are exercised in greatest
hazard and danger for their godly prosession, we must crave with most ardent
prayer, that God would utterly subuerte the furies of the devil and of
Tirantes, and preserve our weak Churches and families, publishing the voice of
the Gospel, and flying unto him for defense.

Verse 2. Send thee help from his holy hill: And out of Sion give thee
defense.
THe Church repeateth the same sorrows and prayers, to show that she with all
her heart prays for kings, and all those in authority under them. For, she
is not ignorant, how great, and how many impedimentes there be unto prosperous
government: namely, infirmity growing in us, the snares of the deull, who is
delighted in destruction of Gods handieworkes, in mankind, and that same
burden of business and dangers, wherein many sodeyne and inextricable evils
(contrary to their mind) are offered unto Governors: Like as David did not
foresee the sedition of his Son. Unto these impediments does he not oppose
engines of war, but the hearing of his prayers by God, yea his defense, help,
and heavenly fortitude.

Verse 3. That he may remember all thy Sacrifices, and make fat thy peace
offeringe,
Hitherto has the Church commended unto God, the personages of godly
Governors: Now does he commend unto God their labors and counsels. And yet
in deed let this verse be understood, as touching Gods acceptance not only,
but also of the meaning and experience of his acceptance, as if David said:
Give prosperity in peaceable government, and victories in battle, so as
Magistrates may have experience in y^ thing it self, that thou art the
Champion, and gettest the chief honor of policies: and that prayers made for
them, is not a vain liplabour. Let also their labors, and careful sorrows,
reasonable seruinges of God: and let them be referred unto this end, that the
doctrine of true Religion may be advanced, that Schools may be mainteyned,
and tender youth instructed, Neither let the Church be utterly dispersed, nor
the young plants of thy Church be hurt or hindered Also that men's lives and
manners may with honest discipline be governed. Let them look upon these
conclusions so often as either they exercise judgments at home, either else
wars abroad. Such a government (pinguis est) That is, both pleases God, and
also is profitable for his Church.

Verse 4. And give unto thee thy hearts desire: And fulfill all thy mind.
THis verse agrees with the former, for it asks of God prosperity in
counsels and affairs, of government at home in peace, and abroad in wars.
Most true is the saying, extant in the 16. Proverb. A man deuiseth a way in his
heart: But it is the Lor that orders his goinges. This sentence teaches,
that it is the best, and most excellent thing in deed for man's heart to hope
well, but the happy and prosperous euentes, are in the hands of the Lord: We
must therefore beseech of god, that he will guide and govern the euentes, and
give them prosperous success. But let the universal particle be understood
without cauillation. For man sometime erreth in consultation: like as Josias
erred, supposing that he made just and necessary battle against the king of
Egypt. And it is no doubt, but the whole psalm ought to be applied touching
godly Governors, which are the nourishers of the Church. For in deed of the
ungodly Esaias in his 8. chapter, says: Take your counsel together, yet shall
your counsel come unto naught. And David 2. kings 15. says: O Lord turn
the counsel of Achitophell into foolishnes.

Verse 5 We shall be glad in thy salvation, and in the name of God shall we
tryumphe: The Lord fulfill all thy petitions.
THis thanks giving for victory had David in mouth and mind so often as he
brought forth his Hoaste into the field, so often as he set them in battle
array and so often as he gave onset upon the enemies host: I will overcome and
put to fooyle mine enemies, not with my armies, but with the help of the Lord,
and I will carye them captives in tryumphe over them not through the valiancy
of my soldiers, but as armed with the presence of God. But although it seem a
foolish thing, To triumph before the conquest, yet faith is the certain
knowledge of things not appearing, and the confidence of things to be hoped
for. In matters of phisike, truly, feeling goes before faith, as a man
believes that water is warm when he has theirein dipped his finger, and
experience has so taught that it is warm: so in nature after experience
follows belief, but in embracing the promis of God, a contrary thing
happens. Belief, that is, faith goes before deliverance, like as in the 2.
Paral. 20. Iosaphat most swetly says Put your trust in the Lord your G^d, and
ye shall be safe, believe his Prophets and al things shall go well with you.
David here also repeateth his prayer: The Lord fulfill all thy petitions: to
teach that God helping us, we shall have both a joyful beginning and also a
prosperous ending.

Verse 6 Now know I that the Lord has preserved his anointed: The Lord hear
him from his holy heaven, his right handsaueth mightelie.
HE adds unto the prayer, a thanks giving which springs of the good purpose
of faith beleuinge that God has care over us, and that we are helped by God.
But here, the doctrine of Papists concerning doubting must we mightily
reprehend which with a malignant vizour strives against faith and plungeth men
either into a contempt of God, or else into desperation For who would not of
right marvel that Papists (believing that God affirms any thing touching
effects by past and to come, should themselves doubt of his benefits, which
in this present life he gives unto men? I believe there is no man in the popish
congregation living which would doubt that all things are made of nothing, and
of the raising of the dead to life, which shall follow after this life. What
then should let them, that they less embrace by the same belief the article
of remission of sins, and therein be settled in conscience seeinge the same
God is the Author of all the articles of the faith, and requires no less
glory of truth to be given him, touching remission of sins (which for his
sons sake is granted) then he requires touching other matters proponed to
be believed? It is manifest plain therefore that papists live in great
error, and in the ignorance of cheifest matters. But we will stand against
this distrust and doubting, and with most firm belief persuade our selves
that we are freely received and heard of God, for his sons sake the Mediator,
if so be that we repent us of our sin, and by faith flee unto the throne of
grace. But these things are in an other place with mo words expounded.

Verse 7 Some in Charyotes, and others in horses do trust, but we will think
upon the name of the Lord our God: Verse 8 They are cast down and fallen to
the earth, but we are risen, and are exalted.
NOw follows the third part of the Psalm: which is a most grave reprehension
of confidence in ma^s help or defense, as if he said: What are chariotes and
horses if they be compared unto Gods power? Nothing surely: But as the vile
dongue compared unto ye bright sun, and as one drop of water compared unto
the main Sea. Who so is wise therefore, had rather trust in the Lord, then
trust that he can by man's power overcome. For, If God be on our side, who can
be against us? Examples do notably verify this saying. In 2. Paralipp. 13.
King Abia before he went to battle against Jeroboam, said: In our host is
God present as our Captain, and his priests, which sound out their trumpets,
and cry out against you, And behold when they cried, God fearfullye amassed
Jeroboam and all Israel, which stood in arms against Abia and Judah, and the
children of Israel fiedde unto Juda, and God gave them into their hands. Abia
then smote them, and so did his people with a great stroke, and there dyed
wounded among the Israelites, five hundred thousand of strong men. And the
Children of Israel at that time were discouraged, and the children of Juda were
most mightily comforted, because they did put their trust in the Lord the God
of their Fathers.

Also in ye 2. Paralipom. 14. King Asa being ready to fight with mighty
armies of Ethiopians, called upon the Lord, saying: O Lord there is with thee
no difference, whether thou helpest in few or in many. Help us O Lord our god
For we trusting in thee and in thy name, do go against this multitude. O Lord
thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee. Therefore the Lord brought
a fear upon the Ethiopians, in the presence of Asa, and of Juda, and they fled
away, that there was not one left alive, because when the Lord smote them, and
his host fought against them, they were altogether confounded.

Again in 2. Paral. 16. The Prophet Hananias reprehending the ungodly
confidence which king Asa reposed in the king of Siria, said: Because thou
have trusted in the king of Siria, and not in the Lord thy God, therefore has
the host of the king of Siria escaped out of thy hands. Were not the
Ethiopians and Libians far more in number with their chariotes and horsemen
and exceeding multitude, whom, when thou beleeuedst in the Lord, he delivered
into thy hands? For the eyes of the Lord behold all the whole earth, and give
strength unto them which with a true heart believe in him. Therefore thou have
done foolishly: and even for this cause only at this present do these wars
arise against thee.

In the 2. Paral. 32. Ezechias the king made this Oration unto the people, when
as Sennacherib was besieging of Jerusalem. Stand to it manfully and be of
good courage, fear not, nor be not dismaide at the king of the Assyrians, nor
all his multitude of men, which is with him, for with us are many more then with
him: For with him is tyere an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God,
and he fights for us, etc. These examples and others which are innumerable,
do greatly set forth the Antithesis of confidence in God, and of trusting in
the help of man.

Verse 9 O Lord save the Queen, and hear us when soever we shall call upon
thee.
PRayer is not so oftentimes repeated in vain, because the devil holds
continual war with the Church, and bends and practices all the endeavor
of his kingdom, to the destruction of the Church. Wherefore we must
continually fight against this enemy with prayer, which confounds, and
enfeebleth his power. Amen

The xxj. Psalm.
Domine in virtute tua. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
IAm not ignorant that certain Divines of excellent wits, and exquisite
learning, have interpreted this psalm, as concerning the politic magistrate,
and apply it unto that purpose, that it may be a thankesgeuing for victory
against the enemies, which the former psalm required of God. But although I
take not so much upon me, as to find fault with their purpose: yet I am moved
with the weightines of the words to be persuaded that this psalm must be
understood, concerning Christ the eternal King and Priest, and of the
tragical punishments due to the Jewish people. For first is an often mention
made of the eternity, which agrees more unto the kingdom of Christ, then
unto transitory states of regiment. Secondly the phrase of blessing so often
times repeated, without doubt points the finger unto the promis which was
delivered to Abraham. In thy seed shall al nations be blessed. Last of al
there is such an extreme rigor, in threatening of punishments, that I suppose
the same can not be co^strued concerning other nation, then of the people of
the Jews. This ground of our purpose thus framed, let us after this speak
touching the argument of this Psalm. No doubt it is that the first pare of the
psalm is a plentiful and notable description of glory which Christ had in
his resurrection, and triumph, and sitting at the right hand of God, for ever,
shall have. For as in his passion he was brought low and debased, worse then
Angels and men: so rising from death to life and triu^phing, he was placed in
high dignity of glory as in the 2. Philip. it is said. Therefore has God
exalted him and given him a name which is above all names. etc. This glory did
the Apostles behold whole 40. days together. For there saw they, mortality
to be fully and wholly abolished in christ: they saw a new nature shining in
the light of heaven, in a new righteousness and life. And seeing it properly
appertains unto the priest to bless, not only the kingdom of Christ, but
also the priesthood of this Lord is here described. Let us therefore hold still
(the definition of the high priest in the church) that the difference between
Christ and other priests may be perceived. The hye priest is a person
immediately sent from God, to the publishing of the gospel, to pacefie by his
sacrifice the wrath of god, and to pray for us having witness, that he shall be
heard, and by which person, benefits promised in the new testament, are
bestowed upon us. By this difinition it is clear, what difference there is
between the priesthood of Christ and the ministeries of the teachers in the
church. For, he is the fountain of doctrine, which being pronounced from the
bosom of the eternal father, he has made known. Other teachers only receive
the benefits mentioned, from this master. Secondly he only with his
sacrifice and intercession pacifieth the wrath of his eternal father. But the
miseries or calamities of other ministers are not sacrifices for the sin of
mankind, but either punishments for certain proper offenses, either else
trials or exercises of faith discerning true faith from hypocrisy, either else
testimonies of the doctrine of immortality which they profess, and are signs
and tokens nothing failing concerning the judgments that shall be. Last of all the
high priest, by his merit and efficacy gives spritual blessing, that is,
delyuerance from the curse of the law and from the wrath of God, forgeuenes of
sins, the holy ghost and life everlasting, as in the 1. of John, is written.
Out of his fulness, we al have received grace for grace. Other teachers are
only ministers of the word of the gospel, and of the sacraments, by the which
the son of god is effectual. Let this high priest therefore be discerned
from Prophets, Apostles and other teachers in the church, as John baptist
says. I baptize you with water, but he baptiseth with the spirit. Mat. 3. cap.

The second part of the Psalm is a tragical sermon concerning punishments of
the Jews, who with most cruel kinds of death persecuted Christ and his
Apostles: for unto these denounces he destruction of their regiment; and of
their church, and also perpetual banishment, and thraldom. This comminatio^
or threatening can no man read without great fear of mind, specially seeing
the thing shows that the regiment of the Jews was so distroyed that it could
never be restored, and that the Jews were punished with perpetual banishment.
Also let that come into our consideration, which Paul Romans 11. settes before
the reader. If God have not spared the natural branches, much less shall he
spare the wild or unnatural branches. That is if the Jews were destroyed
with so horrible punishments for their unthankfulness and contempt of the
gospel, out of whom Christ was borne, after the flesh, let us fear like
punishments of contempt in grievous offenses, sithence the same God is judge
both of Jews and Gentiles. But now let us proceed to the exposition of the
Psalm.

sVere 1 O Lord in thy strrngth shall the king be glad: And in thy saving
health* how exceedingly shall he reioye?
THis Pean, or solemn song, is a most joyful victory of Christ raised from
death to life, and making glorious triumph over sin, death, the devil and
hell. For as by reason of our sins, he was weak and mortal, and cried
aloude upon the cross: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? So being
exalted by the right hand of God, for our righteousness he spoiled his enemies,
and carried them captives in his triumphs, bereaved of all power. As in the 2.
to the Coloss. and in the 68. Psalm is written.

Men say that Epaminudas Prince of Thebes, in accomplishing his greatest
exploytes, said: that he reaped this special profit or fruit of his
enterprises, in that he had his parents the beholders of his glory: So there
is no doubt, but the son of God rejoices in the judgment and testimony of
his eternal father, approouinge and helping forwards his victory against the
devil and his champions. Being fully repleate with this inspekeable joy, he
affirms that he is well apayd, and rejoices and that he can neither by
words or outward appearance sufficiently declare the greatness of his affecte.
But seeing this his victory is also ours, let us with joy embrace the same,
and let us lay forth the same as a Gorgon or Shield of Pallas before the
kingdom of the devil, crying aloude with Paul 1. Cor. 15. Death where is thy
stinge? Hell where is thy victory? Thanks be to God which has given us
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Undoubtedly, if with perpetual mind and consideration we were converted unto
the image of Christ, thus rayses from death, and ascending up into heaven, we
should more easelye bear the sorrows of this most short and most transitory
life, and we would less be afraid in the midst of death. But our hearts are
too cold in considering upon the promises of Christ: Be ye of good cheer, I
have overcome the world. John. Again, I live, and you shall live. Let us
therefore crave of God, that he would with his holy spirit illuminate in us
the consideration of these special matters, and also would give us joy and
confidence, which is the vanquisher of fears and doubtinges.

Verse 2* Thou have given unto him his hearts desire, And have not denied him
the prayer of his lips.
I Have before now and then said: That prayer is after a twofolde manner: The
one which proceeds from cogitation of mind, and a confidence illuminated in
the will of God, and fleeing unto God, inwardly craving and expecting good
things. The other, which is made with the tongue, expressing those motions of
the heart, and the heart therewith ag^^^ing. And God requires an express
veice, that others may be instructed, and confirmed: Yea, that even the devils,
when true prayer unto God is heard, may tremble for fear, and flee away.

Therefore it testifies that both sorts of prayer is heard of God. For, what
can the bountiful hand of God deny unto his only begotten and beloved Son?
But seeing the Son has promise that he is heard, as Paul in the 5. Heb.
says. He is heard by reason of his humility. There is no doubt, but they
which call upon God in confidence of his Son, are received and heard. For God
loves us for his beloved Sons sake, unto who^ he has given al things. And
what things the Son of God with sorrow of heart, and with tongue, has asked
of his eternal father, the Verses following plainly will teach us.

Verse 3. Because thou have prevented him with gracious blessings: Thou have
put a Crown of gold upon his head. Verse 4. He asked life of thee, and thou
gave him a long life: Yea a life that lasts for ever. Verse 5. Great is his
glory in thy salvation: Thou shall indue him with glory and great honor.
ALl these things are most easily understood, in considering an Antithesis
of the passion and resurrection of Christ. For Christ in his passion was
cursed: because the curse was turned upon him, whereunto mankind was subject.
And he himself suffered the due punishment of Gods justice, and so paid for
us the ransom, But what a heavy speech is this, to be called cursed of God,
that cannot be expressed in words, but let us with a godly meditation learn,
when we behold our sins after a sort, and tremble, fearinge that we are in
deed cast away into everlasting damnation.

But now after his resurrection, God is not only blessed for ever, but also
the fountain of heavenly blessing, concerning which I will anon say more. And
that he was prevented (says he) with blessing, that seems Paul to interpret
Coloss. 1. when he says: Christ is the first begotten of them which die, that
he may hold the principality in all things. Also 1. Cor. 15. Christ is risen
from death the first fruits of them which die. Let this prerogative of Christ
be understood as touching the circumstance of time, and efficacy of Christ's
resurrection. For (as unto the time pertayneth) no man was ever so raised from
death before Christ's time, that he yealded not again unto mighty death. But
Christ rising again from death, after that dies not, neither has death any
more power over him. Moreover, the resurrection of the Lord is so effectual,
that even in us also it overcomes death, and may make us partakers of the
most joyful resurrection of the Saints. We shall therefore live by the merit
and efficacy of Christ, according to that saying, I live, and you shall live.

Secondly, most sorrowful was the appearance of Christ, when he was brought
forth arrayed in purple, and crowned with thorns: But now he bears a crown
of gold set upon his head: wherein is written, King of kings, and Lord of
lords. Also, Unto me shall every knee bow, Apoc. 19. 1. Tim. 6. Phil. 2.
These precious stones and pearls are imbossed in the crown of Christ.

Thirdly, to his death and buryall is opposed life, not in deed a transitory
and a frail life, but a permanent and everlasting life. In this Antithesis let
the example be considered, which the saying of paul, Ephe. 3. notably sets
down: God is able more abundantly to perform all things, then we dare
ask or look for. Christ asked of his eternal father life, and obtained life,
which no Limitte of time compryseth, and which alone is to be accounted for a
life.

Fourthly, Unto the reproaches of Christ crucified, is opposed glory, which is,
that by himself, having cleansed us from our sins, He sits at the right
hand of majesty, being ordained in the Heavens as Heir of all things, And
Lord over all principality, power, strength, and dominion, is made of God unto
us righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Heb. 1. Coloss. 1. 1. Cor. 1.

Verse 6 Because thou shall power upon him blessinge for ever Thou shall make
him glad with the joy of thy countenance.
Hitherto has he discribed Christ the king adorned with blessinge, with a
crown, with life and with glory. Now discribeth he him as priest, and
attributes unto him the office of blessing his people, therewith interpreting
the promise delivered unto unto Abraham. In thy seed shall all nations be
blessed. For, because he names an everlasting blessing, it is needful the
same be understood, not of a politic kingdom, as the Jews dream, but as
touching forgeunes of sinues, and of the free gift of his holy spirit, and
of life everlasting. After the same manner does Paul. Ephe. 1. entreat upon
the blessing of the Messiah. Blessed be God and the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which has blessed us with his spiritual blessing in heavenly gifts,
in Christ in whom we have redemption (through his blood) and also remission of
sins. etc. Let therefore the dreams of the Jews be suppressed, who not
considering the mischeefes wherein mankind is ouerwhelmto, do ask of the
messiah, and look for of him, riches and wordly dominions. But let us
understand, that Christ was sent of God, to the end he might distroy sin and
death, and restore unto us righteousness and life everlasting.

Verse 7 Because the king trusts in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most
highest shall be never fail.
WHen as no kingdom can be firm and stable without necessary defenses or
safegards. David shows here, what the defenses or safegardes of Christ's
kingdom are, namely, not riches, not hoastes of men, not brazen pieces, but
the mercy of the most highest, which can not be weakened by any force or
strength, neither yet at any time can be removed out of place, as in the 54. of
Esai. most sweetly is said. The hills shall be moved, and the little hills
shall tremble. But my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace be moved, says the Lord thy merciful God. Let us
therefore hope, that the church shall continewe still, yea though kingdoms
quayle amongst them selves, and the whole world should utterly be frushed
together.

Verse 8 Thy hand shall find out al thine enemies, thy right hand shall find
out them that hate thee.
ALthough these most sorrowful speeches, (in thinking whereof it is needful
that all the godly do tremble in each part) may be understood of all Christ's
enemies and of his church: yet not absurdly are these by exception referred
unto the Jews. But there are two causes for which the horrible punishments of
the Jewish people were before spoken of by God. First that we may know it is
the work of Gods justice that the ungodly sins and mischievous wickedness of
the Jews should be punished with so great calamities. Secondly that we may
know even these calamities are the voice of God admonishing us touching
repentance. When as therefore we consider the tragical punishments of this
people, let us be stirred up unto repentance and let us crave with true and
fervent prayers that we may be governed of God, that we fall not into like
dotage and fury. Now let us way the effectual substance of the words as by a
balance. He profoundly calls the adversaries of Christ, the adversaries and
ememies of God. For, He which honors not the son, honors not the
father. So it is said in Zachar. 12. touching the enemies of the church. He
that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. Then do not the Turks and
tirannicall bishops hold wares with us only, but against God him self do
they fight, which thing sith so it is, let us hope for victory not in bewe
and sword, but in the Lord our God. But why does he so often repeats the word
( find out) because he would rebuke the security of the enemies, which
trusting to their power think they shall escape ^^ot free. They shall not
(says he) be with any power sufficiently fenced against the Lords inquisicion:
no dark d^ngeons shall be able to hyde them, as in the first of Sophonie most
elegantly is written. I will seek Jerusalem with lanthornes, and I will visit
those men which stick fast in their filthiness, which say in their hearts: The
Lord will not do well, and he will not do evil. And their great strength
shall be their own destruction, and their house shall be laid wastie. Finally
he sets down, an universal note, as if he had said, God is not addicted
to have any respect of persons in punishing man, but he catches both great
and small unto punishment, neither is their any man which can escape the
mighty hand of God.

Verse 9 Make them like a fiery oven, in time of thy wrath, the Lord in his
fury shall swallow them up, and the fire shall devour them. Verse 10 Thou
shall destroy their labor, upon the earth and the seed of them from among
the sons of men.
THese verses do I understand touching the last destruction of Jerusalem whose
history is by Josephus and certain others sufficiently well and largely
described: And that I may omit other things which to remember my mind
abhors and with sorrow again shunneth. The city being by the enemies
beseeged, began to be oppressed with horrible famine, after which ensued so
filthy a destruction, that 1100000. persons are said in time of that seege to
have been destroyed by famine and pestilence. A great multitude was slain of
seditiouse persons, with daily slaughter within the walls whiles the batle
lasted. Afterward by the enemies weapons in beating down the walls when the
city was taken and burned, certain thousands perished: In time of ^^e feight
there were taken to the number of 97000. who being partly soulde, and partly
dispersed into great cities of the dominions nere unto them, at the feast days
were cast forth to be devoured of wild beasts, others one striking one
another with wounds in a straight after the manner of enemies feighting were
compelled to slaye the^ selves, and others were sent bound to dig at the
streets of Peloponesus. With these most heavy examples of Gods horrible wrath
against the contemners of Christ and his doctrine of the gospel, all that
motion was almost wholly destroyed, when as it was so done by Gods providence
that even upon the feast day of sweet bread wherein all the Jews were
accustomed to meet together from Jewry at Jerusalem, the city should then be
beseeged.

Verse 11 Because they practiced mischief against thee they purposed things
which they could not bring to pass.
I Will repeat in this place the exposition of an usual argument: A will
agreeing with the will of God, is good. The Jews will or mind agreeed with
Gods will, because God would that his Son should dye, and the Jews had a
will to put Christ to death. Therefore the will or mind of the Jews was good:
I answer the mayor, so again is true, when our will agrees with Gods will
according unto all causes. False is the minor, therefore because the will of
the Jews did not according unto all causes agree with the will of God. For
causes impulsive, formal and small do very greatly differ: which make
diversities of deeds, without end. In the Jews was the cause impulsive,
burning hatred against their teacher who rebuked their sins and lewd
^^^nions. The formal cause was as (they had a will even in his passion,) the
same torments and rending of him, which they would to be eternal. The final
causes were that this teacher might so be taken away that he should not have
life again, and to the end this liberty of their mischief might be
confirmed. But the impulsive cause moving god, is the great mercy toward
mankind and the same intercession of his son, who offered up himself unto
punishment for us. The formal which god would work in his passion, is not
chiefly the torments, but the obedence of his sonue. The final causes are,
that wrath being pacified by this obedience, he might satisfy the righteousness
of God, and that the same son might have life again, and reign in eternal
fellowship with the father eternal, and might there restore life and
everlasting salvation unto his Heritage. It is manifest then that the causes
agree not in God and in the Jews alike, although they run both into one
obiecte, like as the surgeon and the manqueller incur both one obiecte, and
both do somewhat smite, but after a contrary manner and by contrary causes. By
this resolution it is clear, what the Jews purposed in their minds, carrying
Christ unto his cruel death, and that the sequel of gods providence
disapoynted the ungodly hope of their Jewish enterprises. And what so is
spoken concerning the head the same also is true concerning the body. For God
by marvelous means deludeth the enterprises and practices of the enemies of
his church, that they are not able to accomplish the web that they began to
spinne.

Verse 12 But thou shall set them as a mark, and against their face, shall
thou chardge thy howstring speedely.
IT is evident, that the Jews after Titus his days now and then put in
practice to restore the state of their Regiment. In the time of Adrian the
Empe^^^ as Eusebius in lib. 4. cap. 6. mentions, The Jews moved an horrible
sedition, gathering an host of 300000. persons from among the fugitives, and
seditious Jews. Captain of this multitude was a furious man, who specially
upon the christians exercised great cruel^e, who named himself Be^ Cochab,
that is, Filius Stellae, the son of Light. For to the end he might increase
his authority, he wrested a Prophecy unto him self: There shall arise a
Star out of Jacob. But in deed afterward, the heavy issue declared that
he was a deceiuer, he is called of writers Ben Cosbe. that is, Filius mendacij,
The son of leasinges. But when this seditious multitude of Jews had peopled
Palestine, and the country of Syria adjoining, Adrian the Emperor, with a few
skirmishes scattered them, afterward the remnant of them fled into the town
of Bithera, or Betheron, which is situate in the Limitte of the country of
Ephraim, The Captain being shut up into that Town with part of his hosts,
endured the siege for three years and six months space. At length having
consumed his host partly in eruptions, partly with plague and famine, the town
was raced to the ground, and the Captain slew himself and they which were
left, were slain. This was the end of the most cruel Tyrant, which made his
vaunts that he was the Star whereof the prophecy speaks: There shall arise a
Star out of Jacob.

Afterward Iulianus in hafred of the Christian name, granted unto the Jews
again to build their City and Temple. The work was begun, a great mass
of money was gathered, but with a Whirle wind an Earthquake, and with balls of
wild fire, the buylding was hindered, and a great multitude of men was
overthrown with stones and rubbish, shaken from the buildinges. Also
Theodoretus in his 3. book, and 20. ^^ap. declares. That in all places there
was imprinted upon the garments of the people figures of the cross in
wonderful manner. The Jews then being with these signs from heaven terrified,
left of their work begun, because God had determined that the government of
the Jews should not again be restored. For he will have the example of his
wrath to be discerned of all nations, because he punishes the contempt of his
Son, with horrible punishments: He will also have the Law of Moses to lie
in scilence, least opinion touching ceremonies be confirmed: that men are made
just by the Law, or with ceremonies.

And least any man doubt of the historical faith in Theodoretus, I will set
down moreover the words of Ammanus Marcellinus, who in his 21. book, says
concerning Iulianus, in this manner: What time busying him self with the
laboursome toil of his works, to set forth the memory of his government, he
in times past purposed to buyld up with immoderate charges, a sumptuous and
stately Temple at Jerusalem, which after many and deadly broils in time of
Vaspasians siege, afterward was fiercely defaced by Titus. And he enjoined
Alipius. of Antioch (who sometime had charge of government in Brittayne) to the
expedition of these affairs. When as then Alippius couragiouslye plied this
business, and as Ruler of the Province helped Julian, behold, terrible balls
of fire, with often thumps bursting forth near unto the foundations, made the
place inaccessible, new and then burninge up the very workmen. And by this
means, the element or fire more forceably repulsing them, their enterprise
ceased.

These does Marcellinus verify, who under Iulianus paid the wages to the
workmen, and bare office, endowed with chief martial dignities. But we
considering upon the inestimable wrath of God against the contempt of his
Son, and of the word by him published, let us take heed least that with
desire of oppressing the true doctrine, or of obscuring the same with false
imaginations of men, either else by contempt of the same Son and his word,
and liberty of our sins, we procure unto us like calamities.

Verse 13. Be thou, O Lord, therefore exalted in thy strength: We will sing
and magnify thy power, for ever, Amen.
A Conclusion gratulatorie of this Psalm. Rule thou, and reign still, and
enlarge the Limits of thy kingdoms, yea though thine enemies burst
themselves: For unto thee is all power given, in heaven, and in earth: To
preserve those that believe in thee, and also to confound and destroy thine and
their enemies, Amen.

Horum xxj. Psalmorum, Explicationis, Translationisque FINIS.
Page 67 for ste^^t^, straight 64 for Eatius, Ectius eadem for Piggliras,
Pighius 8; for nonscire, conscire 89 for rue, rule 97 for Varoncayrbe, Varro
may be 138 for mecum, metum 173 the words truthbe added (...) (...) 196. for
shows Priests, ^^ew the Pri^^^es 191 for coniungem coniugem* 1^8 for thro^^,
horn 209. for helps which, read helps them which eadem for alegatory,
alegarically 212 for meats, meats 247 for streets of Polo^onesus, read
straightes of. etc. 223. ver. 12 are (...) are they then 247 for motion, nation.


