THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S PLEA TO TRVE HAPPINESS IN Ten Sermons, on PSALM. 4. ver. 6.

Preached by John Stoughton Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Emanuell
College in Cambridge, late Preacher of Aldermanbury, London.

Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that
I desire besides thee.

Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for John Bellamie, H. Overton, A. Crook, I.
Rothwell, I. Crook, R. Sergier, D. Freere, and R. Smith. 1640.

A Methodicall Analysis of the Principal things contained in these Sermons on
Psalm 4.6. as they were left written by the AUTHOR.
Doctrine. ALl men do universally and naturally desire that good which will
make them happy.

Explication. 1. Proposition. 1 What Happiness. 1 Definition it is 1
Propounded 1 That excellent estate Of reasonable nature 3 Wherein it possesses
and enjoyes 4 That good which it is capable of, and can reasonably desire with
satisfaction and security.
2 Explained 1 Objective good. 1 General 1 State of a 2 Reasonable Nature. 3
Excellent.
2 Particular.
1 Convenient. 2 Excellent. 3 Sufficient. 4 Permanent.

2 Formal. 1 Possession. 2 Agnition. 3 Estimation. 4 Fruition. 1 Delight. 2
Content. 3 Security.



2 Distribution from the 1 Subject. 1 God. 2 Reasonable creature. 1 Angels, 2
Men requires. 1 Fruition of good 1 Internal right frame of 1 Soul 2 Body 1
Plenitude of understanding 2 Rectitude of will.

2 External. 1 Isntrumental. (...). 2 Principal. (...).

2 Operation. (...).


2 Kinds and degrees. 1 Deficient. 2 Sufficient. 3 Perficient.


2 How all men desire it. 1 Morally 1 Ignorantly. 2 Inconstantly.
2 Naturally. 1 Universally. 1 Consideration of Happiness. 1 General. 2
Particular.
2 Interpretation of Appetite. 1 Elicit. 2 Innate.
3 Condition of men. 1 Wise. 2 Weak.

2 Necessarily.


2 Probation. 1 (...). 1 Scripture. 2 Experience of 1 Good. 2 Bad.

2 (...). Reason. 1 Constitution in written. 2 Not blotted out by corruption. 3
Left for stock to graffe. Renovation.

2 Application. 1 Instruction. 1 Congruity of beginning with this 1 Philosophy.
2 Mechanicie.
2 Excellency of Divinity. Above 1 Meets our desires. 2 Helps our defects: 3
Mercy of God toward, 1 Church. 1 Us.
4 Misery of Man. 1 Knows not. 2 Seeks not. 3 Likes not.
5 Possibility and way of cure. 1 Invincibly. 2 Inviolately.

2 Exhortation to 1 Preachers. 2 People. 1 Observe Inclination. 2 Acquire
Direction. 3 Fix Resolution. 4 Force Execution.




2. Doctrine, That not the Quintessence of any, nor the confluence of all
created things can make a man happy.

1 Explication. 1 Proposition. 1 Subject. 1 Created good. Nor 1 Quintessence of
best 1 Accomplishments 1 Intrinsecall of the 1 Mind. Virtues 1 Intellectual. 2
Moral.
2 Body.
2 Extrinsecall of Fortune.

2 Additaments. 1 Intrinsecall of 1 Honor. 2 Pleasures.
2 Extrinsecall of 1 Riches. 2 Friends.


2 Confluence of 1 Many 2 All.

2 Without God they 1 What God may make Accession. 2 Without God. 1 May breed
imagination of happiness. 2 Cannot give possession of 1 Principal, Royal. 2
Real.



2 Predicate cannot give happiness either 1 Supernatural. Natural. 2 Perfect.
True.

2 Probation. 1 (...). Mat. 5. 1 Scripture. 1 De. 34.12. 73.18. 44.15.
2 Hos. 2.21. 3 Ier. 9 23. 4 Tim. 6.17.
2 Experience. 1 Extraordinary. Eccles. 2 Ordinary.
3 Reason.
2 (...). Nature of 1 Happiness wherein must be 1 Perfection. 2 Satisfaction.
2 Created things. 1 Each. 2 All good in them. 1 Defective short 2 Diminutive
narrow. No 1 Perfection. 2 Satisfaction.
3 Derivative shallow, without God not Had. Held. Happy

3 Man requires good 1 Long immortal. 2 Large universal. 3 Deep spiritual.



2 Application. 1 Instruction to 1 Correct our Judgments concerning happiness
of 1 Others. 2 Our selves.
2 Convince error of 1 Worldly Philosophers. 2 Godly Professors.

2 Reprehension of 1 Practices of the 1 Worldly. 2 Godly.
2 Pretenses: there 1 Should be vast difference. 2 May be clear evidence, if
we consider 1 Expense of 1 Times, Pains. 2 Thoughts, Cares.
2 Neglect of 1 God. 2 Neighbor. 3 Soul.



3 Exhortation. 1 Duty. Learn to 1 Abate for world. 1 Action. 2 Affection. 3
Apprehension. Opinion.
2 Translate to better things, 1 God. 2 Heaven. 3 Holiness.
3 Moderate. 1 Grief of 1 Want. 2 Loss.
2 Envy. 3 Delight of Fruition. 4 Desire of possession, be ready to 1
Communicate. 2 Abdicate.


2 Motives. Consider 1 Vanity of the world 1 Immortal. 2 Mortal.
2 Condition of man 3 Excellency of Duty.



3. Doctrine. God and his favor, the light of his countenance shining on us,
is that excellent good, which can alone, without the help of any creatures
without any created thing, make a man truly and perfectly happy.

1 Explication. 1 Proposition 1 subject 1 Material 1 God, according to his 1
Essence. 2 Person.
2 His favor 1 General. 2 Special.

2 Formal 1 Possession by 1 Vocation. 2 Covenant.
2 Fruition. 1 Direct through 1 Donatives. 2 Duties.
2 Reflexive.


2 Predicate in 1 General. Good. Excellent. 2 Special. According to the 1
Thing, beatificall good, in life 1 Present, truly real. 2 Future, perfectly
royal.
2 Manner, Singular. 1 Without the help of the creature 1 Absent. 2 Adversant.
2 Himself alone, Sufficiently. Efficiently.



2 Probation. 1 (...). 1 Scripture. 1 Testimonies 1 Numb. 16.23. 2 Epistles. 3
Psalms. 27.4. 36.7. 65.4. 144.25.

2 Examples 1 Samuel 30.6. 2 Heb. 3.17.

2 Experience of the Faithful. 1 Singular. 2 Particular.

2 (...). Nature of 1 Happiness, requiring 1 Perfection. 2 Satisfaction.
2 Man which requires it, 1 Long. 2 Large. 3 Deep. 3 God in 1 General,
All-sufficient by way of 1 Causality. 2 Eminency. 3 Negation.
2 Special. 1 Perfection. 1 Power. 2 Wisdom. 3 Goodwill.
2 Proportion. 3 Conjunction which is most 1 Intimate. 2 Indissoluble.






2 Application. 1 Instruction of the ignorant. 1 Godly 1 Felicity. 2 Dignity.
2 Wicked. 1 Misery. 2 Indignity.

2 Reprehension of the madness of the 1 Wicked, who neither 1 Seek, God. 2
Care for, God. 3 Esteem of God.
2 Godly, who 1 Know it. 2 Profess to believe it. 3 Neglect it.

3 Exhortation to the weak. 1 Know. 2 Believe. 3 Ponder. 4 Meditate. 5 Make
God the strength of it. 1 Seek 1 Presume not upon 1 Fortune. 2 Church. 3
Knowledge. 4 Common Grace.
2 Make sure of it.
2 Retain 1 Acknowledge his favor. 2 Seek his face. 1 Eschew evil. 2 Do
good.

3 Esteem God, so must 1 Rich. 2 Poor. 3 All.


2 Motives. Possession of God brings 1 The greatest joy. 1 A more noble joy. 2
A more cordial joy. 3 A more permanent joy.
2 The sweetest peace.



4 Doct. Sound knowledge and belief, joined with sovereign fear and love,
and both these crowned with sincere repentance and obedience, according to the
line and light of the true religion, is the only way to bring a man to true
happiness.

Explication. 1 Proposition. 1 Subject. 1 Particular. 1 Sound knowledge and
belief. 1 Act with Object. 1 Knowledge, in 1 General. 2 Special, of 1 God,
in his 1 Excellent Nature; shining in his 1 Attributes. 2 Works.
2 Revealed Will. Covenant, which he 1 Commands, in the 1 Law. Obedience. 1
Holiness. 2 Righteousness.
2 Gospel. 1 Faith. 2 Repentance.

2 Commends by 1 Menaces. 2 Promises.


2 Divine things.

2 Faith. Assent 1 To Gods truth. 2 On Gods Word.

2 Manner. Sound, for 1 Matter. Extension. Sufficient of Necessaries, 1
Respectively. 2 Absolutely.
2 Manner. 1 Substantial. Penetrative. 2 Effectual Operative.


2 Sovereign fear and love. 1 Act. 1 Fear. 2 Love.
2 Manner. 1 Sonne-like. 2 Sovereign.

3 Sincere Obedience, repentance. 1 Act. 1 Repentance. 1 Moral, Legal. 2
Evangelicall.
2 Obedience.
2 Manner, sincere. 1 Characters. 1 Rise. 2 Rule. 3 Race.
2 Cognizances. 1 Universality. Current. Adequate to the 1 Act, eschewing all
evil, doing all good. 2 Rule, Decalogue, first, second Table. 3 State in
general. Particular Calling.
2 Perpetuity, constant.




2 General. All these 1 Are required both 1 Absolutely. 2 Comparatively. 1
Knowledge and Faith. 2 Fear and Love. 3 Repentance and Obedience.

2 Must be regulated by the light and line of the true Religion. 1 None but
that can teach these. 2 These are all that that teaches.
2 These are the way to all happiness. 1 What way. 1 Sufficient. 1
Effectually. 2 Only.
2 Necessary.
2 To what happiness. 1 True. 1 Inchoate. 2 Consummate.
2 All.

2 Probation. 1 (...). 1 Scripture. 1 Knowledge, Faith, Joh. 17.3. 2 Fear,
Love, Prove. ^.7. Romans 8. 3 Repentance, Obedience, Psalm. 15. 1 Distinctly. 2
Conjunctly. 1 Knowledge and faith, Ioh. 13.17. 2 Knowledge and fear, Prove.
9.10. 3 Fear and obedience, Deuteronomy. 3.29. 4 Knowledge, love, obedience, 1 Chronicles.
28.9.


2 Conscience.
2 (...). 1 Happiness in Gods Favor. 2 Gods favor by these.

2 Application. 1 Confutation. 2 Conviction. 3 Examination. 4 Reprehension. 5
Exhortation. 1 Particular. Get 1 Knowledge. 1 What for the 1 Object, divine. 2
Act. 1 Apprehension. 2 Assent.
3 Degree. 1 Extensively. 2 Intensively. 3 Proportionally.

2 How. 1 Preparatives. 1 Humility. 2 Ingenuity. 1 Freedom from 1 Partiality.
2 Prejudice.
2 Full 1 Estimation. 2 Affection.


2 Perfectives. 1 Conscience. 2 Diligence to allow time. 1 Employ parts. 2
Improve means. 1 Public. 2 Private.

3 Prudence.

3 Wherefore Consider the 1 Thing, which is a 1 Special ornament. 2 Initiall
Lineament. 3 Perpetual Regiment. 4 Effectual Instrument.
2 Times of 1 Gospel. 2 Reforamation.

2 Get fear, love. 1 What, for the 1 Object, placed on God. 2 Act, tempered
together. 3 Degree, Sovereign.
2 How, in 1 General, by taking 1 Heed to chase away other 1 Fear. 2 Love.
2 Care to chafe in these.
2 Particular, by 1 Constant Application. 2 Vigilant Caution. 3 Frequent
Excitation. 4 Pregnant Meditation of 1 Vanity of world. 2 Excellency of God. 3
Nobility of Man. 1 Immortal soul. 2 Mortal body.



3 Wherefore these, 1 Best fruit of knowledge. 2 Next root of obedience. 3 Only
grace of either, without which neither 1 Knowledge saving. 2 Obedience pleasing.


3 Get repentance, obedience. 1 What, for the 1 Act, in all parts, 1 Thought. 2
Word. 3 Deed.
2 Manner, sincere. 1 Intrinsecally, in the true 1 Rise, from 1 Knowledge,
Faith. 2 Fear, Love.
2 Rule. 3 Race.
2 Extrinsecally. 1 Universal, in 1 2 Negative, Affirmative. 3 Thought, Word,
Deed.
2 Perpetual.


2 How, in 1 Particular, by 1 Increasing form, 2 Excercising these. 1
Knowledge. 2 Faith. 3 Fear. 4 Love.

2 General. 1 Serious consideration, whereto take 1 Heed of 1 Carnal 1
Reasonings. 2 Fear. 3 Sloth.
2 Worldly distractions.
2 Hint of 1 Outward occasions. 2 Inward motions.

2 Strong resolution. 3 Speedy execution.

3 Wherefore, these are the 1 Scope of Both. 2 Seal of Truth. 3 Scale of all
our 1 Own consolation. 2 Neighbors edification. 3 Gods glorification.




2 General. Seek 1 All these. 1 How, in the due 1 Order. 2 Temper. 3 Manner.
2 Wherefore. 1 Each of them in conjunction 1 Beautifies. 2 Fortifies. 3
Beatifies.
2 Neither of them in separation can 1 Subsist in sincerity. 2 Support in
anxiety. 3 Suffice in felicity.


2 True Religion. 1 Magnify. 2 Certify. 3 Satisfy.
3 Happiness, in these. 1 What, happiness, which is 1 Desirable, attaineable.
2 Miserable in world. 3 Incomparable in God. 4 Indubitable in this way.
2 Why. 1 Necessity of thing. 2 Mortality of man. 3 Mutability of times. 4
Excellency of gain. 5 Oppurtunity of grace.




THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S PLEA TO TRVE HAPPINESS. SER. 1.
Preached in Ten Sermons.
PSALM. 4.6. There be many that say who will show us any good? Lord life thou up
the light of thy countenance upon us.


We have treated formely, of the use and benefit, of a form of sound and
wholesome words.

The last time I gave you that form, which I did in a prudentiall way: The
sum of which consisted of 52. Heads, or Particulars; partly belonging to the
Porch and Frontispice, and partly to the Pile, and Edifice it self: There were
four things, that I desire to premise in the Frontispice,

Concerning Happiness.

Concerning Religion.

Concerning the Church.

Concerning the Scriptures.

And they are all of general importance, in the first gate and entrance; as
being the first grand inquiries, that will be made (as it were) in the entry.

How shall a man attain to true happiness? That is the very first thought,
the very first desire of the soul: and the very scope and sum of all a man's
labors and endeavors: and the very scope and sum of Religon.

And the resolution of that brings in the second: That the only happiness is
(how ever men mistake) I say the only way to attain true happiness is, by
the Knowledge, Fear, and Service of God, according to the true Religion. And
that (as I said) leads to the second Inquiry, which is

There be many Religions in the world: How shall a man know which is the true
Religion? Which of all the rest is that, that the soul may rest upon?

And the answer will be: That neither the Pagan and Heathenish, nor the Jewish,
nor the Mahumetane: but in a word, the Christian Religion, which is professed
in the Church of God; that is the true Religion.

And that brings us to the third, which is,

But there be many pretenders to the Church; and a man knows not which of them
is the true Church? The resolution will be, the Protestant Church: That Church
that submits its self to be regulated by the Scriptures, is the true Church;
and then the fourth will be concerning the Scriptures.

I am now to begin, and therefore have chosen this portion of Scripture for
that purpose; concerning the first of these four, viz. Concerning Happiness.

Now I will but briefly acquaint you, with one thing which I did not do the
last time, and so go on. There be (as I have said) 52. Heads in the whole, for
I framed it so at the first; that (if it might be possible) I might go
thorough it, in the compass of one year.

There be these four in the entrance, besides the Body; and in the Body it
self there be forty eight; whereof there be twenty four things to be known
and believed; twelve in General, and twelve more Particular: and there be as
many more, concerning things to be done and practiced: Twelve concerning the
sum of duties, that are to be practiced of a Christian: and twelve concerning
the helps and furtherances that may be used, for the better inabling of us to
the practice of those duties. Now in every of those for our better instruction,
I purpose to observe, both the fundamental truths which are most maine and
vital, belonging to every Christian: and will note by the way the opposite
errors: and withal, as occasion shall serve (as I am able) clear the doubts
that may be incident; whether questions by way of Speculation, or cases, by way
of practice and conscience.

And generally I aim at this, to comprehend the sum of all the maine things,
in every one of those Points: each of them in four principles, or four Points
of Doctrine; and to dispatch as near as may be one of them at a time. But yet
there is one thing that may seem to be wanting; and I will give but a brief
account of that. It is thus

There is nothing at all concerning Divinity in general, I purposely omitted
it: Partly because that discourse may prove more Scholasticall than popular;
and not so fit to be treated of in such an Auditory: and partly, because so
much as may be useful in such an Auditory, I shall have occasion in the first
entrance to touch on.

I begin then with the Argument we have in hand. And as I said, I propound to
myself not to exceed the number of four Observations, in which I shall
comprehend the maine fundamental things concerning every Point; and so I shall
do in this.

Some thing I must therefore first premise in general: concerning Happiness,
and concerning the desire of it, which is the sum (as I said before) of all
the desires of men: and the scope of all Religion: whether all other
instructions, and truths that are to be handled, are all to be referred.

And secondly, I shall speak wherein Happiness does consist.

Both negatively, that the whole world, and the concurrent meeting of all
earthly things cannot make a man happy.

And affirmatively that the fruition of God alone, and his favor does make the
soul truly happy.

And in the last place, I shall speak of the way, for the attaining of
Happiness, viz. That it is only by the knowledge and practice of the true
Religion.

Those will be the maine Points, I shall speak of. And though some of these
particulars might happily be more fully propounded out of some other text of
Scripture: yet because I would not multiply more than needs; where I can find
a text, that in any good analogy will fit me, I will confine my self to that,
and so in this, where will be all those things contained that I intend to
prosecute in this argument. Some explicitly, and some implicitly; and yet all
directly enough, if we well consider the Text.

I must not stand upon the Coherence; in brief therefore, in a word.

The sum of the Psalm (besides the Title) consists 1. Partly, of an humble
petition of Grace. 2. And Partly, of a noble profession of Faith.


There is an humble petition of Grace in the first Verse.

And the noble profession of the Prophets faith in the whole Psalm following,
which is propounded both* more Generally. and more Particularly.


1. In the General there is

First of all a reproof of the vanity of worldly men's courses, that they
mistake in their own good; He taxes them all of vanity, and leasing, Verse 2.

And Secondly, there is an instruction of them, concerning the Prophets own
state, and condition: and in general, who are the happy men, who are in that
state and condition; Know you that God has respect to those that are upright
toward him: Know that God chooses such, and they are the only happy men,
Verse the 3.

And therefore there follows in the fourth and fifth Verses, an exhortation
of the opposites of the Psalmist, to embrace this way, and to set themselves
upon making peace with their God; and to serve him, that they may attain to
true happiness, in a solid and real way.

2. And then there is more particularly laid down, The Profession, and
confidence of his faith, with the root and ground of it, from this Verse that
I have read to the end of the Psalm.

Wherein is expressly set down, what his happiness was:

Wherein it was considered:

And what must be the happiness of any, if he would have it true, viz. It is
God, and the light of his countenance, which is of more comfort than all other:
and which he that injoyeth may lie down in security, and possess his soul
in peace.

Now here are all those four Points, either directly, or covertly, which I
propounded to treat of.

First, we have the general desire of all men, after good, after happiness:
Many say, and it may be extended to all, universally, and so we shall conceive
the Point thus.

All men do universally and naturally, The first Doctrine.
desire that good, that will make a man happy: it is the desire of all men.

But then wherein does this happiness consist?

I confess now here is but little for my negative point (that it does not
consist in worldly things) directly: But take the consequent, Thou have put
more joy into my heart, then when their corn and wine increased, Verse the 7.
and take the Tacit preterition; The Psalmist looks a squint on all worldly
things, passes them by, mentions them not, but turns himself directly to
God, as the only place of happiness: And therein we may see (though tacitly)
the Negative Point; which is,

The second Doctrine.
That the happiness of a man does not consist in any, or all, of the worldly
things.

But then here is the third Point directly: the positive and the affirmative
part, viz. wherein our happiness does consist, The third Doctrine.
even in the favor of God, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us,
etc.

And here is the fourth and last part couched too (especially* if we compare
the former part of the Psalm) and that is

The fourth Doctrine.
The way to attain true happiness, is by knowing, and serving, and fearing
God, according to the true Religion.

Which is the sum of the instruction which the Psalmist gives to his
opposites in the Verses before the Text: for that very end and purpose, to make
them owners of true happiness.

I am now to begin with the first, viz. That it is a general desire of all
men to attain to that good, which will make them truly happy.

1. Take the Explication of the Proposition.

There be but two things, that I shall propound to my self to open: and the
former of them I shall do briefly; because I have had occasion sometimes, to
treat upon that argument, in an other portion of Scripture, and therefore I
will but remember that briefly.

1. What is happiness? or what is that good that will make a man happy?

2. How do all men generally, and universally desire this?

1. Observe the definition of it, which is first propounded, I will give a
brief circumscription of happiness; or that good that will make a man happy.
It is in a word, to speak (properly, and not curiously) that excellent estate
of a reasonable nature wherein it possesses and injoyeth that good which it is
capable of, and can reasonably desire, with Satisfaction, and security.

2. Take the explication of it in these particulars which I shall generally
adumbrate, wherein does lie (as I conceive) the nature of this happiness.

There be diverse particulars in it, Generally.
the which I will but touch.

1. I call it first a state, A state.
not as the Schools do an act, (...), and not (...), which is merely to
fasten it in one act, and the act of one act: a man may be then happy while he
is not active: while he is a sleep; a godly man is in the state of
happiness, and does not lose the denomination of it. And who ever does well
consider it (as some of the best Divines do) will acknowledge the acceptance
of happiness to be as true and substantial that way: It is a state.

A state of a reasonable nature.
2. It is a state of a reasonable nature: Though every creature has a
perfection which it does breath after: and has a natural inclination to,
which if it possess, and enjoy, it is in a state of perfection, yet the
enjoying of such a state, has not the name of happiness: only in a
reasonable nature it has the name, which when it injoyes its perfection, it is
denominated happy: the brute creature when it has its perfection, is not
called happy. Therefore I say it is the state of a reasonable nature.

An excellent estate.
3. It is an excellent state of a reasonable nature. There be two opposite
states and conditions.

1. There is a state of misery: 2. And there is a state of happiness.
1. And in opposition to the state of misery; I call this an excellent or
desirable, or perfect estate (not to stand on words) to note the difference
between this, and the contrary state.

2. More particularly there be two maine things further to be explicated: and I
will give but a brief touch of them, because, as I have said before, I have
had occasion formerly to treat of this argument. There be two things required
toward the making up of this happiness; there is a double part of it.

1. There is an objective happiness: 2. There is a formal happiness. To the
making up of happiness there is required.

An objective happiness, A formal happiness.



The first inquiry will be concerning the objective happiness; that good; the
fruition of which will make a man happy.

And the second inquiry will be of the formal: what kind of possession of
such a good does really, and completely make a man happy.

And indeed happiness cannot be perfect without these.

The good, though it have some foundation of happiness in it, yet there must
be some conjunction of our souls with it, it is the conjunction of some good,
in which we are interessed, that makes up happiness: good obtained that makes
happy.

Now briefly for that good: The characters of that good that makes us happy.
A convenient good.
The characters of that good (what ever it be) that must make happy are these.

1. It must be a good convenient, suitable to our nature; which our nature is
capable of, for other wise the perfection of a Tree or a Horse, or any other
creature does not make a man happy: it is not to have the perfection of
another thing, but his own; it must be proper and suitable unto his nature, it
must be convenient.

2. It must be an excellent good, An excellent good.
a good that has some excellency in it, some worth: (for happiness is the
most highest, and perfect estate) and in a word, it must be some thing that is
better than a man's own self, it must have more than a man's own bottom. For
as we use to say, You cannot guild gold with dirt: lay dirt on gold, and it
does not perfect it, or advance it: and so in this case, to add any thing to a
man, which is inferior to a man, (heap up never so much of it) you do not
perfect a man, but rather defile him. It must therefore be excellent.

A sufficient good.
3. It must be a sufficient good: A man must have a sufficiency; not only a
sip, or a taste, but a full draught: Though gold be the best, yet a little
scrapings of gold do not make a man rich. There must be a competent
proportion, it must be sufficient.

A permanent good.
4. It must be a permanent good, that which has some durable substance. For if
it be washy, if it does vanish away, if it be of no abiding, nor of any
continuance, it is impossible it should concur toward our happiness, or
complete our happiness much less. It is the permanencie that sets the
greatest price, and has the greatest influence in the completing of our
happiness: it must be permanent.

But now for the obtaining of this good, which is the second part, viz.

This happiness must be made ours.
2. The formal happiness: How must it be had, it must be made ours, it must be
in conjunction with us, or else it will not be our happiness, though it has
all these conditions.

There be four things herein likewise, every one having their weight, and use.
I will but mention them; and I confess I shall but distinguish them popularly,
not Scholastically.

1. By possession.
Possession: A man must have a possession of this good; he must have this
good, be master of this good; this good it must be ours.

2. By Agnition.
Agnition, or knowledge, that he has this possession. Non est beatus, esse
qui se non putat. He that has the possession of never so great a good, yet if
he do not think, or count himself happy in it; it does not make him happy: In
a good sense it is very true, and therefore we must know it, that we have
possession.

3. By estimation.
Estimation of that good: For if a man should have never so great a good in
possession; and know he had the possession of it; yet if he have no affection
to it, no estimation of it; his heart will never be at rest, which is the maine
thing in happiness; viz, to give a man satisfaction.

4. By fruition.
Fruition, and enjoying. When a man injoyeth that good that he possesses and
knows, and esteems of, therein chiefly consists the happiness of
happiness: viz. The fruition, the delicious taste of that good; that excellent
good that a man possesses.

Now there be some particulars in that, The de^rees of which are.
that do concur to ma^e it up.

There be these degrees of fruition.

1. Delectation: Delight in it, by which eternal life, and eternal happiness
is oftentimes expressed; Delectation.
as Enter thou into thy masters joy, etc. There are rivers of pleasure at thy
right hand for ever more. There is sweetness in it, that pleasure and delight
which the soul finds, and that is one part of fruition.

Contentation.
2. Contentation, a quietness of the soul: which does chiefly depend, and
principally upon the sufficiency of the good: that a man is not to seek, but
is at the center, is at rest: that he can say, Soul take thine ease, my heart
and spirit are calmed, and quieted; all troublesome thoughts and fears, and
doubts are off, and I am fully contented. There is not only delight but such a
fullness of delight as gives content.

3. To make up a full fruition, there is another thing required; Security.
and that is security. For if a man had full delight, and full content in a
thing; yet if a man have no security; but that, that state may be altered, may
be changed, to day a happy man, and to morrow all at pieces, he cannot be
happy. There must be something to secure the soul, and to warrant it, and so
there must be an apprehension of the perpetuity of that estate: that it is
firm, and a man need not fear the loss of it. Where these things meet there
cannot be thought any thing more in substance to make up the formal fruition
of happiness; and where all these do meet, there is a real happiness.

Thus of the Definition of happiness.

2. It will not be amiss to premise something concerning the distribution or
division of happiness. The distribution of happiness.


1. There is a division, partly in regard of the subject of happiness,

2. And partly in regard of the kinds and degrees of happiness.

1. In regard of the subject; In regard of the subject.

A reasonable nature. And so there is, A happiness of God.


the subject is a reasonable nature. Now, as there be diverse sorts of
reasonable natures; so there are diverse sorts of happiness.

1. There is a happiness of God. An increate happiness, an infinite, and
transcendent happiness, God blessed for ever more. The Scripture attributes
that to him, which is nothing else, but the fruition of himself, his
delighting in himself, himself is his own happiness. That we have not to
deal with all; it is out of the reach of our understanding and the compass of
our Point.

2. There are reasonable natures, which are creatures, that are capable of
h^ppinesse, and wherein this happiness is to be found.

There is a happiness of the Angels. Men.


1. There is a happiness of the Angels, Of the Angels.
those blessed Angels, that stand in the grace and favor of God. They have a
greater happiness than man can have here; a more excellent happiness far
beyond what we are capable of here, though we shall come to enjoy it hereafter.

Of men.
2. There is the happiness of a man, which is the principal thing we have to
do with here.

Toward the capabilitie of a man's happiness there does concur.
And toward the capability of a man's happiness (to express it in the
general) there be diverse things concurring.

There be some things, 1. Internal: 2. And some things external toward a
man's happiness.


Something Internal. A right constitution both of soul and body.
1. There be something internal and fundamental toward happiness. And they
are a right constitution both of soul and body: which must concur (at least)
to make up complete happiness: and so far as they are defective, there will
be some defects in our happiness.

1. Plenitude of understanding.

2. Rectitude of will.


1. The soul must be in a right frame, both for fullness, and clearenesse of
understanding, and for firmness, and strength of a right willing of that,
which we ought to will, according to truth of Reason and Religion, and the
rule of Faith. For if a man had all the other happiness in the world, and yet
wanted this; To him that is polluted, all things are polluted; if a man's spirit
be out of frame, if he understands not the excellency of things, or the worth
of them, or affects them not according to that; that will poison, and intercept
all happiness, though he had all the good in the world.

2. There must be a concomitancy of soul and body. A concomitancie both of
soul and body.
Because the soul is but a tenant here in the body in which it dwells; and
there must be a great deal of harmony, and coresponcie between these two,
Iagenium male habitat; if the soul be as an ill tenant, and dwells in a sickly
and crazie body, that will be some interruption, and some impediment to
complete happiness; for the internal and fundamental ground of happiness,
that which has been anciently expressed, Men's sana in corpore sano, a right
mind in a complete body, is fundamentally toward complete happiness.

2. There is something externally, Some thing external.
and that is Partly isntrumental: (...). Partly complementall (...).


1. Isntrumental to happiness is a sufficiency, Isntrumental.

A sufficiency of outward things


and a convenient proportion of all outward things: some proportion of outward
things I say; for a man is made of body as well as of spirit, and therefore
needs outward things, without which there cannot be a complete happiness.

2. Which is the maine of all, Complementall.
his external relation that he has to God, and the operation according to
this: and this I call complementall. The right use of soul, that is
intellectual, is regular in the affections; the acting according to that
rectitude makes up complementall happiness.

For there are three words in the Greek for happiness.

The first is (...), which implies a necessary supply of outward things, a
well being in regard of the outward estate.

The second word is (...), which implies to be in the favor of God, and to
have a good aspect from God.

The third word is (...), which implies a well doing, or a right acting
according to the excellency of nature, both toward God, and other things:
therein is the consummating, or the completing of humane happiness.

But now this being premised in general; let me add the other distinction.

As there is a difference, or distinction of happiness in regard of the
subject; things capable of happiness, God, and the reasonable creature,
Angels, and men.

There is a difference of happiness in regard of their kinds.
2. Distinction. There is a difference of happiness in regard of the kinds and
degrees of happiness; I will give that but in a word.

There is 1. A false happiness Deficient. 2. A true happiness Sufficient. 3.
A complete happiness Perficient.


There is a false happiness, that is not true.

And there is a true happiness which is not complete.

And then there is a complete happiness, that is both true and complete.

And all these are so, according to the foundation of that good thing, upon
which they are made, or built.

1. It is a false happiness, There is a false happiness.
which is built upon any inferior good, without God, as in the next Point we
shall show; That not any creature, nor all the creatures in the world together;
even a full fruition of them, without the fruition of God, with them, and in
them, and above them, it makes but a defective, and a false happiness; that is
not worth the name of happiness. Although a man may call it in some respect a
happiness, as a man may be said to be happy in this respect, because he has a
sound body, and mind; in that respect it may be used. But such a kind of
happiness as that, comes far short of the name of true happiness, it is a
false, that is the first.

2. There is a happiness true, There is a true happiness but not complete.
but not complete, and that is, when a man is in conjunction with God, that a
man does enjoy God (who is the chief good, and the greatest good of all
others) though he has nothing else in the world: may though there were
nothing but sickness, and trouble, and all the miseries in regard of the
outward respect, yet God is so sovereign a good, that he that is Gods, he
that is in relation to God, that God ownes him for his own; so that he is in
the favor of God; in this respect (I say) in that he possesses God, and
injoyeth God (which alone makes him happy) he is truly happy, though not
absolutely; it is true, though not complete happiness.

There is a complete happiness.
3. There is a complete happiness, which is a concurrence of all; where there
is the enjoying of God: and all other things, that are any way in relation unto
happiness, either to an isntrumental, or complete happiness, all meet and
concur together.

Now the former of those happinesses, is the happiness of the worldlings: who
can reach no higher, it is but an imaginary and a false happiness, it being
without God; but (as I said) the worldling can reach no higher, being without
God in the world, and so without true happiness.

The second is the happiness of a godly man in this life; they may perhaps be
exceedingly shortened, and straightned in respect of all worldly things more
than the wicked, and so more miserable than other men in that respect. But yet,
God they have, who is that rich good, and invaluable good, which is above all
other, they have the favor of God, and therefore they are truly happy, though
not compleately.

But then the third, that is the happiness of heaven; where there shall be no
misery, nor the relics of misery, but a full compleatnesse both of body and
soul, in those relations they have to God, and all other things by a
redundancie as it were, the principal and the essential thing still being in
God, which shall be more excellent than any thing we have here; but that is
that which we look for, though God is the chief, yet all the rest is added,
and the least accidentarie is without defect, there shall be no defect at all
in any things.

Thus of the first thing in the Proposition, what happiness is: The second
inquiry follows:

2. How all men may be said to desire happiness. How all men may be said to
desire happiness.


I express it briefly thus. If you desire an answer to the question,
according to the morality of it, I shall give the answer in two circumstances.

Men do desire happiness.

1. Morally 1. Ignorantly. Morally.
2. Inconstantly.


1. They desire it ignorantly: They would have it, but they do grope for it.
Ignorantly.
They are altogether naturally ignorant, even of that which their own
propension, and weight of nature carries them to; they seek as the Sodomites,
Lots door in the dark. They make toward happiness, but as in a mist in a
Wilderness, in a labyrinth, they go in and out, they follow happiness, and
desire it very ignorantly.

2. Very inconstantly. Sometimes in one thing, Inconstantly.
and sometimes in another thing, childlike. As a child that follows a bird,
the bird, if it perceive the child, perhaps may play with it,, and sit near
it, and then hop away a little, and a little, but at the last away it goes.
And so we shall find it is in the prosecution of happiness among men. Many
desire it, but it is wondrous staggeringly, and inconstantly, even like
drunken men, in and out; sometimes they think this will make them happy; and
then all might and maine goes for that: and sometimes again an other thing
takes off the fancy, and then all for it; and anon they are taken off from
that, and then another thing, they are weary of that too: there is no
satisfaction, always craving, and from one to another, never still, and so very
inconstantly. So that as they do it very ignorantly: so likewise inconstantly.
And so you have the moral answer.

Naturally.
2. All men naturally desire happiness; and that is my Point. And so it
comprehends two things, which I will briefly open, and so come to the proof of
the Point.

1. They desire it naturally, and so universally. And because they desire it
naturally, they do desire it universally.

It is not the desire of one, or two, or a good pretty part of men, but all
universally* all men desire it, good and bad, wicked and godly, howsoever they
miss in the particular; yet generally all men desire happiness. And therefore
that which a Father long ago observed upon an occasion of the act of a jester,
that came upon the Stage to make the people sport with tricks; he told them
that he would undertake to tell unto every one that was there present, men and
women their thoughts, and what every one of them desired. There was great
expectation still what he would say: at last he tells them, vili vultis emere,
and care vendere. i. e. You all desire to buy cheap, and sell dear. But says
Augustine, if this man had told them, you all would be happy, he should have
spoken more truly, for that is not true in some respect: good men and honest
men are not greedy to make bargains for advantage always. But yet if he had
said you all do desire to be happy, he had spoken without all exception. None
would have denied it, or gain said it; but every one would be a happy man.

And this will appear to be true, if you take but two or three distinctions.

1. Take a distinction in regard of the thing happiness, Consideration of
happiness.
the thing that I affirm to be universally desired.

2. Take a distinction of desire.

3. Take a distinction of men.

Take it with these considerations* and you will find it to be an infallible
truth.

1. Make a distinction of happiness, which I express thus: Happiness may be
considered Either in general, to be happy. Or in particular, to be happy this
or that way.


General. Particular.
All men desire in general to be happy; but all men do not desire in
particular to be happy, this or that way: That is, they do not agree in this,
that this or that is happiness. But here is an infinite difference, quot
bomines, tot sententiae: men are divided in the particular, wherein they do
place their happiness; And yet they that are divided in the branches are
united in the root, and all do agree, and conspire together in this (even
those that are at the greatest odds) that they do make toward happiness.
That man that rejoices like a Giant to run the ways of God: He does it out
of the desire of happiness; but placed in that which the worldly man thinks
to be no happiness, viz. in the favor of God, and obedience to his
Commandments, and the getting of everlasting life; and therefore he makes
haste that way. And a man that runs the quite contrary way, headlong and
post to hell, he cannot tell how to be speedy enough, in the prosecution of
evil courses, yet that man does it out of a desire, to come to happiness, but
only he misplaceth his happiness in the wrong thing, and is out of the way to
it. So, that is the first thing, all men in general desire happiness, though
in the particular they agree not.

2. Make a distinction of desire, or appetite; Interpretation of appetite.
and it is double.

1. There is an illicite appetite. 2. There is an innate appetite.


Concerning the first, Illicite.
whether a man does desire illicitly, that is, whether a man does by a firm
and actual desire, desire to come to happiness, I will affirm nothing.

But of the latter it is true, Innate.
for without all question, there is an innate appetite: there is a natural
desire of the soul of happiness. As the stone does weigh downward toward
the center, which is the place of its rest: even so the soul of a man
weighs, and presses toward the center of rest, toward that place, what
ever it be; toward that thing in the fruition of which it may be at rest:
there is (I say) a natural pondus or weight of the soul that way, whether it
be illicite, I say nothing, and yet that may something appear by the third;
which is,

A distinction of men: Condition of men.
there be diverse sorts of men, yet I will not meddle with any thing now, but
give one division.

1. There be wise men. 2. There be weaker men.


Men that are wise, and men that are weak.

Now their desire of happiness is different, according to the different ranks
of men in that respect.

Weak men.
Weaker men that have but weak intellectuals, and weak understandings, it may
be that they live like beggars all their life, and have no habitation of their
own, but do rove up and down the country; they make not any mark or
design of their lives; set up no scope that they shoot at, and do not level
their actions to come to that scope; weak men, it may be, do not so actually
make some design, at which they aim. But now wise men make some end, Wise men.
set up happiness as their work, and so do level all their actions to meet
there: the more strength of wisdom and understanding is in a man, the more
actually, and strongly he does it. It is for a wise man to have a scope, a
mark to aim and drive at: and he is a weak man that does not make some
design, propound some mark (wherein he thinks probable to attain to
happiness) and press toward it.

And now with this difference, and being thus opened, it is a clear truth,
that there is a natural desire in all men toward happiness: and that
universal good, and this naturalnesse shows the universality.

Necessarily.
2. They desire it necessarily. There is a necessary desire, as those that are
the great patrons of the liberty of the will acknowledge; they that do
maintain that man has an absolute freedom of will; yet all of them do
agree, that this freedom is not express concerning happiness: a man is not
free whether he will will happiness or not, but his will is actuated, and
determinated that way, he cannot but desire it whether he will or no (I say)
he cannot but will happiness, There is a natural instinct of God upon him, by
which he does poize toward happiness; it is natural, and therefore both
universal in all, and necessary, without discourse or reasoning, or choice
and liberty, but out of necessity, as the greatest patrons of Libertinisme
acknowledge.

Thus of the explication of the Point: Proof.


2. The Probation, I shall add but a word now for the proof of it, because I
conceive there is no necessity of first (...) it. (...).


1. Scripture, Besides, Scripture.
that which is here set down, which I conceive may be enlarged. Many say, etc.

That is, as I conceive, all men: There be many places of Scripture that run
upon this string, and are built on this foundation: All the arguments that God
uses to induce a man toward this, taken from our happiness, do argue that
God would work on the advantage of nature, and that there is a natural desire
of happiness, and therefore he propounds those things that will conduce to a
man's happiness, that should induce him. And thus therefore he propounds the
Law, choose life or death; and thus Christ propounds the Gospel. Blessed are
the pure in heart. He uses an argument of blessedness; on this ground of
nature, there is a desire of happiness, he comes to work, showing the way how
a man may come to that he desires, how he may compass his own desire.

Experience Of good. Bad.
2. Experience may confirm this unto us, I suppose that there is no man good,
or bad; that if the question were made, whether he would be happy, or no; I
conceive he could not choose but say he would be happy.

(...).
2. (...), the ground of it, briefly is:

Constitution in written.
1. Reason: It is a thing implanted in us by the constitution of nature: God
made a man for an end, and for a happiness, capable of happiness: and
therefore planted an instinct of nature in him, to carry him along, and poize
him toward this happiness.

2. Reason: Not blotted out by corruption: corruption has not blotted this
out: Though man be corrupted by the fall, and, is grown degenerate from the
excellency of nature. Yea though in many other things, many principles are so
beaten out, of particular goodness, and particular virtues, that a man has
lost the rudiments, and the lineaments of them; which was in him at the first:
yet this is so intrinsecall, and so innate in nature, so graven in it; that
even the fall has not blotted it out: That even in corruption so long as there
is a rational creature, the nature of a reasonable creature is so, that of its
own will, it desires good; it cannot but desire good, and that which is the
conflux of all good, happiness: even corruption itself does retain thus much
of the reversion of the integrity of nature.

3. Reason: Left for stocks to graft Renovation.
This is left for a stock to graft Renovation on: it is for a very good end,
as Nebuchadnezzars stumpe was, because God meant to restore him again, so that
although the tree were lopt down, yet there was a stock left, etc. So God
has left this to be a stock to graft on; If there were not this instinct of
nature, that a man had a desire to happiness, for God to conveigh the doctrine
of happiness, and give directions to attain it, there were no ground work,
to work upon a man to induce him to such things. For as a great man of this
Kingdom sometimes said, I do think there is a truth, and an elegancy in the
observation; God grafts the plant of grace upon the stock of nature. If there
were not a stock of nature, so far forth as a man is a reasonable creature,
some general principles and inclinations; there were no dealing with a man
toward his renovation: But this is left as a ground work, for God to work
better things upon: We have some desire to happiness, and therefore when God
comes to direct him to happiness, he has some thing to work upon, something
in nature to make him capable of it; of understanding, embracing, and closing
with it. Not that he has an active power, but as it were, a capability, or
capacity of it. And therefore as they that spinne, do not spinne out all the
whole thread, but leave some end, that they may add to it another thread, So God
having a purpose to do good on man in his renovation, he did not altogether
suffer the stock of nature to be wholly rooted out, but left that as a hint,
or root to graft upon, to make him capable of happiness the better.

Application.
Now briefly to come to the application of this point. There are but two things
which in general I shall infer from hence.

Something by way of instruction;

And something by way of exhortation.

Instruction
By way of instruction, there be diverse particulars I might recommend unto you.

The congruity of beginning with his.
1. Congruity of beginning with this. You see here the reason, and a good
account given, why I placed this thing in the first entrance, in the treaty of
Divinity, placing the argument of happiness first. It is the scope of all
things, that are to be taught and learned. Wherefore do we learn or teach,
but to bring men to happiness? And therefore as it is in shooting, it is
necessary that a man should see the mark that he shootes at that so he may
level at, that mark; So in treating of Divine knowledge, as they say of all
practical arts, the natural method is to begin at the end, to set down the
end whether all things tend, that a man shoot not at Rovers: So this gives my
account, and the reason why I thus placed this point here. It might be inquired
in the beginning what should be the upshot of alt that a man learnes, or
hears: All must be such things as do conduce toward our happiness, and he
must gather it piece by piece, to make up his happiness, seeing it is that
which we all desire.

2. We see here the excellency of Divinity, The excellency of Divinity.
above all other Arts and Professions in the world. It does meet with our
desire: and not only meet with our desire, but it supplies our defects.

1. It meets with our desire. It meets with our desires.


However men may count it a strange doctrine, to be acquainted with the things
of Divinity, of God, and of Religion, and of his own end: and therefore look
asquint upon it, and regard it not. But whoever well considers of it, he shall
find divinity to be the nearest of kin to him; to the most inward propension
of the soul, it comes to instruct him in that, whereunto himself has a
n^tur^ll impetus and pondus. To weigh him.

2. Supplies our defects. Supplies our defects.
We have a desire of happiness, but we all mistake the true way unto it; now
here is the excellency of Divinity, that it teaches this unto a man faithfully
and truly: and therefore infinitely to be advanced above all other professions
in the world. All Philosophy, or matter of learning, or other trades, is that
by which a man makes up a temporal living, and comes far short of Divinity.
That is the great art, and the Queen of Arts, and Sciences. That teaches a
man the great things of all, viz. The way to come to his desire, to happiness,
without which all other arts are but lost labor, a man wants the maine, we see
here the excellency of Divinity, though it does not teach a man to make
shoes, or clothes, or houses, to get a living; yet it teaches a man a better
thing, it teaches a man how to come to his desire, it teaches a man how to
walk in that way that does bring to everlasting life, and that which will
bring true happiness to the soul.

The mercy of God to the Church
3. Take notice here of the great mercy of God, both toward the Church in
general, and this place in particular. If Divinity be the most excellent
Profession and Science in the world, in so much that all must stoop and veil
to that, in comparison of the infinite excellency that is in it, and the good
that it brings; than how much cause have we to bless God, that we are so
happy, as to live in a Church, wherein we are taught the Doctrine of Divinity,
and where God will take it upon himself to be our Schoolmaster, a poor
trade, and yet such a one, as God will undertake to present himself personally
in, to undertake to instruct and teach us, and we must all go to School to
him, to learn the way to that we all desire, viz. to happiness.

And so in particular those that live in this place, that enjoy those means,
To us of this place.
that enjoy those continual directions, that guide a man in the way to
happiness, which is not the happiness of all that bear the n^me of a Church.
We have therefore a more especial cause for to bless God.

4. Hence take notice of the misery of man, Misery of man.
and the infinite depravation of our nature. That whereas we all desire
happiness in general, and that truly and naturally, by a natural pondus,
and weight, that carries us to it: Though we would have good and happiness,
yet for the true good, and the true happiness, here appears our misery.

1. We know it not, We know it not.
we are altogether in the dark, ignorant, we know not that, which we long
after: we long, and long in a blind manner, and know not what we would have;
It is a miserable case to think, that a man should have a perpetual desire of
that, which he has no knowledge of: God endued him with knowledge at the
first, in the state of innocence. But now in the state of our fall and
corruption, we have lost that knowledge, and this is our misery, herein it
lies, we know not happiness, we know not what we would have, and what we
desire.

We seek it not.
2. We do not only not know, but we seek not for it; about an imaginary
happiness, a false happiness, many bestow a great deal of pains; but for
the right happiness, in the right way to it, men seek it not, regard it not,
but slight it.

We like it not.
3. Nay, even when God brings it home to our doors, we like it not, any
happiness will please us better, though we have a natural desire toward
happiness, yet glass will please us better than pearls, counterfeit
happiness better than substantial. The devil can cheat us with a painted
happiness, and we go away as well pleased, as a child with a rattle; and
throw away our jewels for it, as a child, leave our bread and butter to play
with a rattle. A miserable case, that even in that thing we do all so
naturally desire and long to have, we are so ignorant that we know it not; so
negligent that we seek not after it; nay, and when we come to know it, we
are ready to startle at it, and mistake it: rather ch^se any counterfeit thing;
any thing is welcommer to us than the true.

The possibility and way of cure.
4. We see here for our instruction, that there is a possibility, and the way
of that possibitie, how God may recover a man out of his relapsed condition,
and that in an irresistible and invincible way, and yet without the violation
of a man's will, which is a great question, and much disputed; Men are very
nice, and afraid to ascribe too much to the power of grace: but will rather say
that God may be defeated and frustrated, nay, resisted, when he has a purpose
to convert a man, they will rather impute impotencie to God, that God may be
defeated, then that he can work irresistibly, because they are afraid they
should violate the will of man, they are so dainty of that, I charge you awake
her not, give her what she pleases, etc. they will rather speak blasphemy
concerning God, than take man's nothing from him; but now the consideration of
those two Points, will help to take off that difficulty; God can invincibly
turn the will, and yet easily, without any violation of the will. He can
invincibly, when he comes so home, and so close, grafting of divine
revelations, on the stock of nature; Now if he can bring it home so close, and
say here is your happiness, and I will set it out so clear, as that you must
either deny your nature, and forsake your happiness, or else you must take
this way, wherein I show you is your happiness; Now this is a way to work
upon the will without violation, working on the inclination, and propension of
it. And it is Gods will, and wisdom, and power alone, to bring it so home, to
show the light so clear, and so near before a man, that he cannot refuse it,
and yet when he does it, he does it irresistibly, and invincibly working so on
the inclination of nature, upon our own desires, that there is no violence to
the will at all, he can strike in, and overcome it in a way of congruitie of
our nature by virtue of our inclinations and desires.

Use. 2. I shall add now but a word for the Exhortation, Exhortation To
Preachers.
and to omit that of the Ministers, that they should labor, and endeavor to
work upon this ground work of nature; the desire of happiness, and to make
all things good, to show the necessary conjunction of that they press with
man's happiness; that they may say the happiness you do desire cannot be
attained without this way.

To the people.
But I leave them, and for the People, I shall propound but these three or four
things.

1. Do we all desire happiness. Then first, observe our inclination, Observe
our inclination.
let us all take notice of our inclinations, and follow them; follow those
inclinations of nature, and be true to them; follow the genius of our nature;
and in this case it is a good rule of the Physicians, Naturam sequi, we should
follow the inclinations of our nature, do that which best shapes with nature;
follow the suggestion of nature and labor to improve it.

Acquire direction.
2. Acquire Direction, labor to get good directions; that the course of nature
may be guided the right way; not to mistake the true way, though we run
naturally to happiness, yet we will go the wrong way, if we have not a
guide, and therefore beg them of God, and when God affords guides to help us
this way, submit to them, and beg of God, that as he has implanted in you a
desire of happiness, so that he would inlighten you, that you may not
withstand your own happiness, and that he would guide you to this happiness.

3. Fix your resolutions, Fix resolution.
toward your happiness. This is the thing we naturally desire, make an
articulate act therefore, a firm, and strong act, in resolution, that you will
steer the whole course of your life, for the attaining and getting of this.
Hoc primum repete opus, etc. Let this be your design, and your drift, I am
resolved to make out for happiness. God has bestowed on me a desire of
happiness, and he has revealed what that happiness is: and therefore that
shall be the scope of my life, it is my desire, and I will go resolvedly, and
ponder every step by step, to see how it conduces to, or swerveth from my
happiness, if it swerve, I will abstain from it, if it conduce, I will follow
it, I am resolved.

4. Force the execution, Force execution.
when we are fixed and resolved, then force to the execution, keep close to
your desires, be true unto your purposes, and walk on constantly, not out and
in; my happiness is my journies end, and I must go to it. And as she said to
a son of hers, a valiant Soldier, that came home from the war lamed; well
said she, that lamenesse will make you remember virtue every step; so let us
all labor to remember virtue every step; often have your eyes on the end of
your journey, see whether you go, and examine your selves, if the way be right
or no, and if right, often rouse up your selves to the execution of your
resolutions this way.

The second Sermon. SER. 2.

PSALM IV. VI. There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift
up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE come now to the second thing, viz. Wherein does happiness lie, and
consist. And our answer is twofold, 1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.


That not the quintesence of any nor the confluence of all created things, can
make a man happly: Nothing without God can bring a man true, much less,
Perfect happiness. I say no created thing can make us happy; that is the thing
we are now upon, Explication.


And for the further explication of this Point; there are some things to be
considered. Proposition
1. Concerning the subject of the proposition. 2. Concerning the predicate:


Subject.
The subject of this propositin, or this truth that I have now propounded, is
contained in these two branches. 1. No created thing. 2. No created thing
without God.


I express in it two other things, to make the point more full. Not any of
those, nor all conjoined. Not the quintessence of any nor the confluence of
all, can make a man happy.

I shall but briefly touch this.

No created good. Not the quintessence of best.
1. There is no created thing of that excellency (though we suck out the very
quintessence of it) that can afford true happiness.

There may be two things that may be thought upon, which (if any could) might
do it.

Accomplishment.
1. There is no accomplishment, not endowments.

2. No addittaments to those accomplishments.

There be two sorts of those accomplishments, that may be thought fit, or
worthy to be named.

1. There be some intrinsecall within a man.

2. There be some extrinsecall without a man.

1. Intrinsecall, or within a man, there are excellencies, and endowments of
the mind, Intrinsecall of the mind.
more excellent then those of the body. But none of those can give a man's
heart, or soul, true happiness. None (I say) even of those excellencies of
the mind: Intellectual.
whether they be intellectual virtues, as wisdom, understanding, and
knowledge; although they be in the greatest height, or highest Meridian, that
possibly they can be exalted to, none of them can make a man truly happy.

No nor any moral virtues, Moral.
as well as the intellectual, they come far shorter then the, other, (I
meddle not here with supernatural virtues, infused by the spirit of God, for
they come in for their share in happiness, and make much toward it, as will
appear hereafter, but) now I meddle with moral virtues, or excellencies which
may adorn a civil man, one that stands within the bounds of nature: Although a
man have never so much of these, though he has the utmost excellency of the^;
nay and though he have them all, yet they all come far short of true
happiness, and so of making him truly happy.

2. And much less any excellencies, Extrinsecall of the body.
or endowments of the body, can make a man happy, as health, strength, or
beauty, or any other thing, which commend, and adorn the body, whatsoever the
good of it be, or the price of it. It comes exceeding short of bringing the
soul to happiness; they are as far inferior to the true happiness, as the
body is to the soul, and therefore, to pass from them, I say.

No extrinsecall, or outward accomplishments; whatsoever they call them:
whether the goods of fortune, Goods of Fortune.
or otherwise; of what rank, and condition soever they be, the further still
off from happiness, and the more remote: for the nearer any thing comes to the
soul, to the perfection of it, the nearer it is to happiness: but the further
off it is (as the estate, and goods, or the clothes, and other ornaments) the
farther off still from happiness. No endowments, No additaments.
or accomplishments will do it, whether they be intrinsecall, or extrinsecall.

2. Nay though we take in to Additaments, or Adjuments, which may be conceived,
for the farther perfecting, and polishing of those. Which as they have a
relation to the former, may be considered, as they were Either 1.
Intrinsecally, 2. Or extrinsecally.


Intrinsecall
1. There be two intrinsecally, which may be as additaments, or adjuments for
the perfecting of a man, and conducing toward happiness.

1. There is one more properly belonging to the mind, and the mind takes some
content in it, Honor.
and especially in a generous person. viz. Honor. And yet all the honor in
the world cannot do it: though a man were never so honorable, or high, or had
in reputation (although it be of high price in noble minds, and gives a great
satisfaction to them) yet there is no happiness at all in it: It comes far
too short to make a man happy.

2. But then there is an other, which belongs more properly to the body, but
yet may be extended in some sense unto the mind likewise, and that is
pleasure: Pleasure.
Some have placed happiness in that, as some Philosophers, and the Stoics,
and some of them dogmatically too; which yet is inferior to honor, and
therefore comes far shorter of making a man happy. Extrinsecall.


2. There be two others extrinsecally, which may be supposed to make some
additament, and may have some name in this business, and belong partly to the
one, and partly to the other.

viz. Riches, and Friends.


1. Not riches, nor estate, Riches.
they cannot do it: let the heap be never so great. Let there be never so
great a spring of riches, it is not that can do it.

2. I will but add the second thing, Friends.
and that is this; No content, or complete satisfaction in friends; no
relation that a man has, in which, his natural content does much consist in;
as parents, or children, and others that are near, and dear unto him; nor any
other of those friends, that may be more beneficial, and have a greater
influence in their good, as the favor of great ones, and the like, no friend
or relation to a man, though that be a great sweetness, as the Wiseman
expresses. Or as the Father expresses it very well. Though a man drink
nothing but Ambrosia, or Nectar, all his life, and have no friend to partake of
it, there would not be any sweetness unto him in it.

So I say, though it much sweeten the life, yet it cannot reach so far
(although he were never so blessed in that kind) as to make him happy.

It is not any of these things will do it; neither the intrinsecall goods of
the mind, nor the extrinsecall of the body; it is not Pleasure to satisfy the
body, nor honor to satisfy the mind; nor any other thing to satisfy both;
neither estate, nor friends, none of these can give a man true happiness.

2. But then there is an other branch, to make the point more full, viz. not
all of these.

Not the quintessence of any of those fully, nor the confluence of many, Not
the confluence of any.
or all of them together can do it.

1. It is not any of them alone can do it; for a man is a compound creature
both of body and soul, and therefore those things which make it up must be for
both: for suppose a man had a Beaver hat, and a gold hat-band, a satin dublet,
and the like: yet if in the mean time he go bare-legg'd, this is far from
compleatenesse, because there is one thing wanting: so it will be in the matter
of happiness: It is not conceiveable that one alone should do it; to have the
mind full, or the body full, to enjoy but one piece, that cannot make a man
happy. And therefore

2. I add this in the second place, not the confluence of all together, though
all were concentred together in one, and conspired together to make a man
happy, yet they would come short. Though a man had wisdom, and virtue, and
goods of body, as strength, and beauty, though he had all outward ornaments,
though he enjoyed honor and pleasure at the full, and riches, and friends,
nay, though he had all these meeting in one together, and concentred in one
man, they come far short of making a man happy, and he may be a miserable man
(though he have all these) in this Theological sense. Thus we see no created
thing can do it.

2. These things without God cannot do it.
These things considered without God cannot do it. For there is a great deal
of difference between those as they stand in relation to God, and in
conjunction with him, and as they are without him, and stand upon their own
bottom, and in their own strength, and excellency. With God they may make
accession.


1. With God it is true, these things may make some accession to happiness,
they may adorn and beautify happiness, and have some part and place in
happiness in an inferior kind; they are in themselves, and in their kind
good, and they are the gifts of God, and those that he bestows on man for
this purpose, to inch out, and help out their happiness in some kind, or
other; as Augustine distinguishes very well: there be Bona Throni, and bona
Scabelli; goods of the Throne of happiness, which is God and Christ: and goods
of the Footstool, as those inferior things: It is true, the throne of a godly
man's happiness is in heaven; but yet the Footestoole may be upon earth. For a
man being a compound creature, is not a mere simple separated spirit: but he
has a body likewise, and therefore those outward and lower things may some way
be conducible toward his outward happiness, and be in an inferior degree of
this happiness: especially when they do not derogate or diminish from the
other: when they make no wall of separation between God, and the soul; but
are in a conjunction with God, and proceed out of Gods favor and love toward
us; and that for our good; and so far they may make an accession to
happiness: as it is with ciphers, put a thousand of them and they make no
number, but put the least figure before them, and they make up a great number.
So all those worldly things, are but ciphers without God; but if they stand in
conjunction with God, they may make some accession to happiness, and be
subservient to it.

2. Without God they cannot do it, Without God they cannot do it.
they can neither give the real, nor the royal happiness. It is impossible
without God they should do it.

Though there may be an imagination of happiness in those men, May breed
imagination of happiness.
who are the owners of them: they may fill themselves with dreams and fancies,
as though they were in a happy estate, and condition, Cannot give possession of
it. The royal or real happiness.
because of the possession of them. But if we consider, either the royal
happiness, or the real happiness, that which is truly worthy to be
accounted so, that they cannot be. And that leads me to the second branch,
viz. the predicate, or the thing affirmed, which is,

2. That all created things without God, The predicate. The secreated things
cannot give possession of happiness either.
none of them all alone, or all of them together, can bring a man perfect or
true happiness.

Now there may be a double degree of happiness propounded; 1. A Supernatural
happiness. 2. A Natural happiness.


1. The natural happiness is, Natuall or
when a man is all well in the natural man, which a man may be capable of as
he is a man.

2. The Supernatural happiness is, Supernatural.
that which cannot be attained without some supernatural qualifications, and
the whole essence of it must be supernatural.

Now all these earthly created things cannot put us in possession of either of
these, neither put a man in a possession of a natural, much less of a
supernatural happiness.

Perfect.
Or rather to express it otherwise, there is 1. A Perfect happiness, or a
royal happiness. True.
2. A True happiness, or a real happiness, though it be not absolute, and
perfect.


A godly man, that injoyes communion with God, even in this life, in the midst
of all other wants, and miseries; he has a supernatural, or superexcellent
good, which makes him really happy, though he do want many things to the
perfecting, and compleatenesse of happiness. There may be tears in the eyes,
and sorrow in the heart here: which perfect happiness wipes off, which is
hereafter: then all these tears shall be wiped away, and this sorrow shall be
turned into joy, and all defects supplied.

Now I affirm, that all these created good things, one of them, or all of
them, are so far from bringing a man to complete happiness, where there is
no want, that is; Omnibus numeris absoluta. They are so far, I say, from
that, that they are not worth the name of true happiness, or so much as to
give rest and satisfaction to the soul, neither in full measure, nor so far
as to denominate happiness. Thus of the explication.

2. Proof.
I come to the Probation and demonstration of this Point. It may be proved Both
for the (...) of it. and (...) of it.


Both that it is so, and then the ground, and reason, whence it comes to be so.

1. For the (...) of it, that it is so, (...).
that it is an undoubted, and infallible truth of God, that reason must of
necessity yield and subscribe unto it. It will appear by that which is the
demonstration of all, viz.

Both 1. By Scripture. 2. By experience.


1. By Scripture; Scripture.
I shall forbear many places at present, because I shall have occasion to do
it hereafter, when I come to handle the other Point. For all these places, that
prove our happiness to be in God alone, and that there is no other way unto
it, they all prove this Point. I shall select some few for present.

To mention that first, wherein this argument is treated in. It is the same
with this wherein happiness is seated. Mat. 5. at the beginning; our Savior
there in this Sermon upon the Mount, purposely treats of happiness, and
blessedness: He sets the crown of blessedness or happiness on the head of
many things. As, Blessed are those that are poor in Spirit; Blessed are those
that mourn; Blessed are the meek, etc. But among all those he mentions
there, he mentions none of those created good things wherein a man might
suppose they should be: There is not, Blessed is the rich man, or Blessed is
the honorable man; or the wiseman, or he that injoyes the goods of beauty, or
riches, or strength of body, and the like. None of those things mentioned. But
all these things that are mentioned there are spiritual, and heavenly graces,
that put a man into fellowship, and communion with God.

The second Scripture is that in Psalm. 34.12. where the Psalmist is in a way of
direction. Come to me my children, and I will instruct you in the way to
happiness; who is he that desires to see good; to live long, and see good
days; to see happiness, and to come to happiness. Where he mentions none of
those things, as I named before: but the same that our Savior seems to
express, and he excludes other things. He directs to spiritual ways, and
spiritual means for the accomplishment of happiness; but for earthly things,
he does not so much as once name them. And then again, Psalm. 73. about the
beginning, there is a full proof of it, in the whole beginning; there the
Prophet reckons up the propriety, and the happiness of wicked men: and
expresses it so much the fuller, because the glister of these worldly things
had dazzled the eyes of the Psalmist, and they had almost made his feet to
stippe; Ver. 2. He was so taken with the flare of earthly things, and the
prosperous state of men in worldly things, that he began to bless in his
heart, and think well of those that enjoyed them, and to repine at his own
estate: and thus he was carried away till God brought him into the Sanctuary.
Verse 18. There he found that all those that had them were not happy; but
those that had them were set in slippery places. There was no soliditie of
happiness, that could be gathered out of those things; when God brought him
into the sanctuary, then he learned there, that there was no true happiness
in all these earthly things.

And so Psalm. 144. the last verse, The Psalmist there in the beginning of the
Verse, seemed to look this way, as though there were happiness in these
created things: Happy are the people that are in such a case: the people that
flourish in prosperity, as in the foregoing Verses: and so far indeed, as
they are conjoined with God, there is something of happiness in them: But lest
any should mistake the Prophet; he corrects himself again, and says (as if
he did unsay what he he had said) Happy are the people who have God for their
Lord: They are happy men whose God is the Lord, that is the right of it; it is
not these things wherein true happiness lies, though they may be subservient
to it, and something conducible to happiness, yet our happiness does lie in
our conjunction with God.

And therefore the Prophet, Ier. 9.23. gives a caution. Let not the Wiseman
glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man
glory in his riches; none of these things can make a man happy; these are not
the things that a man can delight in, or boast of; there must be other things
that must make up this happiness, or else we shall come short of it.

And so in, 1 Timothy 6.17. See what the Apostle says, concerning one thing,
which has the greatest show and splendour, viz. Riches. Charge them that are
rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in
their uncertain riches. That they do not build a conceited happiness in, or
upon them; and think they are in a good estate by reason of them; the Apostle
does it with authority, and efficacy, and he would have it laid home to
them, because men are exceeding apt to cozen themselves, in such things.

And to give something as the Reason of it: Look Hoseah 1.21.22. Alas, all
these things and the goodness of them (so far as they may conduce in an
inferior rank for our good) depend upon God, as God by the Prophet there
says. In that day, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall
hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn and wine, and the oil,
etc. The first link of the chain is tied to the Throne of God, I will hear,
says the Lord, the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, etc. All the
influence there he ties to God, all comes from him, and depends upon him.
Experience


2. By Experience; All the experience in the world makes this certainly true,
and evident, especially to those that have found the experiment, and to others
likewise, if they will trust to experience, and not (like fools) buy their
own wisdom, by their own experience.

1. Take an extraordinary experiment; Extraordinary of Solomon.
the experiment of one may serve for all: viz. that of Solomon, who gives up
his verdict, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. etc. Eccles. 1.2. I would
desire every one to consider this well, there is no exception to be put in
against the verdict; but it will speak home to the point, and absolutely
convince any one, that is a rational man,

A man's testimony may be elevated, or abased upon diverse grounds; but there is
none can come here to make a slight, or diminish the authority of Solomon. He
wanted not means to try; for he had all these things, and could run through
them all, and taste, and pick out as it were all the excellencies of them: He
was the richest King that ever was, he had the greatest plenty of gold, and all
other things, that God had bestowed upon him: there wanted no means
whatsoever, to make an experiment of any worldly thing, but he had it; being a
King, and a rich King. Neither wanted there any Wisdom, for if he had all
other things, and wanted skill, it had been nothing, he might have gone the
wrong way to work. But he wanted not skill to make an experiment, although it
had been to draw fire out of flint; as Alchymists can draw oil out of iron,
whereas ordinary people can draw little moisture out of it, being they want
skill to fetch out the quintessence of it. But it cannot be said so of Solomon,
he had means and wit to fetch out all the virtue in them; and to suck the
quintessence out, to sift the things to the branne, as they say. But then
again, if a man had both means and wit to do it, yet if he had not a mind
to it, he could not do it; But it cannot be said so of him, for he had a mind
to try; Solomon set his heart to it, to try the nature of all the world, and
worldly things; to try what was in pleasure, and honor, and music, and
singing, and all things that may give content to the heart of man. He had a
mind to employ his means, and wisdom this way, to try the experiment of all
these worldly things, and yet after all this, he returns this verdict (as I
said before) vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

2. The ordinary experience of every one may confirm this same; Ordinary
experience of everyone
Not only in particular good things, wherein men promise to themselves
happiness: A man thinks he should be happy, if he could but obtain such an
estate, or marry thus, and thus, etc. And ordinarily, this is our folly, that
whatsoever a man is eagerly set upon that does please him, while he is a suitor
for it, he pleases himself with conceits and fancies, that if he were but
master of such a thing, oh he should be a happy man. But who is he that has
not tried the folly, and the emptiness of this conceit; how short it comes to
satisfy the soul, and give it that fulness of content, which a man expected
from it: Although a man were extreme fond, and sick of desire for those
things; He finds no defect in the thing, for it may be it is really such as it
did appear, but yet merely the defect in the creature is, that it satisfies
not; God would not have it so, neither were it good for us to be so; namely,
that we should find a fullness in the creature.

And not only for the particulars do we find it; but also in the conjunction
of all together. It was the saying of a great Emperor, that in his time had
passed all the ranks, and states of every condition: He had been mean and
base, and yet grew to the greatest condition, to have the greatest Empire in
the world, himself made this the wonderment of all, Omnia fui and nihil
expedit: He had made trial of all conditions, but yet could not find any
happiness, or any rest and satisfaction in any condition at all that he had:
So does (or at least may) every man find this vanity in all things; what ever
seem glorious in our eyes before we have them, yet when we have them, they
send us away empty. There is no man, that has had to deal in the world, but
may come in, and give testimony to this truth.

indifferency, that they are indifferent both to good and to bad: Now if a man
be not good himself, it is impossible that any of these things should make him
happy, a wicked man if he remain such, he cannot but be in a miserable
condition, a miserable man for all these things: Now these are indifferent, and
as incident to the wicked as to the godly, God makes not these things any badge
of his people, or any characters of difference, or pledges of his love and
favor; But deals them promiscuously to all, yea many times and most
frequently, his people have the least share in them, his servants are low and
base for these outward things, for those created excellencies, it may be they
are not many wise, nor many noble, nor many rich, that may be rather a
vexation; but God bestows graces on them. For all these outward things are
very various: for the goods of the body, and much more for the estate, is
common to all, nay sometimes God bestows them, and usually, upon those that
are naturally crabbed and untoward.

2. To come briefly now to the Reason of the point; and I will but touch a few
things, and so demonstrate the (...), (...),
the reason whence it arises, that no earthly thing, nor all earthly things,
can make a man truly, much less perfectly happy: It will appear to rise,
From 1. The nature of happiness. 2. The nature of earthly things. 3. The
nature of man.


1. Nature of happiness wherein it must be.
I must premise here (though I included it in the other) in the first place,
something of the nature of happiness.

Now happiness, in the nature of it, implies these two things; Perfection and
Satisfaction.


And there cannot be happiness where these do not meet. Perfection.


1. Happiness is that which gives the utmost perfection, and compleatnesse to
our nature. Satisfaction


2. And secondly, it must be happiness in that estate and condition, which
gives true and full satisfaction to the soul, that it can rest upon it, and
have quiet, and full content in it.

Now neither of these two; neither the perfecting of our nature, nor the
satisfying, and contenting of our soul, can be had in this fruition of any
created good thing whatsoever: As I have often expressed it: Aurum luto
inaurare, to guild gold with dirt, it is ridiculous, to beautify the more
excellent thing with the inferior, or the more unworthy thing; to think to
make a man happy with that which is lower then a man's self, it adds rather
disgrace: It is impossible that satisfaction should be had in these things, as
it is for a stone to mount up, or rest in the air, without holding up with a
man's hand, or some other thing; The air, it is a thin liquid body, and that
a heavy body; and therefore it will give way unto it, to fall down; it cuts
through the air, and can find no rest till it come to some sollid body, for
(if it might be) it would never leave moving, till it come to the center: So it
is impossible that the sublime nature of man, which is substantial and solid,
a man that has sollid affections, and solid understanding; I say it is
impossible that he should find any solid rest but in the center, in God; who is
the alone center of rest; all these earthly things are but like the air to the
stone, they can give the soul no stay, but those solid affections will make
way through them, as being airy substances.

2. But it will appear more clear, The nature of created things.
if we consider the nature of these earthly things, and especially if we
compare together the general nature of these earthly created good things, and
the nature of man: and we shall find that there is no

1. Proportion in the one, There is no proportion, because
to add satisfaction, or perfection to the other: and among many things I
shall contract all into a few considerations.

2. Defective and short.
That good that is in the creature is such an inferior good, that it falls
short in three circumstances, and is therefore impossible to give satisfaction
or compleatnesse to the nature of man, which must have none of those defects.

I. All the good that is in any created good thing, it is at the best
defectively good. As the Prophet Isaiah expresses it. The bed is too narrow,
and the covering is too short, to keep warm, and wrap them in, all these
worldly things are too short and too narrow; besides that I shall add
hereafter.

First, they are too short, and of a defective nature, of no solid subsistence
and continuance. It is certain all these worldly things, will and must have
either finem suam, or finem tuam.

1. Finem suam, either they dye, or may take them wings and fly away. And sure
they being so fading as the flower, They are fading themselves.
the sweetest flower which a man is delighted with, withers away, while a man
holds it in his hand, in the midst of a man's delight, he sees it wither
away, and lose the beauty of it, and the sweetness of it; it is of no
continuance; and so al these worldly things are fading and fleeting, and
mutable, and such a defective nature as this is, cannot possibly make happy or
give satisfaction to the soul in that respect. A man may be to day high in
honor, and to morrow high on the gallows, as it was Hamans case; and it falls
out many times so with wicked men; they are like the grass which stands on the
house top, it stands high indeed, but it has no rooting, and so vanishes
quickly away. And as they say of the metal, which they make glass of, it is
nearest melting when it shines most brightest. So wicked men are nearest
destruction, when they are at the greatest luster, and ruffling themselves in
their pride, and jollity; and therefore the caution is given Psalm 37. To Gods
children and servants, that they should not fret themselves, though these
prospered in their ways.

We must leave them.
2. But although these things had not Finem suam, yet they have Finem tuam:
though they should not fail, nor fly away, as he said (namely the Roman
when he took his Kingdom) tie the goods of Fortune, and clip the wings of
victory: So though that thou had the wings of Fortune tied to thee with
adamantaine ties, suppose that they be not moved, yet thou may and must be
moved from them, and have Finam tuam, thou must die and carry no substance with
thee; when thou art gone they will leave thee; all these worldly things will
accompany a man to the grave, but no farther, and therefore in regard of their
defective nature, they cannot make happy; neither the goods of one, or all the
creatures together.

2. They are all of a diminutive good, Dimunitive narrow.
and they are too narrow a supply to furnish the large heart of man; as I have
sometime said, they observe in nature, that a man's heart is made in a man's body
like to a triangle, three cornered, and they do observe that it is impossible
to cover a triangle with a circle, with any round thing justly, but still there
will be some corner empty: and so, although a man could compass all the whole
world, yet his heart could never be filled, till it have the possession of God.
And therefore some have observed it, and would make out the initiall letters of
the word Cor, this. viz. Camera omnipotentis regis, i. e. the Presence Chamber
of the King of heaven, and as it fits none but him, so none will, or can fill
it, but him.

An other thing they have observed, that this triangle stands with the sharp
end downwards and the broad upwards; as intimating that a godly man should but
touch on the earth, Vno puncto, as little as may be; but he should have his
broad sides toward heaven, and stand extended and enlarged toward, heaven and
heavenly things, as being his proper field land mark.

No perfection.

No satisfaction.

They add vexation.


And in this respect they are of such an inferior rank, as that they not only
miss to give perfection to the nature, and no satisfaction, or real content
to the soul of man,

But also they add vexation, as Solomon speaks of one that stood (as it
were) on the top of all these excellent things, of wisdom, and knowledge,
etc. He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow; that is much more true of
any other thing. As he said sometime being a great Emperor; you look on this
goodly robe, or this goodly crown, it is purple the robe, and gold the crown;
but if you knew what it were lined with, or what cares are under it, you would
not stoop to gather it up in the dirt to have it. These earthly things, they
are not such excellent things, as the world esteems them to be, though they
make a glorious show, and draw great admiration toward them, yet when a man
comes to the inside of them, they do make the head full of cares, and vexation
of spirit, they are so far from giving satisfaction, or perfection.

3. All the good that is in all, or in any created good it is an others, it is
but a derivative good, and a dependant good, Derivative. Shallow.
and so not solid and deep enough to give the soul satisfaction, to yield
satisfaction, or perfection to the heart of a man, Without God not.
the things in themselves in their nature depend on God, they cannot be had or
attained unto without Gods leave, he must bestow them upon us, or else we
shall never come to have them. It is not rising up early, and going to bed
late, and eating the bread of carfulness, that can make a man attain unto
riches, but it is God that bestows riches. Promotion comes not from the East,
or from the West, but it is God that pulls down one, and sets up another. Held.
All is derived and borrowed from God, and when we have them, it must be God
that must be soder, to knit and hold them together, with an other blessing and
mercy of God; for God does not settle them upon us, and perpetuate our tenor,
we are but tennants ad placitum at the will of God, he may turn us out at
pleasure: These earthly things are but like Snow balls which melt with the
Sun.

But the maine thing here, Happy.
is to show their diminution or no sufficiency to conduce to make up happiness
which is plain.

Because that all the good and virtue of them contribute nothing at all toward
our happiness; but only what depends simply upon God. It is bread that
nourishes us, but take it alone, and not in the word of God, it will do no
good, for it is Gods blessing that makes any thing nourishing, and comfortable
to us, though we have the things, and they remain with us, yet they cannot be
useful to us, neither bread to nourish us, nor clothes to warm us, or
wisdom to guide our ways. God can take away all these, and nothing is any
thing without the Lord, nothing has any virtue to preserve us without him, but
God may beat our own weapons on our own heads, and afflict us, and make those
good things executioners of his just judgments against us. So that without God
there is no sweetness in these things, but our conjunction with God that gives
all the sweetness and excellency, in which they may any way conduce to our
happiness.

3. Consider the nature of man, we see the thing that is in the creature is a
diminutive, and a dependant good, which may fail, and there is no good at all
in them without the blessing of God. But now the nature of a man is such as it
must be free from all these defects, it desires something else, that it must
be free from these defects.

Long; immortal
1. The nature of man requires good that may be long, immortal. The mind is
the man, and the soul is the man, Hospes corporis, the body but the instrument
of the soul, and the soul is the principal, it is of an immortal nature,
and cannot be happy, but by an immortal good; something that cannot decay; and
therefore all things that fade or decay can no way do it, they are too short
to cover him, to reach to make him happy; except they could be extended to
immortality which they cannot be.

2. It must be large universal good; Large, universal.
that good that makes a man happy, which nature requires, must be a large good;
it must be an universal good, according to the universalitie of his desire.
For there is an universal appetite, and desire in man to every thing that is
good; and if a man had many things, and not all, there would be an emptiness,
and want of satisfaction, unless he could have all the good he is capable
of; but now all the creatures cannot reach this universalitie. Man is capable
of more than all the created things are, of a greater good than is in any
creature; and so long as he misseth the principal, he is far from
happiness. It is a remarkable saying of the Father concerning King Ahab, when
he was walking in the time of the three years famine. I have gold, and silver,
and wives, and children, and all these like things; but what do these things
good, seeing the heaven is as brass, and the earth as iron? I have no supply
from thence: so if a man have never such an abundance of all created things,
and does see heaven shut with doors of brass, and bars of iron against him;
that he has no part, or portion there, what would all these created things
do him good? He is made by nature capable of that high and noble happiness,
and therefore whatever comes short of that, it cannot give him satisfaction, or
perfection; but he may say in the midst of all other riches, and plenty, I am
miserable.

Deep, spiritual.
3. It must be a deep, and spiritual good; That good that must make a man
happy, make his nature happy, as it must be immortal and universal; so it
must be a spiritual, a transcendent, and superexcellent good; and therefore
all the good of these created things is too short, they are to shallow, o not
deep enough, nothing but God is better than man, and it must be something
better than man, that must make him happy, and therefore it is nothing but God
that can add the least perfection, or give full satisfaction to the nature of
man: as the Hebrew Grammarians use to observe, concerning the letters in the
name Jehovah: all the letters of Jehovah, are Litera quiescentes, quiescent
letters, letters of rest. And there can be no true rest to the soul, till it
be in God; it will be in trouble and anxietie; it will be perplexed in the
midst of all worldly things till it rest in God, who is the center of the
soul, the center of true rest; as the Father said. Cor nostrum factum estate,
and inquietum est, donec requieseat in te: Our heart is made, oh Lord by thee,
and it will never be at rest, till it return to thee.

As it is in the circle, the circle is the perfectest figure of all other
figures in the world, and this the Mathematicians give to be the reason of it,
because it begins and ends, and the points do meet together, the last point
meets in the first, from whence it came, and so we shall never be at rest, or
come to perfection, or satisfaction; till we return to our Original, till our
souls come to God, until God do make the circle, and we return to God, we
can never rest in our perfection.

SER. 3.
The third Sermon.
PSALM IV. VI. There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift
up the light of thy countenance upon us.


THE Point you remember was, That no worldly thing can make us happy; We
opened the Point, both concerning the Subject, what those things are that will
not make a man happy. In a word, we showed, that it was no created good
whatsoever, not the best, or quintessence of all, nor the most, and the
confluence of all together. Neither the intrinsecall goods of the mind, nor
the extrinsecall of the body, or estate, no nor all those that are more
excellent, not any pleasure to satisfy the body, nor any honor to satisfy
the mind, nor any other thing to satisfy both, whether friends or estate,
etc. none of those can bring a man true happiness.

No nor the confluence of many, or all of them together, although all were
concentred together in one, yet they would prove short of making a man happy.

But we added this caution. None of these, nor all of them without God can do
it.

And for the predicate, we did show, whether we considered, a natural or a
spiritual happiness; or a true and perfect happiness, they come short of
making truly happy. And for the proof, it was done by Scripture, and
experience: Salomons, and every ones experience show the Hoti of the Point that
it is so. And the Dihoti we showed thus: viz. That, that which makes happy
must give perfection, and satisfaction, which all worldly things cannot do.
And we made it appear by considering the nature of earthly things, and the
nature of man.

First, we showed, if we do consider the nature of worldly things, there will
be found wanting all the dimensions of happiness;

And secondly, man's nature is too capacious to be satisfied with worldly
things, which are narrow and defective.

We come now to the application of the Point, which I desired, and thought to
have finished the last time; and therefore I did cast it into a compendious
mould, so as it might have gone along with the other; time prevented me; and
now I shall resolve not to enlarge it, but to deliver it in the same compass,
and with the same brevitie, I then intended; partly because I find some
weakness which makes me not altogether fit to enlarge much; and partly,
because what ever may seem to be defective, or short in this place; there will
be sufficient opportunity in the next Point to bring it in, wherein we shall
treat of the possitive part of happiness, wherein it lies indeed, if it do
not lie in these worldly things to make us happy.

2. Application.
2.There be but three things in general which I intend to infer by way of
Use, and Application, out of the consideration of this divine Truth. The first
shall be for Instruction.

The second for Reproof. The third for Exhortation; which are indeed the most
general heads, which may help to regulate and guide our practice, to which
all Application tends.

1. Instruction.
1. For Instruction, briefly to touch upon that; for that is not the thing that
I intend.

1. It may convince the error of worldly Philosophers: We may here receive a
good principle, by which we may convince all the erroneous conceits, which men
are ready to fasten upon; and which do fasten upon men, many times ere they
are aware, we may see here the broad and wide error of all Philosophical
fancies concerning happiness. Convince the error of worldly Philosophers.
Augustine reckons up no less than 288. several opinions of several learned
Philosophers, that placed happiness, one in one thing, and another in another
thing; every one being different, and opposing one another, every one
contradicting what others had said, and being confident of his own. But as the
Apostle speaks of the Romanos in the like cause, Rom, 1.22. (...). i. e. The
conceit of their own wisdom, and their ambition made them fools, i. e. even
befooled them, and they grew infatuate. And indeed, this is a point, that it is
not to be expected, that the conceit of natural reason, or the natural light
of a man, should ever be able to guide a man steadily to. No marvel that they
did speak like blind men, like drunken men, and run in a labyrinth, in a
miss maze, and were not able to get out of it, having not the lantern of the
light of divine revelation to lead them out. It is not worth the while to
speak particularly of them, I shall content my self only with a brief touch
of them.

We see all the opinions of Philosophers,and all their knowledge clean out of
the way, yea, and the wisdom of all natural men, is too shallow by far,
and all natural abilities, to come to show steadily wherein true happiness
lies. If nature could have done it, then the learned wits, and wisdom might
happily have found it out. But they could not, they groped in the dark, as the
Sodomites when they were stricken with blindness groped to find Lots door; so
they groped to see if by any means they might find out happiness, but they
had not light enough to do it.

In the second place, to mention that which is not so far out of the way; we
will not meddle here now with Philosophers.

Godly professors.
2. It may convince the error of godly Professors, and of those that pretend to
Christianity* and have more than natural men, being alienated from them in
their principles, yet even among them will appear a great deal of the
relics of that wound by that blow, which our nature received by our fall. In
this I shall bring the application nearer to our selves. We may see here our
blindness in this, by the experience of all Christians, and in some degree of
the best sort too.

Who is there that does not place too much in these worldly things? that has
not too high an esteem, and makes too precious account of them: and does not
retain many times in his mind, and nourish too, some secret thoughts at
least, that there is some extraordinary virtue in those things to make a man
happy. There be many caracters, that do evidently discover the relics of
this disease, that it is not fully cured, even where grace begun his work. But
I shall better touch on this afterward, and shall therefore pass it now.

2. Correct our judgments concerning the happiness of Others.
It may rectify our judgments concerning the happiness, first, of others;
secondly, of our selves.

1. Of others; We may learn to judge what is true happiness, and who are the
happy men. And if we will do this aright, we must not do it Populari
trutina, not weigh it in the balance of the world, but come to the balance of
the Sanctuary, and weigh things there, by which it will appear evidently, as
out of this truth that we have named, and treated on, who are happy, and who
not. We should not think those the happy men, that have either the excellency,
or the confluence of these worldly things: As when I see a man, suppose one
that has a very great estate, and has plenty of all in this world: Suppose he
has with that many perfections of body, as beauty, and strength: Suppose he
with all this has many excellencies of mind, that he is pregnant in
understanding, and admirable in many such abilities. We are ready as Samuel was
in the cause of David; we are ready to mistake the true happy man, and to set
the crown of happiness upon the wrong head, as he was ready to power out the
Oil upon Eliah the eldest son, and a goodly man, and least of all though
upon poor little David, that was an out cast and abroad in the field as a
Shepherd; and this man Eliah was a Gentleman, a Gallant home with his Father,
and he keeping his Fathers sheep; but God placed the crown upon him, though,
as I said Samuel was ready to mistake. And we are ready to do so in this cause
that we now speak of. But now this point will, and should help to rectify
and guide our hands aright in placing of the crown of happiness: and it
teaches us not to measure by worldly things, not to count those the happy men
that are the darlings of Fortune, that are lulled asleep in the lap of the
world, and are dandled there, and have all plenty, and abundance of worldly
things.

Our own happiness.
2. This may rectify our judgments concerning our own happiness; in this the
deceit is more dangerous. As this will help us to judge of others, so of our
selves: we should not therefore (if we will be true to this Point, and do
remember it well) be in danger to bless our selves, and sooth up our selves,
as though we were in estate of happiness, when things go smoothly with us. I
beseech you to remember this present point, and keep the truth of it in your
minds, that it may be a charm against all enchantmens in this kind, that do
fascinate our minds, and bewitch us with the things of this world: Do not
think the rich man, or the honorable man, or the wise man, that because he
has these indowments, therefore he is happy; not you your selves if you have
them. Deceive not your selves, your happiness has not in these things;
although you are rich, and witty and beautiful, etc. these are indeed great
things, but these make not the man* do not think so, as to befoole
yourselves, and not look out after the maine. It is an observation, a man were
better be deceived in the dark, than have a false glimmering light, because
the confidence of the one will make him careless and so fall; whereas
otherwise he would weigh more how he goes, and ponder every step
carefully, and so avoid the danger. A man were better be in a bad and blind
estate and condition, than in such a condition, as has a kind of glimmering of
happiness, which keeps him off from the true happiness, and makes him run
many times upon the rock of true misery, out of a false conceit, that he is
already in the state of happiness. But of these things I have spoken enough
for the present.

2. Use. Reprehension of.
As we have something here for the rectifying of our judgments in the point of
happiness; so in the second place, this affords matter pregnant enough of
Reproof and Reprehension; to reprove the practice of many men in the world. I
will first name the practices, and then a little unmaske the pretenses, by
which men think they have a nooke to run out at, and think that this truth,
does not touch them with any just reproof.

The practice of worldly men
1. The practices of worldly men. It is clear enough that all worldly men that
are made up of dirt, and who carry about them the curse of the Serpent. Upon
thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat. They are like the woman in
the Gospel that had a spirit of infirmity for so many years that grew crooked
downward, toward the earth. These are worldly men, men that do mind the
things of the world only, which makes them grow crooked, downward; who make
it their great work, and only study, because they place the only happiness
in it; and so spend and ravell out all their time, and spinne out all their
bowels for the purchasing, and the getting of worldly things. They are clean
out of the way, and mistake foully as the Father speaks; Vitam beatam quarunt
in regione mortis. It is a foul mistake to look to find heaven in hell;
happiness in misery; such are they that mind nothing but worldly things. And
they are clearly to be reproved.

Of Godly men.
2. The practices of the godly men here reproved. There are many that do not
only pretend to godliness, but do participate (it may be in some degree) of
godliness, that are blame worthy too. If our happiness lie not in worldly
things, as it does not, why then do godly men soul their hands, and disparage
their names, in being so greedy in their pursuit of these worldly things; in
being too having, and taking too much delight and contentment in them, and
being infinitely grieved at the loss of them; and so for all other the
symptoms which argue an adherency of the soul to them. It argues a root of
bitterness, in them, in some degree, and that they place more happiness in
these worldly things, then God would have them, or then he ever did: for,
every man does proportion his care in seeking after any thing, according, to
his estimation of the conjunction of that thing which he seeks after, with
his happiness; happiness being the end of all a man's aims. He would not
mind over much, or be greedy overmuch of any thing, but that there is a
secret estimation in a man's breast, that it is very near alyed, and of very
near kin to his happiness. Now it is clear and evident amongst us, that
there is this fault even in godly men, that they do too much lick up the
dust, and do too much groape after worldly things, and set too great a price
upon them, and therefore the reproof reaches to them also. I may well make
use of that which Chrysostom said sometime, that if he were the fittest in the
world, to preach a Sermon to the whole world gathered together in one
congregation, and had some high mountain for his pulpit, from whence he might
have a prospect of all the world in his view, and were furnished with a voice
of brass, a voice as loud as the trumpet of the Arch-angell, that all the
world might hear him, he would choose to Preach upon no other Text, then that
very one, even in this Psalm, O mortal men how long will ye love vanity; and
follow after leasing; those deceitful things of the world which promise
happiness, when they cannot make it good. It is that which would make a Sermon
of a general reproof to all the world, and come home to every one.

Pretenses there.
2. But now to come to the second thing I propounded, which I will but briefly
touch on. Besides those Practices, Men have pretenses to excuse themselves upon
some fair colors, and such possibly may be in them yet for all these
pretenses we may otherwise discern well enough, that they place their
happiness too much of it, at least in these worldly things, yet that they may
not deceive themselves we will examine them.

The best plea of all is, that they do but make conscience of their duty, we
are to seek these worldly things in some measure, because God appointed every
one to do it, and the hand of the diligent shall make rich. God has made us
our own executioners, our own instruments, to be fabirs fortunae in some
sense; to be servers of our selves, and to help our selves with the
necessaries of this life. And the consideration of a man's charge and family,
and estate, and such like, will afford a man plausible glosses, and probable
arguments to defend themselves, even those that are most deeply tainted with
this poison, and guilty of this fault, yet think to wind out of all reproof,
and escape the blow thereof with such fair pretenses.

But briefly in a word for answer (for I intend not to sift things to the
branne, and to prosecute them so close) in a word therefore for answer, I shall
give but a touch.

There be two things that I desire every one to consider, against all their
pretenses, beside one thing which I desire may be considered in general.

I desire no man would deal with me, or with any other that should call on
them, to take heed of immoderate love of worldly things, or an immoderate
prosecution of them, I say not deal with us, as many will deal with man: for
though men have no such art as to enter into the hearts of men, men have not a
window to look into the breast, and see the secrets of his heart, and thoughts.
I am contented to conceive so charitably of you, and charitably to interpret
and excuse, except I see the failing be over gross, if it be not extravagant,
and exorbitant, I will heartily make the best construction: But remember that
besides man, whom thou may put off with words (because he has no such art
to see thy inwards) yet thou have a God to deal withal, and thou have a great
Tribunal, at which thou must give up a reckoning; thou have a conscience
within thee to deal withal, which will once be awakned. And though I be not
able to convince thee, that thou do too much poize toward, and post after
worldly things, that thou go beyond the golden line of mediocritie; yet if
thy own conscience do accuse thee, consulting with the Word of God, and those
many passages in it which point out this sin; that if there be any truth and
propriety in the Word, all those passages fly in thy face, and proclaim thee
guilty, that thou art guilty of this sin; I say, think not because now thou
can put me off with such flimme-flamme excuses, thou can put off God too;
then daube not with God, and thine own conscience, with whom it is to no
purpose to dissemble; this being premised in general, I shall add but these
two things in particular.

There should be a vast difference.
1. First of all, consider that there is a very vast, and wide, and broad
difference, between those affections which we should have to God, and those
which we are allowed to use for the world, and worldly things: There is a vast,
and broad difference between the excellency of the one, and the vanity of the
other; and therefore there should be as vast, and broad a difference in our
prosecutions, and affections toward the one, and toward the other; and if
there be not a very broad difference, that thou do infinitely more pursue
after God, and after heave^ly things (which are infinitely of more worth than
all worldly things) than thou do after any worldly thing. If there be so nice
a difference that thou can hardly distinguish and discern, which is
predominate in thee, or which thou do most look after; in which thou placest
the greatest part of thy felicity, thou art guilty; for it cannot be right,
unless there be a broad difference; because it is but reasonable* If God be so
infinitely transcendent above all these worldly things; and go so far beyond
all those earthly things, as that they are all but as the dust of the balance
in weight against God: Then if thou do seek these things, and mind these
things, and do do it any way as much as thou do God, it is certain thou
do it inordinately and exorbitantly. And therefore to end this, I would
desire every one, but to try their consciences and their hearts, and see
whether they can discern such an infinite distance in themselves, between the
price they set upon God, and heavenly things, and the prosecution after them,
and that price they set upon, and the prosecution they do make after worldly
things; if they do not find the difference wide, but that their hearts do
bend and warpe too much toward worldly things, it is certain he is guilty of
this fault which I now tax, and the words do meet with him in a just
reproof, and he has need to be humbled for it.

2. As there should be so wide a difference, so broad a difference between
those two, that it should be written in legible caracters; it may be in a
palliating way onemay say. I will dare any man in the world to say, if be can,
I am as much for the world as for God; I know there is a broad and a wide
difference to be put between them, and a man shall wrong me to think I bring
the world in competition with God: when as alas, all these pretenses will be
but as Fig Leaves to cover him. As suppose now in an other case, I should
palliate an inordinate love to the maid, more than to the wife, and yet the
wife deserve more of love; this is a great suspicion, for there is a great
deal of difference, that is between the one, and the other, if I should not
make a broad difference between the one and the other, I might be suspected;
and I will assure you, how ever a man may be free from the sin, yet he
cannot be free from the suspicion of an adulterous mind toward these worldly
things, if there be not a vast distinction, and a broad difference in our
carriage toward the world, and toward God. Now I say, as there should be this
wide difference observed in our prosecution of the world, and of God: so there
might be, There may be a clear evidence.
and are means to fetch men out of their holes and fences that they have, and
clear evidence to convince, that there is a great deal of exorbitancy, and
disorder in this kind, in the carriages of the greatest part of men in the
world, and even of Christians too, that profess themselves to be such, and
indeed such as are really such, but are not aware of this remainder of
corruption that still adheares unto them; especially since it comes disguised,
and covered with some fair excuse, or vizard. I say there be many evidences,
If we consider.
that might clearly evince it to a man, that will deal truly with his
conscience, and not captiously, as one man will deal with another. He give but
a brief touch.

1. Examine thy expense of time; Expense of time.
what time do thou bestow upon God, and what time do thou bestow upon the
world. Certainly a man that loves his wife will not bestow more time in
conversing with an other woman, it will be very dangerous and prejudicial to
his credit and reputation if he do: and he can hardry wash his hands from
shroud suspicion. And in this case it is so likewise, if a man spend all his
time, or the most of it, in the prosecution of the world, and worldly things,
and grudges at a little time for God; six days are not enough for the
prosecution of the world, and one day too much for looking after God, and after
heavenly things; is not this a sign of the hearts going out inordinately after
the world? But I know there may be many difficulties in this, and some that may
be justly objected against this character, and therefore having given this in
general, I pass it.

Pains.
But secondly, an other thing there is, that may come a little closer, viz. the
pains we take, especially with the intention of the mind laid together:
admit it be necessary, and Gods own appointment, and the thing requires it,
that no time must be spent otherwise: for the great Publican of the world
(Sleep) takes up much tribute of a man's time, and takes out a great portion:
And the necessary reparation of this rotten cottage of ours; meat and drink
take a great deal of our time. And the labor of a man's particular vocation;
all these must needs take up a great deal more of a man's time for the world,
then a man does immediately for the service of God, and without blame: well,
suppose that.

Thoughts and cares.
But now examine in the next place the proportion of thy pains, especial with
the concurrence of thy affections, and thy heart, which has the most full gale
of thy pains, and which art more eager upon. I say, if thou do neither give
God the principal of thy time, nor bestow the greatest part of thy time upon
him, yet do thou give him the principal of thy heart and affections; that
though thou art necessitated to converse more about the world, then for God;
why, yet if thou do it more eagerly, and with a greater eagerness of
affections toward God; and thy heart does infinitely more prize, and love, and
esteem of God, and goes with more alacrity and cheerfulness, and more
heat, and delectation of spirit, when thou art about God and about heavenly
things, than it does about worldly things, this may be some thing indeed; but
if there goes together with the flower of thy time, the eagerness of thy
heart and affections toward earthly things, that thy heart is corrupted with
them, and thy judgment, and thy estimations drawn after them, and thou art
builded more on them, and pleased more with them; and in a word all thy
affections run more to them; than to heavenly things: I cannot see then how
there can be any color of excuse. Now therefore examine thy self in this, and
do thou deal truly with thy self, and by that we may discern a greater
stream running for the world, than for God, and so a great disorder in the
affections.

And lastly, it is an evident character, Neglect of.
that there is an inordinate love going a whoring after the world, and of
placing our felicity in them, more than we should do, and more than we do in
God; when we can facilitate and further our prosecution of these worldly
things with a neglect of our duty to God: Duty to God.
when I can neglect my duty to my God, when I can neglect my duty to my own
soul; To our own soul.
when I thus run after the world, that I care not if I do trample upon God
in the way, and trample upon Christ in the way, upon my own soul, upon
heaven, and all in the way, so that I can make so much the more speed toward
these worldly things. This is an evident sign that my heart is addicted to
them, and that my heart is over-growne with a desire of them. Mark this, and
if thou find, I say, that thou can dispense with thy duty toward God, or
any service of his for the prosecution of thy worldly estate; if thou find
that thou can dispense with thy duty toward thy neighbor, because thou will
not diminish thy estate, or that thou can dispense with thy duty toward thy
own soul, neglect the spiritual edification of it, because it does take thee
from the prosecuting of the world; This is an evident sign that thy heart
runs out wonderfully inordinatly after them.

Exhortation.
3. Use. In the last place, let me add briefly the sum of the Exhortation:
which (if time had not prevented) I would have propounded more particularly.
The exhortation shall be to press this duty upon us, that we knowing our
felicity does not consist in these worldly things, would regulate and square
our selves by this rule.

I will briefly touch these two things. I will briefly touch.


1. The duties that may be inferred upon the consideration of this Point.

2. The motives that may be used for the enforcing of those duties upon us, to
set us upon the performance of them.

1. Duty.
Now there be diverse duties that might be inferred very naturally upon the
consideration of this truth, and are worthy to be learned. As

1. Abate for the world; Abate for the world.
If this be so that our happiness does not consist in these worldly things.
Let us learn then to abate our selves something in our eagernes toward the
world, that we would not be so eager for it.

Tanquam hac sit nostri medicina doloris: follow not the world as though that
would cure our malady, and heal our misery, and bring a happiness to our
souls: and therefore they that have such erroneous thoughts, and find
themselves convinced; let them show it by abating of their eagerness toward
these worldly things.

1. Abate our actions, Action.
the eagerness of them; learn hence not to be so busy, not so early and so
late, and so thoughtfull, and so carefully for, and about these worldly things,
not to be so anxious in our spirits for them. I say, learn hence to abate our
actions: not to incumber our selves too much with worldly things, do but as
our duty and conscience require, so far as we are bound by the rule of duty,
to provide for our selves and family, do it in duty and inconscience to God,
but do not over-doe it, do not too much, trouble not your selves about too
many things as Martha did.

Affections.
2. Abate at least, if not our actions, if we cannot forbear any one of our
actions, but our charge and calling require it; yet I say, abate in our
affections, cool our affections toward these things, that though I do use
them for necessities sake, yet my heart longs to be freed from this necessity:
O when shall my mind be perfectly freed from these things! and O when shall
that happy time be, that God will free me from the burden of these worldly
things, that I may not soil my soul still with these worldly things: that I
may not converse in this present world always; but that I may live continually
in the enjoyment of that blessed presence of God, and behold his face
continually, and exercise my self in nothing but serving and praising of him,
and having nothing else to do! Abate at least your affections, do not so much
esteem these worldly things, and this world, though you cannot leave it, yet
despise all these worldly things, and contemn them, and trample them, and have
them under our feet, as God has given them to us, so esteem them, but as in
the Psalm 8. He has put all things under our feet: In respect of worldly
things, it is true of the godly man; in this sense it is true, I say, in regard
of Christians, they have them all under their feet; but worldly men have them
as a crown on their head, and they esteem it so; but indeed it is a burden,
that presses them down, that they cannot arise in any noble thoughts; and
therefore to prevent this, abate your affections toward these worldly things.

3. Learn to abate your estimation, Exhortation.
or else these cannot do it. For so long as we nourish such an erroneous
thought, that this is the only happiness, Ministers may talk what they will;
they disparage riches and honor, etc. that have it not themselves; they
disparage pleasure, that have not been acquainted with it; but yet when all is
done, happiness lies in these things. For so long as there is such a root of
bitterness within us, such a corrupt opinion, it will not only overflow like
the gall, to imbitter, and poison our affections, but also our actions; and so
all things will be disordered. As in a Watch, if the spring wheel be out of
frame, all runs wrong, so if this be poisoned, all will be in danger: The
very spring of every thing in a man is a man's judgment, and if that be tainted
and corrupted, that will soon corrupt, and poison our affections, and our
actions: for there is a natural connection between them, and the intellectual
part is the guiding part of all the rest; and therefore if you would keep all
the rest aright, that your actions may be moderate, and your affections may be
moderate, you must labor to get, and keep moderate opinions, moderate your
apprehensions of them; think not too highly of them: but rather think on
these things, that may most of all disparage them, and block them, and take
off the beauty of them, and that glory that is on them, that may dazzle our
eyes. Learn to abate the world in our prosecution of it, in our actions, in
our affections, and in our estimations; this is the first thing that we may
learn from this.

2. If this be so, then as we must learn to abate what possibly we may,
abate our actions, Translate to better things.
affections, and estimations of this world: so in the second place, let us take
a hint from hence, to translate all these, above these earthly things, and set
them upon those things in which indeed our felicity lies. If felicity be not
in this world, and if happiness be not in these worldly things, it is no
inconsequent counsel.

But we have shown, it does not lie in these worldly things; it lies therefore
in some other, and we have mistaken the box all this while, and taken quid pro
quo, as the saying is. Then let us translate our affections, which we have
spilt upon these earthly things, and place them upon better things, in which
our felicity lies: translate them upon God, upon Heaven, God. Heaven.
Holiness.
upon Holiness: these are undoubted felicity, and the way unto it. The other
things of this world are nothing near the thing, happiness it self, no nor
the way unto it: but those are undoubtedly such, and therefore they are worthy
to possess, and inherit all those excellencies, of our judgment, and
affection, and actions* And the stream of them should run; currantly after
heavenly things. But I shall touch on these things more, when I come to the
next point.

3. Moderate.
Labor to moderate our joy and our sorrow; and moderate our hearts, and
compose them aright in many cases, which do depend upon this truth, and
principle; and for want of which many do oppress themselves, and afflict
themselves very unworthily, and undecently.

1. Learn then here first to moderate our grief and sorrow, in a double case.
Grief of.
First of want: Secondly, of loss.

1. Suppose we want these worldly things, Want.
let us not be over sorrowful, and hang down the head, because we are at a
low ebb in these worldly things. Remember this to moderate it, my felicity is
not in this thing, nor any part of it, no nor any way unto it. And therefore I
can spare them, and be without them, if God do think it fit: I can live well
without them I can well afford to want them, since I lose never a whit of my
felicity by them: It is neither annihilated, nor eclipsed by the want of them;
let us not therefore be overmuch cast down if we want them.

Loss.
2. Let us not be too much cast down for the loss of them: which is indeed the
worse; O that I had them once, that is a sad word, to think I had them once,
but now have lost them: It is more grievous to be stripped of what a man had,
then simply to be naked, to be stripped of all the enjoyment a man had, and took
some pride in, and wherein he thought himself happy, and afterward to be
brought to a low ebb from that, as the Prodigal was, to be brought to the
husks of the Swine; so far degraded from that enjoyment, and contentment a
man had before, this cuts more deep, and pierces the soul more grievously,
but yet this consideration may help to mitigate and moderate it, and compose
our hearts in this case: It is true I have lost, but I have not lost so much of
my blood, or my special happiness: no nor any thing that is essential, or
rituall to it. And may not a man comfort himself in such a case as this?
Suppose a man had been in travel upon the way, and had met with thieves, and
he had some loose money in his pockets, but had in a private place (which the
thieves were not aware of) some precious jewel, and the thieves should come
and take away only the loose money, and not find his jewel, would that man
rejoice or be sad think you, when he is gone from the thieves: would he be sad
and hang down the head, because he had lost it may be two or three shillings,
or rather be thankful and glad; that he had saved his jewel. And so it is in
this case, that man has no reason to be sad, though he lost any worldly thing,
if he lose not part of his happiness. It is not my jewel that I have lost, it
is only something that did fit loose about me, a little worldly thing it may
be, which was not connaturall with me, but more easy to be separated from me,
and so without a diminution of happiness. This might help to compose, and to
bring the heart in a right frame, when I consider I have lost something, but it
is but a poor thing, that is not any part of my happiness.

2. This may teach us to moderate our envy, Envy.
we are ready to repine at those that have more then we; and when we find any
want in our own estates, we can cavil with God for others; because they are
higher, or better then we, therefore God deals unkindly with us, and we begin
to repine at this, and many times the heart is ready to miscarry in such an
estate, with such childish thoughts. But now this point will rectify a man,
and tell him, he has no reason to envy him for having that which is so poor,
that it makes not a happy man. Alas poor miserable man, that has never so
much! I think with sad thoughts of him, when I consider this man is counted a
happy man by the world, but yet he is far from it, being he is far from
God, I should do well rather to pray for him, and commiserate him, then envy
such a man, and I should rather study how to direct him to follow that which is
right happiness, and that be might not any longer deceive himself, and please
himself with glass, better then pearls.

Delight of fruition.
3. This should teach us to moderate our delight in the fruition of these
worldly things. Does it become Christians to bathe themselves in pleasures, and
delight and solace themselves in these worldly things: as Nebuchadnezzar did in
his palace, in his Babel, is not this Babel that I have built? No certain,
the delight of a Christian should not run out in excess in the use of these
worldly things; because he has plenty of them: But he should labor to
moderate and keep himself within his bounds, because though these be good,
yet they be so inferior, that his happiness does not consist in them, and he
should delight in those things that do conduce toward his happiness, rejoice
not in these things; but rejoice, as our Savior says, in this, that your
names are written in the Book of life. That is, that a Christian should
delight in, and rejoice himself in, and bless God for, and not run into the
same excess of riot, in the use of these worldly things, as worldly men do,
that think these things a great part of their happiness, and think to piece
out their happiness by getting of these things. Far be it from the thoughts
of a Christian to be so earthly minded, that has more noble things to delight,
and solace himself in.

4. Desire of possession.
This should teach us to moderate our desires after these worldly things, and
the possession of them, not to hanker too much after them: much less let our
souls pine away for grief, because we cannot have them, but be of his mind.

Nec, Palma negata macrum, donata reducit opimum.

We must resolve not to be puffed up as a bubble, with a child's blast in a
Wallnut-shell, when he has in it a little soap; we should not be puffed up,
when we have great things in this world, nor cast down when they are low, nor
greedy in our prosecution of them; but be contented to use fair plea, and a
conscientious course for the getting of them, and if I cannot have them so, I
will rest contented with Gods will: these things we should learn in general
from this Point. And there be but two particulars that we should all learn
from hence.

1. To be so far from cleaving to the possession of these things, Communicate.
and having a longing desire after them. That we should be willing upon this
principle, to communicate those things that God has bestowed upon us, unto
others: and not as the Serpent, keep the golden apples, and neither to eat
any our selves, nor suffer others to eat them: It is an allusion of a Fable;
but yet may have a truth in it, as it has reference to the Cherubin that
keeps the garden of Paradise; so we should not hover over our estates, and
cannot endure any other to come near them, as the Hen over her chickens, that
is ready to fly in the face of those that come near them: but let us be
communicative, our happiness does not consist in the having of them, so much as
in the using of them well, dispensing and giving them to others, that is the
way by which all these worldly things may be conducible to our happiness: It
is not the mere possession of them, but the right using of them, that makes
them instruments of our happiness: As the Apostle, exhort rich men not to
trust in uncertain riches, but to be fruitful in good works; because, as I
said, our happiness does not depend upon the having of them, but upon the
right using of them; God has made us but dispensers, and if we discharge our
fidelity in them, we shall advance our happiness, but otherwise we shall
advance our wickedness.

2. As we may be content to communicate, Abdicate.
so also to abdicate them: Let us be content to be so far from cleaving to
those worldly things, that we do not only Collocare, as the Father speaks,
but projicere, seeing our happiness does not lie in them; let us, I say, be
contented not only to communicate them where necessity requires, but even
projicere in some cases to cast out all, as they did, viz. the Disciples in an
other case, They came, and did lay down all their estates at the Apostles
feet. As suppose now in times of persecution, rather to part with all than
God, my happiness lies not in them, and I will rather than I will part with
God, and with a good conscience, say farewell to all the world, and to all
worldly things; my happiness lies not in them, but my happiness lies in God
and in a good conscience; I will rather therefore justly part with all, yea,
and throw away all, rather than part with that which is dearer and better, and
more conducible toward my happiness.

2. For the motives, in a word briefly, they are taken

1. Motives. Consider. Vanity of the creature.
From the consideration of the vanity of the creature, in all these worldly
things; there is not enough to give any delight, or satisfaction to a man: they
are of no worth, if we do but well weigh the emptiness of them.

Condition of man.
2. If we consider the condition of man; Man is made of a double matter,

Mortal.
There is first the baser piece of man, he is mortal in regard of his body, his
breath being in his nostrils, he is but a blast, and he is gone; and should we
seek too much after those things, that will do us good but only for this
life, this short life. The shortness of this life should make us not to
esteem so much of these worldly things. We are but travelers here; and as I
have said sometime, a staff in a travelers hand may be serviceable to him,
and a good companion to help him on his way: but a bundle of staves may be a
burden unto him, and a hinderance in his journey: and so a competencie may be
a good help to us in our way, but too great an estate proves a clogge and a
hinderance, in the expedition of our way.

Immortal.
Again, as man in regard of his body, is a baser piece, and very frail, and
not worth the while to be looked so much after, so he is a noble piece in
regard of the soul which is immortal; and it is no way suitable to a man's
excellency of nature for him to set his mark lower than immortality.

Excellency of duty.
And lastly, Consider the excellency of the duty: it will free us from many
temptations, and fit us for all duties and services toward God: who knows not
that the too much thought, and care for the things of this world, choakes all
the good feed of Gods Word in the best of us; as it is in the Parable; and
breeds a thousand miseries, and distractions, which (if a man would learn to
moderate his prosecution, and desire of the world, and worldly things) he
might be free from, and his soul exquisite in the service of God.

SER. 4.
The fourth Sermon.
PSALM IV. VI. There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift
up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE are upon the Point of Happiness, and to show wherein it consists; we
have already dispatched one branch of that, viz. the negative, which was, That
our happiness consisted not in the things of the world: It is not the
quintessence of any, nor the confluence of all worldly things can make a man
happy. There now remains the second Branch concerning happiness, wherein it
lies, viz. the affirmative part, here expressed in this prophetical petition
which the Psalmist makes to God. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us.

I shall propound the Point thus (and this will be the third Point in order)
God and his favor, 3. Doct.
the light of his countenance shining on us, is that excellent good, which can
alone, without the help of any creature, without any created thing, make a man
truly, and perfectly happy.

That is the sum of the Point: I shall not spend much time in the explication
of it, only briefly to point out some things.

There be two things, which I shall but touch upon for the Explication of the
Proposition.

1. I will say something concerning the Subject of this Proposition.

2. Something concerning the Predicate.

For the Subject of this Proposition in effect it contains these two things.
Subject.


First, the Object of happiness, or the thing that makes happy materially.

And secondly, formally: I shall speak of it so, I say both Materially. and
Formally.


As the Schools do distinguish, though with some difference. Material.


1. For the material happiness of a man, wherein it lies; I express it (as
the other) generally, and so

1. God will make a man happy. God, according to his,
And I shall desire you to understand it (for I shall add no more concerning
that in this place, but God considered both essentially, Essence. Person.
and in the excellency, of his nature; and personally in the distinction of
his persons, God in Christ, and God in the Spirit; none is to be excluded, but
there is a concurrent influence of the whole Trinity, and of every person in
it, that contributes toward our happiness.

His favor.
2. And I express an other part of the Object, when I say the favor of God,
here noted by a phrase that is tropicall enough, and yet I shall spend time in
vain to open the trope, for I suppose it is commonly understood. Lifting up
the light of his countenance upon us, is as much, as casting a favorable
aspect toward and upon us; and being (in a word), gracious and favorable unto
us. For as when a man is well pleased with any, you know it is one testimony of
his love, to cast a sweet and lovely countenance upon him. Super omnia vultus
Accessere boni, as he accepted it: the Host was wonderful careful and
solicitous to give the guests content, but that which he noted as the
principal, was Super omnia vultus Accessere boni: her affable carriage and
good countenance. It is not only the blessings of God which makes us happy,
although God should heap many blessings upon us, but it is especially a good
look from God, that proceeds from a gracious and a loving disposition of God
toward us; that puts a price and a beauty upon the blessings themselves. It is
an elegant story or observation which Xenophon tells of Artabazus a great
courtier in the Court of Cyrus: King Cyrus gave him a cup of gold, and there
was an other courtier in presence, that was more intimate, and more near in
favor than he, viz. Chrysantas; to whom, though the King gave nothing at that
time, yet he kissed him, in token of special love; which when he had done,
Artabazus complained, and wittily said, the cup you gave me was not so good
gold as the kiss you gave Chrysantas. It is so in this case; it is not any
gift of God, especially those outward things, that is so great a sign of Gods
favor, as the light of his countenance: A good look is a special testimony
of his real affection, which those things are not. For no man knows either
love or hatred by these things.

And though there might be many other expressions used, yet I conceive this as
real and proper a note, to show wherein our happiness in God consists, as
any: viz. his favor, and good will, and good pleasure toward us, because that
comprehends all the rest, and if we have that, that is it that interests us in
all the rest of the excellencies, and the blessings of God, hereby they come to
be all ours, and we are interested in them all, so far as they may make for
our good. Thus of the material part.

2. But then there is an other thing that I intimated in the propounding of the
Point; and that belongs more properly to the formal part of happiness:
Formal.
which I comprehend in two things.

There is nothing of it self what ever that of it self can make a man happy,
no not God himself, nor his favor, except it be ours, and we be interested in
it; which I express by these two things, Possession. and Fruition.


Possession.
1. We must be possessed of God, and possessed of his favor, than is, be in
such a state and condition, that these things do belong to us, and are ours,
and we are in conjunction with them: Now in a word not to dilate in either of
these, because the next Point will give me a more proper hint of that: we
come to the possession of God and his favor, to have interest in that, so as
we may challenge him as ours, and look upon him as ours, by these two things
laid together.

Vocation.
1. When God does make us his own by effectual calling, and creates or
renewes, or repaires his own Image in us, and sets his own stamp and
superscription, or impression upon us.

Covenant.
2. When he does enter into covenant with us, and takes us into confederation
with himself (which is a thing resulting from the former and depending upon
it) that we are in covenant with God, in league with him; which conjunction is
expressed by diverse things in the Scripture, as a marrying of us to himself,
and other things that import a near union and league: but I shall content my
self in the generality, and only desire to point at things.

So that now, when a man comes to be effectually called, that God translates
him from the state of sin to the state of grace, from being the sons and
daughters of the old Adam, he ingrafts them into the new Adam, bearing his
Image, as the state and condition is thus altered, so upon this, God looks on
them as friends, Abraham my friend, as confederates, as in league with him;
that there is a combination between God, and a Christian: why they that are in
this condition, they are in the possession of God, and of his favor.

2. But then to add but one word more concerning the second branch. viz.
Fruition.
The fruition of Gods favor: that is, that which is requisite likewise,
toward that compleatnesse of happiness, that is, to be sucked out of God: we
must enjoy him as well as possess him, and in that fruition lies the very
upshut and crown of happiness.

Now this fruition, not to enlarge on it, for there is a more proper place for
it (though it cannot altogether be omitted here, without some wrong to the
Point) It consists for my present purpose in these two things.

viz. In a direct act, and in reflexive act.


I shall add no more.

Direct. Through. Donatives.
1. A direct act, is that intercourse of favor on Gods part, a donative (if I
may so speak) on Gods part; and duties on man's part, when there is a communion
maintained between God and us, and there is a sweet intercourse and
fellowship between God and a man's soul. As for example. God gives us the
favor (to mention no more) of his Ordinances; that we in joy his Ordinances,
and he walks before us in them; and we have his Religion established among
us: we have his Word, the Scepter of his Kingdom set up among us; and we
have the rest of his Ordinances; God does not debar us of those, but shows
us his favor, and the light of his countenance, in lifting up of these, in
holding out this golden Scepter to us, and keeping the doors of grace open to
us, and so maintaining a reciprocal commerce of heaven and earth on his own
part. And on our parts we do likewise maintain it, when we answer God in
Duty, Duties.
in serving God according to his Ordinances, and in meeting of him in them: the
soul and the spirit of a man giving God the meeting there (as I may say) and
so maintaining that communion, and fellowship with him in a humble, and
reverent hearing of the Word of God, and in a hungering and thirsting after it,
with fervent, and frequent prayers, still maintaining the trade and commerce
between earth and heaven, by those duties that must return from us, and on
our parts: and so all other exercises of any spiritual grace, whereby we
express our duty toward God, belong as parts, and branches, to the
maintenance of this commerce, and communion with God, and so, that we enjoy
himaccording to the state and condition of this life.

2. Reflective.
But then there is a second thing wherein the fruition of God lies, and that is
a reflexive act, which (though it be not so absolutely necessary to the state
of happiness, for a man may be in the state of happiness, and in a good case
and condition, and yet not be able to exercise it, and put it out in a
reflexive act) but for the sweetness, and the taste of happiness, and for the
complete fruition, and enjoying of it, it cannot be without this reflexive
act: that is (that I may in a word tell my meaning by it) when a man does
reflect upon what God has done for him, and what God has done by, and in him,
and enabled him to do toward God; and by it he is able to understand, and
see, and take notice that God has dealt mercifully with him, that he is Gods,
and God is his: and that he can see his own happiness, and see his own
condition, and so to delight himself, and to joy in God, and in his goodness.
In one word, to enjoy, imports no more than to joy in a thing, and to enjoy God
is one principal thing that makes up the sweetness (at least) of happiness;
when we joy in God upon the sense and apprehension of a man's own blessed
estate and condition. For as I have said sometimes, Non est beatus, esse qui se
non putat, he is at least completely, and in a sense no happy man, that does
not think himself to be so, and does not see himself to be a happy man, and
does not take notice of his own happiness. I say though it be not of absolute
necessity to the essence of happiness, yet to the rituall perfecting, and
tasting of the sweetness of happiness it is necessary. There be many
Christians I know that are not able thus to reflect, and see their own face,
and condition, though they have a right, and title to happiness, and are in a
real communion with God, and do maintain directly their duty with God in
sincerity; yet there may be some clouds that keep off this reflection, and
something that takes them off (at least) from that sweetness, that they might
take in this. I shall add no more concerning this first part that I
propounded, viz. to open the subject of this proposition, which contains the
object, both materially, and formally of happiness.

2. I shall but speak a word neither, briefly, Predicate.
concerning the predicate, the thing that is affirmed concerning God and his
favor, in this proposition: which in a word briefly, contains two things,
that were intimated in the proposition, as affirmed concerning God and his
favor in relation to our happiness.

1. In general, this is tha^ excellent good, General.
which answers to this question, in the Text, Excellent good.
Who will show us any good? The great good that conduces toward the happiness
of a man, it is God and his favor, that excellent and transcendent good.

2. And a little more particularly, Special. According to.
this is that beatificall good, that will make a man happy.

in regard of all the degrees of happiness. and in regard of the manner.


First, sufficiently for the degrees; Degrees.
he does bring a man to the true happiness, and to the perfect happiness, to
the real happiness, Beatificall. God in life.
and to the royal happiness; only this is the difference, all communion with
God, that is in truth, does interest a man in the state of happiness; but
there is a difference in that communion, and so proportionably, there will be a
difference in the degrees of happiness.

1. Present, truly, real.
There is a communion that we have with God, and a conjunction with him, even
in this life, I mean all that are his by faith. Future, perfectly, royal.


2. There is a communion, and a conjunction which we expect in another life,
which is by sight.

1. We are now (though joined to the Lord yet) in some respect absent from the
Lord, in the land of our pilgrimage here; wherein we have some beams, some
glimpses, some tastes of the sweetness of the light of Gods countenance,
though not in full measure: But yet so, that even those tastes are such as do
possess a man of a true and real happiness, not an imaginary happiness,
which worldly men have, viz. their own dreams, and fancyes in the possession
of some worldly things, but indeed that which is truly, and essencially such,
and that which does deserve the name of happiness, and has the very nature
and being of it; that a man is in a good estate, for the maine substance,
though short in the degrees: God is so great a good, that even the enjoying of
him in such a manner as is possible for us here in this life, in this veil of
tears, in this absence from God; that enjoying of him here by faith, and those
tastes that we have of him, is enough to elevate, and raise our condition to a
state of true happiness.

2. But then as a lower communion with God, such as we have by faith here, does
bring a man to true and real happiness: so when we shall be exalted to a
higher degree, and a more near, and excellent communion with God in heaven by
sight, we shall attain the royal and perfect happiness, when we shall see
him face to face: Not in that rigid sense, or notion, that the School men have
so much written of, as though all a man's happiness lay merely in beholding of
the very essence of God, which is neither possible for us here, nor in another
life (I say) to behold Gods essence: and they themselves (as whosoever is
acquainted with them, must ingenuously confess, if he will speak the truth)
do exceedingly fumble in the business, when they come to it, and they are
troubled very much how to accommodate one difficulty: viz. How a man can
possibly comprehend the very essence and quiddity of God, and yet not
comprehend him, and in my opinion, it is an inexplicable difficulty: And it is
impossible for any nature created, not only for us men, but for the very
Cherubins in the state of glory to comprehend the very essence of God, so as it
is distinguished from his attributes, for the truth is, there is no proportion
at all between a thing that is finite, and a thing that is infinite, and
therefore it is impossible that our finitenesse should not only be able to
comprehend, but apprehend the intrinsecall essence of God. Neither is this
altogether the only thing, although it be a special thing that makes up our
happiness: Our happiness does not consist in being all eye, and beholding all
beauty, but in the participation of God in all his excellencies, and in the
fruition of all those which shall descend from him upon the glorified creature,
that is glorified in that state, and condition in every kind, whereof this is
but one, though it be a very maine one. But it is no wonder for men to advance
their own art, and for those to speak so highly of contemplation, who have
placed al in contemplation. But this only by the way.

(There is one thing more which I shall add but in a word) God, I say, and his
favor, is a man's happiness in every degree of happiness, according to our
degree of conjunction, the lower conjunction, by faith in this life, being a
true and real happiness: and the higher conjunction with God by sight, being
a perfect, and royal happiness, the top of all that which our nature is
capable of.

Manner. Singular.
2. So in the second place, in regard of the manner, God and his favor bring
happiness in the most excellent manner, as well as in the latitude of all
degrees. I express thus much concerning the manner.

First of all negatively, God without the creature: Without the help of the c
reatures.
God without all, or any of the creatures, he needs not the help of any; No
more then the Sun needs the help of a star, to make the light of the day;
The Sun alone can do it; nay, it is impossible the ordinary course of
nature, that the stars should shine while the Sun does: they are all silent
when he is in presence, and they all disappeare, when his glorious beams are
spread upon this Horizon. There is none of the creatures can be a contributer
to God; nor he needs not the help of candles to increase his sun shine, in
the conveighance and influence of happiness upon us. And if you please you may
consider a double state, and posture of the creature, in which it may be in
respect of us.

The creature may be either Absent from us; Or an Adversary to us.


1. The creature may be absent from us. Absent.
We may want those things that are within the compass of the creature. They
are subservient, though not sufficient to happiness, they help something
toward the completing of happiness; yet I say when all the creatures are
wanting. Behold I create light: God created it out of nothing; he needed not
the help of those creatures to produce happiness, and when they are all
wanting, God can do it without them: God can do it when there is the
conjunction of no creature with him: Though they be absent.

2. Nay suppose that they are not only absent, Adversant.
there is not only a bare privation of them: But suppose a violent opposition
(as it were) of all the creatures; the opposition of men, and devils, to show
their hatred in the withdrawing of all things, that might conduce toward our
happiness; though all the creatures set themselves against us, and conspire
against us: Yet the opposition of al could not make any interposition between
us and our happiness, where God is pleased to come, and bestow himself upon us.
That is the negative part, God without the creature; in what posture soever we
consider them, whether absent from us, or opposite to us: can make us happy, he
needs not the aid, and help of any in the business.

Himself alone.
2. Affirmatively, God himself alone can do it, himself; and himself alone.
He is All sufficient, and can confer this happiness, merely by
communicating himself.

I will add but one word more, and so come to the proof of the point. He can
do it (and it is concerning the manner too) as in the best manner, Sufficiently
so in the best manner absolutely. There is not only a sufficiency, but an
efficiency; He can do it not only sufficiently, but effectually. There is not
only a possibility and a sufficiency in God, that it may be done: But there is
an efficacy, Efficiently.
and such as is inseparable: and where God is so possessed, and enjoyed, there
is an actual conveighance of real happiness. Thus of the Proposition.

2. Now briefly for the proof of the point. It is not a thing absolutely
needful to multiply many places of Scripture in this case, in an especial
respect; Because it is the whole scope, and sum of all the Scripture, to
present God unto us in this excellency of being, and in this relation to our
happiness; that it is him alone that can do it. But yet to make it up, it
will not be amiss to point at some few places among the rest, which may give a
sufficient taste, and confirmation unto any of this truth; that he shall no way
doubt of it.

1. For the (...), it is proved.

1. By Scripture, and so.

1. By Testimony.

If you will but remember that charge, and direction that God gives by Moses
to the Priests, how they should bless the people of God. Numb. 6.25. and so
following. He prescribes a form of blessing the people, and directs them in
the very words, how they should do it. The Lord bless thee and keep thee,
the Lord cause his face to shine on thee, the Lord lift up the light of his
countenance upon thee, etc. Here is the very same thing, and the very same
phrase; and this text is a strong proof of this truth. For this were not a
sufficient intimation of blessing conveyed unto the people, if there were not
contained (all the blessings necessary to happiness) and expressed in the
blessing. And here is nothing expressed, but God and his favor, the shining of
his countenance, and that is that one, in which is comprehended all blessings,
and all happiness.

And the very same thing may be observed out of that form of salutation, that
the Apostles used frequently, Paul especially in all his Epistles: Grace and
peace be multiplied unto you. To omit all other variety of expositions, by the
grace of God, is intimated Gods love and favor, for the word (...) signifies
principally, that; I know it has some other signification; but the most
original and primitive signification of grace is the favor, and good pleasure
of God, which he casts toward a man: That is, that which is set in the front,
as the very spring, and fountain of all blessings, out of which it issues,
and in which it is contained. Peace, was formerly the salutation of the
Hebrews: and they intended to comprehend under it all blessings, because peace
is the mother of many: and the ancients were wont to paint Peace in the form
of a woman, with a horn of plenty in her hands, all blessings: And indeed
peace is a wonderful great blessing; and they were wont to comprehend by it,
as a principal thing, all blessings, and all good: when they wished peace unto
them. And indeed take peace in the latitude, and it fully comprehends all,
peace with God, and peace with a man's own conscience, besides all other
things, that are intimated by it. Now the Apostle adds in the New Testament
grace, to peace. Grace and Peace, etc. As implying that that is the very spring
and head of all peace, and of all blessings: There be abundance of expressions
in the Psalms, which do pregnantly set out this truth unto us. That in Psalm.
27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold his beauty;
and to inquire in his Temple: Some interpreters vary concerning what the
Psalmist aims at; I understand thus much in a generality, which is clear,
that he means a communion and fellowship with God: which is that one thing,
which if a Christian had, he needs desire no more: That we should all desire
and desire again, and be in love with, and that is enough even to satisfy us,
the fruition of God; and the beholding of him in his Ordinances, in his Temple,
to have correspondency and fellowship, and communion with him there. O God
vouchsafe us that! Now this is so infinitely sweet, that it was the Psalmists
only desire, and the sum of all his desires here, and therefore much more in
the Tabernacle of Heaven, which does make up the consummation and
compleatenesse of all our happiness. And so in the Psalm. 36.7. O how excellent
is thy loving kindness, O Lord! Therefore the children of men put their trust
under the shadow of thy wings: they shall be abundantly satisfied, etc. All is
placed in God, as if we could but get our share of God, get him, and then all
happiness is gotten. But more plainly in words to our purpose in the Psalm.
65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou chusest and causest to approach to thee,
etc. would you know who is the blessed man, and what is that thing that makes a
man blessed? It is he that God chooses that is happy; it is Gods love and
favor that makes happy, and our conjunction too, and communion with him. And
that place that I mentioned before in the former point, in Psalm 144.15.
Blessed are the people that are in such a case: But then he corrects himself,
it is not the sheep and the Oxen, nor the sons and daughters, nor all things
going merrily with them in this state and condition of life: He corrects
himself there. But this is the happiness, Happy is that people whose God is
the Lord: They that are in communion and covenant with him, there is the maine
thing in which our happiness, and blessedness lies.

2. This proved by example.

Example.
I will add but one place or two more, by way of example out of Scripture: and
that is all that I will insist upon, as being not altogether so necessary; but
only to come a little more close unto you, and to make it plain, that God
alone can make a man happy. To omit all others, there be two excellent examples
in Scripture that present this truth unto us.

That same in 1 Samuel 30.6, 7. of David being wonderfully distressed, the people
(says the story) whispered of stoning him: He had lost before, his wife, and
children, and his estate, and all his people were at this loss, and therefore
they that were among his troops began to mutiny, yea even those that were his
followers thought to stone him: but yet (the Text says) David comforted
himself in the Lord his God. It was that which stayed him, and supported him,
and furnished him with comfort in that great distress, he being able to see
his conjunction with God. For there is a double degree of comfort. There is the
consummation of comfort in heaven, when there is the consummation of
happiness. And there is a lower degree of it here, which sometime is called a
consolation; such as may be enough to comfort us here, and to make us hold up
our heads here, and that when all the creatures fail, and are all withered and
blasted, even here God affords this to David, in his greatest distress and
extremity.

And that which I have sometime treated on, that excellent place in Habbac.
3.17. The fig tree shall not blossom; neither shall fruit be in the Vines,
the labor of the Olive shall fail, etc. But yet though all these things fail
and decay, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will exceedingly joy in the God of my
salvation: which implies thus much; that God is so excellent a good, that they
that keep their hold in him, and keep close to him, it shall be a spring of
comfort, a fountain of happiness unto him in the midst of all adversity;
when all things desert, and forsake a man, and will afford a man no happiness
at all, this shall. Now briefly in a word, further for the (...) of the point,
for I will not dilate in any, but shall desire to pass over all things in as
compendious a way as I may, because I would finish the point.

Experience of the faithful.
2. Besides the testimonies in Scripture, it may be made more legible, and
visible, by considering the experience of the faithful, and of the Saints of
God in all ages. For as for those that are strangers to God, that never tasted
how good and gracious God is: and have not their eyes opened to see the beauty
and the excellency that is in God, they may hear all this discourse it may be
as a tale, and strange thing, that a man that has nothing but God alone, yet
should be said to be a happy man, it seems very uncouth to them, and they
hear it, and smacke a little at it perchance; but they understand it not, nor
find any relish in it; but the soul that is Gods, all that are godly, that
have had this conjunction with God, and this communion with him, may come in to
testify and verify this point.

Some more singularly, as the Martyrs, Singular.
which have willingly suffered the loss of all things, and yet suffered
nothing in their suffering; but so far have been elevated and raised with
the apprehension of this conjunction with God, and fruition of him, that even
the most bitter things, that could be laid on them, could make no print in
them: They laid down their bodies with as much willingness, and
chearefullnesse, when they were to dye for the name of Christ, as we lay off
our clothes when we go to bed, as a Father speaks. Particular.
And in many particulars which I could bring (if I had time and did intend it)
I could excellently make plain this truth. That of Theodoret (to name no more)
that found so much sweetness in this, even when he was on the rack, in the
midst of his torture, that he did not find any anguish in his torments, but a
great deal of pleasure: and when they took him down from the rack,
complained that they did him wrong in taking him down, and in ceasing to
torment him: For, said he, all the while that I was on the rack, and you
venting your malice against me, me thought there was a young man in white, an
Angel stood by me, which wiped off the sweat, and I found a great deal of
sweetness in it, which now I have lost.

In this experience we may see it clear, and evident, that God needs not the
help of any other thing, here was nothing in the world, to give any sense or
taste of happiness, unto poor Theodoret; but it was (...) it was merely a
conveighance of Gods own spirit and himself, unto his spirit and soul; that
supported him infinitely, and made his pains sweeter then his case, and more
desirable to him. And I know there is no Christian, that has had communion
with God, but in some degree, or other, has the same experience; especially
when God does make his comforts most sweet, and the sense of their happiness
at the highest; It may be when their outward condition is at the lowest. A
clear experiment to prove, that what God does by the creature, he can do
without. The comforts that lie scattered in them, are all concentred in him,
and he can conveigh them in the midst of the want of all.

2. Now in a word for the (...), the ground and reason of it. I shall give but
a brief touch, because of the consanguinity of this argument with the former,
and there has been something said in that, which will ease me in this.

There be three things (as I propounded in the former point) which I must
merely mention here.

Whether we consider the nature of happiness. or, Whether we consider the
nature of man: or, Whether we consider the nature of God: (for I shall only
add that as proper here in this place) you shall find it most true, that God
alone without all, or any of the creatures, is our happiness, and can make us
happy.

1. For the nature of happiness, Nature of happiness.
that requires two things, Perfection, and Satisfaction.


It must be perfect good, and a satisfactory good; and this you shall see most
fully in God: Requiring Perfection, Satisfaction
who is such a good, as the soul may rest upon, and rely upon.

2. If we consider the nature of man; Nature of man.
that requires such a good that should have all the dimensions of good; as
length, and breadth, and height, and depth: It must have longitude, and
latitude, and altitude, and profundity, or else it will not be commensurable to
the condition of the nature of man. Man is (at least his soul) appointed to be
an immortal creature, and therefore a happiness, that is less then
immortality, cannot be a happiness for a man: Now there will be no defect in
the length God is infinite and immortal (I shall touch it a little more
particular anon) but I say God is immortal, and without doubt can conveigh
that happiness which a man's nature requires.

And there will be no defect in the other neither, in the latitude: whatsoever
latitude, or largeness, the large heart of man does require, God and his
favor will come no way short to fi^l up that latitude; Neither will there be
any defect in the height, or profundity. A high, a noble, and sublime good, it
must be, that must make a man happy: that is of some noble nature, a solid and
substantial good, and all this concurres in God, and therefore

Nature of God.
3. To come to the thi^d, if we consider the nature of God, we shall find that
all these do concur in God, and that there is no deficiency at all; but that
God alone without the help of any creature, may make up our real and our
royal happiness. I propound this 1. A little more generally. 2. A little more
particularly.


General.
1. More generally. Divines use to observe, and it is traditionally taken out of
the Schools; that there are three ways of knowing God, All-sufficient.
which I will mention here by the way, because I shall have occasion to use
them hereafter.

1. Via causalitatis, of causality. 2. Via eminentiae, of eminency. 3. Via
Negationis, of negation.
They make them three, but I shall invert the order, and make them but one:
because there is but one way, whereby God does come to be known unto us, who
are his creatures, and that is Via causalitatis; if God had done nothing, or
made nothing, though he had been then in his own excellency of nature, and
enjoyed an infinite glory, and happiness in himself, yet he could not have
manifested it to others, when there were no creatures made, and so all the
manifestation of God had lain hidden; not hid in darkness, but hid in light,
in abundance of light. It is not for want of ability that he cannot make
known himself, but it is for glory. As the Sun cannot be beheld, not
because it is too obscure, but because it is too light, Excellens sensibile
destruit sensum. The object is too strong; it is so glorious an object that our
eyes are too weak to look fully upon it. Now the two other ways come in, and
subordinately help out that; because God has manifested himself to our
capacity, by his works of creation, and providence, which is the only way
that God manifests himself in nature, in every workmanship, in every work of
his: As the saying is, the meanest creature has aliquid Dei, and the best
creature has aliquid nihili. Every creature is a compound of perfection, and
imperfection; and therefore cannot possibly exactly manifest God. But there
must be the two other ways to supply it, and make up that manifestation, by
which the soul may be reduced to the understanding of God, by his works.

The two other come in, I say as ways to supply it.

First of all, all the excellencies that be in the creatures, are supposed to
be in God that did make them. It is impossible, as the saying is, that ullus
daret quod in se non habet. It is impossible that a man should give that to
another, which is not in himself, it is impossible that there should be any
good, or excellency in the creature, but that it must be in the Creator, and
that in a transcendent manner: which is the second way Via eminentiae.

But because every creature has aliquid nihili in him, that is his
imperfection, by which he comes short of God, and will not be full: we must
make it up with the other supply, and that is the third thing, Via negationis:
by removing all the imperfections, and setting them all aside, as the
concomitants of the creature, for God cannot see the creature, but with some
deficiency which he is free from. And therefore this follows as another way, I
say Via negationis, God has not these and these imperfections. But now to
apply all this and bring it home to my present purpose; As God may be known
these ways in general.

2. So in special, he may be known to be, and is our happiness, and can be
our happiness all these ways even alone.

1. He can be our happiness, and is our happiness, Via causalitatis, God is
omnipotent, and so if there be any thing that is necessary, or conducible for
our comfort, or happiness, it is all in his power to give, and so can be our
happiness. If creatures be necessary (and so far as they be necessary) if we
have God we are in the most certain way of having these and all other things.
For all lie in God as a Fountain and spring of all. Suppose there be a
necessity, that a man cannot be perfectly, merely happy, in the fruition of
God, formally; because man is a compound creature, a body as well as a soul:
yet God alone may be sufficient, because all is in him casually, he can produce
and command all other good, and all other creatures, as being Lord over all, if
we want fire, or clothes to warm us, and keep us from the cold; though for
the present we have not those, yet God can bring fire and clothes, and
command all the creatures to wait upon us, and serve our necessities. So that
if a man have nothing, yet in having God he has all; besides he has the
Lord of all; which can with a word, or a nodde, an intimation command not only
the creatures that are, but create creatures anew, if he would; If the whole
world now extant were not able to do Christians good; God were able to create
another world for their good: and furnish it with all creatures sufficiently to
do them good. As suppose a Christian were sick of some new disease, that all
the world had not a medicine for it; yet God can command one, or make a new
medicine; because all things are at his disposing, So that if we have God, we
have all in the case, and so an all sufficient good in God alone, and an
all sufficiency of happiness.

2. God is all via eminentiae, being able to supply the want of any creature;
as he can bring all the creatures to us, and give them us, which are necessary
for our good, and comfort: so he is able by way of eminency to supply the
defect of them, though he bring them not, he can do it by himself; and which
is most of all, he can give us that, without which nothing can be good for us;
that is, set our spirits, and hearts in a right frame; which if they were not,
they would spoil all we have, and they would make them rather an aggravation
of our misery, then any addition to our happiness. God only is able to make a
man so that he may be a fit subject of happiness, and capable of it; being
enlightened in his understanding, and rectifyed in his will and affections,
whereby he is able to esteem of things, and love things as he ought, and to
use them accordingly. So that whatsoever good may result from the creature for
our good, if we have God, we have it. For we have the Spring, and Fountain,
and Mint, in which he can cast all other good for us. For this is a certain
rule in Divinity, that God cannot do any thing by the creature, but he can do
the same without the creature. Nay more then so, the creature (although
present) cannot do any thing without the assistance of God; but he himself
can do it though no creature be present. Yea God is so eminent a good, that he
contains the transcendent excellency of every creature: For let any creature
be wanting, as fire to warm us, or water to wash us, yet God can supply that
defect; he can do it by himself, because all the excellency of every creature
is transcendently in God. He has power to suspend the action of the creature,
and take off the blessing: and on the other side, God can supply the want of
the creature, by a hidden way of his own blessing. He can make a little to go
a great way, yea without all, as well as with all, he can make a man happy. He
is an equivalent good to make satisfaction for all, and so in this respect he
can be our happiness, and bring us to happiness.

3. Via negationis. God alone can be our happiness, because there is no
defect in him. He is a rock in time of need; he can do whatsoever any
creature, or all can do for us; nay more, for if we had all the creatures,
they would be all defective, but there is no defect in God; As suppose if in
sickness there were such a medecin, which if I could get, it, may be it would
do some good: Now God, he can do that alone himself, which any, or all
creatures could do, nay and above, and beyond all that every one of the
creatures can do. Because every creature is defective, and too short, but God,
he has all excellencies without any mixture of imperfection. In a word, God is
All-sufficient, as in the tenor of the covenant with Abraham, Walk before me
and be upright, I am God All-sufficient. He is All-sufficient, that you cannot
name what you would have, but he is that, As the Rabbis had a conceit of
Manna, that it had that taste in every man's mouth, that every man desired: I am
sure it is so of God: Or as some men that have a mind at some dishes of meat,
they can find all the dainties in the world in that dish which likes them; as
suppose Pheasant, and Partridg, and Capon they find al in that dish; It is most
certainly and really true of God, not in conceit only; He that knows what
God is, if he have God, he can find all good in him, all the excellencies of
all the creatures are compendiously, and summarily comprehended in God. Now he
that is All-sufficient, there can be nothing wanting in him to make perfectly
happy, even by himself alone.

2. But now to speak a little more particularly. There are but three things
that I shall desire you to consider, and no doubt but out of every one of them
will result a strong and clear proof of this truth.

First, consider the particular perfections which are in God.

Secondly, consider the proportion they have with our nature to supply our
wants.

Thirdly, consider the neerenesse of that conjunction and communion, which we
may have with God, that so we may be interested in his perfections.

For the first of these, the particular perfections of God: In a word to name
no more but the maine.

1. The power of God, and his omnipotency.

2. The wisdom of God, and his omnisciency.

3. The goodness and grace of God, which is infinitely transcendent, and has
the crown of all the attributes of glory. For when the Lord told Moses he
would show him all his goodness, he set himself out in the attribute of
grace and mercy. But yet a little more particularly.

1. There is power in God, by which he is able to supply all things whatsoever,
according to his will. There is nothing but his omnipotency can reach; And for
a man to have him to be his friend, that is Lord of all, in whose hands is the
disposing of all, he cannot but think himself happy, having the possession of
such a friend.

Wisdom.
2. All wisdom is his. If he knew not our wants, but were ignorant of them,
though he had all power, it were nothing, and he had need to be put in mind
to show it. But now he knows our state, and condition; and he does know all
the ways, by which it is possible to supply our necessities.

Good will.
3. But yet neither of these were any thing, though he had power and wisdom,
yet if he did want goodness, this would little relieve a man, and stand him in
stead. Therefore we added in the third place, the excellency of goodness. He
is the fountain of all goodness, all proceeds from himself; he is the
Original of it, and he looks not for any rise from us.

Now to have God in whom there is such a concurrence of all these; that has
all power to help me in all cases; that there is nothing can come without the
sphere of his activity, beyond his power. That has all wisdom, to take
notice of all my wants, and knows all the ways to supply them. And beyond all
these, having intelligible goodness, such bowels of compassion, that it is not
possible, but he should use his power, and set out his wisdom, rather then
those that he has taken into covenant shall not be supplied. Who would not
easily apprehend out of this* that the possession and fruition of God, such a
friend as he is, needs no more, all being in his power. Suppose that a man had
among men such a friend, suppose a King, who were wise, and did know in what
state and condition he were: And had such power, and dominion, that he could
command any thing, that were necessary for the supply of his honor, or
advancement; And withal, had such an engagement upon him in affection, and
good will, might not this assure a man, that this were better then many pennies
in a man's purse, then the possession of many other things, nay although he
wanted all other things, yet the favor of such a man would fetch in all other
things. Such a friend is God.

2. This would not be our good, Proportion
except there were some proportion in our nature toward it. It is not in God,
in all those excellencies to make us happy, unless we be capable of
happiness: But now therefore consider that man being created according to Gods
Image, he is capable of it, and it is suitable and competible with him, as Gods
servants good. His soul may look upon this society, and fellowship that he
has with God, he is apprehensive what a rich treasure it is. How much it is
more worth then ten thousand Mines of Gold, to be able to say, God is mine:
he is apprehensive of it, and he sees no defect, but this may be complete
happiness to him and therefore he delights in it, and comforts himself with
it. As he did sometime, he was a great Courtier in King Cyrus his Court, and
one in favor with him, he was to bestow his Daughter in marriage, to a very
great man, and of himself he had no great means, and therefore one said to
him O Sir, Where will you have means to bestow a dowry upon your Daughter,
proportionable to her degree? where is your riches? He answered, what need I
care, (...), Cyrus is my friend. But may not we say much more (...), where the
Lord is our friend, that has those excellent and glorious attributes, that
cannot come short in any wants, or to make us happy, especially we being
capable of it, and made proportionable.

3. Consider the degrees of communion and conjunction between God and those
that are his, He is so intimate, that he can conveigh himself; he can drop
his own influence into the soul of a man, and sweeten a man's very spirits
within him, and heighten and elevate them. Whereas all other creatures stand
without a man, and cannot reach so far, but in him we live and moove and have
our being. To omit all other expressions, of the neerenesse of God and the
soul. It is the most intimate conjunction that can be. And therefore the
fittest to conveigh an infinite and complete happiness. And as it is the most
intimate conjunction; so it is the most indissoluble conjunction. The bond can
never be untyed again, if the match be once made between God, and t he soul
of a man, that must continue, which is the excellency of happiness. For this
is one maine part of happiness that it shall never be lost. And therefore
where there is such riches in God, and such All sufficiency, as appears in the
particular attributes before mentioned: and such as we are capable of, as are
within the sphere of our natures capacity; and so may be our good. For nothing
will make us happy, but what is bonum congruum. And where we may come to have
sufficient conjunction with it, an intimate, and strong conjunction, and
indissoluble and inseparable. And all this being in God; there can be no
hinderance but that God alone may, nay God alone is the spring of all our
happiness; and so the point is clear. That God alone can make a man truly
and perfectly happy; give us the real and the royal happiness.

The fifth Sermon.
PSALM IV. VI. There be may that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE are still upon the point of happiness: The last time, we came to the
affirmative part, viz. That God alone can make us happy. I opened then the
point, and demonstrated the truth of it; we now come to the Application of it.

The maine thing that I aim at, according to my ordinary course, is the matter
of Exhortation. But before I come to it, I shall premise a word, or two.

SER. V.
First, for Instruction. Application.
Second, for Reproof, and so Third, for Exhortation.
Instruction of the ignorant.
1. First of all for Instruction. We may first learn what happiness is, and
who is the happy man. A thing I confess, which I mentioned by way of
instruction out of the former point, as sometimes it falls out, that I have
occasion to deduce the same things, out of different principals. But yet let no
man think it is superfluous; for, for the most part, those consequencies which
flow out of many things, and are so often spoken of, are (for the most part, I
say) of frequent use: and therefore if they be iterated it cannot be
unnecessary: as we see it, there be some things that are more necessary than
others, and we are not weary of using them often, nay always: and some things
though necessary, yet if we use them always, we should grow weary of them; as
now if we use Beef, and Mutton, or any one such thing, (though these are the
best we can hold longest with) yet if we use them always, the stomach would
be cloied, and we should grow weary of them. But yet Bread we are not weary
of, though we use it always: nor drink we are not weary of using always:
what ever other cates or dainties we have, yet these are common concommitants
of all our eatings and feasts. And so there be some things in Religion, that
men would be cloied with all, with hearing them often over, and they count it
tedious to have them often inculcated upon. But yet there be some things, that
are so necessary, and we have such an immediate necessity of them, that the
state of our souls requires that they should often be inculcated on. As the
saying is (which I often use) Nanquam nimis dicitur, quod nunqua^m satis
discitur: We can never hear that too often, that we can never learn too well.
And this is that we learn hence, both, Who are the happy men: And wherein
happiness consists.


Because there is so much blindness and darkness in the minds of men this
way, and men are so befooled in their thoughts; that though they be told of it
a thousand times, yet they will relapse into the same error.

Now to give a brief touch; Godly.
we see here that a godly man, and even in the worst condition, Felicity.
when he is at the lowest; how ever men do scorn, Dignity.
and despise men in that condition; yet if we look on them (as we ought to do)
with judicious eyes, we must needs acknowledge them the happy men. Admit they
have not wealth: admit they have not honor: admit they have not pleasure, in
this world, but it is all contrary with them; yet if they have God, who is the
all in all in point of happiness, as this truth manifessteth, who can deny
that they are happy men? We see the Stars; although we see them sometimes in a
puddle, in the bottom of a Well, nay in a stinking Ditch: yet the Stars
(although they reflect there) have their situation in the Heaven: So it may be
with a godly man; we may see him in a miserable condition, in a low condition
for these worldly things; but yet for all that, he is fixed in the region of
happiness: so long as they retain the possession of God, and the fruition of
him; that God ownes them; and that they have commerce with him, and communion
with him; It cannot be, but that he that thus partakes of God, must partake
also of happiness. And on their side, it will not be amiss (though it be done
enough already, yet it can be never too enough) to beat down the vanity of
worldly men, that want godliness, Wicked. Misery. Indignity.
and so have no interest in God, but live in their natural condition, in
prophannesse, or some higher degree of sin; and are strangers, and aliens
from God; Suppose now such a one, who has all those outward things, in such a
manner; that men at the first view do admire, and envy, and repine at the
happiness of such a man, yet if a man do consider well, and view the state of
that man, he cannot conclude him to be a happy man. Alas this man is without
God; he has not the favor of God, but God is his enemy; and how can he be
happy then? As the Father speaks of Ahab, he describes him sitting in his
Ivorie palace, in the time of the three years famine in Samaria; when that
there was a want and scarcity of all things, by reason that it had not rained
in three, years, (says he) he had gold and silver, and jewels, in every
place, but yet says he, what good does all this to me; so long as the heaven
is as brass, above; and the earth as iron, beneath? And what good can all
these worldly things do to a man, so long as the heaven is as brass; so long
as heaven is shut against him; if Gods favor be not on him; but his frown?
this must needs dash, and mar all the mirth, and happiness that he has, in
the midst of all earthly things.

2 Secondly, Reprehension of the madness of wicked men who,
we may take up an other consideration from this; and speak of it by way of
Reproof and Lamentation, and bewail here the vanity and misery of a great
many (not wicked men only, but even) godly men: that seeing there is so much in
God, yet they make out so little after God.

1 If we look upon worldly men, Seek not God. Esteem him not as the only
happiness.
we shall easily see this; how far they are from seeking God as the only
happiness, from esteeming God, and loving God as the only happiness, insomuch,
that they cannot be persuaded to think that there is or can be any great
happiness in him: you shall hardly beat them out of it, but that it were better
to have so much gain; such a revenew by the year, then to have God for their
friend: they will hardly be beaten out of these principals: and therefore it is
no marvel, no wonder if they turn an ace with God, and be bold with sin to
like violation of their peace with God, to purchase that thing which they count
more precious then God, and to turn their backs on God to get that which they
count their happiness: as suppose they think that gold, or any such thing, be
the only way to make them happy, then farewell God: and hoc primum repetunt
opus, hoc postremum omittunt: they are all for this: and therefore I say it is
no wonder that these worldly men who never tasted the sweetness of God, do
thus: 2. But this is the grief of heart, and the greatness of the sin, Of
godly men that, Know it.
that those that are Gods servants, that know the excellency that is in God,
and do pretend to it, and profess that they believe that God is their only
happiness, Profess to believe it,
and that it consists in their communion and fellowship with him: yet when all
comes to all they are so far carried away with the course of the world, Yet
neglect it.
that neglecting God, they seek after gew-gawes, and toies, and place so much
happiness in them; and make so little after God, though they profess
otherwise, and though they know otherwise. It is not my jewel in my bosom, or
my curling, or crisping my hair, that makes me a happy woman: nor is it any
of these gew-gawes, or toies, (happily will they say) that makes me happy: But
yet alas, when all comes to all, they go as gaudie and as fantastic as any
others, and make so much of it, and are as ready and as foolish to run to the
same excess of riot, as though God were not their ornament and their
happiness: If they did believe this, and remember this, that their happiness
and excellency lay all in God, though they might make use of other things in a
sober and a modest and exemplary way, such as were fit to give an example to
the world, of extraordinary piety and sobriety: in this course, and with
this caution, I say, though they might make use of any sober and modest way,
yet they would not go so vainly, and fondly, and gaudily, and place so much
happiness in these things; did they believe this, that their happiness lay in
God: and surely, it argues that they have not that high esteem of God, and
that they repose so much confidence in him as in their only happiness, they
would not else be so fond of so foolish things, for it is a thing incompatible
with a mind that is fully possessed with the excellency of God, which if we
had, it would make us look a squint on all other things, even the best things,
and much more on things of an inferior nature: yet I say, this folly of many
professors that they place so much in these poor things, and it is a thing to
be bewailed.

3 But to come to that which I aim at most, Exhortation to the weak.
and which is indeed the principal, viz. the matter of exhortation: That we
would every one of us, seeing the maine of our happiness lies in God, and so
much of it, that he alone can make us happy, if we can but get him, and enjoy
him, and walk in a sweet and holy communion with him, that will make us
happy, though we have nothing else in the world, though we be cut off from all
other things, then I shall entreat to make way by certain steps and degrees to
what I aim at: and,

1 That all Christians would understand this truth; Understand it.
I know there are many other things in Religion necessary to be known, but I
only mention these steps which otherwise I am not to dwell on, but to arise
higher, and ascend by these. Many men I know count many things in Religion, and
many things that are delivered, and so this, to be but Paradoxes, and the
conceits of men's brain, the fancies of some contemplative persons, that live
retired and do not know what belongs to the world: and truly for my own part,
I will never decline the imputation of being subject to such weakness (if men
will so term it) as there is no man but has his failings and his errors: But
yet if this be truth of God, and in his Word, then I suppose we are out of any
danger of being questioned for fantastic, or foolish, or paradoxall conceits,
delivering that which we have received from God: and I would desire every one
but to consider and take notice of this truth, not as the fancies of a man, but
as a truth that is divine, and as the Word of God: that God alone can make a
man happy, though a man have nothing else: understand this and take notice of,
and think on this truth.

Believe it.
2 Believe it, bring your hearts to assent and adhere unto it: Do not stand out
in distinctions, or in staggerings with this truth, or speaking against it, or
finding some evasions or declinations to avoid it, but receive this truth and
embrace it by a firm and steadfast faith: It is not to be expected, though this
good Word of God be for my good, might serve for a good end, viz. to press
the endeavoring many things in my practice; yet (I say) it is not expected that
it should do this, except it be embraced by faith; believe this therefore, that
is the second step. I would desire every one to bring their hearts to this
truth, and believe this, and receive it as a realitie.

Ponder it.
3 Ponder on it, and consider it, and meditate upon it; to chew it up and down
in their mouths, and in their minds. Many truths there be, that have a swimming
motion in our heads, but there is no decoction of this truth, and we are not
the better for them, because we do not ruminate on them, and chew them, that
we do not turn them into nutriment: As you know it is with meat which a man
would put into his belly, if it be not prepared some way, as boiled, or
roasted, or some such fitting, it will not turn to nutriment, but rather turn
to diseases in the stomach: And so it is oftentimes; that many truths that a
man understands to be truths, for want of ruminating and chewing, they do not
turn to spiritual nutriment, to breed any good spirits, any good blood: I
would desire every man therefore ever and anon to ponder on this truth, and
meditate on it. Is this a certain truth that there is such a compendious way to
happiness, that although I go not from the East to the West Indies, and fetch
all the commodities to bring in gain daily, bring in such an estate to me, yet
if I sit still and only take care to walk with God, and make God mine, if I
can but get him, and come to possess my soul of him, and have a fruition of
him, this will make me happy alone: I would desire men to consider this and to
ponder, and meditate upon this.

5 And then in the last place, Walk in the strength of it.
I will but only mention all these steps, let us carry our selves in the
virtue and strength of this truth, in the way that this truth thus known, and
believed, and thought on, will bring us unto, and force us to go; let us do
these things, that may express our apprehensions of this truth, and our
belief of it, and our thinking on it; this is the maine thing I aim at, Let
us live as those do, and as those cannot choose but do, that do know and
believe and think on this truth.

Now there be but three things, wherein we shall express the realitie, that
we do know, and that we do believe, and that we do ponder and think on this
truth, and not cast it far from our eyes, I say we shall express it, in
these three things according to the several ranks and degrees of men.

They that yet are not in possession of God should,
1 First of all, are there any men that are not yet in the possession of God,
that are yet without God in the world, such as have no interest in him, no
relation unto him; no assurance of his favor, if this be a truth, that in his
favor is life, and that all our happiness is bound up in him: then those that
know and believe and think on this truth should seek after God, and endeavor
to make God theirs, to come in and lay hold on God: to come into covenant with
God, to come out of their sinful course and to repent of their evil ways,
and to make their peace with God, and set themselves to walk with him: Seek
after him
So that this is the first sort of men we have to deal withal, if there be
any here, that are not yet Gods, nor he theirs, that are not in covenant with
him, nor have an interest in him, nor have any assurance of his favor, nor any
ground of any such assurance, let this be an incitement to induce them, to make
it the first thing that they do, to lay hold on God, believe in him, submit
your selves to his service, repent of all your evil ways, and come into the
service of God: only let me add something by way of caution, though we all
profess the name of God, yet I persuade my self there is none here that is so
charitable to think that all that are within the pale of the Church, have
real interest in, and real possession of God, Many are called, but few
chosen; and I think no man will hold this in general uncharitable (though
when a man shall fall to deal with particulars perhaps there he may
transgress the bounds of charity, but) I say in the general there is no man
will question it: And therefore being to speak in such a place of this
argument, where we suppose there are a great many that have real interest in
God, yet we cannot expect that all have so: the thing therefore will not be in
vain, to give some cautions.

1 Take heed that they do not presume that they are Gods, and hate the
profession of him, Presume not.
and have an interest in him, without sufficient ground and warrant, there be
many things that lift men vainly up in their presumptions this way: Briefly to
mention some few.

1 Many men are presumptuous of God and of his favor, Upon goods of fortune.
upon the most unworthie ground that can be, I mean, not worthy to be named
among Christians as a ground of Gods favor, I mean riches and outward estate,
they presume on this as a sign of Gods favor, supposing if God did not love
them, how should he prosper them so, whereas they see that many men that
pretend more to Religion than they do, and are more busy in religious ways
and courses then they are, yet notwithstanding they have a great deal more,
and are a great deal richer, and more prosperous then they are; and therefore
they are ready to bless themselves: but this is so fond and foolish a ground
to presume upon, as it is unworthie to be mentioned among men, much less among
Christians: I beseech you, let no man be so foolish, nor so ignorant in the
ways of God, as to think that a great estate is an argument of Gods real
favor: God many times debarres his servants and children of those outward
things, and many times, loades his enemies with them: As you know it is in
another case, those Sheep and Oxen that are to be fatted for the slaughter,
shall be sure to be put in the best pasture, whereas those that are to live,
be laid up perhaps in a poor, or no pasture: And so it is in this case, those
that God preserves for heaven, reserves to eternal glory, may be and often are
in a mean condition on earth; whereas those that he fattens for eternal fire,
for the day of destruction, the day of slaughter, are it may be fatter fed
here. I hope there is no man therefore in this assembly that will be so foolish
as to be carried away with these, to think that because he is in greater
estate, and has more riches, he is therefore in Gods favor.

Upon the bounds of the Church.
And again, many men are ready to presume because they are in the bounds of the
Church, as they replied to our Savior, have not we heard thee preaching in our
streets, yet says our Savior, I know you not: It is no argument that a man is
in Gods favor, because God has made a man so happy as that he has been
borne in the bosom of the Church of God, and has been acquainted with the
means of grace and has been a partaker of the ordi^^nces, as I have said
diverse times on other occasions, there may be found some filth under the
stones of the Temple, under the Church building: so there may be as filthy and
as odious persons to God, live under the ordinances, and in the Church, as any
other: And therefore let no man presume on this, build on this, that he is in
Gods favor, because God have given him this happiness, made him so happy as
to be borne within the Church of God.

3 Let no man presume on common gifts: Upon common gifts.
there be some gifts even in the Church of God, and such as belong to the
Spirit, such as are communicable not only to the good and elect of God, but to
the wicked and reprobates, such as neither have nor shall have any part in God:
they may have, many gifts, but they are but common gifts, which do not commend
them to be the sons and daughters of God: wicked men may have a great deal
of knowledge and outward godliness, and know a great deal of the mystery of
faith and other things, and therefore let no man build on this sandy
foundation, to conceit that he is in the favor of God, and a possession of
him, and so in a state of happiness and way unto it.

2 But to come to that which I aim at, Make sure that God i^ y^^^s
make it sure unto our selves that God is ours, let men go thoroughly to work,
and consider and deliberate of it, as it becomes so solid and so serious a
business, Make sure God is yours.
to make sure of their salvation, to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling; and in one word, for I shall only put you in mind of what I
delivered in the explication, which will be the crisis of a man's estate and
condition, No man is in the fruition of God, but he that is truly regenerated,
and effectually called; and he that is received into a covenant, and league,
and confideracie with God: Now therefore here will be all the trial: Let a
man examine whether he be thus truly regenerated, and effectually called: and
in one word, the sum of all will be this, if he do embrace Christ, (and God
in Christ) as Christ is offered him in the Gospel, and resignes himself to
the regiment and government of Christ, and does so esteem and prise him, that
he counts all things as dung and dross in comparison of him, and can leave
father and mother, and forsake all, to follow him; and can take up his cross,
undergo any cross and affliction that shall be laid on him, rather then he
will forsake Christ, or part with him; they that have thus brought him in their
hearts, to contract it in one word, to resign themselves to the government of
the Law of God, and set themselves in every thing to walk with him, and to
approve themselves to him, that have some evidences that God has brought them
into covenant, and that he has effectually called them, and that all the
promises and privileges do belong to him, but without this he must not rest
secure, till he has deserved some signs of this, for certainly (I know there
be degrees of this, but) except he be assured of this in some measure, let no
man presume that he has an interest in God, and therefore that he is not in
the state of happiness, but he is yet in the state of sin and of misery, and
that he must repent and alter his course, that so he may make an approach to
happiness.

2 But then in the second place, is God our happiness, and the possession of
him alone perfect happiness; then, as they that as yet have not God, make that
the first thing they do to get him, and neglect all other things, for otherwise
they are out of the state of, and way to happiness: So in the second place,
let those that have God and do enjoy him, learn how charie they should be to
maintain their communion with God, Retain him.
they should be as charie and wary as in a thing that concerns their
happiness so near: No man would neglect his happiness, nor willingly forgo
his happiness more or less: God is all in all to the happiness of a man: And
therefore if God has given you any taste of this, if he has brought you home
unto himself, any Christian that is made sure of this, let him make precious
account of it, and let him be very charie and wary how he forgets his
happiness; consider your close keeping to God, is your close keeping to your
own happiness: your life, and your good, and your happiness belongs to that:
learn therefore to depend on God, and to look charily to that.

Now there be two things necessary toward this, and I take both out of the
Scripture.

Seek his favor.
1 If we would enjoy God, then as in the Psalm, Thou saidest Lord seek my face,
thy face Lord will I seek: if we would enjoy the light of Gods countenance,
then it should be our care, our first and chief care to do our duty, to
seek the face of God, O Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
us, seek the face of God; make it our care to keep close to, and walk with
our God; and not straggle and wander away from him in the ways of sin: That
which the Prophet gives us counsel to do in Isaiah 1.17. Cease to do evil,
learn to do well, may serve as a general rule.

Eschew evil.
1 If we would enjoy God, then let us be careful to avoid and take heed of
evils; for every sin does make a separation from God; sin is the wall of
separation, and a cloud that hides Gods face from us.

Do good.
2 Seek his face, and walk more diligently and constantly in the practice and
exercise of all holy duties, especially the spiritual duty of continual
prayer, that is one thing by which you maintain communion with God: and so all
other spiritual duties that are spiritual, they are the things that do
approximate us to God, and therefore let us practice them, and be serious and
spiritual in the performance of them, that is one thing, we must seek his
face by abstaining from every evil, and doing every good, especially by doing
those things by which our communion with God is in an especial manner
maintained.

Acknowledge his favor.
2 And then when all is done, there is another thing. Lord hide not thy face
from us, we must acknowledge it is all of the special grace of God, Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: if we should set our selves to
seek God, and God should hide himself from us, if we seek his face, I say,
yet if God should hide his face from us, there might be a great deal of sorrow
and anguish of spirit, it is Gods gracious freeness to lift up the light of
his countenance: and therefore let us walk humbly with God, that we may not
provoke him to hide his face in indignation, let us prise him so (I say) and
walk so with him as he may not forsake us: For if we live not loosely and do
not evil, yet if we are but formal, and cold in the performance of duty, and
go not submissively about the work, and show not the vivacitie of love and
affections toward him, this may cause him to hide his face from us, and punish
us sharply, though his good will be toward us. And therefore we should do all
these things that I spoke of before, and do them withal humility, and all
vivacitie, and still know it is Gods special grace to lift up the light of his
countenance upon us, even when we have sought it; and therefore that I add
here, Thou saidest, seek my face, thy face Lord will I seek, Lord hide not
thy face from me: Men should still be begging of God that he would not hide
himself from us, nor withdraw himself, but cause himself to shine upon us,
and the only way after all is this, that we show our selves humble and
vigorous in the performance of our duty, for the more vigorously we call on
God, and the more humbly we walk with God in a sweet manner, the more we
shall perceive God to be delighted with us, and reveal himself unto us.

Is God our happiness, and our all in all unto it, then as those in the first
place that want God should make out after him and seek to enjoy him; and as
those in the second place, that do enjoy him; should make it their greatest
care to keep close to God, and to hold him and to maintain communion with
him: that they cause him not to withdraw his face from them, and depart from
them, and so withdraw all comfort, (for when the King is gone, all the hanging
is taken down, so all joy and comfort and happiness is gone and taken away
when God is gone; whereas in the midst of miseries if God be with us we are
happy (...), where God is, there is Heaven; where the King is, there the Court
is; if a man be in a prison, yet if God be with him, he is in state of
happiness.

Esteem God, so must,
3 In the last place, let every man esteem and prise God as the only thing of
his happiness, and let us show that we do esteem him so: if we do profess
that our happiness depends upon God, then let us show that we do thus
think, and thus believe, and thus esteem of God. I might draw this into
diverse particulars: As for example.

Rich men.
1 Rich men, let them take heed when they have riches, let not their hearts
run too much upon them, nor after them, but in the midst of them they can
scorn them, and spit on them, and think it is not in them to make them happy,
but God that gave them, and with adherence cleave to God, and say, I had rather
have my part in God, a thousand times, than all this wealth: and it would be a
greater evil to me to want him, then to want all these: for though I had all
these and wanted him, I should be in a miserable condition.

2 If a man be in a meaner condition, Poor men.
in the loss of friends and estate, let us learn to set a prise upon God as
our only happiness, by delighting our selves in him, when all is gone, and
when we are stripped naked of all other things: Do we prise God to be our
happiness, and do we believe he is able to make us happy alone, then let
us show it when there is nothing else but God. It is a dishonor to God to
rely otherwise: You know what Elkanah said to Hannah, when she was cast down
and overwhelmed with a conceit of her barrenness, Am not I better to thee than
many children? Should we not count God so great a happiness, that we should
be able to raise our spirits, and possess our souls with patience though all
other things frown on us, and though all things else forsake us: that were an
honor to God indeed, and an honor to Religion.

3 All Christians should thus prise God above all: All Christians.
if Christians will be like other men, mourn as other men, be cast down as
other men, it is dishonorable to their profession, and exceeding derogatorie
from that faith which they have professed, namely that God alone is able to
make a man happy, for how can it be said we speak truth in saying God is our
happiness, when as we let others see how unable we are to delight our selves
in him as in our happiness?

Motives.
2 Consider the motives to this duty: There be two things in this Psalm, which
may serve as effectual arguments to stir us up to this, Possession of God
brings,
truly to set our whole care, to seek to possess our selves of God, as of our
only happiness. By this means we shall attain the, 1. Greatest Joy. 2.
Greatest Peace.


The greatest joy.
First, the greatest joy, Thou have put more joy into my heart, then when their
corn and wine increased: this will bring a man more joy then all worldly
things can, when we can thus be possessed of God, and esteem of him, and
that in many respects.

More noble joy.
1 It is a more noble joy, a more high and transcendent joy, that raises the
soul to God, which no worldly thing can do.

More cordial joy.
2 As it the more noble and the highest joy, and more transcendent and
excellent, for God is infinitely above all those things, as being causally all,
and eminently all, and therefore the joy from him as it is a more noble joy, so
it is besides that a more intimate joy, a more cordial joy: all these outward
things can but come to the outside, they cannot pierce into the heart to affect
that, but now the light of Gods countenance can; God being a spirit, he can
penetrate the spirit of a man, and raise the spirit and soul of a man, and set
it above himself.

3 It is a more permanent joy, whereas all other joy is transient, More
permanent joy.
all the joy that we have in other things, is as the things themselves are, but
transient; they may all, nay will all pass away, and all be turned into
unhappiness. A man may have these outward things they may make an ornament of
joy, but they will not hold long; All these things being momentary and
transient, a man may have them to day, but they will betake themselves to their
wings to morrow, they cannot last long, at most, not longer than this life: but
the joy that is settled upon the favor of God, is eternal joy, and brings to
eternal joy.

2 As it will bring the greatest joy, The sweetest peace.
the most excellent, intimate and permanent joy; so it brings the only peace, I
say the possession of God brings the only peace; I will lay me down and rest
in peace. A man may be secure and at rest, if he has God in possession, if
he has God for his friend, although all the world be his enemies, this may
secure him and quiet him, God is his, and what can all the world do to him,
whereas if God be his enemy, how can all the world keep him from the wrath of
God; cannot God find him out, I say, although he has all the world to guard
him, yet if God be his enemy he cannot rest in security, I say, though he be
compassed with all the world, and have it as a guard about him; nothing can
give rest to the soul but God; and if a man have Gods favor, and him for his
friend, he may rest in sweet security, notwithstanding all foes whatsoever:
In one word to end all, I know it would be counted an infinite thing, (and I
suppose there have been many tricks and a great deal of knavery to find out
the Philosophers stone) I suppose, I say, no man would desire any other riches
but that, if it were a real thing, and certainly known, that a man knew the
experience of it, and the virtue that it would turn all things into gold: and
not as that will do, for all that ever men have done in it, they must use so
much gold, and spend so much gold, and then they can turn as much into gold by
it, as they have spent in making of it, and so they have their labor for their
pains: but suppose they could without the expense of any gold, turn all other
baser metals into gold by it, I suppose, none of you would desire a better
trade and jewel than this stone: But this is a better thing we speak of, and
a better skill to turn all things into gold indeed: If a man have Gods favor,
all things shall turn unto his good, and that is better than gold, for gold may
not be good. As they say of King Midas (not true, but fabulous) the King had
obtained that of the gods, that whatsoever he touched should be turned into
gold, but it became an unhappie favor, for when he came to touch his meat, his
meat also turned into gold, and so by this means he was starved, but now to
have all things not turned into gold, but into good, that is a thing that is
the happiness of Gods servants: All Gods servants have this great privilege,
All things shall work together for the good of those that love God: to those
whom God loves and favors, God will do them that good, and give them that
happiness, that whatever it be, good estate, or bad estate, high estate, or
low estate, spiritual, or temporal, what ever falls, all shall work together
for their good, and this is better than gold: get Gods favor and that is this
happiness: so that in a word, you may sit down, and need not go from the one
Indies to the other to get happiness, here is a more compendious way, get gods
favor therefore, and that is the compendious way to all happiness.

SER. VI.
The sixth Sermon.
PSALM IV.VI. There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE are still on the point of happiness, where the first point handled was,
That true happiness is a thing desirable by all: the second was, That all
worldly things, though selected into one, without God cannot bring a man to
true happiness: The third was, that God alone can bring a man to true happiness
here, and perfect happiness hereafter.

The fourth point remains, which with these words, and the coherence of the
Psalm, arises well enough, and that I lay down thus:

Now for the opening of the point, Explication.
there be two parts which we must a little explicate.

1. The Subject of this proposition. 2. The Predicate of this proposition.
For the Subject of the Proposition I shall consider therein, The subject.


First, all the Particulars in the several branches of those things that are
necessary to make up the way to true happiness.

Secondly, I shall recollect the general of all these particulars, and the
sum of them.

To begin with the particulars first; Particular.
there be three things which I do affirm in it to concur to make up the
entire and full way to the true and perfect happiness, and in every one of
them I shall distinctly mention both the acts that are required, and the
quality of those acts.

The first branch belongs to the matter of understanding, where there is a
double act, viz. Sound knowledge and belief.
1. Knowledge. 2. Belief.


And the qualification of those is, 1. A sound knowledge. 2. A sound belief.


The second branch contains likewise (as all the rest) A double act of the
affections. Sovereign fear and love.
1. Of Fear. 2. Of Love.


And the qualification of these is, they must be sovereign.

The third branch belonging to the whole, and as the issue of both these,
contains a double act, Sincere repentance and obedience.
1. Of Repentance. 2. Of Obedience.


And the qualification of both these is expressed in this word, they must be
sincere.

Now briefly to give light to each of those, so far as shall be necessary.

Act with the object.
To begin with the first thing necessary for matter of understanding, the first
act belongs, To Knowledge. The second to Belief.


Knowledge in General.
To begin with knowledge 1. In the general, that there is nothing so suitable to
the nature of man, who is of an intellectual nature, nor nothing more near of
kin to happiness, then to be advanced to knowledge: Ignorance and blindness
is the brutizing, and knowledge is the highest perfection of the intellectual
nature, and there is no knowledge whatsoever (if real knowledge in any kind,
and not falsely so called) but is very conducible to our good, and happiness,
though very remote and far of, and therefore to take it in particular.

In Particular.
2 That knowledge in particular which is nearest in relation with, and of most
proper concernment, on which our happiness depends most, in one word is,

1 The Knowledge of God.

2 Of Divine things that appertain unto him; that are in relation and reference
to him: other knowledge may be a very good light and ornament to our life, and
may strengthen and further us in many things, and may be subservient and
useful even to the knowledge of God; But all other knowledge is nothing
toward our happiness in comparison of the knowledge of God, and of divine
things.

1. To mention briefly without any inlargment some few things necessary to be
known concerning God, which have near relation to, and near connection with
our happiness. Of God in his,


1. There must be knowledge of God in his excellent nature, shining partly in,
Excellent nature.
1. His glorious Attributes. 2. His glorious Works.


1. Shining in his Attributes.
We must know something in some degree concerning the Attributes, wherein he
transcends all other things whatsoever: some thing of necessity must be known
this way, because all the reason of any act of Religion that is to be performed
unto God, which is peculiarly due to God, is founded upon his supereminent
excellency, which is not communicable to any creature whatever, being not so
qualified: as (not to meddle with particulars) the infiniteness of God, the
power, knowledge, and goodness of God: there must be some knowledge of these
in some degree and measure, or else I shall not respect God as God, nor worship
God, or make any dependence on him as God, for my dependence on him by faith
must have relation to the excellency of God, to have a bottom, foundation and
groundwork on that.

In his works
2 God is to be known in his works, the works of creation and providence are
the maine, and so in those excellencies of relation that depend on these, for
by virtue of this, that he is creator and governor of the world, he must
needs be the Lord of all, and all creatures are and must be servicable to
him: for dominion and soveraigntie over another, God could not have, except he
had made it; and there was nothing till he made manifest his excellency in
some works, nothing but himself, now no man has dominion in regard of
himself, to speak properly, as a Lordship, for that is a relative attribute
reflecting on the works of God; when God had made the world and the creatures
in it, there was a resultancie and relation arised out of that, between him,
and his works, they are his workmanship and all his creatures, and servicable
at his disposing, and he as their Lord disposes and orders all, and so much
of necessity must be known in general, to lay a tolerable foundation for any
religious carriage, and deportment of a man toward God.

In his revealed will.
2. There is an other maine thing to be known concerning God, and that is, he
must be known not only according to the excellency of his nature, but in his
revealed will: A man must know some thing concerning the revealed will of God,
what is, and what is not pleasing and acceptable unto him in any religion; for
no religion can have any acceptance, or be of any worth, except it be regulated
by the will of God: to do those things that we do out of our own heads and
fancies, which we think should please God, or else God should have nothing,
is that which God abhors, and for which he will requite you with a quis,
requisivit, who has required these things? we must know therefore the revealed
will of God (to mention no other thing) in the main substantial thing, viz.
that God is pleased to enter into covenant with man; and except we know the
substance, and the maine of the covenant between God and man, in which God is
pleased to reveal himself concerning the way to our happiness: which
contains,

1 Partly, Which contains, What he commands.

In the law, Holiness, Righteousness.


what he commands and requires at our hands, whether, In a legal way. Or in
an evangelicall way.


1 In the legal covenant, perfect obedience is required, and so perfect
holiness, and perfect righteousness. In the Gospel.


2 In the evangelicall covenant, obedience is not so required, though there be
still a natural obligation on man to God, he owes him all obedience, and
that cannot be dissolved, the obligation cannot be cancelled, there can come no
supervenient thing in the world to take it off, much more is it far from
grace to annihilate the obligation of obedience, it only heales the inabilitie
of man, and sets him in power; but yet obedience now though it be required, it
is in another way, not in the vigor of perfection, of obedience, but so as
that all perfection of obedience is made up by the addition of two other things
which the legal covenant was ignorant of, and that is,

1 Faith in Christ, that what I come short of in my own performance, and so
could not satisfy the Law or God, and the Justice of God, I therefore go out
of my self to find it in another, and lay my confidence on another, who has
paid the price for my happiness, and made up what was wanting in me: obedience
is now supplied by faith which is evangelicall, and which the law knew not of
before.

2 Obedience is now made up by repentance, that though a man does not keep a
constant tenor of exact and rigourous obedience, yet there comes in a supply
of that in another evangelicall way, making it whole by repentance, by
sorrowing and mourning for those failings, and walking humbly before God, the
same obedience is required as much as before, but the rigor is not exacted:
but God is pleased to accept of repentance such as may proceed from faith, so
that now our obedience is supplied by repentance, for out failings in the
exactness of it: Now I speak of these things only as things to be known and
believed, the the sum as least of Gods covenant, by which he is pleased to
dispense happiness to us, in what way, and what he requires at our hands
toward the attaining of it, before he will bestow it upon us: there must be
some good degree of knowledge of these things, but yet this is not all the
groundwork laid toward happiness. Commends by,


2 Therefore we must know not only what God commands in the substance of the
covenant, but how God commends this covenant unto us, and how he ratifieth it,

1 By menaces, Menaces.
in which we know the sanctions and threatenings of wrath, upon our breach and
neglect of what God requires of us in the covenant.

2 By promises on Gods part, Promises.
in which we may see what we may expert from God and look for at his hands if
we do perform what he requires: now the covenant contains both the promises
of this life, and the promises of a better life: These things all belong to the
substance of the covenant between God and man, and contain the way by which
he conveighs happiness unto us, and therefore must be known; but I speak only
of knowledge in the act.

2 Now lest there should be any thing wanting in the branch of knowledge,
Divine things.
I add this to make a supply of it: only to mention it therefore and so to
pass; There must be the knowledge of Divine things.

The knowledge of God in his nature and in his will, and of divine things that
pertain to these, that have a necessary connection with these.

2 Faith in God: Faith assent.
there must be a liking in the understanding: a man has an apprehension of
these things, but a bare apprehension of these things is not sufficient, but it
must be an apprehension and knowledge joined with faith; believing and
assenting to those things we do apprehend: a man may know something (suppose
concerning heaven) that another man may tell him, but he may believe it no
more than a fable; or he may be able to discourse and describe it as well as
another, but if so be a man yields an assent or belief unto it, so as he
conceives a realitie in the thing, and a substance, so as it is not fabular and
imaginary, but real, this is faith: when the mind of man closes, and
assenteth, and consents unto it: I mean no more here by faith then an
assent, though I know it comprehends more then this, which is the reason of the
mistake of many Divines, and of the diversity of opinions that is among them,
and so of their contradictions one of another; I say, the not clear observing
of the use of the word: but every one understands the word in his own sense,
and so takes up opinions according to his own mind, and so makes
contradictions, which oftentimes, are about matter of words: now I say, faith
comprehends not only the act of the understanding, but the act of the will too,
so as the will does embrace and adhere and cleave to those truths, which the
understanding conceives: and not only embracing merely by the assent to the
truth of it, but by closing with the good of it, tasting and relishing it: as
faith in Christ is not only the assenting of a man's mind that Christ is the
Savior, but a resultancie of the will on Christ as a Savior, embracing of
him, and loving, esteeming, and honoring him as a Savior: the Scripture
comprehends both these together, and there is a rule for it, which the Rabbis
give for the opening of the Scripture, viz. verba sensus etiam denotant
affectus: words in the Scripture which seem too imply matter of understanding
only, import also matter of affection: as in that place, John 17.3. This is
eternal life to know thee, etc. It is not bare knowledge the Scripture means
there, but knowledge joined with affections: And so in the Psalm 1.6. The Lord
knows the way of the godly, etc. It is not a bare knowledge only, for then
there were no more said of them, then of the wicked; but it is meant of a
knowledge peculiar to the godly, and therefore it is not a bare knowledge: for
the way of the wicked shall perish, implying he knows the one with
approbation of, and delighting in his ways: and that is the meaning.

So that now to draw up this, there be two things to make up this faith, this
believing, this assent, for I go no farther here.

1 There is a closing with a Divine truth, To Gods truth
with a truth of God, for faith cannot be extended beyond this branch, in this
Theological sense we now speak of, it is true, there is a humane faith,
which embraces and looks on a humane truth, but this Divine faith which is
necessary to salvation, and the way to happiness respects only divine
truths of God.

2 It implies not only the material object, On Gods word.
which faith looks on, but also the formal respect, which induces a man, and
that is the testimony of God, so that there is an assenting to a truth of God,
for a divine testimonies, for Gods words sake: And now join both these
together, and they will both concur together in the way to happiness: All
the knowledge we have here in this life is but a knowledge of faith, such a
knowledge as is founded altogether on the testimony of those divine truths,
which God has revealed unto us, and not founded on any evidence or
demonstration of Scripture, for all the stresse of it lies on the stresse of
divine revelation.

Manner. Sound for.
2 Besides this act, there is I told you the manner or the qualification of this
Act, and that is, 1. A Sound knowledge. 2. A Sound faith.


For this is a step likewise toward happiness, a sound knowledge, and a sound
faith, take both together, and to circumscribe the soliditie and soundness of
knowledge and faith, I shall comprehend it in these two things: 1 Due matter,
and extension. 2 Due manner, and intension.


Matter, extension, sufficient, of necessaries.
1. It must have due matter and extension to these things: it must extend and
reach to all those things that are necessary to be known and believed: and
then it is sound knowledge and sound faith, when it reaches to all those
things that are necessary, for whatsoever things are not necessary, bur
accessarie, a man may be ignorant of them, yea and a man may err in them, and
yet be not out of the way to salvation, nor in any danger simply, as
concerning some things that are not clearly revealed, and of some things too
that are clearly revealed, as it matters not whether or no we know the form of
Noah's Arc, or of Salomons Temple, etc. But for those things that are
necessary to salvation, solid knowledge and belief must reach to all those.

Now there is a double necessity, as the Schools do distinguish.

1. Necessitas praecepti. 2. Necessitas medii.
I do not intend so much concerning the former, as concerning the later, yet
something I will speak briefly of either.

First, for necessitas praecepti, Necessary as a precept.
things necessary in regard that God has commanded them: and a thing may be
necessary to be known in a more rigid sense, which is such an one as a man
cannot possibly attain to the end without it.

2 Necessitate medii, necessary as a means, Necessary as a means.
the want of which, and the deprivation of which, will exclude a man from
salvation. Now there are many things, necessitate praecepti, which a man is
bound to know; it admits of a great latitude: every man is bound to employ his
wits and parts to get as much as may be, to be rich in knowledge, especially
some men according to the proportion of the place they are in; Respectively.
as the Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and therefore the command lies
on them to read, and to study to attain to this (as Paul exhorts Timothy:)
and to get a further measure of knowledge then is necessary for others;
because they are to be as nurses to feed themselves and others: so that there
be many things necessary necessitate praecepti, to be known: but yet a man
may be ignorant of many things not necessary to salvation: and that I mainly
intend, knowledge in things that are absolutely necessary to salvation:
Absolutely.
Now it is a very hard thing, and Divines have been at a long stand about it,
and much puzzled in it, how to circumscribe or innumerate, how to determine,
what things, and how many are necessary to be known to salvation, which it a
man know not, he is out of the way to salvation, and not in a possibility of
salvation, I say, it is a very hard thing to do this in particular, to go and
point out every one that is necessary to salvation absolutely: but I conceive
this to be neither a material nor satisfactorie way, there be some things
which God has required of absolute necessity to be known, as that without
faith it is impossible to please God, or to come to attain salvation, and I
would reduce all to that, namely, to all those truths of God, which if a man
know not, he is not able to produce and act a saving faith: so that he may
rightly and cordially lay hold on the Lord Jesus christ: all articles of
knowledge without which this cannot be done absolutely, these and these alone,
(no other things) are absolutely necessary to be known under pain of
damnation, and loss of salvation: nothing I say but those truths, which alone
if I do know, I may be enabled and put in a competent state to produce a real
act of faith in Christ: if I do know that I am salvabilis, if I have so much
knowledge as to light me to Christ, as the star did the Wisemen, so much
knowledge as this, that will sufficiently and safely lead me to Christ, so that
I may be really united to, and incorporated in Christ, so much knowledge is
absolutely necessary, and who ever has, or has not, is, or is not, in a way
to, and a state of salvation: there is no knowledge but this absolutely
necessary, necessitate medii, to grow and increase in: many things, as in
regard of our place and the like is necessary to be known, necessitate
praecepti, but not absolutely necessary as chose principalls are that do
belong to the covenant of God in Christ, and do lead and enable a man to the
exercising of a lively act of faith in Christ: Then knowledge is sound, and so
faith when it reaches in regard of the matter and extension to all those
things that are necessary, and wants nothing that is necessary, but reaches
and comprehends all that is necessary to salvation.

Secondly, Manner, intension.
knowledge may be conceived to be solid in regard of the intension and manner
of knowledge: now I will express that briefly in two things, It must be 1.
Substantial, penetrative. 2. Operative, effectual.


First, it is a substantial knowledge, Substantial penetrative.
that is a solid knowledge: a man may have a superficial knowledge of some
divine truths, which is so far from sinking into the heart, that it does not
soake into the brain, but only swimes on it: a man may have a little dark,
and obscure glimmering of things, but they cannot sink in deeply, nor are
solid, whereby he may apprehend and comprehend the depth of them: Now such a
knowledge as that is a man may have, and it may be no way beneficial to him,
do him no good, nor be any way useful to him toward the way to happiness
and salvation: such a fleetie swimming knowledge a man may have, but it is not
solid, unless it be substantial.

Effectual operative.
Secondly, as it is substantial, so it is effectual: and if this be defective
I cannot conceive it to be solid: for as for my own part, I could never
comprehend that which Divines have gone about, to be able to put a
characteristicall difference in the nature Of knowledge, that a man may be
able to say such a knowledge is, and such a knowledge is not a saving
knowledge, but only as I use to express it in this similitude (which seems
very fit) in the sun: the Sunn is the most glorious body which is in the
heavens, but the Moon has the next degree to the Sunn in appearance, yet
according to the rules of art, many stars exceed the sun in magnitude, but
the Moon has only the advantage of neerenesse to the earth, which does make
it appear so great: but yet though the Sun be the more glorious light, and the
Moon somewhat a faint, and weak light, which a man may behold, whereas he
cannot the Sun: yet this light of the Moon has this peculiar property,
which he does more than the Sun (I speak by way of supposition) the
reciprocal ebbing and flowing of the Sea depends on the change of the Moon,
and the Moon which is the weaker light, has a peculiar property in regard of
its influence on those bodies that are humid, so as that all watery bodies here
below depend more on the light of the Moon, then on the light of the Sun:
Now to apply the comparison, for I stand not much to confirm or deny much the
philosophical distinctions; There may be as excellent light which may not be
saving, for I cannot difference it in light: a wicked man may be a great
Rabbine, and understand Divine things with a glorious eye like the Sun; and
there is no characteristicall difference in it, but it is the influence of it
on those lower bodies, as the Moon has the greater influence, though it be
the weaker light: So knowledge let it be what it will, if it be good and
saving, it has an influence on the soul. There may be a great deal of
knowledge which is not vital and practical; which carries not the heart and
affections along with it, and they that have it, have not saving knowledge, but
they that have the least degree of knowledge, so it be such as has an
influence to draw the heart and affections along with it, to love God, and obey
God, though it be I say in a lesser degree, and a weaker light, yet it is
indeed, solid and saving knowledge: such a knowledge as that, which I can say
it is a substantial and a penetrative knowledge, that it does not swim in the
brain, but that it does comprehend those things, not only slabber them over,
but it is official and operative, and that indeed is the most
characteristicall and intrinsecall difference, and it is that which is indeed
saving knowledge, whether it be in a greater or lesser measure, so it be
operative and effectual on the affections and actions of men: this is the
first thing in the explication, and belongs to the first branch viz. of
understanding, which comprehends knowledge and belief.

Now the second follows, as there must be solid knowledge and belief,
Sovereign fear and love.
so there must be sovereign fear and love of God, which depends on the
former, for then I know knowledge has done his work savingly, when it has
raised up, and wrought on the heart and affections: and among other affections,
to speak only of those two, which are indeed the masters of all our
affections, and which in regard of the relation between us and God, are most
predominant, and which are most frequently used and named in Scripture (though
I do not exclude any other) for if the heart be won, it is impossible but all
the rest of the affections must wait and give attendance on that.

The Act.
1 Consider the Act, there must be fear of God, and love of God: our knowledge
must work so far as to bring us to a holy fear, Fear. Love.
and a holy love of God, not in that sense in which it is sometimes taken, not
properly a flying away from some evil which is eminent, and which we are in
danger of: But it is an intentionall fear, that holy awe and reverent respect
we bear toward God, in regard of the inward excellency, and greatness, and
majesty of God, that a man stands in awe of, and fears the name of the great
God of heaven and earth: And in regard of the excellent sweetness and
goodness of God; there is not only magnitude, but also pulchritude in God: he
is not only majesticall to cause all to fear him, but he is also as full of
love and grace to draw all in love unto him, and both these must be placed upon
God.

Manner.
2 The manner, it must be a sovereign fear and love: as there must be fear
of, and love to God, in regard of our distance from God, and his love to us, so
this must be sovereign; and there be two things that I comprehend under it in
regard of the manner. 1. A Son-like fear, and love. 2. A Sovereign fear and
love.
Not slavish, wire-drawn, Son-like fear and love.
and compelled affections: when our affections are extorted and drawn by force,
without any natural sympathy; but it should be a kindly, and a sonne-like
affection toward God: our affections must be melting and dropping toward
God, and then it is the best, as that honey is the best and sweetest that drops
out of the comb: And that which is the maine, as in all other things, and
which I desire every one to consider (for as I often say, Nunquam nimis dicitur
quod nunquam satis discitur, a man cannot speak that too often which we can
never learn too well) that is (as in all other things) God requires the
Soveraigntie of the heart toward him, Sovereign fear and love
so that we should have the sovereign fear and love to him: to fear him as
some petty thing, that is not sufficient, but we must fear him above all
things: nor to love him as some petty good, but (although it be a hard point
and difficult to reason) as our Savior Christ speaks, Except a man hate
father and mother, etc. that is all relations, even the nearest relation and
bond: if our love to God be not such as swallows up all these when they come
in competition, when they stand in conjunction, it is not only desirable, but
when they come in competition it enjoined, a man must love God, as that he
must love nothing else in comparison, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart: that is the qualification of our affections, they must be set on
God, and they must be Sovereign: and this is the second thing which puts a
man in the way to salvation and happiness.

Sincere repentance and obedience.
3 The third thing follows in order, sound knowledge and belief, joined with
sovereign fear and love, and both these crowned with sincere repentance and
obedience, make up the perfect way to all happiness.

It is not possible where knowledge is saving and right, but that it should
work on the affections, and where knowledge and affection is regulated, they
will express themselves in action: now this is the sum of all action,
repentance and obedience: I mention them first, and then the qualification of
them, they must be sincere.

Act. Repentance.
First, for the act of repentance, it was not necessary, nor is not in every
state, as in the state of innocence, it was not required, for there was no
need of it: but only in the state of the fall, and therefore I pass by that,
and only instance in the other, for so far as repentance is a sorrow and
mourning, it comprehends under it the right setting, and rectifying of the
affections: if love be set right, and fear be set right, then all the
affections will be set right on God both of sorrow and joy: and the maine
thing in repentance (if it be right) is good reformation and obedience, and
therefore to speak only of obedience.

Now obedience is twofold. 1. Moral and Legal obedience, Obedience. Moral,
Legal.
to the Law of God. 2. Evangelicall, to the Gospel of Christ.
We must obey both these, Evangelicall.
we must obey all the Commandments concerning the Law, and concerning the
Gospel: and that I generally propound, we must obey God in the morality of
them, which must continue to the worlds end: But that which I speak of, shall
be rather concerning the qualification of both these, and that is syncerity.

2 The manner or qualification of repentance and obedience, I express in one
word, Manner. Sincere.
when I say they must be sincere: now three be two things that I express
concerning that. 1. Intrinsecall characters. 2. Extrinsecall cognizances.
By these two, syncerity will discover it self, and a man may know whether his
obedience be sincere or no.

The Intrinsecall Characters which make up synceritie as the maine, are
threefold. Characters.


1. The Rise and Fountain whence they flow. 2. The Rule whereby they are
guided. 3. The Race and end whereunto they are directed.
1. Rise.
When all the actions of our obedience rise from a right fountain and a right
principle, viz. a perfect heart, endowed and enlightened with knowledge, and
inflamed with heavenly and divine affections, so as a man produces obedience
in strength: when a man does obey because he has a sonne-like spirit in him:
when knowing what the will of God is, being enlightened in his knowledge, and
believing it to be the Word of God, his heart is brought to fear and love
God: and therefore he desires to show both these in the fruits of obedience to
the will of God, and does all his actions out of this principle, not out of any
false respect (as the Windmill) stand and go by the breath of men: not out of
singular respect for man's sake, or the laws sake, or their Princes sake: like
as it is said of some, the virtue of some lies in the spectators eye: they do
it to approve themselves to them that look on: we must not do what we do
for by-respects, but then we do that we do, syncerely; when all that we do
arises out of this fountain of holy fear and love unto God: this is one of
the intrinsecall characters, characterizing the syncerity for obedience.

Rule.
2 And as a man may know it by the principle and rise: so secondly, we may know
the synceritie of our obedience by the rule according to which we go: when as
a man makes the Word of God the rule and square of his actions, and he has a
conscientious eye cast on the word of God that he draws his line by it; as a
man would draw a line by a rule, and does every thing exactly with reference to
the will and word of God, then it is sincere obedience: then I say when it is
perpendicul^^ and exactly to the Law of God and the Word of God, and in
reference to, and relation with that.

3 And thirdly it will be sincere in regard of the Race and end, Race.
when our obedience is elevated to the right end, the glory of God: when a man
does all out of holy affections toward God, and therefore for his guide takes
the rule of Gods Word to guide his obedience by, and to square all his actions
in all his life by: and then looks up and is elevated to the right end, the
glory of God: That his light might so shine before men, that his Father may be
glorified which is in Heaven: when he does all not for some worldly respect,
or for himself, but is raised through all those transparent things, and looks
through them all to God: And as the stone through the liquid air, so he
looks above all these things and poizeth to, and looks to, as his end, the
glory of God; that he may approove himself to God, that God may be glorified
in all his actions by his obedience: obedience is right, intrinsecall, in these
three respects: and these are the intrinsecall characters of the synceritie of
obedience.

2. There are extrinsicall cognizances, Cognizances.
by which a man may be known to the world to be sincere, for by this only,
his own spirit and that Spirit which searches the spirit, can judge of his
synceritie: and so whether he does the things which he does aright or no: but
now men cannot imagine of others by these marks; for they cannot enter into a
man's secrets, but yet there be some outward badges, by which men may judge of
our synceritie, and by which it may be apparent to all that we are sincere,
and they are these two.

1. A Current universalitie. 2. A Constant perpetuity of obedience.
Universally current, adequate to the,
1. A universal current of obedience, reaching to whole latitude and compass
according to which we should go, guiding the whole work of obedience which
God has laid down in his word for us to do in these three respects
especially.

1 In respect of the Act, eschewing all evil, doing all good. 2. In respect of
the Rule, the Decalogue, first and second Table. 3. In respect of the state,
general and particular calling.
Act, eschewing all evil, doing all good
First, obedience if sincere, it is universal in respect of affirmative and
negative obedience, in avoiding all evil and doing all good; when a man is
conscientious not only to avoid one evil, but all evil; and so far as there
is any difference, his watchfulness against his own iniquity his own evil,
his own darling sin: he is as nice to avoid, as watchful to prevent, as
harsh and bitter against that as any: And when he reaches out, not only to
all negative Divinitive, but to all affirmative, and to do all good, to do
what ever God commands, to do every duty in particular, and to extend and
reach himself to all duties in general, that is one thing in the
universalitie.

2. Obedience if sincere, Rule, Decalogue: first, second table.
it is universal to the whole Law; when a man looks on the duties of
holiness, and righteousness, and is conscientious in walking with God, and in
his address toward God in his ordinances, wherein God is pleased to give him
the meeting; and to discover himself to him; and does perform those duties of
holiness that God requires of him: Neither does he do this only toward
God, but toward the whole world too; as he thus walks in the ways of
holiness toward God, in the first Table; so he walks in the ways of
righteousness toward men, with a care and conscience of all righteousness,
in the second Table: not only doing no injury, but on the contrary, excelling
in charity.

3. The last thing in this universalitie, State in general, particular calling.
is in regard of a man's state, calling, in which he is; when a man walks in
an universal obedience, not only in his general calling as a Christian (which
may be sufficiently circumscribed by what has been spoken) but is
conscientious in his particular condition and calling in which God has set
him: as a Minister, a conscientious Minister, as a good Christian; and so a
wife, a conscientious wife; and so a child, a conscientious child, and a
servant, a conscientious servant, and a master, a conscientious master, as well
as a good Christian and so all other relations that God sets a man in, when a
man is conscientious not only in some general way, in a certain stage like a
post-horse; but when God puts him on particular relations and duties, he is
conscious in general and in particular duties too in all the particular
relations God has put him in: this is one of the first caracteristicall
cognizances viz. universalitie.

Perpetuity Constant.
The second characteristicall cognizance follows, and that is constant
perpetuity: when a man keeps a constant tenor that is not for a fit or a
spurt, not like some men, who will be for a fit, or in a humor, in a mind to
go to hear a Sermon, but they are not constant, and so for prayer and
fasting, and the like; but he is constant in good ways and will ever live and
die in them: not like a man that takes up resolutions and has many good
intents, but is like a deceitful bow, or the morning dew, and so starts aside,
and all vanishes away, having no root in the soul at all, or having not root
enough, as Christ speaks in the Parable, they have not any vertuall station or
bottom, and so are like grass on the house top, and therefore bring no crop,
come to no perfection: there may be some affections darted into the heart of a
man, which are not incorporated in him, and some love, and some affections dart
out again like lightning which guids not in, but rather leads a man out of the
way: whereas a constant light guides a man: even so it is in this case, when a
man has some knowledge, and some affections, and some resolutions, which if
they be not incorporated and rooted in a man are nothing, but if they have a
spring and a fountain, there as it were, whereby a man walks steadfast and
continual in a way of obedience in his ordinary course, then it is sincere; I
know there may be failings, and many of the best Christians may be sometimes
out of the way, as you know there is no traveller, but may step out of the way,
but it is as you know the phrase, animo revertendi, and so the holy traveller
to heaven may be out of the way sometime, but what is his constant course, and
constant endeavor, and his ordinary walk, mark that and that will be one of
the extrinsecal cognizances, by which a man may judge of another synceritie,
If I see a man walk in all the ways of God, that he knows, and loves, and
fears and obeyes God constantly in his ordinary course, and that it is his
bent and trade and project and design to do so in his whole life, this is an
outward evidence and a very good one of his synceritie, and the syncerity of
his obedience, which is the qualification of the third step in the way to
happiness, and thus you have the explication of the point in the particulars.

The seventh Sermon. SER. VII.

PSALM IV.VI. There be many that say, who will show as any good? Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE are on the point of happiness, the last time we came to the way to attain
it, and the point you may remember was this, viz. Sound knowledge and belief,
joined with sovereign fear and love, and both these crowned with sincere
repentance and obedience, guided by the line and light of the true religion, is
the only way to true happiness.

We have passed over the explication of the point in the particulars of, 1.
Knowledge and belief, with their qualification: soliditie. 2. Of fear and
love, with their qualification: soveraigntie. 3. Repentance and obedience, with
their qualification: synceritie.


Which was the first thing I propounded in the explication of the point.

2 We shall now come to add a word or two of the second, and that is to take
up all these, In general.
and to say something of them in the general, having opened them already in
the particulars.

And there be but two things, that I shall but touch in a word.

1 All these are required take them together, All these are required.
not one of them alone is sufficient, but all of them joined together, to make
up the perfect way to true happiness: they are all of them in their places of
absolute necessity, and without any one of them a man cannot attain to that
happiness that we aim at.

1 All these are required absolutely: Absolutely.
Take them divisively, every one of them by themselves, and a man shall see a
great, nay an absolute necessity in every one of them: Knowledge and Faith are
necessary as the very foundation and groundwork of the whole building:
Repentance and obedience, they are necessary too, as the very issue and
product of all, as the evident demonstration of the other: Love and fear those
holy affections of the soul, they are necessary too, as the very vital
things, wherein I conceive grace does principally consist; it is that which
demonstrates that our knowledge is saving knowledge, when it has won the
heart, and wrought on the heart and affections, and it is that which gives the
beauty to all our actions; it is the life, and vigor, and grace, and gloss
of all that is in them. The actions done of themselves, though they issue from
a right root of knowledge and faith, yet they have no worth, nor are not in the
way to happiness, they are but splended acts, but splendida peccata, except
they arise from this: so that we see every one of them is necessary, all in
general, and every one in particular have a plain evident necessity.

Comparatively.
2 But yet if we should speak comparitively; which of all these were the most
necessary, and wherein lies the principality of these, I conceive in this
former respect, every one of them may claim a principality, and may go for a
principal: But yet simply and absolutely, the most characteristical of all
these is the qualification of the heart and soul, the changing and turning of
the affections: when the byas of them is set to Godward, and heavenward,
there lies the principal: No knowledge for ought I can understand (as I
intimated the last time) cannot in the nature of knowledge be termed to be a
characteristicall thing, to be a notionall thing for a difference: a man may
have a great deal of light, and understanding, and yet be out of the way to
heaven, and true happiness. No nor actions which are surer signs than
knowledge, these cannot be characters of being in the right way to true
happiness; for a godly man may be (as I often have expressed it) like a tree
which may have life in it, when it has neither fruit nor leaves on it; as in
the winter time: so that I may not define a tree, a living tree by the fruit
and leaves, as though the maine character and crisis of life were tied on that,
for that is a thing which in some season may be wanting, and yet the tree may
be and is different from a dead stake in the ground: a dead stake wants the
spirit of life at the root, and therefore come in the winter season and you see
nothing, and come in the heat of summer again, and you find nothing, dead
still, and withered, and springs not out; but a living tree, he, though some
time he be hindered for want of the external favor of the heavens, that it
does not produce his leaves and fruit, as in the winter time, yet when the
heavens look fair and smile on him, and the Sun returns in the spring,
then it shows the head and life: And so it may be with a godly man, actions are
not so infallible characters a man may be a living man and yet in a sown, no
action left in him: a man may be a living Christian, and yet be in some
deficiencie of spirit, and in some sown, his spirits bound up, and is not in
case for action, always in any kind: and besides there is more required, then
action, to the constitution of grace to set a man in a true condition.

So that I conceive of all these the maine thing and the principal, is the
right setting of the heart and affections on God, that is the principal,
though every one of them in their several kinds are necessary, knowledge as
leaves, and actions as fruits in their season; these are so necessary too,
that I would rather decline comparisons, but yet when I come to make the most
exact search and trial, especially of living; the best way is to feel the
pulse of the affections, and they are the most certain sign of life. And this
is the first thing I desire to add to all the particulars, in a general
consideration; there must be all had; both Knowledge, Affections, and
Obedience, all are required.

Must be regulated by the light and line of true religion
2 But there is an other thing, and that is, All these must be regulated
according to the light and line of the true religion: It must be such a
knowledge, such sound knowledge; such affections, such sovereign affections;
such repentance and obedience as are prescribed, and as we are enabled to
perform and exhibit unto God, by Gods light and line, by the line and regiment
of the true Religion: I propound this clause in the point, because it
comprehends all these particulars, as you shall see.

Now there be two things that I express concerning it.

None but that can teach these
1 There is none but the true religion can teach us such a knowledge, as will
be a saving knowledge, or such affections, as will be the real holy
affections, or such obedience, as will be available to happiness; they are
not to be learned any where else, they grow no where but in the garden of
Religion: such a knowledge as is not illuminated with the higher light of the
true religion cannot teach us these things, nothing but the true religion can
do it; the highest principles of nature or philosophy cannot conveigh the
knowledge of God, and so consequently, not those holy affections, nor that
obedience, which are the way to true happiness, none but Religion, the true
Religion, can teach us these things.

2 The sum of all religion, These are all that that teaches.
all that religion teaches, consists briefly and compendiously in these
things: And therefore (this point because I do not mean in the prosecution of
the argument to handle any notionall things yet) this point would help me
here in the definition and for the distribution of Divinity, and those
notionall things that belong to the doctrine, and way of conveyance and
delivering of those doctrines that belong to religion: in sum, Divinity may
be defined to be that Doctrine that teaches the way to true happiness, that
is, the sum, and the maine parts of which it consists, are partly
Theoreticall, and partly practical, it contains things to be known and
believed, and things to be done and practiced: the whole sum of Religion is
reduced to this. Now though I expressed the point in things to be known, and
affections to be had, and then things to be done: yet these three may be
circumscribed in the other two: the affections may be included in the matter
of knowledge according to the use of Scripture, for that knowledge the
Scripture accounts as no knowledge, that does not carry along with it suitable
affections, and therefore the rule is, Verba sensus denotant affectus: or else
affections may be comprehended under the practical part, things to be done,
for there is not only the thing to be done, but the manner of the doing of that
thing, as out of holy affections: for that is one of the principal praises of
Religion, it lies in the right regulating of the affections, and the setting
of them aright: So that I say this distribution into these, that Religion
comprehends and teaches no more but these three, nothing but the right
knowledge of God.

And the right affections we ought to have toward God.

And the right actions and obedience that we ought to exhibit unto God; All is
comprehended under these three, and it comes to the same effect if it be laid
down in these two.

1 Things to be known and believed. 2 And things to be done and practiced.
And the ancient contraction of Religion was nothing else, but, Rectus de Deo
sensus and rectus cultus: the right apprehension of God, and the right way of
worshipping and serving of God, this they made the very sum, and pith, and
substance of Religion.

Now this is all I desire to add in the general to the particulars, and
having thus explicated the subject of the proposition both generally and
particularly, I come to the predicate of it.

2 Now concerning the predicate of the proposition I have expressed, Predicate.

These are the way to happiness.


First in general, and Second in particular.


The true Religion in general, or, which is the particular of the true
Religion, the right knowledge of, and affections and obedience unto God, I
affirm to be is the only way to true happiness, that is the predicate: But
here we must enquire,

1 What kind of way it is which is the sufficient way, both effectually and
singularly; What way.

Sufficient.

Effectually.

Only.


it is the only way and the effectual way, for the attaining of happiness.

2 It is the necessary way, it is such a way, Necessary.
as happiness may be had only by it, and cannot be attained without it.

2. What happiness? To what happiness.
I shall express it in a word I comprehend it in the point.

1 The true happiness: not a vain and imaginary happiness, not a painted
happiness, True.
or the dream of happiness, but the thing it self, this will bring a man to
the real, solid, and true happiness.

2 All happiness, it leads not to a piece, All.
but to all happiness, and all the degrees of it; both the inchoate in this
life, which consists in those tastes of heaven which the soul has, Inchoate
and that more obscure communion and fellowship that we have with God; in the
light of his countenance and the assurance of his favor, in the sealing of the
pardon of our sins unto us, and that we are reserved in a state of grace with
him.

Consummate.
And also the perfect and consummate happiness, which is to be expected in
heaven, which beside and above that, which we have here, has a more full and
entire union with God, a more close fellowship with him, with an apprehension
of all other good that may make up, and complete the nature of man, and
satisfy every desire of the soul, and every desire of the body too; there is
no such happiness here, but it is mixed with some defect, though yet it be the
true happiness in the maine, in that it is the possession of God, which is the
principle, and which is true happiness, though it be not in that excellent
manner as it is in heaven, where a man shall enjoy God in every kind, taking
away all wants, and adding every perfection that is complete and perfect
happiness: And now the walking according to this rule or line of sound
knowledge, and sovereign affections, and sincere obedience unto God, it will
bring a man to that inchoate happiness, so much as we are capable of here;
and to the consummate happiness hereafter, and thus you have the explication
of the point.

Proof.
2 The Probation: I shall be very brief in the proof and demonstration of the
point, because I take it a very clear truth, without any superfluous
elaborating of the demonstration of it.

First of all therefore for the (...) that it is so, it is so clear. (...).


1 The Scripture, Scripture.
as that at the first we may see this, as the way that God has chalked out
for the obtaining of happiness, I will propound it in a double consideration.

1 Take all of them distinctly as I have mentioned them, Distinctly.
take the particulars simply by themselves, and there are some places of
Scripture that entitle happiness to each of these, the knowledge of God, the
loving and fearing of God, and the obedience and observance of God is
happiness: only let me premise one caution by the way: when the Scripture
does ascribe happiness to every one of those, and so makes any one of these
the way to happiness, they must not be taken in opposition one to the other,
but in conjunction, and subordinate one to and with another, as for example,
John 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent: this is the way to life eternal, and so far the
way that it is life eternal, gives a man in part a possession of life
eternal, which intimates that when a man is once in the way, when a man has
once a beginning, there will be a perpetuity in this cause, or else the thing
cannot be said to be life eternal, so that knowledge is said to be the way
and possession in part of life eternal: But there you must not take it to be
a bare knowledge, but such a knowledge as we spoke of, that is in conjunction
with holy affections, and both of these together do produce fruitfulness,
holy actions and obedience.

And then again for the other two, fear and love, happiness is ascribed to
either of them: tho to add this caution by the way: the old Testament speaks
more often in the language, of fear, and the new Testament in the language of
love, as in the Prove, 1.7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
wisdom as you shall see in every place, is set out as the ladder to
happiness; the fear of the Lord, is the first step in that ladder: (...)
or (for the word * will bear both) the highest top, as well as the first
step, the principal thing, so the margent reads it, and the word will bear
it, there it is ascribed to the fear of God, and so in infinite places of
Scripture.

And it is ascribed to love too, in that place of the Romans 8.28. All things
work together for the best to those that love God: they are in a condition of
happiness, in a way to, and in a possession of happiness that love God: but
now you must not take either of these in opposition to knowledge, or without
knowledge, for without knowledge of God, these affections cannot be wrought,
nor have any acceptance, nor countenance: but you must take them in conjunction.

And so most frequently the Scripture ascribes happiness unto obedience alone,
as to name but one place, that in Psalm 15. where the inquiry is made, Who
shall come into Gods Tabernacle, who shall be the happy man here and
hereafter? the answer is, from obedience: he that walks according to the rule
and line of obedience, he that abstaines from evil and does good, he that
walks uprightly and works righteousness* In the sum of the Psalm
happiness is ascribed to obedience, but still obedience flowing from holy
affections, and guided and directed, and first set aworke by the knowledge of
God.

2 But now take them conjunctly; Conjunctly.
sometime two of them are joined together, and sometime all three: I will give
you an instance of some few places of either. Sometime knowledge and obedience
are joined; knowing and doing; knowing God, and doing his will are joined
together, to make up happiness, as in Ioh. 13.17. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them: there is happiness, or, at least, the way of
happiness; There is first supposed, if you do know him: the knowledge of
divine things is the very first step to and in the way to happiness: but that
is not all, if you know these things, and do them: this is that which makes up
the perfection of happiness; the tree of knowledge and the tree of life make
up the perfect garden of paradise: but both must concur.

And as knowledge and obedience are joined together, so sometime knowledge and
fear: as to instance in the Proverbes 9.10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom (as the first Chapter had it) and he that knows him, or
the knowledge of him is understanding: i.e. perfecting understanding, sound
understanding, which will be as the very spring which leads a man to
happiness, and put a man in the certain way to it: there is fear and
knowledge joined together.

And sometime fear and obedience are joined together; and that frequent, as
Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such a heart in my people, that they might fear
me and keep my commandments always: that it might go well with them, etc.
There the way of happiness that God intimates in that place, is made up of
these two, fearing and obeying, fearing God, and keeping his commandments; a
heart to fear him, and a heart to keep his commandments; affections set
aright, and actions flowing from them; and so in Ecclesiastes 12.13. Let us
hear the end of all, having discoursed before diversely pro and con; negatively
and affirmatively; this is the sum of all, even the whole desire of man, to
fear God, and keep his commandments: the fearing of God, and keeping of his
commandments, i. e. fear and obedience, happiness is placed in these. And so
in the Psalm 24.23. where the like inquiry to that in 15. Psalm being made,
the answer to this question, who is, or shall be the happy man? is made up out
of these two, he that fears God, and serves him.

And to name but one place where all are joined together, you have it in the 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy fathers, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind: he prescribes that of the
certain trace and path to happiness, which comprehends all these stairs to
make up a ladder to reach heaven, to reach happiness: Know thou the God of thy
fathers; there is knowledge: and serve him; there is obedience: with a perfect
heart, and willing mind; there are those holy and sovereign affections. So
you have all the particulars I named before.

I shall not need to add any more for the (...): and but little for the (...).

2 For the ground and reason therefore, (...).
two things will make it apparent; that those things are a sufficient, and a
necessary, and an effectual way to attain happiness.

1 Supposing one thing, Happiness in Gods favor.
that the happiness of a man consists in the favor of God; that it is that
which will make a man happy; that the light of his countenance shining upon a
man, is the only thing which will make a man happy: supposing this, I say in
the first place, which we have already proved. Then,

2 It is a clear case in reason, Gods savor by these.
that these three are the only means, yea a perfectly sufficient means to
make the soder and the union between man and God, to bring a man to the
possession and fruition of God, (for this comprehends the whole man) so that
the whole man is possessed of God, and inflamed by God, when his understandings
know him, and see the excellence that is in him; and when the affections of his
heart cleave to him; and close with the most sovereign affections of fear and
love, and then when all his whole man is at the command of this knowledge, and
those holy affections; to be members of righteousness, walking in a course of
obedience to him; so as that we exhibit the whole man unto God; then we come to
have a possession of God: and this makes up to us a perfect union to, and
fruition of him in such a manner as the creature is capable of, and so
consequently this brings a man to true happiness.

I will not enlarge any more in this, because I suppose the thing is clear: to
come therefore to the application.

Application.
And here be some things which I shall but give the mere hint and mention of,
leaving them to your farther meditations, and so to pass to some other things,
at which I aim more.

Confutation.
This being therefore a truth, and rightly understood; in the first place it may
serve for a full confutation, of all those erroneous conceits and fancies that
men may take up concerning any way to happiness besides this: The world
usually counts religion one of the most unprofitablest things in the world, as
appears by their speeches, which are such as this; What is it good for? I tell
thee what it is good for, it is better then all those things you hunt after:
for they will never put you in a way of happiness: but walking in the way of
religion puts you in the way of happiness alone; it is only the knowing, and
fearing, and loving, and serving of God (which is the sum of the true
religion) that is the plain pathway of happiness: this therefore confutes
all those ignorant conceits that the blind nature of man, the blind
understanding of man is ready to fall on, and to be seduced and drawn away by,
as it were with ignis fatuus, which, as some fable, draws out of their way in
the night. This I say, confutes all those false and erroneous conceits of the
way to happiness.

2 This may serve for conviction, Conviction.
to convince a great many; and I pray God there be none here among us whom it
may concern; as I suppose, none will think it uncharitable in me to think
that there may be some: for when the sons of God appeared before God, Satan
stepped in amongst them; and there may be some that are not the sons of God:
But if there be any such here, let them know here is a clear conviction, that
there be many, even within the compass of religion, that do pretend toward
it, that are not in the way to happiness: they have nothing of it here, they
have no beginnings of it here, nor are they ever like to have the full
perfection of it hereafter, however they please themselves in their own
conceits and imaginations: for a man may easily evince it, and convince them of
it, if they want any of these things which we have mentioned; and much more, if
they want all of them: they are diverse: to instance but in one of the
branches, viz. in the branch of knowledge, which is the very first introducer
in the way of happiness: He that has not a sound knowledge of the nature of
God, and of the will of God, at the least the substance of the covenant; and
that in some degree of profunditie, solid, and substantial, the mere ignorant
man that knows not these things, as hereby convinced that he is out of the
way to happiness: and which is worse, I am afraid, even in these times of
knowledge, (though it be a shame it should be so, and a grief to think on
it, that it is so) I am afraid, I say, that there be many men, not only of the
poorer sort of people, that by reason of the means of their condition, have no
generous thoughts in themselves, nor look after matter of knowledge, who
cannot so well appear in the use of the means, I mean, come to Church, in
that they have not time to spare to come, nor understandings to reach what they
hear when they come. But besides these, I am afraid even many men and women,
in gaudie coats, and gay clothes, yea, and I am afraid too many, that are of
good intellectuals, and understanding for other things, as for the world, and
their Trade, for plenty, and honor, and riches, and as we use to say of a
Top, the keen point of it is toward the earth, but it is flat and dull enough
toward Heaven, and heavenly things: I am afraid, I say, that they have not at
least a sound and solid knowledge; but content themselves either with none at
all, or at best, very little; though they know other things, yet they care not
for religion; or if they do, they content themselves with a superficial
swiming knowledge, or some general knowledge of God. But certainly beloved,
know, that they that have not knowledge, and a competent degree of knowledge in
some measure and degree of the maine things of Religion; these men must needs
be clean out of the way to happiness, that is a clear truth. But I suppose
many men will escape this conviction, and when they come at this door, they
are, it may be admitted, they pass now, and it is true, it may be they have
knowledge in these times of knowledge, yet know, that many men that have it,
shall at last be kept out: for suppose it, come but to examine their
affections, how their hearts do stand toward God, especially in the degrees
of it: where is the soveraigntie of the affections, of fear and love, to love
God, and to fear God above all, certain this is a clear case, where this is
wanting (as in many it is I fear) knowledge will not give entrance into
heaven, they will not be admitted at this door: so that it is a clear case,
they that do want holy affections, and that in some degree and measure of
soveraigntie, they that want these are clean out of the way to happiness,
though they have a great deal of knowledge.

And lastly, which is indeed the maine trial is by the pulse. The Physician
uses to try the condition of the Patient by feeling the pulse; and though
there be one through the whole body, yet notwithstanding he takes the pulse
at the hand: So indeed, the greatest trial, the most visible trial is by our
hands; by our actions and conversations: they that walk not in a course of
obedience unto God, of sincere obedience, universal obedience, perpetual
obedience, obedience arising and flowing from a high principle of love and
affections toward God, according to the rule of his Word, and aiming at his
glory: they that do not this in some measure, they are here convinced that
they are not in a way of happiness, for the way of happiness is made up of
these three, knowledge, affections, and obedience, as ye have heard at large: I
will add no more of this use, but come to the next, and only in a word.

3. Use.

Examination.


This serves for a sad and serious examination, by which we may try our own
estate and condition, whether we be yet in the way of happiness or no. And I
beseech you, do not you deceive your selves, in a point of such consequence,
look you have a good Card or Compass to sail by, against you come to the
trial of the business: As I have said sometimes of Scholars that make verses,
though they will not try them themselves, nor scann them, their master will:
you were as good scanne your lives, as God, for God will scan you, before he
admit you into heaven, and happiness: you were as good therefore to try your
selves, for I say, God will say, friend, how came thou in here, what right or
title have thou to this place of heaven without thy wedding garment? except you
bring these things that God requires, there will be no admittance: and though
you outbrave and outface the Ministers, yet when the Lord of the feast comes,
he will try. I beseech you therefore be so wise as to try your selves: Try
your selves by your knowledge; try your selves by your affections; try your
selves by your actions; if you find it is not so with you, as I have said, do
not I beseech you, loose the realitie of heaven, for a fancy; do not let go
the realitie, while you hugg the shadow; as the Dog in the Fable, who did
let go the bone in his mouth to catch at the shadow he saw in the water;
take heed I say, you do not loose the realitie while you catch at your
fancies, and rely on them: but this is not that which I intend.

Are these things I have spoken of the way to happiness? 4. Use.

Reprehension.


Then it is a just reproof that meets with every one, more or less; why do
not we prosecute this way more earnestly then? and why are we sluggish in this
way? is it not the way of happiness? why do we not labor and endeavor after
knowledge? why do not we labor to raise and elevate our affections to a high
pitch toward God? Why do not we strive to abound in the work of the Lord?
and make our calling and election sure, by adding one grace to another, one
action of obedience to another; to scale heaven, climing up from one round of
the Ladder to another, and so be going upward still? O that we should be so
sluggish and slow in these things, that make so for our happiness, that are
indeed (as we have prooved) the way of happiness! when on the contrary side,
we are laborious enough, and too much after these things, that are not for our
happiness, tend not to it: -- Tanquam hac sit nostri medicina doloris. We
hunt after worldly things as though they would make us happy: but alas we are
to consider, that there is no happiness in them; this is the way of
happiness, why do not we then make haste to enter this way; and speedily
prosecute this way? it is the great folly of those that are negligent.

The eighth Sermon. SER. VIII.

PSALM IV.VI. There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE are still on the point of happiness, and we are upon the last thing in that
point: viz. the way unto it: The point (that you may remember it) was this,

Thus sound knowledge and faith, joined with sovereign fear and love, and
both these crowned with sincere repentance and obedience, guided by the line
and light of the true religion, is the only way to true happiness.

We have passed through the explication of the point, and the last time we
came so far as the application, Exhortation.
and in that to the matter of exhortation which by reason of the time we could
not then prosecute: we come now unto it.

There is a double branch of the exhortation, according to which I desire to
go.

Particular.
First, in relation to every one of these particulars in the point; to persuade
men to labor to get every one of them:

viz. 1. Sound knowledge. 2. Sovereign affections. 3. Sincere obedience.


Secondly, I shall say something in the general, with relation to all of them;
and to the true Religion, which is the mother and the mistress that must teach
us all these, for they are not to be had any other where; nor no other School
can teach us these (at least) as they will be available.

To begin then with the particulars, and first of the first.

Get knowledge.
1 Concerning knowledge and faith.

There be two things in which I shall prosecute that exhortation, in which I
shall stir and raise men up to endeavor after knowledge, and that sound
knowledge.

What for the,
1 Give me leave, to circumscribe what manner of knowledge I would have you set
up for your mark and aim; which you know I did touch in the explication; and
will therefore but briefly touch here in the prosecution of it.

2 I shall suggest some means; in the use of which, we may come to attain
this knowledge.

2 I will propound some considerations that may whet us on unto it: But all
very brief.

1 For the first therefore, what kind of knowledge should a man aim at the
getting of? now I shall circumscribe that in these three particulars.

1 Your knowledge in regard of the object, Object.

Divine.


must be divine; a divine knowledge: knowledge of God; knowledge of Christ;
knowledge of the mysteries of grace, and of the covenant between God and man;
those essential things that God has signified unto us in his covenant, for
our guidance to happiness; the knowledge of these things especially: I know
there is no knowledge in the world but is precious, even the knowledge of the
meanest things, the knowledge even of the basest things may be of very good
use: But what is all the knowledge in the world to the knowledge of God, that
made the world; and of Christ, that redeemed the world? That is the knowledge
which does immediately conduce toward our attaining of happiness and
salvation. Men may swell themselves in vain conceits of other kind of
literature, and look big and scornful upon this divine knowledge; but yet one
dram of this, one grain of this, is worth more then all the knowledge in the
world: and therefore remember this, that we may not mistake our scope and aim.
I do not interdict any other knowledge subordinate in its place and rank; but
I set this in the highest place and highest rank, the divine knowledge of
God, and those things that concern our happiness in God. And this is the
scope of the exhortation in regard of this, that we would be contented to take
a little pains from other things to get this divine knowledge; at least not to
squander away all our precious time, and parts, busily in the pursuit of other
things that will do us no good; but take it from them, and bestow our selves,
our times and our wits, for the pursuing of divine knowledge, which is the most
precious of all.

Act.
2 In regard of the act: all that I will put you in mind of in regard of that
is; that it is not a bare knowledge that I am now recommending unto you,
Apprehension.
which consists in the apprehension of divine things: but a knowledge joined
with faith; mixed and tempered with faith: that the understanding may not only
have some apprehension of those things in the tenor of them, Assent.
but in their connection; so that the heart may close with them in giving full
assent to the truth of them; apprehend the realitie of them, to be such indeed
as have a ground and subsistence: for it is one thing to apprehend the promise
of eternal life, and to know what the happiness is to be in conjunction with
God, to have a glorified body, and a glorified soul, far beyond that
excellency that is here: but it is an other thing to apprehend that these
things are really promised, shall be really performed by God, and so to set a
man's soul to the truth of God by faith; that these are not only mere words;
but such as indeed shall be exhibited to all Gods servants: many apprehend
these things, and understand what is meant by them; but yet they have a root of
atheism in their hearts, so that they think they are but devised things to
keep men in awe, and that there is no realitie in them, to have no
subsistence: it is therefore a knowledge of apprehension joined with a full
assent of faith resting on the truth of the things promised, but in this place
I shall use the word no further.

3 In regard of the maine of all, Degree.
viz. in regard of the degree or manner: I desire every one to be industrious
after knowledge, divine knowledge especially: and careful to join assent of
faith to their knowledge, to mix and temper them together; and lastly to aim
at a soundness of knowledge, and a soundness of believing; that they be solid
and not superficial; that they have not merely flashings, or glimmerings of
light, like lightning, which does not guide a man in the way, but rather leads
a man out of the way: Many men may have a flash of knowledge and assent, but
this is not bottommed, nor grounded, it is not solid.

Here you must remember these three things, wherein I shall comprehend all that
I aim at in this substantial and solid knowledge, which I exhort every one to
endeavor after.

1 That it be so extensively. 2 That it be so intensively. 3 That it be
proportionably.
1 To have it extensively substantial and solid: not some catchings and
snatchings at some things in religion; Extensively.
here to get a scrap, and there to get a scrap, and in the other place another
scrap; still scraping at a little, like a garment made up of patches: but we
must labor to know the whole will of God, and all things necessary, at least
that are absolutely necessary to salvation, to be ignorant in none of them; in
regard of the near connection, and that necessary influence that they must have
in the forming and fashioning of a right and faithful receiving of God in
Christ; which will not be without such a solid knowledge as is apprehensive of
all that is necessary.

Intensively.
2 It must be intensively solid, and substantial: not only to know and give
assent to all those things that are necessary, not merely catching at one act
or some pieces of it: but to join to this a penetration of knowledge; not
only to have it swimming in the brain, but that it penetrate and sink into
the understanding, and make a deep impression there: A man may have sometimes a
swimming notion in the brain, floating aloft on the top, which never
penetrates nor enters in a man, which I desire we would most aim at, not to
content our selves with a mere swimming notion, to lick on the outside, as it
were, as it is in the fable of the Fox; when the Crane invited the Fox to the
feast, he provided gruell for him in a narrow mouthed vessel, so that he
himself could put in his long bill, and suck it out, but the Fox could not put
in his head, but was feign to lick the outside, etc. I would not have men to
content themselves with the outside, to have a little superficial notion, but
the solidity of knowledge consists in this, that a man have a real notion, and
apprehension which does enter into his mind, and penetrate it thoroughly, makes
a deep impression that it be received there, and such an impression as may put
a tincture on the heart, and affections too; for indeed that is never a perfect
dye of knowledge, does not redound and overflow to the affections, and draw
them, leave a tincture on them; and therein indeed is the Crisis of knowledge,
when it is saving and solid, namely then when it is penetrating, when it so
far fills the understanding, and enters so deeply into it; that there is a
resultance to overflow from it on the affections to inflame and draw them, that
will give the through dye which is in grain, which will never out, but truly
save.

3 Let every one endeavor after a proportioble knowledge: Proportionably.
proportionable to his parts and means; proportionable to the place in which
God has set him; and proportionable to the oportunities that God has given
him: where God bestows much, he requires much; a lesser measure of knowledge
may be saving, where God affords a lesser measure of light: In times of
superstition and darkness without all doubt many did get to heaven with a very
weak light, yet it was such that made an impression on their hearts; but far
short of that glitteringnesse of light that is in our times: therefore we
should (for this is one branch of the exhortation) labor every one to make his
knowledge go hand in hand, in an equipage with the means that he enjoyes, with
the opportunities he has afforded him by God; and with the parts he has to
make him capable; they that have more means, let not them content themselves to
have so much as some have had that lived in times of darkness; they that have
parts, and better understanding, let them not content themselves to have so
much as a poor ignoramus has; it is not sufficient for them; (though the
thing it self be sufficient to salvation, and so is not necessary absolutely,
yet) God requires more of them, because he has given more to them; God exacts
more at their hands, because they have received more at his hands; God requires
that they should keep proportion.

How shall we attain to it.
2 This being premised, now let me add concerning the other thing, viz. How
shall we attain to this knowledge: suppose we be willing and desirous of it
(as nothing indeed is more desirable then knowledge, to be a knowing creature,
a rational creature, an understanding creature; it is pabulum anima, the food
of the soul, a soul, that is a reasonable soul, is as much nourished and
refreshed with reasonable things, with knowledge and other intellectuals, as
the body, that is a body, is nourished with corporeal sustinance) but suppose
now we desire this, how shall we attain it?

This is a large compass to go through the full of it, I shall therefore point
out briefly some few ways.

Two things in general I shall only speak, Preparatives.
which are as two preparatives for all things: and then I shall add two or
three of the maine helps that are perfective in this kind, if we would attain
to knowledge, sound knowledge, and above all and especially in divine things,
that which we confine our speech unto.

There are two preparatives that are exceeding advantageous this way, to fit
the soul to stand in a good posture, to make it capacious of this divine
knowledge.

1 A humble spirit: Humility.
humility is a very fit quality to make the soul of a man capable of getting
knowledge: for as it was the saying of the Moralist, which is of more large
extent, but yet holds a truth here; there is nothing hinders growth in
knowledge more then a humor and swelling of pride: when a man is proud in his
own opinion, in conceit and apprehension of his own wisdom; he is incapable
of learning any thing; he lets slip the means and opportunities which
otherwise he might have, only upon a vain conceit that he is wise enough
already: And therefore as they use to observe the ground on which the Peacocke
uses to sit, is ordinarily noted to be even by that occasion made exceeding
barren: I am sure it is so here (the Peacocke being an Emblem of pride) And
there is a double reason for it, why he is made incapable of knowledge. There
is a moral reason of it.

1 He does by his priding of himself, alienate God from him, nay and provoke
God, so that God has no delight to communicate himself to him, for God
despises the proud, and gives grace and knowledge to the humble, and the
secrets of the Lord are with those that fear him: he will communicate himself
to the humble spirit; and he will withdraw himself from the proud spirit; he
sils the humble spirit with knowledge, but those that are wise in their own
conceits, he sends them away empty.

2 There is a natural cause of it: it hinders a man from using any means, or
from profiting by any means; it hinders a man from receiving any thing that is
dropped into him: a proud man is a natural bar or hinderance to his own
knowledge, or from receiving any knowledge: and therefore, as I have sometime
noted in another case, which is appliable here; you know, in a dish, there is
an inside of it which is hollow, and an outside which is unequal; now if you
would power any thing in it, you must not power it on the outside which is
unequal, for that unequal superficies, by reason of its convexity, can hold
nothing, but all runs over: But if you power any thing in the inside, it will
hold just according to its proportion, as you can power in; the humble spirit
is like the concave and hollow of the dish, that is empty by reason of his
humility, and so is capacious of any thing which God in the use of the means
shall be pleased to power in it, it has emptiness, and can hold it: but now
the proud spirit is like the unequal superficies, and every thing is but spilt
that is powered on it; for there is no hollownesse, no concave, no
capaciousnesse to hold it. And as it is in the familiar similitude of the
mountains and the valleys; the rain falls on the mountains, and makes it
nothing fruitful, because all the rain by reason of the proclivity, and the
height of the mountain, slips and slides down from the mountain, and the
mountain shelves it off (as it were) from its self: and not only casts off
the rain, but it self also (at least the best of it self) with the rain;
and so much more fattens the lower grounds, so that the valleys have not only
the fruitfulness that comes by the rain, but also that which comes by the
soil which falls on them from the hills by the rain: And truly it is the
valley, the lowly spirit that is made capable of any thing; but the lofty
spirit drives all from it self, and so makes it self incapable to receive any
thing, and unfit to attain any thing: And therefore if we would get knowledge,
attain to this first step in the ladder that reaches to happiness, we must
take heed of pride: the proud lofty spirit is not in the way to attain
knowledge, nor in any way to profit by the means which might be good for that
purpose; but the humble spirit that finds an emptiness in it self, an
hungering and thirsting after knowledge, such a spirit is fittest to gain by
all advantages and all opportunities, and so consequently to attain to
knowledge: So that this is the first qualification to attain knowledge,
humility.

Ingenuity of spirit.
2 Another preparative is ingenuity of spirit; that is an excellent preparing
qualification to attain knowledge, and profiting by the means of knowledge: A
man that is of an ingenuous spirit will interpret what I mean by that; though
at the first those that are not learned understand it not; yet that all may, I
comprehend in it these two things.

1 A man must be free from partiality and prejudice.

2 And a man must be full of an estimacie, and good opinion, and good affection
toward knowledge.

And such ingenuity of spirit prepares a man exceedingly for thriving by the
means of knowledge, and so for attaining the thing it self.

Freedom from partiality and prejudice.
1 For the former freedom from prejudice and partiality; that is necessary, for
if a man be partially-minded, it will hinder him in profiting by the means of
knowledge: as for example; such partiality whereby one esteems of men, and so
that he disesteeme all others; perhaps this man may get a little by that man
whom he does esteem, but loose a great deal for it by reason of his
partiality: and why? because he cannot always hear one, he therefore never
comes to hear any other: and if he does, his partiality choakes the benefit:
And so for prejudice, to come with a prejudicate opinion to the hearing of any
man, or the reading of any thing, to have the mind possessed and anticipated
with prejudice, it will hinder a man from attaining to that knowledge which
otherwise he might gain by that man, or that thing: As if a man now have a
fault in his eyes, it will hinder him from seeing any thing which is before his
eyes; or suppose they be muffled, or hudwinked (although he has a power of
seeing, yet being hudwinkt) he cannot see: A man blindfolds himself with
prejudice from seeing that which he might see: And therefore if we would get
knowledge, and thrive by those means that tend that way; a man should lay this
preparation of an ingenuous spirit, being free from prejudice: gold is gold
where ever you find it; and truth is truth from whomsoever I take it; If a
blind man give me gold, it is gold; and where ever I find it, (although in
the dunghill) yet the pearl has his price still: and so by whatsoever means
the thing is conveyed to me (if I be not partially minded) the thing does not
loose the worth, or the use: It is daintiness of spirit, that a man will not
receive knowledge except he may choose the party by whom, or the means by which
he may receive it: A man must therefore be free from partiality in this case; a
hungry stomach will never refuse meat because it is in an earthen dish; a
cloyed stomach indeed is squemish; but yet I say, if a man be put on it, and
hungry, he will not refuse a good mess, because it is not in a golden dish, or
a silver dish, etc. That is the first thing therefore in this preparative,
ingenuitie of spirit, by being free from partiality, and prejudice.

Full of,
There is yet (as I said) an other thing in this ingenuitie of spirit, as the
mind should be free from these things, so it should be full of another thing,
Estimation. Affection.
viz. estemacie, and good affection of knowledge: a man must come to the use of
the means by which we may get knowledge with a good opinion and estimation of
the excellency of knowledge: it was the Orators expression, if a man be (...)
he shall in time be (...), if a man have a good opinion and estimation of
knowledge, and so that his affections are strongly bent toward it, it is
strange what a man may do, his good affection toward it, and good estimation
of it, will work out those difficulties, and overcome those dangers, that may
hinder his attaining to it. They tell of that great Orator of Athens, the
Prince of faculfaculties, Socrates, that he had as many difficulties and
impediments to hinder him from attaining to eloquence as ever any had; he
could not so much as speak plain the first letter of his art, he could not
pronounce it, having a defect in his tongue; yet he had so high an opinion of
eloquence, that in the strength thereof he went through all those difficulties,
that he became the greatest in that faculty: And this is that which Solomon
intends, in Proverbs ^.1. where he describes wisdom to keep an open house,
that so men may come to esteem wisdom, and to have an high account of it, to
love and affect it; and prescribes that as a sovereign way for the attaining
and getting of it: these are the preparatives.

2 Now for the perfections, Perfection.
that will come in upon these, as the maine and principal things, (for those
be not expressed here, but as the first tincture to give the farther dye, but
to prepare the thing for it, to prepare the mind for knowledge) but the maine
and principal things for the gaining of knowledge are three; which I will
mention, and but mention them.

If a man have therefore, 1. Conscience. 2. Diligence. 3. Prudence
These are the three maine things, that may, Be conscientious.
and do advance knowledge, by any, yea by all the means of knowledge.

A man that is conscientious, he waits on the means of knowledge, that he
may come to know, not because he would know for curiosity, but that he may
know in conscience, that he may be able to direct his own ways, and
increase his own parts, that so, he may be a means to edify others, and
advance Gods glory: he that conscientiously desires his knowledge for the true
scope and end of knowledge; which is to do himself and others good, he is
the best qualified man for the attaining of knowledge; and he may most
confidently expect Gods blessing on it; for God will bestow, and multiply his
talents on those, who will conscientiously employ them; as you have it in the
Parable.

Be diligent.
2 And again (for I must but touch things now) diligence is another maine
thing: there is no thing in the world that will be attained to without labor,
Dii labor omnia vendunt, we must purchase all by labor, for, (...), and
(...), (...)
where there is an excellency, there is a great difficulty; pearls are not so
easily purchased; there must be a great deal of digging and delving to find
gold and silver, and a great deal of refining of it after it is found: and so
it is for knowledge; if a man will be willing to save his labor, he must not
look to have the thing he longs for, and which we speak of: he must not
think to lie gaping with his mouth open, snorting and sleeping, and think
that knowledge will drop into his mouth, in such a negligent and lazy posture,
it is an unreasonable thing to think it: we must do our endeavor, use our
diligence if we will have it: To give but a touch of this in some things.

Allow time for it.
1 Be diligent thus far, to allow time for it: there is a time for every
thing, and every thing must have a time; if we will allow no time for searching
after knowledge of divine things (for of that we speak) never afford our
selves time, never but grudge at every scrap of time, and think all is lost
that is spent that way, as he said, (...), wherefore is this lost, when she
powered out her ointment on our Saviors feet: if we thus think, it is no
wonder if we do not attain to knowledge: we can bestow any time on the
world, and on worldly things, and not grudge at it, but grumble at every hour
and minute, and think all is lost, at least too long, that we bestow for
getting knowledge; but these cannot stand together, for there must be time
allowed to every thing; and if we will not be content to allow time, we must
not, nay, cannot hope to attain any thing.

2 Employ your parts: Employ your parts.
we must employ and use those parts that we have, and set them a work if we
would attain this knowledge: if men will use their best gifts, and stretch
them at the highest strain for other things, and never bend his gifts and use
his wits in searching into divine things, searching in the Word of God, and
waiting on the ordinances of God, it is no wonder if we miss of this divine
knowledge: I say, if a man do not employ his parts, and put out his strength
of wit and memory setting them a work for the gaining of, and attaining to
knowledge, it can never be that ever he should have it. We must therefore
employ our parts, that is another thing.

3 We must be diligent not only in allowing time, and in using our parts this
way: Improve the means.
but also in laboring to thrive by all the means and opportunities that we
have: The fool has a precious price in his hand, but knows not how to use
it: if we let slip so many golden opportunities that we have, letting them to
run like water besides the Mill, driving no trade of knowledge with them,
making no use of them, for that purpose, we may soon loose all the benefit of
those means we have: it is admirable to think, how under the dropping of the
pipe a man should be dry, how that under the continual means of grace, a man
may continue in deep ignorance: it is admirable I say to think that it should
be so, but yet if a man do not allow time, nor employ his parts, nor make use
of the means both public and private, that God has bestowed on us, it will
be so: I say, if a man make no use of these means that he has publicly,
which are now so rich, and so plentiful, that Mannah falls daily about our
Tents as it were, that if a man would but vouchsafe to step out of his door,
and carry his Omer in his hand, Public.
he may fill it every day: but if men will not vouchsafe the gathering of it,
never attend on the posts of the doors of wisdom, never make use of the
means of grace that God offers, but will be as childish, and as foolish, as
those that go to the Market, they go there for some business, but when they
come there (like fools) they go see this gay thing, and the other gaudie
thing, and so forget utterly their arrand, and go home again without it: if
men and women, I say, will do so, (as I fear too many do) come to Gods
House to see and to be seen, to see this gew-gaw, and the other gay thing,
this woman's dress, and the other woman's fashion; to prattle with this party,
and gape and look on the other, and so let all fall besides them, without
minding what they hear, either to know or remember it: they may have excellent
means, but yet they will never make any advantage of them. A man therefore
that would thrive and increase in knowledge, must make precious account and use
of the means; he must resolve thus much at least to lay up some thing out of
every opportunity that he has; to keep a stock of knowledge, and add
little to little; he must labor to learn something this day; and something
the next day, and so to treasure up something out of all opportunities at least.

And not only this for the public; Private:
but a man must labor to do something in private; he must be content
likewise to use some diligence in private. I do not speak now of a
Scholasticall, much less of a Monastical sequestring of a man's self, leaving
all other employments, and so make the plow stand still in all other trades, to
drive on this: I know there is a difference of persons, and employments, and
conditions in the Church of God, and in the Commonwealth, and there is a use,
and we have need of all these: but yet there is one general trade that every
one should drive, viz. the trade for heaven, and so for matter of divine
knowledge, to get skill and to furnish himself with it; it is a thing (I say)
that generally belongs to all, be they of what trade, or profession they will:
they must if ever they will look to come to happiness, if they be of God,
and would enjoy God, and be indeed Christians, they must look after these
things that tend and conduce this way, that is a general thing that belongs to
all. And therefore I conceive this is one of the maine impediments, why men who
live under the means both public and private, and yet alas, die of poor
estates, and leave but little that appears of any stock, or advantage that
they have made under these means of knowledge; I say one of the maine reasons
is, not only because they do neglect to attend the public, or if they attend
it, it is for some other end and purpose, not with a mind to grow and increase
in the knowledge and grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to increase and add to
their stock of knowledge, but as the saying is, In parabola Ovis Capras
quarunt: i. e. come for some other end: but it is not only the neglect of the
public, I say, for suppose a man do attend on it, and bend his ears to go
along diligently to hear and understand the thing that a man hears, and so to
advantage himself in knowledge, laboring also to revit and fasten in his
memory those things he hears and understands, that they slip not out,
locking up all those doors that might let it out, as his eyes from gazing up
and down, and his ears from listening to other matters, and so stopping as it
were, all the chincks, that his memory may hold and keep it fast: yet I say
for all this, (I would have you mark it) if men will do nothing at all in
private, being gone out of the House of God in public, never meditate on that
which he has heard; never chew the cud as it were; never roll that sweet bit
he had in his mouth, never chafe it by private meditation, so as to make a
full impression on his understanding, and so more strongly locking it up in his
memory: if a man, I say, will take no pains in private, it is impossible that
he who comes out of business up to the ears (as we say) thick and
threefold, and as soon as ever he goes out, plungeth himself up head and
ears in the same business again, and will give no rest for to ruminate on,
and digest what he has heard, it is I say, impossible he should add any
thing to his knowledge: a man must therefore be so diligent for to attain
knowledge, as to add some private means to the public, and not be like a
child always, to eat no more then is put into his mouth with a spoone, from
the mouths and hands of them whose lips should preserve knowledge; but himself
must feed at home, and spend some time, employ his parts in some sort,
according to his condition and vocation, (so much as he can well bestow) to
increase his knowledge: for otherwise if men do not add some private
diligence, it is impossible that a mere hour spent here should do him much
good, (if any at all) especially when he comes full into the Church, and slips
out presently falling on his old thoughts, and so go on in them, never
remembering, nor understanding any thing: so that all that was spoken to him in
the Church is like prints made in water, as you know, a man may draw a thousand
prints in the water, but as soon as over the finger is off, all is out: So we
may draw prints on men here in public, but as soon as ever they are gone
(unless they add private meditation) there is no more footsteps, or signs of
it, then is of prints on the water; and so in this respect, there is no
impression made at all, and therefore no advantage of knowledge.

There is another thing also besides this: as they that would have knowledge,
must have conscience to desire it for the true end, which is to do themselves
good, and steer their own course aright; as also to advance Gods glory,
laboring by their knowledge to do good to others, and so are in a good
capacity of knowledge: And add to this, they must have diligence; which is
another good capacity for the attaining of knowledge, for the hand of the
diligent makes rich, and even in this kind of riches too.

3 So in the next place, there is another thing which is of extraordinary
importance, and a very large Sphere and compass, yea, so large that I do not
dare to enter into it, and that is prudence: Prudence*
It may seem a strange thing (but yet you know it is ordinary in all other
things) some men will go as far with a little, as some others with ten times
as much; and all is by reason of prudent managing: a man may perhaps bestow
more time, and use more diligence for getting knowledge then another, and yet
never attain as much as he, in respect of his natural parts: but suppose an
equality, not only in the qualification of parts, but also in the parts of
nature (for some men by reason of their natural abilities may attain more
knowledge in an hour, than others in a week, by reason of their dullness of
mind, and weakness of memory) but set them I say at equal; and you shall
see that a man that has prudence, prudently to order that little time which
he spends to attain to knowledge, with a wise carriage and good discretion,
to make choice of those ways and that means, by which he may most thrive and
advantage himself in knowledge, this prudent ordering of his time and pains,
may be, and is as much, and of as great importance as a great deal of
business; a man may be as busy as others, and yet gain nothing, by reason
that he wants prudence: Remember this therefore, if we would attain to
knowledge, we must labor for prudence, prudently to make choice of what we
hear, and what we read, to make choice of those that will most increase and
direct our knowledge: and not to squander away and spend our time in searching
after those things, which when we have sound, we shall make no great
advantage by them, though we have even sucked and squezed out all the good
which was in them: I say, therefore we should make choice of those things that
do conduce most, and are more near of kind, and most close to our end and
scope, and will most really advance us, to the advantaging in, and gaining of,
and attaining to divine knowledge; which is the thing I intend and which you
must aim at, as being the first step to your happiness.

There be so many particulars that would come in here, that I shall not enter
into any of them.

And therefore in a word, those qualifications before being supposed, viz. that
a man be thus prepared with humility and ingenuitie of spirit: and will put
himself on it, with a conscience to aim at Gods glory and his own spiritual
good, the true end of knowledge: and not to abuse his knowledge, to get skill,
like a mad man, to cut his own throat, or like a curious man to hurl and
tumble every thing he comes by, to quarrel and jangle in disputes and
reasonings, maintaining contradictions; but to do himself and other good, if
a man be thus conscientious in regard of his end in seeking after knowledge,
and to this add diligence and prudence in using of the means to attain
knowledge: these are the maine things to fit us and enable us for the having
and gaining of knowledge; and that shall suffice for that second thing that I
now aim at in the general.

3 Let me add but a word concerning the third thing in this first particular;
and that is, Wherefore consider
to propound some few considerations (and merely to mention them) which may a
little whet us on to the prosecution of this course, for the gaining of, and
attaining to this divine knowledge, in the way of happiness.

I shall only propound two things in general, which I draw 1 From the
consideration of the thing it self. 2 From the consideration of the times.


The thing it self, knowledge; The thing it self, which is
though there were no other argument, yet there is much in this, to set us on
the prosecution of it: for it is,

1 A special ornament, and a very rich jewel; A special ornament.
far better then Rubies: Some that have a jewel and are in rich robes, think
they have enough, and are ready to despise those that are in their rags, and
have not a jewel (as they have) in their bosom, but this is a childish thing:
However knowledge is such a jewel, and knowledge of those things, of divine
things, as (however it be esteemed of by carnal men) it is a real advancement
of our natures, it is to excel in that which is most excellent, it is to make
us excel in that, by which a man excels all other creatures; for what is the
difference between man and other creatures, but only that (although there be
many other creatures stronger and swiftner then man, yet) man is a knowing
creature, an intellectual creature; and this is an excellency, even a special
one, that in an especial manner advances man above all other creatures; nay
this divine knowledge advances men above men, one man above another: a little
of God, a little glimpse of him, nay every (though the least) touch and relish
of the knowledge of God is more precious then all the secret and hidden arts in
the world: it excels all the wisdom in the world, and is of more near
concernment: it is a special ornament.

Initiall lineament.
2 And it is an effectual lineament of all grace and goodness, the very door
by which all enters into us; the very groundwork that must be laid before
we be capable of any goodness, there can be no grace or goodness wrought in
us, no nor acceptance of us by God, without this: no service we do can please
him, except it be a reasonable service, tendered out of knowledge, and
according to knowledge; knowledge is an introduction into the state of grace
and all goodness: the very first conveyance of all the good and excellency we
can have. In the creation of the world the very first thing that was created
was light, God said, let there be light: and in our regeneration, which is as
a new creation, the first thing is illumination; for Christ is set up to be a
light to the Gentiles: The Philosophers observe that lumen is vehiculum
influentiae; the influence of the light begets things, as it begets the flower
in the face of the field; and the pearl in the bosom of the earth, it is all
by the influence of the heaven, and all those influences are conveyed by
light: and so all those precious ornaments of grace which adorn a man: the
foundation of all renovation comes from illumination, from knowledge.

3 It is the perpetual regiment of our life; Perpetual Regiment.
that also depends on our knowledge; and the more u nderstanding, and the more
knowledge we have; the more we are advanced in that kind, and the more we are
furnished with it, the fitter we are to carry our selves in every station; it
is a very necessary thing for the regiment of our life.

2 It is an effectual instrument to beget all other things in us: we are
reasonable men, Effectual Instrument.
and the best faculty we have, is understanding and knowledge; for, as the
saying is, men's cujusque is his quisque: and the knowledge of divine things is
the most effectual way to work in us the love of divine things, and obedience
to divine things, etc. Knowledge is the mother by which all these are begotten
and borne; they all are derived from knowledge; God makes use of knowledge to
work all these in us.

2 If we do consider in the second place the times, if there were no other
argument, Times,
there is abundance enough from the times; these are times of wisdom, and
times of knowledge; Of the Gospel
and it will be a shame, nay a very fearful thing to be so far from all
excellencies in religion, that a man is not come in the way, has not yet the
beginning of Religion, has not attained to a good measure of knowledge: It is
a monstrous thing to see such starvelings and such dwarfes in Gods family, that
God himself does feed with his own hand, that his plants should not grow, it
is strange: God himself continually, day after day, week after week, Sabbath
after Sabbath, time after time, does vouchsafe us the light and means of
knowledge, and hold it out continually to us, it is a woeful and doleful
thing, that we should not in all this time attain to knowledge.

1 We were borne, and live now under the times of the Gospel, which is
infinitely advanced for matter of light and knowledge beyond the times of the
Law: All was in dark sentences then, in riddles as it were, all was veiled
then, Moses was veiled then; and there was but a little to be known clearly
then in matters of religion; then was that saying true, and latet, and lucet,
there was a little light, but it was hidden, and it had many coverings that
kept men from the clear sight of the mystery of grace: But now God has
clearly revealed his face in the Gospel, and these are the times, these (I
say) are times of the Gospel.

2 Nay more particularly, these are times of the Reformation, Of Reformation.
of the reforming and renewing of knowledge, which does infinitely surpass
those times that were under the Gospel too, but in superstition; when the
smoke of the bottomless pit, instead of light to guide men's eyes, offended
men's eyes, put out their eyes, as it were; we have the happiness to live in
Goshen, where it is light, whereas it was all darkness over the land in the
times of that Egyptian darkness: And therefore let every man think what an
account and reckoning he will have for living in those times, wherein he has
so much means, and so many opportunities, and to be found to be so bad an
husband, as to have laid up no stock of knowledge; that comes not only short
in other excellencies, but in this which is an infinite shame, and will be an
infinite bitterness in the end: and which would, at least should make a man's
heart to ache, nay bleed, to think that any in these times should sit in
darkness, and be without knowledge: which notwithstanding I fear not only
many poor souls that are as yet without, want, but even many that are full of
knowledge otherwise, not giving their minds to this kind of knowledge, having
an undervaluing esteem of it, and no affections to it: And I doubt that many
that are otherwise in gay garbs, and great places, and it may be of excellent
parts, and excellent indowments, yet are to seek and come short of this
knowledge; and it is a very sad thing to think of it: And therefore let us
consider what has been said, and set our selves to advance and increase our
knowledge, according to the means and opportunities which we have.

The Ninth Sermon. SER. IX.

PSALM 4.6. There be many that say, who will show us any good? LORD, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE are still on the point of happiness; and we are on the last part of that
point, and are come to the last thing in it: the point (that you may not forget
it) was this; That sound knowledge and belief, joined with sovereign fear
and love; and both these crowned with sincere repentance and obedience,
according to the line and light of the true religion is the only way to true
happiness: having dispatched the explication, and the confirmation, we came to
the Application, and in it to the point of Exhortation: wherein we propounded
two things

1 In particular.

1 To exhort every one to labor after every one of these in particular, to
get, 1 Sound knowledge: 2 Sovereign affections: 3 Sincere obedience.


2 In general, to speak something in the general of seeking them all, and of
the true Religion.

We began with the first of these the last time; And I endeavored then to
persuade every one to labor for knowledge.

Get fear and love.
2 And therefore in the second place, I shall exhort every one to labor to get
those sovereign affections, of fear and love of God: which is the second step
toward our happiness, to bring us to the possession of it.

Sound knowledge must have sovereign fear and love joined with it, or else it
will be of little worth, nay it will not be available: I shall proceed in this
as in the former (although more briefly, because I desire and resolve to end.)

To proceed therefore in the same steps.

1 I shall circumscribe what affections, what fear and love we must get.

2 And then I shall direct those that are willing, how they may bring and
implant such affections in their hearts.

3 And lastly show, why we must do so; laying down some motives which may
induce us to a serious care of this.

To begin with the first of these, viz. What affections of fear and love we
must labor for. What for the


Briefly they must be such affections as in regard

Object, must be placed on God; above all get such affections, that is that, at
which I aim now, to put every Christian on, Placed on God.
to endeavor to plant in the garden of their heart, such affections as have
God for their object, viz. the fear and love of God.

2 For the act (to express that) they will not do well except they be
tempered and mixed together: the most beautiful color, Act.

Tempered together.


the goodness and sweetness of the soul, arises from a mixture of fear and
love: as if a man would temper the purest white and fairest red, it makes the
perfect ruddy color; such as that is for which the Spouse gives her beloved
the commendation, he was candidus and rubicundus: The mixture of that makes the
beauty of the face in the body: and the mixture of these make the beauty of the
affections in the soul: fear mixed with love, for it must not go alone: Fear
though it be apt to make us careful and cautious; careful how to please God,
and cautious, fearful to offend him; yet if it be alone, it will be ready to
precipitate us into despair, or forlorn hope. It must be tempered therefore
with love, that we look not only upon the greatness; but on the goodness and
sweetness of God: that as we are affected with the prospect of the one, viz.
his greatness; with an affection of holy fear and awe and reverence of him:
so that, that may not drive us too fa^re to subject us and overthrow us by
despai^e, we must keep it up with a mixture of love, looking upon his
sweetness and goodness. And so love likewise, that must be tempered and
mingled with fear: love alone perhaps may grow wanton, if we think on nothing
but love, fix our eyes on nothing but goodness and sweetness in God, we
shall be ready to build our sins on his back, in a presumption of his
goodness: and as the laying is; there be as many, if not more ships and
vessels that miscarry on the soft sands as on the hard rocks; and there be as
many that do miscary on the soft sands of presu^ption, as on the hard rocks of
desperation; building on the goodness of God inordinately, and upon his mercy,
ever saying, misericordia ejus super omnia opera, misericordia, etc. and so
presume to do any thing: presuming that God will in mercy save them; I say,
love alone would be too wanton; except it be poized and balanced with a holy
fear and awe and reverence of God: As a ship that is well furnished with
tackle and sails, that may give the motion and advance the swiftnes of it; but
if the ship has not ballast in it, nor weight to make it go steady, it is up
and down tossed always, and the more sails, the more danger, and hazard: so
it is in this case: That our ship may go safe and steady, we must not only
have the sails of love to make it go swift; but the ballast of fear to make
it go steady; we must not only have love, but fear, least otherwise we walk
but wantonly* skipping and danc^ng by fits and by spurts, in good ways, and
not keep any constant tenor in a holy pace.

3 And lastly, for the manner, that is another thing, which I must confess I
have ever in all things commended and praised as one of the most vital and
maine things of religion, and I never yet met with any just reason to
contradict my apprehension of it, or to think otherwise but well of my
opinion; I say, it is the manner; we must look to the manner and degree Degree.
, of these affections: and in one word they must be sovereign: a sovereign
fear of God and a sovereign Sovereign.
love of God, above all things: assuredly when all is done, I conceive the word
is clear for it, that a man does but vainly pretend to godliness, and
pretend to God, who though he has some kind of fear of him, and some kind of
love of him; yet comes short of this degree of sovereignty. God is the
sovereign Lord of all, and therefore will have the sovereignty of our
affections; he will not endure any parting, he must have all, the highest and
the most sovereign fear and love, he will not suffer any to part with him,
but we must fear him above all, and we must love him above all: The Scripture
runs full for it, and I conceive this is the maine cognizance whether the
will be regenerated or no; this will characterize whether grace has attained
the preheminency in the soul, whether it be set up in the throne, surely if
it be, it would quickly turn all out of doors that is not competent with God
that is not fit: and therefore remember this, as the main, that we should aim
at to bring our affections to; not to rest or satisfy our selves with any
degree, or with any kind of fear, or love, or any measure of them; but wind
them up to that degree of sovereignty; love God above all, and fear him above
all: Let nothing be so terrible nor so formidable as to make us to forsake God,
nor nothing so lovely or so desirous, that it should tempt or allure us to part
with God; if any thing do make a man do so, that is his God; and that is that
which he preferres above all, that is to him really and formally a very God,
and God is no God to him: if he can set his foot (to speak it with reverence)
upon God, to clime up to some other thing, and make religion his stirrup for
that purpose, it cannot be right. And therefore rest not in any thing till you
come to that degree of sovereignty, to love God and fear God above all.

How.
2 How shall we bring our hearts to this; how shall we implant, and ingraft
these affections of sovereign fear and love in our souls? There is some art
in getting these in this kind.

Briefly to show it in a few words; there be some things I shall say in
general, and then add some things in particular, and but in a word.

In General by taking heed.
1 In general we must take heed of some things; and take care of some things;
or,

There is a Negative act, and a positive act of care that must be used, for the
implanting, and ingrafting of these affections in the soul.

Heed to chase away other.
1 We must take heed to chase away, at least to moderate and bring under, and
subjugate all other affections; to keep them under, to keep them low, Fear
and love.
that the water do not go beside the Mill; that we do not spend those
precious affections, and pour them out like sweet water on some filthy and
stinking ditch; bestow not your fear upon any thing that is not to be feared;
nor bestow your love on any unworthy thing, that has neither beauty nor
goodness, nor worth, nor any thing to deserve love: We must call in all our
stock, and drive an other trade; and suppress and keep all these under as much
as may be; that all may run in this channel; If the stream be divided, it is
weakened, and it will not be navigable when it is cut into many rivers; and so
if we divide the stream of our affections; if we suffer one current of fear
to run this way, and another the other way; and a current of love to break out
this way, and the other way, and make many little channels that will not be
useful; neither shall we be able to maintain the maine Current. We must
therefore take off our affections from other things; weane our affections from
the world; from the pleasures, from the honors, from the riches of it; for
every one of these like unfruitful boughs, under boughs, flourish at the
root of the tree and grow up to the prejudice of the maine tree; for as much as
they draw the sap and nourishment away from that, and starve the tree it self;
like Ivy about the Oak, the Ivy grows about it, but the Oak fares the
worse: as one said of the Child at nurse; the Nurse fares the worse for the
child's sake, the Nurse pineth and wastes when she nourishes, and cherishes
her child; the child draws her so much down, that it leaves her but lean:
and so in this case, if we let our affection loose, let them out upon any
thing besides God, in an inordinate way, it does exceedingly abate and weaken
our affections toward God: They who would preserve the fire which is on the
hearth, can hardly do it, if the Sun beams do shine upon the hearth; for
they will extinguish and put it out: so it is in this case, our hearts will
grow exceeding cold toward God, and all the fire of holy affections will
moulder away, if these worldly things seem glorious in our eyes, and seem
beautiful, they will steal away our love, and steal away our affections, and
draw away our hearts from God: That is the thing that should be taken heed of;
it is a thing that Christians should always be careful of; that the fear of
other things, do not eat out the fear of God; nor the love of other things,
do not make a damp, and quench the love of God, and choke the growth of it: we
must take heed of that.

Care to chase in these.
2 But then as we should take heed to chase away other things that would be
prejudicial to these holy affections; So we should take care to chafe in these
holy affections; to keep them always warm, to nourish, and to cherish them:
If you would keep in your fire, you must supply it with fire; what ever few ill
will serve to keep in this fire of heavenly love, and heavenly fear, in the
full heat, and full brightness, you must be chary how you withdraw that fire,
and careful rather to feed that fire: And so much the more tender care should
be had of this; because you must know that it is with those holy affections as
it is with noble and generous plants, which are in our country, but exotique;
and brought hither from another soil, out of other countries: the country is
not so kindly for them, being but a stepmother to them, and a little
unkindnesse of the air will soon nippe the blossoms, if we have not so much
the more care of them; in watering of them, and cherishing of them: Now all
grace, and all holy affections are but exotique plants, they came from heaven,
and they descended from thence, and they are far more by a great deal
rigorous, and odoriferous in heaven, because they are there in their proper
native soil, in the blessed Saints, and the blessed Angels, they are near
God; near to the fountain of life and heat, and there is more vigor and
sweetness in them: But alas we are far a font caloris, and this world is
but an unkind mother to these plants, a step mother to them, though a mother
to other affections; and therefore they will easily dye, if there be not an
especial care taken of them, to rub, and chafe these, to keep perpetual life
in them, by so much the more diligence, and by the use of all means, that may
preserve and perpetuate it. So much in general.

2 Now more particularly, Particularly.
I shall present a few rules of direction, especially to the last of these
generals, how we may keep holy affections in warmth; but very briefly.

Constant Application.
1 Constant application of those things, that are of force for the chasing in,
which cause a begetting and preserving of these holy affections. As for
example, we hear many things out of the Word of God, we read many things out
of the Word of God, and other good writings, which do conduce exceedingly to
inflame and warm the heart and affections, with a holy love, and to make the
heart soft with a holy awe and fear of God: Now we should never read or hear
those things, but we should lay hold on them, and labor to chafe them on our
hearts, and demonstrate the use of them: if we have but the bare naked, cold
theorem and speculation, we do but strangle the birth child in the womb: if
we read them, and hear them, and never chafe them in, by application, to
warm the affections; so that all those things that we hear or read, we
must chafe them on our affections, by applying them to our affections, and by
holding of them to the affections, and keeping the warmth with it.

Vigilent Caution.
2 Let there be vigilant caution, over out hearts, to observe both our full and
our wane: when our hearts are full and high in holy affection, observe
cautiously what uses to raise them so, what experience, what arguments
prevail most to advance and mount the soul like Eliah his fiery Chariot,
sparkling with holy affection, and mounting us to heaven (as sometime a man is
as it were in heaven, when he is elevated in these divine affections) observe
very narrowly, and mark very carefully what are our vehicula our fiery
Chariots that carry us up to heaven; and make use of them, apply them, ponder
on them: And again observe our wane and declining; for a Christian has not
only his spring tide when affections overflow, and carry him sweetly; But he
has also his low tide, the motions of the spirit of God are not ordinary, rara
hora, brevis mora, as Bernard said, rare and dainty are the tastes of Gods
spirit; and many times a Christian is at low water, at ebb in his affections:
observe now and mark and see how comes this declining: what aileth my poor
soul to wither, and my affections to droope, and hang down the head? observe
whether it be not my neglect of the Ordinances? my neglect of duty? and
whether it be not some sin that lies upon me, that God does estrange
himself, and hide himself thus, that the pipes that should bring in water are
cut off by the Key (I mean the conveyances of Grace) observe I say what
causes this wane, what it is that hinders, and watch against that: pry often
into thy heart, meditate on thy ways; and keep a vigilant eye, be very
suspicious, watch continually to make full discovery unto thy soul, what does
advance, or what does hinder you in the way of these holy affections; and take
heed of the one, and take care of the other: that is the second thing.

2 Use frequent excitation and stirring up of your affection; If a man be in a
swoone; Frequent excitation.
rubb and chafe him till you fetch life again: and so it had need be with
us, we had need often to rub our affections; for as I have often expressed
it, our hearts are ponderous, multum trahit de terra, de carne multum: it
weighes downwards; as the weight of a Clock moves downward continually, and
if it be once to the ground, the Clock is silent; they must pull it up again,
every twelve hours, or such a certain compass, they must ever and anon be
winded up: And so in this case, besides man's ordinary course what he does in a
diurnall way; he must have his annual courses, and his monthly courses, and
his weekly courses of winding up his holy affections: if the fire be out,
kindle it again from heaven, go to God, and reinforce your selves to prayer
and other holy duties; There must be a frequent excitation and stirring up of
our selves: when once we do feel our selves begin to dye, go and make your
complaints to heaven, my heart o God has forsaken me, is gone away from me, I
cannot have the command of it, Lord restore it again: go thus to God to fetch
it back: this holy fire if it be out, it is like the fire on the Altar, it
was unlawful to have it kindled but only by the means of heaven, it must be
the fire of heaven, not any other fire: So we must be often renewing of our
holy affections; we must use often excitation to keep our affections in
reparation.

Pregnant meditation of
Lastly, use pregnant meditation on those things that may conduce and are
effectual for the producing and preserving of these holy affections: that we
must take up, inure our selves, to a constant and lively meditation of those
things, the consideration of which may wind the soul up again if it be down;
may fetch life in it again. As for example, ever and anon meditate on

1 The vanity of the world: If the heart be out; Vanity of the world.
it is because it is drawn away with some worldly thing which has stolen it
away; and therefore it languisheth toward God, and heavenly things; if any
worldly thing comes within our eyes sight, (such is our nature that) it hales
and steals away our heart, makes us in love with it, makes us esteem highly
of it; makes a man grow sick for it: and then farwell all holy affections; they
are turned out of door; and this new guest must take up all the room: it is a
thousand to one, but we find it so on such an occasion. And therefore to
prevent this, the heart should ever and anon meditate on the vanity of the
world, vanity of vanities, all is vanity: and what a mad thing is it for me to
misplace my affections upon such poor things as these are: be full therefore
with all those thoughts and meditations that present the vanity of the world,
that it may take off that apparent and painted beauty that bewitcheth you, and
steals away your hearts, so that you cannot bestow them on God: often
meditate of the vanity of the world, that is the first.

2 And secondly, Excellency of God.
often meditate upon the excellency of God: If a man would see the vanity of
the world, and then turn his eyes and behold the bright beauty of God, and all
those transcendent excellencies of goodness that is in God, which are such
that a man's soul is (at least may be) overwhelmed in the consideration of
them: I say if a man did but fix his eyes upon it, would not he think himself a
stark mad man, to be ever so foolish, as to dote upon these worldly things; on
those inferior things: when there is such a conjugall, and soul ravishing
beauty in God, to delight it self in meditation upon the excellency of God,
inflaming the soul with that, that will set an edge, when our affections are
dull; and sharpen them again: Whet your souls therefore, and your affections
upon that meditation.

Nobility of man.
3 Meditate often, ever and anon, upon the frailty, and yet illustrious nobility
of man's nature: Consider and ponder, thou have a poor mortal body, a rotten
carcass that must drop ere long into the grave, and stink there (be it what
it will) and be devoured by worms: But yet thou have as a Guest in that same
homely cottage, a divine Guest, an immortal soul: Now then reflect on that
thing firmly with this consideration, shall I neglect my precious soul, and
bestow my short time that I have to live, that I have to work out Eternity
(for upon this little point of time hangs the Crown of Eternity, all depends
on it) shall I now I say, that have such a noble soul befoole my self so; as
to neglect and refuse the offer of Gods excellency; and not to be inamoured
with his beauty, and in the mean time go a doting on the vanities of the
world, is this a thing suitable to me? this would wonderfully raise a man, if
men did but remember that (...), did but understand both his frailty, and his
nobility, it would make him infinitely to scorn any other thing, and raise him
only in his affections toward God.

3 Let me ad but a word now concerning the third thing, and that very briefly.
Wherefore these
Wherefore must we get these, or what may be the motives to move us to labor
for the gaining of these heavenly affections of fear and love placed on God in
a sovereign manner?

I will propound some, but according to the proportion of the point that I have
now in hand, and confine my self to that narrow compass: and so

There be five maine considerations that may induce every one to make it a
principal part of his care, to get about him those holy affections, and get
them in a high and sovereign manner.

1 Because they are the best fruit of all our knowledge: Best fruit of
knowledge.
Alas our knowledge is merely and altogether but barren that does not beget
affections: To have a golden head, and feet of clay was that portentuous Image
showed to Nebuchadnezar; to have a golden head, and earthen affections;
knowledge of divine things, and yet love of humane; love of the world; the
whole fruit of knowledge, and the whole scope of it is lost: God does conveigh
knowledge to us with this purpose, to beget holy affections: it does therefore
frustrate God in the maine scope of all our knowledge: let that be the first
consideration, it is the best fruit of our knowledge; the best product of
knowledge is when the light of the understanding warmes our affections, and
raises them to God in some manner.

2 It is the next root of all obedience: If knowledge be precious unto us, then
should heavenly affections; Next root of obedience.
for the pearl and price of our knowledge is when it elevates and works in us
holy affections: And if obedience be desirable, if obedience be worth the
while; then holy affections which are the very next root of our obedience,
must be desirous and worth the while; for from it, it issues and flows, and
receives it life and strength: It is just with the soul as it is with the
body; the nerves and muscles are the instruments of motion: that I pull in or
put out my hand or foot, or open or close my eyes, it is by a secret and inward
power of the muscles, nerves and sinews; by which I rule these, and order
these parts as occasion is: and so it is in the soul, all outward motions in
obedience, it will be but a mere poppet-play, except it be from an inward
motion, a popet is a dead thing except some man move it, the wind may move it,
it is but merely carried in men's hands, and not by any natural motion or
life: But then only is our obedience right and lively, when it has an inward
motion, a motion of love, or fear, when it rises from a root of holy
affections: when a man loves God, and fears God, then is he fit to serve and
obey God: timor addidit alas, and so amor: fear gives wings, and love is the
most compelling thing, for the love of Christ constrains us to make us
industrious to serve God; the act of love or fear is great: affections are the
best root, to thrust plenty of sap forth, to make all our actions green, and
fresh, and flourishing.

3 As affections are the best fruit of knowledge, if we value knowledge; and as
they are the next root of obedience, if we prize obedience; Only grace of
either, without which Knowledge is not saving.
so they are the only grace of both: neither of them has any grace on it, or
any gloss, or beauty in it, without heavenly affections; Knowledge, (let it be
never so great, never so profound, never so universal, never so clear, yea in
divine things, yet) it is not saving, till it be mingled with holy affections,
till it have begotten and brought forth them: All our knowledge without
affections, is not saving; but a man may go like a Bull with Coronet and
garland when he goes to the slaughter; a man may go to hell and perish
everlastingly with all these ornaments of knowledge in his head: knowledge is
not saving, except we have this ornament in our hearts of spiritual and holy
affections: And therefore as the Father said in a patheticall bemoaning of
those that were learned men; men of great parts, but cold affections: Surgunt
indocti, and coelum rapiunt; and nos cum doctrinis nostris sine cord, ecce ubi
volutamur in carne and sanguine: that is, the unlearned arise and snatch
heaven, and shall we perish with all our learning? they out-goe the learned in
this, they that have heavenly affections. Though they have such a great
excellency of knowledge, as it was sometime said of one that came to contend at
the olympike games, in the game of running: he was a tall man, and had a
mighty long arm and hand, certain said one jestingly if the garland were to
be worn with reaching, he that could reach himself farthest; this man would
carry it: but it was not he that could reach farthest, but he that could run
fastest, that bare away the garland. And it is not those that have the deep
reach in religion, but those that have the best speed in religion, the sweetest
affection in religion: It is heavenly affection that puts the grace on our
knowledge, yea and puts a life into it, which otherwise would be but a dead
knowledge.

Obedience not pleasing.
And again obedience without holy affections will not be pleasing: except it
proceed out of a root of holy affections, and what we do, (let us do it never
so busily) if we do it not out of the fear of God, and conscience to him; if
we do it not out of love, and sweet and heavenly affections toward him, it
has no acceptance with God, nor is it available: The heathens had many acts of
obedience, as justice, and temperance, and chastity, and such like virtues,
which were but wild plants, not gardens planted, nor having their due culture;
they were never cultured by God in his garden, because they grew not upon the
right root; they were done in self-love, for their own glory, as the Stoikes
were called, they were animalia gloriae, men that aimed at self-love and their
own vain glory in doing of them, and therefore they had no acceptance with
God. But it is these holy affections, that God looks at in all our actions, and
which alone puts the price upon all our obedience: He that gives but a little
in a way of charity, so it be out of affection, is accepted: It is not the
greatness of the gift; but the riches of the mind that commands; not the great
gift, but the rich mind has acceptance with God: The Widows mite, was
beyond the rich man's magnificence, because it came out of a richer mind: And so
it is in all other actions, it is the root, from what heart they spring, from
what affections they spring, that commands the actions: without which the
actions loose all their beauty. And this shall suffice to infer the second part
of the exhortation, to labor to get sovereign affections.

SER. X.
The Tenth Sermon.
PSALM 4.6. There be many that say, who will show us any good? LORD, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.


WE are yet upon the point of happiness. but upon the last observation in it;
and at this time we shall finish it: The point (that you may not forget it) for
it is the maine, was this; That sound knowledge and belief, joined with
sovereign fear, and love; and both these crowned with sincere repentance and
obedience, ordered by the light and line of the true religion, is the only way
to true happiness: we have dispatched both the explication, confirmation, and
the best part of the application; for we are on the last branch of it: viz. the
matter of exhortation: which was, and is, to exhort every man to the
prosecution, of every of those particulars in the point, which are the several
steps in the way to happiness: we handled it succinctly in these branches.

First, to exhort every-one to labor for sound knowledge and belief.

Secondly, to put every one, upon the prosecution of these sovereign
affections, of fear and love.

The last branch, which I intend now to dispatch, is, that those that have both
these, and have made a good groundwork and foundation of knowledge and
belief, and are not altogether defective in sweet and holy affections toward
God; would be careful to crown both these with sincere repentance, and
obedience.

That is the thing I shall now treat of: Get repentance, Obedience.
in the prosecution of which I shall take the same order that I did in the
former: which (...) to propound it in these three particulars.

1 First (I shall take up what I intimated in the explication: because it will
be needful here for the pressing of the point) what kind of obedience and
repentance we should aim at, and having briefly circum^cribed that,

2 I shall show what course we should steer in, and what way we should take,
for acquiring and improving of our repentance and obedience, that we may
attain unto it, and really exhibit it.

2 And lastly, bring some few considerations, wherefore, that should put us on,
and provoke us to this duty and care.

First, what kind of obedience and repentance we should aim at: What for the


In regard of 1 The Act: 2 The Manner of obedience and repentance.


I shall comprehend them both, though I shall prosecute rather the point of
obedience, as being the maine in this place: But the maine of both is the
manner, Manner.
that we may understand what manner of obedience we should aim at; It must
be sincere.

I shall express all very briefly in these two words: which though they may
seem too repugnant the one to the other, yet you shall find otherwise: Sincere.
Sincere obedience I circumscribe in that which is 1 Formal, 2 Cordial
obedience.


Formal obedience.
1 Formal obedience: I mean not that which barely has a show* and shadow of
obedience; but that which is obedience in propriety, and formality of
obedience; that has the very formality, and proper nature of obedience: For it
is not merely the opus operatum, the work done that makes a thing obedience; A
man may come, and work in my field, and do that same work which I do hire
another to do; he may come I say, and do the work, but he does it not upon
my command, neither is it therefore obedience unto me; neither is it done in
reference unto me, but he does it for some other end of his own, and it is his
own business, and in this case a man is not bound to give him wages, for he
never covenanted with him for it: And so it is in this case; there may be many
duties done in the species and kinds of them, or acts of obedience; but if it
be not done with respect to God, and conscience of his Commandment; it is not
formally obedience: For you may remember that I noted in the application three
Intrinsecall Charracters, Intrinsecally, in the true
which did describe the quality, and the property of obedience:

1 The first was; that we must take heed, that our obedience arise from the
right rise and root; Rise.
that it have the right root from whence it springs and flows; for that is all
in all to make it proper obedience: as now when it springs from those things
that I mentioned in the other branch of the point; that is, from a grounded
knowledge of the will of God, and faith; From knowledge, faith.
that it is Gods will I should carry my self so: and when it springs from a a
holy fear and love of God, Fear, love.
that I live conscientiously and respectively, to approve my self to him in
the discharge of my duty: this is the first thing necessary in the formality of
obedience: it is not otherwise formally of the nature of obedience, nor cannot
expect that acceptance and reward from God, which he will bestow on obedience.

2 And besides the right root, there must be right rule, Rule.
by which our obedience must be squared: It is an ordinary observation, that a
man cannot draw (even in natural things) a long straight line perfectly
straight, except he draw it by some rule: it is not the steddiest hand that can
do it exactly, but there will be some nookes, and therefore men use to take a
rule to draw a line by: I am sure it must be so in spiritual obedience: a man
must have an eye to the Word of God, to make that his Card and Compass to
sail by, to make that his rule and warrant of his actions; or else though he
hit (as it were) hab nab at some circumstances, yet it is not formal
obedience, because it is not regulated according to Gods Rule: Now though a man
may hand over head (as they say) make some hasty and tumultuous doings, patch
up a great deal of mud together to make a wall, not caring for a square to
make it perpendicular, yet if a man would build a Temple, or stately Palace, he
must do it perpendicular, it must be straightly built according to an exact
line and measure, or else one part will overtop an other, and all tumble down:
It is so in this case, every thing that is not squared, and regulated, and
ruled by the rule of Gods Word; what ever materiality it may have, it has
little or no formality of obedience: Gods Word must be the pattern; and those
examples that are propounded to us, and so far as they are propounded to us
for examples: In a word, all must be regulated by the Word of God; that must be
the rule of our actions, if we will perform right obedience.

3 Lastly, Obedience that is formally right, must have the right race, Race.
scope, end: as I do it out of conscience to God, and regulate it, not
according to my own foolish fancy, but his Word; so I must level all to his
glory: not that I exclude my own salvation and good, for they are subordinate,
and may work well together; but the more that is swallowed up, emptying ones
self, and wholly nullifying a man's self, not looking to himself, but
devoting himself to Gods glory, the more noble, and more excellent the work is.

And this is that I mean by formal obedience: I shall express but a word
concerning the other branch: It must be cordial, or hearty, Cordial.
and sincere obedience, as I expressed it in the general.

Now (as I noted formerly, and therefore shall but mention it now) there be
two extrinsecall cognizances, Cognizances.
by which a man may guess of a man's sincerity, and cordialnesse, which we must
aim at: they are, 1. Universality. 2. Perpetuity of obedience.


I. We must labor and take care to exhibit not a lame, but a complete
obedience, universally: Universal.
Now there may be mentioned a threefold Universality necessary in this case.

I. Universal, Extending to the whole law.
extending to the compass of the whole law: A man must not be narrow handed;
he must not be Funambulus virtutum, as Tertullian speaks, going in a narrow
tract of obedience: not thinking because he has one virtue, he has done a
great exploit, and attained the favor of God by it (and it may be think that
may be an excuse to bear him out in a great many other failings) but he must
have respect to all Gods commandments: his walk and compass of duty must be
as large as the compass of both the tables, in duty toward God, and man.

2 Universal in an other respect too: viz. to the whole compass of the law a
little more intimate: In negative and affirmative Precepts.
I mean both in negative and affirmative obedience; abstaining from every
evil the law forbids; keeping a man's self pure and undefiled from the guilt
of any of those things that cross that holy law; and endeavoring earnestly in
every good: not satisfying a man's self that he is negatively good; that is,
he is not thus or thus, or as such are; but a man must be affirmatively
perfect too; he must extend to all that God requires: we must not only
commit, or practice that which God commands us to do; but omit also that which
he has forbidden us to commit: and perform our obedience in both kinds.

3 To the whole man.
3 Lastly, the Law of God reaches to the whole man, and therefore I extend it
so far: If we would have our obedience bear the Character of sincerity, In
thought.
then it must reach the thoughts, and bents of the inward man; and the very
inward bent of the heart and affections; it knits all together: It reaches the
words, Word.
and lays a law on the tongue and speeches, neither of these must violate
Gods Law: and as by a steady rule it reaches to actions too, wherein the
principality is, and the greatest manifesttaion: and he that would exhibit his
obedience so as may be accepted, and accounted of as sincere, must approve
himself in this universality; approve himself in his thoughts words and
deeds: Deed.
yea I say, in his very deeds and actions, and thoughts: not only taking care
of the outside to make that clean; but to purge himself inwardly; and rather
to be rich in good works; to have the greatest part of his ware in the inner
part of his shop, and not all in the fore side, on the board or stal; not in a
bravado, in some outward expression of words; but in ou^ very thoughts we must
be conformable to the Law of God, and in the very beatings of our heart and
affections: that is the third thing, and sincerity demonstr^tes it self in the
universality of it, whereas hypocrisy comes exceeding short.

2 It must approve it self too in perpetuity: 2 Perpetual.
Sincerity shows it self by a constant course of obedience toward God and
man: Not to hamper a little at some pieces of obedience; to have some times,
some good intentions; some good thoughts; some good speeches; to go to the
Church now and then; and as soon as ever a man is out again, to turn to his
vomit of swearing, and drunkenesse, and filthiness, and all kind of excess.
It Is not sincerity to be seemingly conscientious and devout, to lift up the eyes
in the Church; but to cheat and cozen in the shop: it is not to make a
labyrinth, to be out and in, backward, and forward; but there must be a
perpetual, and a constant course: For if grace be truly rooted in the heart,
it will be a perpetual spring: not like a poole, or some current, which after
some rain it may be runs very fast; not upon some fits to run a great
deal; but if it be from a sincere root and principle, it will show the
sincerity of it in its perpetuity: And though it be not able to keep that
pace that it desires, yet it will not start out of the way, but be constant in
it: Tardus viator, etc. the slow and soft paced traveller, is better then a
nimble hunter; though the one runs far in a day, and nimble; yet the other
comes to his journeyes end: and this is one of the maine Characters, of
sincerity, that there is a perpetuity: And therefore the Scripture and Divines
have made this distinction of grace: There is grace that is true; and grace
that is temporary: A temporary grace for the outward act, a wicked man may
have, an hypocrite may reach it; but time will discover it, Truth is the
daughter of time: It will be manifest in time: A man must keep a constant
course and tenor of obedience in his life, and that is a Character of
sincerity; These I say are but extrinsecall ones; yet we cannot have a fairer
and more legible one then these, universality, and perpetuity; these only
crown a good man, and do demonstrate his sincerity.

How, in,
2 But how may one that is willing and sensible of the truth and equity of this
course, attain unto it? There be many difficulties, and many repugnancies of
the flesh to keep a man off from such a course of obedience toward God: how
may a man therefore (notwithstanding these rubbes) attain unto it, and raise
his mind, and fasten it this way?

For that, I will say but these two things, viz. Some things in general, and
Some things in particular:


In general: general.
there be three steps (as it were) and degrees, which are very considerable,
to bring a man to that pitch; and to fasten him in a steady course of
obedience: as

1 A deep and serious consideration of our ways: Deep and serious
consideration.
examining and considering our ways, and pondering our steps; and studying to
beat down that which is contrary to the right way; to see the deformity of the
one way, and the bents of the other way, let there be this serious
consideration:

2 From this we should proceed to strong resolution; Strong resolution.
to bind our hearts to the good behavior: to engage our selves by vows and
covenants to GOD, to walk in that way, which upon sad, and serious, and
sober consideration I have discovered to be the good way: Endeavor I say, to
come to resolution of spirit; to say, I will keep the Commandments of my GOD:
and therefore I will beat off all other things, that would keep me off, or
interrupt me in that way: There must be strong resolutions: which had need
ever and anon to be repaired, because they are apt to grow sick and faint and
weak: It may be for a while a man may hold out well; but if our resolutions
be not renewed, they will grow slack: therefore ever and anon we had need
renew our resolutions, vows, and covenants.

And (as I have formerly expressed) there may be considered a threefold time,
in an orderly course (besides an extraordinary) wherein it is meet for a man
to take up his spirits, and set them in a right temper of resolution, viz.
First, we should do it every day: Every day even a heathen man could say,
call thy self to an account, and consider thy ways: see how thou do walk
or decline, or thrive and prosper in obedience, and repair thy strength, renew
thy covenant every day: And again do it more solidly every week, every Lords
day, when we have further helps to strengthen us; when we have the preaching
of the Word, to quicken us, and to work upon our spirits and put us on more:
Take an occasion to do it yet more seriously every month, when we come to
the Lords Table, and partake of those seals, the substance of which is the
renewing of our covenant with God.

Do it yet more often, bestow yet more time in meditating upon our ways;
Reinforcing.
and reinforcing our selves upon new resolutions; humbling our selves for what
we have failed: and even as a horse will do, after every stumbling make so
much more speed, so after al our stumblings and failings, let us recover and
enforce our selves so much the more. To omit all extraordinary cases, and
extraordinary persons, and extraordinary times, and motions of Gods spirit, and
all other extraordinary occasions, we must take this course of serious
examination, and strong resolution.

Speedy execution.
3 And then there remains nothing, but speedy execution, to let upon this, which
is the third thing in the generality, and which I will express a little more
particularly:

And there be but two things that I will mention as most considerably helpful
to set a man upon and strengthen him in a way of obedience. In special.


First of all, Repair and increase in Knowledge.
the repairing and increasing of those former things in the point, as namely,
your knowledge, labor for a new improvement every day; increase your
knowledge: Let the word of God dwell plenteously among you: strive more to know
what the good and acceptable will of God is: build your selves up more in your
knowledge, and this is one step toward our obedience.

Increase your faith and belief; Faith.
cleaving and assenting to the word of God; belief, that is a good help: It
is unbelief that is a great rub hindering us from setting upon the ways of
obedience: for because we do not believe, therefore we do not do. But the
more firmly we believe the more strongly we shall run the ways of Gods
Commandments.

Again, increase your holy affections of fear and love. Increase a holy fear
of God: Fear.
often set his Majesty before your eyes: often think upon the holiness, the
excellency, and the purity of his nature: think on his Majesty in all
respects, think upon his All seeing eye, and upon his All-knowing knowledge:
that he takes an account of all a man's ways, and all his actions: and this
will work a holy fear of his Majesty, and that holy fear will put it upon
holy obedience: Increase also your love and sweet affections toward God:
labor to see, Love.
not only excellency to astonish, but beauty in God to move us to love, and
sweetness to inflame our love: labor to see all the goodness and sweetness
that is in him: and this will wonderfully raise our thoughts to love him; and
that love infinitely set us on in a way of obedience to him. This I say will be
a great help: for the truth is, nothing in this kind comes off hansomly from
us, if it comes not from love; it is against the hair, if it come not from a
principle of love: whereas on the otherside (as the saying was) Marti arma non
sunt onera: The commandments of God will not be burdensome to us, if we love
God: so that now the increasing, and the renewing of every one of these former
things, will be a means to set us upon obedience: for every one of them servs
proportionably, for the watering of the very root of obedience, to make it
thrive and prosper: though I do not now (for it is not necessary, if I would
make a young tree grow that I have planted, that I should go to the top, or
boughs of the tree, and cast water there, it is but frivolous; for it
suffices to cast the water at the root; for it is the root that nourishes all
the branches; and all the sap, it is first at the root, and so conveyed to
the boughs and branches:) So it is in this case: I do not speak of watering
the top of obedience, to make it flourish outwardly: but water the root, with
this knowledge, and these affections (which are the root of all the actions of
obedience) and then there will naturally issue forth the fruit of obedience:
For if these be kept well and strong: if these be renewed and furthered; the
other will be a natural issue out of it.

2. But yet to speak a little more particularly: Exercise these.
The maine thing that will help us in obedience, is the very act and exercise
of obedience: Every act is strengthened, and every habit is strengthened, by the
exercise of many acts of that habit; and it grows to be strengthened by
frequent use: obedience is a thing that cannot be otherwise strengthened, but
only by mere practice: So that this is the Maine, viz. the setting upon the
work, not only meditating, and pondering upon it; and thinking what I ought to
do to obey God, but when I do know what his will is, I must set upon the
doing of it, I must not dispute about the thing, but fall upon the doing of the
thing, which I know I ought to do.

And now in this there be two things.

taken heed of that will hinder us in the practice of obedience. Take heed


care of, that will exceedingly further us in a course of obedience.

I will but touch upon some few things in either.

Take heed of such carnal things, Of Carnal
as will choke us in the very thoughts, when we are to go about a course of
obedience: I say will choke the very thoughts: as 1. Carnal Reason: It is a
wonderful thing to see (and yet no wonder when we consider our natural
condition) how many things will boil (as it were) out of the heart; how many
foolish excuses, and how many vain pretenses, to keep a man off from duty,
when a man has some thoughts to go about it: as when a man has some thoughts
to go, and hear the Word of God, then arises such an hindering thought, as
thus. I can sit at home, and read the while, and save my labor of going: I
know what the Minister will say, viz. that it is but faith and obedience we must
labor for: And so many other things there may be, and indeed so many, as that
they will take us off from the thing we should, and indeed otherwise would do:
It is strange to think of the infinite reaching, and racking a man's wit to make
excuses, some thought of other is in the way, either it is not now time, or
some thing else there is always; some disputes that reason will suggest, by which
we contradict our intents, and choke our purposes of doing this or that duty
Take heed therefore of canall reason, it is a dangerous thing to word it with
God: but when a man once sees his way before him; then it is have to fall upon
it; let there be no cunctating, no delaying in the work for some foolish
respect: Remember this; there is nothing in the world, but may be spoken
against; if a man would give way to every reasoning: Is there any truth in the
world, but may be reasoned against? is there any truth so clear, but wit will
find something to say against it? But it is no matter what men, or thy own
carnal reason say, so Gods word says otherwise: And therefore away with all
such foolish carnal reasonings as these: I would do such a duty; but there is
a secret suggestion of my heart now, that I think it not best to do it, or I
will do it some other time: but away with these; when we know what we should
do, fall on it and do it: Away with carnal fear, Fear:
away with fear, take heed of it: Rusticus expectat etc. A country man
expects at the water side to go over, he sees the waterrunning, and is
resolved to stay till it was all gone, but he considered not that it came from
a Fountain: And so as there will be disputes alwais, so there is a spring of
difficulties that will arise, as indeed there can beno good action, but there
is, or may be some danger, or difficulty in the performing of it; and something
that may be a restraint against the performance of it; Carnal fear will
hinder; I shall have some shame, a nick name (it may be) set upon me; I say
carnal fear of shame may hinder, that is an other: but we must rectify this
fear, with the fear of God, nay mortify it: A man must not respect such
foolish things, nor fear some Bug-beares, but fear God: And let that fear
extinguish all carnal fear: that (may otherwise discourage and dishearten us
in the thoughts of any duty.

3. There is likewise carnal sloth, Sloth.
and sluggishnesse of our nature, whereby we learn to delay and put off; and
the Devil is ready to envegle us with it, and put it into our heads; that this
may be done soon enough before I die; what, shall I be godly, and holy; and be
a Saint before I come to heaven: yes I tell you, you must; you must be Saints
here; or else you shall never be Saints there: Do not delay, nor dally, nor
suffer your corrupt nature therefore to keep you off, by any reason that can
be objected againt this: Do not fall off from the duty out of a mere
sluggishnes, to be loath to put your hands to your mouth, as they say: loath to
put out your hands to reach the Crown. Take heed of these carnal things.

2. Take heed of worldly distractions: Worldly distractions.
It is a wonder to think, into what a labyrioth, the world leeds a man, if he
will dance after the pipe of it: sometime with this thing, and sometime with
the other thing; so that there is no time for any duty to God; do it I must,
and not slothfully; I see that this is a duty, and there is no excuse to be
made: but the subtilty of the world insinuates it self into us; drawing us
from one task to an other task, from one occasion to an other oceasion, from
one visit to an other visit; and complement after complement; that a man eats
out all his precious time, and cats out al good thoughts, while a man danceth
in that maze, and follows the world in a wild Goose chafe: And certainly if a
man will stay while all worldly business be done, a man shall never have any
time for God: But remember one thing is necessary: take your selves off from
worldly distractions, do not plunge your selves over head and ears in the
world: Be not so deep in the world as too too many are; that have nothing left,
nor spirit, nor time for God, nor for their own souls: But remember (...), let
not the world have al, bestow some time upon God, some time upon your ownsoules.

2. I will add but a word for the affirmative part, take care of
and that is concerning what you must take care of.

In a word, 1 Hint of
take the hint of al outward opportunities and occasions, when God offers an
opportunity of doing him service, and of doing any act of obedience, do it.

2. And take the hint of inward motions: when the Spirit of God, and the
dictate of our conscience, does say, this is the way, walk in it; and thou
ought to do this; do it.

1. Take the hint of opportunity, 1 Opportunity:
as suppose thou have an opportunity of prayer; take heed of all those
creepings, and windings; those serpentine tricks of the flesh and the world
that would stay thee; and when thou have an opportunity to prayer offered, lay
hold upon it, and make use of it: take I say the occasion; when God has now
led thee to privacy, thou art then where thou may freely have communion with
God: Take also that opportunity, that thou have offered, to do good to thy
neighbor, while we have opportunity let us do good to all: It is not good to
let slip any opportunity; that is a certain truth: Do not neglect therefore,
nor slightly, (but upon just ground) let fall any opportunity: when God gives a
man an occasion, and an opportunity, it is Gods call; and therefore let no
opportunity slip: It may be now, thou have a good knowledge of the ways of
God, thou have a good affection to it, and thou do not act yet according to
it: but when there comes any opportunity for us, let us take that occasion: let
that wind blow us over to God by duty, let that opportunity make all move to
God.

2 Take the hint of the motion of Gods Spirit; I do not speak of any
extraordinary motion, Inward motions.
or revelation: It is not needful for me to stay for them; neither are they
such common things, as some fanaticall, and fantastic spirits have, and do
imagine (whether out of strength of fancy; or wickedness of policy, I know
not) yet notwithstanding the spirit of God has diverse ways of revelation, as
in his word, or upon some occasion of some acts of the spirit: the spirit of
grace that God has planted in a mansheart, that stirs him up to good: And this
spirit of God does often times whisper to us, saying, this is a duty thou must
do; and thy conscience does witness with the spirit that it is so; and thy
own affections (if thou have any heaven ward, duty-ward) do stir thee also;
now these come on thee, do not neglect the offer of the spirit; do not,
quench the spirit of God: Thou have it may be, a motion to go and pray to
God, and this comes from a regular ground; and it is also seasonable: do not
lightly then extingtish and quench the spirit through neglect, drive not away
the spirit, God is willing to strive with thee, and thou shall not drive away
the spirit if thou art but ^achable, if thou have but an ear to hear; oh ^f
God will sweetly converse with us, and put an h^nt to quicken good motions in
us: if he will (I say). O let us cherish them, by putting ourselves ponduty! O
when God offers the hint by his spirit, take it; take that hint, I say, A man
may do more in an hour of prayer, when he has the motions, and the power of
the spirit, when the forerunner of it, is some sweet motion cast into the
heart of a man; some sweet touch of meditation puts him upon duty, O then I
say, a man would make use of the sails of that hint by that wind, he might
dispatch a great voyage of prayer, and return richly laden. Do not loose
therefore these opportunities: and so for any other p ar of duty, or obedience,
do notextinguifli or slightly turn back those motions of the spirit of God;
those voices of thy conscience within thee, calling upon thee for the
performance of duty, do not neglect it, but let that time be thy time; for
now it is a time of winning grace; and God that has stirred thee up, will
certainly strengthen thee: when I am private, and am at leisure, then is a
peculiar and proper time, and when Gods spirit moves me, and tells me this is
the time, make use of this efficacious motion.

3. 3 Motives:
There remains now the third thing in this branch, viz. to propound some
considerations to press on this duty.

To dispatch that, I shall propound but some two, or three.

1. Consider that obedience is the scope, Obedience the scope of both.
and the end, and the perfection of both the former; the very top, and crown
of knowledge and affections; the very height that they reach unto: knowledge is
give that we may be the fitter to obey: and affections are given but to stir
us up to obeditence; and therefore we shall loose the fruit, and scope, and the
end of all the other preparatives, if we do not add this: All acts of our
understandings and affections will be imperfect, if we do not add obedience:
for that is the scope and end why God gives the other: why the Spirit of God
works the other in a man's heart; it is all but to prepare a man for this: Now
if a man be furnished with arms to fight, he must fight when he is called to
use them: And so in this case, when God gives a man affections, and
endowments, if a man use them not, what is he the better?

2. Scale of truth
This is the very seal of the truth of both the former: A man can have no
assurance that he has knowledge that is saving; or that his affections are
such as are right; except both these show themselves by inclining us to
obedience; for there is a natural l dependency between this and the former;
between the actions of obedience, and the root that I spoke of: It is
impossible but they must break forth, and show themselves in actions (at
least) in seasonable time: It is true the tree does not always show the life of
it, by the leaves and fruit; (they are something separated from life) but yet
that tree that does not show, (though it lie dead all the winter) that it lives
in the spring; I say if it do not spring up in the Sunshine in summer; if it
do not then flourish, it is dead: So in this case, certainly though actions
do not always accompany us; a man's affections may be strong in him; but yet
there is more required to action, then affection: the intrinsecal character of
grace lies principally in the affections: and therefore when a man comes to an
inward breach, that is the worst: the externals may fail, and the Apostle
complained of that, Miserable man that I am: his will was good, his affections
were good, but he had not power to act; But yet when there is a season of
actions, and all things concur; when God affords other conveniences in
abundance to produceactions, if a man does not bring forth action then,
certainly I will conclude that knowledge is dead knowledge, and those
affections are dead, that life is gone out of him, or else it would show it
self in this warm summer, and we should see both leaves and fruit: for it
cannot lie hidden, (if a man have affection to God) but it will break forth
upon occasion: Obedience therefore is the seal of truth; and we can never
evidence the truth of our knowledge, and our affections, except upon occasion
we show it by the fruitfulness of our actions.

3. Root of al ends.
And again this obedience is the Seal and immediate root of all these ends,
which we shall propound to our selves: It is the immediate root of our
Consolation: 1 Own consolation:
A man may gather comfort from his obedience to God, in the performance of
duty: I do not say it is the proper root, but it is the most immediate root;
for you know apples do not grow out of the root of the tree; but they grow out
of the top of the branches, and yet they grow by virtue of the root: but the
branch is the most proper place on which they are to grow: So it is in this
case; comfort is immediately gathered as it were from the forecite in the
actions, in the utmost branches of the actual obedience: Immediately we have
but little comfort from our affections, because we have bu^ little assurance
of the sincerity of our affections; but our comfort is gathered, and multiplied
in our abounding in the work of the Lord: The more obedience, the more
comfort: I cannot express it better then thus: A man's body is warm when his
clothes are on him, to keep him warm: the clothes give me not that warmth
that I have; but my body, and yet the clothes keep me in warmth; for without
them I should suffer some cold in my external parts. And so it is in this
case: Though our comfort do not originally arise from our obedience, yet our
obedience keeps our comfort warm: The more we compass our selves about with
obedience, the more we heap up things, and do them according to the rule of
Gods word, and our conscience; the more we abound in these things, the more we
keep our comfort warm: out of what fear or love we do them to God, there is
the vital excellency of them: but this is mightily cherished by these
breakings out in actions of obedience; it is the seal of our own consolation.

Neigbours edification.
2. The edification of our neighbor, which should be an other end we should
aim at: we should depend more upon our obedience, then upon any thing else
for that end: Indeed knowledge may be a means to edify, and so may our
affections too, but all this cannot do any good without action: Let your
works be seen before men, that they may glorify your heavenly Father: we
provoke others by our holy pattern; Some thing may lie in us, which they
cannot take notice of; our knowledge and affections may lie hid: they will not
have the treasure of grace, except it be manifested to them, by works of
obedience, as of instruction to them, or reproof with tenderness of heart;
our edification, and building up of our neighbor, flows from such actions. As
the Candell does shine through every pane of the Lantern to give light: so
our knowledge and affection shines through every act of obedience to edify our
neighbor.

And this is the way to glorify God, Gods glorification.
and adorn Religion; to beautify that, and cast an honor upon it: If we
know, and can talk of Religion, and will be contentious for it; in truth it is
something; But alas it is nothing: So far as our way tends to the glory of
God, it is in actions of obedience: our knowledge, or our affections
immediately do not glorify God: It is alone our actions of obedience, that
put an honor, and glory, and beauty upon God, and upon the religion of God:
whereas Religion fares ill, if men be all in tongue, and nothing in deed, or
actions: If we put all in our pretense of affections of holiness; and walk
not in the actions of holiness; this will be a disgrace, and scandal to
Religion: The performance of holy actions, makes men see the beauty and
excellency of Religion, and does strongly advance the kingdom of God, and the
glory of God: I had thought to have added something in a general way: In
general Seek al these
that we should take heed that we do aim at all these; viz. knowledge, and
affections, and obedience, I say to exhort you to aim at all these: because
none of these alone are sufficient to note our sincerity; nor to support us in
misery; nor advance us to felicity, and happiness: But every one of them must
go together; And therefore take heed of all; for all these do but make up the
way to the true happiness, the thing that is so desirable as in the first
point, that is so miserable if it be only in the world, as in the second point,
that is real and royal, if we possess our selves of God, as in the third
point; and the thing that is attaineable to by these things, as in this last
point: and therefore we must set upon this way, which will bring to that
happiness we desire.

If we do but well weigh (to pass by the necessity of the thing; Necessity of
the thing.
we cannot be without happiness, it is a thing no man can want: and to pass
by the opportunities of grace that GOD has given us, Opportunity of grace:
to bring our selves in a way for the attaining of happiness; to pass by all
these I say) the mortality of man, Mortality of man.
and the mutability of the times: and there is nothing in the world that can
secure us, Mutability of times.
or ensure us of any good: Let us therefore labor after this, to ensure this
happiness to our souls; Excel^e^cy of grace.
that what ever come we may be sure of this, and if we be we shall do well: I
cannot ensure you of anything that you have; you are now rich, I cannot ensure
you shall be long so: I cannot ensure you of your health: you are now healthful
and strong, but I cannot ensure it: I can not ensure your lives, you are living
now, but how long ye shall you nor I know not: I can only ensure you of this,
God and your happiness; if you have God you shall have happiness; yea I can
ensure you of your God, and happiness in this way: and then whether I am rich,
or poor; whether I am sick or well; whether I live or dye; If I can be
insured of this, that I shall be a happy man, I have all, if I can make that
sure: and this is the way to it, by walking this way, you and I may attain it:
Labor therefore to get sound knowledge; and join to that sovereign
affections; and to crown both with sincere obedience: and this way will assure
us of it; viz. that what ever come we shall be happy. *

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

THOMAS VVYKES.
Jan. 20. 1639.

