THE COPYE OF THE SELF SAME WORDS, THAT MI LORD Sturton spoke presently at
his Death, being the.vi. day of March, in the year of our Lord. 1557. among
the people as his Confession, desiringe the people to take Example by him, and
to keep no Envy in their hertes for that is the root of all euylles.
GOOD people, I am come hither to dye, I am come hither to dye, and justly
Condemned for mine offenses by the law, what mine offenses were I am sure you
understand, which was for a most cruel and detestable murder by my
commandment don and committed, wherefore I shall desire you al for gods sake
to let me be an Ensample to you al, and to all the world and beware that ye
let no malice take root in your hertes, for that is the utter dysstroier of
al virtue, I shall desire you al, and all the world, to forgive me, and
specially those poor women, Children, and kinsfolk, of them whom I have
caused so cruelly to be murdered, that God may put it into their hertes, for
Christ's sake, and for Charity to forgive me, and if there be any here, or else
where, whom I have offended, I shall desire you al for charity sake to forgive
me, and if there be any of you who has offended me, I do from the bottom of
my heart forgive them, as freely as I trust God of his mercy has forgiven me
being most sorry and repentant, and when I shall depart out of this world,
that you will say al, Lord take his spirit into thy hands, and I shall also
desire you for christ's sake to say with me on your knees our Lords Prayer,
which is the Pater noster, and so turning him to the East, and said the Lords
Prayer, which done, he desired Sir John Sowch to forgive him, who answered that
he did forgive him from the bottom of his heart, and then going higher on the
Ladder said, good people pray for me, and so wynkyng with his eyes said, I
charge the O Satan in Gods name to depart from me, and suffer my soul to
rest in the lord, and than said. Domine accipe spiritum meum. And so departed
this world: on whose soul God have mercy.

The Prayer of the Lord Stourton which he spoke kneling on his knees desiring
the people to pray for him and also say with him.
LOrd harken to my words, consider the thought of mine heart, behold how loud
I cry unto the, let my just Prayer enter into thine ears which unfeignedly
comes from mine heart, here me lord for I am poor and distitute of man's
help, take care for my soul, save me thy servant which wholly trust in the,
have mercy upon me O Lord, for I will never cease criynge to the for help for
thou art my lord, and more merciful than my tongue can express, as aduer site
assaileth me I will cry and call for help unto the, I will call upon the in the
day time, and in the night my cry shall not be hid from the. O thou god of
heavens, the maker of the waters and lord of al creatures, here me a pore
sinner calling upon the, and putting my hole trust in thy mercy, O lord what
great pleasures thou haste prepared for me in heaven, that I should delight in
no earthly thing but in the, my most pleasure is to cleue fast unto the, and
in the to set my hope and trust, have mercy upon me O Lord, O Lord, God have
mercy upon me for thy manifold mercies sake forgive me al mine offenses: I
commit my spirit into thy hands, deliver me from the power of darkness of this
world, thou have redeemed me O Lord God of truth.

In te domine speraui non confunder in eternum, in iusticia tua libera me.
Inclina ad me aurem tuam accelera. et.c, FINIS.
Imprynted by Wyllyam Pickeringe dwelling upon London bridge.


