A prayer said by the lord Sturton being on his knees before he went up the
ladder, and also his confession before his death the.vi. day of March in the
year of our lord God. M. D. L.vii.
LOrd harken to my words, consider the thought of my heart, behold how loud I
cry unto the, let my just prayer enter into thine ears which unfeignedly
comes from mine heart, hear me lord for I am poor and destitute of man's
help, take care for my soul, save me thy servant which wholye trust in the,
have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I will never cease crying to the for help, for
ye art mild and more merciful the^ my to^g can express, as often as adversity
assaileth me I will cry and call for help unto the, I will call upon yt in the
day time, and in the night my cry shall not be hid from the, O thou god of the
heavens, the maker of the waters, and lord of all creatures, hear me a poor
sinner calling upon the and putting my hole trust in thy mercy. O lord what
great pleasures thou haste prepared for me in heaven, that I should delight in
no earthly thing but in the, my most pleasure is to clean fast unto the and in
the to set my hope and trust, have mercy upon me O lord (O lord god) have
mercy upon me: for thy manifold mercies sake. Forgive almine offenses. I
commit my spirit into thy hands, de liver me from the powers of darkness of
this world. Thou have redeemed me Lord God of truth. I pray you all to pray
for me, and then he said. In tedomine speraui non confundar in eternum. etc.

The words of the lord Sturton upon the ladder before his death.
GOod people I am come hither to dye, I am come hither to dye, and justly
condemned for mine offenses by the law, what mine offenses were it is not
unknown unto you all, which was for a most cruel and detestable murder, by
my commandment done and committed. wherefore I shall desire you al for gods
sake, to let me be an example to you all, and to all the world, and beware yt
ye let no ranker or malice take root in your hearts, for where ranker or
malice is rooted no good virtue can grow, I shall desire you all, and all the
world to forgive me, and specially those poor women and children, whose
husbands I have so cruelly caused to be murdered, that god may put it into
their hearts for Christ's sake and for charity to forgive me, and if there be
any here whom I have offended I shall desire you all for charities sake to
forgive me, and if there be any of you whom has oftended me, I do from the
bottom of my heart forgive you as truly as I trust god of his mercy has
forgeuen me, being most sorry and repentaunt. And when I shall depart this world
that ye will say all, Lord, take his spirit into thy hands, and I shall also
desire you for Christ's sake to say with me upon your knees our lords prayer
which is the Pater noster, and so turning him unto the East said our Lords
prayer, which done he desired Sir John Souch to forgive him, who answered, my
lord I forgive you even from the bottom of my heart, and then going higher
upon the ladder said, good people pray for me, and so winking said somewhat
softer. I charge the Satan in gods name to depart from me, and suffer my
soul to rest in our lord. And then said, Domine accipe spiritum meum three
times, the^ one of the guard did bind a handker theife about his eyes, and so
he was immedtatly turned beside the ladder, on whose soul Christ take mercy.

Amen.
Imprinted at London in Fleet street nere to Saint Dunstans Church by Thomas
Marshe.


