THE MANNER OF THE CRVELL OVTRAGIOVS MVRTHER OF WILLIAM STORRE Mast. of Art,
Minister, and Preacher at Market Raisin in the County of Lincoln:

COMMITTED By Francis Cartwright one of his parishioners, the 30. day of August
Anno. 1602.

printer's or publisher's device AC: OX


AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1603.

ABout Lammas last viz. Ann. 1602. there happened some controversy between
the Lords and the rest of the Inahbitants of Market Raisin in the county of
Lincoln, concerning their commons and liberty in the Towne-Fields, and the
matter being moved by one of them in the Church immediately after evening
prayer, on a Sabbath day, diverse hot intemperate speeches passed among them.
Whereupon their Minister, whose name was M. Storre, much disliking so
indiscreete a course, willed them to have respect both to the time, and place
where they were. And further advised; seeing the cause in hand concerned a
multitude, amongst whom some of the least government, would always be the
readiest to speak: that they would therefore make choice of two or three of
the fittest, and most substantial men to answer, and undertake for all the
rest. This motion seemed to please them well, and thereupon they entreated him,
that he would, as a man indifferent, speak first what he thought concerning
the cause. But he not willing to intermeddle in that matter, twice, or thrice
denied their request. And the rather for that there was present one Francis
Cartwright, a young man of an unbridled humor: the only son, and heir to one
of the same Lords of the Town, betwixt whom, and himself there was grown no
small unkindness. Yet in the end being pressed thereunto by their importunity,
with the consent of both the parties, he delivered his opinion, using therein
such discretion, and reasons to confirm the same, that they could not
directly except against him. Notwithstanding seeing him incline more to the
right of the freeholders, and the rest of the commons, than to favor their
intended purpose, they seemed to dislike his speeches and to cavil at the same.

Young Cartwright standing by, not able any longer to contain himself, took
occasion hereupon to break forth abruptly into these words. The Priest
deserves a good fee, he speaks so like a Lawyer, M. Storre having often
aforetime had experience of his hot stomach, and hastiness as well toward
others as himself, thought it best to reply little against him for that
present. But the other respecting neither the time, nor place, nor yet the
dutiful regard he should have had to his fathers presence, uttered many more
such base and odious terms, that for modesty sake, I forbear to rehearse
the^. The next morning as Mr Storre, and some others of his neighbors were
talking with the elder Cartwright about these his sons abuses, he came unto
them, where they were, interrupting their conference, and fell into the like
outrageous railing as he used the night before. The Minister seeing this second
incursion more violent then the former, replied to some of his words, retorting
the^ back again, as more properly to be applied to himself.

This reply he took in such high disgrace, that had not his father hindered it,
he had there presently with his dagger effected some part of that mischief,
which afterward he putt in practice. But being not suffered to do what he
would, he departed from the^ into the open market place, and there proclaimed,
That Storre was a scurvy, lousy, paltrie priest: that whosoever said he was
his friend, or spoke in his cause, was a rogue, and a rascal: that he would
(but for the law) cut his throat, tear out his heart, and ha^g his quarters on
the maypole.

These speeches, and many more of the same quality being daily given out,
occasioned Mr Storre to think it now high time to provide for his own
safety, and therefore he went to some Justices near adjoining: acquainted the^
with these proceedings, and desired the good behavior against the said
Cartwright. But they doubting whether they might grant the same in this case,
or not, offered him for his present safeguard the peace, and the other at the
next quarter sessions, if occasion so required.

He not resolved what were best to be done, whether to except of this offer,
or to complain himself before the high commissioners, came home, and the next
Sabbath took his text out of Isaah Chap. 1. verse. 9. in these words. Except
the Lord of Hosts had reserved unto us, even a small remnant, we had bin as
Sodom, and like unto Gomorah. The which words by the general report, even of
his enemies that hard him, he handled very learnedly, and delivered out of the
same many points of necessary doctrine. young Cartwright seemed to note it
diligently with his pen, but as the stomach filled with raw humors corrupts
all good nourishment that comes therein, so this man's mind fraught with
rancour, and malice, wrested al things he heard into the worse sense, as
purposely spoken against him, and after that, more, and more thirsted for
revenge.

About a week after, he espied Mr. Storre walking about eight of the clock in
the morning alone by the south side of the town in his cloak, went to a
cutlers shop, took out of the same a short sword, which he had formerly
provided, and made very sharp, and presently overtooke him. The other hearing
one at his heels looked back, and saw him drawing his sword as he came:
noting also by the palenes of his visage, how mightily he was incensed to
mischief, and seeing no means either to escape, or to defend himself, was
greatly aghast, and purposed to use some speeches (if it were possible) somewhat
to assuage his passions.

But he being double armed both with force, and fury, would abide no parley, but
presently at the first blow cut his left leg almost of, and then making at
his head, the other casting up his arms to defend it (for other weapon had he
none) he gave him two mortal wounds on the forepart thereof through the
brain-pan: cut of three of his fingers: and gave him other two grievous wounds
on the outside of either arm, between the elbow, and the hand, the one to the
midst of the arm, and the other more the^ half in sunder, deviding the
maine bone above two inches one part from another. Thus massacred he fell
backward into a puddle of water, and striving to recover himself, the splinter
bone of his leg half cut through before, knapt in two, and his heel doubled
back to the calfe of his leg. Cartright not yet satisfied with the blood,
which he had already gotten, continued his rage, still more feircely upon him,
and gave him another gash on the outside of the right thigh to the very bone.
And again on the left knee, his leg being bended, as he lay, he cut him the
fashion, and compass of an horse shoe battring in pieces the whirlbone, and
the nether part of the thighe bone, that it was most grievous eve^ to behold.
Some smaler wounds he had, and sundry other blows which came not to his skin,
as appeared by the ma^gling of his apparel.

A maid coming that way by occasion of business cried out, whereupon he fled,
and many of the neighbors came presently to the place, and behoulding this
vvoefull spectacle, their Minister thus wallowed in the mire, and his blood so
extremely, gushing out, ran some of them into the town with such a
confused noise, and outcrie of murder, that others hearing it, supposed on the
sudden there had been fire, and went with all speed to towle the bells. Thus
was all suddenly in an vproare, yet few, or none could tell what the matter
was. The rest of more discretion took up the wounded man, carried him to the
next house, where one of the constables dwelt, and made very good, and speedy
means to bind up his wounds, and to stanch his blood.

Against the next day was provided a bone-setter, and three or four of the
best surgeons thereabout, who when they came to dress him, were of opinion,
that, if he died not at the opening of his wounds, and forcing together of his
bones, he would at the least be very subject to often sounding. Yet he beyond
all their expectation endured all extremities, which necessity in that case
imposed on him to abide, for three hours space at the least, and never
fainted, or changed color. The which thing induced them to alter their mind,
and to hope (as it were) past all hope, that he would escape it. But the deadly
blows had so perished his brains, and let out so great a quantity of his
blood in other parts of his body, that it was not possible he should recover.
So that after he had languished in very great pain from monday morning till
the next Sunday after midnight, which was at the change of the moon, he ended
his life.

The time that he thus continued, he spent much to the profitte of himself,
and to no less comfort of those that came to visit him. For besides many
divine meditations he daily uttered, and thanks to God for his so merciful a
visitation, in giving him both such time, and memory to prepare himself, he
also heartily forgave, and continually prayed for his greatest, and deadly
enemy, whom he esteemed now in worse state, and more miserable then himself.

Now to leave the dead man (as no doubt he is) with the Lord: it is not amiss
breifely to declare by what means the offender escaped.

Presently after he had committed this cruelty, he posted home to his fathers
house, on the backside, and the truth of his fact being now known, many that
were already assembled, and knew not at the first about what matter; came to
apprehend the fellon. But his father fearing least in that desperate heat he
should do some more mischief, did what he could to pacify the tumult until
the constables came, and then delivered him. They sending for three or four of
such as they thought best, which had some of them seen the wounds, as well as
one of the constables himself had done, carried him to a Justice. Where either
for lack of their due information of the truth, or by the corrupt, and
favorable affection of the magistrate, or both, there was a very slender bail
taken, and the malefactor by this slight sent away.

To the Reader.
FOr that some of Cartwrights favorites wanting color to excuse altogether
the fowlenesse of his fact, do yet endeavor to qualify the same in what
measure they can, affirming that he being a young man, was provoked, and
stirred up by evil words to commit that in the heat of his blood which
otherways he would never have committed: And some others being themselves
either of a loose conversation, or at the least enemies to the Ministry of
the Gospel, would seem to extenuate the crime, by imputing it, as a just
reward due, not only to the party murdered, but also to the most of his
calling for their over-bold checking, and (as they term it) domineering over
their betters, because indeed, they reprove the general corruptions that so
abound in every corner: And least also it might happily be surmised by some
indifferently affected, that many things in this relation might partially
proceed in favor of the dead man from some of his friends, it is therefore
thought fit for the better satisfying of the later sort, to assure them that
there is nothing set down, but that which is to be justified by very
sufficient proof: and for the better answering of the former scandalls, and
such like, here be annexed the testimony (as it were) of four substantial
Iuries, which speak of their credit what they knew concerning the man. The
first does consist of the better sort of his parishioners where he remained:
the second of the chief of such Ministers among whom he conversed: the third
of the worshipful in the country to whom he was best known: and the fourth,
of the learned in the University where he was brought up.

The testimony of his Parishioners.
FOrasmuch as some uncharitable people not satisfied with the guiltless blood
of M. Storre our late Minister, give out slanderous speeches against him now
dead, as proceeding from us his parishioners: we therefore willing to clear
our selves from such untruths do give to understand to who^ these presents
shall come, that as (no doubt) the fact was heinous before God, so is it a
thing most grievous unto us, as well in regard of his wife, and five small
children, whose staff of bread (as himself said) by this means is broken, as
also chiefly that such a man should thus perish among us, whose learning
diligence, and dexterity in teaching the word of God was equal (as we are
persuaded) to the better sort of his fellow Ministers: his conversation so
answerable to his doctrine, and his carriage such in all his affairs, that (in
our judgment) it might have bin a president to direct a civil, and christian
life. Thus having witnessed the truth in the premises, we cease.

From Market Raisin this 17. of April. 1603. Edmund Wright. Hum. Chapman. John
Da^^otte. John Rutter. Rich. Pockley. Alexan. La^ming. Robert Lilly. Tho.
Brakes. Mich. Iesoppe. Rich. Wright. Chri. Gyfford. Will. Wright. Christ.
Wright. Mich. Hanson. Hen. Parker. Pet. Parker. Thom. Harwicke. William
Dannotte. John Cater. William Hansley. Leonard Hill. John Tailor. James
Robinson. Edw. Fawsitte.


The testimony of Preachers, half of them Doctors, and Batchelare of
Divinity, and the rest Masters of Art.
WHereas upon the late murder of William Storre Mr. of Arts and preacher of
market Raisin in the county of Lincoln, there have bin set abroach certain
reports tending to his disgrace in favor (as it is thought) of the offender,
we therefore the Ministers to whom he was best known either by nearness of
dwelling, or by conversing with him, do signify to all those to whom this our
testimony shall come, that we always held, and reputed the said William
Storre, not only for his learning and sufficiency in his calling, a man far
passing many others: but also of such honest and commendable bearing of
himself in his life, and conversation, that his greatest adversaries could
never while he lived (as we are verily persuaded) justly take exception against
him.

In witness whereof we have subscribed our names this present April 1603.
Law. Stanton. Greg. Garth. Alex. Southwicke. John Chadwicke. Roger Parker.
Rich. Turswell Theo. Tanzey. Tho. Burton. Mich. Reniger. George Eland. Hen.
Nelson. William Mason. John Downs. Amos Bedford. Cuth. Dale. John White. David
Hatcliffe. Will. Symonds. William Lownd. Hugh Brown. Samuel. Allen, Paul
Balgaie. Richard Bateman. Nic. Clarke.


The testimony of Knights and Esquires,
BEing requested for some special causes to deliver under our hands what we
knew concerning Mr. Storre late Vicar of market Raisin, we whose names ar
subscribed, neighbors somewhat near adjoining, thought it our Christian duty
to yield testimony therein accordingly. And therefore do signify that as we
account the manner of his death a part of most barbarouse cruelty, so we much
lament that it happened to a man so well approved generally for a good
scholar, a painful preacher, and for many other commendable parts, which (if
by untimely death he had not bin cut of) might otherways have bin greatly
beneficial both to the church, and common wealth.

Given at Lincoln the 29. of April 1603. George St poll. Edward Ayscoghe.
Edward Tyrwhitt. Char. Metham. Ric. Rossetter. Fran. Bullingham Phillip
Tyrwhitt. Thomas Grantham. Thomas Dalison. Vincent Ful^^^by Richard Ged^ey.
Edward Saltmarsh.


The testimony of Doctors, and Bachelors of Divinity in the University.
FOrasmuch as we are entreated by certain ministers of the county of
Lincoln to signify what opinion we held of William Storre Mr of Arts, and
late fellow of Corpus Christi College, we whose names are underwritten do
by these presents give him this testimony; that for the time of his aboade in
our University he showed himself very sober, and honest in his conversation:
he was of quiet carriage in his place, studiouse, learned, and religiouse: of
great, and special hope to prove a worthy member in the Church of Christ.

Oxon. June. 29. 1603. John Howson Vicecan. Oxon. Edmond Lilly. Richard Kylby.
Raph Kettell. John Aeglionbee. Nicholas Higges. Thomas Luddington Chri. Membry.
Chri. Chalfount. Robert Burhill. John Rainolds. John Perin. John Williams.
Leon. Hutton. Rich. Crakanthorpe. Sebestian Benfeld, Peter Hooker. John
Barcham. Thomas Holland. George Abbott. Henry Asray. William Thorn. Edward
Hyrst. Thomas Burton. Henry Hindle. Richard Alleyne.


FINIS.

