TWO SERMONS OF DIRECTION FOR IVDGES AND MAGISTRATES.

By Matthew Stoneham, Minister and Preacher in the City of Norwich.

1. Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, honor the King.

Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no
power but of God.

printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI



LONDON, Printed by Richard Field. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR EDWARD COOK Knight, Lord chief Justice of the
Common Pleas.
MATTHEW STONEHAM Minister, wishes the accomplishment of all his godly desires.
I Had not suffered (right Honorable) these worthless labors of mine to have
passed to the press, but that the importunity of many my friends have pressed
me unto it. Quod exemplo fit, iure fieri putamus, says the famous Roman
Orator. The community of the act, may plead an immunitie for this mine
action. As the one of them was not long since uttered in your Honorable
presence and audience; so now it presents it self unto your view and
perusal. The other, which I have added unto it, provided upon the same
occasion to have been uttered heretofore, preached in the same place, at the
hearing of two honorable and grave Judges now deceassed, being then by other
necessary business intercepted, rejoices that it has so fit opportunity now
at length to open it self to the view of the world. Though neither of them
have ought else to commend them, yet Solomon himself will afford them
commendations in this, that they are words uttered in due season, Pro. 25. 11.
If God season the^ Pro. 25. 11.
with his grace (though men do not grace them with their favors) it is as much
as they expect, or I desire. And thus commending your Lordship to the
protection of the Lord of Lords, I humbly take my leave.

Your Lordships poor orator, M. STONEHAM.

THE FIRST SERMON.
EZRA 7. 26. And whosoever will not do the law of thy God and the kings law,
let him have judgment without delay, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or imprisonment.
A Rtashashte the great king of Persia, having given leave to Ezra together
with his people to return to Jerusalem, as may appear by the copy of Letters
patents of the said great King to that purpose, verse. 11. of this Chapter,
Verse. 11.
authoriseth him also there (according to the wisdom of God which was in him,
to set Judges and arbiters over all the people that is beyond the river, verse.
25. Meaning thereby no Verse. 25.
doubt, the river called anciently by the Hebrews Perath, Genesis 2. 14. by Genesis
2. 14.
the Greeks Euphrates, modernely, as it is probable, by a brief corruption of
that word Frat, the mainest of the curre^ts which do divide Persia from Iudaea,
and therefore (...) called the river. And in these words now read, is set down
as it were a table of direction, to inform all Judges and Magistrates, in
their several sessions and processions, what to examine, sentence, punish.

This table consists (as I may so say) of two leaves or columns, whereof the
former contains in it Culpa or matter of fault: the other Poena or matter of
punishment.

The leaf or column culpable or of fault, is co^siderable in these words,
Whosoever will not do the law of thy God and the kings law: The leaf or
column penal or of punishment, is obseruable in these words: Let him have
judgment without delay, whether it be unto death, or banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

In the former leaf there be two branches: the former is the intent, the other
is the extent of it. The intent has in it three points, whereof the first is
the manner of it, which consists both in undutifulness, in that they do not
the law of God and the law of the king: as also in wilfulness, in that it is
said, they will not do it.

The second point is the order of it, in that it is not first said, the law of
the king and the law of God, but first the law of God, and then the kings law.

The third point is the matter of it, in two particulars; the one, will not do
the law of God: the other particular, and the kings law.

The extent of it is, that it concerns not some, but out-spreadeth it self
unto all whosoever.

Concerning the second leaf or column of this table, which is penal or of
punishment, I will then unfold and branch it out, when I shall come to the
special handling of it: lest whilst I labor to propound method, I may happily
confound memory.

The former branch then of the two in the culpable leaf of this table, is the
intent of it: will not obey the law of thy God, and the kings law: wherein
because there is, manner, order, matter, the manner is first to be assumed to our
handling, and that first in the undutifulness, do not: secondly in the
wilfulness of it: will not do, etc.

Their undutifulness appears, in that they do not, etc. All which did arise
from the want of obedience, as the want of obedience chiefly springs from the
root of pride. Pride then causes disobedience, and disobedience makes
undutifulness, not to do. Humility is submission, submission submittit, that
is, puts a man under his superior, not only in place for his condition, but
also in office for action. But pride is elation, which elation effert, that is,
carries a man aloft, even above his superiors, both in affectation of place,
which is ambition, as also in prescriptio^ of office, which is transgression,
that is, a going over or beyond a limited bound: a doing indeed of that which
ought not to be done, but a not doing of that which ought to be done, the
undutifulness here meant. The way then for a man to become most obedient, is
first to become humilimus, most humble, and the means for a man to become
humilimus, most humble, is for him seriously to meditate with himself, that he
corporally is but humilimus, that is, the puddle or the slime of the earth or
ground: ne ergo Lipsius de Constantia.
efferat se coenum supra coelum (as one speaks) let not the earthly element
labor to surmount the heavenly firmament: which it shall attempt to do, if we
shall not only not do the law of the King, who is the immortal Gods
lieutenant in earth; but of God who is the mortal Kings sovereign in heaven.
It is no doubt an happy combination, whereas Pauls' (...), Tit. 2. 15. that
is, authority and command, Tit. 2. 15.
goes coupled with Peter's (...), 1. Pet. 2. 13. that is, submission 1. Pet 2.
13.
and obedience. Submit your selves unto all manner of ordinance of man for the
Lords sake. Where there is a doing of the law of the King, because there is a
submission to all manner ordinance of man: there is a doing of the law of God,
because it is to be performed for the Lords sake. It is a worthy saying of a
learned Historian, who witnesses French hist. in Henr. 3.
that as in the person of a man the life consists in the union of the body
and the soul: so in a kingdom, state, or commonweal, the life thereof
stands in the coherence and conjunction of commands, which be as the soul,
and of obedience, which is as the body thereof. If either then (says he) the
soul of commands shall tyrannize over the body of obedience, by unjust laws;
or the body of obedience will not receive the law of the soul in just
ordinances, there insueth a death to that kingdom, state, or commonweal.
Though sic volo, sic iubeo, so I will, so I command, be the voice of tyrants:
yet for a man to add his volo to Gods iubeo, his will to Gods command, is the
harmony of obedience.

The second thing I do consider in the manner of this intent, is their
wilfulness, in that they will not do the law of God and the kings law. Their
undutifulness forespoken of, may be likened to the rolling of the stone to the
door of the sepulcher, Math. 27. Mat. 27. 60
60. Their wilfulness, in that they will not do it, is like the sealing of
that stone so rolled, to make all sure, Math. 27. 66. The one is non obedire,
the other Mat. 27. 66
a nolle obedire. The one puts too the door against the law of God and the
king, the other bars and bolts it. The one is like the sin of David, who
did not obey the voice of the Lord, in marrying two sins together, to make a
bloody divorce betwixt a married couple, I mean Bathshebah and Vriah, by
committing of adultery with the one, and murder against the other. 2. Sam.
11. for which 2. Sam. 11.
David afterward was so penitent, as he brake forth into this contrite
confession, admonished by Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. 2. Sa. 12.
13. falling, 2. Sam. 12. 13.
as sometimes the Poets feigned the gia^t Anthaeus to fall, who by every fall
in his wrestle with Hercules gained a man's strength: so David after his fall
rose again, never in like manner to fall. The other nolle obedire, to nil to
obey, is like the sin of Pharaoh the reprobate, in his detaining the Lords
people, Exodus 5. 2. Who in the swelling of Exodus 5. 2.
his heart uttered these words of blasphemy, Who is the Lord, that I should
obey his voice? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Neither will
I, etc. He is not only undutifully, but wilfully disobedient: therefore was his
fall as the fall of an Elephant, of whom it is anciently written, that being
down, he is not able to rise again. In the^ that are only undutiful (happily)
one sin upon better aduisement may prevent another: but in them which are
wilful, and therefore hardened like unto iron, as it is said, Prou. 27. 17.
that iron Pro. 27. 17.
sharpneth iron: so one iron link in this iron chain of sin, tolleth and
haleth on another, till posse non peccare, becomes non posse non peccare, that
is, to be able not to sin, comes to, not to be able but to sin. As the
voice of tyrants stands for a law, so the will of traitors stands against
the law. They will not do the law of God and the kings law.

The second thing to be assumed to our handling in the intent, is the order of
it. In that it is not first said, the law of the king, and then Gods law: but
in that it is said first, the law of God, and then the kings law.

Most necessary it is, that the law of God should be set in order before the
kings law. First because God is greater then the king. This may appear, not
only in that David himself being a king, calls God his king: My king and my
God, Psalm. 5. 2. Psalm. 5. 2.
In that also he binds kings in chains and nobles in linkes of iron, Psalm.
149. 8. Psalm. 149. 8.
In that (a token of homage) kings bring presents and gifts unto him, and those
not only of the Isles, but of Tarshish which is Cilicia, and of Shebah and Saba,
which is the rich Arabia, Psalm. 72. 10. and therefore all kings shall Psalm. 72.
10. Psalm. 72. 11.
worship him. Psalm. 72. 11. because when the whole earth consists of Isles and
co^tinent or firm land, the kings both of the Isles, and also of Cilicia and
Arabia which be firm land, shall and do acknowledge subjection unto him, in
that when it pleases him to put on his glorious apparel, even in the skirts
of that glorious garment his name is written, A king of kings, and Lord of
Lords. Apo. 19. 16. But also the greatness Apoc. 19. 16
of God above the king may appear, in that the great Monarkes of the earth,
when they by the wings of their ambition have been so borne aloft, that of
Kings they have become Monarks: yet being Monarks, the leue^ of the same
ambition has so swollen them and in them, as of Monarkes (still aspiring to the
higher) they would be Gods: as may appear by Alexander Quint. Cur. Pedio Mex.
in Calig. and Domitian.
the great among the Macedons, by Caligula and Domitian among the Romans; and
among the Persians, by that proud Monarke, who caused an artificial globe of
glass to be made, with a semblance of the Sun, and Moon, Du Bart. in 6. day
the 1. week.
and Stars in it, which went from East to West, and according to the circular
motion of it, was wheeled and carried about again, and placed his throne in the
top of it: where himself sitting in majesty, would seem a God and no man. But
be it that these, in the great thoughts of their hearts would be taken for
Gods, then the which they cannot climb higher: yet God to defy them who would
thus deifie themselves, is said to be a great king above all Gods. Psalm. 95. 3.
and Psalm. 95. 3.
by consequence, of such Gods as these would be.

The office of Dictator among the Romans was above the place of a king,
forasmuch as when many kings and kingdoms were subject to that State, the
State it self during the time of his authority, was subject to the Dictator.
Of this Dictator Plutarch writes in the life of Fabius, that when Plutar. in
Fab.
it was lawful for him almost to do any thing, yet was it not lawful for him
to ride upon a horse. By how much God is greater then kings, as he is greater
then these Dictators, who were commanders of kings, in that he rides upon the
heavens as upon an horse, yea in that the holy Cherub becomes as his horse,
Psalm. 18. 16. and Psalm. 18. 16.
the clouds are his chariot, and the wings of the wind his gallerie whereon he
walks, Psalm. 104. 3. And therefore Psalm. 104. 3.
because God is greater then the king, Gods law in order is to be placed before
the kings law.

Secondly it is necessary that in order the law of God should be preferred
before the kings law, because it is wiser then the kings law. When as the
chiefest wisdom consists in two points, in the knowledge of God and of our
selves. The law of God like that ancient Ianus (whom Macrobuis Macrob. in
Saturnal.
testifies to be double faced, for his wisdom in remembering things past, and
foreseeing things to come) in most plentiful manner respects the^ both. First
touching the knowledge of God this law of God enformeth us in it, not only as
God is the protector and redeemer of mankind, but also as he is the highest
cause, and alone creator both of man and every creature beside, as writes
Thomas Aquinas: Cum Tho. Aquin.
sacra doctrina de Deo determinet, vt altissima causa, inter omnes sapientias
humanas, non solum in genere, sed simpliciter est maxima sapientia: When the
holy doctrine does determine of God as of the highest cause, among all humane
wisdoms, it is not only in kind, but simply the greatest wisdom. Touching the
knowledge of our selves, that I may pass by the manner, matter, and end of our
creation, what other writing I beseech you, does so inform the understanding
concerning man's fowerfold estate: of his innocence, of the law, of grace, and
of glory, as this law of god does? Search, read, advise, judge, whether (in
comparison hereof) the wits and writs also of the sagest sort of men merely
natural, have not been in this point as one speaks, but as (...) Aristot. in
Metaphys.
(...): like the eye of a night-bird dazeled against the rays of the Sun.
Clemens Alexandrinus Clemens Alexandrinus
charge secular wise men with theft, because whatsoever truth of God is to be
found among them, they have robbed from the Scriptures, as Plato the chief of
them did from Moses, who was therefore called Moses Atticus, the Athenian
Moses: of which mind also is Justinius Martyr, whom Jusii. Mart. Apolog.
for this purpose learned Iunius cites, writing on the sin of Adam: when (as
a learned man writes) there is a twofold law unwritten, which is either Iunius
de peccat. Ada. Antoni. Sebast. Min. de offic. Ecclesiae praest. Orat. 2.
of nature or of custom; or written, which proceeds either from God, or from
man, or from both: the written law of merely man may be changed, as of him
whose defective wisdom may be perfected; but the written law of God simply,
or of man inspired and directed by God subordinatly, must not be changed,
because his law is like himself, (...), a perfect gift, and the nature of
perfection is to admit nothing to be added to it, to permit nothing to be taken
from it. A law which has like God himself (...), no change, Iam. 1. 17. or as
S. Hieron. aduersus Iouinianum Iam. 1. 17.
interprets it, nullam differentiam, no difference. And therefore Hier.
aduer. Iouinian.
because it is the wiser law, is Gods law in order to be placed before the
kings law. Thirdly it is necessary that in order the law of God should be set
before the kings law, because it respects a better object the^ does the law
of the king. The law of the king works about the conseruatio^ of bodies: the
law of God labors about the salvation of souls: by how much the^ the soul
out-matcheth the body, by so much the law of God out-valueth the kings law. To
let pass other reasons, whereby it may appear unto us that the soul is of
more price the^ the body (wherein I might be plentiful) this for this time
shall suffice. The body separated from the society of the soul, becomes
first a carcass, then a carrion, declining from good to ill, from ill to
worse; from a body to a carcass, from a carcass to a carrion: but the soul
(on the contrary side) disioyned from the fellowship of the body, aspireth
from ill to good, from good to better, from bondage to liberty, from liberty
to bliss; from bondage in the body, to liberty from the body, to bliss in
and with God. And when (in representation of (...), the great world) man is
said to be (...), a little world: man this little world consists of two parts,
soul and body, even as the great world of heaven (whereunto the soul may be
likened) and of the earth (whereunto the body may be compared.) This soul to
this end S. Bernard S. Bernard.
resembles to heaven, wherein righteousness is as the Sun, constancy as
the Moon, which is longlasting and during, Psalm. 72. 7. faith, Psalm. 72. 7.
hope, charity, and other Christian virtues, as the stars. As heaven then is
more noble then the earth: so is the soul of man, which is like unto heaven,
more precious then the body of man, which being of the earth is earthie, 1.
Cor. 15. 47. And therefore 1 Cor. 154. 7.
because it respects the better object is the law of God in order to be
placed before the kings law. Fourthly and lastly, necessary it is that in
order the law of God should be set before the kings law; because as there is no
need of a rudder where there is no ship: so there needs no law where there
is no commonweal; but there can be no commonweal where the law of God is
not: for as much as where piety is wanting toward God, there cannot be
performed any duty to man. Let Theology die, and no policy can live. Every
kingdom (in such a case) will become a thraldom, every commonwealth a Chaos,
every Monarchy an Anarchy. Man must first be persuaded that there is a God,
before man will ever reverence the assembly of Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. This was
Psalm. 82. 1.
well known unto those ancient Sages the first inuentors of religion to their
people (although not in verity as we have it, but in policy, as they could
have it:) who as Pol. Virgil witnesses, Pol. Virg. de Invent. reru^.
even in the first spring of their kingdoms and states, lest they should as
soon be dissolved as they were established, supplanted as they were planted,
did rather invent the^ they would want a religion. Thus among the Egyptians
did Hermes, among the old Latins Eanus, who also (as Lactantius Lactantius.
writes) was called Ianus, among the Romans Numa Pompilius, among the Greeks
Orpheus, among the Cretenses Melissus. Whereas (on the other side) the law of
God may be, and stand, without a commonweal, as that which is naturally
implanted in the heart of man; as might undoubtedly appear in those Barbarians
which were anciently straggling in the world before they had a Theseus to
congregate the^ into cities and corporations: as that which also at this day is
proved among the rude and naked Indians in the Western parts of the Iosep.
Acost. hist. natural and moral, of the East and West Indians.
world, who by the light of nature acknowledge (as Joseph Acosta a Spaniard
witnesses) a supreme Lord, author of all things, whom they of Peru call
Vuachoca, and give unto him the names of Excellent, Creator of heaven and
earth, Admirable. And therefore because no commonwealth can stand without the
law of Cod, and the law of God can stand without the commonweal, is the law
of God to be placed before the kings law.

This doctrine affoordeth unto us the application of a twofold instruction,
whereof the one is, the sustaining of the Church, the other is the maintaining
of the Churchmen.

First the Church is to be sustained, the arches and pillars whereof are with
all care and diligence to be shoared and supported, lest the fall thereof bring
with it a co-ruine and inseparable downfall of the commonwealth. A thing
which not I but the truth it self, and that with the voice of her sister
wisdom, cries in the highest places Pro. 9 3.
of the city, Prou. 9. 3. that it is to be done, if not for Gods, yet for the
worlds sake; if not for the souls, yet for the bodies sake; if not for the
Churches, yet for the co^mon-weales sake; if not for piety, yet for policy
sake: because neither the world, nor the body, nor the commonweal, nor
policy, can stand without God, the Church, religion and piety.

The second instruction from hence to be apprehended and applied, is, that
Churchmen are to be maintained, both in their ability for their purse, and in
dignity toward their persons. For albeit piety through the impiety of these
times, may seem (long since) to have been banished, and with that old Astraea,
to have been enforced to leave the earth and to fly to heaven, there to make
complaint unto God of her hard usage among men: yet Policy still stands, and
pleads still for us. This may abundantly be proved by the guise of the
ancient barbarous and Ethnicke people (as Ioh. Bohem. de moribus om^^^ gent.
Johannes Bohemus writes de moribus omnium gentium) both among the ancient
Egyptians, Aethiopians and Arabians. Concerning the Egyptians, the same
author witnesses, that none De Africa, cap. 4.
but they which were Priests sons, above the age of twenty years, and well
learned, might attend on their Kings: which he seemed to have borrowed out of
Diodorus Siculus, lib. 2. Diodo Sicu, lib. 2.
That also when the revenues of the land of Egypt were divided into 3. parts,
the first part was due unto and divided among their Priests, as they which were
of the greatest estimation, partly for the administration of the service of
their gods, partly for their learning and wisdom, partly also because they
were as oracles to the Nobility for wisdom and counsel. The second part went
to the King, to these ends: that it might maintain his own royal estate, that
secondly it might sustain the charges of his wars, and that thirdly it might
be a fountain of his bounties toward men of the best deserts. The third part
was shared among the pensioners and men of war.

Touching the Aethiopians of old Job. Bohem. Ibid.
time, the same Author in the same place reports, that they were wont to
choose their Kings of their Priests, and of such among them as they knew to be
more religious then the residue. A custom also (if not at this day) yet not
long since used in Iseland, as Giraldus Cambrensis writes in his Topographie
of Ireland. In Hislandia Girald. Ca^b. Topograp. Hiberniae.
(says he) vtuntur eodem Rege, quo Sacerdote, eodem Principe quo Pontifice.
Penes enim Episcopum tam regni quam sacer dotij iura consistunt: that is, in
Iseland they use the same man for a King and Prince whom they use for a Priest
and Bishop. For the rights as well of the kingdom as of the Priesthood, are in
the power of the Bishop. A guise also among the famous old Romans, who when
they could bear any thing better then the name of a King in their
commonweal, so retained they still (an honor no doubt unto that order) nomen
Regis sacrificuli: the name of the sacrificing King, among their Priests. The
Patriarchs were kings and priests in their families. The Apostle Peter without
doubt by the direction of the spirit of God, joins royal priesthood
together, 1. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Hierome.
Pet. 2. 9. whereupon S. Hierome says, Ecce cum Regali dignitate Sacerdotium
copulauit: Behold he has coupled the Priesthood with the Royal dignity: and
his Majesty in his (...) (...).
affirms, that Rex non est mere laicus, that a king is not merely laical:
which show that the kingdom and priesthood are not incompatible. In Arabia
likewise the old Panchaiani (as the Job. Bohem. in Asia. ca. 2
same Author avouches in the same book) delivered their customs, revenues,
and all their profits into the hands of their priests, who might according to
their discretion, as they found it necessary and expedient, justly distribute
them to every man as he had need. What should I speak of the honor that the
old Saracens did bear unto the Caliph of Babylon? from whom (an honor greater
unto their Rich. Knols gener. hist. of Turks, page 57.
Priesthood, then we can either expect or dare warrant in ours:) from whom (I
say) the great Sultans of the Turks and Saracens, before the succession of the
Ottoman house was established, took their authority, as from their
superiors, the true successors of their great prophet Mahomet: or of the high
account and esteem that the Grand-Segnior at this day of the Ottoman line
makes of his Muphti or Mophti, that is, his Metropoliticall Priest or chief
Bishop, without whose advice and counsel he undertakes no matter of
importance. If also any inferior priest of the Mahumetane law at this day,
shall have any outrage done unto him, in being violently stricken, if he be a In
Turkish (...).
Turk which so does, he loses his right hand; but if he be a Jew or a
Christian, he is burnt alive for it? What should I also remembrance you, of
what esteem and regard even the very barbarous Christians have made their
priests and priesthood, even to these times, among the Russes and Affricans?
among whom the Emperor of Russia says of his Metropolitan, that he is Gods
spiritual officer, and himself but his temporal officer: therefore leads
the Emperor the Discovery of Englishmen in Ant. Ienkinson. page 34 3.
Metropolitanes horse on Palme-sun day, and on twelfe day the Emperor stands
by on foot, whiles (according to the custom) the Metropolitan sitting on
horseback, blesses the waters of the river Mosco. The great co^mander of
Africa also, whose power is commonly a thousand thousand men and five hundred
Elephants, is called by the name, not of Monarch, Emperor, or King, but is
styled (as he thinks) by a phrase of far greater glory, that is, Presbyter a
Priest. In whose largely exte^ded Empire there be four orders: whereof the
Priesthood is of the first and most eminent: the second of Sages, called also
Balsamates or Torquates: the third of the Nobility: the fourth of the
Perisioners and men at arms. All which (and more then which, that might be
alleged) should move us with all love and industry to maintain churchmen,
if not for piety sake, yet for policy sake. That seeing men of that coat and
calling can have little help (as these times be) by piety, which is as the
body of Christ, yet with the woman we may be cured and medicined, Math. 9. 20.
at least Math. 9. 20.
wise by policy, which is as the he^me of Christ's garment.

The third thing to be assumed to our handling in the intent, is the matter of
it, in two particulars. First, will not do the law of thy God: secondly nor the
kings law. Will not do the law of thy God, etc. There is a threefold
transgressor of the law of God, which if they shall not only be undutiful but
wilful, deserve a more sharper edge of punishment to be inflicted on them.

The first is he that transgresses against the doctrine of the law, as it is
the subject of faith. These be Heretics, who defend some dogma or self hatched
opinion (as Augustine writes) August.
contra verbum cum pertinacia, against the word with stubburnnesse, induced by
one, two, or all these three allurements: vaineglorie, gain, and flattery of
great men that way inclined. For vaineglorie, S. Cyprian says: Initia
haereticorum, vt sibi placea^t: they Cyprian.
are the beginnings of Heretics, to please themselves: according to which S.
Hierome writes in Zach. 13. Whatsoever Hieron. in Zach. 13.
they conceive they turn it into an idol. The covetous man worshippeth his
Mammon, and the heretic dogma quod finxit, the opinion which he has coined.
For gain, preferment or flattery, Theodoret tendereth Theodoret.
Paulus Samosatenus for an insta^ce, who being led with hope of great gain
and preferment, which he expected from Zenobia Queen of Arabia, fell into that
heresy which afterward became his overthrow. The second transgressor against
the law of God, is he which tra^sgresseth against the moral precepts of the
law, as it is the subject of life and manners. This is chiefly done by these
principal means.

First by blasphemy, which word is derived (...), of violating or hurting the
great, holy, and reverend name of God, by vain oaths, false oaths,
imprecations, exorcismes, etc. A thing was it, so punished by Justinian the
Emperor, as he Justinian.
that did profanely swear (oh a thing very usual in these times) by any
member of God, or by his hair, or did any way blaspheme God, he died for it.

Secondly it is done by murder, which is an unlawful taking away of the life
of man by man, whether it be by an immediate act by himself, or auxilio and
consilio, by some mediate aid or counsel from another. Murder is a sin so
abhorred of God, as that it may not go away unpunished, he makes inquisition
for it, Psalm. 9. 12. Yea unless a man hate blood, eue^ Psalm. 9. 12.
as God does hate blood, blood shall pursue him. And to show the certainty of
it, it is doubled again, even blood shall pursue him. Ezech. 35. 6. Ezech. 35.
6


Thirdly it is done by theft, which God has not only forbidden as a breach of
a branch of the Decalogue, Exodus 20. 15. Thou shall not steal: but Exodus 20. 15
also by making those fowls and beasts which are given to prey and rauine, an
abomination. Leuit. 11. This sin Leuit. 11.
in the time of Edmund Ironside could scantly be found in this land, but in
these days this kingdom swarmeth with many an Autolicus, of whom Ovid
reports, that he was furtum ingeniosus Ovid.
ad omne, his crafts-maister to prove a master thief.

Fourthly it is done by adultery. This God so detesteth, as he would not have
it once named amongst us, as it becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. It is Ephesians. 5. 3.
the very source and spawne, fountain and foment of fearful murtherings and
poisonings, even betwixt them who being coupled in one yoke of matrimony,
ought to be most near one to another, in regard of a fourefold combination, of
goods, names, bodies, and minds also, but that this lustful monster, like unto
the sword of Alexander the great, cutteth in sunder the Gordian knot of love:
yea (as histories be too full of such examples) of life also.

Fifthly and lastly (because I cannot insist upon all) it is done by
drunkenness: which is not only a transgression it self, but a mother sin
to all the residue. For when (I beseech you) is a man more ready to blaspheme,
kill, steal, break wedlock, then when it may be said of him, that he is
affected as that Emperor was, which for Bonosus.
his overmuch drinking was called a bottle. Many good laws have been made
for the restraining of this sin, but they died as it were in their birth,
because they have been enacted but not acted, written in glass not in brass.
Cities and corporations (for the most part) are as full of Alehouses, Alehouses
as full of drunkards, and drunkards as full of sin, as they were before these
laws were published, which were (it should seem) decreed rather to be put to
execution, then to be put in execution.

The third transgressor of the law of God, is he which transgresses against
them both, that is, both the doctrinall and moral precepts of this law: these
are the Atheists, who acknowledge no life but this, no God but their pleasures;
who sleeping in, and being overwhelmed with sensuality and security, although
they be men, yet have the first sparkles of nature more quenched in them, then
the Elephant being but a beast, yet of all other creatures coming nearest unto
man, for his disciplinable apprehension, acknowledging a Deity therein, does
he worship the Moon, and Sun, and stars at every change.

The second particular in the matter of the intent, is that they will not do
the kings law. From hence may I derive both confutation and instruction.

First from hence may I derive a confutation of them who would have the Priest
to be a medium of superiority betwixt God and the King: when here by the
Spirit of God immediately after God is placed the King, as he who (as Tertullian
writes ad Scapulam) Tertul. ad Scapulam.
is next unto God, and obtains from God whatsoever he has, only inferior
unto God. As this anciently was, so ought it now to be: a subordinatio^ not of
God, Aaron, and Moses, but of God, Moses, and Aaron; to show that Aaron must be
under Moses as Moses under God.

Secondly from hence I may derive instruction, of a twofold lesson, whereof the
former concerns the King, the later the subject. The former lesson
instructs the King in an awful reverence toward God, that as God is placed
before him, so he should place God before him. Kings are the children of the
most High, Psalm. 82. 6. As Psalm. 82. 6.
the child therefore yields reverence to his father: so ought kings as
children to God their Father. The other lesson instructs the subject in a
dutiful obedience, that forasmuch as the king is placed next and immediate
under God, so he obeys him in and for God, if he shall not be contrary unto
God. The authority of the King is then disauthorized, when he shall either
command that which is evil, or forbid that which is good: for the Kings scepter
and privilege chiefly lies (...), in things of a mean and indifferent
nature. To deny then the Kings command in matters indifferent, it is to
encounter his authority in the best title of it; a guise of some, who (happily)
for their zeal may be commended, for their ignorance are to be pitied, for
their stubburnnesse, in that they will not do the kings law, are to be
punished. Hitherto the intent.

The second point in the culpable leaf of this table, is the extent of it.
Whosoever will not, etc. It is not then to be required of some, but to be
looked for from all. Whosoever: This I can but point at, not prosecute. The
second leaf or column of this table is penal, or of punishment. This is
proposed first more generally in 3. members, whereof the first is the
denunciation of a sentence, in the having of judgment: the second, the
expedition of it, without delay: the third is the application of it, which is
set down both in specie, or more specially, let him: as also in genere, or more
generally, whosoever.

Secondly this leaf or column is proposed more particularly in four
branches: first by death: secondly by banishment: thirdly by confiscation of
goods: fourthly by imprisonment.

The first of the three members more generally proposed, is the denuntiation of
a judgment, in the having of judgment. This having of judgment, both
authoriseth the Judge, and also discourageth the offender.

First it authoriseth the Judge: for he that commands the Judge that he must
do it, authoriseth also the Judge that he may do it. Judges are of Gods own
raising, Judge. 2. 16. and Judge. 2. 16.
also of Gods assisting, as with whom the Lord is said to be, Verse. 18.
Therefore Judge. 2. 18.
authority cannot be controuerted, unless God himself in some sort be
countermanded. For the better understanding of this judgment, we must know
that there is a threefold judgment, Coeli, seculi, conscientiae, supernall of
heaven, internal of conscience, external of the world. Judgment in this
place is not to be taken for the supernall judgment of heaven, neither yet for
the internal judgment of conscience, but for the external judgment of the
world: whereunto God incourageth the heads of Jacob, and the Princes of the
house of Israel, Micah. 3. 1. Hear o ye heads of Jacob, Micab. 3. 1.
and ye Princes of the house of Israel, should not you know judgment? which
judgment, S. Hierome interprets either S. Hierome.
for right reason, or administration of justice, according to that Psalm. Psalm.
72. 1.
72. 1. Give thy judgment unto the king o Lord, and thy righteousness unto
the kings son. Judgment to the king, that is, administration of justice.
Judgment and justice in the Scriptures seem to be (...), words of one
signification. Yet David Psalm. 94. 15. distinguishes Psalm. 94. 15.
them, where he says, that Judgment shall return to justice. In which place,
judgment (as it is probable) is taken for the execution of the sword, and
justice for equal decision of matters in controversy.

Secondly, this having of judgment discourageth the offender, in that though
for a time he has run on his heedlesse and heady race, in being both
undutiful and wilful against the law of God and the kings law: yet
notwithstanding God has a time wherein he that would not submit himself unto
the tenor of the law by doing, shall be enforced to yield himself unto the
terror of the law, by suffering: for there is not only judgment passed, but
execution out against such: Let him have judgment.

The second of the three members more generally proposed, is the expedition of
the sentence, without delay. Prius consulto, deinde mature facto opus est: a
Judge must first determine with deliberation, and then (what he has once
ripely determined) act with expedition. A long suite hanging in the Court of a
Judge, will be no more grace unto him, then a long sore under the hand of a
Chirurgian: which may (peradventure) increase his coin, but will decrease his
credit. The cause of a poor man must not be delayed before the bar of a
Judge, as the diseased poor man lay before the poole of Bethesda, even eight
and thirty years, and was not cured, Ioh. 5. 5. Ioh. 5. 5.
The reason whereof was, because when an Angel came and troubled the water,
another stepped in before him, and was healed. But the cause herein must be
inuerted; for whereas there was first the troubling of the water by an Angel,
and then the stronger stepped in before the weaker: here it must be deemed, that
first the stronger steppeth in before the weaker, and then troubles the water
with angels. The Lion (as we know) is not only valiant but swift. The throne
of Solomon was guarded on both sides with Lions, 1. Reg. 10. 20.
hieroglyphically (as it 1. Reg. 10. 20.
were) to set forth unto us, that they which sit on thrones should be as
Lions, not only in ability of action, but also in agilitie of expedition. As
God is said to be against the soothsayers, adulterers, false swearers,
oppressors, a swift witness, Malach. 3. 5. so they Malac. 3. 5.
who sit upon Gods seats, against such malefactors ought to become swift
Judges. A thing was this so carefully provided for in the Jewish commonwealth,
as their judgment seats were in the gates of their Cities, Ruth. 4. 2. Ruth.
4. 2.
A means of the more quick dispatchall, so that there might be judgment
without delay.

The third of the three members more generally proposed, is the application of
the sentence, which is to be handled first in specie, or more specially, let
him: that is, him who has bin thus undutifully and wilfully disobedient
against the law of God, and the kings law. Let him even in his own person,
that as he in his own person has done what he should not: so him self in his
own person may suffer what he would not. The Judge must take heed of Herod's
miscariage, who co^ceiuing a displeasure against Christ, unjustly bathed his
sword in the blood of all the innocent babes of the male sex, in Bethleem and
the coasts thereof, from two years downward, Math. Math. 2. 16.
2. 16. Secondly this application is to be handled in genere, or more
generally, as this him has a reference to the forenamed whosoever. The Judge
must be in Gods seat like unto God himself, who respects no man's person,
Act. 10. 34. but says of every soul Act. 10. 34.
that sins, that it shall die the death, Ezekiel 18. 20.
Ezech. 18. 20. He must not be affrighted with fear, nor blinded with favor,
nor corrupted with Iucre, but even as the needle of the compass points
always toward the North: so ought he to have a perpetual aspect toward
Justice. Iudex cordatus, lapis quadratus: a courageous Judge is like a
quadrangular stone, which what way soever you shall turn, it lies
quadrangular still, or like a mountain firm in it self and defensive for
others, in which the people may make them caves, and strong holds against their
adversaries: as the Israelites did in the mountains against the Madianites,
Judge. 6. 2. This is the means Judge. 6. 2.
for the Judge to be loved of good men, and to be feared of the evil; An
example hereof we have in the French history, in the Duke of Aniou, being In
Charl. 9.
afterward Henry the third of France, who notwithstanding the mediation of many
Lords and Captains to the contrary, put a certain Captain, a Turk by
nation, to death for manifold robberies and spoils, whereof he was convicted:
whereupon (says the history) he was well thought of by all good men, and
feared by the evil. In the second place of this penal leaf or column of this
table, are proposed four particular limbs, whereof the first is death, the
second banishment, the third confiscation of goods, and the fourth
imprisonment. Of these several particulars I cannot particularly speak, but
must close them all in one.

Three principal qualities there be, which are craved in a Judge (says his
royal Majesty in one of his memorable orations uttered in the Parliament
house) courage, knowledge, and sincerity, which three qualities may be easily
derived out of these four particulars.

First from hence may be derived courage, because (according to the quality of
the offense) there is not only to be imposed imprisonment, co^fiscation of
goods, and banishment, that is, loss of liberty, goods and country: but
death also, which imports the loss of life it self. Although the Judge is
to provide what in him lies that it may not be said of his judgment seat by
overmuch severity, as it was sometime said of the Tribunal seat of Lucius
Cassius a Roman Praetor, Valor. Max.
that it is scopulus reorum, that is, the Rock of defendants and guilty ones:
yet is he to know and acknowledge on the other side, that God has given him a
sword not for naught or in vain, but to take vengeance on him that does evil,
Romans 13. 4. Qui semel malus, semper Romans 13. 4.
praesumitur esse malus: he which is once evil, is always presumed to be
evil. As this is supposed by law, so is it certainly true, unless it be
transposed by grace. The impunitie of sin is an inuitement to further
sinning. A worthy example hereof we have in that late French Historian John de
Serres Ioh. de Serres.
in the reign of Charles the fair, the four and fortieth king of France: In
whose time a certain Gascoigne under color of being nephew to Pope John the
22. then resident in Auinion, had his pardon for eighteen crimes by him
committed, whereof the least deserved death: yet thereby could he not be
reduced from his wickedness, but more and more encouraged and incited to
harden himself therein: till in the end waxing worse and worse, by the
counsel and judgment of the said Charles the 4. he was put to death. But in
the interim that saying which Chrysostom to another purpose utters, Chrysostom.
may herein be applied: Dum parcebatur lupo, mactabatur grex: while the wolf
was spared, the flock was spoiled: and better it had been that one had more
timely bin ended, that so many might not have been offended.

The second principal quality craved in a Judge, is knowledge, which may also
from hence be derived. Without this knowledge courage is strong indeed, but
blind and cannot see, and Andabatarum more, after the manner of them who fight
blindfolded, hurts as well friends as foes, the guiltless as the guilty: or
if it shall wound only the guilty, it may either be excessive or defective,
either giving death, where banishment, confiscation of goods, or imprisonment
might have sufficed; or imposing only banishment, confiscation of goods, and
imprisonment, where death should have been inflicted. None might come into the
number Picus Mirandul.
of the Rabbis among the Jews, until they could speak seven languages: so
is it to be wished that none might be made a Judge, until he were wise
according to the mystery of the number of seven, which is a number of
perfection.

The third principal quality craved in a Judge, is sincerity or equity,
which also may from hence be derived: without which wisdom is lame, and though
it sees what ought to be done, yet neither will nor can do what it sees. This
sincerity or equity gives suum cuique: the own to every man: like that
logical rule, which is called lex iustitiae, the law of justice. This sorteth
and fitteth every scourge and punishment according to the fault and error of
the offendent or delinquent: death to whom death belongs, banishment to whom
banishment fitteth, confiscation of goods to whom confiscation of goods
sorteth, and imprisonment to whom imprisonment appertains. Iudex, says
Isidorus, a Judge is Isidor.
so called, quasi ius dicens, one that speaks right, unto whose tongue his
heart and hand ought to have correspondencie, in giving to every man his ius or
what belongs to him.

These (right Honorable) are three ornaments in Judges, which will enrich and
ennoble them more then the robes wherewith they are garnished, or the troops
wherewith they are attended. A triplicitie, which if it shall be found in an
unity in the persons of Judges and Magistrates, no doubt will make them
pleasing unto God who is trinity in unity. Cornelia that chaste and famous
Roman matrone (when a certain noble woman of Campania was boasting and
glorying of her ouches and ornaments) held her talk until the Gracchi her
sons came home, at whose return she made her this answer: and haec sunt
orname^ta mea: Tiber. and Cai. Gracch.
and these are my ornaments. If Judges and Magistrates shall say of these three
virtues, as Cornelia did of her two sons, haec sunt ornamenta mea: these are
mine ornaments: oh, it will advance them so high from the thrones of their
justice and judgment to the throne of Gods graces and favors, as they shall be
admitted to be Judges, to judge for God in this world, and kings to reign with
God in the world to come. Which God grant unto all faithful Judges, and all
his faithful people, for his Sons sake: to whom together with the holy
Spirit, be ascribed all honor, glory, praise, power, and dominion, both now
and ever. Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON.
2. CHRON. 19. 5. 6. And he set Judges in the land in all the strong Cities of
Judah, City by City, and he said unto the Judges: Take heed what ye do, for
ye execute not the judgment of man but of the Lord, and he will be with you in
the cause and in the judgment.
IEhosaphat (right Honorable) being the king and supreme governor of the land
of Judah, thinks it a point of his duty to substitute and depute inferior
governors under him, that so himself might be the more eased, and his land the
better governed: the truth whereof the drift and purport of this my text does
make plain unto us. The words may be divided into two parts, whereof the
former concern the ordination of Judges, in the fifth Verse. 5.
verse: the other the information of Judges, in the sixth. In the ordination
Verse. 6.
of Judges there be three points of me to be handled. First who were ordained;
Judges: secondly by whom; By him, that is, by Iehosaphat. Thirdly where: first
set down more generally, in the land: secondly more specially in four
members. First, in the Cities of Judah. Secondly, all the Cities. Thirdly, the
strong Cities. Fourthly, City by City.

In the information of Judges I am to consider: First the lesson of it.
Secondly the reason to enforce it. The lesson consists of three precepts,
whereof the first is of courage: that Judges are to do. Secondly of wisdom:
that they are to take heed. The the third of both linked and coupled together,
that they are to take heed what they do. The reason for the inforcement hereof
opens it self in a twofold consideration: whereof the former is, whose
judgments they do execute, set down first negatiuely, not of man: next
affirmatively, but of the Lord. The second consideration is, that they
themselves are to be judged: to be collected out of these words, that the Lord
will be with them in the cause and in the judgment. If they do well, in mercy
to reward them: if they do evil, in judgment to punish the^.

First then concerning the ordination of Judges, and the first of the three
members therein contained, who were ordained, Judges; who were officers
appointed either immediately from God, or mediatly by Kings and Princes Gods
lieutenants, wisely to hear, and indifferently to determine matters and causes
betwixt parties and parties. Wherein great care is to be had, that Judges may
first be informed by the law, according whereunto they are after to conform
themselves and their people: for there is and ought to be a mutual
reciprocation betwixt the law and the Judge, the Judge and the law. That as the
law is a speechless Judge: so the Judge may be a speaking law. Neither ought
the phrase of the law only to dwell in his lips, but the sense of the law to
live in his person. Wherefore by a certain learned man is he called (...) a
living law or soul bearing justice; a living law so needful, and a
soule-bearing justice so necessary in all States and co^mon-weales, as without
them they become dead and breathless, rather cadauera then corpora, that is,
carcasses then bodies.

These be the eyes of kingdoms and states, which being put out, because every
man will then do that which seems good in his own eyes, Judge. 17. 6. large
limited monarchies will become Iud 17. 6.
like huge limmed Poliphemus when his eye was taken from him, in daily danger
of downfall and destruction. The necessity of whom are further set down unto
us Zachar. 10. 4. in that they are called by the name of Zach. 10. 4.
a corner, or a nail, whose nature is to hold fast and close together; to show
that without them the veins and sinews of kingdoms are loosened, and the
knees of States do smite together with iarres of discord, and wars of
homebred insurrection, as sometimes the joints and sinews of Belshazzar the
king were loosened, and his knees Dan. 5. 6.
smote together, at the vision of his kingdoms division, Dan. 5. 6.

The second thing is, who ordained these Judges, (he) that is, Iehosaphat the
king and sovereign of the land: Honos onus: honor is a cumber; and he which
sits on the hill of authority, bears a burden on his neck as heavy as
was the hill Atlas. As the Sun therefore having absolute light in it self,
yet being not able alone to satisfy the earths contentment, lends and
transfuseth the beams thereof to the orbs of the Moon and other stars,
which may supply in the Suns absence: so Kings and Princes having absolute
authority in themselves, yet being not able alone to extend the same to the
satisfaction of every subject, are enforced to depute and subordaine Viceroies,
Vicegerents, Lieutenants, Presidents, Deputies, Judges, Magistrates and other
inferior officers under them, which may furnish out this defect. And no
marvel it is: for how is it possible for one man alone to sustain the burden
of Gods office? Now that Kings and Princes stand charged with the office of
God, it may appear in that they are graced with the name of God, Psalm. 82. 2.
Psalm. 82. 2.
Hence it is, that Moses being weary of bearing the burden of the whole
people alone, and complaining of it, Number. 11. 14. God came down in a Number. 11.
14
cloud, and took of the spirit of Moses, and put it on the seventy ancient
men that should assist him, Numb. 11. 25. Number. 11. 25
Hence it is that God himself appoints it to his people: Judges and officers
shall thou make in the Cities which the Lord has given thee throughout the
tribes, and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment, Deuter. 16.
18. Hence it is that Solomon appointed twelve Princes under him for the
governing of his whole kingdom. 1. Reg. 4. 7. Hence it is that Darius
constituted 1. Reg. 4. 7.
and ordained an hundred and twenty governors under him, for the ruling of
all the provinces of the Monarchy: three over all, whereof Daniel was the
chief, Dan. 6. 1. 2. Dan. 6. 1. 2.
Hence it is that king Ahashuerosh among the rest of his Princes to whom he
made his feast, made the same to his Governors: whereby we may observe he had
Governors, Ester. 1. 3. For this cause the Philosopher calls Ester. 1. 3.
Judges and officers thus appointed under Kings and Princes, in the 4. book of
his Politikes, for their wisdom their eyes; for their instruction Aristot.
Polit. lib. 4.
their ears; for their protection the hands; for their supportation the legs
of the Common wealth. And Philo Iudaeus that learned man, writing de Philo
Judae. de creat. princip.
creatione Principis, says, Id quoque summae potestatis officium est: that is
also the duty of the highest power or kingly authority, to substitute
governors under him for the administration of justice: for one man, quantumuis
forti alacrique corpore simul and animo, in tanta mole and multitudine
negotiorum non sufficit: though he be of never so strong a body and cheerful
a mind, yet in so great a weight and multitude of businesses is not sufficient.

The third thing is, where Iehosaphat set these Judges, set down first more
generally, in the land: secondly more specially in these four points which in
their places shall be handled. First, in the land; without which a fruitful
land is made barren: for where the land is ungoverned, there it is unoccupied;
where it is unoccupied, there it becomes a wilderness, Jer. 17. 6.
Iere. 17. 6. with which a barren land is made fruitful. For while as
barrennes chiefly proceeds from winds, and tempests, and drought, and
parching of the Sun: a Prince, a Gouerner, a Judge, a magistrate is said to
be a hiding place from the wind, a refuge against the tempest, as a river of
water in a dry land, and as a shadow of a great rock against the parching of
the Sun, Esaias 32. 1, 2. Secondly Esai. 32. 1. 2
more particularly in four points: first in the cities of Judah: old Jacob had
foretold, Genes. 49. 10. that the Scepter Genesis 49. 10.
should not depart from Judah, nor the lawgiver from betwixt his feet, till
Shilo should come. The truth whereof is here furthered by Iehosaphat, in that
he planteth as it were a scepter in Judah, and places a lawgiver betwixt the
feet thereof, when he sets Judges in the cities of Judah.

Cities they are prone first unto deceit; therefore as the Greeks call a City
by the name (...), the Romans by that word expressed deceit, to show that
cities are subject to fraudulencie. Secondly, cities are prone to cruelty;
therefore though Jerusalem were the light of nations, the lady of the world and
the city of the great King, yet is she called a bloody city, Ezech. 22. 2.
Ezech. 22. 2.
Thirdly, cities are prone to incontinencie: examples whereof we have in Sodom
and Gomorrha; who for that they burnt in the flames of unnatural lusts amongst
themselves, therefore brought down the flames of fire and brimstone from
heaven, to the burning and turning of them and their cities to cinders and
ashes, Genes. 19. Genesis 19.


Fourthly and lastly, Cities in a word are prone to all sins and
wickednesses: wherefore Samaria which was the head city in Israel, is said to
be the wickedness of Jacob, Micah. 1. 5. To Micah 1. 5.
the end then that this deceit in cities might be repressed, cruelty
oppressed, incontinencie restinguished, and all sins and vices (as evil
humors that crase the health of the commonwealth) removed, Iehosaphat places
Judges in the cities of Judah.

The second thing is, all the cities, etc. some without all, is partiality;
all as well as some is equity. Equity not partiality ought to be the livery
and cognizance of kings, princes and Judges. Xenophon writes in his book
(...) Xenoph. (...).
(...): A good ruler nothing differs from a good father. A good father (as we
know) respects not the good of some of his children, and neglects the
welfare of the rest; but stands equally affected unto them all. Thus old
Jacob Genes. 49. blesses not some of his Genesis 49.
sons, and leaves the other unblessed, but blesses them all by name. A good
father is affected like unto the true mother, 1. Reg. 3. 26. who will 1. Reg.
3. 26.
have his whole kingdom governed not by peecemeale, as she would have the
whole child not divided. Uniformity is a thing basely esteemed in these times,
but highly regarded by Iehosaphat in those days, who would have his kingdom
not like unto the lap of Saul's garment rent, 1. Sam. 15. 1. Sam. 15. 27.
27. but like unto the coat of Christ, whole without seame: wherefore as it is
said of the Spirit of the Lord, that it fills the whole world; so it may be
said of the scepter of Iehosaphat, that it ruled his whole kingdom. For he set
Judges in all the cities of Judah.

Thirdly, the strong cities of Judah: as the stong man is not to boast of his
strength, so the strong city is not to glory in her strength; for might
without wisdom, and strength without counsel, are like unto huge piles of
stuff and stone heaped together without any mortar or matter to combine the
same, which are easily ruinated and dissolved. One says, that laws are the
life of the commonwealth: execution is the life of the laws, and the Judge he
is the life of execution. Where then there is no Judge, there is no execution,
because it is as dead: where there is no execution, there is no law, because it
is as dead: where no law, there no common wealth, because it is as dead. And
what strength (I beseech you) can there be in a dead thing? A certain learned
man described a law to be (...) Juni. de palit, Mosis.
(...), a right reason, commanding things which are to be done, and forbidding
things which are not to be done: but where there is might without wisdom,
strength without counsel, there things which are commanded are violated, and
things which are forbidden are performed, because men are carried with the
unbridled sway of their own raging appetites. And corporations of men become
as herds of beasts, where not the wisest, but the mightiest bear rule: vt in
grege taurus: having, it may be, horns and hoofes, but no understanding. An
army of Hearts is but weak, yet an army of Hearts (says one) which has a Lion
who is stout and wise to be captain, is better then an army of Lions which are
strong, who have a Heart which is white-liuerd and foolish to be the commander
of them. It is said, Eccles. 9. 16. that wisdom is better then Eccles. 9. 16.
strength. Which may appear unto us, not only by the reason which Solomon
uses in the 14. and 15. verse of that Chapter, of a little City which Eccles.
9. 14. 15.
had few men in it, and of a great king which laid siege unto it, and builded a
fort against it; and of a poor man therein, who was wise, who delivered it by
his much wisdom: but by a particular inducement of special experiments
amongst our selves, as of the fierce horse, of the mighty Elephant, of the
strong Camel, which by the wit and wisdom of man are tamed and made pliant
to the use and service of man. If then the strength of Sampson lay in the hair
of his head, which being taken away, it became as the ordinary strength of
another man, Judge. 16. 19. much more Judge. 16. 19
does the strength of kingdoms and states lie in their Judges and Magistrates,
which are not as the hair of their heads, but as the heads themselves, which
being removed, kingdoms may say as sometime David the king said, My strength
is dried up like a potsheard, Psalm. 22. 15. Be it then Psalm. 22. 15.
that it may be said of our Cities, as of the Cities of Judah, that they are
strong Cities: yet is it not to be supposed that they are inuironned with
walls of brass. (...): the wisdom Jsocrat.
of rulers is as a wall of brass unto cities and commonweals, as writes the
philosophical Greek Orator; without which, though the stones of our walls be
for their strength as rocks, yet will they prove but rocks of wrack and
confusion to the inhabitants therein. As wisdom without justice is subtlety,
so strength without wisdom is cruelty; and the people which are in such a
case, may be said to eat the strength of their own skin, Job. 18. 13. like to
Job. 18. 13.
huge Pyramides and Colossi, which being not well set together, or supported,
do fall by their own weight: so these by their own force, as Saul by his
own sword, 1. Sam. 31. 4. Fourthly, City by City. As God made the 1. Sam.
31. 4.
world by order, so will he have it to be governed by order; without which it
cease to be (...), that is, a beauty arising of things set in order, and
begins to be a (...), that is a deformimitie growing of things hudled and
confounded together: which here Iehosaphat respects in that he sets Judges
in all etc. City by City. Zach. 11. 7 calls Order by the name of Beauty.
Zach. 11. 7.
The Greeks call beauty (...), that is of enticing or alluring: because it does
or ought to allure all men to the gaze and embracement of it: so beautiful is
it, and so fruitful.

The second general head of my text does concern the Information of Judges in
verse the sixth, which consists verse. 6.
first of a lesson, secondly of a reason for the inforcement thereof. The
lesson stands upon three precepts, whereof the first concerns courage that
they are to do: what Judges have maturely purposed, that is by them effectually
to be performed, not suffering themselves to be alienated first by anger: for
as the Philosopher speaks, we use not troubled water till it be settled,
neither ought (...) to use a troubled mind till it be quieted. Secondly not
corrupted by gifts: for gifts blind the eyes of the wise, Exodus 23. 8. Thirdly
not estranged Exodus 23 8.
by favor; but as the balance weyeth the gold that is precious, and the lead
that is base, both alike: so to stand equally affected to the high and to the
low, to the honorable and the base, the rich and the poor, one and other.
Fourthly, not auerted by the suites and mediations of friends, but to be
affected for justice, as he was for truth, who said, Socrates is my friend, and
Plato is my friend, but truth more my friend; so justice is most my friend.
Fifthly, not perverted by the wreake of private teen, or the revenge of our own
private quarrel, but in the place of God to be like God himself, who (Math.
5. 45.) not suffers Math. 5. 45.
but makes (which has an emphasis in it) his Sun to shine as well upon the
bad as upon the good, and his rain to fall as well upon the unjust as upon the
just: so to bear an even hand between them that love them, and them that hate
them, their friends and their enemies. Sixthly and lastly, not daunted or
dismayed with any dangers or perils: for dangers and fearful things are the
true object of true fortitude; without which it can no more be said to be true
courage, then Judas his kiss was true frienship.

Oh it is a happy thing, when it may be said concerning any state, as Naum Naum
2. 3.
2. 3. that they which are in scarlet are valiant men: and men may witness
concerning their Judges and magistrates, as the Angel does of Gedeon: The Lord
is with thee thou valiant man, Iud. 6. 12. What is it that causes Judge. 6. 12.
histories to report of certain flames of Majesty that sparkled in the eyes
and countenances of Scipio and Marius? and chiefly, as Suetonius reports
Sueton. in Aug. Caesar.
in his life, of Augustus Caesar? but that they were full of courage, full of
fortitude, full of magnanimity. Faint courage is worse then ignorance,
ignorance (it may be) betrayeth a cause for want of knowledge, but faint
courage (contrary to the priuity of knowledge) betrayeth right for want of
spirit. Holy anger then is well befitting a Judge, well beseeming a magistrate;
I mean not that anger which blinds their wisdom, but that anger which
whetteth their courage. This anger it has been found in Moses, in Christ, in
holy men from time to time; whereunto the Apostle exciteth us in Gal. 4. 18: It
is good always Gal. 4. 18.
to be earnest in a good matter; the word in the original has an emphasis,
which is (...), that is, to be ernest with heat and feruency: and Seneca
says, Qui caret ira, caret iustitia, He which Seneca.
wants anger, wa^teth justice; because when he ought to do, he leaves off to
do. The second precept contained in this lesson, is that they are to take heed:
wherein I observe their wisdom: none may be superior in place above other,
but he which is superior in grace above other, beautified as much as may be
with the seuen-fold grace of the spirit of God, whereof the spirit of wisdom is
said to be one, Esa. 11. 2. Where Judges and magistrates may be Esai. 11. 2.
said to be made drunk with the cup of follies, as the kings of the earth are
said to be drunk with the cup of the abhominatio^ of the shameless stru^pet,
spoken of in Apo. 17. there must needs ensue Apoc. 17. 2.
first reeling, secondly tripping, thirdly ouerturning, both to themselves, as
also to the state which is weilded by them; as excellently writes Plato:
(...): that is, a drunken Plato.
gouerner overthrows al things, whether it be a chariot or a ship, or a
navy, or whatsoever else is guided or commanded by him. There be (says
Hesiodus) three sorts of men in every Hesiod.
commonwealth: the first are the worst, who can neither inform themselves,
neither yet are willing to take information from others. The second of a mean
sort, such as (it may be) cannot instruct or inform themselves, and yet are
willing to receive instruction or information from others. The third sort be
the best, who can both inform and instruct themselves, and are able to give
information and instruction to others: these be Judges and magistrates, which
when they are wanting in any state and commonweal, woe be unto that state,
woe be unto that commonweal, because the Princes thereof are as children,
Ecclesiast. 10. 16. Vbi stulti Eccle 10. 16
prudentibus praesunt, as excellently writes Plutarch in the life of Cleomenes
Plutarch in (...). and Agis.
and Agis: where fools are over wise men, there it fares with the common
wealth as with a Serpent, where the tail labors to rule and draw the head
after it. Plato writes in his former Alcibiades, that the heir apparent Plato
in pr. Alcib.
to the Persian Monarchy, as soon as he had attained to fourteen years of
age, was delivered to four most choice and principal men that could be found
in all the provinces of the Monarchy to be brought up, and nurtured in four
of the most choice and principal virtues; whereof, the first was (...), that
is the most valiant, who should train him up in fortitude and feats of arms.
The second (...), the most just which should inure him to speak the truth, and
to give to every man that was his own. The third (...), the most sober, who
should frame his mind to that sobriety and temperance that he might not be
conquered, (...), no not of one of the least pleasures. The fourth and last he
was (...) the wisest: (...), that is, who taught him wisdom, chiefly
consisting in the worship or religion of their gods, and matters concerning a
King or kingly dignity: Be wise therefore, o ye kings, be learned o ye Judges
of the earth, Psalm. 2. 10.
Psalm. 2. 10. that ye may not only do by courage, but take heed by wisdom.

The third precept comprised in this lesson, is courage and wisdom, both of
them linked together in that the Judges are to take heed what they do. The
Egyptians had an Emblem among them, which might be a good rule of direction
for Princes and gouerners, (...) and magistrates, An eye with a (...): an eye,
this argues their wisdom, whereby they take heed: a scepter, which
bewrays their power, whereby they do: that as they are over men as the Eagle
over the fowls, and the Lion over the beasts; so they may labor for the eye
of an Eagle, whereby they may see into matters, first quickly without delay,
secondly deeply without doubting, thirdly singly without doubling; for the
heart of a Lion also, which is vndantable unconquerable.

The men of Israel testified concerning David, that he was worth ten thousand
of them, 2. Sam. 18. 3: so 2. Sam. 18. 3.
have the people just cause to say concerning their Judges and governors, You
are worth ten thousand of us for your valiancie, worth ten thousand of us for
your wisdom. Wisdom like the wary spy is to go before, and Courage like a
valiant army to follow after, vanquishing and subduing all things under it.
Wisdom informs, courage performs: wisdom instructs, courage effects:
wisdom prescribes, when, where, why, how things are to be done; courage
enableth to do them. A Judge or a magistrate having wisdom without courage,
may be said to be (...) without heart; having courage without wisdom, may be
said to be (...) without a head; but where they both meet together as mercy
and truth did, Psalm. 85. 10. there Judges and magistrates Psalm. 85. 10
may be said to do in their several charges, as they which bare office amongst
the Spartans, (...), that is, dispose all things in a beautiful order,
confound nothing by headlong rashness. Hence comes the protecting and
patronizing of the good and innocent by wise courage, the correcting and
punishing of the evil and nocent by courageous wisdom: inclinable indeed
rather unto mercy then severity, endeavoring for that name which Minutius
bestowed upon Fabius, as Plutarch Plutarch. in Fabi.
writes in the life of Fabius, Quando venerabilius nomen non habeo, te mitem
appello parentem: When I have not a more honorable name to bestow, I call thee
by the name of a mild father; yet not so pliant to mercy as negligent in
judgment: but remembering always that they bear not the sword in vain, but
that they are the ministers of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil,
Romans 13. 4. Romans 13. 4.


The parts then of the Judges office, are like the parts of David's song, Psalm.
101. 1.
mercy and judgment. In the first place, if it may be, mercy, that they
which are like God in office may resemble him in image, whose mercy is said to
be over al his works, Psa. 145. 9. Psalm. 145. 9.
many punishments are a disgrace to the magistrates, as many funerals to the
physicians, as writes Seneca. Seneca.


Yet because there is a sparing cruelty, and a punishing mercy; and foolish
pity spilleth the city, as says the proverb: not so addicted to mercy as
not at all affected to judgment, without which it is sure that the weeds of
vices would ouer-spread the field of the whole world, reason would become rage,
laws license, well governed men as brutish and savage beasts, Monarchies
anarchies, kingdoms thraldoms, and the world it self a wilderness. They are
therefore as in mercy, so to bear the likeness of God in judgment, who is
said to have first judgment, secondly judgments, thirdly armies of
judgments, Job 10. 17: armies which are Job 10. 17.
for number many, for kinds sundry, and for force mighty, beginning all things
in wisdom, following all things so begun with courage, therein taking heed
what they do.

The second thing is the reason for the inforcement of this lesson, which
consists in a twofold consideration: whereof the former concerns whose
judgments they execute, set down first negatiuely, not of man; secondly
affirmatively, but of the Lord. Not of man, who is base, weak, miserable in
his birth, life, death: therefore may he seem justly to be contemned, his
laws to be wrested, his ordinances to be perverted, his statutes to be
transgressed by him which is the public organ and minister thereof: so he may
do it secretly without detection, or subtly without conviction. Not of man,
who for his matter is called Adam, Adam, red earth. Enosh, sorrow or affliction.
which signifies earth: for his misery Enosh, which signifies sorrow or
affliction: and therefore may he and his laws seem lightly to be regarded,
basely to be esteemed. Not of man, of whom it is said, (...), man is full of
windings and turnings: therefore seems it no matter very important, if there
be a winding and turning from his laws and judgments. Not of man, who sets
forth deceit with his tongue, Romans 3. 13. therefore may he seem (according Romans
3. 13.
to the natural suggestion of depraved reason) lege talionis, by law of like
for like, to be worthily deceived again. To conclude, not of man, who has
transgressed the law of the highest: for there is none that does good, no not
one. It may seem then no matter of great moment, when a man has transgressed
the law of God, if man violate the judgments of man.

The part affirmative follows the part negative: But of the Lord. Of the
Lord, who for his continuance is God from everlasting and world without end,
Psalm. 90. 2. For his essence a spirit, Psalm. 90. 2.
who will be worshipped in spirit and truth, John 4. 24. For his state, one
Joh. 4. 24.
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16. 12. For his constancy Psalm. 16. 12.
has no shadow by turning, Iam. Iac. 1. 17.
1. 17. For his sincerity and sanctimonie is holy, holy, holy, not once, nor
twice, but thrice holy: and that not by the opinion of men, but by the witness
of Angels, Isay 6. 3. Of the Esai. 6. 3.
Lord, who spanneth the heavens with his span, and measures the waters in his
fist, and weyeth the mountains in a balance. Of the Lord, in comparison of
whom all the nations of the earth are but as a drop from a bucket. Of the Lord,
who is the Lord of anger, whose paths are in the whirlewind and the storm, and
the clouds are the dust of his feet, Naum 1. 2. 3. Naum 1. 2. 3
Finally of the Lord: at the presence and in the sight of whom the earth is
burnt, the rocks cleave, the mountains tremble, the hills melt, the deeps roar,
hell it self and all infernal troops do shake and shudder. Seeing then ye
execute not the judgments of man such and so base, such and so weak, such and
so contemptible, but of the Lord, such and so glorious, such and so mighty,
such and so fearful, such and so dreadful, of such and so great terror and
majesty: oh it stands you in hand to take heed what you do.

The second consideration obseruable in this reason, is, that Judges themselves
are to stand at the seat of judgment, to be collected out of these words, who
will be with you in the cause and in the judgment: he will be with them by the
all-seeing eye of his unsearchable wisdom and understanding, if they do well,
to reward them with mercy: if they do evil, to punish the^ with judgment. If
then the Judges of the earth shall not administer judgment, shall not do
equity, shall not perform justice, shall not beware, shall not take heed,
shall have incontinentes oculos, and incontinentes manus, incontinent eyes and
incontinent hands: Incontinent eyes like to the two unchaste Judges toward
Susanna: Incontinent hands like to Felix, who is said to leave Paul bound,
because he looked for money to have loosed him, Act. 24. 27: then the Lord will
Act. 24. 27.
be with them in such a case and judgment, in the vial of his wrath, in the
edge of his indignation, punishing them both in this world and in the world to
come. In this world, as he raised up Daniel, which signifies the judgment of
God against those two incontinent Judges, who arraigned, condemned, and caused
them to be stoned to death: as he no doubt also raised up Cambyses against
Sisannes that corrupt Judge, in causing him to be fleyed quick, and his skin
to be hung on the judgment seat for his bribe-taking. But if not in this
world, most certainly in the world to come, when, oh fearful saying, The
mighty shall be mightily tormented, Wisdom. 6. 6. Wisd. 6. 6.


But if the Judges of the earth shall administer judgment, shall do equity,
shall perform justice, shall beware, shall take heed, shall seek to be that in
their several circuits, which Aristides was amongst the Athenians, of whom
Herodotus reports, that he was (...) Herodot.
(...), that is, the best and the most just man among the Athenians. If they
shall be men of courage, there is fortitude; fearing God, there is wisdom;
dealing truly, there is justice; hating covetousness, there is temperance, Exodus
18. 21. Exodus 18. 21
which are called the four Cardinal virtues, because upon them, as upon their
proper hinges, all other virtues do depend. Virtues fit for Judges and
magistrates, on whom the stay and state of commonweals and states, as on
their several hinges, are sustained: then the Lord will be with them in such a
cause and judgment, with mercy rewarding them both in this life, as also in
the life to come: in this life with riches, wisdom and honor; in the life to
come with bliss, life and immortality. As it is comfortably written, Wisd. 6.
from ver. 17. to v. 22. VVisdom^ from verse. 1^ to 22.
The desire of discipline is the beginning of wisdom, and the care of
discipline is love, and love is the fulfilling of the commandment; the keeping
of the commandment is the assurance of immortality; immortality makes us
near unto God: wherefore the love of wisdom brings us unto the kingdom. If
then your delight be in thrones and in scepters (oh ye kings and Judges of the
earth) embrace wisdom and reign for evermore.

Thus (right honorable) have I opened this text unto you, not largely
amplified, but briefly comprised: wherein I have showed you the ordination of a
Judge, and the informatio^ of him. S. Cyprian says, that God is Cyprian.
one in essence, but diverse and manifold in office and magistracy, whereof your
honors have a portion. Gird therefore your loins with the girdle of
fortitude, but of fortitude informed by wisdom: let mercy and judgment,
judgment and mercy meet in your persons, as sometime the sweet and the
strong, the strong and the sweet did in Sampsons riddle, Iud. Judge. 14. 14
14. 14. Go on to do that which ye do, I mean to shun and avoid that which is
evil and unjust, and so ye may shun and avoid the being of God with you in the
cause and in the judgment punishing you. Go on to embrace that which is good
and just, that so the mercy of God may embrace you, and his loving favor may
compass you about as it were with a shield, Psa. 5. 12. Psalm. 5. 12.
Let the iudgement-seate, whereon your honorable personages do sit, put you in
mind of the seat of Gods judgment: let the judgment bar, whereat the
miserable prisoners are arraigned before you, bring to your remembrance the bar
of Gods judgment, when the judgment shall be extraordinary, both in regard
of the Judge, who shall be God the Judge of the whole world, Genes. 18. 25. as
also Genesis 18. 2
in regard of them which shall be judged, which are the Judges of the earth.
And ever and anon think upon that saying, which, the wiser the heart is it
lights on, the deeper impressio^ it makes, written Wisdom. 6. 5. Suddenly
Wisd. 6. 5
will the Lord appear unto you: for a hard judgment shall be for them that
bear rule. Proceed therefore as to the good of this kingdom you have begun:
proceed I say, and so long as this your life continues, continue you this
proceeding, to be that unto his Majesty, which his excellency in that his
excellent speech which he made in the Parliament house, no doubt in your
honorable presence and audience, advises you to be his eyes to see for him,
his ears to hear for him: that as his Majesty desires to hear and see for
the Lord; so ye may see and hear for his Majesty. For his Majesty in that
his speech, religiously protests that the thrones which you sit on, are
neither his nor yours, but the Lords. Keep therefore judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, defend the cause of the widow, Esaias 1. 17.
Let that saying Esai. 1. 17.
of Gregory Nazianzen be as a magistrates memento unto you, Quemadmodum Grego.
Naz.
leonum and reliquorum animaliu^ motus non sunt ijdem, ita nec magistratus and
populi: as the motions and gestures of Lions and other baser creatures are not
alike, so neither of the magistrate and the people. As therefore ye manage
greater matters then the people, so ought your carriage to be of better manners
then the people: that as in places, so you may be above them in graces; that it
may be said of you in regard of your Judges office, as it is said of David in
respect of his kings office, that the spirit of God is come upon you from that
time forward, 1. Sam. 16. 13. Plutarch reports 1. Sam. 16. 13. Plutarch.
(...) Demosthen^^
in the life of Demosthenes, that it was a saying among the people, that
Demosthenes was worthy of the city, but Demades above the city. Behave your
selves so in your places, as ye may not only be counted worthy of your places,
but also above your places; that he which sits above, may reward you both
below and above: below in this life with riches, wisdom and honor, waiting on
your judgment seats, as sometime they attended on the throne of Solomon:
above in the life to come with bliss and immortality, when your scarlet robes
shall be turned into long white robes, your trains of estate into troops and
millions of Saints and Angels: your judging of men into judging of Angels; and
your earths authority into heavens glory: which God grant unto all faithful
Judges and all his faithful people, and that for his Son Christ Jesus sake: to
whom, together with the holy Spirit, be all honor, praise, power, and dominion
both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

