TRUE HAPPINESS, OR, KING DAVID'S CHOICE.

Begun in Sermons, and now digested into a TREATISE.

By Mr. WILLIAM STRUTHER, Preacher at Edinburgh.

LUKE 10. One thing is necessary, Marie has chosen the best part, that shall
not be taken from her. Aug. Mor. 4. Illud est hominis optimum, quod and corpore
and anima optimum facit. Idem Lib. Arb. 2. 19. Vita beata est animi affectio
inhaerentis summo bono. EDINBVRGH, Printed by R. YOUNG, for John Wood, and are
to be sold at his shop on the south side of the high street, a little above the
Cross. Anno 1633.

TO THE MOST MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES, KING Of great Britain, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace, etc.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
Man's greatest Misery is seen most in the marter of happiness; and when God
presents the chief good, then Satan presses to turn it into our chief
ill.

Of all things on earth only man's Soul keeps a conscionable correspondence
with God, because it is only capable of his instructions and inspirations; and
able to give him a meeting in affection and action. And yet in the matter of
true happiness it was most miserable. For though God made Adam happy, yet by
his fall, losing happiness, he had neither conscience of misery, nor care of
recovering what he had lost. And which is to be lamented, all mankind (except
the handful of the Church) for more than three thousand years lived in the
brutish opinion of the souls mortality. Aug. Civit. 18. 25.
Then Thales, in the days of Manasseh and Numa, observing exactly the heavens
motion, raised this conclusion; That man's soul which could observe those
things, had a greater respect to heaven, than to gaze upon it; which could be
no other but to dwell in it: whereupon he inferred the souls immortality.
Thereafter the Phiosophers laid clearer grounds, and raised clearer
conclusions: and thereupon began to think of true happiness for an immortal
soul. But though they resolved that happiness is the fruit of the union of
the soul with the eternal God, yet they fell foul both in the conceit of
their Gods, and of happiness it self. Their carriage to their gods was
insolent: They tyrannized over them, Tertull. Apol. Arnob. contra Gentes,
Minutius. Lactantius
and served themselves of them rather than served them. They made them; they
casheered them: They engaged them for money, and exposed them to a licitation
or roping in the market. And if they were not so rid of them, they cast them as
blocks to the backs of their fires. And all the honor they gave to the
things those blocks represented, was to find liberty to sinning. For they
honored seditious Jupiter, contentious Mars, drunken Bacchus, licentious
Venus, etc. that they might find a patrocinie of their sins in themselves,
Scurrilatis potius quam divinitatis officia. Aug. Civit.
and yet they never sought true happiness of any of them; for the offices
which they assigned to their select gods were rather scurrilitie than divinity.

In like manner they erred both in the matter of happiness, and the way of
acquiring it. As for happiness, though Saint Augustine multiply their opinions
to 288. Civit. 19. 1.
yet they neither agreed among themselves, neither any one of them apart with
himself; and none of them all found the truth. If we look to them jointly,
they are like blind Andabats smiting other. Aug. contra. Acad, 3. 7.
If severally, they are like Bedlemits, every one feeding himself in his own
fancy, pretending a confidence that he had found the truth, but within full
of restlesnesse. Cicero presenting all these sects, shows that there was none
of them who took not prioritie to themselves. The Socraticks seemed to come
near by their maxim. Nihil se malle quam virum ^onum esse. Aug. Epist.
That they desired nothing more than to be good men, And yet they knew not the
way: Quid attinet scire quo eundum, nisi sciamus qua eundum, Bern. Jejun. 4. f.
39. c. 2.
And what avails it to know whither to go, if we know not the way how to
go? And when S. Augustine asked a Pagan Philosopher, what was that way to be
good? He got no other answer, but that men should be purged by sacrifices, and
reconciled to God by intercession of the lesser gods.

Plato overreached them all, affirming, In cognitione and imitatione Dei.
Civit. 8. 8.
That true happiness consisted in the knowledge and imitation of God. He went
also further to his purifications, aiming at the real change of the person,
which Porphyre long after him did purify more: But they were nothing but the
evanishing of fleshly minds. Aristotle envying his Masters Divinity, turned
him unto nature, and disputed much of virtue; but proved miserable in his life,
and with the rest Manciparunt virtutem voluptati. Aug. Civit. 5. 19.
mancipated virtue unto pleasure. And though Epicurus by some abstract Maxims
(gathered by Seneca) would mitigate his brutish opinion; yet it is sure he
pleaded all for base pleasure, and measured happiness as grossly as he did the
Sun, whose diameter he alleged was but two foot.

Thus they blinded both the world and themselves, and for keeping their own
credit, made men think there were many happinesses, Erant tantum multi errores
errantium, and non multa summa bona. Aug. lib. arb. 2. 10.
which were only errors, and not many chief goods, And the best of them, when
they had wrought their minds to this, that God was the chief good: yet they
knew him not clearly, and therefore came back to their wonted darkness, not so
much by choice as by weariness Non tamelectione quam fatigatione. Aug. de Mor.
Ecc. 7.
.

So by a Poenali morbo plus sitiunt quam capiunt. Aug. Confess. 11. 12.
penal disease they thirsted more than they could conceive: They were blown up
with pride, and sought vainly to build happiness to themselves. But Quanta
est vanitas, quanta insania, hominem mortalem in seipso fidere ut beatus sit.
Aug. ep. 52.
how great vanity is it, and how great madness, for a mortal man to trust in
himself to be happy! For Non accipit humana natura ut per s^am potestatem
beata fit. Aug. de Genesis 2. 15.
humane nature has not that power to be happy by it self, because Non facit
hominem beatum, nisi qui fecit hominem Deu^. Aug. epist. 52.
none can make man blessed, but he that made man.

God ever kept the doctrine of true happiness in his Church: Genesis 5. 24.
Enochs walking with him, and translating to heaven was a real document of it:
The Patriarchs conversing with God, the exercise of his worship under the law,
and the preaching of the Prophets made it to shine clearly long ere Thales
advertised the world of immortality. And yet when the Jews would be like the
Gentiles, they obscured that doctrine: And the Sadduces brought into their
Church Epicurus opinion of the mortality of the soul. But Christ refuted
their error, and positively designed in one sentence more than they all. Joh.
17. 3. Aug. de mor. Ecc. 18.
This is life eternal to know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ. S. Augustine labored painfully nine years to find out the
truth: He assayed the sects of the Philosophers one after another, but found it
with none of them: Then he turned him to the Christians, add falling upon the
Manicheans, was more perplexed with their fancies than before, Consess.
but being advertised to read Scripture, he found the truth and true
happiness in Christ.

This is your Majesty's glory, that true happiness is more fully preached
under your Majesty, than any King on earth. Paganism and Mahumetisme
overwhelme all without the Church: Superstition marreth it in Papists, and the
craft of Heretics obscureth it among some Protestants: But under your Majesty
the salvation of the Lord is near to them that fear him, that glory may dwell
in our Land. Psalm. 85. 9.


The Lord who has made your Majesty a King of many Kingdoms, make your
Majesty more and more a King of many blessings, that we all walking in truth
and love, righteousness and peace kissing one another, Psalm. 21. 6.
we may all in the end be happy in him, who is true happiness.

Edinburgh, 15. Maii, 1633.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient servant, WILLIAM STRUTHER.

THE TABLE.
A
ADams selfe-dominion of his will was his fall page 19. Affliction stays not
happiness 26. it prepares Pastors 99. Application necessary 119. Assistance
divine 103.
B
Baptism 104. Beauty of the Sanctuary 82. It is not in building, 84. nor in
imagerie, ib. but in Gods presence, 85. and in his work, 89.
C
The Calendar of the godly 82. The Chief good 3, 4, 5. Choice of the chief
good, 34. it is directed of God, 40. it divides mankind, 44. and discovers
our by past, present, and future estate: 46. we are conscious of it, 36 Christ's
union with the Father and us 7. Churches are schools of happiness 77 they
should be frequented 81. Combat spiritual stays not happiness 67. Conceit of
perfectionis great imperfection 142. Congregations in Churches are most
beautiful meetings 111. Constant search of happiness 139. Contentment is our
element 134.
D
Death perfecteth happiness 150. Desertions of God are fearful 141, 143. The
discord and concord of godly and wicked 45. Dwelling with God, and in him is
our happiness 64. This dwelling is mutual 81.
E
No chief evil, as there is a chief good 10. Popular chief evils 11. There
is no little evil. 13. Excess spiritual 126. Experience should be
communicate 100.
F
Faith is for application 121. Forget things past 145. Free Will a seat of war
against grace 17. it destroys its adorers 56. Fruition of God 84, 124. it is
better than sight, 131. here it is but in tastes, 128.
G
God is our chief good, 9. 29. he only is to be sought, 9. he is the beauty
of the sanctuary, 81. he offers grace. Craveth service. Gives power to
serve, and accepts our service 98. Gods teaching, 95. how we see God, 118,
123. he is the fountain of happiness, 21. and gives it freely ibid. Good is
greater than ill 12.
H
Happiness is not in many things, 2, 8. it is not in riches, 31. nor in
honor, ibid. nor in fame, ibid. nor in power, ib. nor in pleasure, ib. nor in
the gifts of the mind, 33. but in one thing, 2. It is our dwelling with God,
64. in our peace with him, 65. in our rest in him, 67. in fruition of him, 88.
in contentment, 134. we must partake it, 117. 120. necessity to search it, 23
the difficulty of searching, 24. the manner of searching, 25, 34. Pray for it,
48. Hatred and love right set. 29.
I
Imperfection in the best 141. Inquiring stands in three 144. Joy in God 125.
L
Libertines are licentiou^ 149. Love to God 124.
M
Martha and Mary's choice 44. Martyrs spiritually drunk 130. Mathematicians
ascribe happiness to fate 20. No merit of happiness 54, 61. The multitude
guess at happiness 19.
N
Natural men blind judges of grace 122, 137.
O
Obedience is our seal 138. One thing is all, 3. 1 For excellency; of
original, of communication, of preservation, of reduction, 3, 4, 4. 2 For
sufficiency 5. 3 For integrity or indivisibilitie 6. 4 For efficacy in
union, 7.
P
Pagans sought happiness of themselves, 15. their errors of it 72 How Pastors
are the beauty of the Sanctuary, in their calling, 96. in their doctrine in
matter and form, 97. their experience, 99. their powerful word, 100. their
duty 112. Paul's choice 38. Peace with God, 65. Pelagians pride 17, 18, etc.
Perfections impediments 142 Their remedies ibid. Perseverance 147. How People
are the beauty of the Sanctuary 91. their diverse disposition 93. Philosophers
would purchase happiness 49. Praise is glorious, 108, it is a sweet debt, 110.
Prayer and practice to be joined, 49. of groans and heart-prayer 50. Prayer
for happiness in humility 53 Prayer for happiness, is happiness, 62. it finds
ever matter, 60. God hears us ever to our weal 57. Presence of God the beauty
of the Sanctuary, 132, 138, 143. Proud prayers enter not heaven 36.
R
Religious worship 87. False Religions give no happiness, 72. 135. Rest in God
is our happiness 67. Rest of resolution, of refreshment, of security 71.
S
Sacraments 103 Satietie spiritual 126. 129. Search of happiness, 25, 34. not
to search is brutishness, 38. fleshly searching, 39. Right search is of God
40. Scotlands happiness in the Gospel 115. Solomon's experience 37.
Selfe-stealth is preservation 137.
T
Time of learning happiness 81. Timely searching 140.
W
The wicked love not Churches, 78, They have an eternal desire of sinning, 81.
They dream that worldly things promise happiness, 32. The working of God is
secret, 132, 136. and known only to the Elect. ibid. All worshippers are not
alike 136.
TRUE HAPPINESS, OR KING DAVID'S CHOICE.
The first Section. of one thing.
PSALM. 27. VERSE. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple.
THis verse contains the prophets choice of true happiness, and it is set
down in four things. First indefinitely, that it is one thing. Next, from whom
he seeks it, it is from the Lord Jehovah. Thirdly, how he seeks it: and
that is in two, for the time present he has desired it; next for the time to
come he will enquire it constantly. The fourth is happiness it self,
particularly described in four points: First, what it is; A dwelling. Next
where; In the house of God. Thirdly, the time how long; All the days of his
life. Fourthly, the end of that long dwelling is in two: The one to behold and
enjoy the beauty of the Lord: The other to enquire in his temple.

The first thing then is his choice, Happiness is but one thing.
summarly described in the word ( one thing:) So Christ confirms the prophets
word, Luke 10. 42.
while he called Mary's choice one thing. And that for these three reasons:
First, because it is not a common, but a chief good. If there be any good above
it, Summo bono nihil est melius, aut superius, semper eodem modo se habens,
semper sui simile est. Aug. de mor. Manich. cap. 1.
it is not the chief good, and if there be any good equal unto it, it is not
alone: But the chief good properly excludes both a superior and an equal
good, and therefore is one. Next, because it is the last end which we mind
eternally to enjoy: If there be any end beyond it, it is not the last, but
amids, and a degree to it: All mids and ends are used for it, but it is sought
for it self, and therefore must be but one. Thirdly, it is a center, whereunto
all reasonable spirits draw. As all lines from a circle meet in the center, so
every one that seeks happiness aright meets in the chief good, as the only
thing which they intend, and therefore must be one.

But some may think, And not more.
that happiness is in many things, Psalm. 32. 1.
because scripture sometime says, Blessed is the man whose sins are pardoned:
and again, Blessed is he that fears the Lord: and in the beginning of the
first psalm, Psalm. 1. 1.
Blessed is the man, etc. the first text has in the plural number be
atitudines, the blessednesses or happinesses of the man: Matthew. 5.
And Christ Jesus in his sermon upon the mount reckons out many beatitudes or
blessings. But I answer, that all these are but diverse respects or parts of one
happiness. As when we say, that a man has a whole hand, or a whole leg, we
make not many healths, but many parts of one health. Happiness is the
sovereign cure of our misery, and our misery has many parts, as the want of
knowledge, of faith, of peace, of uprightness, etc. And on the other part the
presence of many evils, as of sin original and actual, etc. And with all
these satan has swadled us up in senslesnesse of our misery, and
carelessness of a remedy: Therefore Christ begins in the doctrine of
happiness to loose us out of these, and pronounces the first blessing on
spiritual poverty, that is on the feeling of our misery: And the second on
our mourning for that felt misery; and the third on our hunger and thirst,
disposing us to seek and receive the remedy. So all these particular blessings
are but parts of one happiness, when God our chief good takes away all our
evil, and imparteth his good to our happiness. Neither is the twofold prayer
of the wise man contrary to the unity of happiness, Prove. 30. 15.
Two things I have required of thee: Natura cogit animam unum quaerere, and
multitudo non sinit. Aug. de Ord. 1. 1.
It is but a deprecation of the two extremes, poverty and superfluity, and
but one prayer for sufficiency as the mids; Therefore this chief good is only
(One) Nature makes our soul to seek one thing, but ^ultitude suffers not.

But this one thing is all good, 1. It is one for excellency.
and beside it all things are nothing, and though it be all and better than
all, yet it is called one, and that for excellency, sufficiency, integrity,
and efficacy. Excellency, because it is the best of all goods. Every good
has the own degrees, as riches, beauty, honor, etc. and these degrees rise
to the height of that kind, and all these highest degrees of all goods meet in
this chiefest good. This excellency is seen in original communication,
preservation, and reduction. For original, it is the first good, Bonum simplex
omnis boni bonum, and bonum quo cuncta bona sunt and a quo cuncta bona sunt.
August. in hunc locum
for if it be of any other, it is not the first, but a secondarie good. It is
good in it self, and goodness it self; not by qualification, but by its own
essence: It is a simple good, and the good of all good; a good whereby all
things are good, and from which all good things are. For communication, because
that chief good keeps not it self within it self, but communicates it to
others; there is nothing in heaven or earth which partaketh not of Gods
goodness, the reasonlesse creature has his footsteps, and the reasonable his
image. This is the proper notion of saving grace, when this chief good freely
gives goodness to the Elect, both finding and fetching the reason of that
communication from its own goodness.

Thirdly for preservation, because it is a preserving goodness, keeping the
good that it communicates, and that either by a common providence, as in
common blessings, or else by a special preservation, maintaining in the elect
his saving goodness; for if they fully or finally lose it, as they would be
the more miserable, so it were a sort of crossing the greatest contentment of
this goodness. The reduction is both in prosperity and adversity: in
prosperity we consider temporal blessings as the good gifts of God, yet we
stand not there, but ascend to spiritual blessings as better: And in
spiritual blessings we find the common gifts of the Spirit, as prophecy,
knowledge, etc. to be good; but we ascend to the saving graces of the Spirit,
as faith, hope, love, etc. as better. Neither stand we still there, but ascend
to the giving grace, even Gods free favor, wherefrom these given graces
proceed: And from that his free favor we ascend to himself who is goodness it
self, Non participatione ullius boni sed essentia. Aug. Mor. Man. 4.
not by participation of any good, but by his essence. But because in our
prosperity we are slow to make this graduall ascension to God, therefore he
teaches us a more harsh reduction in adversity, for when we are any ways
afflicted in the blessings of God, we find no rest till we return to our chief
good.

Secondly for sufficiency, 2. One for sufficiency.
and that both of furniture and supply. Of furniture, because it suffices all;
for all persons, of whatsoever sex, quality, or condition; for all places both
in heaven and earth; Omnibus omnia est, qui omnia administrat. Bernard. 124. 2.
for all times both in this life and after it. It is ever the same, and makes
us ever the same: it has no change in it self, but the communication of it
grows in us, and what is now grace, shall be glory in heaven. If it could
decay or lose, it were no happiness but misery. It is for all necessities
both of soul and body, that one good is all-sufficient, there is none beside
it, and we need no other for happiness. Lastly, it is for all the powers of
soul and body, to hold them in their pleasant exercise and give them rest: It
busieth our faith to apprehend it, our hope to expect it, our love to adhere to
it, our joy to enjoy it, our fear to eschew the loss of it, etc. It has also
the sufficiency of supply. For God exercises his children greatly about other
blessings: either he holds from us the thing we desire, or takes from us the
thing we love, or spoileth it in our possession. Therefore we have need of some
biding substance to supply these losses, and this is God alone: for if we find
him present, we can easily bear with any loss. 1. Sam. 1. 8.
Elkanah said to Hannah, Am I not worth ten children to thee? So the presence
of God is able to countervail the loss of a thousand blessings. If a merchant
have his stock of some hundred thousands secured on the land, he is not greatly
grieved though he lose a little by sea.

Thirdly for integrity, because it is a full and complete thing. 3. One for
integrity.
The chief good cannot be divided, but is as indivisible as infinite: as unity
in number excludes multitude, so in essence it excludes division, and the
mistaking of this division made first Pythagoras, and then Plato to evanish in
their mystical numbers, though some with more charity than verity have
labored to smooth it: We partake not God by parts, but wholly, for he who has
him has all and is wholly possessed of him. When Christ says, Come to me all
ye that are weary and laden, Matthew. 11. 28.
he offers all happiness to all, and it is possessed alike of all and of
every one. Pariter ab omnibus totum, and a singulis possidetur. Aug. de Verb.
Dom. ser. 18. fol. 47. col. 4.
As every one hears the whole word when it is preached. For the kingdom of
God is not diminished by the increase of possessours, because it is not
divided, and everyone has that entirely which many possess in concord. There
is no matter of envy, because it is sufficient for all, Simul omnes plene
integreque possidemus. Bernar. Cantic. 12. Auditur verbum a singulis totum.
Aug. Epist. 3.
and no man's measure does prejudice another. Neither is their disposition to
envy in them who are advanced to happiness: Christ's disciples envied other in
the beginning, but when they were filled with the holy Ghost they did not so.
Envy reigns in carnal men about temporal things, they are so small in
themselves that they cannot suffice all, and so proper in their possession that
what one has another wants: But if God dwell in us, his fullness excludes
occasion of envy, and his goodness excludes the possibility of it: Non est
socialis ^elicitas quam torquet aliena. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 234. fol. 340. col.
4.
For God is love, and fills the heart with love, to make us count the lot of
our neighbor as our own. The more grace the less envy, and the less grace
the more envy: Toll invidiam and quod meum est tuum est. Qui sque habet quod
amat in altero. August. tract. 67.
It is not a sociall happiness that envieth another, but remove envy, and
that that is mine is thine also. In heaven there shall be no envy, and the
more heavenly on earth, the less envy, for they have that that they love in
their neighbor.

Fourthly for the efficacy: It is an uniting good, 4. One for efficacy.
and binds all in one who partake it. That participation is an union and
adherence, and by virtue of that union with it they are unite to other, the
goodness they receive is a band among themselves as well as to it: God is that
fountain-goodnesse and has summed up all in himself, they are all of one
originally, in one by sustaining, and to one finally. The four elements
concur to make one body, the body and soul make up one man, and many men make
up one city or kingdom, or army: But spiritually it is more wonderful, how
many gifts, graces, and powers make a renewed man, and many renewed men make up
one mystical body of Christ, John 17. 23. Vna est consubstantialis, altera
consentibilis. Bernard. Cant. 71.
all of them are one in that head, and with that head they are all one with
God. I in them and thou in me, that they may be one as we are one. Not that our
union with him is equal to his union with the Father, the one is
consubstantiall, but ours is consentible: That is in substance, but this is in
spirit, for we are one spirit with God; Acts 4. 32.
that is, native, but this is factitious or wrought by grace: That is properly
an union in unity, but this is only in unition. In like manner he uniteth us
among our selves, Omnes in eo unum sunt qui vident eandem faciem divinam.
Confess. 10. 34.
the multitude of the faithful were of one heart, and of one mind, because
who ever see and love the divine face are one. He is as a center and sends
out his divine power, and sheddeth abroad his love in the hearts of his own,
Omnium nostrum anima, per fidem est una anima. Aug. Ps. 103. Psalm. 73. 28.
and all these hearts meet in him again. So the faith and love of Abraham
meets with our faith and love in him. Thus then he tieth us to himself when
he is our chief good, and works the good in us to adhere to him: As for me it
is good to adhere to the Lord. He adhereth to the Lord, who being beloved of
God sucketh God in himself again by love: So when God and man inhere mutually
in other, Mut^o inviscerati. Bernard. Cant. 72.
and are enbowelled by mutual love, then God is in man, and man in God: This
is our happy adherence to our chief good. It is our first and greatest and
chiefest good to abide in him.

Finally, this unity is seen in the order, degrees, and cession: Order,
because all order is from one to one. Degrees, because there is an ascension of
goodness to one God in whom all good things are most only one, for truth,
wisdom, power, which we consider diversely, and work diverse affections and
actions in us, are all one in him: and our straitness makes him communicate
them to us but partially, as his knowledge to help our ignorance, his wisdom
to cure our folly, his power our weakness. Cession, because every good thing
naturally yields to a better good, as the body yields to the soul, the senses
to reason, etc.

Hereof we may learn, Happiness is not in many things.
first that happiness is not in many things: The multitude think otherwise,
for they are led by sense, and must have their eye filled with a multitude of
things; riches, honor, wealth, and these increased, and multiplied are their
choice. Many things import not perfection, but weakness, and the necessity of
their number proves the infirmity of their worth. If one sufficed, there were
no need of more, but when a number serves not necessity, all are proven to be
weak. They feel a bodily and present necessity, but not a spiritual, and
therefore seek a sufficient supply of some bodily thing, but cannot find it.
As a man falling in water grippeth sticks, or straw that swim beside him for
help, but he and all go to the ground together: and as a man in fever changes
many places to find rest, but in stead of rest, increases restlesnesse: So
every one that seeks happiness in other things beside God, finds naught but
an increase of misery. Besides, these things bring not contentment, but rather
with their increase augment their desire. The skin of a boy is sound, but when
he comes to age it is full of wrinkles, crying for more flesh and bones: So
in the infancy of our lot we are most content; but in its greatness, Prove.
30. 15. Abundantia laboriosa and copiosaegestas. Aug. ver. Rel. 21.
and old age our inflamed desires cry with the horseleach, Give, give. This is
their painful abundance, and abundant poverty, while they seek one thing
after another, and nothing remains, but in end they conquish vanity of
vanities. Many have been better content when they had but one attendant, than
when they are thronged with a great train: and some have thought themselves
richer with a small estate, than when it is multiplied an hundred fold: The
love of money grows ever with money. Gods blessings are good indeed, yet none
of them the chief good; they are but as petty goods, and a small shadow of the
true good, and as a drop of water out of that great fountain and ocean God
himself. They go on their kinds, degrees, and numbers; but God has none of
these, he is his own number, and his own measure; he only is, and calls
himself by the name I am: and to be, to live, Aug. confess. 3.
and to live happily, are not diverse things, because he is his own blessedness.

To close this first point, our duty is to take God for this one thing; that
he be most in our mind to know him, most in our heart to love him, most in our
mouth to honor, and most in our life to obey and imitate him; Cum te Deum meum
quaero, beatam vitam quaero. Aug. Psalm. 16. 5. Idem de mor. Ecc. 8.
that as bees hyve upon a branch, so all the powers of our soul adhere unto
him. So the prophet glories in it, The Lord is my portion: for God is the
sum of all our good, he is our chief good. We ought not run down-ward,
neither forward to seek another; for the one is dangerous, the other wicked. If
we seek any thing beside God, Confess. 5. 1.
we will lose him, for he will not daigne to be possessed with another chief
good, for he loves God less who loves any thing beside him, which he loves
not for him.

A question here arises, There is no chief ill.
Whether there be a chief Ill as there is a chief good? And some have made two
eternal principles, one good, and one ill, as the Manicheans. They taught
also, that every man had two souls, one from the author of good, and the
other from the author of evil. But I answer plainly, that there is not a
chief ill in that sense as there is a chief good. A chief ill implies
contradiction, as we would say, Being no-being, highest-lowest,
perfection-annihilation. For the chief good is a substance, infinite in
goodness, and eternal in durance. But ill is no substance, but a fault in
substance, it has no subsisting in it self but in another, as a sickness that
is thrust on an whole body. Neither is ill infinite as goodness, but only
potentially as number, because there are innumerable Ills; or respectively in
demerite, because sin deserves infinite punishment: neither is it eternal,
but came after the creation, for God looked on all his creatures, and they were
exceeding good: but ill came afterward by the falling of angels and men, Oculus
creatus bonus est, accessit caecitas. Basil. 181. Aug. ver. Rel. 23.
The created eye was good, but blindness came afterward. The vice of the soul
is not the nature of it, but contrary to nature, wherefore no Nature, nor
substance, nor essence are ill.

Men fell on that opinion of two chief principles upon three special grounds.
The grounds of that error.
One that they looked not to the universal cause, but to particular causes of
particular effects. The other, because they considered apart particular
contrary actions of good and ill, and reduced them not to a common cause.
Thirdly, they were ignorant of the degrees of good and ill; for when they saw
in good there was good, and better, and so an ascending to best of all, the
chief good; so seeing in ill there was ill and worse, they thought there were
degrees ascending to some chief ill. But it is contrary, for the degrees of
good ascend to a biding term, and the greatest degree is the best nature: But
the degrees of ill are descending, and go not to a biding term, but to
annihilation, and the greater ill the less good or being, and the greatest
degree of ill is not highest but lowest; so that if there could be a chief ill
it would destroy it self, Si contra se facit, ipsum esse sibi admit. Aug. Mor.
Man. 2.
Whatever makes against it self, destroys it self, and what ever becomes
less than it was is ill, not in so far as it is, but in so far as it
becomes less, and so tends to death. Sin has a motion, but it is a
defective motion, because it is a falling from God: But good has a perfective
motion, because it is an approaching to God.

But if we speak popularly, Four things come under that name.
four things come under the name of the chief ill: A principle or root: a
fruit: the punishment: and a substance in whom these three do meet. The root or
principle of all ill is free will in angels and men, Ill root.
for when God had made all good, and his work stood in perfect beauty, Satan
brought in the first ill; not of any provocation without, nor corruption
within, but of his own free will. He would not be subject to God, but would set
himself in a sort of dominion. In like manner he tempted man, who without
either necessity in his lot, or corruption in his soul upon the bait of
equality with God, of his own free will would break the command. Ill fruit.
The worst fruit is sin, for Satan's sin was great, because in a great angel,
and directly against God; and his will keeps the stamp of his first
defection, so that he cannot repent, because he will not, yea he will not so
much as wish a will or power to repent: and man's sins likewise are great,
because they flow from that same free will which now is a slave to sin. Ill
punishment
The worst punishment is damnation, because the just reward of the worst fruit
from the worst root, and an eternal torment of soul and body. Ill nature, or
substance.
And the worst natures in whom these do meet, are evil angels and men, and
Satan the worst of them all, because his worst will has greatest sin, and
shall find greatest punishment. In a word, the worst ill in man is sin, and
the punishment. That is a willing defection from the chief good, Aug. ver. Rel.
c. 25.
and an unwilling labor among extreme evils. Which otherwise we may call
liberty from Justice, and a flavery to sin.

Two uses rise of this question. The first is a comfort, that good is greater
than ill; Good is greater than ill.
for good is in God and God himself, and ill is nothing but the loss of good,
and falling of creatures from him. Therefore when our conscience checketh us
for the greatness of our sin, we should remember there is greater goodness in
God than ill in us: And the sin against the holy Ghost is not called
unpardonable, as though Gods goodness could not pardon it, but because the
guilty will not repent, for the very nature of that sin stands in a
malicious oppugning, and hating of God and his grace.

The second use is our warning concerning ill, The least ill is great.
that albeit there be not a chief ill, yet every ill is great. There is some
ill comparatively less than another, as fornication is less than adultery,
and an officious lie is less than a pernicious; yet there is no ill properly
little, but the least ill is great enough to cut us off from the chief good.
For were a sin never so little in the sight of the world, yet if we live and
dye in it without repentance, it shall prove a bar to hold us out of heaven,
and a weight to pull us down to hell.

SECTION II.
Of the author of happiness.
From the Lord.
YE have heard the first part of this doctrine concerning (on^ thing) follows
the second concerning the author of happiness, God the fountain of happiness.
and this is the Lord Jehovah. One thing have I sought of the Lord. This is
clear, both by the properties of a fountain, and some instances. The properties
of the fountain of happiness are three: That it be happy it self; that it impart
happiness to other without diminishing it self; and that it preserve that
happiness it imparteth. These three are proper to God alone, for he is the Cant.
5. 4. 16.
fountain of the gardens, and well of living waters: Psalm. 36. 9.
With him is the fountain of life, and in his light we see light: Jam. 1. 17.
And he is the father of lights, from whom every good gift and donation comes
down. 1 A communicating good.
Next, though he impart happiness to all, 2 Not decaying.
yet his fullness is never diminished. Though all the vessels of the world were
set at the sea shore and filled, the sea would not be known to be less. If
this be in the creature, how much more in the Creator? And therefore the
apostle cries out, Romans 11. 33.
O the deepnesse of the riches. It is a deep richness that cannot be sounded,
and a rich deepnesse that can neither be lessened nor exhausted. All the
happiness of men and angels do not impare it, but it abides ever the same
fulness. Before it imparted it self it was full, and by that imparting it has a
greater manifestation without either diminishing or augmenting.

Thirdly, 3 Preserving what he gives.
he preserves the happiness that he gives, for none can Joh. 10. 28.
pull his sheep out of his hand: Joh. 6. 37.
and all that the Father gives me, says Christ, they come to me; and these
that come to me, I cast not away, but shall present them at the last day. In
Adam we were blessed, but left to our own free will, and that free will
overthrew us: we were like a fair lock without the backsprint, and therefore
Satan like a jugler shot the lock with the first temptation. But now renewed
in Christ, our will has the backsprint of a confirming grace. Jer. 32. 40.
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

Three instances prove the same: The first is from reasonlesse creatures, Three
instances.
the lion roareth for meat, the dog howleth, the ox loweth for fodder, etc.
these creatures have no sense of God, but of their own necessity, and nature
directs them that way to implore the author of nature for help. Psa. 145. 15
The eyes of all things wait on thee. The second is in children, who being
either afraid suddenly or provoked, cry on God. Though then they be neither
sensible of the work of reason nor of grace, yet God gives them these
beginnings of amore resolute seeking to him, while they call to him as the
fountain of their safety. The third instance is of men come to age, and these
either hypocrites or atheists, for I need not speak of the godly who openly
profess him the fountain of their happiness. The fashioned prayers of the
hypocrite, though they be without his heart, proves God to be this fountain:
and the forced prayers of the atheist in his necessity, tells likewise that
he is the fountain of happiness.

From this ground we have first some errors to refute, and then our duty to
learn. The errors about the fountain of happiness are dangerous.

First, Pagans sought happiness of themselves.
the Pagans made themselves the authors of it in thinking they had a
sufficiency by nature to deserve and work their own happiness. They knew not
that man was made good in Adam, that he fell, and is now corrupt, and has need
of regeneration: But they thought he was never better than he is now, and that
he may be better by the right use of his natural sufficiency. This was
Satan's craft, for he knew that man had a natural notion of happiness, and a
care to find it, therefore he set both these wrong, and made man think he
needed not go out of himself for happiness. This was not in the grosser sort
only, who placed happiness in pleasure and bodily things, but even in these
Philosophers who placed it in the gifts of the mind and virtuous actions, they
were puffed up with pride of their own strength both to work these actions, and
to engage their gods to give them happiness, as the just fruit and consequent of
their virtue: So they ascribed not things to their author, but to nature, Non
authori attribuebant, sed naturae, autsuae industriae. Ber. Cant. 6. and 22.
or their own industry and virtue. And yet in vain they either disputed or
conceited of virtues which they had not without him: So they could find no
true happiness, because they sought their own happiness, and they had no true
virtues who had not the Lord of virtues.

They contemned their gods.
But Satan led them on farther to contemn their gods in the matter of
happiness: Non invenerunt felicitatem veram, quia suam voluerunt felicitatem.
Aug. epist. 48.
for they sought it not from any of them; and it was long ere felicity was
made a goddess, and being made, the Romans assigned her a place without the
ports. If they had worshipped her according to her name, they might have
neglected all other gods beside her. It is a wonder how godless they were
about the multitude of their gods; for they employed their select gods in base
offices, for begetting, bringing forth, and nourishing of children, for their
food and trifling business, whereas they neglected Men's (of whom they held the
soundnes and goodness of their mind) in respect of Venus, Ceres and Bacohus; in
all which they testified they were more brutish than reasonable. And lastly to
tell the conceit they had of their own felicity, they gave to their greatest
gods ( Jupiter and Juno) their names from helping only, as though they had
power to do their own turn, and lacked nothing but some small and accessorie
help of the gods. They took the greatest part of the work to themselves, and
the greatest praise, and so made themselves their own gods, and gave no other
respect to the gods but of servants without any relation to happiness. They
sought trifles from their greatest gods, and greatest things from their
trivial and basest gods, but sought happiness from none of them.

The same error Satan brought in the church by Pelagius, he is the father of
that spiritual pride, Pelagius the father of that pride.
that natural man is able to purchase happiness, and needs not grace for
efficacy, but for facility of working. And that he is so sufficiently
disposed to receive grace, that he needs no more but a general offer. After
that Satan for three ages had labored to make the Godhead contemptible by
innumerable errors he turned him to exalt and deifie humane nature by
Pelagianisme, and put such a trick upon the church, that he turned man's
free will in a seat of war against the grace of Christ, and the Radix peccati
libertas. Basil, 128.
root of all our misery in the root of merit, and the cause of our first and
perpetual falling in the cause of happiness. He was crafty in his choice,
for it is the strongest power of the soul, and has a natural indifferency to
diverse things, and a liberty in working, and therefore the most fit power
either to present as a counterfeit of grace, or to employ as opposite to grace.

The papists have followed both: Popish pride.
They are busy with many gods, and though they seem to employ them about
happiness, yet they take more of the work to themselves, and do share salvation
with God, as to make him only a common helper, turning our Jehovah in the Pagan
Jupiter. Non intelligit divina beneficia qui se tantummodo (...) Deo juvari
putat Lactant. 1. 11.
This was justly taxed of one who said that this name of helper did not
express a divine power, but an humane, and that Jupiter and Juno had their
name from helping, which do not agree to God, because it is man's work to help:
-- And again, he understands not divine blessings, who thinks that he is
only helped of God.

It is more dangerous Periculosius erratur de Deo quam hominibus. Aug. Lib.
Arb. 3. 21.
to err about God than about man, but they err about both, for they make God
but a cipher by their moral swasion, only offering grace, and not conferring
it, and ascribe to him but a help without a principal and effectual working.
But they make their own will mistress of her actions, and not subordinate to
the will of God, nor taking influxe nor determination from grace, but
determining it self as a natural principle which they have of Adam: And
whereas sometime they were content to call the will a power partly passive,
partly active, now since they are Jesuited they will have it with Pelagius a
mere active power as another principle, beside God which properly is a pure
act. Herein they usurp upon the grace of God, even as the Pope did upon
principality; for as he (void of civil power in himself) begged some of it
from Princes, and in end overthrew them: So they who craved at the beginning
some power to free will, make it now an usurper against grace. They are ingrate
to grace, giving it no thanks for its work, and exalt their own nature as
sufficient of it self without grace to salvation; They take the glory of the
work to themselves, and are not content with the glory that God works. They
make him only a witness to their work, and engage him to recompense their
pride with salvation, which deserves to be condemned. This of old was justly
called an Est av^rsio a Deo, cumille, cui bonum est Deus, vult ipse sibi bonum.
esse. Aug. Lib. 3. ^4, 25.
aversion from God, when he, to whom God is happiness, will be his own
happiness, as he is his own God. But man is better, when he forgets himself
for the love of the unchangeable God, or when he altogether contemns himself
in comparison of God. But if he please himself to the perverse imitation of God
while he will enjoy his own power, then he is so much the less as he desires
to be great. For while the will turns from the common good to the particular,
it is separate from it, when it will be of its own power.

This is pride, the beginning of all sin, Aug. Lib. Arb. 2. 19. Happiness is
Gods gift.
and the beginning of man's pride is to fall from God. For malicious envy,
joined to Satan's pride, made him to intise and persuade man to that same
pride, whereby he found himself damned. He would be equal with God, and free
from his dominion. This is the mother of the Frank-arbitrians pride. I touch
this not for any delight in controversies, but to show that their question of
free will is of no less moment that Whether God in Christ, or we be the causes
of our happiness; or whether we are saved by the good will of God or our own
free will. Therefore God in wisdom made Luther to clear these two jointly.
Our happiness in the grace of Christ, and our misery in our natural will,
which justly according to scripture and pure antiquity he called it
slavish-will, and affirmed that the proud exalting of nature by her patrons,
was the cutting of the throat of grace. If in a Qui puer^li animositate gratis
servari nolunt, merito non servantur. Bernard. The multitude uncertain in their
search.
childish pride we will not be freely saved, justly we are not saved at all.
The dissembling of our misery is the excluding of Gods mercy.

Another error about the fountain of happiness is in the multitude: They seek
it by guess, Psalm. 4. 6.
Who will let us see good? All is here uncertain, an unknown happiness, wished
with a wandering desire from an unknown author. If Satan came in their way who
offered all the kingdoms of the earth to Christ, they would soon agree with
him: And some go so far on as to covenant with him expressly for to satisfy
their wicked desires of riches, honor, revenge, pleasure, etc. They are the
shame of men and Satan's mockingstocks, who first inflaming them with excessive
desire, blinds them both with imaginary satisfaction, and the price of it:
they value a shadow at no less price than the loss of soul and body
eternally. There be also many who seek happiness of him, though not in so
express a bargain, they care not to loose their credit, honesty, and
conscience to come to their desire, and to oppress or deceive their neighbor
to make themselves great. They bargain with Satan as well as the other, and
there is no difference between them, but that the first expressly covenanteth
with him, and the second serves him without a covenant. Both seek happiness by
the means of sin, and shall have the same punishment in hell, except they
repent.

Others again as the Mathematicians, make the fountain of their happiness
neither God nor their own will, Mathemacians are fatuous.
but a fatal necessity, which they fetch from the stars: They deny
Mathematici providentiam tollunt. Naz. Monod. 772. Aug. Psalm. 51.
providence, they are deceived, and deceive others, and speak many lies against
God: They say (Not unlike to our Libertines who lay all their sins on God) that
man's own will commits not murder, but Mars; and that man's will commits
not adultery, but Venus. This is to turn men Atheists toward God, and brutish
toward themselves, that they shall neither thank God for blessings, nor blame
themselves for sin, and so to turn themselves from God and themselves and from
religion the bond betwixt both.

Follows our duty to hold God for the only fountain of our happiness: God
the fountain of happiness.
We got it first of him in creation, and cannot find it of another, though we
lost it in our fall, yet it ever abides in him, and is recoverable when we
return. We have right to it by our election, it is offered to us in the
promise, and conferred upon us in our conversion, and shall be perfected in
glory. Let us therefore Revertamurne evertamur. Aug. Conf. 4. 16.
return, lest we be overturned. In our creation our soul was set toward God
alone, and by our fall we turn back on him: it is now only the right set of our
soul to look to him again for happiness: This should not be by occasion only,
but we should adhere to him continually and dwell at this fountain: Peter said,
Whither shall we John 6. 68.
go? Thou have the words of eternal life: and it was Mary's praise that as she
choosed this Luke 10. 42.
one necessary thing, so she set her self down at the feet of Christ where she
might find it: The happy man is as the tree that grows by the rivers of
waters. Psalm 1. 3.
When frost has bound up the face of the floods, birds and beasts do haunt
living springs, so should all that care for true happiness dwell continually
at this fountain of living waters.

God is not a sealed up fountain reserving his goodness to himself, but
runs over continually: He communicates it freely to us.
He was ever happiness it self, and yet by creation would both reveal and
communicate that happiness to us: And though we lost it, yet still he runs
over more abundantly to us in Christ, and a part of this overrunning is his
grace, making us to seek happiness: We have a confused notion of it by nature,
but he clears it by his word and spirit, and it is the work of his special
grace, that makes us both seek and find it in him alone. Admonitio ab ipso
font emanat. Aug. Vit. Beat
The instruction wherewith he deals with us to seek God, flows from the
fountain it self. But this is an unspeakable goodness, that rather than we
receive not grace, he will send his own Son in our nature, and turn that our
nature, which he assumed to a personal union with the word, in a conduit to
convey grace unto us: The humane nature of Christ is as a channel between this
fountain and the faithful for the influence of grace. It is said to the
Godhead by a personal union, and to the heart of every believer by a spiritual
union. God and we were more distant than heaven and hell: and how should that
fountain communicate its goodness to us, but by that channel of our own nature?
in Christ we receive it both kindly and largely: He is the fountain of grace,
as God one with his Father: he has deserved it by his obedience, and
dispenses it to us as Est Deus quo itur, est homo qua itur. Au. Civ. 11. 1.
Genesis 29. 2, 20.
God-man. So we receive grace by a kindly convoy. This is better than Labans
Well, for none could drink of that till the stone was rolled off. But this
fountain is always open to the house of David: Zach. 13. 1.
And the first shot of these overrunning waters roll this stone of hardness from
our heart, when his grace softneth our heart to receive more grace. John 4. 11.
And though Jacobs Well had water, yet they who came to it had need of a bucket,
and coard to draw: but this fountain furnishes both the bucket of an earnest
desire, and the coard of a strong faith: Even he who says, Psalm. 81. 10. Act.
16. 14.
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, does open our heart with Lidia's, and
makes us to receive his grace largely.

This is the sweet respect that this fountain of happiness has to our
misery, to prevent us with exciting grace, to draw us with effectual grace,
and to communicate this happiness to us, that our misery may be happy in
him. Before we loved Non dilectus fecit nos, etc. Aug. Lib. Arb. 3. 20.
him, he made us, when he kythed his love to us, he renewed us, and being
beloved of us, he shall perfect us. I close this point with Solomon, O fountain
of the gardens, O Well of living waters. Arise, O north, Cant. 4. 16.
and come O south, and blow on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out:
Let my welbeloved come to his garden, and eat his pleasant fruit.

SECTION III.
How to seek true happiness.
I have sought, that I will inquire.
THe first section of this doctrine has told us that there is a happiness ( one
thing) The second, that God is the fountain of it. The search of happiness.
Now follows the third, how to seek it. And this is set down in two words, of
Praying and Inquiring; and offers to us two kinds of seeking: The first is
the Inquiry of happiness among many things: The second is the suiting of it
from God by prayer after we have found it.

In this inquiry we shall consider the necessity, difficulty, and the form.
1* The necessity of it.
The necessity is great, because it is about this greatest necessar one thing.
We have it not by nature, but must get it by grace, so we are not born happy
but made happy. We are miserable in our selves, and must be changed by
happiness, and this change is furthered by inquiry: Our life is short, our
death uncertain; and when it approaches, if it find us unprovided, our misery
shall be threefold: What then should we do in a short life; Dimittamus haec
inania, and conferamus nos ad sola^ inquisitionem veritatis. Aug.
but cast off vanity, and set us for the search of the truth? Besides, it is
the main end wherefore we are brought into the world, and if a new born child
could speak and were asked, wherefore he is born? He should answer: To seek the
happiness that he lost in Adam. We are not born to buy, and build, and heap
riches, and honor together, but to enquire for salvation, as a child is not
formed in the belly to bide there, but to come forth, and to be a perfect man
in the free light: It is a great Magnum bonum est quaerere summum bonum. Ber.
The difficulty. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Colos. 3. 3. Primis pulchris inhiamus, and
amplexamur nostra phantasmata. Aug. ver. Rel. 49.
good to seek the chief good.

The difficulty of this inquiry is first from the nature of happiness: It is
hid manna, the eye has not seen it, nor the ear heard it, etc. And this our
life is hid with Christ in God. Next from the multitude of false happinesses
that deceive us: For Satan has filled the way of our inquiry with sundry baits
to divert us from the right, that on them we may stick as upon the chief good,
and embrace our own fancies. Thirdly from our own disposition we are all born
with a desire of happiness, and every life in it own kind desires to be better.
If we ask any man though he were a fool, would you be happy? He would answer I
would: For every being is desirous of Ipsa est vita beata quam omnes volunt,
and omnino qui nolit eam nemo est. Aug. Conf. 10. 20.
goodness or well being: The desire of meat, drink, raiment are no more rooted
in us than that desire of happiness, and these smallest desires serve the
greatest: The appetite of the wills sacietie (which the schools call happiness)
is common, but few know the reason of that saciety, so that many laboring to
choose a particular happiness which their common appetite desired, have chosen
misery for happiness: It is as hard to find out true happiness as it is easy to
have the common desire of it the one has need of a supernatural grace, as the
other flows from a natural power. Fourthly, the practice of all ages proves
this difficulty: for of the many millions that sought out happiness, none did
find it out except those whom God assisted by a special grace. The
Philosophers traveled painfully, but brought out the wind; they were
confident that they had found it, and yet found it not: But that confidence was
double misery, both in missing true happiness, and then in resting upon their
own deceit. They neither agreed with the truth, nor among themselves, nor any
one of them with himself. If we look to the universal desire, rising from the
common notion, we shall be forced to say, There is a happiness: if we look on
their diversity, and contrariety, we shall wonder at Satan's craft, abusing
man's wit to err so foully about happiness. And Solomon himself thought this task
both worthy of him, and hard for him to find out, what was that good or
happiness of the sons of men? Eccles. 2. 3.
We must think it an hard task, whereon so many Philosophers have lost their
labor, their time, and themselves.

The search it self goes in two: the refusing of ill, and choosing of good. 3.
The form of the search.
The ill of sin must simply be refused, whether it be original or actual,
inherent or adherent guiltiness. It is the cause of our misery, and contrary
to good; it cannot enter in happiness, but stays it in us. Our misery began at
it, and our happiness begins in turning from it. Adam was tried by the tree
of knowledge of good and ill, which told him that so long as he stood, he had
a known good, and was free from an unknown ill: But when he fell, he ^o und
experimental knowledge of a lost good and purchased ill: That tree is yet our
trial, if we will eschew the ill of sin, and follow the good of happiness.
There can be no happiness in ill, neither can any man desire or love ill as ill,
and satan (whose malice is fed with it) does not love it as ill, but as a
good, as a satisfaction of his malicious will; And those men are most like to
him, who seek their happiness in ill. They make it their happiness when they
boast of it, as Lamech of his tyranny, and Doeg of his calumnies, and
politics, that they can plot mischief, and bring it to pass. Who ever
glories in sin, professes that he counts it his happiness.

It may here be demanded: Afflicton stays not happiness.
If affliction can stand with happiness? The name of it is miserable to the
worldly; but that name hurts not, where misery is absent Non obest nomen,
cum abest miseria. Aug. Mor. Ecc. 27.
. I answer, it can: for it is not the ill of sin, or of the fault, but the ill
of punishment; and there is more misery in the least sin than in the greatest
cross: 2 Cor. 12. 10.
and the Apostle called not himself miserable for his great affliction, but
glories in it, I will glory in my infirmities. But when he found the
rebellion of his will against the law of his spirit, Romans 7. 24.
he cries out, Miserable man that I am. Gods love is the ground of our
happiness, Heb. 12.
and affliction can stand well with it, for whom he loves, he chasteneth. Sin
wounds the soul and body, and wastes the conscience, but affliction purges
all, and makes Gods grace more sharp, and lively. Sin can admit no
qualification, but must either be simply pardoned or punished, but affliction
is qualified with grace to the godly, and furthereth them to happiness; so that
the spirit pronounces them happy that are chastened of the Lord: Our happiness
is in no external good, but in Gods favor, and the state of our person
qualified with his grace and image in us: But affliction, though it spill
external blessings, yet it neither separateth us from his favor, neither
destroys his grace, but augmenteth it. It can make us no more miserable, than
prosperity makes the wicked happy. We need not now compare Lazarus in heaven
with the rich man in hell: Luke (...)
Even in this life, Lazarus in his rags and sores was more happy than the rich
man in his costly apparel and dainty fair. Affliction is a medicine, and
keeps grace fresh in us, Pro. 1. 32.
while ease and prosperity slays the foolish. It is both the occasion, and
whetstone of virtue; for God exercises them most whom he loves and imployeth
most. The best soldiers are set on hardest service, and none of them going out
exponeth it as their Generals base account of them; but rather, that he
esteems highly of their valor. God keeps us from more misery in making us
repent former sin, and keeping us from sin that we might commit, than all the
ill that affliction brings on us. Our daily crosses chase us daily to God who
is our happiness: and the godly count more of grace than of goods. Job 1. 21.
Job, after he had lost all, kept his soul so fixed on God, that he made it
manifest that they they were Non illas sibi magnas, sed se illis, sibi autem
Deum. Aug. de Mor. Ecc. 23.
not given to him, but that he was more than they, and God was more to him than
they and himself.

The second respect is to good, Choice of the best good.
that we choose it; and that not every good, but the best: for we are not now
inquiring every good, but the chief. Herein we must climb in two ascensions,
the one in our self, the other in goods. For our self, we must not bide in our
bodily senses, which are evil Judges of happiness: but we must ascend from our
body to our spirit, from our affections and will to our reason, and from that
to the eternal law the rule of reason, and from that to eternal verity the
informer of reason in that law: So we must rise to the enlightened mind in
Jesus Christ, that we may be enabled to make this search aright.

Next we must ascend by the degrees of goodness in the things themselves; And
that by degrees.
for every creature of God is good, but not the chief good: Though we may
respect it as good in the own kind and degree, yet we may not rest on it for
happiness. As a man that seeks a lost jewel in a house, casts by all that
comes to hand till he find it: Or as one in a well furnished shop seeking
rare stuff, though the merchant put many in his hand after other, yet he
lays them all by, till he find that he desires: So in this search of
happiness, what ever good come in our way, we must shift it till we come to
the chief good. If we ascend to the height of a mind enlightened by God,
nothing will content us till we come to himself: As his own light discovers
him, so his own love shed abroad in our heart cannot rest on any good till it
come to him. The dove sent out by Noah Genes. 8. 9.
found no rest till she returned to the ark, so the inquiring mind finds no
rest in the creature till it come to God in the covenant of grace. Spiritual
things are better then temporal, and heavenly things better then earthly, and
in spiritual things we must ascend from gifts to grace, and in grace from a
common to a special grace, and in the special grace from a preveening to an
exciting grace, from that to the operating and cooperating graces, and from
those to preserving and persevering grace. From given grace, we ascend to
giving grace, that makes us acceptable: And from all graces inhering in us,
and qualifying us, as faith, hope, holiness, etc. we rise to the
fountain-grace in God, even his free favor, whereby he has Ephesians. 1. 3, 8.
and ver. 2. 8.
chosen and blessed us in spiritual things in Christ: This is the grace
whereby we are saved, our chief good and true happiness. The Prophet
professes this his search through heaven and earth, ending in this choice of
God alone. Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and in the earth I have desired none with
thee? And the Apostle, Philip. 3. 8, 9.
I count all things but dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ,
and that I may know him, and be found in him. This is our highest ascent.

Reason it self craveth this, God is the best good.
for we ought to seek the best good; and if these things be good, God is better
who made them: They have their goodness of him, which is infinitely less then
his goodness, as a drop of water compared to the sea: They are both better and
greater in him then in themselves, and more truly also, as the original is
better then the extract. All goodness is both originally and eminently in him,
and more perfect then in creatures, because what is in them a shadow, in him is
truth: If we love riches, true riches is in his favor; If we love honor, true
honor is in his testimony; If we love true pleasure, it is in his peace. The
author of things is better then the things themselves, and he who made all, is
to us for all things: He who made all is better then all, and that is our God,
he departs not because none succeeds to him Sed long his melior qui secit
omnia, and non discedit quia ei non succeditur. Aug. Confess. 4. 11.
.

This is the right set of our two chief affections, Hatred and love well se^.
hatred and love: Of hatred, that we hate all ill absolutely. There are degrees
of ill, some less and some greater, and answerably we should hate them all,
but we may not love any degree of ill: this is our separation from it; for
though it subsist in our substance and flesh, yet if it be not in our
affection, but we abhor it, then God will assist us against it. It may lessen
the degrees of our happiness, but cannot destroy it: In like manner, there are
degrees of good, and we should love every good according to the degree, till we
ascend to the chief good, and love him with all our heart, and all our soul.
These affections qualify our person, for the hatred of ill divides us from
that ill we hate, and the love of good makes us like that good we love; And
our love to the degrees of good, makes us grow in goodness and grace. The
wicked keep neither this order nor aseending: They pervert all, and choose for
their happiness a lesser good then they refuse, as worldly goods in place of
heavenly. That is both a transposing of their heart and a descending, and so
they prove the sons of Belial, according to the Hebrew, because they neither
ascend in the Lords mountain, but are unthrifts; neither take on them the
Lords yoke, and it is their naughtiness or knaverie, according to the Latins,
that they turn themselves to nothing; for knaverie is the death of the life, so
called because it turns to nothing Mors vitae nequitia est, quia ab eo quod
necquicquam est dicitur. Aug. ver. Rel. Their degrees must be keept.
.

But we must further distinguish these affections, for though we should hate
all sinful ill, yet we may not hate any good: We may wisely neglect lesser
goods for the chief, but not hate them: Though we count less of a lesser good
then of a greater, and comparatively neglect all in respect of God, yet we
should abhor none. Quicquid vituperatur in melioris comparatione respuitur.
Ibid. ver. Rel. 41.
What ever is neglected is in comparison of a better. It is not only sin to
turn from good to ill, but even among goods to decline from eternal to
temporal things, from visible to invisible, from the creator to the creature,
yea Est igitur quoddam bonum quod si diligat anima peccat quia infra came
ordinat^m est. Ibid. 29.
and to love any good too much that is less then our selves, because it is
ordered under us. And that due love we give them is not to hold us on them, but
to send us away to the chief good; for if these small goods be love-worthy,
with what a love should we adhere to the fountain-good?

The most part of men run on riches, The worlds choice.
honor, fame, power, and pleasure Thom. 1. 2 ae.
and yet true happiness is not in any of them, nor in all together. 1.
Happiness is not in riches,
Riches, whether natural, in food and raiment; or artificial, in money, are
but earth in their substance, and worthless in themselves: Though the wretch
count greatly of them, they are only for use wherein they perish. 2. Not in
honor,
Honor is not happiness (though the ambitious man count it so) but a
consequent of it, neither has it true worth, but is a sign of it, and that
discerned and proclaimed by the multitude a blind judge of worthiness: And
though the supposed worth be in him that is honored, yet the offered honor is
more in the honourer; and at the best it is but a vanishing smoke. Fame, is
happiness to the vainglorious man, 3. Nor i^ fame,
but at the best it is a fruit, and not a cause thereof: It is oftener false
then true, and can proclaim loud where no happiness is: Satan uses it as a
miserable subsidy to the dead, whom he has killed with the hunger of
vain-glorie, and as a bait to their consorts to devour that same angle. 4. Nor
in power,
Power seems happiness to the stirring man, that he may perform his own
purposes, and oppress his enemies; but it is rather an instrument then
happiness, and more hurtful to the abuser then to others; and the abufe of it
makes more miserable, then the possession of it can bless.

As for pleasure, 5. Nor in pleasure.
the happiness of beasts, it is to be left to Epicures; for though some of
them pretended a pleasure of the mind, yet when all is searched, that is but a
pretense to color their beastly opinion of bodily pleasure. They strove to
purify it with abstract explications, but their life refuted their discourse,
and their gross practice overthrew their subtle disputes. Est hominis optimum
quod animam optimam facit. Aug. de Mor. Ecc. cap. 6.
Pleasure is the bodies happiness, but not the souls; and if we speak properly,
the soul is rather the best thing of the body, then any bodily thing.

Moreover all these idols of the world are cut off from happiness, because
they are common as well to the wicked as to the godly, which cannot fall in
true happiness, the patrimony of the saints. Next, happiness brings
contentment; but the more we have of these the more we thirst. Thirdly, true
happiness is not in external things; but all these are external.

The cause why so many seek these things for happiness is, The worlds error.
they love them better then God, and from their own fancy do conceit a worth
which is not in them, and allege a promise on them which they make not. It is
truly said that they who love, fain dreams to themselves; The wretch thinks
that riches cry on him, saying, Come to me, I shall make thee happy: The
ambitious man thinks honor cries so to him, so the epicure dreameth of
pleasure, etc. But falsehood rises not of the things themselves, but of our own
deceiving and deceived hearts Falsitas oritur non ex rebus ipsis fallentibus.
Aug. ver. Rel. 36.
. These things neither promise happiness, neither can perform; the error of
their fancy turned into a strong desire, makes them father such promises on
these things: even as fools and babes do imagine, that ringing bells do speak
the thing that they think. And it is our reproach that we believe things that
neither promise nor can perform, and hazard our eternal happiness on that
credulity: But when God promises who is both truth and omnipotency, we meet
his word with infidelity: If these things could speak, they would chide their
lovers as the angels did the woman seeking Christ in the grave, Why seek ye
the living among the dead? Why seek ye happiness in us who have it not, but
are worse then your selves?

Some again who seem more perfect, Happiness is not in the gifts of the mind.
seek happiness in the gifts of the mind, as learning, virtue, wisdom, etc.
These are better than the former, and yet come not to true happinsse; for these
gifts are common, and many wicked men have excelled in them, and yet perished.
They are as the light to the eye without seeing, a furnishing to seek it
without fruit: The Philosophers who excelled most in these things were most
miserable: The fleshly villainies of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle equalled and
exceeded their moral virtues. Solomon found not happiness in these moral
virtues, but in the fear and obedience of God.

All these erred foully in their search, The godly surpass the world.
yet not alike. The world is as a great man's house, to whom many resort: Some
stay in the lower rooms with their companions; but some go to the hall, and
yet stand there gazing on pictures, or rich hangings, but the wiser sort pass
all these, and stay not till they find him in his cabinet. So all men are
busy for happiness, but the most part remain below on riches and pleasure:
Other that seem of greater spirits, climb up to honor, and are bewitched with
the painted hangings of worldly glory, or adore the gifts of their own mind:
But the godly pity these men in their errors, who are intised with such
trifles. They know that they are not called to a worldly felicity, but to a
heavenly; they pass from one good to another, and urge pensively their
inquiry, till they come to God himself. So the church in her search could not
stay, till she found him whom her soul loved. God is above all, whom if we
follow we learn well; if we apprehend, we learn both well and blessedly: his
following is our appetite of happiness, his apprehending is happiness it self
Aug. Mor. Eccl. 6. and 11. It is to be sought in God alone.
.

Let us therefore in this inquiry lift our minds above all things, visible or
created, and seek true happiness in God alone; for none can make man blessed,
but God that made man: Non facit hominem ^eatum, nisi qui fecit hominem Deus.
Aug. Epist. 52.
Seek the thing that you seek, says one, but not where you seek it. You seek
a blessed life in the region of death, it is not there. For how can there be a
blessed life, where there is no life? And we may say: Woe to that bold soul,
which hops, if it depart from God, that it can find any thing better than
God. For the soul goes into fornication when it departs from, and seeks not
out of him these things pure and clean, which it will never find till it
return unto him Quomodo enim beata vita ubi nec vita? Aug. Confess. 4. 11.
Ibid. 6. 16. Ibid. 2. 6. Id. Psalm. 62. Id. de Mor. Ecc. 6. and 11.
.

The choice it self.
WE have heard of the search of happiness, The choice it self.
follows the choice it self: I know school-divinitie speaks otherwise, and
thinks (some of them at least) with the Philosopher, that election is not of
the end, but of the midst to it: But I am content to speak rather with Christ,
than the Philosopher, who commended Marie for choosing that one thing that was
necessary: and Divines speak roundly, What shall we choose to love but that,
than which we find nothing better Quid autem eligamus, quod diligamus nist quo
melius nihil invenimus? Aug. Epist. 52.
. There is formally a choice of the end. This choice is the act of the will,
and goes in four special works, Inclination, Apprehension, Retention, and
Rest.

Inclination, ^ By inclination.
when the will inclines and applies it self to the sought and found
happiness. Es. 26. 8.
The desire of our heart is unto the^. We have naturally a desire of
happiness; but when the truth has particularly revealed it, then we desire it
more firmly. And this has not only the last judgment of the practical
understanding (as some speak,) but more, the finger of Gods spirit bowing the
will to it; for many in their reason do apprehend things to be good, and yet
their will follows not. The Creator of the will does bow it to good, else
that pointing of the mind were not sufficient: All the time of our search the
will stood in suspense, but now being informed by the mind of the nature of
happiness, and bowed by the spirit, it inclines to it willingly: Our first
sin began at a declining from God, and our first good disposition begins at
the inclining of our will to him again.

2. Apprehension is, 2. Apprehension.
when the will embraces that greatest good with greatest power. Cant. 3. 4.
I laid hold on him, whom my soul loved: In griping other goods, it abides in
it self, and gripeth them slenderly, as inferior goods, but it goes out of it
self gladly to this chief good, and quitting that proud title of mistress of
her own actions, is glad to go out of her self, and to be taken up in that
chief good. For the pure and perfect soul, subjecteth it self unto happiness
Summo bono anima pura and persecta subjungitur. Aug. Mor. cap. 1.
.

3. By retention. Tene tenentem. Bernard.
Retention is our firm keeping of happiness. Cant. 3. 4.
I would not let him go, till I brought him in the house of my mother. This
keeping is his keeping of us; for as inclination is by his power, our
apprehension by his griping of us, so this retention is by his holding of us:
Romans 11. 18.
The stock bears us, and not we the stock.

4. A sweet rest on this good follows, A Rest.
which is the sweeter, the greater our search has been: As Scripture has some
mysteries, otherwise men would neither seriously search, nor sweetly find out
the truth: Aug. ver. Rel. 17.
So in the search of happiness, the more labor the sweeter rest: If Adam had
painfully labored for his happiness, he had kept it better than he did: Easy
finding, makes slack keeping, but a painful conquest is carefully preserved:
It is but the continuance of one care, and that with more joy in the
preservation, than was in the purchase.

This choice is accompanied with a conscience of it self; We are conscious of
this choice.
for our conscience goes along all this work, and makes us conscious, both of
our seeking and finding: God has joined it to the reasonable soul, as a
witness of all actions, yea even of the least motion of our affections: 1.
Joh. 2. 3.
We both know that they are, and we know that we know: The conscience making us
sensible of the own consciousnesse: So that it is a comfortless religion, that
involveth men in the confusions of an implicit faith toward God, and holds
them in senselessness of their own estate, as not being conscious of that they
do. They destroy the image of the Trinity in us, which is known by conscience:
Aug. Civ. 11. 27.
Our being; to know that our being; and to love both: Our being in him has no
death, our knowledge has no ignorance, and our love no offense; but they
confound all. He is senseless, who feels not the work of his own affections,
when he hates, or fears, or rejoices; so here if we love God, we need no
more doubt that we are beloved of him, than that we love him. By this I know
that it is true that is said Per hanc intelligo vera que dicta sunt and haec me
intelligere per hanc rursus intelligo. Aug. ver. Rel. 49.
. And again, I know that I know these things: and when I love God, I can no
more doubt that I am beloved than that I love Ego vero amans amari me dubitare
non possum non plus quam amare. Bernard. Cant. 84. Solomon's experience.
.

But the experience of the Saints, will clear this practick point of the
search, and finding of happiness: And first in Solomon: He wrote the book of
Ecclesiastes, than which the world has nothing more perfect of this purpose
Vnus Ecclesiastes copiosissime mundana in contemptum adducit. Aug. Mor. 21.
Eccles. 2. 3.
: Therein he expresses his consultations ending in just sentences: His
counsell-house for this inquiry was his heart, I said in my heart: where
gathering all his thoughts in the presence of God, he pondered things deeply.
Next he proponeth the purpose for consultation, that he might see what was that
good for the sons of men, which they should do uuder the heaven all the days
of their life. Thereafter he brings in all these common places of worldly
happiness, as riches, honors, wisdom, possessions, etc. and sentenceth
every one of them: This also is vanity and vexation of spirit. Moreover in the
beginning of the sixth Chapter he gathers Paradoxes, adjudging rather
happiness to the contrary of these things, than to themselves. Eccles. 6. 4.
and 10.
That it is better to be in the house of mourning, than of laughing. That the
patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit. And in the end he closes
with the sum of all, Eccl. 12. 13.
that to fear God and keep his commandments, is the duty of man: If we look to
the beginning of his discourse, Eccles. 1.
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, it is like a program affixed on the
entry of a city, to tell that all things in the world are but vanity:
vanity in their being, because they are but shadows of true goods; vanity in
their work, because they work not that good we expect; and vanity in their
durance, because they perish in using: The first is a vacuitie; the second is a
weakness; and the third an evanishing. And his conclusion is to set us upon
that chief good, to wit God, and his worship.

The second practice is in the Apostle, S. Paul's experience.
who had many privileges; he was a Jew Act. 22.
, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, profited greatly in learning, and so
zealous of the law, that he Act. 9. 2.
sought commissions to persecute the Gospel: But when he compares all these
things with the excellent knowledge of Christ, he counts them but Philip. 3.
8.
loss and doung, and sets down his choice of true happiness in terms,
that after long inquiry, 1. Cor. 2. 2.
he had judged and decreed to know nothing but Christ and him crucified.

Two errors in the inquiry of happiness are here to be condemned: Not to
search is brutish.
The first seeks not at all; they think happiness is easily found, and will
fall to them as ripe fruit: And because they look easily up to heaven, they
think it as easy to go up thither; But they should remember, that though
naturally the way be broader, because it is from the center to the circle, yet
spiritually it is straiter, because God is our center, and we upon the earth
are in the circumference; They are as gross as beasts, who have neither
foresight, consultation, nor election, and are carried only with the sway of
appetite, which is not much different from the weight of a stone: These men say
in their heart, Psalm. 14. 1.
that there is not a God; and though the common notions of nature tell them
there is one, Romans 1. 18.
they hold that righteousness of God in unrighteousness; but in the matter of
happiness, though they have a natural appetite of it, yet they take no pains
to seek it out. Herein they carry their conviction in their bosom: for in all
other matters they use consultation, as in contracts of marriage, plees for
their inheritance: But in the matter of happiness, how few dare say, that in
all their life time they have taken one hour to advise ripely, how to come to
it? We have all time and leisure enough for other matters, but little or none
for happiness. I know that every one cannot make that painful inquiry like
Solomon and Paul. God was to employ them to teach others, and therefore took
more pains on them; yet every one in some measure should make this search, and
bring their souls to this question, How shall I find and obtain true
happiness? If it be not in a question, it will never come to a consultation,
nor a sentence, nor a search.

The second error is worse in a bad consulting Fleshly searching.
They Esaias 30. 1.
take counsel, but not of God, and advising with flesh and blood, call in
three dangerous counselors: Their bodily sense, their predominant lusts, and
the custom of the world. Their bodily sense goes no further than things
present: Their predominant lusts leads them on their own delight. Avarice
counsels the greedy man to seek riches: Pride bids the ambitious man seek
honor, etc. And the custom of the world advises them to conform them to it,
lest they incur the anger of the world, and be persecuted for crossing its
choice. These are like Rehoboams young Counselors, brought up with himself:
The first is brutish, and bids satisfy the body: The second is violent,
and bids please the predominant lusts; The third is politic, to do as
others do, and to hazard on a common error, rather than on an happiness
uncertain, and unseen to them. But they shall at last seriously (though too
late) repent their foolish choice Fatuam electionem sero, sed serio dolent.
Basil. 212.
: They serve these creatures which they choose, and lose both their happiness
and themselves, whereas by the choice of God, they might both be free, and
served of these creatures, which now they make their masters His rebus
quicunque beatus esse vult serviat necesse est, velit nolit. Aug. ver. Rel. 38.
God directs us in this search. 1 By his word,
.

But God saves his own from these errors, and leads them in a wise search
and choosing, by his word, his example, and work. By his word, generally bidding
us, Coloss. 3. 1.
Seek the things above, and not the things beneath, Joh. 2. 15.
and forbidding us to love the world and the things of it: And specially,
Matthew. 6. 19.
forbidding the rich to lay up their treasures in earth, but in heaven: He
says to the leacherous, Galat. 6. 8.
He that sows to the flesh, shall reap of the flesh: He says to the proud,
Luke 18. 14.
That he that humbles himself, shall be exalted: He says to the revengefull
man, Matthew. 5. 39. and 44. Aug. ver. Rel. 3.
If any smite thee on the one cheek, hold up the other also: And to the
contentious, love your enemies. We must not look what man says, or what our
own fleshly mind suggesteth, but what his oracles says, And subject our
weak reasons to his divine speeches Nostrasque ratiunculas divinis subjiciamus
affatibus. Aug. Tom. 1. 168. d. By his example,
.

Next by example: Because when Christ took our nature he walked in the best way
to happiness, and that in two: In contemning those things that the world
loves, and enduring those things which it flees: He saw men love riches, but
he chose poverty: They thirsted for honor, Joh. 6. 15.
but he refused to be a King: They abhorred contempt and contumelies, but he
endured them patiently: They counted injuries intolerable, but he was scourged
and tormented. There is no greater sin, than to covet those things which he
contemned, and to abhor those things which he endured: All his life on earth
was a discipline and pattern of Christian manners Omnia que habere cup ebam us,
vilia fecit -- tota ejus vita disciplina morum fuit. Ver. Rel. 16.
.

Thirdly by his work, 3 By his work.
and that in Correction and Direction: In Correction, because he makes us to
forsake other small goods, which otherwise we would keep as happiness: For
when we find them but weak, and not able to be our constant contentment; and
when in their loss, we find our comfort in spiritual things, we forsake the
weaker, and take us to spiritual graces. In direction, when he leads us in
this search, and in place of the three bad counselors, the bodily sense,
predominant humor, and custom of the world, he gives us other three, a
sanctified mind, a pure conscience, and his word as a thread, to lead us
through the labyrinth of the worlds errors: The light of that truth directs
us, and the work of his spirit guides us in that direction: Psalm. 73. 24.
He guides us by his counsel, that he may bring us to glory.

But let none think, This search is a work of grace.
that this search and choice comes of himself, as many who turn great
blessings into curses, when being made great of God, they use not his gifts as
given to glorify him, but take the glory of them to themselves: But he that
takes glory of Gods gift, is a thief and brigand: The School says, That to
will, to love, etc. are elicite acts of the will, and flow from her inward
power: If they mean of moral and natural things, we dispute not with them,
but if of supernatural and spiritual things, it is a proud piece of
divinity, for Scripture says, Philip. 3. 13.
That God works in us, both to will and to do: Magnum donum quaerere Deum.
Bern. Gant. 84.
It is a great gift of God to seek God; It is second to no gift, because it is
the first; It succeeds no grace, which has no precedent, and cedeth to none
that has the perfection of all. Let no soul seeking God turn that great good
into a great ill, by ascribing it to it self, but let it know, that it is
preveened and sought by him, before it seek him. The church sought Christ in
the night, but was first sought of him: And David confessing his Ps. 119. 176.
wandering like a sheep, prays to God, seek thy servant. If it had been in
his own power, he needed not to pray for it; he would, but he could not, and
that his will was of Gods effectual grace: Therefore let every soul that
seeks God confess, that it is sought before it seek, and is beloved before
it love him. Non est invenire Domino sed praevenire, and inventionem praeventio
excludit. Bern. fol. 18 1. Col. 3.
Our invention then is Gods prevention, and that prevention excludes
invention; Quae sivisti non quaerentes ^e, and quaesivisti ut quaererent. Aug.
Confess. 11. 2.
he sought us who sought him not, that we might seek him: He preveeneth us
with two blessings, of Love and Seeking; Love, the cause of seeking, and
seeking the fruit of his love: And hereof comes our seeking, because he
seeks and finds us; If we were not sought we could not seek him, and
being sought we cannot but seek him: Neither can we seek before we be sought:
Nec non quaesita quaerere potes, nec non quaerere quaesita nunc potes. Bernard.
fol. 185. 3. 4.
Neither can we but seek when God has sought us. Suasio est quaesitio, and
persuasio est inuentio. Ibid. col. 4. Quaerimus votis, fide invenimus. Ibid.
Gods suasion is his seeking of us, and his persuasion is his finding. Our
desire of him is our seeking of him, and our faith and delight is our finding
of him. We seek him by desire, and find him by faith.

Of all that is spoken of this search, The godly are happy in their search.
we gather three things: The happiness of the godly man in his search; The
distinction of mankind; And our duty. The happiness of the godly, in that they
are not left to themselves, but are guided therein by a divine wisdom and
justice: In wisdom, because they pass by all other things, till they come to
God: They count of other goods as becomes, but not as the chief good, they
are lesser goods, but not prime, they follow happiness, but lead not to it
Subdita debent esse non praedita; sequentia, non ducentia. Aug. Epist. 52.
: Amant quod sibi eripi no^ potest. Aug. ver. Rel. 45. Deum nemo potest
eripere. Ibid. 47.
They love that, that cannot be taken from them: none can take God from them.
Many of the Ancients make these three equivalent, Wisdom, Verity, and
Happiness, because it is truth that directs to happiness, and wisdom that
finds it out, and this is true wisdom to choose the best, and the thing that
will not be taken from us. It was Mary's wisdom, that she chused the thing
that would not be taken from her.

Next they are guided by divine Justice, Their righteousness therein.
to give every thing the own due; To God their greatest love, and to his gifts
they measure according to their kind, and degree of goodness: They seek God
for their happiness, and leave the world unto worldlings: Perfecta est justitia
quae potius potiora and minus minima diligit. Ibid. 48.
That is perfect justice, that loves best things greatly, and mean things
meanly: None have the balance of the sanctuary in their heart, but the
sanctified ones; their minds enlightened of God value things rightly, and their
pure affections follow accordingly, and therefore they are only the right
esteemers of things; but the worldling is a blind judge, he neither knows the
excellency of things spiritual, neither the baseness of worldly things, but
as a sow, embraces the dongue-hill of wordly contentments, and contemns the
heaven, yea they are the serpents brood, because they Genesis 3. 14.
eat the dust of earthly trifles, and are the more sweet morsel to him again.

Secondly, This choice divides mankind.
this distinguishes mankind in it self. -- Mankind has many divisions, but
this is a special one from the choice of happiness, and so goes in two
parts: One the Psalm. 24. 6.
Generation of those that seek the Lord, the other of them that seek him not.
Psalm. 4. 6.
Many say who will let us see good things? But Lord lift up above me the light
of thy countenance. This is not like Martha and Marie: Aug. de Verb. Dom. sermon.
26. 27.
These two sisters choice were both good, for Marthaes business was
commendable, but Mary's was better: The one was busy in the works of
Charity, doing good to the body of Christ; the other in the works of Piety,
about his Godhead: Martha and Marie.
The one to feed his body: The other to be fed of his spirit: and yet he
counts more of Marie, who neglected his body, to feed her own soul, than of
Martha, who neglected her own soul, to feed his body: He was fed in spirit by
her, whose spirit he did feed: This was a work of the same love, that made him
neglect himself to save us; he came to do divine things, and to suffer humane
miseries for us, and so to be hungry and eat: He subjected himself to be a
guest in man's houses, who is preparing mansions in heaven for men, and yet in
this voluntary necessity, gives more than he takes, and is gladder to feed
us, The godly err sometimes in their choice.
than be fed.

Jacob and Esau do more represent these parties, the one in piety waiting on
God, and enjoying the blessing: The other profanely contemning the blessing,
and following his fleshly delights. Sometimes the godly will follow the common
error, and choose the world, as Genesis 13. 11.
Lot enticed with the fatness of the valleys, chused to dwell in Sodom; but
that folly cost him dear, for beside the society of Abraham, he lost his
wife, and all his goods: There is no other cure of their folly, but the loss
of that their choice.

Herein the godly and the wicked, The godly and the wicked have concord and
discord.
have both a concord, and discord in their choices: They agree in the matter,
in that they choose contrary things, the godly choose God for their happiness,
and the wicked, the trifles of the world: They cannot encroach one on another,
for the choice of the one is the refuse of the other, and the refuse of the
one, is the choice of the other: And yet they discord, because these contrary
courses flow from contrary dispositions, which breaks out in enmity in the
wicked; for though they be content, that the godlies choice leave the trifles
of the world to them, yet they are angry at it, because it proves them fools,
who choose that which the godly refuse: And Satan augmenteth this discord, to
avenge his double quarrel upon the godly: The one, in disdaining his baits,
whereby he allureth the wicked, the other, for loving of God, whom he
abhors: Yea the wicked mock the godly as fools, for their refusing of the
world, and choosing of God Aug. lib. Arb. 3. 5.
. But it is like Ismaels mocking of Isaac, Genesis 21. 9.
, or rather as foolish children, mocking the prudence of the ancient, which
they can neither choose nor follow. But the godly endure that ignorant censure
patiently, as wise men do either contemn or neglect the ignorance of babes, or
else bear with them, till they come to riper judgment.

This expresses that which God did by choosing his own out of the corrupt
mass: Eternal separation, and temporal.
Albeit they were borne twins as Jacob and Esau, yet they are divided at their
birth, and setting their backs to other, the one runs to God, the other to
the world: The one as right-handed men follow good: The other as left handed
men follow ill: This is that Solomon tells us, Eccles. 10. 2.
That the heart of a wise man is at his right hand, but the heart of a fool is
at his left hand, that is, not in situation, but in use: For God has given our
soul many strong and sweet powers toward good, as love, to love it; to desire
it; to hope before we get it; and rejoice, when we have found it: These are as
the souls right hand, which in their work to good, carries her self
dexterously. But ill is set at our left hand, and God has armed us against it,
with Hatred, Fear ere it come, and Sorrow when it is come; which serve to
rebate and keep us in separation from it: Therefore when the wicked set their
soul for the seeking and embracing of ill, they turn left handed like the
Benjamites, who with their left handed skill, Judge. 20. 16.
were foreward and able to defend a villainy; Psalm. 144. 7.
Their right hand is a right hand of iniquity, because they prefer the things
that should be postponed, as the right hand is to be preferred to the left
Dextra eorum dextrainiquitatis, quia haec praeposuerunt, quae ^uerant post
ponenda. Aug. Ep. 52.
. But the godly are contrary, they Psalm. 16. 8. 1 It is a resolution of
election.
set God before them, and find him at their right hand, and all the dexterity
they have is for good.

This furnishes also to the godly a resolution, for three things: The first,
of their election before time: For no soul can choose God for its portion, but
that soul that is chosen of God, and our choosing of him is his work in us,
meeting that his eternal election in the own kind. Next our present estate: 2
Of our pr^sent state.
For if we love God sincerely, we may be sure we are beloved of him, if we
seek him: we are first sought of him; if we find him, we are first found of
him in mercy: If we desire him, we are the men of his desire, as Dan. 10. 11.
Daniel was: If we delight in him, we are the children of his delight, etc. For
all these works of the soul neither breed in us, neither begin at us, but he
preveeneth us in them all, and works that meeting to himself. Thirdly, 3 Of
our future state.
of our estate to come; For if we be righthanded men in God, in choosing and
seeking true happiness, then at the last day, Mat. 25. 32.
he shall set us at his right hand, and keep us in an eternal separation from
the wicked, when he shall say, Ibid. 25. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you Omnes
cupiunt felicitatem, and boni and mali, sed nulli inveniunt nisi boni. Aug. Ep.
121. c. 4. We should seek the Lord.
. Now we are not distinguished in our wishes, but in our courses, for both
good and ill desire happiness, but none obtain it but the good, and that by a
separation from the wicked, before time, in time, and after it.

Lastly our duty is, to be of Psalm. 24. 6.
that generation that seek the Lord. Some are neither sought of him, nor seek
him, as they who lie hardened in their sins: Others are sought of him, but
seek him not as yet, as the elect in Baptism whom he inquireth, and acquireth
Quae^ivit and acquisivit. Bern. sol. 97.
in that second generation, though they know it not. But the third sort are
best, who are so sought of him, that he makes them seek him again. This is
the generation of them that have him, and seek him, for if they had him not
they could not seek him: Testimonium gustatae gratiae est esuries vehemens.
Ibid.
And a clear testimony that we have tasted grace, is this vehement hunger of
grace. God is most simple, and we should seek him in simplicity. And let us
seek him truly, that has not another like him, nor another beside him, nor
another above him: If we seek him Deuter. 4. 29.
with all our heart, we shall find him, for he cannot withdraw himself from
those that love him. Love makes up all the parts of this inquiry, for he is
sought by love, and found and kept by love: Imus ad eum non ambulando, sed
amando, non pedibus, sed moribus, amores nostri sunt mores nostri. Bernard.
We go to him not by walking, but by loving, and we have him so far present as
we love him, we go to him not on our feet, but on our manners, and our love
is our manners.

Happiness is to be sought by prayer.
Have I desired.
THis is the other part of the seeking: By prayer: The first was a seeking out
of the thing it self, and now when he finds it in God, he seeks it of him
by prayer.

In the order it is to be marked, Prayer and practice should be joined.
that seeking of happiness, and praying for it, are well joined together: for
if they be separate they are unprofitable. Some pray only without labor, as
the old Euchites. But they should remember, that God who gives us a heart, and
a tongue to pray, gives us also hands and feet to work and walk. This was
Number. 23. 10.
Balaams warsh wishing, his desires were so weak, that they pierced not his
heart, how could they pearce the heaven? He put not his hand to labor, how
should God open his hand to bless? They had no strength to banish or mitigate
his avarice or pride: The fleshly heart cannot conceave the birth of true
happiness, nor admit the love of it, and these weak wishes are more forced on
it from outward occassions, than bred in it, at least they are soon strangled
by the predominant love of some vanity.

Others take great pains to find out happiness, but pray not to God for it,
so the Philosophers thought by their labor, and good use of natural
abilities, to attain it, and would not pray for it Philosophi felicitatem sibi
parandam putarunt, non impetrandam. Aug. Epist. 52.
. And indeed upon their grounds of a self-sufficiencie, they needed not pray to
him. Therefore we must join them together. Laboring in faith is Gods presence
with us as his instruments, working that in us that we pray for: In prayer,
we crave that he would work happiness in us: In labor, we strive that he
would work with us: The success of our labors depends 1. Cor. 3. 6.
on his blessing, and that blessing is obtained by prayer. This is a complete
seeking of happiness, when both go together: There is no happiness without
fruition, and no fruition without Union, and no union without endeavoring for
obtaining: Divine light discovers it, faith apprehends it, and love feels
it. Therefore we must labor diligently for the increase of discovering light,
of apprehending faith, and feeling love, that we may grow in that fruition,
and rejoice in the conscience of that growth.

In the word of his prayer, Prayer has 1 A conscience of want.
we shall first consider the prayer it self, and then the properties of it
enclosed therein. In the prayer it self three things are offered: The
conscience of want going before; The desire to have; And the hope of obtaining.
The conscience preceding is of a double want, both of happiness it self, and
of merit or worth to purchase it. If we had it in our selves, we needed not
seek it, and if we had merit to deserve it, we needed not suit it of God: But
we have none of those, and therefore we must ask it. We have set times to
pray, both public and private; but are often coldrife therein, and do it more
of custom than conscience. Therefore God sharpneth our conscience with a felt
necessity and want, as a whetstone, to make our prayers fervent. When Seth
called his son Genesis 4. 26.
Enosh, that is, miserable or calamitous, then men began to call upon the name
of the Lord: So that name expressed that they were sensible of their misery,
and that felt misery makes men religious.

Next comes the desire to have that thing which we want, 2 A desire to
obtain it.
and that is the prayer it self: For a ground, we look to Gods mercy; and for
price, we look to Christ's merit. Herein is the work of faith, to make the
prayer faithful, as the preceding conscience makes it fervent: It specifieth
our desire, and makes it supernatural; for it is the hand of our soul,
meeting Gods hand, who offers his blessings to us in the promise: as a lively
child, takes the pap of his mother greedily, and sucketh milk out of it
largely: So the faithful soul opening wide the mouth of the desire takes in
the promise, and sucketh the blessing of God out of it. We present his
promises, as his own handwrit and obligation: And he deigneth by his promises
to be debtor to us, to whom he forgiveth all debt Tanquam Chirographa --
dignaris enim quibus omnia debita dimittis, etiam promissionibus tuis debtor
fie^t. Aug. Confess. 5. 9. True prayer is a heart-prayer.
.

True prayer is not so much in our words, as our heart: Words in public prayer
are necessary for others to hear and follow us: And in private prayers they
serve to hold our minds constant; but the life of prayer stands in faithful
desires: For long speech is one thing, and a strong affection is another, and
the work of prayer is done more by groans, than by words, and by tears more
than talk Hoc negotium plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur, plus fletu. quam
affatu. Aug. Ep. 121. c. 10.
: And the Lord cares not much for the cry of our flesh, but for the cry of
our heart; For his ears are in our heart, and he hears us say nothing to
him, but what he has first spoken to us Quia aures tuae in cord meo, and
nihil audis a me quod non mihi tu prius dixeris. Aug. Confess. 10. 2.
. Moses was silent at the red sea, and yet God said to him, Exodus 14. 15.
why cryest thou? His mouth was close, but his heart was crying to the Lord, he
was grieved to see the peoples danger, and yet believed God, who promised to
deliver them, and was challenging God in his heart to keep his promise:
Therefore one says, That the people cried, but God heard them not: Moses cried
not, and yet the Lord answered him. Clamavit populus and non audivit Deus:
Silebat Moses and audivit. Aug. sermon.
. And the reason is clear, because the cry of the people was in murmuring and
fleshly reason, which God misregardeth, but the secret and heart-cries of
Moses, were the language of the holy Spirit: And the Apostle seems to point
at this, when he tells the work of the spirit helping us to pray, brings
forth Romans 8. 26.
sighs and groans, which cannot be uttered. We call him then into our selves,
when we call upon him In meipsum eum vocabo cum invocabo eum. Confess. 1. 2.
.

Light cares can speak, Groans are good prayers.
but great cares do stupifie with silence: Weak desires are easily expressed,
but excessive desires cannot be equalled by speech. A rod serves a man in a
small work, but in a greater he casts it away, and takes him to stronger
instruments: So the tongue is a sufficient interpreter in other things; but
here we leave it, and take us to groans and sighs, the best language of the
heart. Men may be near and not hear us, and yet our groans be heard in the
heaven of heavens: We cannot bide in our selves, but would be at God, and yet
cannot win to him as we would, therefore we groan under that restraint. Gods
suggestion to our heart is by inspiration of heavenly power, making us capable
of grace: And by infusion, pouring in that grace he offers. So our best
speech to him is by aspiring, not of ambition, but of affection, in breathing
to him as the Psalm. 42. 1.
chased heart does to the waters. The kisses of Christ on our soul, are better
impressed and stamped by him, than can be expressed by us Osculum Christi
melius impressum quam expressum. Bern.
. So the best expressing of our soul to him, is better by thrusting it on him,
than by uttering of words.

This excessive desire of God is wrought in the heart by himself, God makes us
desire him.
he fills it both with himself, and a desire of him, that he may make it
sensible of both: The more it is full of him, it desires him the more, and the
more it powers out it self in that desire, it is satiat the more, and the
more the desire increases: And in this heavenly inebriation, satiety provokes
our thirst. The more we have of God, we thirst him the more, and are inflamed
with new desires. Superstitious worshippers think by their prayers, as
charms, to devocat and draw God out of heaven. And the Idolater thinks to
command him, but both separate themselves from him: But the godly seek him in
their heart, and thrust their heart on him. It is also a touch of that Cant. 2.
5.
sickness of love, when the soul burns in a desire of God, and that
sickness is the health of the soul, and God sensibly filling the heart, is the
cure of that sickness. This prayer then is nothing else, but a laying of his
desirous heart, open to the fountain to drink in happiness. Who so has
received this affectuous devotion, and devout affection to God, has already
conceaved the birth of happiness, and shall travel therewith now painfully,
now joyfully, till he be delivered of it in his full deliverie from all misery
Cum accepit sponsa hoc osculum concepit. Bern. Cant. 4. 3 Hope of obtaining.
.

Thirdly, hope of obtaining happiness follows our faithful prayers, for
what faith believes, that hope expects: It is as soon in our hope, as it is
in our faithful desire, and long before it be in our hand; and yet as sure as
it were in our hand, though sometime interveen; for Heb. 10. 37.
he that is to come, will come, and not delay; Rev. 22. 12.
And behold I come, and my reward is with me; Psalm. 9. 18.
And the hope of the godly shall not perish. Our hope is greatly confirmed, by
the tastes of happiness we find in prayer: We may more firmly expect that,
that we find begun already, and these first fruits assure us of the fullness
in due time: Such faithful desires powered out with a delightful freedom, are
not only the Lords harbengers in our heart, to tell that he is coming, but the
ushers of his entry, and tokens that he is already come. He is in that heart
that earnestly desires him, and with liberty powers it self out on him.

Moreover this word contains three properties of his prayer: Prayer should
be, 1 In humility.
Humility, Absoluteness, and Constancy. Humility, because it is an humble
asking, and not a proud exacting, and so excludes man's merit, which cannot
stand with the humility of prayer: If he had merit for happiness, he would
not beg it as a gift, but exact it as a debt. The Apostle clears this, for
when he has said, Romans 6. 23.
The wages of sin is death, if he had followed the rules of Logic, he would
have said, that the reward of righteousness is life eternal: But he knew that
could not stand with Gods mercy, and Christ's merit, therefore he calls life
eternal, the free gift of God. And to this truth God provided himself a
witness even among the Cardinals: The Apostle (says he) says not that the
wages of righteousness are life eternal, but the gift of God is life
eternal: That we may understand, that we obtain eternal life, not by our
merits, but by the free gift of God. Therefore he subjoynes (In Christ Jesus
our Lord.) Behold the merit, behold the righteousness, whose wages life
eternal is: But to us it is a free gift through Jesus Christ Ecce meritum,
ecce justitiam ^ujus stipendium est vita aeterna. Nobis autem est donum.
Cajetan. Romans 6. We cannot deserve happiness.
.

Reason also proves this: For all the good we have, whether natural or
spiritual is his gift. Natural goodness comes by his providence, both in
it self, and the right use. And though they were both of our selves, they have
no proportion to deserve any grace: No good deserves another, but far less
does natural good deserve happiness: And all supernatural goodness is his
gift also, and every degree of it is a native growth of his donation, without
the respects of merit or reward; for that same mercy that gives the
beginning, gives also the increase and perfection of grace. Our state also
goes in two; first we are miserable in our selves, and then happy in God; and
what good can be in misery to deserve the least happiness? While we are in
misery, we can deserve no happiness, and when God begins happiness in us,
that beginning is neither a reward of any preceding merit, neither a merit of
any following goodness: But all is the work and gift of grace. Again, both
the name and nature of grace excludes merit, for Psalm. 36. 7.
grace properly cannot be valued at any price, neither has miserable man any
price to give for it: Therefore the greatness of the giver, the excellency of
the gift, and poverty of the receaver make it to come freely. Esaias 55. 1.
Ho, every one that is a thirst, come to the waters, come and buy without
money, without merit. Apoc. 22. 17.
And he that is a thirst let him come, and drink of the water of the well of
life freely.

That pride of the Pelagians is grounded upon the indifferency of the will to
ill and good, Free Will destroys her Adorers.
and on a like furniture for both, which deny flatly man's misery, and the
grace of God: In such a pride they cannot pray, because they neither feel their
misery, nor seek to mercy. They are like the Pharisee that L^k. 18. 11.
counted with God, and put him in his debt, and like sturdy beggars, who boast
of their birth, and do rather threaten than beg, and deserve more to be thrust
to a house of correction, than to be helped with alms: So God plagueth these
proud Justitiaries with a judicial pride, that not Romans 10. 3.
subjecting themselves to the righteousness of God, but seeking to establish
their own righteousness, they cut themselves off from Christ and his grace.

It were better to them with the Luke 18. 13.
Public an humbly to beg mercy, and with the blind man Marc. 10. 47.
at Jericho, to cast away the menstruous clouts of their supposed
righteousness, that they may be clothed with the righteousness of Christ.
They are like the old Giants, whom the fables said, would take the heavens by
force, and for that end heaped mountains upon mountains. So do they add
Condignitie to congruitie, and dignity to condignitie, Supererogation to
dignity, and confidence in them all: This is nothing but the old blind
cyclopick superarrogancie, and will have the like success with these Giants:
Socrates lib. 3
For we may say of them as Jovian said to Acesilas a Novatian, disputing of the
perfection of his followers. Go to Acesila, set that ladder to heaven, and thou will find it too short to carry thee thither. Genesis 28. 12.
They cast aside Jesus Christ the ladder of Jacob, and make to them a ladder of
pride to their own ruin.

Heaven has no open door to the prayer of a proud Pharisee, Proud prayers
enter not heaven.
but all the gates of it are cast open to an humble supplicant, David
disclaimed merit. Psalm. 143. 2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, and appealed only to mercy, Psalm.
51. 1.
Have mercy upon me according to the multitude of thy compassions. And the
faithful venture on that humility: What I have (says one) I have taken it of
God, and not presumed it of my self, -- for what I am commendably, it is not
of my ingine, neither of my merit, but of his free gift: And what merit can be
in man, whom the deliverer from sin Jesus Christ himself found altogether a
sinner? Or how shall a man trust in himself to be happy, who cannot guide his
mind (his best part) from error Si quid habeo a Deo sumpsi, non a me
praesumpsi -- non enim meo vel ingenio vel merito, sed ejus dono sum, fi quid
laudabiliter sum. Aug. Epist. 52.
? And if the Prophet says truly, Jer. 17. 5.
Cursed is he who puts his trust in man, much more is he accursed, who
trusts in himself for happiness.

Next this prayer for happiness must be absolute, 2 It is absolute.
and not conditional, and that because happiness is absolutely necessary. Non
oramus ut divitiae and honores adveniant, sed ut ea quae bonos and beatos
efficient. Aug. Ord. 2. 20.
We crave common blessings with this condition, if God think it expedient, as
health, liberty, wealth, etc. But when we pray for remission of sins, life
eternal, and happiness, we seek them absolutely. All things that we ask go
in three ranks. The first are good in themselves, and yet better us not, as
riches and honor, etc. because they qualify not our person with any good
change: The second are god in themselves, and make us better, but cannot
beatifie us; as learning, wisdom, prudence, etc. The third is both good,
makes us better, and beatifieth us, and therefore is simply to be craved of
God: This distinction setleth the godly in a great doubt, they pray often and
earnestly for some things, and yet are not heard, and therefore think that God
has cast them off. But here is a resolution, for God neglects not their
prayers, but has them written before they utter them. And his refuse is not in
anger, but because he thinks it not expedient: and though he refuse one
thing, it is to give us a better; as he refused to stay Satan's buffering to
the Apostle, 2. Cor. 12. 9.
yet gave him sufficient grace to endure it. Besides, we may plainly say, that
God hears ever his own, although not to their will, yet to their weal Deus
non semper ad v^luntatem, sed ad utilitatem ex^udit. Aug.
.

Our will that leads us in rebellion against his Commandments, We should not
stick to our own will.
should not rule his hearing of our prayers. For oftentimes God gives us
blessings that we never sought, and holds from us in that same mercy, many
things that we seek: Bernard. de Quadr. ser. 6.
As a wise father gives his son nourishment, though he seek it not; but if
that same child cry and weep for a knife, he will refuse him, because he
foreseeth he may hurt him with it. It had been good for Ps. 78. 29.
Israel that God had refused to give them flesh in the wilderness; and for
Balaam, that God had stayed him as well in his second as in his first desire.
Item in 1. Ioh. Tract. 6.
But happiness has a more absolute course; Aug. in hunc locum.
for God has purposed it absolutely for his own: he has promised it
absolutely, and what ever condition is required of faith or repentance, he
works it in us. Christ has purchased it, and prayed for it absolutely, and
upon these grounds absolutely we seek it of God; Rachel said to Jacob Genesis 30.
1.
Give me children, or else I die. How much more reason have we to crave of God,
that he would give us happiness to conceave Jesus Christ by faith, or else we
perish?

The third property of this prayer is Constancy: 3 It is constant.
For faithful prayer knows no end but obtaining of that it seeks, and this
is both in constant love of the chief good, and constant seeking of it: 1 In
love to the chief good.
The love we have to chief good changes not, but increases daily: Worldly
happiness gives not this constancy; Men seek one thing to day, and another
to morrow, they burn even now in a desire of honor, and at once in greed of
riches, as occasion offers, or possibility of obtaining appears, they
change both their object and course: But the godly who choose true happiness,
neither repent their choice, nor change their course, but grow in the like of
their choice and love of happiness: They can change the place of their
dwelling, their complexion, their diet and contentment in common goods, but not
in the chief good: These things are but for the way, and for a short time, but
the other for eternity, and in the current of changes upon other things, he
holds ever fast his love to happiness: The more he knows it, the more he
loves it, and blesses God who has directed him in that choice. Herein he is
not so much active as passive, and that both willingly, and in a sort of sweet
violence, captivated with the delights of his most beloved and desired good. It
possesses him rather, than he does it, and he is more in it, than in
himself: The sweetness he finds in it, suffers him not to change for any
other: God may bless him with many other goods, and Satan may turn them as
baits to withdraw, or divert him from the chief good, but he never changes
his first love: The first impression of the joys of happiness are so deep in
his heart, that no contentment of lesser goods can either divert it by change,
or diminish it by equality. And though God from heaven would bid him make a
new search of happiness, he would still fall upon his first choice.

The other is in his prayer, 2 In his prayer.
he will not leave seeking, till he obtain happiness: It is not at our hand,
nor found at the first, but we must pray often for it: We faint if we be not
heard at the first, but that is our fleshlinesse, who would have God subject to
us: The gift is his own, and he knows his time, and it is our part patiently
to wait on: So David, Psalm. 40. 1.
I waited patiently on the Lord: And Jeremie, Lam. 3. 24. 26.
The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him: It is
good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the
Lord. And Christ gives us the parable of the Luke 18. 1.
poor widow, who importuned the judge, till she was heard: It is counted a
courtesy among men, to take with the first refuse, but with God, it is no
courtesy, but infidelity; and we cannot give him greater rest, than to
importune him with our desires of happiness: And the Mat. 25. 28.
Canaanitish woman is commended for it, that she cried out, till she was
heard. So should we do in praying for happiness: and that the more, because
we get it not here in the fullness, but in the degrees, which should strengthen
our patience, because they are obligements on Gods part. His purpose is in
himself, and his promise is known and believed of us, and if providence begin
to perform them both, it is a sort of engaging of him who is liberty, (if we
may ^o speak) to perform that he has begun. Gods delay is in respect of us,
but not of himself: It is the trial of our faith, the proof of our hope, the
opening of our heart in large desires, and a way to sweeten our delights, when
our desire is filled. For the more and longer we have thirsted, the sweeter
shall our satietie be; and our prayers are not so much in particular times, as
the constant opening of our desires to God, when our hearts, like empty
vessels, lie at the fountain, and like the Joh. 5. 5.
man at the poole of Bethesda, we wait on till God heal us. He will have us
exercised in prayer, that we may receive that, that he prepares to give us
Vult exerceri orationibus desiderium ut possimus capere quod praeparat dare.
Aug. Ep. 122.
.

This answers a question which some move, Devout men want never matter of
prayer.
when they hear of some who are often and long at their private devotion: They
ask, what purpose they had to be so often, and long with God? But if we be
sensible of our misery, we will never want purpose to pray to God, though it
were to crave again, and again this true happiness; we get it not at the
first, nor at once, but by degrees: and though the matter were one, yet we have
need of a new affection of that same matter; and when that affection decays,
we have need to have it repeated. The Apostle bids us 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
pray continually: which is not so to be taken, as though we should ever be on
our knees, in the action of prayer, because he has commanded us to labor in
our particular callings; but of our constant affection, our habitual desire,
and continual disposition, for seeking of God, which most show themselves in
the frequent action of prayer, though not in the continual.

Out of this I raise three things: First our duty: Happiness is not our
desert.
That if we would obtain true happiness, we ask it of God by prayer. We
are every way craving and begging creatures, because we are ever necessitous.
Though our grave have the name from craving, yet from our conception to our
grave, we are craving continually. In the womb we crave nourishment, and then
liberty by birth; and at our birth, our weeping is a craving, to testify,
that a miserable and indigent creature is come into the world. Though there be
some reason of the first weeping, because we are come from a warm lodging to a
colder, yet the maine reason of it is, because we are entering into the valley
of misery, and the fittest saluting of it, is by tears: And all our time in
this life is nothing but a world of necessities, after other, of raiment, food,
physic, etc. But among all, we care least for this one thing. Our body is
sensible of the own wants, and seeks for them, but our soul is senseless,
and in the multitude of prayers, scarcely have we one about true happiness:
But we owe to that chief good our greatest love, the greatest care to
obtain, and so the most frequent and fervent prayers. Christ taught us this by
express command; Matthew. 6. 33.
Seek first the kingdom of God, and these things shall be cast to you: So
that comparatively other things are scarce to be sought; but a promise made,
that they Matthew. 6. 33.
shall be cast to us. And in his prayer he persuades the same order: First, to
pray, that God may be glorified in the hallowing of his name, and so our
glorification will follow his glory. Next, that his kingdom may come, both
insubduing his enemies, and ruling us by his grace, to our happiness. Thirdly,
that as his revealed will directing us, should be done by us, so the secret
will of his purpose, may be performed on us, in our happiness. Likewise the
petition for remission of sins committed, and the other for escaping
tentation to sins, that might be committed: Of all these petitions only one
is for daily bread, or temporal things, and that cast in the mids, where is
least, either attention or intention. So Christ has put the matter of
happiness in that prayer, that we may daily ask this one necessary thing of
God, though the most part rehearse the words, without thinking on that matter.

Next we may infer, that our praying for happiness is a work of happiness
in us: Prayer for happiness is happiness.
That chief good communicates it self to us diversely, according to our
necessities: As sin original is not a single sin, but a multitude and mass
of corruptions, defiling all our powers, like a pulpous or chairie root, which
in one contains many several roots, as in garlic, or such like: So that
natural vitiousnesse contains ignorance, senselessness, infidelity, pride,
and all other corruptions in us: Even so the chief good has all goods in it,
and sends out it self to men to cure these miseries: It is light, to
inlighten our ignorance; It is life, to quicken our senselessness; It is
mercy, to pardon our sin, and strength, to keep us from falling; It is
good, to allure us, and a prevening power, to stir us up to pray for it, so
that our very praying for it, is its prevening work. This is all of God, who
works powerfully, and abundantly in us; Psalm. 81. 10.
He bidd^th us open our mouth wide, and promises to fill it. And he himself
opens the mouth in moving our desire. As Physicians force up the mouths of
some patients, under their convulsions, and then power in some cordials to
refresh them: So God, by the convictions of our conscience, opens our hearts
to desire, and then gives us the happiness that we desire. Thus the chief
good gives it self to us in this life, by parts and degrees, but in heaven 1.
Cor. 15. 28.
Go^ shall be all in all, and we shall possess our chief good once, at once,
and eternally.

Lastly, Sure grounds of obtaining our prayer.
we have here sure grounds of hope to be heard in this prayer, for we pray not
alone, but have more intercessors than we know of: We feel when we pray our
selves, and are sensible of the assistance of Gods spirit, when Romans 8. 26.
he helps our infirmities, with groans, that cannot be expressed: Esaias 65. 24.
But our necessity cries also to God, and he hears it, though we know it
not; Yea before we were, and before our necessity was in us, it cried to his
commiseration from eternal, and his bowels were moved toward us: Joh. 1^.
Christ also prays for us, that the fruit of his obedience may be applied to
us: The covenant also supplicateth for us, and casts it self open before
him, entreating him, to accomplish all that he has promised to us: And his
own name and glory pleads for us, Ezekiel. 36. 22.
For my own names sake I will do this. Besides these, his justice intercedeth
for us: 1. Joh. 1. 9.
If we confess our sin, he is faithful and just to forgive us. It is as
native to justice to absolve the innocent, as to punish the guilty; And we
are clean before him, when we are clad with Christ Jer. 23. 6.
the Lord our righteousness. It is as just to pardon the faithful penitent,
as to punish the faithless impenitent: So when Christ has applied to us the
fruit of his obedience, Gods justice pleads for happiness to us. It is
mercy enough in God to hear us when we call, but this is more, Isay 65. 24.
before they call I will answer. These things may assure us, we shall be heard.
All this is bred in the bowels of Gods commiseration, and the brood of so
tender mercies must be acceptable to him, and so our happiness sure withal.
Where his will, and our weal, and so many intercessours concur, who can stay
our happiness?

SECTION IIII.
Of happiness it self.
That I may dwell.
WE have heard the first three parts of this doctrine: And 1. Of our dwelling
with God.
That one thing; The Author of it, Jehovah; The way to find it, by prayer,
and searching: Follows the fourth, to wit, happiness it self, expressed in
a dwelling, or remaining, and that not every where, but in Gods house: Not for
a short time, but all the days of his life: And for this end, to see the
beauty of the Lord, and partake that happiness, that God there offers to
the Saints: And because of our imperfection here, to be still inquiring more
and more for happiness.

The notion of dwelling or mansion, Happiness is in our dwelling with God.
expresses happiness well; because it is the end of the inclinations,
intentions, and work of all creatures: For the senseless creatures incline to
a rest in their places; the reasonable intend and labor for it, Christ calls
it the place of Joh. 14. 2.
our Mansions, the Apostle our Heb. 13. 14.
biding City, and S. John Revel. 14. 13.
A rest from our labors. God provided the earth, a dwelling place for the
creatures; and a paradise in the midst of it, a dwelling place for man, and it
was Cains punishment, Genesis 4. 12.
that he found no rest, but was a vagabond. This dwelling we consider in peace
and rest.

Peace with God, Peace with God is a great part of it.
is the special part of our happiness, and the first whereof we are sensible:
For albeit we be in God from eternal, and his mercy secretly, (yet strongly)
does follow us from the womb in our adoption, baptismall regeneration, etc. yet
we are never sensible of that happiness, till our effectual calling; wherein
repenting our sins, we find remission, and so peace with God: Romans 5. 1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God; he is our chief good, and
our union with him, makes us happy. Psalm. 30. 5.
In his favor is life, Psalm. 63. 3.
yea it is better than life; and a separation from him, is our misery; we may
flee from the anger of men, Phil. 4. 7.
but whither can we flee from the anger of God? 1. King. 19. 12.
This is the peace that passes all understanding, for even the minds that
have it, cannot express the sweetness of it: And God has wisely so provided,
that he shakes the conscience with some fear and terror, ere he power this
peace into it, and that not only as a fruit of our sin, but for two other ends:
The one, to make the change more sensible to us: For if we be translated from
nature to grace, without any grief for sin, or fear of wrath, we could not
so well know our translating; but when we are even now swallowed up in sorrow
and fear: and repenting, and believing in Christ, feel our selves persuaded
of remission: and the tormenting conscience turning a comforter, and the joys
of the spirit filling the heart in the sense of that peace, then we are
sensible of a change. The next cause is for proportion, that as the measure of
our grief is, so shall the measure of our peace and joy be; so that they who
are most grieved at their conversion, afterward are usually acquainted with
greatest joys. What ever our condition be in the world, we are but miserable
without this peace, but what ever be our condition, we are happy with it, and
may say; Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is the man, whose sins are forgiven him.

This peace of God has two fruits: Peace with our selves, Peace with our
selves.
and with the creatures: Peace with our selves flows from Gods peace. So
soon as God is offended with our sins, and sets us against him, as marks
of his wrath: Postquam posuisti me contrarium tibi, factus sum contrarius mihi.
Bernard. 130. 2. Col. 2.
Then we are contrary to our selves, and revenge his quarrel on us.

This is that holy 2. Cor. 7. 11.
indignation, arising of the sorrow, according to God; when we seek a sithment
and revenge on our selves for angring him we take Gods part against our self,
and eat up our own heart, and make our flesh to pine away for his displeasure,
and our Psalm. 39. 12.
beauty to consume like a moth: But when he pardons us, and seals that
pardon with his peace, then we turn to peace with our selves: So long as we
feel sin, we are as an house on fire; Heb. 12. 29.
God is a consuming fire: Esaias 33. 14.
and who can dwell with devouring fire, and who can abide with everlasting
burnings? The conscience terrified of God, does terrify us, and all the powers
of the soul are in confusion: The spirit so wounded, wounds the body in all
the natural powers; weak appetite, worse digestion, troubled sleep, and an
universal ineptnesse, both in soul and body to any good office: The flesh
evanishing, the bones consuming, and the moisture turning in the drought of
summer, Psalm. 32. 4. Charbone Kaitz siccitates aestatu.
wherein the Prophet possibly alludeth to mount Horeb, which had the name from
burning; the Law was given on it in fire and thunder, and every heart in some
measure, must be shaken with the terrors of the Lord, that it may come to the
peace of God. But the sight of a reconciled God in Christ, changes all to the
contrary; the testimony of conscience is stronger in her judicial acts, than
in other: For when God is directing, informing, and simply proponing things,
she has but a weak testimony, but when God judicially deals with us,
accusing, reproving, and terrifying, her testimony is strong; because the hand
of God is powerful in it; and therefore, there is no denying of her
accusation, no shifting of her torture: On the other part, her comforting is as
certain, when she assures us of Gods pardon, because the hand of God is in
her to comfort us, and in us, to be as sweetly comforted, as we were formerly
grievously tormented.

The combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit seems to trouble this peace, The
spiritual combat troubles not our peace.
and consequently our happiness; but it does rather confirm, and increase
it: For it is not a power of God pursuing us, but our own corruption molesting
us. The parties are flesh and spirit, nature and grace, the new and the old
man: And though it be grievous that we have corruption either passively, to
receave Satan's temptations by consent: or actively, of it self to breed the
work of sin: Yet this is joyful, that we have a party within us against
Satan: And that not only a conscience or reason, or care of public honesty,
etc. which are in the wicked, but the new man, and the new spirit, assisted by
the holy spirit. The Apostle finding that combat, cried out; Romans 7. 24.
miserable man that I am, yet feeling the spirit a contrary party making
resistance, thanked God in Christ for his deliverie; and though Rebecca was
grieved, Genesis 25. 22.
to find the two children strive in her belly; yet she was glad for having
children. This spiritual combat, is a seal that we are at peace with God, and
our selves, so long as we abhor our flesh, strive against, and Habac. 1. 2.
complain to God of violence, and implore his help to his own spirit against
it.

Our peace with the creatures comes not so near to our happiness: Peace
with the creatures.
God has the fabric of the world in his hand, as a mounter; so long as we
please him, he makes all creatures go in their order; but when we offend him,
he distempereth it that nothing go right, till we return to him by
repentance, and then Job 5. 23.
he makes the stone of the field at covenant with us. But we are to inquire of
the peace of the reasonable creature. The good angels are ever at peace with
us, for though sometimes God gives them hard commissions of punishment against
us, yet they love us still: The evil angels will never be at peace with us,
but their war is our peace: Better to have Satan without us, than within us;
and to have him tempting us to sin, rather than tormenting us for sin. If
we were Luc. 11. 21.
his possession, he would not trouble us; but his tentation argues that God
has Job 1. 10.
hedged us about, and we are free of his tyranny: He troubles none of his
own, but keeps them in peace: A mastive dog barketh at none of the household,
but at strangers; and Satan's tentations are not against his own, but the
Saints.

As for men, Peace with men.
their peace is various: We should not look for peace at the hand of the
wicked, for we are called out of the world, therefore the Joh. 15. 19.
world hates us; Genesis 3. 19.
and the old denounced war betwixt the woman and the serpent, has neither
truce nor peace; therefore their injuries are our peace. But the wrongs we
receave from the godly are more grievous, for Gods grace in them colors
their cause, and perplexeth our mind more, than the wrongs of the wicked: And
Satan craftily sets the godly against the godly, Genesis 37. 4.
as Jacobs sons against Joseph, and David's brethren against him, etc. 1. Sam.
17. 28.
But though these things may trouble the peace of our body, yet they should not
trouble the peace of our breast. The equity of our cause; Our patience in
suffering; No desire of revenge, but seeking occasions to do good to our
injurers, and that neither of hypocrisy, nor policy, nor a natural
softness, but a conscience, and that because God commands it: Christ has
done so, and commands us to follow him. These work greater peace than
injuries can make trouble: Genesis 50. 19.
Joseph rejoiced more in Gods grace, making him meek and beneficial to his
brethren, than in the outward power he had so to do: In the second, he
overcame them, but in the first, he overcame himself.

The second part of this habitation is Rest, Spiritual Rest, a part of
happiness. 1. Rest of Resolution.
the most desirable end of our appetites, and that of resolution, refreshment,
and security. The rest of Resolution, keeps us at home with God: For when
we are searching what is happiness, where, and how it is to be found,
perplexity holds us from home; but being resolved that all is in God, that
as Joh. 1. 41.
Andrew said to Peter, We have found the Messiah, so that we may say, We have
found happiness in God, we rest from these first perplexities. Our labors
after that (though painful) are sweet and pleasant, because they are about the
chief good; yea we have not such rest in any thing, as when we are most busied
about happiness: These very labors are our rest, and we go to bed most
contentedly that night, when we have spent the day most painfully with God
about happiness.

Next the Rest of refreshment, 2. Rest of refreshment.
when God refreshes with his grace in that habitation. So the Church calls
to Christ; Cant. 1. 7.
Tell me where thou feedest, where thou make thy flock to rest at noone. And
David professes; Psalm. 23. 2. 3.
That God led him by the still waters, and made him lie down in green
pastures. God has provided convenient means for every life, and the
spiritual as excellent in the actions, as in the kind, is ever set on the
grace of Christ, as the only convenient food. The body turns food to the own
substance, but the food of our soul turns us to its own nature. When the
heat of the holy spirit boyleth and burns up our earthly thoughts, and
turns them into heavenly. There is no dwelling like this, and it has the
own convenient diet; the house of God has its own fat things, wherewith the
godly are fed abundantly.

The third is the Rest of security: 3. Rest of security.
For what avails quiet and refreshment, if the next hour we might lose
them? This security is seen in Gods protection, and our conscience of it. God
is like that loving shepherd, Ezech. 34. 16.
guarding his sheep from their own wanderings, and the violence of the wolf:
And like the Mat. 23. 37.
Hen warming the birds she has brought forth: whom ever he loves, he has
them all in his heart, and preserves them 1. Pet. 1. 4.
by his power to that immortal kingdom. He gives us also the conscience of
this security, when as we know the certainty of the matter in him, so we
find the confidence of it in our selves. He has promised to preserve John 13.
1.
us to the end; and when we feel our selves to believe that promise, our
confidence of security rises. So the faithful soul concludes the own
security formally; Ps. 91. 1, 2, 3.
Who so dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of
the Almighty. Then from the conscience of faith it assumeth; I will say unto
the Lord, O my hope, and my fortress, he is my God, in him will I trust.
Lastly, from both it infers that God would preserve it; Surely he will
deliver thee, etc. But the committing of our selves to him clears it most, 2.
Tim. 1. 12.
I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded, that he will render to me, that
I have committed to him. This is not so much life eternal, as our soul and
body, which are every hour in hazard. Therefore when in the conscience of our
weakness, and malice of our enemies, we take our soul and body, as things,
which we can neither preserve from ignorance, nor rebellion, from sin and
fearful accidents, etc. and lay them over in his hand to be preserved to the
last day, with express indenting for restitution; we cannot but be sensible of
such a work, and confident both of his taking us in keeping, and of his
restoring of us in the last day: Arrhae perditae damnum pateretur. Chrysostom.
hom. 1. 2. Col.
If God brought us not to the possession of the inheritance, he would suffer
the loss of the earnest.

This then is the power of true happiness, that maugre all the miseries of
this life, it provideth a peaceable habitation to us. Christ reigns in the
midst of his enemies Psalm. 110. 2.
: and makes all his own to possess happiness in the mids of miseries. This
is our heaven on earth, without which, it were better to dwell in hell, than in
the world.

False religions know no settled dwelling, False religions teach no happiness.
but are ever restless: restless in intending, restless in working; and most
in their fruitless end. Vera religio est via ad faelicitatem. Aug. ver. Rel. 1.
The Pagans doctrine in this point may be found in three of their sentences.
The first was, that in any misery they should return to the beginnings of
nature. Fessa laborat. Aug. Mor. Ecc, cap. 7.
This tells they acknowledge no misery in nature, but like the declining of
a commonwealth, Ad prima naturae redeundum.
for which there was sufficient remedy in nature to return to the beginnings,
as politics do in reforming their republics: Our first naturals, are our
worst naturals: Prima naturae pessima naturae.
we are conceaved Psalm. 51. 5.
and borne in sin, and except we be borne again Joh. 3. 3.
we cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Their next sentence was: Debet homo sibi reconciliari.
That a man should be careful to be reconciled to himself: They acknowledged
a discord, but placed it wrong: They knew no other, but the discord between
their will and the conscience: Of their mind and heart: Of their reason and
passion: Of their contrary affections, And extremes of vice; And most of their
predominant sin against all the rest. These vexed them sometimes with such
anxietie, that it cut their life. But they knew nothing of the Romans 7. 23.
Combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit, nor of the offense of God, in
breaking his Law: And therefore they neither knew peace with God, Naturae
convenienter vivere.
nor themselves.

Thirdly, they affirmed, that it was man's happiness, to live agreeably to
nature: This was nothing, but to loose the raines to their fleshly lusts, that
they might sin with greediness, they found the check of conscience mar the
pleasure of their sin, and where they should have reduced their humor to
reason, they threw reason to humor, and of a grave counselor, they turned it
into a base flatterer, to applaud their greatest villainies. So their pretended
conveniencie with nature was not only a discord with grace, but with nature it
self, and that dedolencie or senselessness, whereof the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 4. 19.
That they were past feeling.

Papists also prejudge themselves greatly of this dwelling, Papists will not
reconcile with God.
and that both in general and particular. In general: Their Church will not
reconcile with God: When they were first challenged, they past two parts of
their own penance, contrition, and confession. For Hadrian. 6. professed his
grief for the abuses of the Church: And he confessed they began at Rome. He
promised also reformation, (the third part of their penance,) but the world
has not seen it as yet: But contrary, that whorish Church in the council of
Trent has damned divine truths with Anathems, and bound her self by oath to
believe and maintain their greatest heresies, and so has sent word to God,
that she will not return to the husband of her youth. Jer. 3. 4.
It is time for us to speak for reconciling with Rome, when Rome has
reconciled her self to God.

In the particular they cut off their reconciliation, They stay this peace.
for Scripture places it in the Romans 3. 25.
blood of Christ, but they take in the merits and satisfactions of men and
Angels, which rather separateth, than reconcileth them to God. And this
habitation, or rest of security, they know not, but choose rather to dwell in
the doubtings of their own heart, than with God, in the assurance of his
protection. Albeit they confess that it is Tutissimum tamen est, etc. Bellar.
surest to put all their trust in the mercy of God, and merit of Christ, and
that because of the uncertaintie of their own merit, and peril of vain
glory; yet they will forsake that, that is most sure, and be tossed in their
own uncertainties, God raised up in the Council of Trent one to plead openly
for this truth, who affirmed, Hoc est sincerae pietatis -- si homo ab inani
propriae dignitatis confidentia abhorrens, omnino a Dei misericordia pendeat --
nec unquam patiatur ex animo suo persu fionem illam excuti, etc. Ant. Marin.
Council. Trident. We should dwell in God.
That this is sincere piety, yea the ground of absolute obedience, if a man,
abhorring from all vain confidence of his own worthiness, depend wholly on
the mercy of God, -- And if he be persuaded that God is with him, as a
merciful Father, -- and never suffer that persuasion to be shaken out of his
mind.

Our duty then is, to seek this habitation in God, what ever be our lot in
the world; for Nihil potest quietare voluntatem hominis nisi solus Deus. Them.
1. 2ae. 8. 12. 4. 3.
nothing can quiet the will of man but God. He has prepared us Joh. 14. 2.
Aug. de Ord. 1.
Mansions: and to assure us thereof, has promised to make us his mansions. If
he dwell in us, assuredly we dwell in him. One made frequent meditation in the
night, a token of this dwelling, but Christ gives us a surer: If any man love
me, Joh. 14. 23.
and keep my Commandments, the Father and I will come and dwell with him. It
is not his shadow will content us, nor his wings, nor his bosom, but his
heart, where all our happiness was bred: We will not be content with the
dove, to be taken in the arc Genesis 8. 9. August. Tract. 76.
, except he take us in the affection that bred the covenant: Our superficial
thoughts of his love suffer not our hearts to warm in it; it is neither the
garment nor the skirt, but the heart that was pierced for us, that we should
touch. When God made the world, he stayed not till he came to man, and then
came the sabbath, after which no day is numbered, Genes. 2. 2.
to tell that man is for eternity. This dwelling in God is our spiritual
sabbathizing, the type of the eternal: we prescribe no measure to God, but
thirst the fullness; but with the casting in of the bucket of our desires, let
us cast in our heart also in the fountain. The outbreaking of the fountain is
according to our straitness, and not according to the fullness it self. God
has made us to himself, and our heart is restless, till it rest on him: For
if we shall go through the world, we shall not find a sure place to our
soul but in him: Things natural are carried to their place by their weight:
Fecisti nos ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te.
Confess. 1. 1.
And the weight of our soul, is our love Pondus meum, amor meus. Confess. 13.
9.
: Thereby we are carried whithersoever we go. And by the grace of God it is
kindled in us, and carries us upward. This is our rest and life, that cannot
be troubled: For who so enters in God, enters in his masters joy, Et habebit
se optime in optimo. Conf. 2. 10.
and shall be most happy in him, who is most happy. Therefore O the virtue of
our soul; enter in her, and fit her to thy self, that thou may possess
her. Da mihi qui huc pervenerit and fateor quiescentem. Bern. Can. 52.
He who is come to this, is in his rest, and may justly say: Return my soul
to thy rest. Psalm. 116. 7.


SECTION V.
Of the place.
In the house of the Lord.
Gods house is the school of happiness.
WE have heard of the happy man's habitation. Churches the Lords houses.
Follows the place, and it is Gods house. Not that he needs a house, who is
All, and fills all, for the heaven is his throne, Esaias 66. 1.
and the earth is his footstool, what house can we build unto him? But he has
chosen Churches for his houses, that therein he may deal with us in the
matter of happiness, and they are so called from his presence and delight. His
presence, because as his providence is manifest every where in ruling the World
in temporal things, he would also have some houses set apart for happiness,
and eternal salvation: So that albeit he be in every house, yet that his being
in them may be called an absence, comparatively to his presence in the Church.
His delight also is great in Churches: Psalm. 232. 14.
This is my rest, here I delight to dwell. And to make it prove his house, he
decoreth it with greater beauty than all the houses in the world: which made
David to choose the house of the Lord, though he had stately and royal palaces
to dwell in, as we shall hear (God willing) hereafter; for this cause one
calls him, Aug. tract. 3.
an aspiring Lover of life eternal, who sought that one thing to dwell in the
house of God. There are also other considerations of the Church mystical, and
individual. Mystical, is the Church of the Elect, to whom he imparteth this
happiness: Individual, to speak so, is every elect person, a lively member of
the Church of the Elect, because they are the Temples of the holy Spirit.

Hereof three things arise: First, Gods great mercy, who notwithstanding our
grievous sins, They are tokens of Gods mercy to man.
has erected his houses every where in the world for our happiness. Man could
not ascend to God, therefore God came down to man, to deal with him openly in
the matter of happiness. When we were cast out of Paradise, Satan thought we
should never be taken in favor again, but now he has appointed millions of
houses for reconciliation. And he has appointed his houses eminently for
Satan's more eminent confusion. So Porphyre confessed it as from Apollo, Idque
maxim in templis, quia Deus hos ibi ludibrio exponit. Aug. Civit. 19. 23. and
22. 3.
that the devils abhorred the chief God, and that most in Churches, because
there he exposed them to mockery. For his house is his trysting place,
wherein we deal with him about happiness: It is also as a richly furnished
shop, offered to those that have no money Isay 55. 1.
. It is like unto these wine-cellars Cant. 2. 4.
, whereunto Christ takes his spouse to fill her with spiritual consolations.

Lastly, it is his open School, Churches are schools for happiness.
wherein the doctrine of happiness is plainly taught. He saw mankind lie flat
on the earth; and though the Grecians seemed to lift men's minds to heavenly
things, yet they erred worse than the former, in so far as error is worse than
simple ignorance, and made people err by authority, who before erred only in
simplicity: for among them all, there was neither truth nor concord. For this
cause, sometimes Gods house is put for Christ, as he is opposed to the
Philosophers, Aug. Confess. 7. 18. and 20.
because in him only is happiness to be found. Therefore God pitying man, opened
his schools of the Church in the doctrine of happiness: and there is more of
it in this one sentence, This is life eternal Joh. 17. 3.
to know thee to be the only God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ; than in
all the writs of Philosophers from the beginning. And God does this in the
sight of the World, because his works are good, and seek the light. Satan
steals away man in his works of darkness; but he will have them publicly
returning to honor him, and shame Satan.

Secondly, And the happiness of a Nation.
the happiness of a Nation where God has houses, Psalm. 50. 2.
Sion the perfection of beauty. And more, Psalm. 48. 2.
Sion the joy of the whole earth, and the City of the great King. Many count
his house a burden, and wrangle miserably in the provision of pastors, like the
Gadarens, Luke 8. 37.
who thrust Christ away for their swine: or like the Polonians, who having
embraced Christianity, and finding the maintenance of it heavier than
Paganism, resolved to turn to Paganism again. However, it bideth sure, that
Gods presence in a Land is their happiness and glory. The world thinks,
that Monarchies are the glory of a nation, but God gave more to the Jews in
the Temple and Synagogues, than to the Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, Romans in
their flourishing Monarchies. He gives to other nations without the Church,
great natural and politic gifts, but they are nothing to the sanctuary.
Albeit they excel the Sain^s in these common gifts, yet the spiritual gifts
are infinitely better. For as the waxing power is stronger in plants than in
beasts. because in them it is eminent, but in the other subject to the
sensitive power: and in beasts the sensitive power is stronger than in man, in
whom it is subject to reason; so among men, they who have nothing but Nature,
it is eminent in them, as in the own sphere. Without the Church many have
excelled in common gifts for mankinds civil perfection, and because they had
no other purpose to exercise their spirit. But the Saints are taken up in
things supernatural, and so are weaker in the natural. And this is a fruit of
Gods dwelling among them, when their souls run out on things supernatural,
rather than natural.

Thirdly, our duty in two things: First, that we frequent the house of God in
reverence: Churches are to be frequented for happiness.
for God is there in a singular manner, and our salvation and happiness is
proponed there. Therefore since he keeps both time and place of trysting, let
us not be so ingrate as not to meet with him. Many in opinion of greater
spiritual profit in private, abstain from temples: but let them remember, that
David was a Prophet, and laden with revelations: yet in the statute times of
worship, he chose to be in the Sanctuary rather than in private. For albeit
God bid us worship him privately, lest we be found hypocrites; yet he will have
us honor the public meetings, because larger grace descends from God, and
more groans ascend to him. Moreover, when we come to the sanctuary, let us
remember, that we are come to get happiness, which is proponed there. For, to
pass by humanity and ph^losophie (which treat not of happiness) and come to
the schools of divinity, Happiness is not there so clearly proponed as in
Churches. For there truth is almost lost by jangling: Happiness is rather
obscured than cleared, new questions augmented, and all more for the glory of
the disputer, than edification of the hearer, but nothing of heart or
conscience. But in the Churches, happiness is clearly proponed. Aug. Tract. 28.
fol. 177. 1, 2.
Here a man shall be convinced of his own misery, he shall hear many are
blessed whom the world count miserable for their crosses, and that many are
miserable, whom they count happy for their prosperity. And that the best have
need to look to the deceit of their heart, that they steal not Gods glory,
ascribing his gifts to them. Churches are types of heaven, Factus sum ad
coelum. Aug. Tom. 9. fol. 27. ^ol. 1.
and of these two great places, God has set the earth under our feet, and the
heaven above our head; and given our body a straight stature, Prosper. 4. 6. 8.
to tell we should tread on the earth, and aspire to heaven.

Next, We should be the temples of the holy Spirit.
that we try if we be the Temples of the holy Spirit: if we have the altar of a
clean heart, daily warmed with fire from above: The daily offering of
Repentance: Bernard. 632.
The shining Candlestick of a pure conscience: The Shewbread of sincerity and
truth, in obedience: The altar of Incense, to praise God for his blessings we
receive daily. God sought not sacrifices under the Law for themselves, but for
the thing signified: They represented Christ to us, and that we should
sacrifice our selves upon that great altar. If we be so, that unction 1 John 2.
27.
dwells in us, he will reveal to us the chief good, and apply our hearts to
the love of it, that we may enjoy it: He makes us also conscious and sensible
of this work, for he is an unction teaching, and a seal confirming our union
with the chief good. This is a great happiness, when the temples of the holy
Ghost, and living members of Jesus Christ, come to the house of God, to seek
true happiness, and obtain it. Deus and home vicissim se habitant. Aug. Tom.
9. fol. 109.
Here is also a mutual dwelling, when God and man dwells mutually in other.
He prepares us Mansions, when he prepares us for these mansions: His house is
the godly, and then the place is prepared, when we live by Faith; Mansionibus
parando mansores.
by beleaving we desire him, that by our desire we may have him. The desire of
our love to him, Aug. Johan. 14.
is the preparing of our Mansion. So Lord prepare what thou preparest! thou
preparest us to thee, and thee to us, because thou make a place in us to
thee, and thee to us, for thou have said Joh. 15. 4.
Abide in me, and I will abide in you.

SECT. VI.
The Time of learning Happiness.
All the days of my life.
Follows the Time, Churches frequently should be haunted.
which is not a Day, nor a year, but all the Time of our life. This may seem
too much: for neither God in the fourth Commandment craveth it, neither his
royal affairs could permit it: But this must be exponed by the Prophets
desire, flowing from his delight in the house of God, which was so great, that
gladly he would have spent all his life in it. And this desire is acceptable to
God: for, as the wicked are punished eternally albeit they sin but
temporally, Peccant in suo aeterno. Greg.
because they sin in their eternal, and because they never repent, nor
change, nor diminish their desire nor delight of sinning: Yea if they lived
eternally here, they would sin eternally: So God respects the holy desires
of the faithful, for albeit they cannot bide continually in the temple,
neither be ever exercised in holy things, yet God accepts their desire so, as
though they remained in the Temple.

Hereof we may gather the Saints Calendar. The godly man's Calendar.
We number times from the course of the Sun, and thereby measure natural and
civil actions. But the godly reckon their Calendar from the Sun of
righteousness his aspect, and influence: this reckoning is for the new man,
for he has his spiritual being in Christ. Phil. 3. 9.
That I may be found in him. And his spiritual life; Gal. 2. 20.
Henceforth I live not, but Christ lives in me, and the life that I live, I
live by the faith of the son of God; so he has his Sun that measures his
time and seasons. For, the Lord Psalm. 84. 11.
is a Sun and Shield. Yea, he counts these days shorter than they are,
and no time runs to him so swiftly, as the time of Gods worship; for he is
so affected with the sweetness of God, that he is grieved that such sweet
time does so soon end. The Sabbath is both the sweetest and shortest day to
him, so among hours is the hour of divine service; but the profane count that
a long time, Gods house is a prison to them, and his worship a torture.

This clears the contrary disposition of the godly and the wicked; The wicked
weary of Churches.
while they are in that same Church, in that same work of Gods worship, in that
same hour. The godly rejoice as in their own element worshipping God, and
enjoying his presence Senec.
. Some mocked the Jews for keeping the Sabbath, calling it a loss of the
seventh part of their time: But it was their best spent time, and sanctified
all their other days. Then their new man deals freely with God, and all the
gifts of the spirit pour themselves out on him. Then they feel the beginnings
of life eternal, which makes the time seem shorter than it is indeed. For
the more we enjoy a desired good, the more time we crave for that enjoying; so
that a long time seems short. And again, when an hateful ill sticks to
us, a short time seems long; hours are as days, days as months, and
months as years. Hereof comes the weariness of the profane, for the
shortest hour of worship tormenteth them: Their fleshly passions are bound in
stocks, they know not God, and the signs of his presence are terrible to them.
And yet these same men count whole days but short for their drunkenness in
tavernes; and in brothels they join nights to days, and days to nights, as
though all time were too short to measure out their vanity. But this will be
the end of all, when at death we look back to our time, we shall have most
comfort of these days we have spent in the Sanctuary, in seeking happiness,
and shall put these chiefly in our Almanac: for one day in thy house Psalm. 84.
10.
is better than a thousand elsewhere.

SECT. VII.
The marrow of true happiness.
That I may see the beauty of the Lord.
THis is the end why he desires to dwell in the Sanctuary, and that is
twofold, in the fruition of Gods goodness, and continuance in that fruition;
wherein consists the happiness he desires. This fruition is to behold the
beauty of the Lord: wherein are two things, the beauty it self, and
beholding. For the knowledge of this beauty, we shall first remove two false
Glosses, and then follow the truth.

The first is of some Papists, The beauty of the Sanctuary is not in building.
who place this beauty in the stately and costly building of their Temple.
Herein they follow the Jews, devoted to the external shows, their religion
is all for them; and seeing they cannot fill the hearts of people with the
power of doctrine, they will fill their eyes with stately buildings, Concilium
Cardinalium.
and pompous ceremonies. So their Cardinals advised Paul 3. that in the decay
of their authority they would make the world admire them, by building and
busking stately temples. The stateliness of the temple of Jerusalem was
extraordinary, both because it was in the time of a carnal service, and a type
of the Church under Christ, the beauty whereof was not in gold and silver (as
Malachie expresses) but in that the desire Hag. 2. 7.
of all nations came therein. But some fail on the other extreme, and have no
more care to the houses of God, than to common houses; yea, it may be seen,
that many barns and stables are more stately in the Parish, than Gods house.
This argues a brutish mis-regard of God, and of his worship, which is justly
fruitless in them. Churches ought indeed to be comely, as houses set apart to
God. But that necessary comeliness is not this beauty of the Lord,
Putchritudo domus non est in marmore. Jerome.
that we require, the beauty of houses is not in marble.

The second is worse, and places this beauty in Images: Neither in imagerie.
So the Fathers of the second Nicene Council (such a Council, and such
Fathers) thought them the beauty of the Sanctuary. But the Scripture calls
images abominations, and the shame of the Sanctuary: And when the Jews
brought the Idols of Israel, Ezech. 8. 14.
and Thammuz, or Osiris the God of Egypt, in their temple. God departed from
them. When the Pagans charged the Christians of the first ages, that their
Oratories had no images; Origin, and other Apologists, took with the
challenge, and gave the reason, that God whom they worshipped, was invisible
and infinite, and therefore, neither could nor would be represented by images.
From the Apostles time till images were brought in the Church, there was a
sufficient body of doctrine, though with some declination, but after that, the
Clergy turned more blockish and ignorant than images. Let them be called the
books of the Laics, but such as turn the Laics in stocks and stones,
because they are the teachers of lies and vanities Habac. 2. 18.
, for they leave their minds in as base estimation of the thing they
represent, Jer. 10. 8.
as of themselves.

The beauty of the Lord in the Sanctuary, 1. The prime beauty is God
himself.
is to be taken first, of God himself, and then of his work with his people.
God is the beauty of beauties, and all these things, which we call beautiful,
excellent, glorious, perfect, etc. in the creatures are but names and shadows
of the truth of these things that are in him. He alone is being without
beginning, and gives being to all, and sustaineth them in that being: He is
life it self without inliving, and yet quickening and inliving all: What ever
we consider to be excellent, as wisdom, purity, goodness, power, etc. are
all in him primely, perfectly, and unitely, howsoever to our minds and
experience, they be diverse: He is great without quantity, good without
quality* Every where, but included in no place, without localitie, and yet
excluded no place. A fountain without a vein, but running out in a continual
source; communicating substance, life, induements, of both to all creatures, in
such plenty, as proves his riches; and in such diversity, to make up the
beauty of the creature, that he the Author thereof may be seen most
bountiful: How beautiful is that Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity! The
Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the holy Spirit proceeding from both;
the Father the beginning, working all in the Son, and that by the holy
Spirit: a mystery to be adored, but not searched; believed by faith, but not
discussed by reason.

Herein Christ Jesus the fairest among men, Gods beauty is seen in Christ.
is to be considered; in whom the Church takes boldness to seek her
happiness with God: he is that eternal Son, of the eternal Father, Joh. 1.
14.
and came down full of grace and truth to save us: As God he is equal with
the Father and the Spirit; As man he is most beautiful of all creatures.
Coloss. 2. 9.
In him dwells all fullness, even the fullness of the Godhead bodily: and
because of the personal union, his humane nature exalted above all
principalities and powers, is adored by them. Bern. Cant. 22.
He is most beautiful, because of wisdom in preaching: righteousness in
remission of sins: Sanctification in conversing with sinners: Heb. 4. 16.
Redemption in suffering for sinners. And because through him only we take
boldness to approach to God: for who durst commit himself to so great a
Majesty without his mediation? Cum de Christo loquimur deficimus non
sufficimus. Aug. Ioh. tract. 3.
But while we speak of him we fail; and suffice not. But most of all he is
the beauty of beauties, if we consider him in his passion: For though the
world contemn him in that state, yet he is our delight, because he suffered
these things for us. This then is the first thing that we should do, when we
enter into the Sanctuary, to take up with the light of a purified mind this
glorious God, as the prime beauty of the Sanctuary, and the only object of
our religious worship, wherein true Christians excel all other people, who
worship not this true God.

Religious worship in the Sanctuary, Of religious worship.
is the greatest work we act in this life, because we seek happiness in the
union with that we worship; For therein three things go together: First our
highest estimation of it, as chief good in it self, and so communicative of
that goodness to our happiness. Next our highest affection, loving it above
all: And these are the two maine parts of inward worship. The third is a
religious reverence, arising of them, manifesting it self in the acts of
outward worship, to pray to him, and praise him. According to the object we
worship, so is our fruit: For if we worship the true God alone, then we come
to happiness, both because our estimation, affection, and reverence are right
placed. And more, because thereby he communicates himself to us, even to our
conformity with him: for our due estimation of him is our excellency, that
makes Philip. 3. 8.
us misprise all things beside, and seek him alone. Our due affection to him,
is our union with him, and a partaking of his divine nature; in that we loath
all things beside, and adhere to him as our only happiness. Thirdly, our
religious reverence holds him ever in our eye, as the pattern, to the which
we conform our selves. So thereby undoubtedly we attain true happiness:
But if we worship any thing beside, we make our selves more and more
miserable; Though we should worship Angels and Martyrs, neither can they
communicate goodness to make us happy; and their worship is impious, and
idolatrous, and separateth us from God.

The pretended cause, why Julian forbad Christians children the use of secular
learning, Socrates lib. 3. c. 10.
was, lest they being armed therewith, might more dexterously refute the Pagans:
But the secret cause was, lest by reading the fables and histories of the Gods,
they should find just matter of mocking and insulting over them; Aug. Civit.
7. 34.
As the old Senate burnt Numaes books, because they expressed the secrets of
their religion. For their own histories makes them the worst men of their
time, yea monsters rather than men, and yet after their death, the world
seeking a color to their own wickedness, made them gods; And the devils (the
promoters of their worship, for their own behoof) made the world think that
adultery, murder, drunkenness, and such were good service to them. If
Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Bacchus, were now living, as they were at their best in
their life time, they would be abhorred as pests, and cast out of the
commonwealth. This then is our happiness, that we worship that God alone who
made the heaven and the earth; and finding him, that all the parts of religious
worship begin in him, continue, and abide in him.

Secondly, 2. This beauty is in Gods work.
the beauty of God in the Sanctuary is in his working with his people for
happiness; which we consider in three: First, as it proceeds from him.
Secondly, the work of his grace in the people meeting him. Thirdly, the work
of pastors betwixt both. Gods work toward his people, goes in four: First,
his offering of happiness. Secondly, his exacting of service. Thirdly, his
conferring, or giving the grace, that he offers to them. Fourthly, his
accepting of his work in them, as if it were theirs only.

The first is his offer of salvation and happiness: 1. His offering of
happiness.
At the first it is thought, that we come to offer to him, but indeed he
brings us to his house to offer to us: Here a great change; God whom we
have made our enemy, is our best friend: Our Judge, who may plague us for our
sin, turns our repledger, by his mercy rescuing us from Justice. Our
Creditour turns our Pardoner; and while he might power out all his wrath
upon us, he is to reconcile us to him: And under this name our reconciliation
goes, because he works the work, whereof we are at first both ignorant and
incapable: So in Scripture every where he calls on us: Isai. 1. 18.
Come let us count together. Mat. 11. 28.
Come to me ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you.

Next in the Sanctuary he exacteth service of us, 2. Exacting of our service.
and that for our own good only; that seeing he is applying to us his
happiness purchased by his Son, he craved of us preparations and dispositions
to receive it. So he craveth that we lay up his word in our heart; That we
repent our sin unfainedly; that we believe in him; that we love him with all
our heart, and all our soul, and that we honor him in keeping his
Commandments: for even while he promises to ease us of our own yoke, he
bids us take his yoke upon us; That we pray to him for blessings we have
need of, and that we praise him for every blessing we receive. Nihil enim Deus
jubet quod sibi profit, sed illi cui jubet. Aug. Ep. 5.
For God commands no man any thing for his own profit, but for his profit
whom he commands: And all the business of our sacrifice under the Gospel is
not for him, but for our more profitable exercise in piety.

Thirdly, 3. He gives what he offers.
he conferreth upon us, and gives the things that he both offers and
exacteth; so he works faith in us, opening our hearts, as he did Act. 16.
14.
the heart of Lydia: and while he bids us, Come to his Son, he draws us
to him, both by alluring us with his excellency, and bowing of our wills to
him: He craveth of us, that we understand his word, and gives us hearts to
understand it, when Deuter. 30. 6.
he circumciseth our ear and heart, Jer. 31. 33.
and writes his Law therein. As he commands, that we love him with all our
heart; so he sheddeth abroad his love in our heart, making all our heart power
it self out on him. As he craveth obedience of us, so he gives the spirit of
obedience, Jer. 32. 40.
putting his fear in our heart, and causing us to walk in his Law. His
craving or exacting is not Legal, but Evangelick; for the legal is, Do, and
thou shall live; and yet gave no help to do the thing that was commanded; but
the Evangelick exacting gives us power to do the thing that it commands,
giving us to know, to will, and to do. And their obedience differs as well
as the exaction; for the legal obedience was to righteousness and salvation,
(if they could attain it,) but the Evangelick obedience is for gratitude and
thankfulness to God, for that happiness, which he has both purchased, and
applies to them freely.

Fourthly, 4. Accepts our service.
as a gracious Acceptor, of that we are able to do by his grace; which goes
in two: First, though it be his, he counts it ours; for we are not able of
our 2. Cor. 3. 5.
selves, as of our selves to think any good, but all our sufficiency is of
him. He gives us the habit of faith, of repentance, and brings their acts
out of them. And though formally, believing, repenting, etc. be our work,
because our wills, moved by grace, do move themselves, and so specifieth the
acts of these habits, yet the power and furniture whereby we believe is of
God. Next, these spiritual acts being pure as they come of him, yet they have
some blemish in them, because of our corruption: as water from a pure fountain
does taste of the brazen or myrie channel, through which it runs; For our
very righteousness is as a filthy clout Isay 64. 6.
: For woe to the life (otherwise commendable) if it be judged without mercy Et
vae vitae, alioqui laudabili si remota misericordia judicetur. Aug. Confess.
: Yet he winketh at these blemishes, and takes our service as perfect. He
takes a weak faith, like a Luke 17. 6.
Grain of mustard seed, as though it were a Cedar: Our will for deed; Our
purposes for performances; Our very desires of grace for grace, and for a
sufficient preparation to fill us with grace; yea, and the desire of a desire
is as welcome to him, as though it were a greater degree: We would not take so
little of our neighbor, no not of our selves, as he takes of us: yea,
ofttimes we are most acceptable to him, when we are least content with our
selves.

The people a part of this beauty.
SEcondly, How people in themselves are this beauty.
this beauty is in respect of the people; and that either in themselves, or in
their work. In themselves they are the Lords choice and portion: They have a
spiritual and inward beauty in the image of God by regeneration; and their
love to God makes them beautiful. The love of no other beautiful thing can
change us into it; but the love of God makes us beautiful like him: Diligendo
pulchri efficimur -- Ipsa charitas est animae pulchritudo. Aug. Ep. Job. tract.
9. And in their work.
For by loving him, who is ever beautiful, we become beautiful; and how much
that love grows in us, so much grows that beauty, because that love is the
beauty of the soul.

The people in their work are beautiful, when they flow to the Sanctuary:
Psalm. 122. 1.
I rejoiced when they said, We will go unto the house of the Lord: They are
like the chickens gathered under the hens wings: in that dispensation of grace
to be warmed with the heat of that same love of God, that has elected them. It
is like the Angels Joh. 5. 4.
moving of the waters of that poole; but with this difference, that there only
one was healed; but here all are healed who can by faith but touch the hem of
his garment. Or it is rather like the spirit moving Genesis 1. 2.
upon the waters in the creation: Because the holy Spirit, working mightily
upon the hearts of the godly, produces such motions and affections, as he
thinks good. And in a word, it is like innumerable empty vessels, set about
an overrunning fountain; so godly souls compassing God in the Sanctuary, are
sensible of their own wants, and desirous of God his supply: And he in the
riches of his grace, furnishes to every one as they have need. In the Gospel
sometimes a Matthew. 8. 2.
leper, craved to be cleansed: Sometimes a Marc. 10. 46.
blind man, to receave his sight: Sometimes a deaf man, to get his hearing,
etc. But in the sanctuary all these are spiritually; Marc. 7. 32.
for therein some are blind in ignorance; some are lepers in natural
corruption; others are deaf, and cannot hear God: Others are lame, and cannot
walk in the ways of God: yea and more, there is not one soul, who has not
all these spiritual diseases by nature, and Christ in his own time heals
them by parts.

In this beauty, the diversity of peoples disposition, Their diversity of
disposition.
and God his operation are to be considered: For as many men and women, as many
several dispositions, And Gods diverse working on it.
and God answerably works on them all: His word is the extract of his infinite
wisdom, so accommodat to man, that it both informs his mind with light,
and stampeth his heart with a divine power; So it has a variety of that
stamping, according to the disposition of the hearer: Some that are guilty of
great sins, and yet senseless, it will waken and pierce them, and make them
cry, Act. ^. 37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? Some again are wounded with conscience of
sin, and fear of Gods wrath, but they shall hear: Ezech. 18. 21.
At what time ever a sinner repents, I will pardon him, and the conscience of
his faith believing in Christ, and repenting sin, shall be followed with this
sweet whispering of his spirit, Marc. 2. 7.
Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. A contrite heart is a
pleasant spectacle to God, when it is brayed in the mortar of conscience. Some
again borne down with heavy affliction, and in fear that they be rejected
of God, because they are daily afflicted; their weary hearts shall hear this
word in due season, Apoc. 3. 19.
That whom I love I chasten, and the only way to Luc. 9. 23.
follow him, is to take up our cross daily, and that affliction is our best
lot, because it tells us we are not bastards Heb. 12. 8.
, but children, and that it is a part of our Romans 8. 18.
conformity with Christ here, and a pledge that we shall be like him in glory.

Moreover that same variety will be found in one godly soul at one time;
Diversity in one.
for being in the hand of God, it is like soft wax for the stamp, and as the
points of doctrine go along is answerably moved, so that in one Sermon it will
find downe-cast and raising up, grief and comfort, and be sensible of all
these changes of operation. Modesty in uttering our disposition.


This Psalm. 45. 13.
beauty is inward, seen of God, and felt of them that have it; yet so, that
outwardly it will appear: For there is such harmony between the heart and
face, as scarcely can any affection be in the heart, that appears not some
way in the countenance; which as it ought to be expressed with modesty, so
should it be exponed of other in charity. Sometimes the heart will be so moved
when Gods hand touches it, that it cannot contain it self, but will break
forth into tears of sorrow and joy; but prudence commands us to convoy these
things in public, as modestly as we can: Our chambers, or the fields, are more
convenient places for the full uttering of these affections; for there we may
use gestures of body, speeches, etc. which we cannot before man: for even the
most sincere affection any ways uttered, will find such uncharitable censure,
as 1. Sam. 14.
Hannahs tears found at the hand of Eli. Therefore in public, the
expressions of our affections must be moderat; our tears that would burst out,
must be turned into groans; and these groans must be suppressed, and turned
into ejaculations; and these brought to a soul-speech with God, admiring our
vileness, and his goodness, that takes such pains on us: Praising him where
we find his grace has kept us in obedience, resolving, promising, and vowing
better obedience in time to come: That is the joy of our heart, when as it can
pour out it self wholly on God in spiritual affections. Affection has the
own voice, whereby it is known of God: Sometimes it requires no other
expression, but is content with sighs; and these sighs will break out, not
only when we will, but also when we know not.

What more pleasant thing than to see Gods people taught of him: Gods teaching.
All hearers are Joh. 6. 45.
not taught of God, but only such as the unction teaches. He speaks to the
renewed ear and heart Purus puris loquitur.
, and the soft heart is only sensible of his working, and gives him the Echo
of his voice. When thou said, Psalm. 27. 8.
Seek ye my face, my heart answered, Thy face, Lord, will I seek. If he speak
of sin, it groaneth under guiltiness, or praises him, if it be free. If he
speak of wrath, it trembles, and prays for averting. If he command, it
prays for grace to obey. And as clean paper takes the stamp of every type,
so the soft heart is stamped with all his word, Jer. 31. 33.
this is the writing of the Law in our heart. The pen is his effectual power;
the ink his unction; the letters are Gods properties, stamped on the powers of
our soul; the words are infused habits; the lines are the lineaments of his
image in righteousness and holiness. Et audivi sicut auditur in cord, nec
erat unde dubitarem. Aug. Confess. 7. 10.
This is to hear to our happiness* when we hear in our heart, and there
remains no more doubting. But often times we know not what Christ speaks,
because we feel not what he feels.

If any think this beauty to be marred, Hypocrites and Atheists mar not
this beauty.
because therein possibly are Hypocrites and Atheists, etc. I answer, that as
there is a beauty of the universe which is not destroyed, but decored by some
naughty things: Aug. de lib. arb. 3. 13. 14. 15.
for ill vices argue a good nature wherein they are, and manifest good things to
be better by their comparison. Quibusdam perfectis, quihusdam imperfectis, tota
perfecta est. Aug. Genesis 2. cap. nlt. Ibid. 152. 154.
By some things perfect, and some things imperfect, the universe is perfect.
God sees them as blots in the Sanctuary, without prejudice of the godly, who
are his delight.

How Pastors are this beauty.
THe beauty of the sanctuary in respect of Pastors is, Pastors a part of this
beauty.
in their calling and work. Their calling is to stand betwixt God and man: They
are Gods mouth to the people in doctrine, and the peoples mouth to him in
prayer and praise. This is the only calling that teaches man true happiness,
that opens the heaven, and leads him to it. All the body of the heavens is
pure, yet the stars are most pure parts, receiving light from the sun, and
rendering it to the world: Mat. 5. 14.
So are Pastors among men, the light of the world, stars receiving light from
God, and rendering it to others: They are Job 33. 23.
as one of a thousand, to declare to man the righteousness of God; and Isay 52.
7.
their very feet are beautiful, because they bring good tidings to the world:
God sends them not of indigence, but indulgence Non est indigentiae, sed
indulgentiae. Bernard.
, as a more fit way to teach man, than either by himself, or by Angels: for
man can peaceably receive instruction of man, but the glory of God, or of
Angels, would overwhelme us. It is likewise man's trial, and the commendation
of his Faith; for if we were taught only by God immediately, and not of man,
there were no proof of our obedience to Gods ordinance. Pastors then are a
part of this beauty, when they stand between God, Psalm. 22. 3. and 65. 2. Isay
62. 6.
who hears the prayer, and inhabiteth the praise of Israel, and are
remembrancers to both.

The beauty in respect of their work, 2 In their work.
is as the mouth of God to the people, and their mouth to him: They are Gods
mouth in preaching, the beauty whereof stands in the matter, and form, the
diversity, and efficacy. 1 The sound matter of their doctrine.
The matter, that they preach 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Christ crucified, and happiness in him: That it be sound without error or
heresy; and divine, according to Scripture. Man's mind enquireth a reason of
all humane verities; but when it hears divine verity, it neither enquireth,
nor examineth, but at the first rests upon it with a divine faith. Therefore
the Ancients in their sermons were exceeding sparing of humane testimonies, and
contented them with Scripture, because they knew, to do otherwise was to
confound divine and humane faith in the hearer: As now the Papists, who have
equalled traditions with Scriptures, have brought their people, that they know
no difference between divine and humane truth, or betwixt divine and humane
faith, respecting both. When any thing is spoken beside Scripture, the mind of
the hearer will vage, Hieron.
but when God speaks, all doubting cease.

The second beauty of their doctrine is in the form, 2 In the spiritual form.
that holy things be delivered holily. As every science has the own proper
matter, so has it the own proper form; and Gods word which is holy has the
own 2 Timothy 1. 13
pattern of wholesome words, wherein it should be delivered. If therefore we
propone it as Orators in the school, or Lawyers, we spill the native beauty
of the word. And this is it which the Apostle calls, the 1 Cor. 2. 4.
demonstration of spirit and power: which is not so much to be expounded of an
exact form of reasoning, as with a manifesting* and kything of a spiritual
power in doctrine. Doctrine comes of four special grounds: 1 Natural
quickness: 2. Art and learning: 3. Diligence in industry, hearing, reading,
collecting: and by grace in the inward teaching and inspiration of the Spirit.
Now public doctrine is a kything how many of these, or what of them are in us.
For a judicious hearer can well discern from which of these, one, or more, or
all, it flows. And though we could rub the itching ear wonderfully, with the
first, or the second, or the third, or all three of them together, yet if the
fourth be lacking, it is not the Apostles demonstration of the spirit and
power, but of nature and industry. This comes of the concurrence of the
spirit, who is first effectual in them by sanctification, and then effectual
by them in a heavenly doctrine in the hearts of people. Psalm. 132. 19
Then his Priests are clothed with salvation, and his Saints shout for joy.

Thirdly, the beauty of Pastors doctrine is in the diversity of their gifts:
Gods house has people of all complexions, and his word has a sufficiency to
every man's condition. So wife Pastors propone it as 1. Cor. 3. 2.
milk for the weaker, and as strong food for the perfect: For they study not
to their own vain honor and praise, but to the profit of their hearers. Non
enim honoribus suis vanis consulunt, sed utilitati auditorum. Aug. Ver. rel. 28.
. God is not like Isaac Genesis 27. 38.
that has but one blessing, but out of his fullness, to some he gives the 1
Cor. 12. 28
gift of knowledge, to some the gift of Ephesians. 4. 02.
wisdom; he has given some to be Apostles, some Pastors, some Doctors, etc.
and all to the edifying of the Church: but these two are most eminent and
ordinary gifts, Knowledge and Wisdom. The first is doctrinall knowledge,
preserving the purity of doctrine in the Church* The other is pastoral
wisdom, dividing the bread of life aright, and applying it to the hearts of
people; which Saint Austine prefers to the other, as far as the Sun is
above the moon.

This comes not only by ordinary teaching of men, Affliction schooleth
Pastors.
and that measure of Instruction which the spirit gives to every one, but
likewise by exercise of the cross and experience. For God schooleth some
Pastors greatly in affliction, and that not only for their personal sins;
(which they have as great as any) but also to make them fitter instruments to
instruct and comfort others. For this cause Luther said, That a Theologue of
affliction was a Theologue of light: and though it be no part of our Church
trials of intrant Pastors, yet the consideration were profitable. 2 Cor. 1. 6.
For whether we be afflicted, it is for you, etc. For when, beside all humane
means without, or labor within, they are taught of God to know the vileness
of their own sin, the deceit of their own heart, the weight of Gods wrath
for both, the terrors of an accusing conscience in all three, the horrors of
spiritual desertion, the desolation and widowhood of the soul in such a case,
etc. And on the other part, the freeness of Gods mercy pardoning sin, the
sweetness of the peace of conscience under that assurance, and joys of the
holy Ghost, the sense of Gods favor shed abroad in our hearts Psalm. 63. 3.
better than life, and the complete happiness of the soul, under sense of the
presence of a reconciled God. With this furniture they are made the more
sufficient in those practick points (wherein the life of Christiaanitie
stands) to speak as men, who have learned by exercise and experience.

This experience brings three things: Pastors should communicate their
experience.
First, a sort of obligement to communicate it according to our calling.
Secondly, a lively speech. Thirdly, authority in both. Obligement, because we
get not experience for our own private use, but to make others better thereby.
Psalm. 34. 11.
Come children, I will teach you the fear of the Lord: Psalm. 66. 16.
And, Come, I will tell you what God has done to my soul. Let men Psalm. 107.
8.
confess before men the goodness of the Lord: And he glories in it, that he
Psalm. 40. 10.
hid not Gods goodness from the great congregation. Such communication of
experienced men is profitable, for thereby people come easily to the knowledge
of that which otherwise they could not learn without great exercise Ab expertis
pastoribus discit populus facile, quod ipsi periculose experiri volunt. Aug.
Epist. 5.
. And among other causes why God afflicts Pastors grievously, this is one,
both to furnish them with a body of experimental doctrine, and to bring the
people easily to it by their communication.

Next, 2 Their speech powerful.
it furnishes them with a powerful speech. Our language is the daughter of
our reason, and our style flows from our complexion, education, and gift: and
the gift is labored by experience. The spirit creates the species in us, the
species give the notion, the notion gives the style to express it self Aug. de
Magistro.
. Every science has the own matter and terms; so has Divinity. The spirit,
who gives the matter, gives also the style of language, and the Col. 4. 3.
door of utterance, comparing things 1 Cor. 2. 13.
spiritual with spiritual; and fitly to express divine matters in a divine
style, is his gift. If we conceive things only by the mind, we may speak
properly, but not affectuously, nor effectually: But if we take them in our
affection, our style will be emphatick. No purpose has need to be more
pertinently expressed than happiness; if it be coldly and warshly proponed, it
wakeneth not the affection: But if they speak who have found the sweetness of
it, their words are vive lineaments, both of their affection, and the thing
that has affected them; so that the common saying is true, As is the
knowledge, so is the expression. Qualis cognitio, talis expressio.


The Apostle condemns humane eloquence, and not divine; and there is none
comparable to Isay in eloquence; and the Scripture has the own pithie phrase,
without the flowers of humane oratorie. Men's words testify their gift, and the
measure of Gods working in them. Nazianzens emphatick words are sentences, and
therefore is called the Theologue. Augustine in many places has a pathetick
style; and Bernards style is full of affection and sense: and Calvin among the
late Divines, like another Nazianzen, expresses his deep conceptions in a
pithie style. This is not only the Isay 19. 18.
language of Canaan, but also the masculous Judge. 12. 6.
Schiboleth: their words have weight, and are as Eccles. 12. 11
goads piercing the hearts of the hearers, and fastening them to God in the
Sanctuary. This is the tongue of the learned Isay 50. 4.
(not of man, but of God) to speak a word in due season.

Thirdly, 3 Pastors authority.
experience makes them speak with authority. Mat. 7. 29.
Christ spoke with authority, and not as the Scribes. For the Scribes spoke
warshly, as men doing some other business; or as Boys in the school,
rehearsing other men's inventions. But a faithful Pastor speaks with
authority. And that comes of Conscience and Confidence: Conscience of their
calling from God; of some competent furniture for the work, and of his
presence with them in doing the work. Confidence of the warrant of their word
from Scripture, and from experience that they find the power of it in their
souls in private: Psalm. 116. 10
We believe, and therefore we speak. This makes them speak affectuously,
uttering their very heart in their speech. Their heart is in their words, which
go out with the weight of affection: They are moved themselves with that they
say, when they feel the power of it renewed in them in public, which they
felt in secret. But when a purpose (though both sound and divine) is rehearsed
either from reading, hearing, or superficial thinking, there is not such union
of the heart with the tongue, or the word with the affection; and so often times
as little union betwixt the word spoken, and the heart of the hearer. If any
man would move his hearer, he must be moved himself; otherwise, how can they
think that he believes the thing he speaks. Preachers are lights, and
fires: they must have light and heat, if they would warm and lighten others:
So then this experience of Gods working, is his speech to their heart; and when
he makes them express it powerfully, they speak to the hearts of the hearers.
When they speak to hearers that have experience, they are heard earnestly, but
others judge of them according to their own disposition Puto hoc ipsum vestra
vobis experientia intus respondet, quod ego foris loquor. Bernard. Can. 21. Da
sitientem and scit quid dico. Aug. tract. 26.
. This made the Ancients in their sermons to cry out, Give me one that
thirsts, and he knows what I say, etc. Want of experience makes
uncharitable carping.

Fourthly, 4 Divine assistance of Pastors.
the divine assistance is the beauty of their work: Exodus 4. 12.
I shall be with thy mouth. If we consider only how so frail men, in so
eminent a place, in the hearing possibly of some thousands, can deduce heavenly
matters without kything infirmity, speaking to God and man in such sort, as
the judicious hearer does confess. 1. Cor. 14. 25.
That God speaks in them. For God has chosen the most part of Preachers of
the meanest sort of people, who possibly in common purposes can speak but
little: But so soon as they stand up in the chair of truth, they are
overshadowed with a wonderful presence of God, that makes them speak with
authority. But his assisting them to work the work of the Gospel, is far
more, when they 1. Cor. 3.
are workers with him, to beget children to God, to turn souls Act. 26. 18.
to him, to cast down in the conscience of sin, and raise up in the
confidence of mercy: And though the fruit of the work depends not on them,
for God has put these treasures in earthen vessels, 2. Cor. 4. 7.
that the excellency of the power may be seen to be of God, and not of man:
Yet it is their glory and happiness, to be Gods instruments in bringing
others to happiness. They have his assistance first, because of their calling;
for God is never lacking to his own ordinance: Next, because of their gifts,
which are a greater token of his presence, than their simple calling: Thirdly,
and most by sanctification, when they sanctify their persons and gifts for the
work, and remove all things from them, that may either offend God or his
people; and this is it, that disposes them for the manifestation of spirit and
power. The Sacraments are a part of this beauty.


The ministration of Sacraments, is a part of this beauty: The first gives us
the life of God, the second nourishes that life in us: The first meets us
with provision at our entry in the valley of tears: The second strengthens
us for temptations in it. Baptism is our first Sacrament, 1. Of Baptism.
and scarcely are we borne naturally, when we are borne again spiritually:
Gods grace prevening our wit, our will, and our worth, and sealing us before
we be sensible. It is a prevening of satan's malice, to mark us with the
seal of the covenant, ere he can abuse us to any actual sin. Therein great
works are acted with little show; the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ, is there represented: Our Justification, death, burial, and
resurrection with him, are there acted. Therein the sons of Adam are made the
sons of God: The children of wrath are made heirs of the kingdom of heaven.
What grace from eternal ordained us, prevening grace as a midwife brings
out. By our first birth we increase the number of mankind: By our second birth
we increase the Church. The grace of election griped us in eternity; the
grace of Baptism gripeth us in time, by the beginnings, and the grace of
effectual calling, pulls us fully to God. As elect children receive the
seeds of grace in Baptism, so in time they break out fully in them. In our
election, though we were in God, yet we were neither in our selves, nor
sensible of that his choising grip: In our Baptism we are in our selves, but
not sensible of his working. In our calling both we are, and are sensible of
the work of his grace in us.

The Sacrament of the Lords supper is another part of this beauty: 2. Of the
Lords supper.
He gave us life in Baptism, and feeds it conveniently in the Supper, as a
life for eternity. He is both our life and the food of it: Neither can that
life live without him, neither can any thing beside him nourish it. It is a
precious food, and dearly prepared. He prepared it on the cross, when he
suffered the punishment for our sins, and gives it to us in that Sacrament,
as that Manna that tastes to every man, according to his desire. He is with
these mysteries, both sacramentally and spiritually, and with us spiritually,
to make us one with him; not by mixture of substances, but by union of spirits;
for our eating of him is our biding in him Manducatio nostra est mansio in eo.
Cypr. de Caena.
. To eat his flesh, and drink his blood, is not horror, but honor Non
horroris sed honoris est, Cypr, 503. August. Tract. 26.
. Because we eat him spiritually, we need not prepare our teeth, but our
mind, for it is not the food of the belly, but of the mind, and our believing
is our eating: He both feeds us with himself, and is fed by our profit and
increase in his grace, refreshing us with his spiritual joy, and rejoicing for
our spiritual profit Pascitur and pascit. Aug. tract. Johan. 26.
. Our repentance, our love, and amendment, are his meat. We are eaten, when we
are reproved: set over, when we are instructed: We are concocted, when we are
changed: We are digested, when we are transformed, and united, when we are
conformed to him Transformamur cum conformamur, non in majestatis gloria, sed
in voluntatis modestia. Bern. Cant. 62.
. Then we eat him, when we dissolve in the sense of his love: When his heart
sends out that love that pierced it before the soldiers spear: Then our
heart is drawn to his, and sucketh his heart in us, we thrust the tongue of
our desire into his wounds, and drink largely out of them: The mother
suffers not her dear babe more lovingly to lay the mouth to her pap, than he
suffers us to lay our heart to his: We see his heart more gladned for the
glory of God in our salvation, than grieved for the wounds, and therein the
love of God, who from eternal loved us in Christ to such a happiness. This is
a drunkenness without sin, Bernard.
an excess without fault. He thinks strange things, and sees wonderful
things, and speaks unheard things, who is full of this Paschall Lamb, and of
this beauty of the house of God.

Thus much for Pastors work, Prayer a glorious work.
as they are Gods mouth to his people. They are the peoples mouth to God in
prayer and praise, the two tables of Gods immediate worship, and a great part of
this beauty. In prayer all adore God as the fountain of happiness: Therein
we acknowledge our misery in sin and punishment, and send up our faithful
desire for pardon: Again, the good that we want, as holiness,
righteousness, and happiness it self we crave in confidence. There is no
part of Gods worship, wherein we be more sensible of the Trinity: The Father
as the fountain, the Son as Mediator, in whose hand we put up our prayers,
and the holy Spirit helping our infirmities, and making us pray with groans
that cannot be expressed. Romans 8. 26.
It is the sweetest exoneration of our heart, for when it is oppressed with
grief, or bound up in the own hardness of senselessness; if we get liberty
to power it out before the Lord, we find a wonderful release, and God
pouring in joy for the grief we powered out: Psalm. 94. 20.
In the multitude of the thoughts of my heart, thy comforts sustained me. It is
a work of Gods grace in us, for those whom he has chosen, to them he has
appointed all the blessings that follow election, and so among the rest, he
gives them the spirit of prayer, to crave the performance of his promise: Heb.
4. 16.
By his grace they draw near to that throne of grace, Heb. 10. ^0.
by the way that Christ has made new by his blood; and Christ who purchases
access, provideth also a success, Quanta fiducia ut tantae me audeam credere
Majestati, nisi mediatori Christo. Bern. 123. 3.
to receave grace for help in time of need. The more we grow in grace, the
more we are enlarged with confidence: Thereof it is, that we both love more
ardently, and pray more confidently for that we want.

Private prayers have greater liberty to feel and express these divine
operations, Private prayers are more free.
and is the diet that most nourishes us, but the prayers in the sanctuary
have their great fruit: Therein all the prayers of the Saints are joined with
us, Tertull. Apologetic.
to make an onset on God: This is an holy violence, wherein he delights. It
was not a reproof of Moses, Exodus 32. 10.
Suffer me to destroy this people; but a commendation of his zeal for Gods
glory in the salvation of Israel, and a professing; that he cannot resist the
earnest prayers of his own. He is liberty it self, Semper orans: tanquam
Chirographa tua ingeram. Dignaris enim quibus omnia debita dimittis, etiam
promissionibus tuis debtor fieri. Confess. 5. 9. The profit of prayers.
and yet willingly is bound by the bonds of his own making. For what is our
faith challenging him of his promise, but his own grace in us, telling he is
minded to yield, because he works in us that strength to wreastle with him,
like Jacob, till we prevail: His Fatherly love that preveneth us with that
disposition, meets us with the desire to answer.

It is most profitable even in this; that by our prayers we partake of all the
prayers of the godly, that have been made from the beginning: God has them
all in register, and they are a treasure of the Church; but above all, the
prayer Joh. 17.
of Christ, that gives life unto them: If therefore we put in our mite in this
treasure, we have a right to the whole. Some have questioned of what thing men
made most gain, as twenty, forty, fifty in the hundredth, but prayer
exceeds all, for we gain a million for one: Neither let us be discouraged if
sometimes we find our prayers but faint, few words, no order, weak desires,
and no satisfying of our selves therein. For as a mother will sooner hear her
sick babe in the cradle, and run to him if he begin to weep, than a stronger
boy that cries strongly; so God is more near and ready to help, when we can
scarcely cry, than when we find greater freedom. We please God best, when
we please our selves least, and we please him worst, when we please our
selves best: our cutted and broken desires are our voice Desiderium est vox.
Bern. 172. 2. 3. 147. 1. 2.
, and these desires are as acceptable to him, as our long prayers. Oftentimes
we come to prayer with a trembling and withered heart, but continuing therein,
sometimes grace is suddenly infused, the heart is filled with joy, and we find
the liberty we crave.

Praise is the other part of this beauty: Praise our joyful returning to God.
The floods return to the sea, so should we give thanks to God, our Maker in
creation, our Benefactour in providence, our Redeemer in Christ, our Rewarder
in crowning his own mercies in us. That affection is dead that powers not out
it self wholly in thanksgiving: Therein people with heart and voice render him
thanks: And with prayer it makes up the sweet respect betwixt God and man; for
in the first we pull down grace for grace, in the second we send up praise
for prayers. In the first the sense of our misery filling the heart with
grief, opens it with a desire of relief; In the second the sense of mercy,
filling the heart with joy, makes it with an unspeakable delight, to thrust it
self upon God. That heavenly thanksgiving, that closes Gods service, is some
token, that people have gotten what they sought, and that God sends them away
in peace with his blessing, pronounced upon them, as a seal thereof: It is the
peoples triumph over satan, who is more grieved with the Saints praising, than
with all the charms of his confederats.

Some have thought strange, How we should pray and praise continually.
why we are commanded by the Apostle both to pray and praise continually 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. 17.
: But that continual is not, as though we should be ever in the action of
prayer, or praise, which is impossible, but of our disposition and affection
rising therefrom: That as we have rooted in us the affections of grief and
joy, so when God sends grievous things, we should pray, and when he sends
joyful things, we should praise. They stand well with our mixed state here,
for there is no man who wants his own daily miseries, and so has need to
pray continually; and none wants his own daily blessings, and so has cause
to praise continually. Even our affliction is a secret cause of praise, for as
it tells Gods love, and foretells the happy fruit, so God leaves ever
better behind him, than he takes from us: For if he take away our health, or
fame, etc. yet if he leave remission of sins, peace of conscience, etc. they
are better than the blessings removed. Lastly, these two are mutual causes to
other, for when our heart is soaped with sorrow, and tears run down our face,
we have cause to rejoice in that disposition, as a special work of grace so
bruising our heart. And in our greatest joy we have cause of sorrow: For while
God is filling our heart with joy, yet at that time we will be grieved, because
that joy will bide but shortly, and that on our default. For we can no more
keep it, than a riven lantern can keep a candle in a storm, or a cold
hearth a sparkle of fire.

This is the set debt which the Church acknowledges, Praise a sweet de^t.
different from all other: Civil debts oppress men, but this relieveth them:
And the debt of sin makes us weary and laden, but this eases us. We owe a
heavy debt to Gods justice: It is first directing, and when we obey it not,
turns into a vindictive justice to punish us, and we lie under a double
burden of sin and punishment, whereof Christ bids us pray for pardon:
Forgive us our debts. But this is a debt to Gods mercy, because it ingageth us
by blessings, so with new grace it helps us to pay that contracted debt: In
other debts, the more we pay, the less is to pay; but in this, the more we
pay, the more we owe, because the thing that we pay is a new gift of God.
Thankfulness receives continually greater blessings, and the opened thankful
heart keeps Gods hand and treasure open Gratitude majora accipit. Bern. 93.
4. Item. 163. 4.
. We crave not to be freed of this debt, but to be drowned in it; so that we be
not able to pay, till we be in heaven eternally. This life is too short a time,
and our souls and bodies now, are ill tuned instruments to praise him: Bern.
128. 2.
Here we have but beginnings and preparations of praise, for grief the
basse-string of our harp sounds now highest, but in heaven God shall take
away that basse, and tune our harps like the harps of the Angels, Revel. 7. 19.
when he has wiped all tears from our eyes. Now Christ gives us a prayer for
the way, but then he shall put Psalm. 40. 3.
a new song in our mouth: New for matter, because Evangelicall, not Legal: New
for the form, because all joy without mixture of grief: Congregations are
most beautiful meetings.
And new for Indurance, because eternal.

Of this beauty of the sanctuary we may gather: First, that when the Saints
are met with God in the sanctuary, they are the most beautiful congregations
of mankind: Other meetings, as triumphs, coronations, etc. have their own
show and glory, but nothing to this: Their expectation is more than their
being, and their being evanisheth at the height. God is also in other meetings,
but not so as in the sanctuary. For there he is as Creator ruling all things
for this present life: But here he is as Redeemer, working true happiness in
his children, that we may justly say, That his presence elsewhere,
comparatively is a desertion to his presence in the sanctuary. His work in
the sanctuary is the kernel, and his providence in all things is the husk and
the shell. He has more delight to see a penitent sinner mourn for sin, than
to look upon all the glorious shows in the world. The good Angels frequent
these meetings with joy, as the pleasantest sight they see among men: And the
grieves they have Luke 15. 7.
to see the godly offend God, are mitigate, when they see these same saints in
the work of repentance, and reconciliation with God. And the evil angels who
compass the Job 1. 7.
earth continually, make a pause, when they come to these congregations, as at
their most doleful object: For then they see their labors destroyed in an
hour, when God opens the eyes which they have blinded, softneth the heart
which they have hardened, and delivers them whom they have kept long in the
bands of sin. But not idolatrous congregations.


But all meetings may not claim this, but such only as have Gods Word and
Worship in purity, according to which this beauty is to be exponed. Let
Papists therefore consider how far they are from this beauty. Gods word is
corrupted among them in such sort, that it cannot have that efficacy which
naturally accompanies it. They serve God in an unknown language, and know
neither what God says to them, nor they to him, so that they cut themselves
off from the sweet intercourse of grace betwixt God and the godly soul,
wherein reformed Churches abound. Their idolatry in praying to Saints as
helpers, and intercessors, and praising of them (as their guardians and
deliverers) defile the sanctuary.

Thirdly, The duty of Pastors.
Congregations that seem reformed may prejudge themselves of this beauty, if
they be not spiritually disposed; so that both Pastors and people may learn
their lesson, 1 In their preparation.
to keep their part of this beauty. Pastors, that they strive to be Pastors
whom God has sanctified: Hierarcha pius, quem Deus sanctificat. Cypr. p. 503.
Bernard. fol. 123. col. 3.
That ere they come to the public, they be with God upon the mountain to get
their commission of him, what to speak, and how to speak in his name. 2 King.
4. 31
Eliseus sent his servant with his rod to the Shunamites son, but there was
neither life, nor moving, wrought, till the Prophet came himself. We carry
the rod of the word, but there will be no quickening, except God himself be
with us. That they deal expressly with God, Who am I to carry thy message to
thy people? for Jer. 1. 6.
I am a child that cannot speak: Except thou go with me I cannot go. That
they bring down from the mountain the written tables, and a shining face, and
the testimonies of their conversing with God. That coming to the public Act.
7. 33.
they cast their shoes off their feet, 2 In the Church.
because the place where they stand is holy ground. That they come in much
fear and trembling, under conscience of the burden of the word of God. Zech.
9. 2.
That they have their secret ejaculations to God, when they fall upon hard
points. Tell me, Lord God, what I shall say to thy servants Aug. tract. 69
. That in all things they depend upon the divine assistance, for it is God
alone that enters in the heart Solus Deus illabitur in corda. Ber. Cant. 5.
: and he speaks better that dwells within, than he that cries without
Melius dicit qui intus habitat quam qui for as clamat. Aug. tract. 3.
. That they carry Aarons garment, bearing their people on the breast plate of
their heart in love, and on their shoulders, in the care of their salvation.
That they be taken up with the desire of Gods glory, and their peoples
happiness, so that they care not what come of themselves, Exodus 28. 12
if they obtain those ends.

That they count their peoples tears their glory, 3 After their labors.
and seek more their mourning, than their applause Amo vocem illius Pastoris,
qui non sibi plausum, sed mihi planctum, etc. Bernard.
; and whatever blessing follows their labors in working grace in the people,
that they take no part of it to themselves, but ascribe it wholly to God. So
the 1 Cor. 15. 10
Apostle, I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of
God which is with me. John the Baptist rejoiced in Christ, and not in himself:
He made difference betwixt him and man-man, and betwixt his master, who was
Man-God: Aug. tract. 14.
He knew that who will rejoice in himself shall be grieved: and therefore he
took no more to himself, lest he should lose that that he received. So ought
Preachers to do lest they glory in the Lords gifts; and not in the Lord.
Bernard. Cant. 14.
But if they neglect the rule, and propone novelties beside, or contrary to
Scripture, taking liberty to preach in public their private new opinions: if
they preach themselves to show their quickness, their reading, their memory,
and that only for a popular applause; they are not beauty, but blots of the
sanctuary, and abominations before God. And though they be free of these
things, they may fall in a worse, if seeing their labors fruitful in people,
they take the glory of it to themselves in any part: then they steal the
glory of God, procure his desertion to their future labors, and prejudge
themselves of their own happiness. Besides, passionate Pastors are worse in
the sanctuary than Hophni and Phinehas, 1 Samuel 2. 29.
they have no end but revenge, no rule, but spleen, and neither regard GOD, nor
reverence man: There cannot be a greater blot in the sanctuary; thereby God
is angered, people are offended, the sacrifice of the Lord is made to stink.

Next, The duty of people.
the peoples duty is, to keep their part of this beauty: 1 In preparation.
That they count it Gods great mercy who speaks to them by Pastors, Bernard.
not for the help of any Creature (because he is omnipotent) but for
accommodation to their weakness: Cant. 5.
And it is their great good, that without their own labor they are brought to
happiness by the labor of Pastors. In their preparation, to be purified
according to the purifications of the Sanctuary Exodus 16. 22.
. The measures of the sanctuary were the double of the common measure,
therefore the disposition for private worship must be doubled for the Church,
and the week days measure must be doubled for the Sabbath. Our Sabbath has
the Manna doubled, and is not like the Jews Sabbath in the wilderness, theirs
was a type that in heaven we should need no preaching nor prayer, 2 In the
Church.
but ours is of perfect glory in heaven. People then ought to be affected
according to the parts of Gods worship: In prayer, that the mind in faith and
zeal, follow the thing that is spoken: In praise, to be sensible of the Psalm
they sing; for praying or praising with a wandering heart is a mocking of God in
his face: In doctrine, that they have their cjaculations for the work of the
spirit, and their earnest intention for themselves and the Pastors Intentio
auditoris, est oration pro ipsis and Pastore. Bern. fol. 104.
: That they mix Heb. 4. 2.
faith with their hearing, and be as content to be rebuked of their sin, as
to be comforted in their cross; if they suffer not themselves first to Hos. 6.
5.
be hewn and wounded with the word of reproof, God will not pour in the
balm of Gilead: And above all, let them be earnest with God, that his spirit
may teach them inwardly: For many hear, but all are not persuaded, save those
only to whom God speaks inwardly Aug. in 1. ep. Johan. tract. 4.
: Lastly, that they take heed how they end that Treaty with God; 3 In the end.
for it were a blockish thing for a man who is in danger of his life, or state,
if his party call him to a frindly Treaty, and he be so senseless that he
knew neither if he met with his party, or know not how they began, proceeded,
and closed their Treaty: So are the most part of us, we come to the
Sanctuary, the Lords trysting place, and when we come home, if any would ask
us, Did you meet with God in his house? Was your treaty in the terms of
peace? And was it closed with this, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins Mar.
2. 7.
are forgiven thee? We would answer with the Disciples Acts 19. 2.
at Ephesus, We know not if there be such things or no.

Lastly, Nations or Cities who have this beauty of the sanctuary, Scotlands
duty in keeping this beauty.
should keep it carefully, for it is their glory. And this is our
advertisement, that we keep this precious thing, that God 2 Timothy 1. 14
has committed to us: For we may affirm, that God has blessed us with a
body of as sound and wholesome divinity, as any age or nation since the
Apostles time. No Church is absolutely perfect, yet in this point, we may
contest with the best. For in former times Satan busied the Church with
heresies, as the Ebionites, Marcionits, Sabellians, Arians, Pelagians, etc. And
when these were damned, Antichrist amassed them all in one under other terms,
and making thereof the body of his Apostasy, obtruded them to the Church, under
the colors of his authority and infallibility. And when God led his Church
by his Worthies, the Reformers, he blessed this Nation with a body of most
refined Doctrine. If we keep this in purity, it shall be our happiness: But
if liberty of private opinions, turn in a liberty of public venting these
opinions, and to turn us to Rome again, then altar against altar will deface
this beauty of the sanctuary. Hold fast that thou have till I come, that no
man take thy crown Apoc. 3. 11.
from thee. Politics (like Gallio) care not for these things, Acts 18. 17.
but the safety of the commonwealth consists in happiness Salus Reipub. in
summo bono. Aug. Ep. 3
, and that same that makes a particular man happy, makes a City happy also.
The last day will prove this, when the sheep on Christ's Matthew. 25. 32
right hand shall be gathered out of Nations and Cities, who had the beauty of
the sanctuary in the doctrine of happiness in the Gospel: But all other shall
be ranked with the goats.

SECTION VIII.
Of our partaking and enjoying of happiness.
That I may see.
We have heard of the beauty of the Lord in the Sanctuary, Seeing for all
senses.
wherein happiness is offered to us: follows the application, whereby we
apply it to our selves, set down in this word ( to see) which has a general
and special consideration. Aug. Epist. 3.
In the general it signifies with the Hebrews all sensing, Item Epist. 12.
because it is the most excellent sense. Basil. p. 101. in fine.
So it is put for hearing: Rev. 1. 22.
I turned to see the voice, that is, to hear the voice. God has boared
through our bodies with five senses, that our souls might have intercourse
with the qualities of his creatures, in their color, juice, smell, etc. And
spiritually for our fuller joy, offers himself to be the object of our five
spiritual senses. So we see him in his works, we hear him in his word Psalm.
34. 8.
, we taste him in his goodness: We smell the fragrancie of the grace of the
Gospel: We touch him, to draw virtue Luke 8. 44.
out of him with the diseased woman, and with Joh. 20. 28.
Thomas to call him our Lord, and our God. Therefore hearing is not here
excluded, but included as the fittest sense for spiritual things Romans 10. 17.
, for faith comes by hearing, and it is a preparation to the spiritual sight
Psalm. 45. 10.
: Hearken Daugter, and behold: Psalm. 48. 8.
As we have heard, so have we seen. It supplieth the weakness of our sight in
Gods works. In them we see his power, his wisdom, etc. But in the Word, we
hear of Christ his coming in the flesh, our redemption and reconciliation in
him: It is also a more common way to learn, for mo can hear than can read,
and the most fit way to receive heavenly things, which are revealed in the
audible word. It is also surest, to keep us from idolatry, for though
spiritual things cannot be represented; yet some have attempted to do so in
images, but when they are explaned by words, there is no such danger Deuteronomy. 4.
12.
: We only hear the voice, but see nothing. Lastly, we were Genesis 3.
lost by Eva's hearing of the Serpent, therefore God will wound Satan with his
own rod, and save us by that sense whereby we were lost; we are saved by faith
Ephesians. 2. 8.
, and faith comes by hearing Romans 10. 17.
.

The special consideration goes in seeing and fruition. How we see God here.
Aug. epist. 6. and epist. 112.
This seeing is not bodily, but spiritual: For as the object is, so must the
sense be. There have been great disputes concerning the seeing of God with our
eyes: but let us stand to Scripture, That 1 Timothy 6. 16.
God dwells in the light inaccessible, whom none has seen nor can see in
their mortality 1 Cor. 13. 12
, yet afterward, we shall see him face to face, and shall know him as we are
known. But for this life, though none have seen him, yet his only begotten
Son Joh. 1. 18.
who came out of his bosom has revealed him to us, and that both in himself
who is his eternal and substantial word Heb. 1. 2.
, and the engraven form of his petson; and likewise by the word that he gave
to his Apostles. In like manner our happiness in the own fullness, the eye
has not seen 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.
, nor has the ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to think
upon; yet God by his Spirit reveals to his own in the first fruits, and
earnest. God has created the new man in his own, and furnished him with
spiritual senses: His sight is the mind enlightened with heavenly light, when
God, who commanded light to shine 2 Cor. 4. 6.
out of darkness, shines in our soul by the Gospel of grace: When he has
created this light in us, then in his light we see light Psalm. 36. 9.
. This illumination of the mind turns in faith, when the things we simply
see by light, we assent unto and apply them to us as our own, and so go
forward in the application of happiness to our selves.

No light discovers the Sun, Faith sees God.
but the light that comes from it, and no light discovers God, but the
light that comes from him, and that so clearly, that it pulls the heart to
him, and true happiness in him. Our happiness is in union with God, and the
maine bands thereof are the spirit on his part, and faith on our part. Faith
stands not at sight, but goes on to apprehension: our assent tyeth us to him
by the mediation of his truth, but our apprehension gripeth himself
immediately, as one who is truth it self, and in whom all things are good truly
and infinitely, so that our trust in God may be called a thrusting of our
souls on him. The diseased woman Mar. 5. 27.
was not content to look upon Christ, but would likewise have virtue out of him
by touching. What is this, said one which shines within me, and smites my
heart without hurt; so that I both tremble and burn? I tremble, in so far I
am unlike him; I burn, in so far I am like unto him Percutit cor sine
laesione. Bernard.
: This sight terrifieth not, but comfort Visio haec non terret, sed mulcet.
Bernard. Cant. 23.
. It is the sight of a reconciled God by a reconciled man, the matter of his
presence here, and of our heaven on earth. There is no light clearer than this,
when truth shines in the mind, and the mind in truth sees God and it self
Quando veritas splendet in mente, and men's in veritate, and Deum and se vider.
Bern. 186. 3.
.

Herein appears the Prophets happiness, Happiness must be applied.
that seeking out happiness, and knowing what it is, and where it is to be
found, he rests not there, till he apply it to himself. Happiness may ever
be happiness, and we remain miserable, if we have no part in it. God is
happiness in himself without us, and we are misery in our selves without
him: therefore we must be in him, that we may be happy. And this is by
application, when as we know he is chief good, so we are persuaded that he
is our chief good and happiness. This is the proper work of faith in her
double persuasion. The one direct, and outgoing to the truth and things
themselves: The other reflecting and turning home to us by the work of our
conscience, in the assurance that we believe, and that these things are ours
by faith.

Papists are here blame-worthie, who cut the throat of the sweetest Christian
consolation: Papists apply not happiness.
for what avails it to hear that God is good, that happiness is in him, if
we dare not, and may not apply it to our selves? And this is the end of Gods
dispensation of the Gospel; for he reveals to us that we may know, and the
first end of knowledge is application: It is also the end of the efficacy of
the Spirit, joined with the word, not to open our minds only to know, but also
to apply to us. And shall we think that the blessings of the Gospel are set
before us only to look to without application? It is the food of our soul,
and must be eaten: The clothes of our soul, and must be put on: The physic
of our soul, and must be applied: So is Christ to us. The Apostle is not
content to say, that 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Christ came in the world to save sinners, but subjoyneth of whom I am the
chief: And more clearly, Gal. 2. 20.
Henceforth I live not, but Christ lives in me, and the life that I live, I
live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me, and gave himself for me.
Ancient Creeds content themselves more to express things to be believed,
(because of the debates of heretics in the matter of doctrine) than to declare
the way how to believe, and yet this particular application may be found in
them: for as we believe the spiritual patrimony of the Church in the
remission of sins, the glorious resurrection of the body, and life eternal,
is it only to know that there is such a treasure in the Church without
application to our selves? Or is an heir so simple, as to content himself to
know, that his father has an heritage, and is not at all persuaded that it
pertains to him?

Faith acts a personal act, Faith is for application.
and as the root of it is personal in the habit, so the fruit of it must be
personal in the application of consolation. Gods work is particular to his
own, he chooses them by name, he calls them by name, as he called, Luke 19.
5.
Come down Zacheus: He casts them down by the law personally; why should not
the application of the grace of the Gospel be personal also? The nature and
work of conscience proves the same; for it is a withknowledge in our breast,
and all the actions of it are particular, ending in our person: And it
contenteth not it self generally to say, We are sinners, but choppeth us in a
particular branch of a particular Law; and that in a particular kind of sin,
in a particular degree. So it makes us as particularly to apply the promise of
the Gospel under conscience of repentance, as it applies wrath under
conscience of sin. And Christ commends the wiseman, not for finding Mat.
13. 44.
of the pearl, but for buying of it; nor for knowing of the field where the
treasure was, but for the possession of the treasure. Where this application is
not, there is nothing but doubting concerning the promise: Probably they hold
them as general in the conscience of sin, as they are in the promises of
grace; and content themselves slenderly to think they are sinners, without any
feeling of particular sins. Thus they delight to shuff^e themselves up in
general, both in misery and happiness, and not to come to particular
application of either: Gods children call him Abba Father, for the divine
nature in them, the sense of their filiation, Romans 8. 15.
and the testimony of the Spirit of adoption makes them to do so, but the
want of these things, make bastards and slaves to stand aloof from him, and
not to think or speak warmely of him, whom they know not to be their Father.

None has this sight in the sanctuary but the spiritual man: For he only
has the heavenly light infused in him, which is as necessary, as the external
light in the eye for bodily things. For the mind, and not the eye, is created
to behold that greatest beauty of God: And they live the better and more
highly, the more perfectly they behold him Ad contemplandam summam
pulchritudinem men's non oculus factus est. Aug. ver. Rel, 33, Aug. de Ord. 8.
. The natural man percieveth it not, but thinks it a fantasy that is
spoken of it: They see not God but men, and the actions they see, are both base
and a burden to them: The Philosophers called Paul a Act. 17. 18.
Babbler, because his doctrine was not in a Philosophic form; and Festus said,
that much learning made him mad Act. 26. 24.
; so the natural 1. Cor. 2. 14.
man conceives not the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned:
None conceives these things, but he that is wise spiritually; for the world
cannot receive Joh. 14. 17. Ibid. 2. 15.
the Spirit, because it sees him not Quis haec capit, nisi qui spiritualiter
sapit? Aug. Tract. 69*
. But the spiritual man discerns all, he sees the glory of God in his
sanctuary, discerns the spiritualitie of doctrine, feels the power of the
spirit, Luke 7. 35.
and so wisdom contemned of fools is justified of her own children. He who
feels not the sweet smell of the spouse, and runs not, is either dead or
rotten Aut mortum est aut putridus. Bernard.
.

Let us then strive to see God. Strive to see God.
This sight shall be our happiness in heaven, and the godly are desirous of it
in this life, for they will see nothing more desirable, and can see nothing
more dilectable Nihil videre volunt desiderabilius nil possunt dilectabilius.
Bernard. 146. col. 4. Bern. 147. 1.
: Moses desired to see his glory, but was refused, and saw only his way. Esaias
saw him symbolically, or significatively: And though he datted the Patriarchs
by the familiarity of his divine presence, yet they saw not himself, but some
thing of him De ipso videmus, sed non ipsum. Bern. Ib.
. For these Fathers saw him not as he was: And that because to see him as he
is, is to be as he is; Videre sicut est, est esse sicut est. Bernard. ubi supra.
but we have that much sight of him in Christ as to save us, for he Joh. 14. 9.
that sees me, sees the Father also. To have this sight we must be pure
Matthew. 5. 3.
in heart, blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: Impuris se
non ostendit veritas. Bern. 169. 1.
For God shows not himself to the unclean: We get this purity by
renovation, and being defiled by sin, we purge our hearts from every evil
Heb. 10. 22.
conscience by repentance: thereby we both may, and dare draw near to the
throne Heb. 4. 16.
of grace in Christ, and look on God, without whom he is a Heb. 12. 29.
consuming fire. The wicked never have this sight, they shall see him in the
Aug. Epist. 112.
sign of his power, but never in his glorious form: Neither have all the
godly it alike: Neither any one godly man has it alike at all times.

Of fruition of God.
THe second thing is Fruition; Of fruition.
the fruit of the former sight, 1. Of the love of God.
and the real possession of the chief good, and so our happiness in it: This
no tongue can teach but grace Hanc non docet lingua, sed gratia. Bern. 166.
col. 4. Ibid. 180. 7.
, and they who have it, cannot satisfy themselves in explication of it, for it
is better felt than described: Yet we may call it with some a possessing of
God, or to have him ready at hand Habere Deum est Deo frui, vel Deum praesto
habere. Aug. Tom. 1. fol. 115.
. But we shall consider in it two affections especially, Love and joy: The
first is our inloving, the other our enjoying of him, and they go together, and
carry our souls with them on a good present and possessed. Love uniteth us to
God, and turns all our affections to it Caeteros in se traducit affectus.
Bern. 185. col. 1.
, and with it to him: It is both the contract and embracements of Christ, it is
our worthiness, Praemium and meritum. Ibid,
and our reward: Our merit, because he loves that his own gift in us, and our
reward, because so he follows his former mercies in us. It is most pleasant
to our selves, because it makes the soul to rest sweetly on a present and
eternal good: Even the desire of a good to come, has the anxietie of delay,
but love has it present. It lays not a part of the heart on God, but all;
for that is his due, Mat. 22. 37.
Love the Lord with all thy heart: neither will the heart rightly affected with
him divide it self, but seeing and feeling his goodness as he draws, so it
yields wholly to him, and desires to be out of it self, that it may be in
him. Love is that only motion or affection, whereby we dare give God a meeting:
If he be angry, we dare not be angry at him, but tremble and repent: If he
rebuke, we dare not rebuke him, but deprecat his wrath: If he judge us, we
dare not judge him, but justify him in his judgments. If he command, we dare
not command him, but in all humility obey him. But it is contrary in love, for
when God loves us, Bernard.
he seeks that meeting to be loved again, for he loves us, that we may love
him.

The second part of this fruition is joy, 2. Of joy in God.
when the soul overjoyed with God rejoices in him. It flows from love; for
when God has filled our heart with the infusion of his love, and made it to
power it self on him, by loving him with all our heart; Of the sense of these
two loves, follows a new infusion of joy, whereby it rejoices, that it is
beloved of God, and bestows it self in loving him. Love is the work of our
soul, in our dearest chief good about happiness, and joy is the fruit of
that work, and the rest of our soul resting sweetly in the possession of him
whom it loves: and they are both mutual causes and equal. Mutual, because
the more we love God, the more we rejoice in him; and the more we rejoice in
him, the more we love him, as the matter of our joy: And they are equal,
because in that same measure we rejoice in him, in that same we love him. This
is a joy 1. Pet. 1. 8.
unspeakeable and glorious: Unspeakable, even of those that have it, for if
they press to express it, their words are less than their thoughts, and
their thoughts less than the sense of it, and their sense less than it self:
And therefore their usual expression is in secret with God, to power out their
heart in that joy, which they cannot express to man. When God infuseth it, the
heart cannot comprehend it fully, but is like a small vessel, filled and
overturned with a greater measure of liquor than it can contain; but it
turns that overrunning on God, and finds that the best containing both of
it, and that joy, is to be contained of God. It is also a glorious joy, or
glorified, because it is the first fruits and earnest of the joys of heaven,
and all worldly joys are as short of it, as the smoke of flax to a great fire.

Hereby are cleared both the spiritual ^atietie and excess. Spiritual
satietie.
Spiritual satietie is that heavenly drunkenness, or inebriation of grace,
wherewith God fills his own. Psalm. 36. 8.
They shall be satiat (or made drunk) with the fatness of thy house. This is
not of wine, as the Jews blamed the Apostles Ebrii Sp. Sancto, non musto.
Bern. Cant. 49.
, neither of malice that Satan powers into the heart, neither of worldly
cares, which come of the wild grapes of humane condition, but it is of
drunkenness of the wine of grace, which flows from the fullness of Christ,
and is put Luke 5. 38.
in new vessels. This S. Peter granted for himself and the rest, we are not
drunk with wine as ye think Act. 2. 15.
, but with a better liquor, the graces of the Spirit, that came down
abundantly on them: And Ephesians. 5. 18.
be not drunken with wine wherein is excess, but be fulfilled with the Spirit.
This is that satietie, that comes of the fat things of the horse of God, and
of the rivers of his pleasures or Paradise: what are these fat things, but the
Luke 15. 27.
fatted calfe Jesus Christ, who is daily Gal. 3. 1.
crucified in the sanctuary in the Gospel, and that for Raritie, Excellence,
and Sweetness? Raritie, because none but he: Excellency, because none like
him: And Sweetness, because he fully delights the soul, which by the faith
of his incarnation and passion, etc. applies him to it self: Here is Samsons
riddle: Judge. 14. 14.
Out of the labourer came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness. Who
labored more than he, who Isay 63. 3.
trod the winepresse of the Lord alone? And who stronger Revel. 5. 5.
than the Lion of the tribe of Judah? And what sweeter than that honycombe
sticking in his bowels, that is the fruit of his obedience for us, springing of
his incomparable love? This made the Greek Church to call it a monster of love
(...) Portentum amoris.
The wicked go by, and search not his bowels for this honey, but the godly take
it out and eat it, yea the wicked can lick the dew off the rock, but cannot
suck the honey out of it Aquam lambunt de Petra, sed non sugunt mel ex Petra.
Cyprian.
; but the godly by the mounds of the rock, thrust their believing and loving
hearts into his heart, and are satiat with that love of the Father, the Son,
and the Spirit, which they find there. This is to be filled with Psalm. 63. 5.
marrow and fatness, who receive largely of that unction, to make us Psalm. 92.
14.
fat and flourishing in the body of Christ.

Spiritual Excess is, Spiritual excess.
when God so communicates himself to the soul, that it exceeds the wonted
disposition, and is carried out of it self to him: The excellency of the
object, and singular sort of working, makes this unaccustomed sweetness; for
ordinarily we can comprehend our disposition, but when he transcendeth our
ordinary diet, we must gather our wits afterward to consider the matter: In
our wonted diet the spirit can bide in it self, though with reference to God,
and by the way can move our body in natural and civil actions: But when this
excess comes, the spirit is pulled out of it self, and the body feebled: So
the Apostle knew not whether in the body, 2. Cor. 12. 2.
or out of the body, because of the excellency of revelation; Dan. 10. 8.
so Daniels body was feebled, because of the separation of the spirit taken up
only with heavenly things: For the soul in any degree of that excess, does
not furnish power to the body, but turns it in half a carcass. It is good
that the body find sometimes this feebling by the vigorous work of the
spirit, because the vigor of the body, often feebleth the spirit. Though they
both make up one person, yet they have but a discording concord, and do not ay
agree upon a common joy and grief. By this feebling, the body resents its own
mortality, and finds that verified, That no Exodus 33. 20.
mortal man can see God and live; and therefore is moved to long for 2. Cor.
5. 4.
immortality, that it may joyfully brook the fullness of that joy, whose
first fruits do so affect us.

But this is not often to be found, no not in the best: Fruition is here but in
tastes.
It is but as a sunne-blink in the mids of storms, Sed heu hora rara! and mora
parva! Bern. Cant. ult.
that comes rarely, and bideth shortly. God offers it but rarely as a
delicate, lest we should think, that it came of our own deserving or working;
or lest the frequence of it should take away the sweetness or account of it.
And he gives it for two special ends: The one, to refresh us after great
afflictions or desertions, when we have been striving with hardness and
witherednesse of heart: But so soon as his spirit rusheth on us, with that
holy and heavenly satietie, like the woman delivered of a son, we forget our
former sorrows, because we have found him whom our soul loves. The other is,
to strengthen us for some great temptation, like 1. King. 19. 2.
Eliahs double supper: But come what tentation may, better to find that
furnishing, than to want it.

It has also a further reach than for the present time, But the fruits of it
are many.
for it leads us back to eternity, and makes us feel our selves in Gods
electing love, whose infallible fruit we find in so full infusion of his
love. Next, it leads us foreward to glorification, and these joys assure us,
that as now we have these first fruits, Romans 8. 23.
so eternally we shall rejoice with God, for it is not as the small and warsh
taste of the temporary Christian, as a drop; but the full measure of Gods
children, as the outbreaking of a fountain. It reaches also to a higher place
than the sanctuary, for under this satietie we are in heaven with God: For as
he boweth down and kisseth us with the kisses of inspiration, Cant. 1. Bernard.
infusion, and delight, so we ascend to him in heaven, and the soul is more
there busied, than the body in the sanctuary. This is also to assure us of
life eternal, for God never brings any to heaven, but sometimes in this life
he gives them a taste of it by some transfiguration Luke 9. 28.
on the mountain: He has promised it, and Satan would make us think his
promise but wind, therefore he gives us such real beginnings, to assure us
of the truth, and to persuade us of the fullness of it in heaven. For it is not
a divided, but a continuat thing, like a chain that cannot be broken, so that
he which gets such beginnings, shall also get the perfection. Lastly, it is
to destroy the love of the world, for the world will never be great in his
eyes, who has seen God; but the loathing of the world, and the love of God
will grow in his soul by equal degrees.

The soul thus filled with love and joy, To be full of God.
is full of God, and under that disposition cannot be wrong charged to any
doing or suffering for him: For the sense of Christ's love makes his yoke easy
Mat. 11. 29.
, and his burden light. That love 2. Cor. 5. 14.
constrained the Apostle to diligence, and the nativenes of it seeks out
ways to honor God. The Martyrs were thereby moved to misregard their
torments: For as a drunken man neither hears nor sees what is done beside
him, so when their wives and children wept on them, that they would pity
themselves; they neither heard that diversion, neither the pain of the
torments. And the Apostle met tears, with Act. 21. 13.
What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? I am not only content to be bound
at Jerusalem, but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus. On this excess
Moses Exodus 32. 32.
desired to be cut off, and the Apostle Romans 9. 2.
to be accursed for his brethren. The love of God made them forget themselves
with an holy oblivion: But it was their best remembering of themselves; to hold
them fast in straitest union with God.

Hereof four things arise: 1. The agreement of sight and fruition. Sight and
fruition go together.
2. The compleatnesse of Gods beauty in the sanctuary. 3. The difference of
religions; 4. And of worshippers in the true religion. 1. Sight and fruition
go well together, as the double spirit of Eliseus, for the illumination of the
mind; and the purging of the affections complete the man: for the mind
knows, and the affections will. Sight or light without fruition is
fruitless; and fruition or affection without light is rash: Light first
wakeneth, and then directs the affection, to affect things in that order* and
measure as it directs: And the affection follows to justify the truth of
that light. Sight apprehends God as distant, but fruition injoyeth him
within, and our selves in that union: the mind is more easily enlightened, than
the affection bowed. Joh. 14. 1.
The Disciples knew Christ was to depart from them, yet they were sorry for it,
their will crossing their mind.

But fruition is better than sight, Fruition better than sight.
as Genesis 48. 19.
Ephraim the younger brother was more fruitful and mighty than Manasseh. When
God craveth the best of man, he bids him love him with all his heart: And
the image of God Ephesians. 4. 24.
consists most in righteousness and holiness, which are most in the heart:
Knowledge makes a sort of mental union, Naked knowledge is fruitless.
and yet the heart may hate that same thing it is so united to; but affection
makes a hearty and strong union, which cannot be broken. Knowledge is a great
gift of God, but if men stand at it as their happiness, and advance not to
fruition, they may be as hard in heart, and profane in life, as the ignorant.
Satan has his name Luke 8. 27.
Demon from knowledge, because being a complete spirit, he has both great
knowledge by creation, and daily augmented by experience: but his affection is
contrary to his knowledge, for he neither loves the good, nor hates the
evil, he knows. We partake more of God by fruition, than by sight. To
dispute of happiness with a frosen and cold heart, is great misery. Goodness
is a special attribute of God, expressing that fountain; and he reveals it,
to make us good and happy in his goodness: and that is more in the
conformity of our will and affections to him, than of knowledge alone. If it
be true, that we know no more of God, than we affect him, then fruition is
better than knowledge, which it both limiteth and exceeds. Bern. 97. col. 4.
Instruction makes men learned, but affection makes them wise. It is one
thing to know, and another to possess: It is not the knowledge of riches, but
the possession that makes men rich: It is one thing to see God, and another to
fear and love him. They may justly glory of their power in being the sons
Joh. 1. 12.
of God, in whom this sonly love burns, and this affection lives.

Secondly, the complete beauty of the sanctuary is Gods presence, Gods
presence the beauty of the Sanctuary.
which makes up all the parts of it. It is known in his working, wherein we
consider four things: 1 The efficacy of it.
First, the efficacy: Secondly, the secrecy: Thirdly, the sensiblenesse:
Fourthly, the discerning. His working in the Saints, is the work of his
omnipotency, whereby he raised Ephesians. 1. 19.
Christ from the dead; for it is called a 2 Cor. 5. 17.
new Creation, a Tit. 3. 5.
regeneration, and the Hebrews call comfort the Lam. 1. 16.
returning of the soul, as though grief had thrust it out of the body, but
God by comfort brought it back again, as a sort of resurrection. And this is
the power that goes out with the word to make it conquering. Esaias 55. 11.
for it returns not in vain, but works the work wherefore it is sent.

Secondly, 2 The secrecy of it.
the secrecy of his work, which is hid oft-times to those who have it: The
spirit Joh. 3. 8.
blows where it lists: yea, often times we apprehend the contrary; for his
diet with the godly is to lead them to heaven by the gates of hell. For many a
time he plungeth us in fearful terrors, but his work ends in joyful
comforts. So David is mourning in the beginning of many Psalms, the 6th. 32.
51. etc. but in the end, he is rejoicing, and of a poor supplicant for
himself, is turned an Intercessour for the Church. The child in the belly
feels not his growing, yet he grows, and the hand of the horologue is not
seen in the moving, yet when it comes to an hour, it is manifest that it
has moved. So the work of grace has a growing in us though hid, and is
manifest in some great degree of joy, or great grief.

Thirdly, 3 The sensiblenesse of it.
the sensiblenesse of it, for we are both the object of his work, and
reasonable and conscionable workers with him: Sometimes we feel the work, but
know not the Author, as the disciples going to Luc. 24. 32.
Emaus felt their hearts burning: but knew not it came of Christ. Sometimes we
know the author, Luc. 1. 41.
as Elizabeth knew the presence of Christ to be the cause of her joy at the
blessed Virgins salutation. And the forerunner springing in her belly,
testified that he was spiritually sensible of his masters presence, before he
had the use of any bodily sense: So the new man in us, when he is not oppressed
with senselessness, leapeth for joy at the voice of Christ.

Fourthly, the discerning of it goes in three: First, 4 The discerning of it.
for original: That it is a divine power; though it specify it self in our
disposition which is humane, yet it self is merely divine: Secondly, in the
force, for it works infallibly in the Elect. Omnipotency admits no
resistance, and man's will has no loss, when the Creator of it makes it free
from sin: no, it is both the glory and liberty of our will, that God takes
it in his hand, and boweth it what way he pleases. And Gods best children
endeavor to this as a perfection, who have their wills altogether conformed to
the will of God; and that they can quite their own will, when they see his
will revealed in his providence: so far are they from thinking their wills to
be harmed, when they are determined of God. They strive to be like Gods who
stand out in the question of free will against God, and are blasphemous while
they affirm, That God works no more mightily in the elect, than Satan does
in the reprobate. But when we find his power to be such, that neither nature
can imitate nor resist, then we acknowledge it is the finger of God in us.
Thirdly, the fruits are a change and calmenes: The change is so sensible, that
it argues a divine power. For it goes either from contrary to contrary, as
from joy to grief, or from grief to joy; or if it abide in either of them it
comes in a greater degree than was immediately before. Yea, all in us feels
that working; the old man to his wounding, and the new man to his strengthening.
Calmness of spirit is the other fruit, whereby with some sweet astonishment,
we rest in his bosom whom our soul loves: Then we break out with this, or
the like ejaculation, Psa. 106. 4, 5.
Who am I that thou remembrest me with the favor of thy people, and visitest
me with thy salvation! that thou make me see the felicity of thy chosen, and
rejoice with the joy of thy people, and glory with thine inheritance! Who am I
that thou discernest me, making me both see and enjoy thee in the sanctuary,
and so to be a part of the beauty of it! Who can contain himself for joy,
when he finds that divine majesty incline himself to his weakness, and
co^^ down to so familiar and sweetest society Non me capio prae laetitia, quod
illa majestas tam familiari, dulcique consortio. Ber-Can. 52.
?

Hereof comes the Christian true contentment. Of true contentment.
The world has almost talked as much of contentment (the marrow of happiness)
as of happiness it self, on these same grounds, in these same errors, and
with the like fruit. For they sought it never in God, but in his gifts: They
fastened not their souls upon the chief good, but loosed their desires upon
every occasional good, and so they neither contained their lot, nor were
contained of it. But increase of their lot inflamed their desire, and augmented
their miscontentment: But true contentment is, when the soul finds it self
embraced of God, yea, and possessed of him; that it may say, The Psalm. 16. 5.
Lord is the portion of my inheritance; for it finds it self contained of
God, and is content to be so contained, which is properly contentment. As in it
self it is so contained, so in all the desires, which run no ways out to
other things; for it has a spiritual delicacie, that being full of God, it
counts not greatly of other things beside. Therefore when the Prophet has
called God his portion, he said, his inheritance was pleasant to him: he found
such contentment in God, that he saw nothing beside, that could so much as
draw his vaging desire to it. He contemns other things, August.
and that not only which he might have, but what he would have, because these
things do more hurt being obtained, than desired.

Thirdly, Difference of true and false religions.
here is a difference betwixt the true and false religion. True religion
presents the true God as an object of worship; an author of working, an
opener of his peoples eyes to see, a mover of their hearts to love him, and
rejoice in him: So that both the union is sensible* and the communion flowing
from it. False religion has none of these: for idolatry has no true God for
the object, neither superstition (the false worship of the true God.) Let them
pretend affection and zeal even to ecstasy, it is no better than the fury of
the Baalites 1 Kin. 18. 28
. The new Pelagians also deny any other working of God in the Elect than in the
Reprobate, and grant no more than a moral suasion generally offering, but
never moving the heart to receive: They hold God and man ever asunder; for they
give man a beginning of good which he has not of Christ. In the work, they
make him his own discerner, and in the end exactour of his own due glory. But
we should consider the Elect, as they are the lively members of Christ, and
have right to the fulness of grace that is in that head, so that when God
comes down to work in the Sanctuary, he looks not to the Elect as
strangers, but as to the living members abiding in his Son, and therefore his
Spirit communicates to them both easily and powerfully, the grace that is in
that fountain. This real union with Christ is better than their division: and
they who will ever be divided from the chief good cannot intend to have
happiness in him.

Fourthly, All worshippers are not alike.
this puts a difference among them, who are exercised in a true religion.
They are not all alike disposed: some receive happiness with joy by that
effectual working: others remain senseless in the hardness of their heart,
which they have drawn on with the deceit of sin Heb. 3. 13.
: Some again contemn the holy disposition of the godly: 1 Samuel 1. 14.
So Eli (albeit otherwise a good man) expounded Hannahs devotion at the first
uncharitably: But though Eli mock Hannahs devotion, and the proud Pharisee
disdain the tears of the penitent Woman Luc. 7. 44.
, yet Christ both accepts and defends her Bernard. Cant. 12.
. No wonder, for this work is personal, and known only to them in whom it is.
That white stone Apoc. 2. 17.
has the name of Elect written on it, and none can read it but he that has
it; none is conscious of his estate in grace, but himself: Others, who have
the like, can judge charitably, while they, who have not such experience do
carpe and censure. This vilifying of the grace of God, is a policy of Satan;
thereby he hardens natural men, and presses to dash Gods children from
seeking, or uttering of that, which is so uncharitably censured. But grace
guardeth them sufficiently, it recompenseth them largely, for that suffering
doubleth their joy; and the conscience of it sharpneth them to seek it the more
Luke 7. 36.
. When wisdom is justified of her children, she justifies them the more: for
their justifying of others, and erecting the throne of God in the soul by his
approbation, contemns the uncharitableness of man. Natural men will neither
mourn at Christ Mat. 11. 17.
, not dance at his pyping, yet they can mock such as sympathize with them both.
They are like that Prince 2 Kin. 7. 19.
of Samaria, who saw the plenty, but tasted not of it, but was trod down by the
press of those who desired that, that he distrusted.

Lastly, Fruition to be sought.
it is our duty to seek this fruition, and it is proper to man: for though
other things be possessed of God, yet they possess not God, and this is our
possession of him to enjoy it August. vit. beat. cap. ult.
. And for this cause, beside the work in the sanctuary, in private sometimes
to steal our selves from our selves, that we may be found in God Men's se sibi
furatur, ut verbo fruatur. Bernard. Cant. 82. 86.
. This selfe-stealth is our preservation, for we find our selves more in him,
than when we are in our selves. This is a commendable theft, God commands
it, and we glory in it. That that is stolen is safer than that which
remains, and nothing is lost, but that which is not stolen. For, knowing of
ourselves, we have need of a great custom and task to depart from our
senses, and to gather our spirit in i^ self August. de Ord. cap. 1.
. For if we exceed not visible things, we have not the eye of our mind
fitted to behold things eternal: But when the soul has gathered it self in
it self it dare look to God Aug. de Ord. 2. 19.
. It is our grief to come back from such a disposition, as a man delighted
with a palace desires not to come to the cottage where he was borne.

This is the presence of God with his Saints, whereby they solace their absence
2 Cor. 5. 6.
from him dwelling in the body. God commands it, Seek ye my face: The godly
desire it, Thy face, Psalm. 27. 8.
Lord, will I seek; he promises it, Psalm. 91. 15.
I will be with him in trouble; and they boast of it, Psalm. 23. 4.
I will not be afraid, because thou art with me: They take the measure from
some excess of spiritual fruition, and according thereto, rule their
spiritual state: As a Man that has leapen far, tries his strength by
equalling that leap; thereby they judge of their lot, which is the prosperity
of their prosperity, the comfort of their adversity, their walking with Phil.
3. 20.
God like Enoch, and their Genesis 5. 24.
conversion in heaven, the awband of our corruption, and the spur of Gods
grace in us. For no law, reward, or punishment, can so either hold us from
sin, or draw us to God, as the conscience of Gods presence. It is Gods
dwelling in us, and our dwelling in him, and our happiness and heaven on earth.

But let us not deceive our selves in the conceit of this vision or fruition,
Obedience the seal of fruition.
except our lives answer to both. For this vision is true wisdom, which we
both have and kythe, by the Joh. 14. 15.
obedience of the commandments: And it is the law of God written in wise
souls, that they live so much the better, when they behold him by
understanding, and keep him by a godly life Aug. Ord. 2. 8.
. Therefore let none boast of vision and fruition, who lives not godly. All
men would come to Christ, but few will follow him: All would enjoy, but few
will imitate him Omnes te frui volunt, sed non imitari. Bern. Cant. 21.
.

SECT. IX.
Of constant inquiry for perfect happiness.
And to enquire in his Temple.
THis is the last point of the Text, Inquiry follows sight.
concerning our greatest care about happiness, to be searching continually,
that we may persevere and grow therein. The first inquiry was to find out
what happiness was, and where to find it. The second is, after we have
obtained it, to go forward in the degrees till perfection. For, Confess. 12. 1.
inquiry imports more than finding: and prayer is farther off than
obtaining. The order tells us, that enquiring follows beholding, and none
do more seek God, and happiness in him, than they that see him. Desire of
grace grows with the growth of it. As the wretch wretcheth the more he is
enriched, so the increase of grace augmenteth the desire of it. Gods Cant. 3. 1.
Church is busy, running to and fro seeking her beloved, when other companies
seek their vanities. That heavenly affection sets her on work, and the want
of it made them idle. Peter and John Joh. 20. 4.
were most forward in running to the sepulcher, because they loved him most;
and Simeon Luc. 2. 27.
came oftener to the temple, than others in Jerusalem, because he longed more to
see Christ in the flesh. And it is ever seen, that they who have most
knowledge with holiness, are busiest to seek the Lord. God is so glorious, and
happiness is so sweet, that the more we see them, the more we seek them.
And the nature of true grace is to be so allured; neither is there a better
token of the liveliness of the new man, than to be set continually to Eccles.
12. 1.
seek his Creator.

The word ( enquire) in the original points also at the morning, Tymely
searching.
because the Soul is then most fit for enquiring; and the Sun rising, rayseth
all things up with him with their first and best actions, which at Even in his
falling are not so. Wisdom also promises, that they that seek her in the
morning Pro. 8. 17.
, shall find her; and the light of the Spirit in the faithful is compared to
the Esaias 8. 20.
morning light, because Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness has brought a
new light into the world after the Evening of Adams fall. Therefore in seeking
happiness, we would be tymous in the morning of our age, and vigor of our
soul, and not cast off that greatest work to old age. God bids us haste in
the morning, but Satan bids us delay till the evening of our time: And he
who does so, what knows he, if he shall live so long? Or, if he do, he
knows not, if God will continue the occasions of happiness with him: Or, if
they abide, what knows he, if God will bless them? No, it is just with God
to neglect them in their old age, who neglected him in their youth. Pro. 1. 24,
25
Because I cried, and ye would not answer, therefore ye shall cry, and I will
not answer, but laugh at your destruction. He who spends the morning of his
age dissolutely, has never earnestly thought of true happiness.

This word offers three things to our consideration: The best is here
imperfect.
1. Our imperfection. 2. Our changeable state. 3. And the remedy of both, in a
diligent inquiry. 1. Imperfection is in the best, for we are here not capable
of perfection, because we have flesh Gal. 5. 17.
mixed with the spirit, and are laid open to the continual tentations of
Satan: This cannot stand with happiness; for in heaven neither can the sin
of ill or tentation be admitted, neither can the chief good be lost Ibi nec
admittitur malum, nec amittitur summum bonum. Aug. Epist. 42.
. The most perfect Philip. 3. 12.
after Christ confessed his imperfection; Not that I have already attained, or
am already perfect, and that to the astonishment of the best Quid dicit
Apostole? non apprehendi, dicis, and miramur. August. de verb. Apost. sermon. 15.
. And here we 1. Cor. 13. 12.
know but in part, for where we know one thing, millions are hid from us; and
that same that we know is more hid than known; and all our knowledge is but
some thing of all, but nothing of all, but nothing of the whole: And the
undoubted testimony of greatest knowledge, is the greatest conscience of
ignorance: Take the knowledge of the best, it is but ignorance, confusion, and
full of uncertaintie. Therefore one cries out justly, Woe to our straight
knowledge, woe to the poverty of our understanding Vae augustae cognitioni,
vae paupertati scientiae nostrae. Bernard. de Ascens. sermon. 4.
. If we look to God, how small is our knowledge; and though modestly we may
search his will, but not curiously his Majesty, lest we be oppressed, we come
but short. And in the search of his will, if we should study from 16. to an
100. year old, we would daily find matter of a new searching Tanta est
profunditas Scripturarum, etc. Aug. Epist. 3.
, albeit there is as much plain, as to suffice people to salvation.

The conceit of perfection is the greatest imperfection, Conceit of perfection
dangerous.
and the greatest stay of proceeding: When men set up these two mountains in
their way, of presumption, and vain glory, they leave off to go forward: For
whither shall they go, who think themselves already perfect? The Jews had
this, and would not submit them to the righteousness of God Romans 10. 3.
. The Papists have it, in their perfection obtained, or to be obtained, their
merit, supererogation: and all vented in the confidence they put in their
merits. They who will not trust in God, will trust in themselves, and in their
righteousness; which is a non ens, or rather their greatest sin. Pelagius
had this pride, when he boasted, that there lacked not one to do the things
commanded, but one to command more: But God has dauntoned that pride by the
Law: And one has answered them in the person of the Jews: Behold, fulfill the
Law, there lacks not one to command, but there lacks one to obey Ecce
implete: Ne putetis deesse jubentem, non deest qui jubeat, sed deest qui
impleat. Aug. tract. 3. in Ioh.
.

Secondly, the imperfect measure we have is subject to change; and that because
of the spiritual combat, of decay, defection, and desertion. 1. The spiritual
combat proves our weakness, the flesh continually rebelling against the
spirit, so that the good we would do, we cannot do it, and the evil we would
not do, we are forced to do: For though we were even now in some good
disposition, yet the flesh, yielding to some tentation, casts us down
further, than we can arise in many days.

Decay falls in the best and most wakrife Christian: For the knowledge that
the mind has laid up, 1. Decay falls in the best.
the memory forgets; and the softnes and tenderness of heart decays even
in them, who labor on their heart continually: and that not so much by outward
provocations, as by the inward deceit, and native backslyding of the heart it
self. When a workman leaves his work at evening, he finds it in the
morning in that same case, wherein he left it: But if we lie down, with an
heart softened with the sense of Gods mercies, in the morning we find it
oftentimes like a stone; grace is a stranger to us, and our nature at the best,
gives it but a step-mothers entreaty: it finds opposition of our
corruption, and therefore is subject to hourly decays.

Defection stays our proceeding in happiness. Every sin is a defection, 2.
Defection stays us.
and a falling from a better to a worse Peccare est deficere, and minus esse.
Qui peccant, minus sunt quam erant. Aug. ver. Rel. c. 11. and 14.
; for it has not only the double guiltiness of the blemish, and lyablenesse
to punishment, but likewise crosses the grace of God in us, as one contrary
does another: And as in our youth, our food has two works: One of
sustentation, the other of adding a new substance; so when happiness is begun
in us, we have need of double labor to intertaine it. Satan rages, and the
flesh fretteth the more, therefore we have need of more diligence to resist
them.

Desertion is most fearful, when we find not God as we were wont, 3.
Desertions fearful.
and under that dreariesome widowhood of our soul, are put to that grievous
task to seek him again, and to greatest necessity to find him. Sometime it
is procured by great sins, as in David under his murder and adultery;
sometimes by our negligence, as when we wax coldri^e in our devotion, and in
well-doing in our calling: Sometimes it is supposed, as when a mother hiding
her face with a cloth, the loving child thinks her absent, and has no rest
till he see her face again. So is it in our supposed desertions: And according
to the degree of Gods presence, is the grief that we conceive of his
desertion, which admits no comfort, but the sense of his presence again.
The more gracious presence we have found, his absence afterward is the more
grievous; for the withdrawing of the thing that we love, is the increase of our
desire: And the thing that we most desire, we want it with greatest grief:
But many of our desertions are more supposed than real: Joh. 20. 14.
Marie Magdalen wept, because they had taken away the Lord, and yet he was
beside her, and by his virtue made her to seek him, till she found him: So
many a time we mourn for the want of God when he is with us, yea, it is his
presence, that makes us feel his absence: For we should not think our selves
without God, when we find him dwelling in our heart by faith: For he comes
when he is manifest in his working, and he departs when he is hid in his
working Venit cum manifestatur, and cum occultatur abscedit. Aug. Epist. 3.
.

The best remedy then of these impediments of our happiness is, continually to
inquire it, 3. The remedies.
which stands in three things: The fixing of the end; 1. Fixing of the end.
The forgetting of things behind; And advancing foreward. Philip. 3. 13.
One thing I do, forgetting things behind, I endeavor my self to that which
is before. The end is God himself, and our happiness as the praise of our
high calling in his hand; Not that we love him for that reward, but he
himself is our reward Noli diligere Deum propter praemium, ipse fit tibi
praemium. Aug. tract. 3. Johan.
. This must be so fixed, as we neither change with any other, neither join
any other to it; but as a mark we must direct all our thoughts, words, and
deeds, respecting or using things only, as they can further us: 1. Cor. 20. 31.
Whether ye eat, or ye drink, do all to the glory of God. We must intend
no other, nor no less, than this end, like the spouse Cantic. 1. 1.
who craved not to be admitted to the kiss of Christ's feet, or of his hands,
but of his mouth. Travelers are known by their journying, and the Jews knew
that Christ Luc. 9. 53.
was going toward Jerusalem, because his face was that way. So if we mind
toward heaven, we must walk through the world as strangers 1. Pet. 12. 11.
, not resting upon the things of the way. God in heaven, with the prise of our
high calling, must be so in our eye, and in our heart, as to draw the course of
our conversation toward them, so that all that look upon us may say: That they
see our mind is toward Sion. Cain built a City, because he sought his
happiness on earth, but Abel builded none, because he looked for a biding
City in heaven. The vessels of wrath, and citizens of the earthly city
sticking in that corrupt mass abide on the earth; But they that are separate
are burgesses in the city of God: And though Cain called his city Enochia, as
though he had found rest; Aug. Civit. 15. 1. 2. 8.
yet he was but a vagabond: For strong walls are but weak defenses against an
evil conscience.

Secondly, a holy forgetfulness of bygone degrees of happiness;
Forgetfulness of by-gones.
yea, though they were excesses or satieties, we must pass them as degrees,
and not stand upon them as perfections: For so long as we seek, not being
satiat with the fullness of the fountain, Aug. Epist. 52.
we are not come to our full measure: God gives us divine virtues, that here
we may live a godly life, Aug. Vit. beat. cap. ult.
and afterward receive full happiness. While we are proceeding in the way, we
count these degrees perfection before we come to them; but having attained
them, and comparing them to perfection it self, we find them as far less
than it, as they are greater than our beginnings. A weak spirit sits down
upon some taste of grace with admiration, and thinks that there is no greater
degree, and that none has the like: But a masculous spirit, while it is
advancing in greater degrees, is mourning for the weakness of grace. This
breeds in the best an earnest desire of more Ut ipsam plenitudinem desiderare
noverimus. Aug. Epist. 6.
, which is both a seal of the spirit, when we can desire fullness; and a
token of a growing happiness, because the hunger of grace is a testimony of
tasted grace Testimonium gustatae gratiae est esuries. Bern. fol. 97.
, and God respects our desire, so that he accepts the very desire of a
desire Paulin. apud Aug. Ep. 32.
.

Thirdly, advancing in grace to the end: 3. Advancing in grace.
For we get not perfection in an instant, as Adam in creation, and the thief
at Christ's right hand in regeneration, Luc. 23. 43.
but we must come to it by degrees: both that Gods work and ours may be the
better discerned; and that we may count the better of any degree of happiness
when we find it. Yea happiness it self drawing, and the new man in us
thrusting, makes us advance: For the greatest satiety of grace brings not a
loathing, but sharpeneth the desire the more. And such is this delight that we
have in this beauty, that it is ever present, and yet never satiateth, yea it
will ever satiat thee, though thou be never satiat Ut semper ^bi praesens sit
and nunquam satieris, imo semper satieris and nunquam satieris. Aug. tract. 3.
in Ioh.
: As in natural motions, the nearer to the end the faster; so here in this
native motion of grace, the nearer to perfection, with greater desire and
zeal, we are carried toward it. Christianity knows no motion, but foreward
or backward, and no standing still. We are like men rowing up against a strong
river, if they slack their oars for a moment, they are carried more down,
than they can ascend for a long space: S. Peter upon the mountain thought he
craved perfection, Luc. 9. 33.
but it was his imperfection; for if Christ had bidden on the mountain with
him, beside the frustrating of Gods purpose, and the salvation of the Saints in
his death, S. Peter himself could not have been saved. The more we inquire,
the more we shall know God; The more we know him, the more we receive him: The
more we receive him, the more he seems to grow in us, but he grows not in
himself, for he is perfect. If thou knew a little yesterday, thou shall know
more to day, and much more to morrow: For all the life of a good Christian is
an holy desire. Aug. tractar. in Johan. 14.
But we see not as yet the thing we desire, but yet by desiring thou art made
capable of it, that when that thing comes which thou desire, thou may be
perfected. Aug. Epist. Ioh. tract. 4.
For as a man inlargeth the lap of his garment, that would receive some great
thing: So God by delaying inlargeth our desire; and by desiring enlarges our
soul; and by enlarging makes it capable to receive our perfect happiness.

This is a ground for the perseverance of the Saints, because God has entered
them in happiness; The Saints perseverance.
and by his Spirit leads them on by degrees, Philip. 2. 12.
to work out their salvation in fear and trembling. They may fall into great
sins, but neither fully nor finally: Not fully, because in their greatest
fall they have both the Spirit, and the seed Joh. 3. 9.
of God in the habits of faith, love, etc. albeit the work of the Spirit, and
of these habits do cease, during the time of their impenitencie. So Psalm. 51.
12.
David desires the restoring of the joys of salvation, while in the mean
time, he craveth a retaining of the spirit. That retaining imported that the
spirit was still with him, and that restoring, imported his wonted joys were
stayed. Psalm. 37. 24.
Neither can they fall finally, because the Lord in his own time raises them
by repentance, as Peter and David, etc. But Scripture and reason prove the same
clearly. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, Jer. 32. 40.
that I will never turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: So Christ tells,
Mat. 24. 25.
It is impossible that the elect can be seduced: and the Apostle Peter tells,
1. Pet. 1. 4.
That we are preserved by the power of God, to that heavenly inheritance; so
that God his preserving power makes our perseverance. And no man Joh. 10. 28.
(says Christ) shall pull my sheep out of my hand. And because they except
slyly: It is true that none can pull his sheep out of his hand, yet, what if
the sheep depart from him of their own will? The Apostle meets, Romans 8. 38.
That neither life nor death, nor any creature shall separate us from his love;
If no creature, then not we our selves, since we are a creature Non igitur
separat nos alia creatura, siquidem and nos ipsi creatura sumus. Aug. Mor. Ecc.
c. 12.
: And the new heart, and the new spirit do promise the contrary: If God be
for us, who is against us? For none can hurt us, but he that over comes God,
and who can overcome the Almighty August. de verb. Apost. sermon. 16.
?

Reasons also taken from the persons of the Godhead prove the same. Reasons
taken from the Godhead.
For the Father Joh. 6. 40.
delivers us to the Son to be kept, and presented blameless at the last
day: The Son commits us to the Father, and prayed Joh. 17. 11.
for us that we perish not: The Father and Son commit us to the Spirit, to be
led in our ways, who dwells in us, and in our seal, 2. Cor. 1. 22.
which cannot be broken. But in our time, God gave a fearful document in this
question: For when one pressed to destroy the grace of perseverance, God let
him fall from such grace as he had, P. Bertius de Apostasia Sanctorum.
to turn Papist, and of a professor of divinity, to become a lecturer of
humanity.

Our late Libertines mock this doctrine. Libertines are licentious.
They profess a perfection in this life, and so deny the necessity of a
graduall increase. They affirm, that the justified man cannot sin, and that
God neither sees nor hates sin in them; That they need not repent nor
mourn for sin, nor incite themselves to the obedience of God; That they need
not pray, but praise continually. This is a refined extract of Satan, who as
by the Pelagians he oppugneth grace by nature, so in them he destroys it in
the name of grace; And under a conceit of singular grace, makes them
singularly graceless. They have carved to themselves an easy way to heaven by
laughing and mirth, whereas Gods best children find it a valley of tears. But
their pretended perfection is found to be a presumptuous color of liberty to
their flesh; for they are known to be more licentious in their ways, than
they who groan under the sense of their imperfections.

The last degree comes at death: Happiness begins before death.
Not that our happiness is suspended till then, for we are here preparing
happiness, August.
though we cannot possess it till death. Solons speech cannot abide an exact
trial, for we are called to happiness even in this life: It is called a
valley of misery, and craveth some solace by a begun happiness: And the
scripture pronounces in the present some men happy. Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is he whose sins are forgiven: And happiness is here begun in us;
faith gripeth it in the promise, hope waits on it in the fullness, our desire
longs for it, and the beginnings of it self begin our profession. But after
death all shall be perfected. This was the weakness of the wisest Pagans, when
they had pleased themselves with their discourses of happiness, they could not
endure the thoughts of death, but called it of fearful things the most
fearful. Aristot.
They trembled at that, where they should find most comfort; and their
thoughts of eternity were as confused, as their doctrine of happiness was
false: And therefore could find no comfort in their evanishing. But the truth
tells us, that at death we end the valley of misery, and enter in
everlasting happiness.

At death then our perfect happiness begins, 1. It shall be a consumption
of all ill.
and that in two: First, in removing all misery, or what ever imperfection;
The other in completing happiness in it self. Our first misery is sin
original, which God cutteth off by perfect sanctification. In our effectual
calling, that cutting off begins and goes on by degrees till death, when
our last breath has the last act of mortifying grace in the full abolishing of
sin. Secondly, the abolishing of all guiltiness whatsoever, that we may be
presented pure and blameless to him. Thirdly, we shall be freed from all
tempters and tentations: Satan shall molest us no more: There shall be no need
of an hedge to Job, neither shall wicked men by their example pervert us, or by
their violence injure us, neither shall a deceitful heart deceive us any more.
Fourthly, we shall be freed of all affliction; we shall not desert God in
sin; and he shall not desert us in his anger to punish us for sin: Rev. 21.
4.
There shall be no more sorrow, nor fear, nor crying out, because these first
things shall be ended, and God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes.
Lastly, the mortality of this body shall end: It is so frail now, that
hardly can we fit it to serve us in actions natural or spiritual, and is a
daily burden to us, to keep it from sickness and inconvenients. And when it
is under them, a greater burden to make it free: But when it shall be made a
spiritual body, these things shall cease: Christ's death has killed death,
and his life is our life.

This is the consumption of the ills of our misery: 2. The consummation of all
good.
Follows the consummation of good things, that perfecteth our happiness: and
these are first the ceasing of the means of grace, which are now necessary for
the way; then they shall end, as having neither further work, nor use in us.
So prophesying shall cease, and praying shall turn in praise: On our part
faith shall end in sight; hope in fruition; desire in delight; and the
beginnings themselves in their due perfection. 2. All goodness shall be
perfected in us, according to our measure: our light perfect without ignorance
or error; our love perfect without slacking; our will obsequious without
rebellion; our affections straight without perversenes; and righteousness and
holiness in our last breath shall be accomplished: and that last act of our
regeneration shall bring forth the new man, and send him in a glorious liberty
to God. And when our bodies have rested a while in the grave, till our brethren
be perfected, they shall rise glorious, like the body of Christ. Our souls shall
see God, as they are seen, and know him as they are known; Rev 21. 5, 6.
Then we shall see his face, Nec aliud quam ipsum exspectamus ab ipso. Bern.
Qui habit. sermon. 14.
and his name shall be on our foreheads. The full happiness that we expect
from God, is of God: neither expect we any other thing from him but himself.
God shall fully possess us; we shall be perfect in God; and God shall be all
in all: he shall delight to look on us his creatures, whom he has glorified
in mercy, and we shall delight in him eternally.

Therefore let true religion bind us to the blessed God, 3. Happiness comes
by true religion.
who is happiness it self, and gives happiness to others, betwixt whom and
our mind (whereby we know him to be happiness and truth,) no creature
interveneth; and who has given to some creatures so much happiness as they
desire; to others as much as they can contain: He is that only God, of whom
we are, from whom we departed, and to whom we were made unlike by our fall,
and yet of his mercy he suffered us not to perish: the beginning, to the which
we return; the form that we follow, the grace whereby we are reconciled; by
whom as creator we live, and by whom being reformed, we live wisely; and by
loving and enjoying of whom we live happily: even that true God, of whom are
all, to whom are all; to him be praise and honor for ever.

FINIS.

