A Proceeding in the Harmony of King David's Harp.

That is to say, An exposition of 13. Psalms of the Princely Prophet David,
from the 22. unto the 35. Psalm, being a portion of the Psalms expounded by
the reverend Doctor Victorinus Strigelius, professor in Divinity in the
University of Lipsia in Germany.

Translated out of Latin into English by Richard Robinson, Citizen of London.
Anno Christi 1591.

Seen and allowed.

Brief Contents of these 13. Psalms.

Of Prophecy and Prayer. 22. Thanks giving. 23.30. Doctrine only. 24.29.32.
Doctrine and thanksgiving. 33.34.
Of Prayer only. 26.28.32. Prayer, as Psalm 25 Consolation. 27


Psalm. 34. Verses 25. and 16. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous: and
his ears are open unto their prayers. The countenance of the Lord is against
them that do evil, to root out the remembrance of them from the earth.



Printed at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop over against
the great South door of Saint Paul.

TANDEM SI.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



To the right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord high Chauncellor of
England, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel: Grace, Mercy, Peace and plenitude of Temporal
and eternal Beatitude, in Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior everlasting.
KIng David the man beloved of God after his own heart (Right Honorable and
most worthy Mecenas) though he was also the faithful feeder, the Shepherd of
God, 1 Samuel 16.7.
the servant of the Lord, the Conqueror invincible, the Captain of the
destitute, the sacred Psalmograph, the melodious Musitio^, the sweet singer of
Israel, and Patron of singers, the praise-worth Prophet of God the anointed
of the Lord, and princely figure of Christ, the sovereign King of all kings:
Albeit (I say) he was such an earthly personage, endewed with mo heavenly
graces, then ever any was either before or after him: yet, in himself feeling,
and of himself confessing great and manifold infirmity of humane nature, by
many his most grievous conflicts between the Spirit and the Flesh, suffering
(according to the saying of Saint Paul, that old beaten soldier of Christ)
Inward fears, outward feightinges. 2. Cor. 7. 5. he found also by experience
in the world both inward and outward envy, both domestical and foreign
enmity, and under the hands of the highest Jehovah, both temptations of
abiections, troubles of deiections, and tryalles of his truth, constant faith
and unfeigned conuertion. So as by the providence of God: seeing all this,
sorting for his best behoof beyond either his desire or desert ( As all
things work for the best to them that love God etc. Romans 8.28.) amongst his
other grievous complaints in his sacred Psalms, to mollify his miseries with
meditating of Gods mercies, he eftsoons took into his hands the harp of
his heavenly harmony, sounding thereuppon and singing to the same such like
consolatary conclusions of Gods goodness toward his elect, as this is: Great
are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all. Psa.
34. verse. 19. And again such like testimonies of Gods indignation against the
reprobate as this is: ibid. But malice shall slay the wicked, and they which
hate the righteous shall perish. verse. 21. That these effects apparently were
thus proved in him and his enemies, the history of his life and actions, and
the events of his enemies enterprises most evidently do testify. For it was a
thing past his and all humane expectation and help, that he so mighty a
Personage, advanced from the sheephooke to the scepter. 2. Sam. 7.8. From a
Kings page. 1 Samuel 16.21 to a kings personage. 1. Sam. 5.3. Long persecuted by
Saul. 1. Sam. 18. whose life he saved 1 Samuel 24.13. committing those two
horrible sins. 2. Sam. 11. And so utterly destitute of all sauegard and
safety in himself, for which he felt Gods judgment and justice threefolde,
viz. (...) the death of the Child borne (...) his banishment for the fact,
and (...) temptation of abiection for exercise of his faith, his own son his
hearts grief 2. Sam. 17. and so many nations his utter enemies, Ps. 18. It was
(I say) a thing impossible with man, and past all his expectation, that this
desolate David should find such favor with God and man, as to reobteine a
right recovery of that, which he had before lost with so great injustice, viz.
Gods grace and favor, his estate of dignity, kingdom, life, and felicity:
Notwithstanding, such was the providence, presence and promise of the most
highest Jehovah (as is affirmed by the holy Ghost, the true witness of Gods most
worthy will and working herein. The Lord in his mercies so looked upon him with
his loving favor, that he searched the secrets of his heart, heard his
sorrowful sighs, salued his sore, renewed his spirit, remitted his sin, healed
his harms, saved his life, prolonged his days, continued his kingdom: and
finally, clothed his enemies with shame, but made his Crown to flourish, Ps.
132. verse. 19. Then all which blessings none could be more at any time or
greater, by God bestowed upon any mortal Prince or Potentate upon earth:
whereupon highly commending the great goodness and mercy of Almighty God as
the only vmpier in this spiritual and corporal conflict, well and worthily
ascribing the glory of this triumph unto the highest Jehovah, does this learned
expositor Victorinus Strigelius thus profoundly infer of this Warrior and
wrastler: David being tempted, prays: praying, he was delivered, and being
delivered he gave thanks. O excellent order of a princely warfare, O more
surpassing virtue of divine deliverance, O most blisfull Conqueror by the
crowning Creator. Many proud pompus and mighty Monarckes of old time, as
idolatrous, tirannous and wicked Pharao, Nabuchadnezar, Antiochus, and such
others, extolling themselves for Gods, contemning the true God, and afflicting
his people for their true profession, have warred against those weaklinges to
the destruction of their bodies, souls, kingdoms, and infinite thowsandes
others of their aliaunces: and after them such other profane princes,
foreprophecyed of by Daniell, as the Assirian and Caldean Lion, the Percian
Bear, the Macedonian Leopard, Dan. 7. cap. verses 4. 5.6.7.
and the Roman beast far differing from the others, all warring against the
Saints of God, attributing their victories to their own valors, derogating
the glory of the immortal God, have destroyed diverse kingdoms, their own and
others, with infinite thousands of bodies and souls into perpetual perdition,
with Satan and his angels for ever. But this divine David, the Lords
Conqueror so fought his battles against the enemies of God and his truth, as
this interpreter infers of him in the 7 Psalm, that the very youths of his
people and dominions, might at home in the Church and Schools hear, read,
learn and profit in the law of Moses and doctrine of the Prophets, touching
the promises infallible of the everlasting kingdom of Christ, and the
salvation of all the faithful for ever: of which everlasting kingdom, Solomon
son of the said K. David was also a lively and express figure, as in the 45.
Psalm is mentioned.

Such a peaceable, spiritual and corporal warfare in this last age of the
world, has God of his unspeakable goodness, grace, and mercy given us this
many years in England by the preaching of the Gospel in the Halcion days of
our most sacred Saba, Queen Elizabeth, hearing, honoring and aduauncing to
our great comfort and consolation the wisdom of Christ himself a better then
Solomon, Idque sub summi Iehouae (...) nostro, Genesis 5.1. Wherein (Right
Honorable) we have manifold and great causes in every degree with the same
our divine Debora, as well Governors as all others, Judges 5.9.
willing persons among the people of Israel to praise the Lord of Hosts for
his late most gracious victory given us over the Spanish Sysera by sea: As also
with the same our humble Hester to celebrate the Lords loving mercies, Hest.
15.22.
with continual remembrance of thankfulness for supplanting and suppressing
the proud, hauty enterprises of hawty Haman domestical, so as we may say, The
Lord has saved his Sion, dwelling with the Daughter of Babel, 2. Zach. 7. And
finally, with the same our joyful Judith (the exaltation of Jerusalem, the
glory of Israel, and rejoicing of our nation) To sing a song of praise unto
the Lord of hosts for his heavenly help, Judith 13.4.9.
in ouercomming, subuerting, and vanquishing the policy, power, and practices
of that Olophernes, the romish Antichrist, and his mischievous members, the
Iesuitish Seminaries and Sectaries, with such other foreign Scorpions,
whatsoever and wheresoever. Since therefere the solace of the Lords Syon, and
joy of his Jerusalem in our churches and common wealths of England and
Ireland, by the gracious and omnipotent presence and preservation of Christ
himself, the true Michael and head of his church and kingdom everlasting,
environed with his angelical ministers and watchmen over us (as this princely
Prophet David sweetly sings) Continues still firm and immouable, Psalm.
125.2. There neither is, nor ought to be any member of this body, no nor the
meanest, nor basest labourer in this Vineyard of the Lord so flourishing, but he
is bounden by all good and dutiful industrye to bestow his time in praying
for, his travel in prospering, and talent in preferring the beauty and
beatitude thereof, to the advancement of Gods alone glory and continual
comfortes of the faithful: Amongst whom (Right Honorable good Macenas)
reputing my self simplest of many thowsands, and much bounden unto the goodness
of God, and those good benefactors which any way have helped or healed my weak
estate, and supported my poor possibility, both in the study of my
translations, and in the exercise of my pen in writing (two simple shifts in
me, but singular gifts in others of better countinance in the Church and
common wealth.) Here therefore finding my self indebted unto your noble
bounty, more the^ unto any other Benefactor whatsoever yet living: I humbly
crave pardon of your Honor for my long delayed duty, and humbly beseech your
accustomed benignity, now (though late to accept in good worth (as in part of
payment of my debt-bounden duty long since liable to your Honorable deserts)
this pittance of my poor study and pen, which is my last translation
entitled, A proceeding in the Harmony of the princely prophet David's Harp:
(whereof a former part was dedicated to the late noble Earl of Warwick
deceased) a token of my true intent (as God knows) which would painfully put
in ure the performance of my bounden duty, to the full satisfaction of all my
honorable, worshipful, and worthy good benefactors, and their worthy good
expectations: Though my hindrances have bin great, and my infirmities are yet
many, Even as the distressed wight wandering from Jerusalem to Jericho,
desirous to be settled at Gods good pleasure, Luke 10.
in the consolation of the faithful, till God the restorer of them that trust
in him, do further increase and confirm me with his grace, favor and comfort.
In mean time I rest, humbly craving and heartily beseeching the same omnipotent
and immortal God, to bless and preserve your Honorable good Lordship with
long life, prosperous health, increase of Honor in the earthly Syon, and with
the perfruition of life and ioies in the celestial Jerusalem, for ever and and
ever. Amen. London, at my poor house In Saint Martins parrish by Ludgate this
Thursday the 22. day of April be-in S. Georges even, anno Christi 1591.

Your Right Honorable good Lordships most humble and debt-bound Orator unto
the Almighty, Richard Robinson, Citizen of London.

Rodolphi Waddingtoni decasticon in Psalmorum encomion and huius operis
SVnt animae morbi varij dum corpore clausa est,
Quae scelerum premitur colluuione graui.
Horum qui quaerit sibi plene dulce leuamen,
Hic Dauidis Psalmos nocte dieque legate.
Lectio Psalmorum psallit solatia vera:
Hinc men's fracta malis se leuat atque fouet
Gratia prima Deo, Dauidi sit proxima regi,
Strigeliusque petit, ne sua laus pereat.
Ordine postremus Robinsonus licet extat,
Tu tamen O Lector viue Richard, canas.
PSALM. XXII. Deus, Deus meus, respice in me.
The Argument and disposition of the Psalm.
Moved I am undoubtedly to believe for certain, that the doctrine comprehended
in the monuments of the Prophets and Apostles, is delivered from the true God,
and that all other Religions, striving with the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, are fabulus, and against God, both blasphemous and deadly; When I
consider the doctrine of our Religion, to be more ancient then the opinions of
other Nations, and to be confirmed by manifest divine testimonies, I do also
behold, (not without great pleasure) the descent or race of our Teachers, even
from Adam to the disciples of the Apostles. Finally, seeing by marvelous
means the Church is preserved, which bears about this doctrine every where
in the world, and seeing that the most wisest, and most modest persons, had
rather suffer all torments then to cast the same away: I doubt not, but that
the Church of CHRIST thinks rightly of God, truly calls upon God, is
truly heard, and shall have her rewards in the end. But much more vehemently
I am so moved to believe, so often as I consider or think upon the sayings of
our Prophets, touching the fatal or divine mutations of ye whole world,
touching the perpetual order of the governments thereof, also touching the
coming, Passion, and Resurrection of our Redeemer, of whom GOD in the
beginning before spoke, that he would send him unto mankind, to take away
sin, and death, and to restore unto us righteousness and life.

Amongst these prophecies, (which properly and plainly do preach of CHRIST,)
this Psalm (in mine opinion) has the special place, which with so great
light of words and efficacy of meaning, sets before our eyes the passion
and resurrection of Christ: as I cannot easily believe, that neither Apelles
nor Durerus the most excellent Paynters, if they had seen Christ before their
eyes, (as he was hanged upon the Cross,) could better or more evidently have
expressed the same with their colors. For although David lived certain years
before Christ was sent in the flesh, yet notwithstanding, being fully
inspired with the light of the holy Ghost, he so describes Christ, (suffering
for us, and raised from death to life,) with such notable words, that this 22.
Psalm, may seem more rather a declaration of the present deed, then a
Prophecy of those things that were to come. For the Prophet takes his
beginning even from those very words which Christ himself used, as he hanged
in his extreme agony, and he foresheweth the venomous illusions wherewith
those enemies of Christ, (being then in his most grievous calamity) insulted
against him: afterward he adds a most lightsome and large description,
wherein he most evidently lays open, the special or chief parts of this
Tragedy. viz. They pierced (says he) my hands and my feet, etc. verse. 17.
Also, They parted my garments amongst them, and cast lots upon my vesture.
verse. 18. To these descriptions are many complaints, prayers, and
consolations inserted, which contain most fervent affections.

In conclusion, there is added a most gladsome narration, or discourse of the
resurrection and glory of Christ, which he enjoyed after he had subdued his
enemies under his power. Let us therefore love and oftentimes read this most
sweet Psalm, not only to the end that it may instruct us concerning the
deeds done by our Captain and Redeemer, but also for this cause, that it may
confirm us against Academicall doubtings of our adversaries, which oftentimes
mightily shake men's minds: whither the doctrine which the Prophets and
Apostles have left for monuments, be delivered from God himself, who in very
deed is Creator and conseruer of all things, whom only to worship with true
godliness of mind, and whom to obey it behooves us. Against these weapons may
a man oppose (as it were a Buckler,) the godly and continual meditation of
this Psalm, which witnesses, that the greatest matters of all, are from God
declared unto the Prophets, which things the event it self also has approved
and ratified. Since therefore, sure it is, that these Prophecies have their
grounds from GOD, it must needs be also, that the other doctrine of the
Church, is of and from GOD. But now let us hear David himself, speaking
familiarly with us.

To him that excels upon Or the Hynde of the Morning, and this was the name
of some common song.
Aiieleth Hasshahar. A Psalm of David.
Verse. 1. My God, my God (look upon me) why have thou forsaken me? and art so
far from my health, and from the words of my complaint?

Verse. 2. O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not: and in the
night season also I take no rest.


A Most heavy or sorrowful lamentation is this, which far passes our
thinking or speaking, and a complaint of the mind, striving with temptation of
abiection: for, it cannot be, but the same person which sustained Gods wrath,
came into that cogitation, as if he were forsaken and cast away from God. And
although we in this instant and present fortune, do not attain unto the
greatness of the complaint, which Christ earnestly, and not dissemblingly
there used: yet notwithstanding, some of the members of his Church feel some
small taste of these agonies.

When our first Parents had begotten of themselves two Sons, they were
brought into good hope it should come to pass, that even these should become
as it were, the first young plantings of the true Church, and with joyful
minds thought they upon the promise made unto them by God, touching their seed
also: afterward, when they saw their cheifest hopes suddenly to be quailed by
the death of Abell, (whose slain body they beheld,) and his other wicked
brother to become a reprobate, no doubt then they were in so great mourning and
sorrow, that they often might cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Why repressest thou not the raging devil, and breakest not, nor enfeeblest
his power? David being driven into exile, and not only bereaved of his
Kingdom, but (which was far greater then his Kingdom) being spoiled of all
opinion of holiness and righteousness, no doubt understood well this verse, and
with often speeches repeated the same, especially here, looking upon those
distresses whereof he knows himself to be both the Author and original,
crying in this verse: My God, my God, etc. Unto these persons is King Ezechias
also to be added. For when he (being himself, as it were oppressed with a
grievous and deadly sickness) saw death even at the door, he began to cry out,
saying: Like a Lion has the Lord broken my bones. Esaias. cap. 38. verse. 13.
And Jeremy the Prophet may well be numbered with these also, as it seems where
he says: The comforter that should refresh my soul, is far from me. Lam. cap.
1. verse. 16.17.18. For what thing may happen more sorrowful and lamentable,
unto a pitiful tender hearted man, and a lover of godliness, then to see his
Country, together with the Temple, most miserably fired or burning, and his
Citizens, partly to be slain, and partly carried away into unknown places by
the enemies. But Christ's sorrows, and grievous perplexities, had much more
bitterness in them: for Christ bare in himself the whole mass of our sin,
he felt the wrath of God poured upon him, even as if he had polluted himself
with our filthiness. Therefore this great and unspeakable burden, not only
expressed unto him a bloody sweat, but also this tragical complaint, which
signifies, that Christ had a grievous conflict with the tentation of abiection.

Truly it is a great and huge calamity, to loose or forgo visible helps or
succors, and to be forsaken of friends, but this by no means can be compared
to the forsaking of GOD. For the eternal Father, exercised not in the
punishment of his Son, his virtue and divine power, but suffered him to be
tormented with horrible miseries both in soul and body.

Moreover, the Word (as Iraeneus most gravely says in his third Book and 21.
chap.) ceased in Christ, that his humane nature might die in him and be
crucified: that is, The word, or second person in Trinity, abused not his
power against his calling, but gave place unto his Fathers wrath against sin,
and became obedient unto his Father unto death, even the death of the Cross.
Thus have I breefely spoken touching the first and the second verses, that the
Reader may thus be instructed therein. For this same greatness of the
complaint, can not be uttered by any speech, but is to be learned in godly
meditation, and in the use or course of our life.

Verse. 3. But thou continuest holy, o thou worship of Israel.

The third verse sets down a consolation against the most sorrowful
complaint above recited: for as he that suffers shypwracke (being by the
violent rage of the storm tossed up and down) if happily he fall upon any
Rock, or boorde of the broken ship, which the Grecians call (...), that is, a
boorde to swim upon, he lays all the hold thereupon that he can, and so
amongst the outrageous roaring storms of the North, succoureth himself
thereupon for a season. So Christ in midst of the waves of his troubles and
trials, embraces consolation to himself, whereby he establishes and
confirms his mind, least he should faint or quail, and be overcome of the
cruel enemy. And the first place of consolation, is the manifestation of God.
[But thou continuest holy] when thou make thy self known amongst us, and
have given thy word unto us, it rests agreeable thereby, that our prayer and
our gronings are not in vain nor frustrate. For neither in deed vainly, nor
without cause, has God so oftentimes made himself known with so evident
testimonies. Let us not esteem these things to be as vain visions and
imaginations, or delusions and pastimes: God has done great and mighty
matters hereby: he would show plainly, that he is carefully affected for our
salvation, and he would hereby deliver unto us, the testimonies of his word
and doctrine, wherein he imparteth unto us, the heavenly gyfts and society of
his blessedness. Finally, he has for that cause manifested himself, so as he
would witness, that he will both be acknowledged and called upon, and that he
will also hear and save us.

Like as therefore the Son of God, in his most troublesome storms or
tempests, has first a respect unto the manifestation of God, (as men say the
Phenician Mariners, espying their Cynosura, that star in the night, guiding
them in the Skies, they are of good confidence as it were to ariue in a safe
Port.) So let every one of us, first and foremost cast our mind and eyes unto
the notable testimonies of Gods manifestation, and being with these confirmed,
let us crave of God, help and deliverance, or at least mittigation of our
present calamities. And where he adds, [o thou worship of Israel,] the
studious sort may know, that the nowne Relative is put for the foundation.
For, the worship of Israel in this place, signifies the same people or
congregation, praising and worshipping God with a true heart.

And what may be thought more sweet? then that we surely know, that the
Congregation is the Temple of God, wherein God dwells and abides, as in the
2. Cor. cap. 6. it is written. You are the Temple of the living God, (as God
says) because I will dwell in them, Leu. 16.12
and will walk amongst them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. And Christ says most sweetly, If any man love me, he will keep my
word, and my father will love him, and we will come and make our dwelling with
him. John 14. verse. 23.

Verse. 4. Our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did
deliver them.

Verse. 5. They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in
thee, and were not confounded.

The second place of consolation, is here brought from an example of the
society of our Fathers, wherein are deliverances many and marvelous, set
down and left us: and that I may omit the rest, which almost are
innumerable, who would not by good right, marvel at the most joyful end or
conclusion of those calamities, Gene. 39.7 13.20.21.
which Joseph that most holy young man patiently suffered. For, first he was
taken away from his Parents cherishing, which he held most entire, and most
dearly loved: after that, upon a false suspicion of adultery, he was cast
into prison. In these inconveniences, which are not slenderly to be accounted
upon, doubtless Joseph craved of God nothing more, then that being delivered
from false accusation, he might safely and soundly be restored into his native
Country. But most true is the saying of S. Paul, Ephesians. 3, God can give all
things more abundantly, then we either can hope, or can conceive in our
minds. Verse. 20. For Joseph was advanced with such glory, that he retained
that place, which was the next or second, unto the Royal principallitie of
Egypt. Upon this example and such like, Christ here now looking, was stirred
up, and conceiueth some consolation. For Gods will was, there should a
memorial of such like deeds remain, to the end the Church might ask and
look for of him, the like deliueraunces.

Verse. 6. But as for me, I am a Worm, and no man: a very scorn of men, and
the outcast of the people.

Verse. 7. All they that see me, laugh me to scorn, they shout out their lips,
and shake their heads, saying:

The sixth little verse, recites a complaint, which declares, that the godly
are exercised in a certain perpetual turmoyle, and enterchange of temptations
and consolations. Marie felt in herself a joy not common, when she heard the
Angels, Mat. 1.20 Luke 1.38.44. Luke 2.19 Math, 2.16
Sheepheards, and Wisemen make mention, and witness that which they had seen
and heard of Christ the infant: but this joy within a while after was
diminished when she understood of the subtle deceipts which were laid by Herod
for Christ. And even so here now in Christ, great is the variety of his
motions or affects, for, although he before recited two notable consolations,
wherein he both might and ought to settle his mind, yet notwithstanding, he is
overcome with the greatness of the sorrow, and once again falls to
complaining. But he makes answer by way of examples, showing the difference
which was between him and the rest of the Fathers. As if he said they were
men, but, I am no man, but a worm. This humility wherein Christ vouchsafed for
our sakes to debase and abject himself, exceeds all wisdom and eloquence
of Angels and of men. For although Christ was in form of God, (that is, in
nature and power equal with God,) yet he usurped not this equality of God,
namely, against his calling: but, as S. Paul most wisely says: He humbled
himself in the shape of a servant. Phil. 2.7.

And although the greatness of these things cannot be comprehended of us, yet
let us render thanks unto the Son of GOD, that he is carefully moved for
our salvation, and that he manifested this his unspeakable humility and love
toward us, in thus suffering for our sake. The other parts of this sixth and
seventh verse, may enough be understood out of the History left unto us in
the wrytings of the Apostles. Wherefore I come to the next verse, wherein there
is a poysonfull and deadly biting taunte of the ungodly High Priests, and
their companions, insulting against Christ.

Verse. 8. He trusted in God, that he would deliver him; let him deliver him,
if he will have him.

The eight little verse, is a biting taunte of the reproachful crew of the
Jewish Nation: as if they said: go to thou goodly Champion, seek now to save
both thy self and us? And as the ungodly Jewish people did spitefully revile
the Son of GOD, so Epicures do in all ages, scorn and mock at Christian
Religions or ordinances: and when the same are about to hinder their profit,
they then endeavor all they can to extinguish the Gospel, and practice all
impiety and cruelty against Christ and his members. But there is an enemy
much more hating Christ, namely the devil: he first by his hatred toward
GOD, plucked away our first Parents from him.

The same Manquellor, holds always the minds of the ungodly ones, bewitched
with false persuasions of God, these he abuses or illudeth as instruments, to
the fulfilling of his infinite bitterness of hatred against the Son of God.
Therefore are ungodly Bishops and their Champions, the Actors or part players of
these illusions. But that most proud spyrit is their Poet: and how wretched a
thraldom is it, to be an instrument of such and so great fury and hatred
against God?

Verse. 9. But thou art he that tookest me out of my Mothers womb: Simile in
Psalm. 71, 5.
thou wast my hope when I hanged yet upon my Mothers breasts.

Verse. 10. I have been left unto thee, ever since I was borne: thou art my
God, even from my Mothers womb.

The ninth and tenth verses, contain a third place of consolation, which is
taken from the providence of GOD: and it appears by this one little verse,
that David here with phylosophical eyes beheld or looked upon man's nature, and
to have gathered dilligently thereby al testimonies of Gods providence touching
the same. For although in the world a most beautiful order of the heavenly
motions, the most acceptable seasons of days and nights, the revolution of the
year, the marvelous compass or course of the Sun, and other Planets, the
fruitfulness of the earth, and finally the whole nature of things, be set
before us to acknowledge the will and presence of God: yet notwithstanding,
there is not a more excellent testimony, (that there is a God, and that by his
providence, the world is governed, and that he provides for all things
appertaining to man, and not only to all, but also for every one,) then is the
whole creation or fashioning of man, and every figure and perfection of mankind.

For, that I may let pass to speak of forming or proporcioning an Infant in
the womb, what can be so marvelous, as the bringing forth of the Infant into
this world? For except God himself play the Midwiues part, and fulfill that
Office, it cannot undoubtedly be brought to pass, that any one Infant, should
come forth safe and sound into the world.

The Anatomists, that is, they of that science which cut men's bodies, and lay
the parts distributed before their eyes, do know the place Os Sacrum, (which
name is derived, as of the most holy and divine work of generation) is most
straightly closed or shut, and that not any thing, be it never so little, can
pearce ye joint of that bone: and yet out of these straights God meruailously
brings forth the timely Infant, as it were in a certain due season, and by
the outstretched joints of the thyghes. Therefore most truly says the
Prophet, or rather Christ himself, here, following Physiologie, (that is, the
rule of nature,) Thou o God, have brought me out of my Mothers womb.

Furthermore, this also is most pleasant to be considered, that God (unto the
young child as yet in the womb) prepares and ordains food or nutriment,
fit and convenient even in the Mothers breasts. For after the child is once
conceived, the Menstruall blood is distributed into three parts. The first
part, which in purity excels the others, is disperced into the Matrice, to
nourish the young one quickening by a little and a little. The second part,
somewhat less pure, ascends into the place of the Mothers dugges, to be
there turned into Milk, which within a while after, may nourish and sustain
the child borne. The third part, of the others especially least pure, is
settled in a certain thin skin of the Matrix, until such time, as together
with the child new borne, the many menstures of the Mother are sent forth.

Seeing therefore God performs the Midwiues duty unto us all, and not that
only, but also procures proper nourishment to those younglings, as yet
unborn, doubtless we must confess, that the lives of men are cared and
provided for of him also. Wherefore let us daily comfort and confirm our
selves, with the remembrance of these wonderful works, so often as we are
distressed for or concerning our living, or for defense and deliverance out of
greatest perrils. And let us cry out with the Prophet. Thou have brought me
out of my Mothers womb, and have nourished me with my Mothers breast:
therefore no doubt it is, but thou will both defend, and also eftsoons
deliver me created after thine Image, and redeemed with the blood of thy Son.

Verse. 11. O go not far from me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there
is no man to help me.

The eleventh verse, mixeth a most ardent Prayer, with complaints and
consolations before expounded. For the whole Psalm ought to be referred,
partly to the kind exhortatiue, and partly to the kind demonstratiue: and
whereas the mind is stirred up and confirmed with the other places of
consolations, he joins thereunto also a prayer, which as Solomon affirms:
Is a strong Tower. Prou. 18. verse. 10. That is, the only Tower and sacred
Anchor, whereunto we (forsaken of all creatures) ought to fly: he also uses
two arguments, whereof the first is taken from the object. As if he said, great
storms and tempests fall upon me, wherefore be present to help me, being
moved with the greatness of my calamities. So speaks David also in the sixth
Psalm, Heal me o Lord because I am weak. The other argument is taken as from
the person of God: as if he said: There is besides thee only, no man which
can help me, and qualify or mittigate my miseries. Therefore thou being
moved with the truth of thy promises, help me.

Verse. 12. Many Oxen are come about me: fat Bulls of Basan close me on
every side.

Verse. 13. They gape upon me with their mouth, as it were a ramping and a
roaring Lion.

The two verses following, amplify the proposition of the narration: for where
he said before breefely, Trouble is hard at hand, now he shows forth and
explaineth this breuity. For he tells with how great perrils or dangers he
is ensnared, and with notable Metaphors painteth out the cruelty of the
Pharisees hatred: he calls the Bishops and Rulers of the Jewish people Oxen
and fat Bulls, because under pretense of the Ministry, they usurped upon
them tyrannical power, and obtained such authority, that both al their sayings
and doings, were allowed by the judgment of the rude multitude, and embraced
with great rejoicing of them. But much more plainly understood here it is,
that he compares the bitterness of the High Priests hatred against Christ,
unto the rage of a Lion, by whose roaring all other beasts are made afraid. And
the Prophet here alludeth this unto the first promise, wherein GOD himself
proclaimed battle against the devil, saying: I will set enmity between
thee and the Woman, yea, between thy seed, and her seed. Neither indeed may
it otherwise be, but that the devil burns with beastly cruel hatred against
Christ and his Church, sithence he knows, that by this one Captain, his
power is broken and enfeebled.

Verse. 14. I am poured out like water.

He amplyfieth the narration to the description by parts or division: first of
all he says: He is poured out like water. This part contains a most sweet
consolation, for it is witnessed by Christ, that he has paid a sufficient
ransom for sin: for although the bloody sweat, wherewith the Son of God
was all over washed, when he was in the Garden, might have pacified his Fathers
wrath: yet notwithstanding, least any man should be overcome with desperation,
by reason of the greatness of his sins, he gave his soul even unto the death,
and shed his blood (then the which nothing is more precious,) like water most
plentifully to redeem us, or as it were, bring us out of bondage into liberty.

We must therefore hold still our opinion against the Nouatians, the
commandment of GOD is immutable or unchangeable, that although our sins be
great, yet when we truly repent, let us return unto GOD, with full trust of
reconciliation for Christ his sake: and let us not despair for the greatness of
our fault, but that the power of Gods Son, is to be accounted of, and to be
preferred far beyond all the sins of every man. And let us not add
blasphemy unto our other faults, which accuses God of untruth, and denies
that men's sins can be forgiven them. Like as Saul and Judas are therefore
condemned, because they believe not, that for the Son of Gods sake, their
sins are forgiven them.

Caine was accused of this blasphemy, that he returned not unto God, but also
added blasphemy thereunto, saying, My sin is greater then that it may be
forgiven. Genesis 4.13,
These things have I breefely spoken, touching the particle, which sets
before us necessary consolation: that God will have none to despair, be their
sins never so grievous.

Idem. My heart melts within my body like wax: all my bones are dispersed.

He said before, that all his whole body was so dried up, as there was no
moisture therein left. Now he complains of the feebleness of his bones,
wherein a chief strength was wont to be. They were dispersed and so shaken,
that they could not perform their duty. Thirdly, he describes the melting
or consumption of the heart, My heart (says he) is melted within me, as wax
melts at the fire. O inspeakeable humility, Christ here sustaineth the wrath
of God, and is made faulty, as if he had defiled himself with mine, thine,
and all men's sins. This feeling of Gods wrath against sin, is the object
and cause of horrible fears which Christ suffered, that we should not suffer
them.

He is made as it were our shadow of refuge, because the Creature of God, is
not able to endure his wrath. But I am moved by the word (...) in Luke. 22.
ver, 44. to think that Christ's bloody sweat, was the resolution of his whole
body, now utterly enfeebled: yielding up breath, drying up his blood and all
his strength.

Verse. 15. My strength is dried up like a potsheard. etc.

In the fourth of Deuteronomy. verse. 24. it is said: Thy God is as a consuming fire.
For the feeling of Gods wrath, is as a fire consuming the heart and strength of
man: as Hezekias most truly says in Esaias, cap. 38. verse. 13. who had but once
tasted a little of the same, viz. Like a Lion has he broken al my bones. But
Christ felt the wrath of God against the sins of al men, and this he
perceived to be poured upon him, even as it were for a sacrifice. Therefore
elegantly compares he here his weakness unto a Potshearde, which is dried at
the fire, and has no moisture or liquour left therein. Let us therefore
looking upon Christ, think upon both these, viz. That GOD is unfeignedly angry
with sin, and that by means of this sacrifice, we are received into favor.
These things are always to be remembered and repeated of us.

My tongue cleaves to my Gummes. All men when they see that death approaches
near, do feel a dryness of their tongue, and desire drink greedily, the
better to moisten and refresh their dried mouths: For when the blood has
recourse in great fears unto the fountain, that is, the heart, it must needs
be, that the outward members are destitute of moisture, and so do require the
steepeture.

Ioh. 19.28.
So Christ upon the Cross cried out, I thirst: for this word is not only to
be applied unto the signification, yt Christ thirsted for the salvation and
restoring of Mankind, but ought first to be taken as the word sounds,
touching the natural thyrst.

Idem. And thou shall bring me into the dust of death.

This is a sorrowful lamentation, as are many others in this Psalm: as if he
said, the eternal Father was not satisfied with the languishing and enfeebling
of my body, shyuering of my bones, consumption of my heart, and finally extreme
drought of my gummes, but it was his pleasure also, that I should die and be
buried.

Verse 16. Many dogs are come about me: and the counsel of the wicked laid
siege against me.

Those whom before he called Oxen and fat Bulls, (which mightily run upon men
whom they meet) the same persons now he calls many dogs. And he has
herein also respect unto the title of the Psalm, wherein Christ is compared
unto a Heart, which is coursed by many dogs.

Verse. 17. They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my bones; They
stand staring and looking upon me.

Verse. 18. They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.

Like as Fuluia rejoiced in the death of Cicero, so the Priests and ungodly
Teachers rejoiced in the punishment of Christ, who had reprehended their false
opinions, and their deceiuable traditions: and finally, because he seemed to
wythstande and hinder their authority and gain. But although there be many
vicious affects or motions in man, yet notwithstanding the great joy or
gladness which evil men receive by the calamity of good men, is a sure token
of their mind bewitched of the devil, and stirred up of infernal Furies.

For so is man's nature created, and all men of good minds hold this meaning,
that they do nothing rejoice at the punishments of evil persons, but do
rather bewail the miseries of mankind, which in a short space is cast down
into tragical calamities. It appears then, that in the Jews thus joyfully
applauding, and like deadly enemies insulting against Christ, (who was
condemned by their wicked decrees) there remained no pitiful affection or
commiseration toward him, but that all feelings and motions agreeable to
nature were even by the devil utterly taken from them. This profits us to
consider for this cause, that we may crave of God to be governed by him, and
defended against the devil, least that we should be drawn headlong into
such like furies. The other verses which pertain to the declaration, are more
largely expounded in the History of the Gospel.

Verse. 19. But be not thou far from me, o Lord, thou art my succor, haste
thee to help me.

Verse. 20. Deliver my soul from the sword, and my darling from the power of
the dog.

Verse. 21. Save me from the Lions mouth; thou have heard me also from among
the horns of the Unicorns.

These three last verses, do rehearse a prayer amplified, by mentioning the
dangers wherein he was then distressed.

The second part of the xxij. Psalm, touching the Resurrection of CHRIST.
Verse. 22. I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, in the midst of the
Congregation will I praise thee.


LIke as Lucius Aemilius Paulus who was called the Conqueror of Greece, (the
Macaedonian wars within a few days most speedily and most happily
finished,) was carried with triumph into the City, and mounting up to the
Capitol, rendered his thanks unto the Gods for his affairs well exployted: So
our Captain and Savior Christ, by the power of GOD being raised up from
death to life, and now making his triumph over the multitude of his enemies,
gave thanks, not unto Jupiter as Aemilius did, but unto his Eternal Father,
who had crowned him with the glorious victory which is beneficial unto the
Church. That benefit he promises to retain in perpetual memory, and to
celebrate the same with a thankful heart unto all eternity. But therewith also
he describes the chief effect of his resurrection: he affirms that he is
again raised from death to life, not to the end he should be idle, or
thenceforth not to be busied in any good work, or that he should boast
himself only of his wisdom and power, and so hold for most assured, that he
should always remain in most great and eternal pleasures: but he says
expressly, that he is risen for this cause, to the end he may gather unto God
his Church by the ministry of the Gospel, which may praise and worship him in
the life everlasting.

This then is the special effect of his Resurrection, namely the gathering of
his Church, which comes to pass by the ministry of the Gospel, which the
Apostles dispersed or published throughout the whole world. So in an other
place it is said: Thus it behooued Christ to suffer, and to rise again the
third day, and that in his Name, repentance and remission of sins should be
preached among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Luke. 24. verse. 46.47.
Truly here is set before us a manifold consolation. The Son of GOD
affirms, that he will preach the Gospel, yea though the world repine and
repugne the same, and that he will publish another doctrine besides the Law.

He will therefore preserve the Ministry, and these studies and learning, and
he allows the endeavors of them which preach the Gospel. Let us comfort our
selves with this consolation, so often as we do consider the dangers of the
Church, though fatal punishments oppress the world for their Idolatries,
Epicuriall furies, lusts, and other mischiefs which are innumerable: yet sure
and certain it is, that the Church of God shall remain, which amidst the
thickest of the enemies shall preach the word of the Gospel of Christ. And
neither will Christ suffer, that at any time the knowledge of him shall be
utterly forgotten of men, but he himself will execute the Office of teaching,
like as in this place he says. I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, in
the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee.

But even in these self words, there is delivered us a most sweet doctrine,
touching the efficacy of the Gospel preached by miserable and weak persons.
The world judges the Gospel to be a deceiuable doctrine, and derideth her
Ministers as it were unprofitable bablers, which go about to take quite away
the chief strengthes of humane society from amongst men: but these profane
judgments Christ does here confute: yea, (says he) I my self will preach,
and will bring to pass, that the Ministers shall not be discouraged with
unprofitable contention, but that the Ministry of the Gospel shall indeed
be the power of salvation to all that believe. Although therefore the Ministers
are in truth but Earthen vessels, yet sure it is, that their preaching is
effectual, and shall profit many men.

Hitherto also approaches the third consolation, which the most sweet phrase
[Brother] sets before us. I will declare thy name unto my brethren. I pray
you what may be more sweetly thought or spoken, then that Christ calls all
men his Brethren, which hear learn and embrace the Gospel. And that Christ
indeed does love us with a brotherly love, that does his taking of humane
nature upon him declare. For that he might join us in a most near bond with
him, he became flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, as Paul says.
Heb. 2. ver. 24 This taking and knytting of our nature, is a testimony of a
great love toward us. But the Passion of Christ declares this effect much
more evidently, wherein he suffered punishment due to the righteousness of GOD,
and fully paid ye ransom for us. For it was his good pleasure, to redeem and
reduce us, which were oppressed with most grievous mischiefs, as, sin and
death, into our ancient dignity and former liberty.

Hereby it appears, that there is no such love of any brother toward his
natural Brother, as is the fervent love of Christ toward us, whereunto he
gives the name of brother. So often therefore as thou beginnest to pray, and
that thy unworthiness hinders thee, be thou turned in mind and thought unto
this little verse of Christ, wherein he expressly calls Believers his
Brethren. For sithence he is our Brother, and loves us most fervently, let us
not doubt, but that we are received and heard, (though unclean and manifoldly
guilty we be) yet for the intercession and prayer which our Brother makes for
us: and neither is there any thing so surely laid up in the unmeasurable
treasure of Gods goodness and mercy, which he will not willingly bring forth,
and freely partake with this, when he is requested of this High Priest and
Mediator, whom the name of a Brother makes not abashed nor ashamed.

Wherefore in all our life long, in all our dangers, and in our daily prayers,
let us think upon this most sweet name Brother, and inculcate the same to our
minds, that we may surely believe, our Brother sitting at the right hand of
our Father will help us, and bestow upon us present and eternal benefits. Let
it suffice to have here breefely thus much noted of these words: because the
greatness of the matters cannot be conceived in words.

Verse. 23. O praise the Lord, ye that fear him, magnify him all ye the
seed of Jacob: and let all the seed of Israel fear him.

Before, Christ (raised from death to life) directed a prayer of thanks
giving: now he speaks unto the remnant of the godly Jewish people: and he
does exhort them, that with a true reverence of mind, they do worship and
obey their Messiah: and not to despise the benefit of the son of God, but
that they give thanks unto the eternal Father, whereas he being pacified with
this sacrifice, receives men into his favor, and imparteth unto them, the
fellowship of his blessedness.

Verse. 24. For he has not despised nor abhorred the prayers of the poor; He
has not hyd his face from him, but when he called unto him, he heard him.

The reason of cohortation is taken of the proper example: the eternal Father
has not despised my prayers and my sighs, yea even then when I was distressed
in most great and most grievous calamities: but he has heard me, and has
granted so joyful an end unto my labors, that to express his goodness I am
not able, in respect of the greatness thereof. Wherefore you also being
admonished by my example, learn here likewise to flee unto God, and to crave
of him reconciliation, his holy Spyrit, and other benefits.

Verse. 25. I will praise thee in the great congregation: my vows will I
perform in the sight of them that fear thee.

He turns his prayer to the Congregation of the Nations which he therefore
calls great, because it is every where dispersed throughout the whole world,
and in multitude exceeds the little flock which GOD has called out of the
Jewish people: for Christ would not have his Church thenceforth tied unto any
certain Kingdom or policy, like as before it was limited within little
bounds, but he would have his Gospel, by his Apostles to be dispersed amongst
the Nations, and again to gather the light which the Nations (forgetful of
the promise given to the first Parents) had before lost.

But although Munckes and others the unlearned sort, understand not what the
name of Vow means, so oftentimes repeated in the Psalms, yet
notwithstanding, most simple it is so to define what a Vow is, as in the
Psalms it is taken for. A Vow is a covenant to perform the worshippings of
the first Table, which are these: 1. Fear of GOD: 2. Love: 3. Faith: 4.
Patience: 5. Invocation: 6. Thanksgiving: 7. Confession: and 8. The preaching
of Gods name etc. These worshippings, and these works or vows (says he) will
I perform unto thee, whereunto by good right I am bound. Let the declaration
of this word (in what manner so ever) be also applied unto other sayings in the
Psalms: as in Psalm. 116. ver. 14. I will pay my vows in the sight of the
people of God. etc.

Verse. 26. The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they that seek after the
Lord, shall praise him, their heart shall live for ever.

Verse. 27. All the ends of the world shall remember them selves and be turned
unto the Lord: and all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before him.

Verse. 28. For the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor among the
people.

These verses agree with them that go before, and cleerelie witness, that the
Gospel shall be effectual, and shall begin eternal life in all men which do
repent, and unfeignedly believe the same: sithence then ye infirmity of the
Teachers is so great, and the confusions in the Church are so many: all men's
minds are moved, and seek to know, whether the voice of the Gospel do profit
mankind, or ye indeed it be only a dissembling voice: whether Paul or
Phocilides, or Theognis or Esope, did more profit.

Moreover, because men see the policies troubled with dissension in Religion,
many also are terrified from the profession of the Gospel, as if it were only
the firebrand of seditions. Against these false judgments of man's reason, we
must gather testimonies touching the efficacy and dignity of the Ministry.
Here the Son of GOD affirms, that the preaching of the Gospel shall be
effectual: for so he says: The poor, that is, the afflicted, shall be
satisfied, and receive comfort to withstand all terrors and dangers, and shall
together celebrate Gods benefits, that he has made himself known, by
sending his Son, and giving his Gospel. Finally, the hearts of the godly
ones, embracing the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, shall have full
fruition of new heaven, wisdom, righteousness, and life everlasting. Therefore
it profits to teach, hear, learn, and embrace the Gospel, yea although
godless persons will not see what it profits: yea, they judge the preaching
of the Gospel, to be either a vain fable, or a dissimulation, or a firebrand
of seditions.

Verse. 29. All such as be satte upon earth, shall eat, and worship GOD.

Verse. 30. All they that go down into the dust, shall kneel before him: and
no man has quickened his own soul.

These two little verses following, do declare or make mention as touching the
calling of the Gentiles, whereof when it is spoken, let us think upon three
things. First, let the greatness of Gods mercy be thought upon, gathering him
an eternal Church, not only out of the Isralitish people, but also from among
the Nations which were polluted with Idols, lusts, and all kinds of
filthiness. Secondly, let the testimony of Gods promise in the Gospel (which
is free and universal) be considered of us. Thirdly, let us know, that the
sayings touching the calling of the Gentiles, are the abbrogacions of the Law,
and refutations of that dream which the Jews had concerning the political
Kingdom of the Messiah.

But seeing else where often, and some what more precisely touching this matter
it is spoken of, as in the 53. chapter of Esaias, I will not be here any more
tedious, but of purpose I surcease the declaration hereof, least the
greatness of my Coments be too tedious unto the Reader.

Verse. 31. My seed shall serve him: they shall be accounted unto the Lord for
a generation.

Verse. 32. They shall come; and the heavens shall declare his righteousness
unto a people that shall be borne: whom the Lord has made.

The Epilogue or conclusion of the Psalm, contains a notable and lightsome
description of the Church: for first it instructs the Reader concerning the
perpetuity of the Kingdom or Church of Christ. For it says, there shall
always remain some seed, and be some remnants which with true and acceptable
Religion shall worship GOD.

Let us then hold fast this consolation, that we may most firmly believe,
the Church shall never be utterly destroyed: no, though the devils themselves,
and all the ungodly ones, do threaten both desolation and infinite destruction
unto the Church. Moreover, there are in this place, proper and convenient
actions attributed unto the Church: the Church shall not make war, nor lead
forth her Armies for to constitute and make any new forms of policy, but
she shall do other works.

She shall preach the righteousness of Christ, and shall refute men's opinions,
which feign that we are just, for or by reason of discipline and ceremonies.
Finally, she shall be the keeper or preserver of the Gospel delivered from
Christ, as it were by hand: and shall study by all care and industry, to
defend and set forth the purity of this doctrine, touching the
righteousness of Faith.

This is the disposition of this Psalm, which by no means satisfies the
greatness of the matter therein contained: but yet sometimes it admonishes the
godly Readers what is to be soundly considered, as touching the most
profitable, and most grave or profound sentences in the same.

A PSALM OF Esa. 40.11. Ierem. 23.5. Eze. 34.23 Ioh. 10.11. 1. Pet. 2.25
DAVID. Dominus regit me.
The Argument.
LIke as Homer in the third Book of his Iliades, compares two Orators
together, Menelaus and Ulysses, and indeed attributes unto the one eloquence
like unto the winter snow, but unto the other short and pithy speech, wherein
few, but very sweet things were uttered: so the holy Ghost uses in certain
Psalms, plentiful and excellent phrase of speech, which lacks no special
commendation of eloquence, when he not only teaches, but also may move and
delight men: in some he uses a short, but a very sweet phrase of speech. For
it is the part of one, and the self same cunning Sayler or Pylot, to sail
with largerspread, and shorter gathered sails, that is, a man may lengthen out
his speech, and with a learned brevity speak what he thinks.

How much plenty and excellency of phrase is there in the 103. Psalm?
wherein the corporal and spiritual benefits of God are celebrated: in this
Psalm, may the same argument, indeed more brief, but in far more excellent
figures be expounded. For here, when the Prophet David is holden as amazed
with admiration, of the greatest benefits of God, bestowed upon him, and upon
the whole Church, and acknowledged that he wanted words, to set forth both
the sweetness and plentifulnes of them, at length he enters into the
cogitation of two figures, then which nothing is more lovely, nor any thing may
be proponed, which may more allure the godly ones unto gyuing of thanks.

For as it is the Sheepheards office or duty, to bring and lead forth the
flock into feeding places, and make them to drink of wholesome water, and the
same to govern and defend against the rage of Wolves, finally, to lay to his
helping and healing hands, when the sheep are sick or diseased; so the Son
of GOD, (who calls himself The good Shepherd. Ioh. 10.14) exercises the
same offices, in gathering, governing, defending, and succouring his Church:
for first, he feeds and refreshes us with the Gospel, Which is the power of
salvation to all that believe. Romans 1. verse. 16. Next of all, he governs
his Church and all the godly ones with the holy Ghost: that they may be his
eternal heritage and (Populus peculiaris sectator bonorum operum,) his
peculiar people, a follower of good works, as it is said, Titus. cap. 2. verse.
14. Thirdly, he defends his Church against the outrages of the devil, and
the world, that she may acknowledge her prayers to be received, and thorowlie
heard: and not to doubt that she is the beloved darling of GOD.

Last of all, he executes the office of a Physician, in healing our wounds,
that is, our sins and calamities: for he both forgiueth them their sins
which unfeignedly repent, and of his unspeakable goodness, mittigateth the
punishments. Then this figure or similitude of a Pastor, which he sets down
in the beginning, nothing may be thought more sweet; for as in the first
figure or similitude, he resembles GOD unto a Shepherd, and his Church unto
a flock of sheep: so in the other figure, he compares GOD unto a rich Host,
and himself unto the guest.

And it is the office and duty of an Host, to furnish the Table with meat
and drink, whereby the hunger and thyrst which the guestes have gotten, may be
quenched, and whereas he may with fragrant smells recreate and refreshe his
guestes: these same things does the Son of GOD as a most liberal Host,
largely and liberally bestow upon us: for he feeds and refreshes us, not
with meat and drink, fecht from else where, but he gives himself unto us, to
feed and drink upon, according to that saying extant in the 6. cap. of S.
John. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. verse. 55. etc.

Unto these most delicate repasts, he adds (...), viz. a surplus, or
superaboundance of delicacie, namely the gift of the holy Ghost, which of
right, and woorthily is compared unto most sweet Balm. But although David
here speaks of this spiritual refreshing especially, yet, not absurdly is
the circumstaunce of the Psalm applied, unto the nourishing and defense of our
bodies, and unto the sustentation of this life. Neither are these things
bestowed upon us by chance, which appertain unto this life, but are
distributed by the liberal hand of GOD, for the causes which are often spoken
of in the Church.

Furthermore, unto these figures are added notable conclusions, which flow from
a heart full of Faith. Yea, though I shall walk in the vallie of the shadow of
death, yet I will fear no evil, for thou Lord art with me. verse. 4. Also,
Because the Lord himself is my Sheepeheard and mine Host, I shall want no
good things at any time: J shall not be destitute of any solaces, but they
shall accompany me, even till J come unto the life everlasting: then which,
nothing can be more blessed, neither any thing be conceived more abundant in
all benefits. Let us therefore take out of this Psalm manifold doctrine and
consolation: and let us use the same, so often as we will advance, amplify,
and magnify the benefits of God, by Christ our Mediator bestowed upon us.

The Psalm and exposition.
Verse. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd: therefore can I lack nothing.


This is a short little verse, but no speech may be equal in greatness of
matters which it contains: therefore also will we be the breefer in
expounding the same, and will only follow the special principal points of
the matters thereof. Of all figures which set forth The goodness, (and as I
may say with S. Paul, Titus. 3.4.
) the bountifulness, and love of God our Savior toward man, I know not
whither any other may be more louelier then this same, which attributes to GOD
the person of a Sheepeheard. For a feeder of sheep, knows right well how
tender beasts the sheep are, how naked, how needy of others help, government,
and defense: therefore remembering his Office, (according to these verses) thus
he does.

STabulis in mollibus sinit herbam carpere Oues,
Dum mox frondosa reducitur Aestas:
Et multa duram stipula filicumque maniplis,
Sternit super humum glacies ne frigida ledat,
Molle pecus, scabiemque ferat, turpesque podagras.
At vero Zephiris cum laeta vacantibus Aestas,
In saltus gregem atque in pascua mittit,
Dum mane novum dum gramina canent,
Et ros in tenera pecori gratissimus herba est.
Inde vbi quarta sitim Coeli collegerit hora,
Et cantu querulae rumpunt arbusta Cicadae
Ad puteos aut alta greges ad stagna iubet,
Currentem illiginis potare canalibus vndam.
Aestibus ad mediis vmbrosam exquirit vallem,
Sicubi magna Iouis antiquo robore quercus:
Ingentes tendat ramos aut sicubi nigrum,
Illicibus crebris sacra nemus accubet vmbra.
Tum tenues dat rursus aquas and pascit rursus,
Solis ad occasum cum frigidus era Vesper:
Temperat, and saltus reficit iam roscida Luna,
Littoraque Halcionen resonant and Acanthida dumi.
HE suffers in warm Cottages,
his sheep to take their meat:
Till Summer season fresh and green,
returned be with heat.
And store of straw and fern he lays,
by handfuls on hard ground.
Least tender beast by cold or scurffe,
or gowte do get deaths wound.
In pleasant Summer but when as
the East winds blow indeed:
He sends his flock toth' thickets, and
fat pastures there to feed.
Whilst morning springs, and whilst the gras
does flourish and rejoice:
The dew on tender herb distills
to beasts most happyest choice.
Before the fourth hour of the day,
when drought they find and heat:
And that the Grasshoppers do burst,
through shrubbes with clamors great:
He bids his flocks go to the ponds,
or pooles that offer first,
Or running water of the brooks,
by drink to quench their thyrst.
But in the hottest time of day,
some shadow vale seeks he:
Or Oak of ancient strength,
which called is Jove's tree.
Whose boughs spread far, or place he finds,
where sacred shadow stays:
Within dark wood, of willowes full,
for all the liuelong days.
And then again he waters them,
and them to feed he plyes:
Till Sun be set, and evening cold,
the air to temper hyes.
And till the lightsome moystning Moon
do shine through darksome wood:
And till the Halcyon byrds by shore
and Goldfinch sing a good.
But in as much, as the harmless sheep needs not only good feeding, but
also defense, as it is written.

A Lit Pastor veloces Spartae catulos arcem,
Que molossum, vt his custodibus nocturnum a stabulis furem:
Incursusque Luporum arceat: Morborum
Quoque causas and signa animaduertit Pastor,
Et medicas manus adhibet ad vulnera Ouium:
Denique in sinu sepe gestat, aut grauidas matres,
Aut teneros Agnos and dulcibus vndis pecus omne refundit.
THe Shepherd brings up Spartane whelps
swift, and the Mastiue fell:
That by these Keepers he from folds,
the night thief may expel.
And eke restrain the assaults of Wolves,
the Shepherd thus discreet,
The causes of Sheep sicknesses
and signs does mark and seek.
By helping hand to cure the wound
of each diseased beast:
And last of all bears in his arms,
the Ewes with young encreast.
Or else he succors silly Lambs,
and bears each beast about
The pleasant springs, to quench their thyrst,
and feed deuoide of doubt.
This figure set forth in Virgils verses, Lib. 3. Georgicorum, so much
delights the Prophets, that often and much they propone the same to the
Church: namely Esaias the Prophet says in his 40. cap. verse. 11. He shall feed
his flock like a sheepeheard, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and
carry them in his bosom, and shall guide the^ with young. And Ezechiell in his
34. chap. verse. 23. says: And I will set up a sheepeheard over them, and
he shall feed them, even my servant David he shall feed them, and he shall
be their Shepherd.

And ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture are men. etc. But if any man desire
to know, what manner a one Jehovah is, the Shepherd of the Church, there is
nothing that we may so easily make trial of: for the Son of GOD now and
then in the tenth chapter of John, rehearses this affirmation: I am the true
Shepherd, verse. 11.16, 27, 28, 29. And S. Peter, in his first Epistle and
second Chapter, says expreslie: You have sometime strayed like sheep, but are
now returned unto the shepherd and Bishop of your souls. verse. 25. The same
meaning may be confirmed by a right comparison of the members in the preachings
of the Prophets. For Esaias without all doubt, in his forty Chap. prophecieth of
S. John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, and of Christ himself: Of John
Baptist, he says: The voice of a Crier in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of
the Lord. verse. 3. Of Christ he says: He shall feed his flock like a
Sheepeheard. etc. ver. 11. Ezechiell in his thirty four Chap. undoubtedly
calls Christ David, by an usual phrase in the prophetical speech. verse. 23.

But having now determined the ground of our purpose, that this Sheepeheard
and Lord of Hosts, is the Son of God our Mediator, let us see if it please
you, what manner of Shepherd he is, what he does, what works he exercises,
and with what business he is encombred: for he sits not idle in heaven,
rejoicing only in his own power and wisdom: But he gives gyfts unto men,
namely, Pastors and Doctors, that the body of the Church may be builded. Ephe.
4.11. For first, he feeds us with the preaching of his Gospel, and sweetly
refreshes afflicted consciences with the use of the Sacraments, which are the
surest pledges and seals of the righteousness of Faith: and least this
Ministry whereby the eternal Church is gathered unto GOD, should utterly
perrish, he oftentimes styrreth up fit Teachers, and instructs them with
necessary gyfts to the expounding and setting forth of the doctrine.

So in this last age of the world, he has given us an excellent Teacher, viz.
D. Martin Luther, a restorer of the doctrine of the Gospel more purer, and
great companies of Preachers. This benefit, or this first kind of feeding, it
behooves all men's minds and tongues to have in reverence, and with praises to
extol even up to the heavens: but our hearts are too cold in giving of thanks,
and in reuerencing so great a benefit. We must pray unto GOD therefore, that he
would illuminate our minds with thankfulness, which both acknowledges and
honors the Author of so great a benefit, and obeieth him him in the duties
of love and other virtues.

Next of all he governs us with his holy Spyrit, that we may do some things
acceptable unto God: that is, that we truly acknowledge and call unto GOD,
truly believe, give thanks, and obey him in our calling, and calamities. For
without this Governor of our mind, will, and heart, (whom he has promised to
give those that ask,) men styrred or set on by the devil, easily fall into
Epicuriall furies, or into other fanaticall errors, also into tragical
mischiefs and inextricable calamities, like as the examples of notable wits
do show, who wanting this guide, are stained with horrible infamies.

Thirdly, he restrains the raging devil, that he cannot accomplish all the
bitterness of his hatred: and with his mighty hand and ministry of good
Angels defends and keeps his silly sheep against this roaring Lion, which
seeks to catch, overcome, and carry away the same.

Fourthly, he bringth into the right way, and heals those that go astray and
offend, without contumacie or stubborn disobedience: neither casts he us
away, which are the sheep of his pasture by reason of our infirmities, but
hanging about his neck, he lovingly bears us, and with his blood washes us
when we are filthy and deformed. This admirable, and almost incredible loving
kindness of our Shepherd, let it stir us up: So, as, we denying all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, may live godly, justly, and soberly in this
present world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the
great GOD, as S. Paul most sweetly writes in his second chapter to Titus,
verse, 12.

Lastly, unto all these, he adds as it were (...), viz. a surplus or
superaboundance, for the helping sustentations of this our life: namely,
fruitfulness of the earth, and of the living creatures, prosperous health,
living, clothing, mean dwelling places, peace, good Princes, quiet and sweet
wedlock, necessary gyfts in our calling, good success in our counsels and
studies, prosperity of our children, and finally, other good gifts which are
innumerable.

But will thou understand how necessary the benefits of this Pastor are, then
have in thy mind the silly Sheep, and unto her compare the great infirmity of
our own nature. The silly Sheep has in herself, neither any wit nor
counsel, but the flesh wandereth at random till she light into the Wolves
jaws: and what is the wandering sheep, when she cannot without the
Sheepeheards help be brought again to the fold? Furthermore, she neither has
any courage nor defense, wherewith she may or is able to resist or withstand,
the violence and assault of the Wolves. Finally, that I may manifest the matter
in one word: The sheep is a beast, foolish, fearful, weak, and laid open for
all injuries of the Wolves, if she be destitute of the Sheepheards watching and
warding.

Neither indeed is one Egg so like another, or Milk like unto Milk, as the
state of humane nature is resembling this figure. For in the dark places, and
in the darkesome night, our minds do wander astray, neither have they any
providence which respects life everlasting: we all like sheep have wandered
out of the way which leads unto eternal blessedness, yea, except we be laid
upon Christ's shoulders, and be carried hanging about his neck, we shall
(plunged headlong in darkness and errors) perrish everlastingly. And what in
us is there, wherewith we are able to resist the devil when he assaulteth us?
There is no such wisdom or power without GOD, but the devil is able to
overthrow and quite extinguish it: which things since so indeed they be, let us
in our daily prayers, remember that we are the sheep of this Shepherd, and
let us flee for succor unto him, and crave help, defense, and government of
him.

But in this place, some man would ask the question, why the Sheepeheard of
the Church ought to be Iehoua, that is, the true GOD, Creator of heaven and
earth? There are many causes for which it is needful, that the guide and
Sheepeheard of the Church, should not only be man, but also by nature GOD.

The first is, Nature only which has end, cannot destroy the works of the
devil, namely, sin and death, and restore unto the Church righteousness and
life everlasting. The second is, no creature can always and every where be
present with the Church and every member thereof. The third is, no creature can
see the sights of the heart, and discern true invocation from hypocrisy. And
the fourth cause is, no creature enters into counsel with the divine nature.
For these causes, which else where are largely explained, it is needful that
the Sheepeheard and Bishop of our souls be Iehoua, that is, GOD, whose
nature and power is eternal, unspeakable, and infinite.

Thus far have I spoken of the first part of the Syllogism, indeed more
brief then for the greatness of the matter: but, as the manner of these
Comments, ought in truth to be: now will I speak of the other part or member,
which of Logicians is called the Consequent. [I shall not lack: or nothing
shall be lacking unto me.] It is a most sure rule, he that has the word of
God, he has God himself: he yt has God, to him can nothing of the
principal blessedness be lacking, because God was before the world was made,
and by his word he made all things, therefore the word of God makes and
brings all things unto us: but contrariwise, he that has not the word, he
has nothing, but faints amidst the floodes, like unto Tantalus, and as he
seems most to have any thing, so yet within a while after, even that is taken
away from him, according to that saying of Christ: To him that has, shall be
given: and from him that has not, (namely the word) even this that he seems
to have, shall be taken away from him. Luke, 19, verse. 26.

But although these speeches are proudly scorned and hatefully handled of
profane persons: yet notwithstanding, let us believe Christ affirming them,
who is Truth it self, so to us saying: First seek ye the Kingdom of God,
and all other things shall be given unto you. Math, 6, 33. As if he said, if
any man have, by Gods grant and gift, the chief good things, acknowledgment
and calling upon God, consolation and government of the holy Spirit, obedience
agreeable to the will of God, and specially remission of sins, and
deliverance from the power of the devil, and from everlasting death, finally,
if he have righteousness and life everlasting, to him are none appurtenaunces
lacking, or helping sustentations of this our mortal life and calling. This
sentence does the example of Solomon, and the figure of the prodigal Son
notably describe.

Solomon in the beginning of his reign, required nothing of GOD but wisdom,
1. Reg. 3.9.
to acknowledge GOD with a true fear and faith, and to govern his Subjects
according to Gods will. This prayer so pleased God, that he said unto him. I
have given thee a wise and understanding heart, so as not any one before thee
was like unto thee, neither shall any be thy like after thee. But these things
also which thou have not asked, I have given thee, namely, riches and honor,
so as there shall never be thy like at any time hereafter. 3. Reg, 3, 12.

The prodigal Son returning home, Luke, 15.12
required nothing else of his Father, but to be reconciled into his favor, and
sweetly applauding himself herein, he desired to be but placed amongst the
basest hyrelings: but what happened? His Father by and by commanded a Ring to
be given him, a new Garment upon his back, and shoes to his feet, and
prepares a delicate banquet, wherewith he might entertain his recovered and
reconciled Son. Let us therefore follow the guide and good success of this
our Sheepeheard, and let us not doubt, but that in purpose and event, he will
most abundantly ratify and confirm his promise in the tenth of Saint John's
Gospel extant: viz. My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me, and I give
them everlasting life, and no man shall take them out of mine hands, because I
and the Father am one. verses 4, 11, 14, 16, 18.

Verse. 2. He shall feed me in a green Pasture: and bring me forth beside
the waters of comfort.

In the first verse he described the Sheepehearde of the Church, and called
him Iehoua, and added therewith, that through this Governor, nothing should
be wanting unto us: now with a pleasant phrase, he sets forth the feedings
or manner of living which the flock has. For like as Sheep do feed upon
three-leaued grass, and of green grass, and drink of the River which
(runs through the stones) more purer then Amber passes into the field: so
the Church is fed with the Gospel, Which is the power of God unto salvation to
all believers. Romans 1, 16. and drinks out of the pure fountains of the
Prophets and Apostles, consolation, which is the beginning of life everlasting.

But let this contrariety or Antithesis of doctrine be considered, which
greatly beautifieth this verse. Philosophy and the Law do not deliver a man
from sin and from death, but do leave the half dead man succourlesse, as
the Leuite and the Priest did in the tenth Chapter of S. Lukes Gospel. verse
31, 32. For Philosophy is only a meditation of death, that is, a funeral
complaint, deploring man's miseries and death.

The Law, not only brings no help to humane nature, spoiled and grievously
wounded, but also more and more increases the dolor or grief of the wounds,
moysting them with the Vinegar of malediction or cursing. But the Gospel
brings peace and life, to those that believe in the Son of GOD, and setleth
their minds (with full confidence of this Mediator) in God. How much therefore
places sandy and set with thorns, do differ from pleasant and soft
Pastures: and how much filthy muddie Pooles, do differ from the clear and
most wholesome Springs, so much difference there is betwixt Philosophy, the
Law, and the Gospel.

For, as no man is able to take meat out of the fire, or water out of the
Flint stone, so is it not only hard and difficult, but indeed also not
possible, to find remedy of unfeigned sorrow, either from Philosophy, or from
the Law. But they which by the preaching of the Gospel, do see the salvation
of God, (which is prepared before the face of all people,) these with Simeon
do sing that joyful tryumphant song, Lord now let thy servant depart in
peace according to thy word. etc. Luke, 2, 29. that is, now I feel my self
to rest in Gods favor, now do I take the taste of eternal life, and do
easily despise the miseries of this life, after that I have acknowledged my
Mediator the Son of GOD, and so acknowledged, have taken sure hold of him, by
faith: and have received by him, both remission of my sins, and
reconciliation also with God, according to the saying of S. Paul: If GOD be
with us, who shall be against us? Rom, 8, verse 31. Who spared not his own
Son, but gave him for us all to death, how should he not with him, give us
all things also. verse, 32. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? it is GOD that justifies. verse 33. Who shall condemn? It is Christ
which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right
hand of God, and makes request also for us. ve. 34.

These are the joyful pastures and most wholesome springs from whence we may
both feed upon peace, and drink also of joy in the holy Ghost: from out of
all other doctrines, we can gather nothing but vain Cockle and Darnell. Let us
love these Pastures and fountains therefore, and let us not suffer the riches
of our possession, either to be polluted with filthiness, or corrupted with
poison: that is, let us flee from all corruptions of doctrine and deadly
Sophistry to ye Church, and let us pray, That we may be sanctified in the
truth, like as the Son of God himself prayed for us. John, 17, verse, 17.

Verse. 3. He shall comfort my soul, and bring me forth into the paths of
righteousness for his Names sake.

We do not set down diverse interpretations upon every verse, as many men
do in the Psalms, which will speak all things every where, and boast upon
their rare learning, and therewith satis-fie the ears of Divines: but we seek
out a principal proposition in every writing, and thereunto (so much as may be
done) we aptly and rightly apply the other parts.

He spoke before of the feeding and watering of the Church, which two,
contain the special benefit of the Church, namely, remission of sins, and
(as we else where have used to speak) the righteousness imputative, joined
with the gift of the holy Ghost. Now he preaches as concerning the ordering
of our lives and conuersations agreeable unto the will of God. For as the
silly Sheep can not govern her self, so cannot this life be governed by
man's alone power and wisdom, as in the tenth of Jeremy it is said: O Lord, I
know that the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man, to walk
and direct his steps. verse, 23. For so great is the blindness and
infirmity of our nature, so many and so diverse are the snares of the devil,
finally, such a heap of businesses and dangers, that both our life and our
vocation can not soundly and wholsomly be governed and ordered, but by GOD:
therefore are these speeches so oftentimes repeated in ye Psalms, craving of
God to be governed: as in the fifth Psalm: O Lord lead me in thy righteousness,
because of mine enemies, make thy way plain before my face. verse. 8. Also in
the 86. Psalm: O Lord teach me thy way, and I will walk in thy truth, knit
mine heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name* verse, 11. And in the 119.
Psalm: Direct thou my steps according to thy word, and so shall no
wickedness have dominion over me. Pars. 13, verse 5. Also in the 143. Psalm.
Teach me (o Lord) to do thy will, because thou art my God, let thy good
Spirit bring me into the right way. verse. 10.

The necessity of these prayers, do the examples of mighty personages well
show, that is to say, Adam, Lot, Aaron, Gedeon, Sampson, Saul, David,
Solomon, Josias, and others innumerable, who being forsaken of GOD, have
horribly fallen, and some of these have returned into the right way, some have
been cast headlong into eternal destruction. Let us not therefore think it a
slender benefit, so to be governed of God, least we filthily violate the rule
of right and honest works, and least we fall into tragical mischiefs, and
into tragical calamities.

But the particle is not any thing vain, which is added in the end of this
verse, [for his Names sake,] but it teaches us that we must cast out of our
minds the opinion of our merits, and let us believe that all good gyfts,
whether they be spyrituall or corporal, are bestowed upon us, first by the
unspeakable mercy and goodness of GOD, and afterward for this end, that God
may be truly acknowledged, called upon, and worshipped: for this particle,
contains the causes efficient and final. For as nothing moves GOD to
bestow his benefits, but his own merciful loving kindness, so the special end
of all Gods gyfts, is, that both the plenty and pleasure of them might move us
unto the acknowledgement and worshypping of GOD.

Verse. 4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil: for thou art with me.

This is a notable and memorable conclusion, which is a sign and token of a
most fervent spyrit: as is said in the German tongue: Ich geb vmb all
tewffle vnd vmb den todt nicht ein Klipplin: and in Latin, Non estimo vnius
assis diabolos omnes and mortem: and thus englished, I wey not the vallue of
one farthing, not all the devils, nor death his sting. For Faith is the
ouercommer of the world, and of all terrors whatsoever, according to that which
is written by S. John, in his first Epistle, and fifth Chapter, This is the
victory which overcomes the world, even our faith. verse, 4.

But the godly ones are to be admonished as touching the enterchange of
temptations and consolations, whereof the 30. Psalm says: I said in my
prosperity I shall never be removed, thou Lord of thy goodness have made my
hill so strong. verse 6. Thou did turn thy face (from me) and I was
troubled. verse 7. Elias, with a great vehemency of the holy Ghost thereunto
moved, slew the false Prophets, 1, Reg. 18 1. Reg 19 4.5.
and was greeuouslie angry with King Achab: but this notable man, feared
Iesabels threatenings so much, that he sought where to hide himself in some
secret place.

Abraham the Father of the faithful, Gene. 14.17
who with a very handful of men, put to flight great hosts of the Caldeans,
within a while after, so trembled, Gene, 20.2
that he durst not declare his wives name. These examples declare, that the
holy ones do not always feel in themselves like feruencies of the spyrite,
but are sometimes drenched into fears and plunges, that they may acknowledge
their own weakness, and confess it is true which the Church sings in the
Hymn.

Sine tuo Numine nihil est in homine, nihil est innoxium.
Without thy grace (o God) in Man,
Naught well he does, nor well he can.
But seeing in the Psalms, there is spoken oftentimes of these changes of the
affects or motions in the holy ones, we will here be the breefer, least we
exceed a measure in our Comment.

Idem. Thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

It is well known what are the weapons which Sheepeheards use. For as the
silly sheep are driven or ruled with the rod, least they should stray from the
fields, so by the staff they are defended against the violent assault of the
Wolves. The rod therefore signifies government, and the staff defense from
GOD: also the staff may be taken for the word of God, whereupon, we (being
wearied with dangers and temptations,) resting and staying our selves, are
then in good security and safety.

Verse. 5. Thou shall prepare a Table before me, against them that trouble
me: thou have anointed mine head with Oil, and my cup shall be full.

The former part of the Psalm, sets down a most sweet similitude of the
Sheepeheard and his sheep: in respect whereof, to my now remembrance, that
same saying serves for my purpose in this place, which Virgil says of Dido.
Expleri mentem nequit, ardescitque tuendo: The mind not satis-fied, therefore,
the more it sees, desires the more. The second part of the Psalm, follows
with a figure or resemblance of an Host and his guest, which also most sweetly
describes the fatherly loving kindness of GOD toward us. For as the welthy
Host furnishes his table with meat for his guests, filling his golden Cups
with the best Wine, and his silver dishes with the delicatest dainties: and
when the Table is taken up, serves the^ also with most fragrant sweet
savors: so God is able, and sufficient of himself, to enriche and make us
happy, for not only he nourishes and strengthens our bodies with great
plenty and variety of things, which partly appertain unto our living, and
partly serve for pleasure, but also he feeds and refreshes our souls with
spiritual meat and drink, giving us also most sweet smelling Balm.

Neither need we seek for Allegories of every word, in the description of
this repast, forasmuch as they teach in brief, that we are nourished and
cherished, even from God, in spite of all the devils and their instruments, and
that we are comforted by the rod of his divine help, with such things as
appertain unto the sustentation of our bodies, and consolation of our minds.
But if any man of a godly zeal, apply the Table and Cup, unto the ministry
of the Gospel and Sacraments, and the sweet balm unto the gift of the holy
Ghost, he speaks nothing contrary from the Analogy of Faith. For as by the
word and Sacraments, our Faith is enflamed, so by the holy Ghost, the saluing
of our wounds, and mortification of our flesh is begun in us, which shall then
be accomplished, when as from death we shall be raised to life, and glory
everlasting.

And whereas we translate it [my cup full,] others do translate it in this
manner, My cup running over. But both ways tend to one meaning: for full
cups often drunk, do make men full of drink: and in this other translation,
there is set down a picture of the holy Martyrs, which like men in their
mirth, do rejoice in midst of their death, and now and then insult against
Tyrants, as Laurence, Agnes, and the histories of others do declare. Now
remains to speak of the last verse.

Verse. 6. But thy loving kindness and mercy, shall follow me all the days
of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

The conclusion of the Psalm, is full of Faith, believing that God will not
only supply our wants, with the benefits of this life, but also, will after
this life, give us wisdom, righteousness, and joy unspeakable. Where he
says that [hee will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever,] that may more
easily be understood, by considering the representation of the silly Sheep:
for as the sheep is therefore fed, that within a while after, she being
well filled and fatted, is brought into her Masters house, and that she may
be made meat, yeeldes her wool, and serves to other uses for her Master
requisite: so are we in this life fed with the word, and Sacraments, and are
after a sort prepared, that we may be fit meat unto GOD in the life
everlasting. That notable saying of Ignatius is well known: Let me be ground
with the teeth of beasts, so I be made fit bread for GOD.

Last of all, to the end the doctrine of this Psalm, may be the more evident,
let these benefits of God be considered: Our creation: the manifestation of
God: the sending of his Son: the bestowing of his word and Gospel: the
giving of his holy Spirit: promise of eternal life: good bringing up: defense
of body and soul: the vanquishing of the devil: the setting forth of learning
and true doctrine: Gods government in our conversation and enterprises:
success of our counsels, happiness of our studies: and uprightness of
judgment: prosperity of our children: good examples and eschewing of
offenses: good report: public concord: peace and mean state of policy: and
a sound estate or constitution of the Church.

These benefits, if in mind we embrace, we shall the more acknowledge the
fatherly loving kindness of God, and accuse our own unthankfulness, and with
unfeigned sorrow of heart, crave of God to inflame in us, the motion of a
thankful heart, and a desire to show forth our thankfulness for all our life
time.

A PSALM OF Deu. 10.14. Job. 28.24, 1. Cor, 10* 16.
DAVID. Domini est Terra. etc.
The Argument.
THIS Psalm of David, is verily short in verse, but full of learning. For it
instructs the Reader, as touching the Church, and also the office and duty
of the Magistrate. The Church (it says) is a company gathered out of all
mankind, tied unto the King and head, Christ: which Church, without
hypocrisy, performs inward and outward worshippings agreeable unto the
Gospel, and again, which from Christ receives righteousness and blessing:
that is, forgiveness of sins, the holy Ghost, and life everlasting.

This description appertains unto the Church properly called, that is, unto
the Congregation which is borne a new of the holy Ghost. For in a general name
of the Church, we comprehend all those which are not enemies, but hearers of
the Gospel, yea, though they be without true fear of God, and without faith.
And seeing the Church has need of succor, this Psalm exhorts all Princes
and Governors of Commonweals that they would vouchsafe their honest and
peaceable succors, unto such as teach and learn the Gospel, and not to
exercise cruelty against this poor and needy Congregation, which retains
the heavenly doctrine. But how few such personages do yield unto this
exhortation, the matter it self, and the event thereof shows. For many
Princes set forth their written decrees, even with blood against the
Confessors of the true doctrine. Others take upon them the defense or
patronage of fanaticall Teachers. Some trifle or dally with the Bishops,
that they may catch or gripe into their hands, the riches of their Collidges,
or Ecclesiastical promotions. But although the greater part of Princes do
swerve from the rule of their duty, yet notwithstanding, God turns the minds
of some, so, that they acknowledge the doctrine of the Gospel, and for to
nourish the Church, as it were banished in the world: such Princes both do
understand, and execute their functions or offices given them from God. For
these sayings are known full well, viz. Psalm, 82. I said ye are Gods, etc.
That is, you are Gods Vizegerents or deputies, and do impart Gods benefits
unto men, namely, The Law of of God, righteousness, and peace. Again, as in
Esaias. 49. Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Nurses.
verse. 23.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the
world, and they that dwell therein.


THE Prophet here, begins his description of the Church, from the head and
the place wherein the Church is gathered. For although the Church is not tied
unto tytles of Bishops, and ordinary succession, as they call it: yet, is it
not with out a Head and Governor. For the Head of the Church, is the Son of
GOD, unto whom (from the eternal Father,) all power is given both in Heaven
and Earth. This Governor, wise and mighty, gathers unto himself a Church,
even out of all mankind, by the preaching of the Gospel, and defends the
same from the tyranny of the devil, that it may be his everlasting
inheritance: and out of this place is taken manifold doctrine and consolation.
For first, it witnesses, that Christ is truly and by nature God, and for
because the Name of the true God, is given unto Christ, and that the work of
creation, is properly ascribed unto the nature of the omnipotency only, it is
needful that there be in Christ, a nature both divine and omnipotent. Let
therefore this testimony be adjoined unto other sayings, which make most plain
and notable manifestation of the divine nature of the Messiah.

Secondly, he admonishes great and small, to remember that they are not Lords
of the earth, but only Court keepers or Bailiffes, and that they must render
up accounts of their Stewardship administered: of this sentence, if Governors
or Rulers would be earnestly mindful, undoubtedly they would do their
duties in the fear of the Lord and in humility: neither would they with such
liberty, exercise tyranny and rapine. At this day, because many do falsely
imagine, that they are Lords properly called of their own riches, they bear
sway with puffed pride, and carry hautie minds, and do fleese their Subjects
with immoderate exacting them: but after a while, they shall render accounts to
the Lord of the Feoe, and like vassals undutiful, shall suffer great and just
punishment, with the loss of their Feoe.

Thirdly, he teaches of Christian liberty, in the which sense verily it is
cited by S. Paul, in the 1. Cor. 10. Whatsoever comes into the shambles, of
that eat ye, asking no question for conscience sake: The earth is the Lords,
and all that is therein. verse. 25. Let therefore the dreams of difference in
meats be refelled: and with giving of thanks, let us eat either of flesh or
of fish, and let us not under a certain superstition, fear any offense,
wherein there is none offense.

Fourthly, he gives consolation unto the godly ones, which for the profession
of the true doctrine, do live in exile. For, seeing [the earth is the Lords.]
let us not doubt but he takes care of the^, that the godly ones may have
mean harbors and succors: according to that saying of Christ, In my Fathers
house are many dwellings, etc. John, 14, verse, 2. And we see at this present
day, many notable examples of Christ's providence, preparing for his Church,
and the godly exiles, safe dwelling places, and giving Halcyon days, even in
the midst of the raging seaes and storms of Germany.

Let us therefore crave and expect of Christ the Lord of all the world,
succors and harbors, and other benefits necessary for this life, and let us
not (discouraged with fear of banishments) cast away our profession of the
Gospel: for as much as his promise is true, and nothing fallible, namely,
First seek ye the kingdom of God, and all other things shall be given unto
you. Math, 6, 33.

Verse. 2. For he has founded it upon the Seas: and prepared it upon the
floodes.

He amplifieth the wisdom and power of the Head of the Church which shines
and is notably seen in the framing and preservation of the world: for who
would not be astonished, thinking that the earth could without props, be
settled at rest in the midst of the world? Who meruaileth not by right, that the
Sea, since it is far greater then the land, does not ouerwhelme all mankind
with the ouerflowing thereof? Furthermore, who can without great admiration)
behold the Heaven, and the Clouds above us, wandering without pyllers to
support such a mighty mass, and variety of bodies.

These are the works of the Workmaisters unspeakable wisdom and power, the
consideration whereof might move us, to this purpose, that we should believe,
the Church is preserved and defended by God without visible helps and
safegards. For if God on this manner, now sustain these creatures senseless,
and which shall perrish in the consuming of this world by fire: who doubts
(that the Church, which is Gods heritage, and shall worship him in all
eternities) shall be by Gods mighty hand nourished and sustained: as most
sweetly it is said in the forty six Chapter of Esaias. You are borne of me from
the womb, and brought up of me from the birth. verse 3. I have made you, I
will also bear you, and I will carry you, and I will deliver you. verse. 14. I
omit to speak of the Philosophers disputations, touching the settling or stay
of the earth, least I here seem to be rather reasoning philosophically then
divinely.

Verse. 3. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, or who shall rise up in
his holy place?

Verse. 4. Even he that has cleene hands, and a pure heart: and that has not
lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his Neighbor.

He proponeth a question concerning a matter, the greatest of all others,
namely, which, what a one, and where the true Church of GOD is? and thereunto
makes answer. The Church (says he) is a Congregation embracing the word
delivered from GOD, and acknowledging calling upon and worshipping God,
according to the rule of his word, and abhorring from all opinions and
worshippings which agree not with that rule.

This description is made more notable, by considering an Antithesis, or
contrariety between the true Church, and the pontifical crew, which for
riches and promotions, falsely challenge unto themselves the most holy name of
the Church. For in this pontifical crewe, first does vanity flourish and rule
the roast, that is, confusion of opinions and worshippings. for who knows not
how filthy things are Idols, prayer for the dead, and the profaning of the
Lords Supper in funeral Masses, and Masses for money? It is manifest also, that
their Books touching canonical satis-factions, are full of errors, darkning
the light of the Gospel.

Finally, sure it is, that their Books speak not rightly, touching remission
of sins, and to be the suppression of faith embracing remission of sins:
yea, and that by the^ a contrary opinion is defended. viz. That men ought
always to doubt of the remission of sins.

Moreover, the hearts of hypocrites are unclean, that is, without true fear of
GOD, and without faith, because they are proud with the persuasion of their
wisdom and righteousness, in love with themselves, and debase and despise
others far under themselves, as did the Pharisie in the 18. of S. Lukes
Gospel. These sins with a malignant countenance, repugne the fear of God,
and the confidence in the mercy of GOD. Thirdly, their tongue is full of
periuries, that is, blasphemies against the true doctrine, which they unjustly
condemn of herisie and sedition. Last of all, their hands are imbrued with the
blood of the godly ones, which they sley for the profession of the Gospel, and
for the reprehending of their Idolatry.

Now on the contrary part, let the Image of the true Church be considered.
First of all, the true Church embraces the Gospel given by Christ, and
declineth not unto vanity, that is, does not corrupt the doctrine, mingling
thereunto lewd opinions and worshyppings, but shunneth and with all her heart
trembles to have corruption of doctrine, and voluntary serving of God.
Moreover, she has a clean heart, that is, as S. Peter interprets it: A heart
purified by Faith. 1. Peter, 1.22. And as S. Paul says, comes with
boldness unto the throne of Grace. Heb. 4.16. Finally, she has not a
blasphemous tongue, nor hands defiled with the blood of the holy ones, but
rather suffers the unrighteous judgments of the world, and is laid open to
al chances of sudden dangers. But here is a necessary admonition to be
repeated, that this description of the Church so properly called, is not set
down as touching hypocrites, intermingled with the true Church in outward
society: for although they of the true Church, profess true doctrine, and are
not polluted with manifest Idols, yet in heart they are careless, and without
repentance. Such, a great multitude are there always in the Church, like as
the Parable of the seed signifies. Math. 13.

Verse. 5. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from
the God of his salvation.

When we see the Church to be oppressed with a greater weight or force of
calamities the^ the rest of the skom of mankind is, we were wont to ask the
question, what peculiar good gyfts, or what treasures had the Church? for it
seems a thing absurd, that the Church dare promise unto her hearers great
benefits, when she herself is ouerlayd with greatest miseries? With this
objection here, he meets thus: affirming that the Church receives excellent
gyfts of God, viz. Righteousness, blessing, and everlasting salvation. Let us
suffer the Heathen people, the Mahometists, and the Popish sectaries, to
preach and extol their promotions, riches, and pleasures, we will highly
magnify this prerogative of the Church, that in this certain Congregation,
righteousness, blessing, and everlasting salvation is bestowed.

But let the word of righteousness be understood, not of discipline, which is
an unclean hypocrisy, but of the imputation of righteousness in this life,
and of the righteousness finished or consumate after this life, which shall be
such as the Law requires, namely, the excellent acknowledgement of GOD, and
the love undefiled.

Blessing is opposed against cursing, and signifies deliverance from Gods
wrath, destruction of sin and of death, and the gift of the holy Ghost
beginning in us new light, and sanctifying us unto life everlasting. In the
name of salvation, are contained all merueilous deliverances of ye Church, even
from the very first beginning, and the raising from death, unto glory and life
everlasting. Let us therefore marvel at, and highly advance these proper
benefits of the Church, and for them let us render thanks unto God: and let us
not follow the foolishnes of Glaucus, who preferred brazen Armor before
golden. Let us not more love pleasure and riches, then GOD and good gyfts,
whereof I have spoken.

Verse. 6. This is the generation of them that seek him, even of them that
seek thy face, o Jacob.

The difference between the Church and the ungodly ones, does specially
set forth this verse. The ungodly ones seek after pleasures, and their
instruments, as in the verses of Mantuan it is said.

Ambitiosus honos, and opes, et faeda voluptas,
Haec tria, pro trino Numine mundus habet.
Desire of honor, wealth, and filthy pleasure,
The world these three, for three Gods holds ever.
But the Church content with food and raiment, seeks especially after GOD,
and least she should stray a wrong way from GOD, follows the rule of his
divine manifestation, in no point failing her. For it is the singular wisdom
of the Church, not to seek for God by any other means, then by his word and
testimonies from him, neither to call upon any other God, then upon this very
same GOD, who has made himself known unto Jacob, that is, unto his Church.

Verse. 7. Lyftvppe your heads, o ye gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.

It was the manner of the people in the East parts of the world, to exercise
their judgment in the gates: for as now the Senators do meet, and sit
together in the Court, so, in times past, they which were about to consult upon
the causes of the Common wealth, met and satte in the gates.

The Prophet David therefore, exhorts here all Princes and Governors, that
they would give harbor and succor unto the Gospel and to the Church, and to
think, that this ought to be their first and special care, that every one of
them bestow in his place of calling, his counsel and endeavor, to retain
the Ministry of the Gospel, in public administration of the Churches, to
the nourishing of the necessary studies and exercises of the Church, and to the
defending and maintaining of the Ministers, Teachers, and Scholars in the
Church and Schools.

Manifestly it appears, that in Kingdoms and Cities, these Offices or
duties, are every where neglected of the most Governors or Magistrates. They
seek not for apt or fit Pastors to their Churches, there are not sallaries
or mean wages given unto such as are able to serve in place, there is not
youth sufficiently employed, unto the necessary studies or exercises of the
Church of GOD: no, rather in Princes Courts there be, which fleese from the
Preachers of the Gospel, their due deserved wages and stipends, and do bestow
the same upon those, whose help or diligence they do use, both in the
Court, and about their profane business. These things do I therefore recite,
to that end only, that the saying of this Psalm may be understood, and
applied unto the same use.

We therefore with this speech, do admonish Princes and Cities, to have
care, that the Gospel may be purely and rightly preached in their Churches,
and that we may comfort all those, which suffer dangers and miseries for the
advancement thereof. Finally, with this very same speech do we accuse
Tyrants, which go about to destroy the Ministry of the Gospel, and others
also which neglect the setting forth of the same. For if Governors or Rulers,
have only the oversight, charge, and keeping, of men's bodies and goods,
undoubtedly I know not, what difference there is, between them, and Heardesmen
or Pastors. Nay, what are Commonweals flourishing with wealth and power,
(wanting true acknowledgment and calling upon God,) but Lanthornes without
light, and a certain Ciclopicall hugenes, having blind and rash wandering
motions of their minds? Let therefore Magistrates understand, and execute the
offices of their vocations, which else where in one word are comprehended, where
the Psalm says: I said ye are Gods, that is, bearing Gods Office, or being
Gods Deputies, and bestowing Gods benefits upon men: that is, the doctrine of
God, righteousness and peace. This testimony without long circumstaunces,
teaches, that it is the special chief work of all Magistrates, to advance
and preserve the knowledge of GOD, in mankind.

Verse. 8. Who is the King of glory? it is the Lord, strong and mighty, even
the Lord, mighty in battle.

Always there has been, are, and shall be, some Kings or mighty Princes,
enemies unto the Gospel: these men's good wills toward the Gospel, he finely
sets forth, saying: [who is the King of glory?] for these Princes despise
the doctrine of the Gospel, as a thing fabulous, and many of the^ practice the
destruction thereof, as if it were the firebrande of seditions, and the plague
of Commonweals. But although in manifold manner, the advancement of the
Gospel be hindered, yet it will have his operation notwithstanding, according
to those verses.

VT aggeribus ruptis cum spumens Amnis
Exut, oppositasque euicit gurgite moles:
Fertur in aruafurens cumulo Camposque
Per omnes, cum stabulis armenta trahit.
AS when a frothing foming floode,
the broken bancks ouer-runs:
And so contrary mighty stoppes,
by great increase ouer-comes,
Of violent force, is carried forth
through all the fields, even there
With fold or Cottage, quite away
the Cattle so does bear.
So Christ the King of glory and mighty in battle, (though whole Kingdoms
repine and repugne thereat) disperseth the sound of the Gospel, and gathers
him a Church, and defends the same meruailously against Tyrants: furthermore,
the meaning of this saying shall be more notable, and sweeter unto us, if we
do consider the History, as touching the restoring and purifying of the
Gospel, by the ministry of the reverend Father, D. Martin Luther. For who
remembers not, what manner Decrees were published against the doctrine of the
Gospel, when it first grew up again amongst us. Neither indeed did the Enemies
only bestow their counsel and endeavor, to extinguish the light of the
Gospel, but also troublesome and unquiet persons, who would seem to be
professors of the Gospel, (with moving seditions) have alienated many men's
minds from this doctrine: but yet amongst so diverse chances, and so many
differences of things, the pure doctrine of the Gospel is spread near and
far of, against which, the very gates of hell shall not prevail. For he that
is in us, is stronger and mightier then the Prince of this world.

Verse. 9. Lift up your heads, (o ye gates) and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors: and the King of glory shall come in.

Verse. 10. Who is the King of glory? even the Lord of Hosts, he is the King
of glory.

The self same phrase of speech unto the Magistrates, is not in vain, nor
rashly repeated: for first this repeticion declares, with what severity God
requires, that they which sit at the helm in the Commonweals, may be
moved with care of helping forward the advancement of the Gospel: moreover,
it signifies tender affection of very many Governors or Princes toward the
Church. For, some neglect the care for necessary doctrine: others are of that
savage beastly blood-sucking and rigorous disposition, that they exercise
cruelty against the Teachers and professors of the Gospel. Unto such does the
Psalm in this place denounce punishments: as if he said. If you will wage your
battayles against Christ, know, ye shall come to utter destruction, for he is
the Lord of Hosts, and mighty in battle: that is, he vanquisheth and
destroys Tyrants, as Iulianus the Apostata cried out, Thou have conquered me,
o Galilaean. And in the Image of Senacherib, (as Herodotus says) was written
in Greek, this sentence.

Jn me intuens disce pietatem.
By the beholding here of me,
Let godliness be learnd of thee.
A Psalm of David. Ad te Domine leuaui. etc.
The Argument.
LET us always have in our eyes, the sum of that doctrine which Christ
himself sets down: when he commands to preach Repentance, and
Remission of sins: for God will have his Church by some means or other, to
acknowledge the greatness of sin sticking in the natures of men, and the
greatness of mercy for Christ's sake promised: to the end she may know, that
she cannot satis-fie the Law of God, nor by discipline be just before GOD, but
ought to seek remission of sins, by and through the Mediator. Unto this
sum of doctrine, appertains this twenty five Psalm; for first it heapeth
up the greatness of sin, which how soever it be, may be so deemed or reputed
by the continual flames of men's lusts: who is so senseless furious, that
dare boldly say, there is little evil in man's nature, when he has doubtings
of Gods providence, and blind security, whereby it comes to pass, that men
either do lightly, or not at all, fear the judgment and wrath of God? Also
the love of our selves, wherein we serve more our own pleasure and glory,
then the glory of God? Touching all these evils, this Psalm says, O remember
not the sins and offenses of my youth, nor my transgressions. verse 6.
Again, Be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. verse 10. that is, much and
manifold: but it is to be lamented, that there are in all ages lyings preached,
whereby the greatness of sin is made less and obscured.

After this, he heapeth up, aduaunceth and amplifieth, the greatness of Gods
mercy, receiving man's nature fallen, and not rejecting the same amongst the
devils: for he says expreslie, Call to remembrance O Lord, thy tender
mercies, and thy loving kindness, which has been ever of old. verse 5. When
our first Parents did fall, and had procured unto themselves eternal
punishments, God in his most just wrath, remembering his mercy, received
wretched mankind into his favor, and turned the punishment upon his Son:
unto this history doubtless the Prophet here alludeth, where he says,
Remember thy mercies which have been of old.

But least any man esteem, that out of the true Church this benefit, (namely
remission of sins) is given: he binds expressly his promise unto the Church
on this manner: All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as
keep his Covenant, and his testimonies. verse 9. That is, the Citizens of
the Church, which hear and embrace the Gospel, and (obeying the preaching of
the same,) do truly repent, and flee in their prayers unto the Mediator, do
obtain from God, remission of their sins and life everlasting.

Therefore this Psalm beautifieth a special Article in the Creed, I believe
the forgiveness of sins. And because we have not only need of forgiveness of
sins, but also of other benefits, he craves of God, the government and gift
of the holy Ghost, defense in dangers, and the universal deliverance of the
Church. Heerehence it is a thing perspicuous, what plenty of doctrine and
consolation, this xxv. Psalm sets down unto the Reader.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. Unto thee (o Lord) have I lift up my soul, my GOD in thee do I
put my trust: o let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph
over me.


THere is a very great difference between the prayers of the Heathen, and our
prayers: for the Heathen people wander a wrong way, and call upon they know
not what, neither may they persuade themselves to be heard: as Haecuba (of
whom Euripides speaks) cries. O Jupiter, auicquid es, sine hoc coelum, sieve
men's infidens huic coelo. viz. O Jupiter, what soever thou art, either this
heaven, or the mind settled in this heaven: so that a contrary wise they wander
from the true GOD, and know not his will.

But, our manner of calling upon the true God, beholds and speaks unto him,
who coming from his secret seat, has by assured testimonies revealed
himself, and made his promises unto us: and our prayer, wisely and fervently
discerns him from the lying Gods of all Nations.

For like as the Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Daniell and
others, in their manner of praying, did know that they spoke unto this true
God, who had made himself known in his promises, and by bringing the people
out of Egypt: and did pray and believe that they were received and heard, even
for the promised seed sake: so do we also call upon the same true God, who
is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, crucified for us, and raised from death
to life: and for this Mediators sake, we believe that we are heard. That this
admonition, touching the difference of true and false invocation is necessary,
no doubt at all it is, which let us undoubtedly make familiar unto us, so often
as we begin our prayer and thanksgiving.

But, after we have separated our manner of praying, from the furies of them
which worship Idols, let us distinguish the same from the vain babbling of
Hypocrites: for Hypocrites make their prayers, without any true motion of the
heart, as of the Pharisees it is said in the sixth of S. Mathewe. But in us, let
there be a consent of the heart and voice, and a heart enflamed with the light
and love of GOD: let it manifest our divine motions, with a voice worshipping
or praising GOD.

Therefore David says here expressly: [Vnto thee have I lift up my soul,]
furthermore, because without faith, no Prayer is effectual, he adds
heereunto a mention of his faith, resting in God, for the Mediators sake: and
unto this virtue, which is the proper ornament of the Church, he attributes a
notable effect, because (says he) In thee I do put my trust, neither shall I
be ashamed: neither shall I be any matter or cause unto mine enemies, wherein
they shall laugh me to scorn, or busy themselves against me, to reproach or
revile me: for, faith is the vanquisher of the devil, and all his instruments,
and suffers not the faithful or believing soul, to be cast out of Gods
favor by any engines, how craftily and subtly devised soever they be.

Verse. 2. For all they that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed: but such as
transgress without cause, shall be put to confusion.

A most sweet promise, wherewith he stirs up and confirms himself in
time of prayer: for our unworthiness murmureth against us, and endeavors
what it may, to drive away fearful minds from praying. Against this
fearfulness, we must oppose the voice of the Gospel, which affirms, that
(though yet defiled) we are assuredly notwithstanding freely received for the
Son of Gods sake. But the promise is amplyfied, by adding thereunto the
Antithesis. Such as transgress without cause, shall be put to confusion: that
is, hypocrites and others shall be confounded, which have confidence in their
own wisdom, righteousness and power, and move or stir up either unjust or
unnecessary matters.

Verse. 3. Show me thy ways (o Lord) and teach me thy paths.

Verse. 4. Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me, because thou art the God
of my salvation, in thee has been my hope all the day long.

How necessary this prayer is, the furies of Epicures do well show, the
dotages of the Stoics, Academicall dubitations, and other infinite errors
also manifest the same, wherewith man's mind is entangled, except it be governed
with the word of God, and with the holy Ghost.

A great number of men there is, which imagine, that GOD is nothing. The
Stoics do tie GOD unto second causes or means, and say that he can do none
other wise then even as second causes do move. The Academicks do defend a
distrust or doubting in Religion and matters divine.

Finally, the furies of Heretics are so great in variety, that no man is
able to comprehend them either in thought, or express them in words. We
therefore, thinking upon these monsters of opinions, let us be afraid to fall
into them, let us bewail man's blindness and boldness, and let us pray unto
God, that he would govern us with his light, so that we wander not a wrong
way from the truth.

Verse. 5. Call to remembrance o Lord thy tender mercies, and thy loving
kindness, which has been ever of old.

Now he teaches plainly, with what confidence he may come unto GOD: although
I know my self to be unjust, and have deserved punishment, yet I flee for
succor unto thy mercy, and do believe I am received, for the Mediators sake
promised unto the Fathers, and sent at the time appointed.

Truly thou might justly have destroyed our first Parents after their fall,
even as thou destroyedst Sodom, and the Towns near the same: but thy heart
relented in thee, and thy pitiful mercy enflamed thee, that thou did not
exexcute ye fury of thy displeasure, because thou art God. Which art not
delighted in our destruction, neither will thou the death of a sinner, but that
he may be converted and live. With the same mercy thou sauedst Noah in the
Deluge, and reuokedst Abraham from error and Idolatry, broughtest the people
out of Egypt, and finally have mercifully received Aaron and others
innumerable, which have horribly fallen.

Seeing therefore, even from the beginning, thou have set forth thy free
promise touching remission of sins, to be given us by thy mercy, and have by
very many examples witnessed, that thou receiuest them which embrace that
promise, I do earnestly beseech thee, that of thy unspeakable mercy, thou
would also receive me into thy favor, for the promised Lord and Savior his
sake.

Verse. 6. Oh remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, nor my
transgressions: but according to thy mercy, think thou upon me (o Lord) for
thy goodness.

This principal peticion in all the Psalm, is to be dilligently considered
of, not only so, that our carnal security and hypocrisy (which makes sin
seem little) might be amended, but also that the greatness of Gods mercy might
be looked upon.

The sin of his youth, he calls all that weight of sin, which as children
borne we bring with us, darkness of mind, a contrariety of will from God, and a
contumacie or disobedience of heart. Transgressions, he understands to be
actual sins, which are partly voluntary, and partly not voluntary, also
sins of ignorance and negligence: these so great misdeedes does he crave to
be forgiven him, and to be blotted out of all memory, by the immense and
unspeakable goodness and mercy of GOD.

But seeing the whole place as touching sin, is else where often repeated, I
will stay no longer in this verse, but I will bring the Reader to consider the
sum of this doctrine.

Verse. 7. Gracious and righteous is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners
in the way.

Verse. 8. Them that be meek shall he guide in judgment: and such as be
gentle, them shall he learn his way.

How excellent and sweet a virtue graciousnes, or goodness is, the sayings of
Menander declare, Bonus vir, est commune bonum: A good man is a common bliss.
Also, Quam dulce temperamentum est copulatic bonitatis et prudentiae.

How sweet a mixture may that be,
Where goodness with wisdom joined we see.
The example of this most excellent virtue, is most notably seen in GOD, who
(as Christ says) suffers the sun to shine both upon the good and the evil,
and sends rain on the just and unjust. Math. 5. verse. 45. And not that
indeed only, but also of his own free will offers us reconciliation, and
with a certain abundance of his goodness, requires us to come into favor
with him, and asks no satis-faction of us for our offense, but would have his
Son to pay that ransom.

But least any man think, that these things in respect of their greatness,
are feigned or dissembling, let him hear how S. Paul speaks. 2. Cor. 5. Now
then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we
pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reeonciled to God. verse. 20. For he
made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. verse. 21. But so great is the force of Gods
gracious goodness, that it can neither be conceived in mind, neither may it be
uttered with man's speech.

Neither is he only gracious, but also just, that is equal according to one
rule which he has set down: for as he reprehendeth and accuses all men,
without exception, by the voice of the Law, so he receives all men without
partiality, according to the free and universal promise of his Gospel: Come
unto me (says he) all ye which labor and are laden, and I will refresh you.
Math. 11.28. And although by the ministry of the Law and the Gospel, he
teaches sinners which are curable, and also by punishments, which are
admonishers and publishers of sin, yet in all these he is faithful, and
suffers us not to be tempted above our strength, but gives an end with
temptation, that we may be able to bear the same.

So he, not only with Nathans speech rebuked David, but for a certain season
took his kingdom from him, and having chastened him in his judgment,
restored him into his kingdom. For judgment is opposed against fury, and
signifies mitigation of pains which we have deserved: as Jeremy in his tenth
Chapter says: Correct me O Lord in thy judgment, not in thy fury, least
thou bring me unto nothing. verse. 24.

Verse. 9. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep
his covenant and his testimonies.

In this most sweet little verse, he comprehends the sum or substance of
his promises, as if he said: God is truly merciful and beneficial toward
his Church, which embraces the word delivered by him, and in faith of his
word calls upon him and worshippeth him: so S. Paul as touching the
gathering of the Church from out of the Jews and Gentiles, says in his 15.
Chapter to the Romans. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the
Circumscition, that is, (of the people circumcised) for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises made unto the Fathers. verse 8. And let the Gentiles
praise God. verse. 9. etc. And to omit other testimonies of the Mercy and Truth
of GOD, how greatly does that Prayer of Jeremy delight me, in the third
Chapter of his Lamentations: It is the mercies of the Lord that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not. verse. 22.

But to the end the phrase both in this place and else where often mentioned,
may be rightly understood, I will here make answer unto the objection of
the Munckes: [God is gracious and merciful unto them that keep his
testimonies.] No man keeps the testimonies of God, because no man satis-fieth
the Law: therefore no man is loved of God. I answer, we must look upon the
kind or manner of ye argument, unto which the Mayor apertayneth, whether it be
the voice of the Law, or in truth the saying of the Gospel, bidding us to
embrace this doctrine with faith and good conscience: as the phrase is such in
all the 119. Psalm every where, I have kept thy Law. Therefore the Mayor is
not to be understood as the Law speaks, of the perfect fulfilling, but it is
to be understood as touching the profession of the true doctrine, as the
Gospel speaks, in having faith and a good conscience: therefore to keep the
Testament of GOD, and his testimonies, is to embrace the doctrine delivered
from God, with faith and good conscience, and to profess and advance the same.

Concerning this profession (such as all the godly ones have, and such as is
both necessary and possible to be) does the Mayor speak: and the whole
sentence contains both most sweet doctrine and consolation. It teaches that
they are the members of the Church, who do embrace and love the true doctrine,
and not the enemies or despysers of the doctrine: and he adds a proper
promise unto the Church, thus: All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth.
If we make manifest the Mayor, we must deny the Minor. No man keeps the
testimonies of God: yea they all do keep them which embrace the true doctrine
with faith and good conscience: unto all these is consolation here set
down, to the end they may know, that they indeed are the members of the
Church, and that God has care over them.

Verse. 10. For thy Names sake, o Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is
great.

He repeateth a principal peticion notably amplified with three
circumstaunces, whereof the first is, a free and mere confession of sin. The
second a consolation in the forgiveness of sins. And the third a recital of
the causes impulsive and final.

Therefore, as to that which concerns the confession of sin, let that
speech be always in our sight, which S. John has in his first Epistle and
first Chapter. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
there is no truth in us. But if we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
verse. 8.9.

For GOD requires an earnest acknowledgement and confession of sins, and he
will have the praise of righteousness and mercy attributed unto him: of
righteousness, truly in accusing and punishing sin, but of mercy in
receiving and saving such as fall, which turn and are converted unto him.
Which things, since so they be, let every one acknowledge him self as a
wretched person, in this blindness and security, horribly to neglect the wrath
of GOD, and by many means to stray away from his precepts, and to hurt others
with many scandales, and to procure punishment unto themselves and others, and
that they can not understand, either the greatness or multitude of their sins
or strayings, but let every one confess, that he has deserved present and
eternal punishment, and with unfeigned sorrow let him cry: Against thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou might be
justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged. Psalm. 51. verse. 4.
And let not fears only remain in us, but let a consolation of faith come
thereunto also, which believes the wrath of GOD is pacified by his son, and
that for his sons sake our sins are forgiven us, and that righteousness and
life is restored unto us.

Let us also ascribe unto God in asking forgiveness of our sins, two causes,
the impulsive and the final. The impulsive, is the unmeasurable and true
fatherly mercy, wherein he will not the death of a sinner, but that he be
converted and live: for as the Father has compassion over his Children, so the
Lord has mercy of them that fear him. This cause does Esaias ascribe unto God,
in his 64. Chapter, and 8. and 9. verses, saying thus: But thou o Lord, thou
art our Father. etc. Be not angry o Lord above measure, neither remember
iniquity for ever.

The final cause is, that the exceeding greatness of thy mercy may be
honored, and that others which are in great fear and trembling, may return
unto thee, and worship thee again unfeignedly.

You see then that every word here, has his propper efficacy, and that in a
very little verse greatest matters are included.

Verse. 11. What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose.

Verse. 12. His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the
Land.

Verse. 13. The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him: and he will
show them his covenant.

Godliness (says S. Paul) is profitable unto all things, having the promises
of this present life, and of the life to come. 1. Tim. 4.8. And godliness
contains the fear of God, faith, and other virtues of the first Table: what
be then the fruits of godliness? The first and most necessary of all, is the
doctrine and government in our private life and vocation. For man's wisdom,
except it be governed by God, is unhappy, according to that saying of Jeremy
in his tenth Chapter: I know o Lord, that the way of man is not in himself,
neither is it in man to walk and to direct his steps. verse. 23. The other
fruit is, (...) bonorum, the additions of some good things, which are either
the instruments or ornaments of this life: touching this fruit Christ says:
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other
things shall be ministered unto you. Math 6, verse 33. The 3. fruit is, the
prosperity of our Children, as it is said in an other Psalm: The generation
of the just, shall be blessed. And no doubt of it, that sentence which
Theocritus recites, was received from our first Fathers.

Piorum liberi faeliciores sunt, impiorum infaeliciores. viz.
Godly men's children more happy be,
Then are the children of the ungodly.
The fourth effect, is the presence and help of God in calamities: for he
calls that a secret, because reason (without the word verily believes God
cares not for afflicted persons. But the godly ones do know, and that for
most assured they hold by all means, that God is present in calamities, or (as
the Prophet says,) God dwells with the contrite and humble spirit, that he
may quicken the heart of the contrite, and set up the Spirit of the humble.

Verse. 14. Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord: for he shall pluck my
feet out of the net.

The prayer of King Iehosaphat is known, which agreeeth with this verse, When
we know not what is to be done, this only is left us, to lift up our eyes
unto thee. 2. Chro. 20.12. For therefore is the Church spoiled and bereft of
man's helps, that she may call upon God, and acknowledge herself to be governed
by the help of God only: yea thereby to be preserved and defended in so great
variety of dangers, which hang over her nights, and days.

And that I may not need to say any thing of the other ages of the Church,
this is doubtless most manifest, the Church waxing old, shall have no other
succouring place or refuge, but only unto the bosom of God, as he says in
the 46. Chapter of Esaias: You shall be borne in my bosom, I will carry you even
unto the extreme old age of your hoarie hayres. verse. 4.

Verse. 15. Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am poor, and in
misery.

The Church is always as a widow, and an Orphane in this world, and has no
other Patron or defender but God, who is the Judge of widows and Father of
Orphans. Hitherto apertaineth that parable mentioned by Christ, in the 18. of
S. Luke of the widow so often calling upon the Judge, which at length, through
her importunity urging him, did wring out of him both the knowledge and
judgment of her cause.

Verse. 16. The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: o bring thou me out of my
troubles.

Verse. 17. Look upon mine adversity and misery: and forgive me all my sin.

In the tenth Psalm, all this whole meaning or purpose of the Prophet is set
down, whereunto this Hypothesis or ground being applied, is made more
notable and sweeter. That thou may take the matter into thine hand, the
poor commits himself unto thee, for thou art the helper of the
friendlesse. Psalm. 10. verse 16. As if he had said: the greatest number of
Governors and people, either neglects, or forsakes, or with deadly enmity
oppugneth the Church, unfeignedly enduring the sorrows of a woman in
childbirth. But although few there be which sorrow for Iosephes harm, and are
moved with merciful cares toward the Church, yet although she be full of
ulcers and sores, that she cannot minister physic unto others: so they by
reason of their slender ability, can neither help nor save the Church.

Seeing therefore no sauegarde remains unto ye Church, but this one, which
she craves and looks for of thee, it is thy power, and propperly
appertaining to thy divine and fatherly Name, not to see the Church destitute
of necessary sauegard and help: but to deliver and bring her from destruction,
and to adorn her with gifts of this present life, and of the life eternal.

And indeed not in vain or unadvisedly, but with great regard does David
here intertexe, amongst other his Prayers, the peticion of his sins to be
forgiven him: for other benefits cannot be obtained, except we first receive
forgiveness of sins and reconciliation, then which benefit, none can be
thought greater. For to how little purpose should other benefits profit us,
without the forgiveness of our sins? For as Sophocles says: Hostium dona
non sunt dona, and non sunt vtilia. viz.
The gyfts of our enemies, no gifts at all be,
Nor any thing profit our state or degree.


Let therefore the praying for this special and greatest benefit, be included
amongst other peticions, and let that saying of the Psalm be much and often
repeated of us. And forgive me all my sins.

Verse. 18. Consider mine enemies how many they are: and they bear a tyrannous
hate against me.

Verse. 19. O keep my soul and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for, I
have put my trust in thee.

The Church is assaulted by enemies innumerable, as the Rock in ye Sea is
always beaten upon with rushing waves, for it is both rent in pieces with
discordes or disagreements in opinions, and feels the cruelty of Tyrants.
But we are admonished by this saying: [They hated me with an unjust hatred,]
that we do suffer (as S. Peter says) not as murderers, or thieves, or evil
dooers 1. Pet, 4.15. But as Christians. verse, 16. that is, for the confession
of the Gospel.

Let not filthiness of life, spoils, too much unjust better portions
allotted, tyrannical cruelties, and other vices, procure us just hatreds.
Moreover, let good men (which are far from these vices) know, that ingratitude
is a common disease almost of all mankind, and let them patiently bear, that
for their special good will and great benefits, they have evil will, hatred,
reproaches, and other evils rendered unto them: like as all Histories are full
of the examples of ingratitude.

Verse. 20. Let righteousness and perfect dealing wait upon me, because I have
trusted in thee.

This Prayer agrees with that saying of Esaias, in his 8. Chapter, Bind up the
testimony, seal up the Law among my Disciples. verse 16. That is, I see
there will follow most sorrowful darkness, amongst the people of GOD, and that
most men will cast away from them, the doctrine of the Messiah, of faith, and
true invocation, and of true worshippings of GOD, and will embrace the Ethnicks
opinions, as concerning a worldly government of the Messiah, and of heaping up
sacrifices: but O God, I beseech thee keep the word (that thou have delivered
unto the Prophets) in the minds of the^, which hear, learn, and embrace thy
doctrine prophetical: and even keep this doctrine sealed, least they either
loose the word it self, or the natural meaning thereof: so David prays in
this place, Let righteousness and perfect dealing etc. That is, preserve the
Gospel, and true understanding thereof, in the minds of them that call upon
thee, and suffer us not to be ensnared with errors, but govern us with thy
holy Spirit, that in all our enterprises and actions, we may godly and
inuiolately follow the rule of thy word. For they that step a nail breadth
from this rule, and follow the opinions of reason, are tossed with great
error, and wrapped in the ignorance of the greatest matters.

Verse. 21. Deliver Israel (o God) out of all his troubles.

God will have us in prayer, to be moved with godly care for the welfare of
others, and of the whole Church as it is written. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem Psalm. 122. verse. 6.

Let us therefore when we pray for our own matters, join thereunto our
prayers for the preservation of the whole Church: and because (as I have often
said) the prayers conceived by the holy Ghost, have effect of Gods promises, no
doubt of it there remains life everlasting, wherein the Church being
delivered from all evils, shall so peaceably rest in God.

A PSALM OF DAVID. Iudica me Domine.
The Argument.
TO him that considers the dangers and calamities of the Church, the meaning
of this Psalm is not obscure, which dangers she endures for the profession
and publishing of the true doctrine; for although the industry of setting forth
the heavenly doctrine be necessary, seeing it is most severely enjoined us by
God, yet there do meet with, and accompany that industry, contempts, hatred,
poverty, banishments, and manifold miseries. The enemies of the Gospel most
cruelly accuse us, and lay in our dish, the crimes most of all to be abhorred,
as of moving sedition and heresies in the Church, and call us both heretics
and scismatiques. Unto these poysonful slanders, they adioyne a Nero-like
cruelty, and put many to death.

But to the end the fear of their raylings and punishments may nothing dismay
our minds, we must with fervent prayers beseech of God, that he would be the
Patron and Judge of our cause, and that he would maintain and defend the
same, against the rage of that murdering Congregation of Caines devotion.
These prayers and these sighs shall not be in vain, but shall assuredly
obtain preservation of the body of the Church, though in some members of her,
she be persecuted. For, so says Christ in the 18. of Luke, Now shall not God
avenge his elect, which cry day and right unto him: yea, though he suffer long
for them, I tell you he will avenge them quickly* verses, 7.8.

Therefore this Psalm shall be the more excellent, and sweeter, to those that
continually do pray for the Church, and earnestly consider of the greatness of
the dangers, wherein the Church is tossed nights and days.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. Be thou my Judge o Lord, for I have walked innocently: my trust has
been also in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall.

Verse. 2. Examine me o Lord, and prove me, try out my reins and mine heart.

Verse. 3. For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes, and I will walk
in thy truth.


Unto thy judgment (says he) do I appeal, who art the searcher of the
heart and reins: thou know, that I am neither moved with curiosity, or
any lewd lust, nor with any blind obstinacy, to embrace and profess, the
Evangelical doctrine of true invocation, of the true acknowledgement of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and which concerns all the necessary parts of a Christian
life: and that I deem it not as a thing to be rejected or cast away, but that
I therein favor and obey, thy most severe and immutable commandments, which
enjoin men rightly to call upon God, according to his Gospel, and forbid that
Idols should be worshipped.

Wherefore, seeing I have not rashly, but for thy glory and my souls health
sake, embraced ye doctrine of the Gospel, and that I endeavor by all means to
advance the same: of thee I crave most fervently, that thou would take
upon thee, the patronage both of thy cause, and of him which embraces the
doctrine of thy Church, and deliver those that are unjustly oppressed. I will
not with perspicuous words, make any longer declaration of these verses, but I
beseech the Son of GOD, that he would mercifully protect the true doctrine and
the succouring places of the Gospel, and that he would not suffer the word of
truth to be extinguished, which he has made manifest unto mankind, as it was
delivered from the bosom of his eternal Father.

Verse. 4. I have not dwelt with vain persons, neither will I have fellowship
with the deceitful.

Verse. 5. I have hated the Congregation of the wicked, and will not sit
among the ungodly.

Verse. 6. I will wash mine hands in innocence o Lord, and so will I go to
thine Altar.

Both these virtues are necessary, a confession of the true doctrine, and a
seperating of our selves from the enemies of the Gospel. For as the love of
truth, cannot be without a bitter hatred of Sophistry or dissimulation: so,
needful it is, that the keepers of the heavenly doctrine, do withal their
heart abhor and abstain, from Caines murdering Congregation: and this
separation of the true Church from the false, is most lightsomly apparent.
First in refuting opinions and worshippings striving with the word of GOD: then
afterward, in shunning false and dissembling partakings in Religion: last of
all, in avoiding the colorable dealings, which are wrought or brought to
pass, either for lucre or ease and rest sake. Touching these three manner of
ways, I will speak breefely, least any man dream that he may be a Neuter, or
of no Religion, and sit upon both stools at once.

First it appears sufficiently, that the true doctrine, is not only to be
proponed, but that false doctrines are also to be refuted: for although
politic men do hate nothing more, then to contend for Religions, yet
needful it is, that manifest Idolatries and errors, should be reprehended,
yea if the world crushed together fall utterly down. Touching this purpose, a
most manifest confirmation may be taken out of the commandment of Christ.
Beware of false Prophets. Math. 7. verses, 15.16.24. For seeing men neither
have any desire for, or flee from that they know not, it is needful that the
sleights and snares of deceitful persons, should be made manifest unto the
world, and that the vizors should be plucked off from their false
persuasions. It is not therefore enough (as many think) to preach the true
doctrine, and yet least Princes should be displeased thereat, either to be
altogether silent in refuting contrary doctrines, or to molifie or excuse any
errors.

Next of all, let us wisely and fervently beware, least with dissembling
felowships the true doctrine be obscured, because, as S. Paul says, A little
sour leven marres the whole lump of dowe. Gala, 5. verse 9. And that speech
also of Marcus Arethusius is true, which is recited by Theodoretus. lib. 3.
cap. 7. Ad impietatem, obulum confer vnum, perinde valet, ac si quis conferat
omnia: Who to impiety bestows but one half penie, in effect as much he
does, as he that all thereon bestows. Wherefore as God himself is strong,
and a ielous God, which cannot abide any society between Christ and Belial,
which doubtless is impossible: so let us flee from and beware of all succors
of felowships or partakings: seeing that saying of Sophocles is most true.

Hostium dona, non sunt dona, et non sunt vtilia.
The gyfts of our enemies no gyfts at all be,
Nor ought do avail our state or degree.
For when the enemy speaks flatteringly, and with a comicall countenance
works his tragedy, we must not trust him at any hand: Because there are seven
abominations lurking secretly in his heart, as Solomon says in his Proverbs.
chap. 26. verse. 25. I would say more to this purpose, had not our Country
Germany to her great loss, learned how much credit is to be given and
attributed unto sophistical fellowships.

Last of all, we must not color up the matter with our enemies, either for
peace or profit sake: as some now adays, having a right perceiuerance in the
true doctrine, by sinister sleights practice to win the adversaries good wills
unto them. For the adversaries are not appeased nor healed with such fair
speeches, but are even much the more stirred up, and conceive good hope the
time will come, that these guileful flatterers, leaving ye true Church at
randon, will again take themselves unto their Tents of mischiefs. But let not
us sit with vain persons, neither keep company with the crafty or
fraudulent dealers, which comes to pass, either by neglecting to refute the
enemies errors, or using a dissembling fellowship in opinions, or with ungodly
suggestion or colluding with the adversaries: but let us bear a most bitter
hatred against the murdering Congregation of Caines devotion, least we be
polluted with the society of their mad worshipping and cruelty: but let us
wash our hands in innocence, that we may walk about the Altar of the Lord.

Verse. 7. That I may show the voice of thanksgiving: and tell of all thy
wondrous works.

He recites a final cause, whereunto is to be referred, the joining together
with the true Church: therefore (says he) do I desire to be a member and
Citizen, of the most praise worthy Country the Church, that I may perform
the worshippings which GOD most severely requires, as in calling upon him, in
thanksgiving, teaching and confessing.

For in the Church only are exercised the true calling upon God,
thanksgiving, and other works of the first Table: many other virtues, as
temperance, gentleness, etc. are also found, even in them which know not God, as
in Pomponius of Athens, and other such like. But true prayer, is only proper to
the Church, and in truth is the special or chief wall of the Church, Prou. 18.
as Solomon says: The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower. That is, true
calling upon God. But let us discern the degrees: for either we crave some
thing of God, or we give thanks for benefits received: that is, we witness
that God unfeignedly helps us, and so we give him thanks, and by the
celebracion of this benefit, we stir up our selves and others unto the fear
of GOD, faith in him, and true calling upon him. But of these virtues proper to
the Church, I have elsewhere spoken oftentimes.

Verse. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place
where thine honor dwells.

The whole Psalm is a Sermon, which bids us flee from the enemies of the true
doctrine and the true Church, and to embrace the true doctrine, to love, help,
and advance the true Church. To this effect also apertaineth this little
verse. [I have loved thy Church,] which is, the Church and house wherein GOD
dwells, and which with true praises worshippeth God. To the cherishing,
helping and maintayning of this Church, I employ my studies, counsels and
labors. For God will have us to love his Church, which teaches aright, and
will have us manifest our zeal thereunto, and he will have the Ministry of
the Gospel to be reverenced and helped: like as in the 122. Psalm he
commands, saying: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. verse. 6. And straight is
added his promise of reward. They shall prosper that love thee. verse Idem.

Like as therefore in the honey Hiues, every Be bestows his labor for the
common profit of all: so, let every one of us, employ all our endeavors and
duties, for the safety and tranquillity of those societies which teach the
Gospel aright, and let us help and further godly studies, so as the pure
doctrine touching God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, may be advanced and
preferred even unto our posterity.

Verse 9. O shut not up my soul with the sinners, nor my life with the
blood-thirstie.

Verse. 10. In whose hands is wickedness: and their right hand is full of
gyfts.

He not only craves this, that he may be defended against the cruelty of
enemies, but another thing also, namely, that he might not be defiled or
stained with the society of Idolaters and Manquellers, wherewith the enemies
of the Gospel do defile themselves, and he prays also, that he may not be
ensnared in their punishments. For many there be, which are not ignorant of
the true doctrine, but yet for fear they dissemble their opinion, and with
their dissimulation, do confirm the rage of Tyrants.

Let such know, there must needs be a manifest confession, both for the glory
of God, and for to deliver others, which for confession of their faith, are
violently carried to torments. But here must the Reader be admonished of the
propper names of the enemies of the Gospel: to the end he may learn to shun
them: before in this Psalm he paynts them out with four proper terms,
calling them vain, crafty, malignant, and ungodly persons. Here he precisely
terms them sinners, blood-thirsty, practisers of evil counsels, and corrupt
Judges, or money men.

I mean not to stay long upon these, least any man should think me to take
pleasure in reproching them: but I am moved to exhort the godly ones, that
they would consider what manner of monsters the enemies of the Gospel are,
whom the holy Ghost here affirms to be compact and framed of so many and so
great vices and mischiefs.

Verse. 11. But as for me, I will walk innocently: O Lord deliver me, and be
merciful unto me.

He repeateth his prayer for defense amplified unto the Antithesis, or
contrariety: seeing with all my heart I do eschew and tremble, to follow the
ungodliness and mischiefs of the enemies of the Gospel: and with a good
conscience profess the true doctrine, of thee do I crave, and from thee do I
look for defense. For I well know, that I am not environed or fortefied with
any power against the cruelty of the Enemies, but am openly laid forth to all
their weapons, except it please thee to be my protector and defender.

Verse. 12. My foot stands aright: I will praise the Lord in the
Congregations.

In the very last verse there is added a final cause, why he craves to be
preserved: namely, that He might praise the Lord in the Congregations. This
cause must we dilligentlie consider: for God will have the Ministry of the
Gospel to be public, he will not have it in corners, as to have the
preaching of the Gospel shut up, so to be kept only as the ceremonies of
the Goddess Ceres were: but he will have ye same to be heard of all mankind,
he will have himself to be acknowledged and called upon.

Therefore will he have honest and public meetings to be, and amongst these
will he have the voice of the Gospel to sound: he will have himself there to
be worshipped and called upon. And he will have those same meetings or
Congregations, to be witnesses of the seperating of the Church of GOD, from the
Sects of other Nations, factions, and opinions.

A Psalm of David's thanksgiving after deliverance. Dominus illuminatio mea.
etc.
The Argument.
ALthough there be a great variety of motions in this Psalm perceived, yet
the principal Prayer is, that the Prophet David might be, and remain, a
member of the true Church, and that he might never be excluded from the number
of the children of GOD. This benefit he craves of God, neither in vain, nor
rashly, but has great and just causes of most fervent prayer. For it is most
sure, that (without the Church, which God in the beginning both called and
created, by promise set forth touching his Son,) there is no salvation.

For like as without the Arc of Noah in the Deluge, there were none saved upon
the earth: so without this Congregation, which embraces the Gospel, there are
no heirs of eternal fellowship with God, as the heavenly sentences do often
affirm, and as S. Paul says: Whom he has chosen, those he has called.
Romans 8. verse 30. Seeing therefore it is the chief benefit of man, to be a
fellow of this company, which shall have life and joy everlasting, and shall
enjoy the fellowship of God, it is the part of a godly mind, and of one that
thinks of his salvation, to seek which is the true Church, that he may
join himself thereunto in mind, will, and confession, that he may be part of
this Congregation and flock of Christ, and that he may utterly eschew the
enemies of the true doctrine, and of the true Church, like as in the former 26.
Psalm is said: I have hated the Congregation of the wicked. verse 5. But the
true Church is discerned from other sects by the preaching of the true
doctrine, and by the lawful use of the Sacraments: and what the voice or
preaching of the true doctrine is, the writings Proheticall and Apostolical
do show, wherein there is no doubtful doctrine as touching the foundation:
that is, touching the Articles of our faith, touching the essence and will of
God, touching the Redeemer, the Law, the promises, use of the Sacraments, and
the Ministry. But which, what manner a one, and where the Church is, in
another place else where, more plentifully is explaned.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The
Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid?

Verse. 2. When the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes) came upon me, they
stumbled and fell.

Verse. 3. Though an hoaste of men were laid against me, yet shall not mine
heart be afraid: and though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my
trust in him.


EVen as the Painter Tymanthes, could not describe Agamemnons countenance,
beholding the sacrifice of his Daughter Iphigenia: so no phrase of speech can
display the feruencies of faith, vanquishing fears, and tremblings: but in
some sort, let us consider the conflict and victory of Faith. The Lord (says
he) is my light, that is, my comforter, for as Michaeas says, When I sit in
the darkness, the Lord is my light. Chap. 7. verse. 8. Then, here says David
further, my salvation, and the strength of my life. That is, I am environed
with thy necessary strength and salvation, I do not fear any rage or power of
mine enemies: for as S. Paul says: If God be on our side, who can be against
us? Rome. 8.31.

These victories or conquests are understood of the godly ones, which are
acquainted with exercises of faith: for although our hearts do naturally
tremble, so often as dangers fall upon us: yet notwithstanding, faith strives
(...) the utmost out of fears, and conquereth the devil and the world. O
blessed are they unto whom this victory is given by our Lord Jesus Christ. O
wretched are they upon whom the devil shall triumph. Let us therefore crave
of God, a simple and unfeigned faith, which is the vanquisher of the devil and
the world.

Verse. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life: to behold the
fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple.

This is a principal proposition of this Psalm, as I have said in the
Argument: for he makes a notable difference between the godly ones, and the
ungodly ones. The ungodly ones desire nothing more greedily then riches and
wealth, as Midas in Ovid says: Effice quicquid corpore contigero fuluum
vertatur in aurum.
Grant that what with body touch I shall:
May into glittering gold be turned all.


But David and all the godly ones, with most fervent prayer, and with all their
whole heart, do crave of God, the society as well of the calamities, as of the
benefits which the Church has: and do more desire, and earnestly wish, rather
to be door keepers in the house of the Lord, then to dwell in the Courts of
the ungodly ones, where vain ambition bears sway, and vain glory full
freight with dissimulation.

So touching Moses, the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 11. says:
By faith Moses when he was come to age, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaos Daughter. ver. 24. For he preferred the exercise of calamities amongst
the people of God, far beyond the brittle and frail shadows of pleasures:
judging the reproach for Christ's sake, to be greater wealth then the treasures
of Egypt, therewith beholding the recompense or reward of these miseries in the
world to come.

Let us know, that these examples of great persons, are set forth for us to
follow. Although therefore we are in truth, a needy and poor Congregation, yet
with this firm and perpetual consolation, let us molifie these our miseries,
That we do dwell in the house of the Lord, and are as Paul in the second
Chapter to the Ephesians says: Of the household of God, and Citizens with the
Saints. verse. 19.

To me truly nothing seems may be more gloriously said or thought, as
touching the members of the true Church, then this saying of Paul, agreeing
with the saying of this Psalm. viz. One thing have I required. etc.
Furthermore, he calls The will of the Lord, true calling upon God, and firm
consolation of our minds, and rule of our life, all which things, are to be
accounted of all men, amongst the special good gifts. And let us not be moved
with the judgments of Epicures, which set down other limits of the chief
good gyfts, and other bounds of things to be by us required: but let us know
that mankind was thereto created, that therein the knowledge of God might
appear, and that it might declare true testimonies of God, and enjoy his
fellowship in the life everlasting. Therefore a thousand causes there be, why
with such feruencie of mind, the Prophet desires the society and most firm
conjunction with the true Church.

Verse. 5. For in the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea
in the secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock
of stone.

The Histories of all ages do show, that the universal Church, and all the
godly ones, are exercised in greatest dangers: neither can the truth of the
doctrine be retained, without great contention: the most sweet figure here,
then promises defense unto the Church, viz. He shall hide me in his
Tabernacle. For as Iehoshebeah, the wife of Iehoiada the Priest, 2. Chro. 22
11.12.
(when wicked Athalia raged, in putting to death all the Kings seed of the
house of Judah,) kept and preserved the young King Ioas, and six years hid him
safely in the house of God: so the Lord knows how to deliver his own out of
temptation, and to defend them, even as it were poor supplicants flying to
some place of refuge.

Unto this most sweet promise, let us annexe examples of Gods wonderful
deliverances: let us confess (so the matter is) that we all in the horrible
tempests and storms of Germany, are helped and defended by GOD himself: for
these great benefits, let us give thanks unto God, the eternal Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and let us heartily beseech him, for his sons sake, Jesus
Christ our Lord, (for us crucified and raised from death to life,) that he
henceforth and for ever would defend us in his Tabernacle, as it were secretly
hydden for our refuge: for there is no stronger safegarde or defense in all
kind of dangers, then is the Tabernacle of God, or (as Esaias says) the bosom
of God.

Verse. 6. And now shall he lift up my head above all mine enemies round about
me.

Verse. 7. Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation, with great
gladness: I will sing and speak praises to the Lord.

Well do the Lawyers say, That they which have received a benefit, are
naturally bound, (according to the manner of their ability) to render due
recompense. And what is it I pray you, that we are able to render unto God,
besides our sacrifices of thanksgiving. Let us therefore rightly think with
David, that any danger falling upon us, is not by chance dashed aside, or
driven away: but that we are helped and preserved even by God himself, and
that he hears our prayers. Let our mind honor God aright, that he has not
a vain name, and that he does not neglect men, but that he unfeignedly
hears them that calls upon him in his Church, and that he undoubtedly
beholds and helps his Church, and keeps his promises with his servant.

These also let us inculcate and beat into our memories, and let us
commemorate the same unto others, let us publish the same abroad when we are
helped and delivered: that even others also may be stirred up to the due
acknowledgment of GOD.

Verse. 8. Harken unto my voice o Lord, when I cry unto thee, have mercy upon
me, and hear me.

Verse. 9. My heart has talked of thee, seek ye my face, thy face Lord will I
seek.

Verse. 10. O, hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast thou thy servant away
in displeasure.

In the fourth verse, he required to be cooptate or chosen into the society of
the true Church, then which benefit, none was more wishfull: now because it is
no less virtue to keep that is got, then to get that we can, he prays
fervently, and craves of God, that he may be able evermore to remain A
Citizen with the Saints, and one of the household of God. For he saw the
example of Saul, who when he was the first King over the people of God, and
undoubtedly at the first had the Spirit of God in him: afterward, by reason of
his contempt in grievous offenses, he was not only forsaken of God, but also
was cast forth into eternal destruction.

While he looks upon this example, he oftentimes sendes forth both prayers
and sighs: as if he said, Lord make me a vessel of mercy, and cast me not
away amongst the vessels of wrath. Cast me not away from thy face, and take not
thy holy Spirit from me. Psalm 51. verse 11. Seeing then so great a personage
as King David, with often speeches used these prayers, [forsake me not, nor
cast me away,] it is not our parts to doubt, but that God is continually to be
prayed unto, that he would confirm that which he has wrought in us: and
seeing he has made us to have a will, that he will enable us also to perform
the same, so as we may render some acceptable service unto him.

Here also let the godly Reader consider, in what manner David while he was
praying, lifted up and supported himself with remembrance of precepts and
promises: My heart said unto thee, seek ye my face: that is, thou commaundest
in thy unspeakable goodness and mercy, that we should crave good things of
thee, and thou addest most large promises to stir us up unto true prayer.
Although therefore great is the imbecilitie, and great is also the amasednes of
man's mind, flying from God, yet notwithstanding being stirred up and provoked
by so many precepts and promises, let us correct our doubting, and let us begin
to come unto God, having Christ for our guide: and let us not think that Gods
promises are vain soundes, or pronounced speeches as Epicures do imagine.

For God has not in vain manifested himself by so excellent testimonies, not
in vain has he declared his will: he will have our darkness and doubtfulnesse
to be by his word amended: for he is a true God, and keeps his promises, as
in the 25. Psalm it is said: All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth.
etc. verse 9.

Verse. 11. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up.

This is an amplification borrowed from the unfaithfulness of friends,
whereof Plato speaks, saying: A friend, and yet an unconstant creature by
nature. And Sophocles says, Nullum atrocius vulnus est, quam defectio amici.
viz.
No wound more grievous, nor more great,
Then when a friend does friendship break.


Against this great sorrow, which the forsaking of most near allied friends
procures, let us oppose the consolation, wherewith David supporteth himself,
saying: My father and my Mother have forsaken me, but the Lord has taken me
up. Let us know, that obedience and moderation of the mind in suffering such
calamities, does please God: and that in the mean time, the Son of God
himself, has care over us, and that he is our faithful and firm Friend,
whose benevolence or great good will, let us study by all means continually
to retain and keep. For he both will and can help, when we are not only
forsaken of friends, but also of all Creatures. As in the 72. Psalm it is
said: He delivered the poor which had no helper. And in the tenth Psalm: Unto
thee is the poor man left, thou art the helper of the friendlesse: that is, of
them who being forsaken of second means, do call upon thee.

Verse. 12. Teach me thy way (o Lord) and lead me in the right way,
because of mine enemies.

Verse. 13. Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversaries; for there
are false witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong.

The true Church is assaulted with diverse kinds of enemies, as Turks,
Bishops, Kings, and Princes: the Champions of Bishops, practice and bend their
endeavor to destroy the Church with sword and fire: and Munckes, with others
which bear sway, with opinion of learning in Courts, inflame the wrath of
these.

The Prophet here, not only therefore prays for government, but also for
defense of the Church, even from God himself: which doubtless is necessary
in so great diversity of dangers.

Verse. 14. I should utterly have fainted, but that I believe verily to see the
goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the living.

As if he said, although I am oppressed on every side, as the stone or Rock
in the Sea is beaten upon with rushing waves: yet I shall be preserved in the
Land of the living. That is, I shall not be oppressed of mine enemies in this
life, neither shall I afterward be swallowed up into eternal death: but I
shall worship and praise GOD amongst the living in this life, and in the life
everlasting. So says he in the 118. Psalm: I shall not die, but live, and
declare the works of the Lord. verse 17.

Verse. 15. O tarry thou the Lords leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort
thine heart; and put thou thy trust in the Lord.

That is, call upon God, crave and look for his help, and thy faith or
confidence shall by little and little wexe strong: let thy heart rest in hope,
and expectation of Gods only help. Touching this rule, there is a notable
example set forth in the History of Joseph: for, although he was sold of his
Brethren, Gene. 39. ver. 1.13.21
and afterward cast into prison, yet with this consolation he supported
himself, he rested in the promise of God, and being settled at peace in this
faith, he looked for deliverance: and truly the event shows it is true that
is said in the fourth Psalm: The Lord has chosen to himself the man that is
godly. verse. 3. The Lord, not by man's enterprises, but by marvelous means,
delivers his, which man's reason can in no wise provide for.

A Psalm of David, or prayer for deliverance. Ad te Domine clamabo.
The Argument.
THREE kinds of enemies there are, by who^ the Church is most cruelly
assaulted: for, first Tyrants do rage with open violence to destroy the Church
and the Gospel: next to them, Heretics and fanaticall persons in all ages,
do devise diverse corruptions of doctrine, wherewith men being bewitched, do
wander in error from God. Last of all, there are Hypocrites mingled in the
Church, whom Paul calls false Brethren.

These Serpents, whom the Church nourishes in her bosom, know the sleights of
hurting most subtly, for although they openly flatter the Church, and will
seem to be defenders of a true opinion, yet privily, if occasion be, they can
lay a cold pad under the matter: that is, they mangle and deface the doctrine
rightly expounded, with unsavory and vain cauillations, and do most
hatefully agrauate the slender faults of them which teach aright; neither
know they how to give their helping hand, to such as humble themselves, or
pardon those that do fall; but do all to rende and spoil that ship wherein
they are carried, with blind vain pleasures.

Such Aspes are the more hurtful, how much less they can be shunned or
eschewed. Touching these therefore, do I understand this Psalm entreats,
wherein first, a fervent prayer is recited by the Prophet, least even with the
dissimulation of Hypocries we should be defiled, or be ensnared in their
punishments. Afterward, there is a thanksgiving added, wherein two most
excellent virtues, Truth and Righteousness do shine: for as Truth
acknowledges from whence a benefit is received, so Righteousness binds us,
to make due requital according to our whole ability. Wherefore when he says
Blessed be the Lord which has heard the voice of my prayer, he witnesses
himself to be of a true meaning. And where he adds, And in my song will J
praise him, he promises himself he will be just and upright in performing
mutual duties. viz. in acknowledging and celebrating the benefits of God. And
so let David's deliverances be read of us, that we being confirmed with these
examples of Gods promises, we may learn to crave and look for help and
defense after like manner, in all calamities and dangers.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. Unto thee will I cry o Lord my strength, think no scorn of me,
least if thou make as though thou hear not, I become like them that go
down into the pit.

Verse. 2. Hear the voice of my humble peticions, when I cry unto thee: when I
hold up mine hands toward the mercy seat of thy holy Temple.


I Have oftentimes elsewhere said, that in all our praying, there are five
things to be considered: First, what God is whom we call upon. Secondly, the
commandment of GOD, which most severely prescribes this worship. Thirdly,
his promise of hearing us. Fourthly, the thing which we are to crave. Fifthly
and finally, our Faith, believing that we are accepted before God, and heard by
him.

These five special points does David, most aptly comprise in the beginning
of this Psalm. For the proper name Iehoua, points as it were the finger unto
the true God, manifested to the people of Israel, and distinguished from the
Ethnic Gods. But the commandment and promise are signified, in the mention of
the Oracle, or Mercie-seate, whereof it is written in the 25. of Exodus, That
from thence GOD would speak unto the people, and there would he hear them
calling upon him. For God would be called upon in that place, and unto this
place he enjoined the people. This figure excellently pertains unto Christ:
for the Church calling upon GOD, is enjoined to come unto the Mediator, and is
not heard but for his sake, as it is written. What soever ye shall ask the
Father in my Name, he shall give it you. John. 16.23. But David's faith shines
in these words, [My strength] for no man can without acknowledgement and
confidence in Christ in his prayer, call upon God.

Finally, the thing to be craved, is described when he says: Least I become
like them that go down into the pit. And a little after, O pluck me not
away, nor destroy me with the ungodly ones. Therefore notably is it said of
one of the ancient Fathers: That Prayer is a most hard work or labor,
because not only the intention is required, but also the consideration of the
revelations and testimonies of God, and a distinction to be made from the
Ethnicks manner of praying, and a thinking upon the promises, and a faith in
the same reposed.

But who can express the greatness of this affect? Think no scorn of me? For
as in the civil conversation of men, the mouth silent, or musing countenance,
makes some show of disdainful meaning: so in the spiritual conflict, God
seems silent, and as it were estranged from us, when he deferreth our
deliverance, and suffers us to be vexed in great calamities. As when Joseph
was not only sold of his Brethren, but also cast into prison, with danger of
life and good name, what else might he think, but that God was deaf and dumb
all that while? But this sorrowful or heavy cogitation, is to be vanquished
by faith, as Job says: Yea though he kill me, I will yet trust in him, and he
shall be my Savior.

This victory give us O God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and strengthen
our infirmity, which is so far unable to enter into such conflicts, except
it be fully by thee instructed, and armed with the fortitude of Faith.

Verse. 3. O pluck me not away, neither destroy me with the ungodly and wicked
dooers, which speak friendly to their Neighbors: but imagine mischief in
their hearts.

This is a principal proposition of this Psalm, wherein he beseeches God,
with most fervent prayers, and even with all his heart, that he might not be
hurt, either with the pestilencie of hypocrisy, which with a flattering face
works mischief, or be plunged in the punishments due to hypocrites.

But I pray you consider with what colors he painteth out the most
mischievous beasts: he calls the^ expressly, Ungodly, and wicked ones, because
hypocrisy is a sin disagreeing with the first Table. For although hypocrites
are not defiled with outward Idolatries, yet in their heart they are with out
true fear of God, and without faith in him, and frame their opinions of
Religion, according to the pleasures of Princes: next of all, they work
iniquity, because such as finally differ from their meanings, and do not
applaude, or like of al their Paradoxes or strange opinions, they endeavor to
deface and oppress by slander: for they differ not meanly from others, but
manfully perform that which the old saying admonishes them: Serpens non fit
Draco, nisi multos Serpents deuoret.

A Serpent can no Dragon be,
Except he devour Serpents many.
But although they work all these mischiefs, yet they will speak of peace
unto their Neighbor, that is, with a populer and plausible show they set
forth themselves and their own doings. For so they dispute, that they are
moved with a righteous zeal to defend the glory of God, and do seek and
provide for man's everlasting salvation.

By this goodly speech, they gain themselves the favors of the common people
and others, who for constancy accept of rigor, and in evil begun matters,
wilful boldness, seems better then repentance. As therefore David prays,
that he may not be plucked away, nor destroyed with the ungodly ones. So do I
with all my heart pray, that God the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
will never suffer me to be a sociate or companion of such hypocrites, nor once
take his word of truth from my mouth: but that he would direct my steps
according to his word, and that he would for ever keep me in simplicity and
righteousness, which are enemies unto hypocrisy.

Verse. 4. Reward them according to their deeds, and according to the
wickedness of their inventions.

Verse. 5. Recompense them after the works of their hands, pay them that they
have deserved.

These cursings are read in the Psalms, not as men's indignations, but as the
voice of the holy Ghost, giving judgment upon the punishments of hypocrites,
which are not converted unto God, neither obey the commandment which is
delivered in the Apocalips: Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do the first works. Apoc. 2. verse. 5.

For like as other sins are plagued with horrible punishments, so no doubt of
it, cruel punishments are the companions of hypocrisy, which practice to cast
a glimmering mist before the eyes of God and men, that they should not see
that which they see. I would therefore have all this speech to be understood,
with the exception of repentance, whereby the mittigation of punishments is
obtained according to that saying, If your sins be red as the scarlet, they
shall be white as snow. That is, though you be guilty and defiled, yet if you
return unto God, not only your sins shall be forgiven, but also the
punishments shall be taken away, or mittigated. Let not therefore a dissembling
hypocritical defense of sin, be added to the rest of our slydings, but let
both our heart and tongue pronounce the confession of Daniell: Unto thee o lord
belongs righteousness, but unto us shame and confusion: we have sinned, Dan.
9.7.8
we have done wickedly, we have departed from thy ways: here us for the
Lords sake. This is the mean whereby the wounds of the Church may be healed,
not to follow our first Parents, who after their fall, covered their nakedness
with fig leaves.

Verse. 6. For, they regard not in their mind, the works of the Lord, nor the
operation of his hands: therefore shall he break them down and not build
them up.

He explaneth the cause and fountain of hypocrisy, whereof I have spoken:
therefore hypocrites in show good, in effect worst of all, cease not to heap
up braules and contentions, because they consider not the works of the Lord,
who suffers his servant sometimes for a season to be overwhelmed, but not to
be utterly oppressed. And yet at length, after Haman has published his
slanders and mischiefs, there has been tranquillity restored to the Church.

But it yrcketh me to stay long upon the description of this hypocrisy, then
which not any more sorrowful plague has burst out of the whirlepoole of hell:
therefore now I come unto the second part of this Psalm.

Verse. 7. Praised be the Lord, for he has heard the voice of mine humble
peticions.

Verse. 8. The Lord is my strength and my sheelde, my heart has trusted in him,
and I am helped, therefore my heart daunceth for joy, and in my song will I
praise him.

Verse. 9. The Lord is my strength, and he is the wholesome defense of his
anointed.

The thanksgiving toward God is truth, which acknowledges, that benefits are
received of God, and that he is God indeed: that he is omnipotent, present
with us, and our helper: and it is a work of righteousness, wherein a man
binds himself to render acceptable duties toward God. By this slender
description may be understood, that thankfulness is a virtue compounded of two
special virtues, namely Truth, and Righteousness. Truth acknowledges from
whence a benefit is received. Righteousness performs mutual duties. David
therefore is true and just: for he plainly acknowledges, that he is both
heard and helped of GOD: and by this profession he witnesses, that God is not
a vain Name, that he is not idle, nor bound to second causes, but that he is
indeed effectual, and helps such as call upon him.

Heerewith also, David binds himself to mutual duties, acceptable unto God,
when he says: And in my song will I praise him. For I pray you, what is there
that we can render unto God, besides the sacrifice of praise? Now contrariwise,
consider what a monster an unthankful person is, who is co^pact and framed of
horrible sins* viz. Lying and Unrighteousness. When Alexander thought that
he obtained his Kingdom either by chance or through his own virtue, and
confessed not that it was given him of God, he is a liar, and that even against
God: afterward, he is become unjust, not rendering unto God his bounden
duty, when he prescribes himself to be worshipped as a God. Seeing then,
thanksgiving is a necessary worship done to God, and that ingratitude toward
GOD, is an horrible offense, let us be thankful to God, both for all benefits
of the soul and body, and also even specially for this same thing, that we
are not snared with the counsels of hypocrites, nor have not dealt unjustly in
the will of the Lord, but have kept our faith, yet indeed not of our own
strength or power, but by the help of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 10. O save thy people, and give thy bessing unto thine inheritance:
feed them, and set them up for ever.

That which Cicero spoke of his Country, in his second Book De legibus, the
same may much more truly be spoken of the Church: Necesse est charitate eam
praestare pro qua mori, and cui nos totos dedere, and in qua nostra omnia
ponere and quasi co^secrare debemus. Needful it is, that our Country excel in
love and good affection, for whom we ought to die: to whom we have wholly
addicted our selves, and in whom we have reposed all things, and as it were
ought to consecrate the same. It is not therefore our part, neither fitteth it
the name of a Christian to doubt, but that, for the universal Church (whose
Citizens we desire to be reputed and named) we must pray continually.

Preserve, govern, and defend thy Church O God, against the devils, Tyrants,
Heritiques, and the furies of false brethren, and their wicked practices: and
seeing there are in mankind, many which curse the Church, bless thou Lord
thine inheritance, and after thou have restrained the practices of the Enemies,
adorn thou her with thy glory everlasting. Amen.

A Psalm of David, exhortatorie to Princes and great personages. Afferte
Domino filij Dei.
The Argument.
ALthough I allow not the rule of interpreting, which culleth out the Oracles
of God, into diverse meanings: yet certain Histories are so written, that with
a safe analogy of faith, they may be expounded alegorically: as the History
of Gedeon is doubtless a notable figure of the Kingdom of Christ. So the
leading of the people out of Egypt, is a figure of deliverance from the
tyranny of the devil and death everlasting.

Wherefore since this Psalm does celebrate the glorious acts which are
set forth, in bringing the people out of Egypt, it shall stand well with the
Reader, either to embrace the hystoricall meaning, or wisely and fitly to use
it as an alegorie touching the kingdom of Christ. And if he will rest contented
with the history, he may take out of this Psalm doctrine most necessary, as
touching the manifestation of God: for it is needful that the true God (whom
we do call upon) be discerned from false or counterfeit Gods, and be
understood how he is to be sought unto; Namely even as he has by assured
testimonies, manifested his essence and will. Like as therefore the Fathers and
Prophets in their prayers, speak unto this true God, which made himself
known in promises, and in that bringing them out of Egypt, by visible and not
failing testimonies: so let our prayers likewise behold and speak unto the
same God, which brought his people out of Egypt, by publishing so many
testimonies, and sent his Son adding like testimonies, as in the resurrection
of the dead and others. But if the Reader like better the Alegory, let him
apply the Psalm unto the gathering of the Church, by the ministry of the
Gospel and Sacraments; by which Christ sitting at the right hand of God,
always was, is, and shall be effectual, and in the hearts of believers
illumineth new light, righteousness, and life everlasting.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. Bring unto the Lord (o ye mighty) bring young Rams unto the
Lord: ascribe unto the Lord worship and strength.

Verse. 2. Give the Lord the honor due unto his Name, worship the Lord
with holy worship.


THE Prophet in this place exhorts all men, that they would offer the
sacrifice of praise, that is, The fruit of their lips confessing his Name,
Heb. 13. And the glory of GOD is the acknowledgement and celebrating of the
righteousness of God, in accusing and punishing sins, and his mercy in
receiving such as fall and are converted unto him. This glory does not the
Epicure attribute unto God, who says most saucilie, That God is nothing, nor
cares not for things pertaining to men.

Saul although he knew there was a God, and the same to punish mischiefs:
yet he did not as yet give unto GOD perfect glory. But David affirms both
that there is a God, and that he is just, horribly punishing mischiefs, and
again, a merciful GOD, receiving and saving miserable mankind fleeing for
mercy unto the Mediator.

This man gives unto God perfect glory, that he is a God, that he is just,
that he punishes, that he is good, merciful, and a Savior, and that he
also punishes, not to destroy, but to save: this glory is then only attributed
unto God, when we have learned the Gospel, and by faith do acknowledge the
Son of GOD.

[Holy worship,] he calls the High Priests attire, whereby he understands
the righteousness of faith, according to that saying: That I might be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
of the faith of Christ, which is of the righteousness of God by faith. Phil.
3. verse. 9. Therefore it signifies, that the Sacrifices of the old
Testament, are to be abolished, as in the fourth of John it is said: True
worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth. verse. 23.

Verse. 3. It is the Lord that commands the waters: it is the glorious God
that makes the thunder.

Verse. 4. It is the Lord that rules the Sea, the voice of the Lord is mighty
in operation, the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice.

Verse. 5. The voice of the Lord, breaks the Caedar trees, yea the Lord
breaks the Caedars of Libanus.

Verse. 6. He made them also to skyp like a Calfe: Libanus also and Syrion,
like a young Unicorn.

Verse. 7. The voice of the Lord deuideth the flames of fire, the voice of the
Lord shakes the wilderness, yea the Lord shakes the wilderness of Cades.

Verse. 8. The voice of the Lord makes the hyndes to bring forth young, and
discovers the thick bushes.

The sum of these verses, wherein is a most excellent description, the fourth
Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews recites. The word of God (says
he) is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword,
and enters through, even to the dividing a sunder of the soul and the Spirit,
and the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and the
intents of the heart. verse. 12. For like as in the promulgation of the Law,
fearful thunders, and shaking astonishments were in heaven and earth, so the
publishing of repentance, wherewith the holy Ghost sharply reprehendeth
sinners, is not a vain voice but effectual, pearcing into the minds and
hearts of mankind, and illumining the acknowledgement of sin, and the wrath
of GOD, and stirring up horrible fears. For who trembles not in all parts at
the hearing of this voice? For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven,
against all impiety and unrighteousness of the^ which withold the truth in
unrighteousness. Romans 1. ver. 18. Again, That every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world be found guilty before God; All have sinned and have need of
the glory of God. Romans 3.19.

Touching the efficacy hereof, there is a notable example propounded in the
second Chapter of the Acts: When they heard these words, they were stricken in
their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles; Men and
brethren, what shall we do? verse. 37. And unto this place, a grammatical
admonition or notice must be added, touching the proper names of Syria and
Cades: for the name of Libanus is known to all men. But Moses shows in the
third of Deuteronomie, That the hill Hermon, was called Syria of the Sydonians,
and of the Amorites, Shenir. verse. 9. And the book of Joshua sets those
down, as the lymits and bounds of the Holy Land, viz. From the East,
Euphrates, from the West, the Sea Mediterraneum, from the North, Libanus, and
from the South, the Desert of Cades.

Verse. Idem. In his Temple does every man speak of his honor.

Hitherto has he described, the fears and tremblings which remains in men's
minds, hearing the voice sharply reproouing sins, and showing the wrath of
God. Now he describes the manner of worship, and the benefits of the new
Testament. For when men's hearts are astonished with the acknowledgement of Gods
wrath, they flee for refuge straight unto the Mediator, in confidence of the
promised mercy: again, in consolation a new and eternal righteousness is
begun, and a life honoring God aright. Neither indeed are the efficacies of
ye words in this verse to be neglected. For where he says: [All men speak of
his honor,] no doubt he signifies, it shall come to pass, that the Church
shall be gathered, not only from among the Jews, but also from among the
Gentiles. And his meaning is, they shall speak of his honor, in that a man
may discern the Religion of the new Testament, from Leuiticall ceremonies.
For the Leuits were kyllers of beasts in their sacrifices: but true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, and offer the Calves
of their lyps, confessing the name of the Lord, that is, Prayer, thanksgiving,
and confession.

Verse. 9. The Lord sits above the water flood: and the Lord remains a
King for ever.

The Histories of the Deluge, and of bringing the people out of Egypt, are
notable figures of Baptism: for as Noah's family was preserved, Gene. 9.
when all the wicked ones were destroyed: so they which are ingrafted in Christ
by Baptism, are delivered from eternal death, and are endued with
righteousness and life everlasting. Moreover, like as Pharao was overthrown in
the Red Sea, Exodus 14.23.
when the Congregation of the people of Israel was meruailously preserved: so
in Baptism our sins are buried, and we together with Christ, do rise
again, that we may walk in newness of life.

Of this Alegory we have plentiful Authors and witnesses, as S. Paul, in the
1. Cor. 10. and S. Peter, in his first Epistle and third Chapter. Therefore
does Christ reign by the preaching of the Gospel, and by Baptism, gathering
his Church, upon whom he bestows eternal benefits. viz. wisdom,
righteousness, and never ending life.

For whereas both the King and Kingdom, bear themselves correlatiuely, (as
Logitians use to speak,) it must needs be, that of an eternal King, the
kingdom must be also eternal: but touching the Kingdom of Christ, elsewhere
is oftentimes spoken.

Verse. 10. The Lord shall give strength unto his people, the Lord shall give
his people the blessing of peace.

[Strength] signifies the gift of the holy Ghost, which is the Spirit, not of
fearfulness, but of strength and love: for when this helps us, when we
will we are able to do acceptable things unto GOD, and wholesome things for
our selves, and his Church. As touching this virtue or strength, divine and
heavenly it is said in the 24. of S. Luke. But tarry you in the City of
Jerusalem, until you be endued with strength from above. verse. 49. And in the
first of the Acts: Receive ye the power of the holy Ghost.

The [Blessing,] comprehends all benefits necessary for the body and the
soul. Let us therefore render thanks unto the Son of God, the King and High
Priest of his Church, that he gives us his Gospel and his holy Spyrite,
which helps our infirmity, and gives us other benefits, necessary unto the
soul and body: and let us declare our thankfulness toward him, not only in
words, but also in godly duties.

A Psalm or Song of the dedication of the house of David. 2. Sam. 7.2. Deuteronomy.
20, 5
Exaltabo te Domine.
The Argument.
I Have before, now and then said, that there are two kinds of trials or
vexations of the Church: for some do cruelly afflict the body, and spoil us
of the benefits necessary for the body: these are sicknesses, poverty,
banishments, dangers of life, and loss of wife and children. These
inconveniences, although they are not slender, yet are they more easily borne,
when in our hearts do shine, the acknowledgement of the mercy, benefits, and
presence of God, healing and embracing us for his Sons sake. Laurence indeed
was consumed upon the hot burning coals, and Stephen was stoned to death, but
either of them was merry in the midst of death, because they perceived in
their heart, a ioyfulnes, risen of the acknowledgement of the presence and mercy
of God.

There are also other trials or troubles, much more sorrowful and bitter,
which pearce into the very soul and spirit; namely, when with beholding the
presence and goodness of God, for a certain season we feel no private thing,
but the sorrows of death, and the dangers of hell: and do fear that we are
for ever cast away amongst the devils: these deiections or downe-castings of
us, can not be described with words, but the examples show after a sort, this
degree of trials or troubles.

Job without any deformity, patiently suffered the loss of his children and
substance, and pronounced this speech full of godliness: The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away: blessed be the Name of the Lord. Job. 1.21. But
this so great a personage, being burdened with the weight of spiritual
tentations, fretted and fumed against God, crying out: Let the day perrish
wherein J was borne. etc. Chap. 2. verse. 3. So Jeremie between fears and
tremblings, said: Cursed be the day wherein J was borne. Chap, 20, verse, 14.
For how much the strength of the mind is, greater then that of the body, so
much more grievous are those troubles which we conceive in our mind, then they
which are borne in our body.

But, to what end do I say so much, touching the degrees of temptations or
troubles? Surely to this end, that thou may understand what objects David
beholds in his thanksgiving. For first he rendereth thanks to God for
defense against Saul and his other enemies, who had conspired his present
death: this part of the Psalm does he amplify with most sweet comparison of
his afflictions and deliueraunces.

After that, he celebrateth Gods goodness, mortifying and quickening, bringing
down to hell, and raising up from thence. That is, striking mankind with
fears, which are the feelings of Gods wrath, and again, comforting us that we
should not fail or quayle, and so be overcome of our cruel enemy. But of
this meaning, we will say more as we do expound other things.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. I will magnify thee o Lord, for thou have set me up: and not made
my foes to triumph over me.

Verse. 2. O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.

Verse. 3. Thou Lord have brought my soul out of hell, thou have kept my life
from them that go down to the pit.


WHereas it had been enough to say, I render thanks unto thee, because thou
have delivered me, with how many words does David adorn this proposition:
for first he uses the word, which properly signifies a drawing out of the
pit or poole. As therefore Joseph and Jeremy, being drawn out of pits, are
delivered from death, Gene. 37.20 and 39, 13 Iere, 38, 13
so the Prophet here affirms, that he was drawn out of the perril of death,
not by man's help, but with the right hand of the most High. After that also,
he adds this circumstance, that his perverse and evil rejoicing enemies, had
no matter wherein they should or might bestow their most poysonfull biting gyrds
and taunts against him. Thirdly, he compares his deliverance unto the healing
of wounds: for as Job in his fifth Chap. most sweetly says: God wounds and
heals, he strikes, and his hand makes whole. Lastly, he says, That he
was raised from death to life, and as it were recovered out of hell, when Saul
and his other enemies fell headlong into present and eternal miseries. So in
like manner, all and every one of us here in Germany, may celebrate in word
and writing, the benefits of God, and may say unfeignedly with Jeremy, chap. 3.
It is the mercies of the Lord that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. verse, 22. For had not the shadow of the Lords hand shielded us,
(wretched and weak souls) we had even now lately been destroyed of the Turks
and other enemies: but God, who is not delighted with our destruction, has
mercifully mittigated those punishments, and has kept us as it were the apple
of his eye.

Verse. 4. Sing praises unto the Lord, (o ye Saints of his) and give thanks
unto him for a remembrance of his holiness.

He applies his example unto the universal Church, to the end others also
might learn, (being partly confirmed by promises, and partly by examples,) to
crave deliverance of God, and being preserved, to celebrate the goodness of
God. For God is no accepter of persons, but receives and saves all them, that
flee for mercy unto the Mediator: as in the 10. to the Romans it is written.
God is rich toward al them that call upon him. And Joel in his second Chapter,
says: Every one that calls upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.

These promises (which have in them great sweetness and excellency,) let us
apply unto our use, in the daily dangers of our life, and let us know, that
God is indeed just and righteous, and that there is no respect of persons with
God.

Verse. 5. For his wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye, and in his
pleasure is life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning.

I would to God our minds in miseries could rightly be persuaded, that God
punishes not to destroy, but to save us, and to restore us unto life and
ioyfulnes. For our minds being confirmed with this undoubted purpose of God,
should passing well bear all the burdens laid upon us by God: but experience
shows how hard a thing it is, firmly to retain this purpose of mind in our
calamities. For where the scripture names a short time of tribulation, that
seems unto us a space of many ages. Let us therefore discern Philosophical
persuasion from faith, and let us prefer the word of GOD, before the actions
of our senses or understandings.

In Philosophy, a man believes water is warm when he has dipped his finger,
and experience has taught that it is warm: but in embracing the word of God,
there is wrought a contrary thing: Persuasion, that is, Faith, goes before
consolation. As Jeremy, though he saw his Country ruinating, or near her
destruction, yet he knew that Gods Church was not forsaken, and he being
confirmed with this knowledge, patiently bears the present miseries: for he
understands their causes, and that there should be an end of them, and he
knew that the Church should for all this be restored and gathered again.
Therefore let Psalms of like meaning be adjoined unto this place, which do
make declaration of the shortness of afflictions, and of their joyful
conclusion or ending.

Esaias in his 54. Chapter says: For a little while have I forsaken thee, but
with my great co^passions I will gather thee: for a moment in mine anger, I hid
my face from thee for a little season: but with everlasting mercy I have had
compassion of thee. verse, 7.8. And in the 16. of John, the Son of God says:
You shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. verse, 20. And your
joy shall no man take from you. ver. 22. And the Apostle S. Paul says: The
afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed unto us. Romans 8.18. And in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, he
says: Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory. Chap. 4, verse, 17.

Wherefore with a good courage let us suffer momentanie inco^ueniences, for
while we look about us (as they say) and do here busy our selves, lo
immortality shall approach.

Verse. 6. And in my prosperity, I said, I shall never be removed: thou Lord
of thy goodness have made my hill so strong.

Verse. 7. Thou did turn thy face from me, and I was troubled.

The meaning of these verses is most simple, which D. Luther now and then, in
expounding the Book of Genesis recites: We were all wont in time of victory
and triumph of the Spirit against the flesh, to be strong and courageous: but
when incredulity assailed our hearts, by and by we wexe faint-harted. Jeremy
feeling the consolation and victory of faith, says thus in his twenty
Chapter. The Lord is with me like a mighty Giant, therefore my persecutors
shall be overthrown, and shall not prevail, but shall be greatly confounded.
etc. ver. 11. But the same man within a while after, with most sorrowful
complaints, describes the debased estate of his mind. Idem. How is it that I
came forth of the womb? To see labor and sorrow, that my days might be
consumed with shame? Wherefore, not in vain, nor unadvisedly does he pray in
the seventeen Chapter, saying: Be not terrible unto me, thou art mine hope in
the day of adversity. verse 17.

So all and every such of us, as are replenished with spyrituall joy, let us
courageously abide the assault of satan, and the world, and let us not wey
all the inventions or practices of our enemies, no not the value of a trifle.
But when we are plunged into sorrowfulness, by the sufferaunce of God, and
feel not the Spirit of fortitude in us, then indeed are we by nature
fearful, and we are amassed even as much with the sound of a leaf falling
from the Tree, as if all the world crushed together, should suddenly oppress
us.

I my self know a certain Pastor of the Church, who when he had with a
mighty courage, endured very many, and most great calamities, and was well
addressed and armed against the threatenings of Tyrants, even at the last point
as it were, (being cast down from the step of faith,) he begun to be so
tossed with sorrowful sadness, that he was not very far from utter desperation.

But, go to, let us not always speak of spiritual combats and conflicts:
which of us all is endued with so great strength of Faith, that he is not
sometime troubled in mind, how to live, and to obtain other necessary benefits
for his body? Seeing therefore it is a hard and difficult thing, to keep such
a course, as our ship may escape both the Rocks, viz. Pride and Desperation,
let us daily pray with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith. Luke 17. verse 5.
For true it is, that the Church sings of the Spirit of Fortitude, Love, and
Chastisement: Sine tuo Numine, nihil est in homine, nihil est innoxium.
Without thy grace (o God) in man,
Naught well he does, nor well he can.


This good Spirit helping us, we are able even from on high, to despise death
and all dangers: but when the same Spirit does not imprint and fix in us his
power or virtue, we then lie overthrown, and yield the victory to the very
shadows of our enemies.

Verse. 8. Then cried I unto thee (o Lord) and gat me unto my Lord right
humbly.

Verse. 9. What profit is there in my blood, when I go down into the pit?

Verse. 10. Shall the dust give thanks unto thee: or shall it declare thy truth?

Verse. 11. Hear o Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper.

S. Augustine says notably in a certain place: Whether shall I flee? from God
angry, unto God merciful For there is nothing more wholesome, then to return
unto him when he strikes us, and of him to crave remedies for our sorrows.
Like as Job in his thirteenth Chapter says: Yea though he should kill me, yet
will I trust in him, and he shall be my Savior. This example let us follow in
great violence of tempests, and in the concourse of calamities, and let us not
seek inordinate remedies, but let us flee unto the fountain of the living
water, that is, unto GOD: which when so we shall do, we shall assuredly prove
the help and presence of God, and find the restitution of eternal life.

But while we are praying unto God, there are both other causes to be proponed,
and also even specially this final cause.

Tu mihi praesidium, tua me protectio seruet,
Vt tibi seruatus carmina grata canam.
Thou art my safegarde, thy defense keep me,
That being safe, I may sing thanks to thee.
Thou art not delighted with our destruction, therefore preserve me together
with thy Church, that I may in this life, and in all eternity magnify thee:
but as touching this cause of deliverance, I have elsewhere oftentimes spoken.

Verse. 12. Thou have turned my heaviness unto joy: thou have put off my
Sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.

He affirms plainly, that prayer is not a vain noise, but obtains of GOD
a joyful end of miseries: Thou have turned (says he) my heaviness unto joy,
such as Boys and Gyrles in a calmetime of the Commonweal were wont to sport
themselves withal, and my mourning weed being cut in pieces, thou have
adorned me with a wedding garment: so no doubt of it, as I may so say with
Tobie, God will restore to every one (which call upon him in confidence of the
Mediator) after heaviness, gladness.

Verse. 13. Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: o
my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

Even as in his prayer, he made mention of the final cause, [Therefore deliver
me, that I may praise thee,] so now after his deliverance, he is not a
dissembler, or unjust, but with an excellent faith, performs his promises:
and he does not only for a small time declare the goodness of GOD, but with
everlasting praises magnifieth God. The same must al we do: neither must we
after benefits received, nourish in us Epicuriall cogitations, as thus: perhaps
thou have deliverance by good hap, or by humane industries. This horrible
unthankfulness, let us (as they say) with Oars and sails, that is, by all
possible means, avoid and eschew: and let us most firmly believe, that
through Gods alone help, the danger is driven away.

To him that excels. 1. Sam. 23, 14 Psalm. 71.1.
A Psalm of David's deliverance. In te Domine speraui.
The Argument.
THE sentence of Plato in his Epitaph is praised, which Cicero expresses in
these words: Nam cui vero ex seipso apta sunt omnia, quae ad beat viuendum
ferunt, nec suspensa aliorum aut bono casu, aut contrario pendere ex alterius
euentis et errare coguntur, huic optime viuendi ratio comparata est. viz: For
unto what man all things are of his own industry at his use, which serve to a
blessed life, and (not suspended, either with the good or sinister fortune of
others,) are not compelled to depend of another man's haps, and so to fail,
this man has gotten a rule of the best kind of life. This sentence does the
thirty one Psalm notably interpret, discerning a true hope from a carnal
hope. For as Pluto warns us, that all our hope or confidences, should not
depend upon the benefits of fortune, or of humane friendships, the same does
this Psalm allow. But whereas it brings us to the consideration of our own
virtues, that part of Platoes sentence, does this Psalm reject and refuse: for
we must be brought to the consideration of Gods goodness, seeing many things
happen unto man, when man's virtue with out Gods help, utterly fails.
Therefore it commands, that God be of us acknowledged and called upon, and
it promises help: but the whole Psalm shall be more excellent in use, if the
figure of some godly Pastor or Teacher, banished for the confession of his
faith, be here represented.

For like as Christ in the time of his passion, was not only cruelly handled
of his enemies, but also forsaken of his friends, falling from him for very
fear: so godly exiled persons, do feel both the cruelty of enemies, and
unfaithfulness of their own friends, for it is most truly written by Tyrteus
the Musician.

Curat nemo vagos, et laedere nemo veretur:
Non Exul curae ducitur esse Deo.
No man cares for the wandering wight,
To hurt him, none does fear.
Men think that God forgets quite,
Poor Exiles living here.
What then shall the godly man do in such a case? whether shall he flee for
succor? He shall have in mind and mouth, the promises and consolations of
this Psalm. The Lord preserves them that are faithful. Again: In thee O
Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion. verse, 1. That
this is no vain Rethorick, we shall well prove, if in unfeigned sorrow, (which
the cruelty of enemies causes us, and the forsaking of friends,) we shall
call upon God.

This our age sees the examples of good men, who being driven from their
abiding places, for the constancy of their confession, are meruailously
defended and preserved of God. Wherefore trusting in the help of God, let us
not cast away our confession of the true doctrine, but let us preach the same
constantly for the glory of God, and for the salvation of our souls: and let
us commend unto God, all the events of our businesses: who suffers us not to
be ashamed, but in his righteousness will deliver all them that call upon him.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. In thee o Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to
confusion: deliver me in thy righteousness.


THere is a notable Emphasis in the particles, [In thy righteousness,] as if
he said, many trust in their money, some mighty persons in the favor of
Friends, and some in their wisdom and righteousness. But I trust not in
visible things, (the^ which nothing is more uncertain, nor any thing more
fading,) but all hope of welfare I do repose in God: and I crave that I may be
heard, not for my righteousness, which is either none at all, or indeed
stained, but for the righteousness of God himself, made known in the Law, of
the which the Law and the Prophets do bear witness. And it is the righteousness
of God, which the Gospel has made known, and Faith apprehends free
remission of sins, and the acceptance unto life everlasting. This hope is
not confounded, but surely obtains deliverance, according to the purpose of
God. But some man would object. I see not how John Baptist, Paul, Stephen, and
Laurence, were at all delivered, which were most cruelly slain of Tyrants. The
answer is not difficult to such as understand the doctrine of the Church,
concerning the causes of calamities: for although they were put to death for
their confession, yet they felt joy in their hearts, which is the ouercommer of
death, and their death is glorious in the sight of the Lord, not only because
it sets forth and adorneth the glory of God, but also because it shall have a
glorious end in the life everlasting, where God shall fully and wholly deliver
his Elect from sin and death, and shall be all in all.

Let therefore the objects be discerned, concerning which, Hope is exercised:
for although eternal life, is assuredly for the Son of Gods sake to be
looked, yet notwithstanding, there are other deliverances, according to the
purpose of God, in this life to be looked for. Let us also have always in our
sight, the most grave and most godly sentence, which Job in his thirteenth
Chapter recites. Yea though he should kill me, yet will I trust in him, and
he shall be my Savior. These cannot be understood of men, living in idleness
and pleasures, but in unfeigned sorrow, when we are assaulted as the stone with
the Sea waves, every where beaten upon. Hic animis opus est, opus est hic
pectore firmo, vincente omnia spectra, quae in occulos incurrentos fidem
langue-faciunt. viz.

Here courage needful is, and constant heart likewise,
All Goblins rushing in our sight,
Our faith vnfeeble for to conquer quite.
Verse. 2. Bow down thine ear to me: make haste to deliver me.

Verse. 3. And be thou my strong Rock, and the house of defense, that thou
may save me.

The Poet says: Dole tantum, sponte disertus eris.
Only sorrowful if thou be,
Thou art distressed willingly.


For the Prophet here is not satis-fied with the word [Deliuer,] but
enlarges his Prayer with more words. As if he said, give not ear unto my
Prayers, as though thou were in hand with an other matter: do not defer thy
help, but with great listening, know my cause, and being even at the first
oppressed, and suffering not my deserts, deliver thou me: be unto me a well
defenced forte, whereunto I may safely flee for succor, and wherein I may
safely hyde me.

Verse. 4. For thou art my strong Rock, and my Castle: be thou also my guide,
and lead me for thy Names sake.

The rule of his prayer, is borrowed out of the first precept, I am the Lord
thy God. Exodus 20. As if the Prophet here said: seeing thou have made thy self
known unto us of thy great goodness, and have given us thy word, and wilt not
that the same shall be extinguished, preserve and defend us: that some
Congregation of GOD may always remain upon earth: that there may be both
Teachers and learners, least doctrine be extingushed, least learning do
perrish. For so often as mention is made of Gods Name, let us comprehend the
causes impulsive and final. [For thy Names sake,] that is, for thy promise,
wherein thou affirmest, that thou will help them that call upon thee, and for
thy glories sake.

For the acceptable glory of God, is spread abroad of the godly ones, who after
their deliverances, are true and just, as I have elsewhere oftentimes said:
also the blasphemous clamors of the enemies are refuted, when examples are
proponed, which do show that God has care of the poor and needy
Congregation trusting in the Name of the Lord.

Verse. 5. Draw me out of the net that they have privily laid for me, for
thou art my strength.

He craves to be defended, not only against manifest violence, but also
against ungodly fraud of the enemies of the Gospel: for there is no man so
wise, which without the safeguard of the Son of God, can eschew all the snares
and deceypts which are laid by the enemies of the true doctrine: for they know
how to color smoothe and fair causes with unjust dealings, and with soft
speech how to dissemble. Therefore there is no watchful wariness equal unto
the most crafty practices of the enemies, but it has need of the Son of
GOD, to safeguard and preserve the same.

Verse. 6. Into thy hands I commend my Spirit: for thou have redeemed me, o
Lord thou God of truth.

A conclusion full of Faith, as if he said. I do well consider, that I am not
sufficiently furnished and armed, against the violence and craft of the
enemies. Therefore being destitute of man's counsel and help, I flee to thee
for refuge, and yield my self wholly unto thee and in thy hand I repose all
that I have: for I know, that thou will keep thy purpose with a firm faith,
seeing also thou have oftentimes before delivered me. For faith, being
confirmed with remembrance of former deliueraunces, believes that God is not
only rich in those things promised, but believes also, that he most
abundantly performs the same he has promised, and conceiueth a most
assured hope of his deliverances in time to come. But, seeing the Son of God,
rehearsed this verse a little before the separation of the soul from the body,
who doubts the same form of words is to be used, not only in other dangers
of life, but also in the midst of death.

For then must we cry out with Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Acts. 7.
verse. 59. For Christ our Lord, not only will, but also can, with a mighty
hand pluck and deliver our soul, flitting out of this frail mansion, and set
the same free from the deadly assault of the devils themselves, seeing he is
both the Creator and Redeemer of our souls, according to that saying: I give
them eternal life, and no man shall take them out of mine hands, because I
and the Father am one. John, 10. verse, 28. Into this hand therefore excelling
in faith and power, let us deliver our selves wholly without doubting: which
when we shall do, the thing it self shall show, they are not vain
delectations, which are said in this verse. Thou have redeemed me, o Lord God
of truth.

Verse. 7. I have hated them that told of supersticious vanities: and my trust
has been in the Lord.

He amplifieth the proposition of ye Psalm, by comparison of contraries, that
is, of a True hope and Carnal hope: for like as a true hope is not confounded,
because it depends of God, so all other hopes are frustrate which depend
upon a rotten thredde, for so humane helps seem woorthily to be called, for
their incertainty and inconstancy: but if any man do judge these to be vain
delectations, let him hear the complaints of wisemen, confirming the purpose
which I have set down.

Cicero in his ninth Book of Epistles, concerning Pompeyes defenses, writes
thus: Thou know well, that Cnaius Pompeyus, was neither safe in the glory
of his fame, nor of his acts, nor with the suits and services of Kings and
kingdoms, which he was oftentimes wont to boast of. etc. Cicero plainly
affirms, that Pompey was neither with his own possessions nor his friends
helps, safely enough preserved against the assault of fortune: for, what so is
said of the likeness or form, the same even in like manner may be said of
the whole nature or kind of any thing: for all humane helps hold by a slender
thread, and things which have been of force, suddenly fall to decay. We shall
therefore remember, that against confidence in humane helps, there are many
sentences delivered us from God, as in the 146. Psalm. Trust not in Princes,
nor in the Sons of men, in whom there is no help. verse. 2. And in that of
Jeremy. Chap. 17. Cursed is every one which puts his trust in man.

Verse. 8. I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered
my trouble, and have known my soul in adversities.

Verse. 9. Thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy, but have
set my feet in a large room.

The effects of a true hope are here descrbed with great excellency of words.
Pompey being overcome of Caesar, was overwhelmed into Epicuriall opinions,
disputing as it were, that God cared not for men's matters. But David being
banished from his kingdom, believed, that God both regarded and helped him:
with this faith when he is supported, there follows a consolation and a
feeling of gladness. For he was not shut up in the hands of his Son
Absalon, 2. Sa. 15.14 2. Reg. 25.7,
(like as K. Zedechias in his fleeing away, was brought back again, and at
the Conquerours commandment, had his eyes put out,) but he was restored into
his kingdom.

Therefore it is far better to trust in God, then in humane helps: for God
considers both the painful travail, and the sorrow of the godly ones, as
it is written in the tenth Psalm, and knows the way of the just, that is, he
not only allows, but also helps them. And as furthermore S. Peter says:
The Lord knows how to deliver his out of trouble or tentation. 2. Peter. 2.
verse. 9.

Verse. 10. Have mercy upon me o Lord, for I am in trouble, and mine eye is
consumed for very heaviness: yea my soul and my body.

Verse. 11. For my life is wexen old with heaviness: and my years with
mourning.

Verse. 12. My strength fails me, because of mine iniquity, and my bones are
consumed.

Albeit the name of tribulation does comprehend all these words, which in
effect may happen unto a miserable man. Yet is it less to say the whole then
all: and to effect less, perceth as it were this brief messenger. Wherefore,
he lays open all things that are included in one word, to the end he may show
his miseries unto God. For, as the only daughter pours out into her Fathers
bosom her cares and griefs, and orderly rehearses every evil affected part:
so David, and all the godly ones, do open themselves wholly unto God, and make
manifest particularly, the grief or sorrow of every member unto him.

But some man will here object, what needs all this recital: seeing God of
himself knows all things, and that God is not honored with the tragedies
of Captives? thereto I answer: We have not to deal with God absolutely,
like as he is in his Majesty, but with God by relation, which has so made
himself known unto us, that he is more moved with the feeling of our
calamities, then any father is moved seeing the great calamity of his most
dearly beloved Daughter.

Therefore when we are in praying, we speak familiarly with GOD, and in the
same matter, we imitate the example of God himself, who does sweetly frame
and aply his word unto our weak capacity. We know, that unto us a child is
borne, and unto us a Son is given. In the confidence of this child and
Son, do we come unto God, and utter our words with a certain freedom, as
in the third to the Ephesians it is written: By whom we have boldness and
enteraunce, with confidence by faith in him. verse, 12. And as in the fourteen
Chap. to the Hebrews, Having such an High Priest, let us go boldly unto the
throne of grace. ver. 16. But let the little clause be well marked: as if he
said, my strength, by reason of mine iniquity, is weakened, because he
recites the first and special cause of all calamities. For, therefore are we
burdened with so many and so great calamities, because we all live ill, and
every one of us do offend, and finally, we bear about with us, sin
enlarged in us. As therefore, The Spirit lives for righteousness sake: so the
body is mortified by reason of sin. Romans. 8. verse, 10. But of this in
other places.

Verse. 13. I became a reproof among all mine enemies, but specially among my
Neighbors, and they of mine acquaintance are afraid of me: and they that did
see me without, conveyed themselves from me.

Verse. 14. I am clean forgotten as a dead man out of mind, I am become like a
broken vessel.

Verse. 15. For I have heard the blasphemy of the multitude, and fear is on
every side, while they conspyre together against me, and take their counsel
to take away my life.

He describes with notable words, the image of a godly exiled person, and
there needs no long interpretation in these complaints, because they are
understood with their examples considered, especially, in as much as we
ourselves do suffer the like things. For GOD will have us, that in such
calamities, both even when we are assaulted of our enemies, and also when we
are forsaken of our friends, we should very near resemble the image of his
Son, as it is written in the 8. to the Romans. He will also have us to lay
away from us, the confidence in humane helps, and to crave help and
deliverance from him, as in another Psalm it is said: My Father and my Mother
forsook me, but the Lord takes me up. Psalm, 27. verse. 12.

Verse. 16. But my hope has been in thee o Lord, I have said, thou art my
God.

Verse. 17. My time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies,
and from them that persecute me.

Verse. 18. Show thy servant the light of thy countenance, and save me for
thy mercies sake.

Verse. 19. Let me not be confounded o Lord, for I have called upon thee.

He repeteth the principal proposition, as it was wont to be done in all
wrytings, as if he said: neither am I so overcome with the forsaking of my
friends, neither am I so broken with mine enemies furies, as to cast away hope
of salvation: but when there remained no good advertisement in me, I turned
mine eyes to thee, and with vndoubting faith, I said, Thou art my God. O
blessed are they, who in great violence of adversities, and concourse of
calamities, do flee unto God. O wretched are they which fall down under
sorrow, as Saul and many others flee from God. Furthermore let the little
clause be marked of us, viz. My time is in thine hands. For God gives every
Pastor or Teacher, his raze of life, and in mean time preserves his body in
health, he gives him safe dwelling, good policy, a place for teaching and
living, to preserve the ship wherein Paul iournied so long, till he safely
ariue into his wished Haven. Acts, 27, verse, 44.

Hitherto appertains that saying of Christ, Suffer these to depart away. As
if he had said, although it be a thing certain, and deliberated upon by you,
not only to seek the death of the Teacher and Master, but also of his
Scholars and Disciples, yet, I appoint how far you shall rage, and do
fortify sufficiently enough my Ministers against your cruelty. For if all the
Apostles had been at one instant put to death, who should have borne about,
and spread abroad the Gospel in the world?

Let us therefore hold still this consolation, the Teachers of the doctrine
cannot be at any time oppressed, before they shall have ended their course.
Paul was often nerer death, then when he was beheaded by Nero: but because the
last end of Paul life, was limited in the hands of God, it was not yet fully
finished, but by a wonderful means was he saved and defended.

Idem. 19. Let the ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in the
grave.

Verse. 20. Let the lying lyps be put to silence, which cruelly,
disdainefully, and despitefully speak against the righteous.

The Histories of all ages do notably declare these threatenings, 2. Mac. 15.
Nicanor when he had proudly threatened the destruction of the Temple of
Jerusalem, being slain in the battle, suffered condign death, for his
cruel, proud, and reproachful speech against the Church and Ministry of Gods
word. verse. 5. and 28. So Arbogastus that Tyrant when he had threatened, he
would change the Churches into Stables for Horses, being overcome of Theodosius
the Emperor in a great battle, slew himself as Saul did. 1. Sam. 31. I omit
the Histories of Herod, Julian, and others, which had the like ends, when God
exercised upon them his wrath or justice distributive.

Verse. 21. O how plentiful is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee: and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust
in thee, even before the Sons of men.

Verse. 22. Thou shall hyde the^ privily by thine own presence from the
provoking of all men: thou shall keep them secretly in thy Tabernacle from the
strife of tongues.

Verse. 23. Thanks be to the Lord, for he has showed me marvelous great
kindness in a strong City.

Augustine says notably in a certain place: Let others marvel at Gods
power, whose steps shine in the most beautiful Theater of the world: I will
marvel at Gods goodness and mercy, promised for Christ his sake. Even so
David, as it were one amassed with meruailing, at the merciful loving kindness
of GOD, cries out, How great is thy goodness? which is not only secretly
hid, as in a Treasury, but also opens and spreads it self abroad: For
in the government and defense, not only of the universal Church, but of all
the godly ones also, this is manifestly seen: this goodness is to be magnified
and praised, with great thankfulness, like as David magnifieth the same,
saying: Thanks be to the Lord, for he has showed me marvelous great
kindness in a strong City.

Verse. 24. And when I made have I said, I am cast out of the sight of thine
eyes.

Verse. 25. Nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my prayer, when I cried
unto thee.

There can be no greater wound made in mankind by the devil, then the trial
of abiection: they which feel this wound, do unfeignedly cry out with David
and Jonas, I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes. But against this biting we
must oppose prayer, and unspeakable sighings, like as Jonas in his second
Chapter says: When my soul was vexed in me, I thought upon the Lord, that
my prayer might come unto thee, even to thy holy Temple. And that this remedy
or Medicine is most effectual working of all others, this Psalm witnesses,
which says in this last verse, Thou heardest the voice of my prayer, when I
cried unto thee.

So often therefore, as God suffers us not to be plunged into this most
sorrowful tentation, let us follow the examples of David and of Jonas, and
other the holy ones, which were not tongue-tyed, but with unspeakable sighing
called upon God, and have had sufficient proof of Gods deliverance. Forthys
tentation differs from desperation, because desperate persons bring forth no
prayers nor praises, but are angry with God, and do flee from God: but they
which strive with tentation of abiection, do as yet retain still some spark
of faith, and sighing of prayer, and at length, by the help of our Lord Jesus
Christ, does overcome the devil.

Verse. 26. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the
faithful, and plentiously rewards he the proud dooer.

Verse. 27. Be strong, and he shall stablish your heart: all ye that put your
trust in the Lord.

This is a comfort or consolation and an application of the example to the
universal Church: as if he said, even as I am heard of God, so shall you be
heard also: therefore be strong, do not become faint-harted, do not cast away
your confession of the true doctrine, comfort and confirm your minds, in
hoping and expecting for Gods alone help. And there is a most sweet promise
added: The Lord shall stablish your heart, all ye that put your trust in him:
that is, all ye which are true and constant, which embrace the truth of God,
and teach true doctrines without hypocrisy.

But contrariwise, God shall destroy the proud person, which most impudently,
and most proudly contemn GOD, trusting in humane power, for that pride is
punished of God, so often affirms the word of God, namely in the 16. Chapter
of S. Luke, What soever is glorious in the world, is abominable before God.
verse. 15. And as Saint Peter in his fifth Chapter, says: God resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble. verse. 5.

A Psalm of David, to give instruction. Beati Quorum.
Of the Title.
THE title admonishes the Reader of the Author, and of this kind of
doctrine, which this Teacher professes: For GOD will have no Books published
in the Church, without assured Authors. But therefore he calls some
Prophets, and some Apostles, and adorneth the^ with testimonies, to the end we
may know from whence, and by whom the doctrine is accepted: therefore it is
needful that Titles be set before the Books. And what manner of personage
David was, and with what Spirit he writ the Psalms, the very last words
which David the Son of Isai spoke, do witness, viz. Even the man who was
set up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet singer of
Israel says: The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my
tongue. 2, Sam. 23. verse, 1, 2. Let us therefore read this Psalm, and the
rest which David has made, even as the Oracles of the holy Ghost, and let us
not be otherwise affected in reading the Psalms, then as if we should hear
the voice of God sounding from heaven.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Author, in truth more breefely then the
greatness of the matter requires. But there were not many more words to be used,
sithence in other places often, the praise of the Psalms is set down. Now
must we speak of the kind of doctrine which is manifested in this Psalm,
that we may hold still the Argument of the Psalm it self: but the word of
the ministry of the Gospel is one, and the same everlasting, even from the
first preaching after Adams fall: namely, the preaching of repentance,
reproouing sin, and from thenceforth followed the promise of forgiveness of
sins, and of reconciliation. Wherefore in this Psalm. which by right, and
worthily is called Mascil, that is, The proper wisdom of the Church, (not
known unto Philosophers nor Phariseis,) there are special places contained,
as the accusing of sin, and the consolation which affirms, that the sins
of them which repent, are forgiven, and that the Church shall yet remain, yea,
even amongst the downefalles of kingdoms. And although the self same
goodness, or excellency of the things which are expounded in this Psalm, may
sufficiently stir up the godly ones, unto the perpetual meditation of this
writing: yet notwithstanding, by the same also may be esteemed, how much
commendation is to be attributed or given unto this Psalm, so as Paul an
Orator more rightly then Pericles, thundering and lightning in the midst of his
auditorie, used the testimony of this Psalm in a most weighty cause.

For when in his fourth Chapter to the Romans, he held a sharp and severe
disputation, touching the righteousness of faith imputative, he used two
testimonies to confirm his, yea the opinion of the whole Church of God.
Whereof the first is out of the History of Abraham, which Moses writ
lightsomlie: and the other is repeated out of the thirty-two Psalm. Paul
lacked not for witnesses, the consciences of all the Prophetical company,
like as Peter says: Unto this man do all the Prophets bear witness, etc.
Acts. 10. But with a singular aduisement, he alleges two witnesses, whose
dignity and excellency is great, namely Moses and David.

For as the shyning Sun, is the Captain of the heavenly company, so is Moses
the Moderator of all the other Prophets. For the other Prophets hold that for
ratified, which they see determined of this Graund Master. But David is the
natural or lawful Disciple of Moses, and (amongst the Prophets which follow
Moses,) shyneth as it were Hesperus or the morning star amongst the glimmering
Night stars. And although all this man's wrytings are full of testimonies
(touching the free remission of sins,) which are bestowed upon the faithful
ones, for Christ's sake the Mediator: yet notwithstanding, seeing Paul out of
this Psalm, takes his proof of a cause, the greatest and largest of all
others, there is no doubt, but the thirtie-two Psalm, in all the multitude and
scope of the Psalms, glittereth like a notable precious stone of rare virtue.
But let this suffice to have been breefely before admonished, touching the
Argument and dignity, wherewith this Psalm excels many others.

The disposition of the Psalm.
Verse. 1. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered.

Verse. 2. Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin: and in
whose Spirit there is no guile.


THE first place of this Psalm, is a notable and excellent testimony of the
manner of justification. For it teaches how we may obtain forgiveness of
sins, namely, by the mercy of GOD, not imputing, but covering our
filthiness and wretchedness for the Mediators sake. He plainly affirms,
They are blessed* that is, just, and the heirs of life everlasting, whose
sins by the great mercy of God are forgiven, covered, and not imputed unto
them. This testimony is so evident, firm, and persp^^cuous, that it cannot be
weakened by any cauillation: nor moved out of place. This testimony, as the
Rock immoouable in the Sea, resists all storms and tempests, accorcording
to this verse.

VT Pelagi rupes magno veniente fragore,
Quae sese multis circum la^rantibus vndis
Mole tenet, scopuli nequicquam, et spumea circum
Saxa fremunt, laterique illisa refunditur alga.
AS Rock, or huge Sea banck, (which sowsing tide,
With roaring waves rush on) does firm abide:
Nor Rock nor foming stones do fret or fume:
But flagge or Reed ytost to the shore, consume.
The second place, is an applying of the determinate purpose unto the ground of
the matter, that is, a framing of the example unto the rule: for David by his
example, teaches the whole Church of a thing, the greatest of all others,
namely, of accusing and confessing of sin in great fears, and of conversion
unto God, which is wrought by the confidence in the promised mercy for the
Mediators sake.

I says he, went about with many sleights of secret dealings, to cover, and
as it were with certain sails, to ouerspreade my sin: but whilst I am
ashamed to confess my sins, I fell into so great fears and downefals, rising
by feeling Gods wrath, that I am almost at deaths door. Therefore looking
circumspectly about all my business, I had naught else remaining, but one most
safe receipt from fears, that I might acknowledge and confess my fault, and
crave pardon with confidence, not of clemency to be despayred, but assuredly
promised for the Mediators sake. Therefore the rest of the holy ones, looking
well upon mine examples, may learn likewise to confess their sin, and flee
unto the mercy of GOD, and there to rest, as in a most safe Haven or Harbor*
This is the manner whereby we obtain remission of sins, This is the way,
either easy or hard, to come unto justification. By this way it is needful
that we go. And if any man will seek for other way, let him call upon
Fortune, as it was wont to be said.

The third place is a consolation, the greatest of all, and most cheefely
necessary, which affirms, that the Church shall remain, yea even amongst the
storms and tempests of kingdoms: surely at this day all men have need of
this consolation, seeing not only the Turkish Army, but also intestine and
inward wars yet in Germany, sticking by the rybbes, are within our beholding.

The fourth place is, a most sweet promise of Gods government, which in so
great infirmity of our nature, amongst so many snares of the devil, and
finally in so great a heap of business and dangers, we cannot want at all.

The fifth place is, a preaching of repentance, which witnesses, that God not
only reprehendeth sin by preaching the Law and the Gospel, but also
compasses us about with tokens of our guiltiness, namely, horrible
calamities, public and private, which are the punishments for sin, and the
admonishments unto repentance.

But least the godly ones should be utterly crushed, and weakened with
violence of tempests, and concourse of calamities, he shows the very end,
and as it were the Port of rest and tranquillity, and discerns the godly
ones from the ungodly ones. Although (says he) punishments fall upon the
ungodly, yet notwithstanding, the godly ones shall be preserved by marvelous
means, or surely shall be supported with a more inward consolation. For the
Lord knows a thousand ways, how to deliver his servant out of their
miseries and tentations. This is the sum of this Psalm, to the daily reading
whereof, both the copiousnesse, and sweetness of the matters therein
contained, and also the very troublesome estate of our days do exhort us:
wherein surely, both the doctrine and the consolation set down by David, is
nenessary unto all the godly ones.

Of the first place.
FOrasmuch as Grammar is the foundation of all true interpretation, first of
all let us see, what is the native signification of the words which David
uses, speaking in the Hebrew tongue. Nasa with He in the end, or Nasa with
Aleph, signifies to take and lift away, which therefore is usually said:
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, that sounds in the Hebrew
tongue thus: Blessed is he who is lightened of his iniquity. And S. John the
Evangelist seems to follow this figure, when he says: S. John Baptist called
Christ the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. 1. John.
36. Namely, that a man may understand, sin is an intolerable burden, and
plunging us down even to the very bottom of hell. Of which burden yet
notwithstanding we are so delivered, that the Son of God takes it upon
himself, and lighteneth or eases us thereof.

I will adioyne heereunto, the words of the reverend D. Martin Luther, in his
exposition upon the fourth Chapter of Genesis. If you apply the word Nasa unto
the corporal thing, it signifies to take unto you, or to lift up on high, as
in the 6. Chapter of Esaias it is said. I saw the Lord sitting upon an high
throne, and lifted up. verse, 1. But this is in a far other manner, then that
in this 32. Psalm. [Blessed is the man whose sins are taken away,] and yet
notwithstanding both one. The Grammarian understands that in Esaias, he
understands not this, because he knows not the matter. For it is one
thing, To sit upon an high throne, and another thing, To take away sin:
that is, to forgive, take away, or do away: but specially it is elegant and
fine, that, (by the word Lightening,) he compares sin to a great burden,
under which, Caine lies oppressed, so that he cannot take breath, except it
be removed from him. But the Epistle unto the Hebrews, declares the manner
whereby we are lightened, and eased of this burden, where he says: By faith
Abel offered a better sacrifice. Chap. 11, verse, 4.

Chaschab. Touching this word, excellently well says the man of God, D. Martin
Luther, expounding the 15. Chapter of Genesis. I do not greatly gainsay,
whether you take, that, to [repute,] or to [consider of,] for the matter
comes all to one effect. For when the Majesty of God thinks upon me, that
I am just, that my sins are forgiven me, that I am free from everlasting
death, and I with thanksgiving in faith do apprehend this cogitation of God
touching me, I am then just, not by my works, but by faith, whereby I hold fast
Gods thinking upon me: for the cogitation of God, is infallible verity.
Therefore when I with a firm faith, take hold of this cogitation, I am not
just with a wandering and doubtful opinion.

For Faith is a firm and certain, either cogitation or confidence in God,
that he is merciful for Christ's sake, that for Christ's sake, he thinks for
our behoof upon the considerations of peace, and not of affliction or wrath.
For these are Relatiues. The cogitation of God or his promise, and the faith
whereby I hold fast the promise of God. Therefore S. Paul has rightly
rendered the word Chaschab, by the word (...), to repute or esteem of, which
also alludeth unto cogitation, as the word of [reputing.] For if thou
beleeuest God promising, GOD reputeth thee for just: but hitherto indeed serve
these. Now let us speak of the sentence Negative and Affirmative.

Blessed are they] that is, the just before GOD, and the heirs of everlasting
life, not they which perform discipline without faith, which is wretched, and
unclean hypocrisy, not unlike to fig leaves, wherewith our first Parents
covered their nakedness after their fall: neither they which extol themselves
by reason of the prerogatives of Circumsition, or of Sacrifices. But they (who
casting away and utterly refusing all confidence in their works and merits)
do flee unto the mercy of God, for his Sons sake the promised Mediator, and
do believe that their sins are freely forgiven them, and that whether they
be faults done and past, or present blemishes, the same are covered, and not
imputed unto them. For although God requires our virtues, and will not have us
cherrish our selves in the lusts of the flesh, but earnestly commands us,
that we should not only bridle them, but utterly mortify them: yet
notwithstanding, they can nothing avail us in the judgment of God, for they
are polluted, and all to defiled with concupiscence.

Except therefore God do turn away his eyes from our sins, yea also even
from our righteousness and virtues, and repute us just for his Sons sake, whom
faith takes hold upon: all is lost on our sides: the only mercy, or the
only reputation of God, saves us. Here therefore is our doctrine grounded,
that we are made just before GOD, only by the mercy of GOD, forgiving and
covering, and not imputing sins.

Out of this Fountain has Paul drawn his disputations to the Romans and
Galathians, wherein he attributes righteousness unto faith, and not unto
works, or to the Law. But in this place, a plausible and populer cauillation is
to be refuted, which brings unto the proper and native meaning of this
Psalm, as it were a certain dark night. For our adversaries do say, Why do
not you unto this Psalm cited by Paul, adioyne other Psalms in like manner,
expressing of works? As the man is blessed which considers of the poor and
needy. etc. Psalm. 41. If by the figure Synecdochen (say they) sayings of works
and faith might be joined together, there would be seen a very fit
interpretation, and the controversy should be taken away. I answer. Always
in sayings touching works, first it is needful that the doctrine of
reconciliation should be comprehended. Because although David does well in
making battles, yet the work is not pleasing to God, neither does he call
upon God for help, except he first crave and believe to have his sins
forgiven, for he has always sins in this life: but when by faith he
receives forgiveness of his sins, it is needful that this faith stick to
the promise of the Mediator, and not to his own works. This sentence therefore
remains firm, that reconciliation ought to go before, and that this is by
faith done freely: so this saying first shines forth, [Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven,] beyond all other speeches, which afterward
do make mention of works. And seeing reconciliation is made by faith freely,
the Synecdoche must be shut out and shunned, which confuseth the doctrine of
Reconciliation and of Works, and imagines that reconciliation is made by
means of our works.

For, let the weightinesse of the words be marked in the Psalm: first he
names Forgiveness, which is Reconciliation, whereby God cease to be angry
with man, and will not cast him away into eternal punishments, but receives
him into favor, loves him, and will govern and save him: and both his
actual sins past are forgiven him, and also the great infirmity which as yet
remains, yea in the very regenerate persons in this life. Which thing indeed
is more notably signified in the words following. Blessed are they whose sins
are covered, which may be understood, both of actual, and sins remaining in
mankind, like as elsewhere it is said, Psalm, 130. If thou Lord wilt be
extreme, to mark what is done amiss, who shall abide it? verse. 3. If GOD
should pour out all his wrath against our sins, no man should be able to
endure the greatness of his punishments: Like as Saul, Judas, Dathan and
Abiron, were ouer-whelmed with sudden terrors.

But of the holy ones it is often said, as in Esaias the fourth Chapter: I have
covered thee with a shadow in the day. verse 6. That shadow is our Mediator,
the Son of GOD, for whose sake, both our actual sins are forgiven, our
punishments are mittigated, and our present and manifold infirmity, (though it
be a sin striving with the Law of God) yet is covered, that is forgiven for
the Mediators sake, making intercession for us.

This greatness of the mercy of God, must be acknowledged, that we may give
thanks unto GOD, and our prayers be the less hindered: for our own distrust
always murmureth, crying out against us, Why do thou pray, seeing thou art
unjust, and unworthy? But against this distrust, let the greatness of Gods
mercy be thought upon, who will hear us, and receive us, though we be unclean,
because he covers with a shadow, our sins, and our uncleanness, like as
it is said in the eight to the Romans: There is now no condemnation unto the^
which are in Christ Jesus. ver. 1. Thirdly it is said: Blessed is the man unto
whom God imputes no sin: as if he said. Truly every man has sin in his
corrupt nature, like as S. John says 1. John. 1. If we say we have no sin,
we are liars, verse. 8. There rests in the regenerate, a great doubting of
God, some lewd security, or distrust, confidence in humane helps, and many
wandering flames of lusts.

Because of these mischiefs, God may justly condemn us, and punish us with
horrible plagues. But he imputes not our sins to us, that is, he is not
angry with us, as with guilty persons: and this mercy he will have to be so
assured unto us, as Esaias says: The Mountains shall remove, and the Hills
shall fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace fall away, says the Lord that has compassion on thee.
Chap. 54. ver. 10. That is to say: although all that is in the world, should
utterly perrish, yet know thou, that this my promise touching the Mediator,
shall remain firm and stablished: and therefore do thou by faith embrace the
same, and with this consolation support thy self: yea though many offenses,
and many confusions of humane things, with diverse temptations, oppugn and
assault thy faith.

Neither is there any guile in his Spirit. That is, where the acknowledgement
and confession of sin is, where acknowledgment of the mercy of GOD, and
promised free reconciliation is, holding fast by faith, the forgiveness of
sin, in such a heart there is no hypocrisy, dissembling sin, or arrogating
righteousness unto it self. For the first place, or principal proposition,
contains two parts, namely, that all men are under sin, also a promise,
that God will forgive sin. For if we be just, not for our worthiness or
merits, but by God not imputing sin, and by him forgiving sin, it ought to
be a thing most evident, that all men have sin, and that God is able to
impute sin unto al men: therefore the sum of the first place of this Psalm
is, we are so reputed just, when we acknowledge and confess our selves to
have sin, and do believe that our sins are forgiven us by Gods mercy for
Christ's sake.

This sentence do not only the sayings of the Scripture confirm, but also
the confessions of the godly Fathers: for so S. Jerome, in his Dialogue against
Pelagius the Heretic, says: Then are we just, when we confess our selves
to be sinners, and that our righteousness comes not of our own desert, but
of the mercy of God. And S. Augustine (whom Prosperus cites) says: Our
righteousness, although it be true, for the true end of good, whereunto it is
referred, yet such it is in this life, that it rather is apparent in remission
of our sins, then in the perfection of our virtues.

The second place.
THE second place is David's confession, showing an example of the proponed
speech. This confession is amplified with a description of horrible fears and
humblings, touching which, Ezechias the King said: Like a Lion has he broken
all my bones.

Verse. 3. For while I held my tongue, my bones consumed away through my daily
complaining.

Like as Minos the Judge removed the pitcher, so God by laying punishments
upon us, namely with the feeling of his wrath, expresses unto us the
confession of sin. And confession is to acknowledge sin, and to crave and
believe to have forgiveness thereof. Contrariwise, to be silent, is to feel
sin, and not to crave or believe free remission of sin, but to remain in
doubting and in fears, or to seek for consolation by our works: like as some
by Monckeries, and others by works do seek it.

Where he adds, My bones were consumed, he means, his bones (the feeling of
sin, which the Law of God works in our hearts or minds) to be consumed
away. For by this feeling of Gods wrath against sin, the courage and strength
of the body is quailed, and wonderfully afflicted, as in sudden dangers of
death, and in other great sorrows we see by experience. Touching this breaking
or consuming of bones, read Doctor Luthers exposition upon the 51. Psalm.

Verse. 4. For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night.

He expounds the cause from which these fears and humblings unspeakable
do rise: for ye hand of God is mighty unto both, either to humble or to
exalte, according to that saying of Peter. Humble your selves under the mighty
hand of God, that he may exalt you in time convenient. 1. Pet. 5.6. Great is
the sorrows which the bodies, (either slain with sword, or torn in pieces
with beasts) do feel: but nothing are the most cruel tormentings of the
body, if they be compared with true fears, and sorrows of the mind, which
rise by feeling the wrath of God, and which are elsewhere often described in
the Psalms. For how much more the force of the mind excels that of the
body, so much more grievous are those things felt in the mind, then in the
body.

Idem. And my moisture is like the drought in Summer.

Like as before he compared his unspeakable sighs and groans unto the roaring
of Lions, which when all wild Beasts do hear, they tremble with fear: so
now with a most pleasant figure, he describes the faintness or languishing
of his heart: for as in the Summer season all things are parched, and the fennie
places are dried up with heat, so the word Laschad, that is, the radical
humor by feeling the wrath of God, is withered and scorched. For the heart in
great sadness is dried up and scorched, as the Marquis C^ssimiros his heart
(being taken out of his body when he was dead,) men say it was like unto a
dry Pear.

Neither indeed can I deliver you a more notable description of sadness, then
that which is extant in the wrytings of Physic: sadness therefore is a motion
of the heart, wherewith the heart being stricken with some contrary misliking, is
constrained, pressed, trembles, and languisheth with a sharp feeling of
sorrow: and except the sadness surcease, at length the heart being dried up,
utterly perrisheth. This vexation or torment is ordained for us, that both the
fear of future evil might restrain us, and sadness for the evil past
should be a revenger, and the punishment for offenses, and the witness of
Gods judgment.

Verse. 5. I will knowledge my sin unto thee, and I will not hyde mine
unrighteousness.

Verse. 6. I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou
forgauest the wickedness of my sin.

After a large and lightsome description of his fears, now follows a
repeticion, and declaration of the principal proposition: so man obtayneth
remission of sin, when he confesses his sin, and craves free remission
for the promise of Gods sake. This is a sweet and firm consolation, truly
beginning in our heart life everlasting: which affirms that we have
forgiveness assuredly, yea though we bring no merits with us, but this same
very groaning acknowledging sin, and craving forgiveness of sin.

For seeing this Psalm perspicuously, treats of the free forgiveness of
sins always, let us bear about with us in our mind and heart, this doctrine
and consolation, and let us exercise the same in daily prayer and repentance:
which when we shall do, the proper and native meaning of the Psalm, shall be
more excellent in us.

Verse. 7. For this, shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee,
in a time when thou may be found.

He trans-ferreth or applies the example of the manner of justification, that
is, of the confession of sin, and the forgiveness thereof, unto the
universal Church, as if he said: [although the holy ones acknowledge
themselves to have sins in them, and do crave and believe they are forgiven
them,] you see then, that the doctrine of repentance and of forgiveness are
joined together: he promises not forgiveness unto secure persons, and such as
do not sorrow for their sins, but unto them in whose hearts are remaining
fears and consolations. And although Hypocrites do sharply contend, that the
regenerate persons, do satis-fie the Law, and be just by fulfilling the Law:
yet notwithstanding, all the godly ones confess, that they still carry about
with them many and great evils, and do with continual tears bewail them:
namely, doubtings, distrust, security, and many flames of vicious lusts, which
hypocrites do dissemble with all. But the holy ones do acknowledge that they
have sins in them, and do crave forgiveness of them, and rest applauding in
the doctrine of this Psalm: they know they are so just, because their sin is
covered, and not imputed unto them.

Hetherunto appertains the memorable saying of S. Augustine in his book of
Ecclesiastical opinions, Chapter 37. The holy ones, (says he) do earnestly,
and in their own person pray: forgive us our sins; Let him be accursed that
thinks or deemes the contrary, and gives unto the holy ones, an imagination
fained in this behalf.

Of the third place.
Idem. But in the great water floodes they shall not come nigh him.

Verse. 8. Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from
trouble: thou shall compass me about with Songs of deliverance.


There are many notable lights of words in these verses, which we ought not at
a blush to look upon, but with eyes full bent to consider of. The word Sether
is a Den in which any thing is hidden: so Esaias writes in his fourth Chapter.
For upon all the glory shall be a defense, and a covering shall be for a shadow
in the day for the heat, and a place of refuge, and a covert for the storm,
and for the rain. verse. 5.6. And in the 91. Psalm, David says: Who so
dwells under the defense of the most High, shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty. verse. 1. But it should be too too long, to prosecute all the
examples of this signification. 1. Reg. 18, 4
Like as therefore Abdias hyd the Prophets, least that they should have been
slain of wicked Iesabell, so God by wonderful means protecteth his Church,
and all the godly ones, against the furies of the devil and his instruments.
The word Pallet, signifies to be escaped out of the enemies hands, as in
Genesis, 14. it is said: And there came one which had escaped. ver. 13. Doctor
Luther adds hereupon. The word Happalit, is to be noted in this place, which
signifies Taken away, and as we were wont to say, the residue of any hauock
or desolation: and it is the proper naming of the holy ones. For God suffers
these so to be plunged in dangers, that they seem to be bewailed, and yet at
ye length they are delivered by marvelous means. So, when all the whole world
shall be condemned, we which confess Christ, and trust in his death, shall be
preserved as the Remnaunts.

Here also the Reader is to be admonished, of the most pleasant figure, wherein
the holy Ghost, as an excellent Painter describes the fury of the devil and
the world. For he co^pareth the enemies which address and put in practice all
the endeavor of their kingdom unto our destruction, like ouerflowing waters
rushing upon the Land, both with great violence, and with great assault: not
to that end only to show what the adversaries do think, but also to
admonish us, that in men there is not so great strength and courage, that we
are able to endure their deadly ouercharging us: namely, that in such dangers,
we may not only forgette humane defenses, which seem able to be opposed, but
also that we may altogether despair of them, and only lean unto him, who in
this case is called a Hyding place.

Thus far have I spoken of the Grammatical exposition, which notwithstanding
can never be conceived enough: now it follows, that I speak a few words
touching the matters themselves, for the order and lengthening of the Psalm.

S. Paul, in the 8. to the Romans, compriseth the whole order whereby God
creates and conserueth the Church. Whom he has chosen, those he has called,
whom he has called, them also has he justified, and whom he has justified,
them also has he glorified. verse. 30. As those whom he will have made like
to the Image of the Son of God. Seeing therefore David in this most learned
Psalm, had said sufficient enough, touching the justification of the Elect,
and those that are called: he adioyneth heereunto a new kind of preaching,
touching the Cross and glorification of the Church, which is a marvelous
defense, conservation and government of the poor and needy Congregation
dispersed, and trusting in the Name of the Lord. For because the devil
burns with a deadly hatred against GOD and his Church, he never cease to
inflame his instruments, the Tyrants and Heretics, to exercise their cruelty
against the afflicted renmants of the Church, and to deface the doctrine with
scandales and discordes of opinions.

Time would soon fail me, if I should repeat the examples of all ages, which
declare the beastly cruelty of the devil against the feeble flock, which is
the keeper of true doctrine. Therefore omitting the recital of examples, which
by reason of antiquity, are far remote from our memory, let us consider the
dangers, calamities, and conflicts of our time. For if ever the devil at any
time whetted his teeth, even now surely as it were loosed from his chains, he
rangeth in the world, styrring battles upon battles, and engendering diverse
monsters of opinions, that with slaughter and lies he might oppress and
extinguish the Church, now wexing old. Therefore raging in this last age of the
world, he rangeth Lyon-lyke, which in much slaughter as a Conqueror, lies
prostrate upon his pray with his iawe embrued with blood, and when hunger is
driven away, yet for all that lays not away his wrath, but here and there
throwing down Bulls, he threatens the Calves, and now wexeth show with a
weary tooth: because he sees that day draws near, wherein his exceeding
filthiness shall be laid open, and his endless torments shall more and more
be increased.

But against this raging fury of the devil and the world, this Psalm sets
down a Trench or defense, which no power created can overcome. For as God has
appointed the Sea within his limits and bounds, to the end it should not with
daily Deluge ouerwhelme us: so has he enclosed the devil within his bounds,
which to keep and contain his fury, it is needful. For although the Church
in some part be persecuted, yet the Church is the Conqueror, and the remnants
are by marvelous means preserved and defended, not indeed with Bow and
Sword, but by the Lord God, as it is said, Hosea. 1. verse. 7. Wherefore, in
the most sorrowful spectacles of civil broils, and which as yet stick by
the rybs of Germany, and in beholding the confusion of opinions, let us cast
our eyes unto this most sweet promise: But in the great water floods they shall
not come nigh him. As if he said: Thou art unto me a defense or shade, thou
knew to deliver me out of temptation, whether it be by glorious deliverance
in this life, or by inward consolation, or by other means, which are pleasing
unto thee, and are wholesome for me. Last of all he says, Thou shall compass
me about with Songs of deliverance. For as they who when they seem to be
taken prisoners, have escaped safely, and joyfully have sunge some solemn song
of victory: so shall I with all thy universal Church, magnify thy goodness,
wherein thou have not given us as a pray unto the enemies jaws, and have
delivered our soul as the silly bird out of the Fowlers share: finally,
breaking the snare thou have delivered us, as it is most sweetly said in the
124. Psalm. But no speech may sufficiently be able to express at full, and
enlarge the worthiness of this promise: therefore I will be more brief, and will
now come to the verses following.

Of the fourth place of the Psalm.
Verse. 9. I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall
go: and I will guide thee with mine eye.


The Way signifies usually our vocation: and there is no vocation whereunto
man's alone wisdom or virtue without God, can be answerable: Like as Jeremy in
his tenth Chapter says, O Lord, I know, that the way of man is not in
himself, neither is it in man to walk and direct his steps. ver. 23. As if
he said: I acknowledge, and by proof it self I find, that we silly wretches
in every our vocation, are by all means besette and assaulted with our
infirmity, of the devil, and of diverse scandales and dangers: thou therefore
govern us, and make us vessels of mercy. etc. For as the silly sheep has
need of defense, not only against Wolves and Lions, but also of government,
that she fall not into the Fennie rotten grounds, and other inextricable
mischaunces: so surely we had need, (in so great infirmity of ours, and
amongst so many snares of the devil,) not of defense only, but also of
governing our mind, will, and heart, that either our opinions and enterprises
swerue not from the will of God, or that our affections rashly ranging, do
make dispersions, or scatterings from the flock, and stir up offenses
hurtful unto the Church.

Hereof are all those speeches, so often repeated in the Psalms, as in the
fifth Psalm, Lord lead me in thy righteousness because of mine enemies, direct
my way in thy sight. And in the 143. Psalm, Teach me to do thy will, because
thou art my God, let thy good Spirit lead me in the right way. And in the
119. Psalm. Direct my steps according to thy word, that no unrighteousness
have power over me. etc. So in this place, the promise of Gods government is
with most sweet words recited: I will inform thee and teach thee in the way
wherein thou shall walk. That is, I will rule thee with counsel, and will
bring to pass, that thy labor shall not be in vain, but that my glory may be
advanced by thee, and that many by thy ministry, may be called unto the
society of eternal life.

Finally, I will guide thee with mine eye. That is, like as Princes do not
always use words and speech, so often as it pleases them to command any
thing, but oftentimes even with a beck, or eye-wincke only, do give notice
what their pleasure is: so I with an inward consolation will support thee,
least thou fail, or least thou be overcome of thine enemies.

The same figure (then which, none is more pleasant) may be beautified by the
example of the Goldsmith. He when he has cast his gold into the fire, never
turns his eyes from it, but firing them thereon, steadfastly beholds the
same, and takes dilligent heed, that it be left no longer then reason
requires in the earthen vessel. Even so in like manner, God has an eye to
our counsels, actions, conflicts, and dangers, and suffers us not to be
tempted above our strengthes, but with temptation gives an end, that we may
be able to abide the same. But the sweetness of this figure, cannot be
expressed with any eloquence.

Of the fifth and last place.
Verse. 10. Be ye not like to Horse and Mule, which have no understanding:
whose mouths must be holden with bitte and bridle, least they fall upon thee.

Verse. 11. Great plagues remain for the ungodly, but who so puts his trust
in the Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.


Always in the true Church, both the doctrines do sound, viz. Preaching of
repentance, and the voice of the Gospel, touching forgiveness of sins:
therefore he now adds the preaching which exhorts to repentance. Be ye
not like to Horse and Mule. etc. That is, acknowledge the wrath of God against
sin, nourish not every your lusts, continue not in offending against your
conscience, but cast ye away the purpose of sinning, and flee ye unto God in
confidence of his Son, and in this faith receive ye the forgiveness of
sins, and begin ye new obedience acceptable to God. For except ye do repent
you, God will bridle you, and chastise you sharply: for death, and other
humane miseries, are the prysons of the ungodly, and the Inn, lodging, or
school place of the godly ones, which ought to admonish men, touching the
wrath of God against sin.

Horrible plagues were dispersed throughout all ye world, Sodom, Egypt,
Jerusalem, Babylon, and Rome are destroyed. God by these examples, both
brideleth the ungodly ones, and warns all men to acknowledge, that God is
unfeignedly angry with sins, and that to the end some may be converted unto
God. Furthermore, he teaches that the holy ones, yea though they be together
afflicted, yet they are preserved, and at length delivered from death and all
evils. For both the godly and ungodly ones, are burdened with death, and vexed
with horrible calamities. But the ungodly do utterly perrish, and fall into
eternal destruction, because they will not be converted unto God, and receive
forgiveness of sins: but contrariwise, they which crave remission of sins,
know themselves by reason of sin, to be subject unto death and other
miseries, (and yet they are not cast away from God for all these punishments.)

Therefore they endure calamity, and crave forgiveness, and know that they
are unfeignedly heard and helped of God, and at length have their deliverance
appointed them.

Verse. 12. Be glad o ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful
all ye that are true of heart.

Very many Psalms are like unto Epigrams, wherein some sentence being
proposed, after that follow amplifications, taken out of usual precepts, and
last of all is added, a conclusion: so this Psalm ends with this conclusion.
They which hold fast these consolations of free remission, and of help in
calamity, do find in great dolors, true ease and deliverance, yea the taste
and beginning of life everlasting.

All this whole doctrine, besides and beyond Philosophy, and the judgment of
man's reason, is to be preferred, and discerned from the Law. For it is the
voice of the Gospel, wherein the secret will of God is manifested touching
true remission of sins, and touching true consolation in persecution.

Therefore this Psalm is of diverse interpretations deformed: because few do
rightly understand the doctrine of free remission of sins, and many
unlearned persons, confusedly deal with those kinds of doctrine, the Law and
the Gospel.

A Psalm of David exhortatorie, to praise and thank God. Exultate iusti in
Domino.
The Argument.
ALthough this Psalm be chiefly consisting in giving of thanks, celebrating
the creation of things, even from nothing, and the providence wherewith God is
present in his workmanship, not as a Stoicall God, but as doing that which is
most freely done: yet notwithstanding, there is by way annexed unto
thanksgiving, a most ample doctrine, touching the true worshippings of God, and
touching Fear and Faith.

For as the thinking upon the unspeakable goodness and mercy of God, stirs
up faith in our hearts, so the consideration of the power and majesty of God,
procures fear. Let us therefore borrow out of this Psalm, firm and evident
testimonies of the creation of the world, even from nothing, and of providence,
and being confirmed as touching these sayings, let us constantly reject the
opinions of Epicures and Stoics, which murmr in men's minds whiles they are
in praying: let us not imagine, that God is absent from his workmanship, or
cannot do otherwise then as second causes do move him.

But let us with most firm assent believe, that God is present with all his
Creatures, and that all which are preserved, and so far forth as they are
preserved, are supported and maintained by God: but yet so, as God is doing
that which is freely to be done, he maintaining it so long as it pleases
him, and therewith does it, so far as he has in his providence decreed it
to be done: and that he does moderate and change some things through his
unspeakable goodness, for the welfare of his Church.

Then after this considered, let us walk before the Lord in Fear and in
Faith, as the second Psalm commands: Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice
unto him with reverence. ver. 11. That is, let there be in us a most sweet
mixture, and society or copulation most delectable of both affections, of
Fear, and of Faith. And let our hearts indeed believe, that the living and
true God is our Creator, nourisher, and gentle Father, dealing with us as with
his tender children; but let our hearts therewith acknowledge his righteousness,
fear his judgment, and obey him, shunning all occasions of sinning. And if in
this manner we shall apply unto our use the sayings of this Psalm: the reading
thereof shall be both more notable and more sweet unto us.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. Rejoice in the Lord, o ye righteous: for it becomes well the
just to be thankful.

Verse. 2. Praise the Lord with harp: sing Psalms unto him with the Lute,
and instrument of ten strings.

Verse. 3. Sing unto the Lord a new song, sing praises lustilie unto him with
a good courage.


THE Prophet here begins with a heavenly Poem touching GOD, and the works
of God, from a proposition Paraneticall, which declares, that David's mind
when he sunge this, was full of joy, and gladness of the holy Ghost
unspeakable. I do exhort (says he) all men which are upright in faith, and
have good conscience, to acknowledge Gods presence and goodness: whose steps
shine not only in this universal being of all things, in this beautiful and
wide world, and in the high heaven distinguished with so many lights of stars,
in that mighty great mass of the earth, in the almost infinite greatness of
the Sea, but cheifest of all in his Church: which God unfeignedly beholds and
cares for, to whom he gives his word, whom he calls, whom he helps,
finally, whom he hears and preserves, both in this life, and after this life.

Therefore this infinite and great goodness and mercy of God being known,
the greatness of his works, and as S. Paul says: The manifold diverse
wisdom of God being known. Col. 1.9. Let the godly ones rejoice in God, and
rejoicing give thanks: let them worship and reverence his presence in his
wonderful works, that by Faith and the Spirit, they may receive a certain
taste of everlasting life. These most sweet affects of joy and gladness
unspeakable, do not the Epicures feel, which doubt of Gods providence, nor
the bitter enemies of the Gospel, nor hypocrites and proud Pharisees, nor
fools, which are in love with the wind and smoke of worldly glory: but the
just and righteous men unto whom God has given the light of his Gospel, and
as Saint Paul says: The first fruits of the Spirit of Christ, and the pledge
of heavenly blessings and of life everlasting. 1. Corin. 15. verse. 23.

Let them take their notable beatitude, and their joys, which seek nothing
but the pleasures of this world, and the instruments of them: let them leave
unto us weak and unworthy persons that chief good thing, that same true, and
by all means absolute wisdom, that same alone and perfect beatitude,
touching which, Christ our Lord himself, in a short and most weighty
sentence says: This is eternal life, to know thee the true God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ. John, 17. verse, 3. The sum or effect therefore
of the three verses in the beginning, is this. Let us (knowing the infinite
wisdom and goodness of GOD, also beholding the greatness, variety, and
marvelous force and power of God working in all things,) rejoice in God, and
in all his works, and with great joy and gladness let us give thanks unto him.

Verse. 4. For the word of the Lord is true, and all his works are faithful.

The first Anologie of the proposition, is taken from the Truth of God,
therefore let all men's minds and tongues worship God, because he is True, and
with a right faith performs his promises: this virtue is made more evident,
by considering the Antithesis. Man's nature is wrapped in many cloakes or
colors of dissimulations, and is as it were bolstered and borne out with
certain sails: the fore-heade, countenance and eyes, oftentimes dissemble,
but the speech most often.

But touching God, we must believe that he is true, and that his word has no
snares or ambiguities hurtful unto men: as it were the Apple of contention, or
the riddles of the Monster Sphinx, nor that the threatenings of God are vain
terrifying, nor his promises set forth to allure fools by all means: for
that sentence which is set down by S. Paul is immoouable: God is true and
without falsehood.

Verse. 5. He loves righteousness and judgment.

An other reason taken from the moderation of the righteousness and mercy in
God: God deals not with us by strickt Law, but moderateth his justice with
clemency. When this purpose is confirmed in our minds, the Fear of God,
Faith or Confidence, and Hope of pardon appear in their order.

David assuredly feared, and looked for punishments for his adultery: but he
knew that there were degrees appointed of Fear and of Faith, according to that
saying of S. Paul, Grace abounds above sin. Romans 5. verse. 21. He
therefore craves pardon, and knows that the faithful are accepted, and do
obtain mittigation of their punishments.

Idem. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.

Verse. 6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts of
the^ by the breath of his mouth.

Verse. 7. He gathers the waters of the Sea together, as it were upon an
heap, and lays up the deep as in a treasure house.

The third reason is taken from the Creation, because he is the Creator and
preserver of all and every thing whatsoever: this reason is amplified in the
distribution: for the scripture recites three parts of the world, the Heaven,
the Earth, and the Sea: now let the Reader consider what fit Metaphors this
our Poet has and does use in describing the parts of the world.

In the Heaven (he says) that the proportion of the hosts, is there lively
ordained, most worthy of consideration and admiration: for the Sun is the
Captain and Ruler of the other lights, this Captain do the Plannets as it
were Officers of account, either go before or follow, or go by his sides.
Also most elegantly has Manilius written, almost even like as the degrees of
men are in a Common wealth: some being Noble men, others Knights, and others
Common people: so do some stars excel others in their power or might. His
verses are these.

VT que per ingentem populus describitur vrbem,
Praecipuumque Patres retinent, et proximum equester,
Ordo locum post quem succedunt agmina Plebis,
Jn qua vulgus iners magna and sine nomine turba est
Sic Natura gradus stellarum condidit, vt sint,
Et procerum similes aliquae, primasque sequatur,
Languidior tenui splendens fulgore Caterua.
Sydera nam paribus, si certent omnia flammis,
Jpse suos ignes Ether tollerare nequiret,
Totus et accenso Mundus flagraret Olympo.
AND even like as by City great,
the people is compard,
Where cheifest place the Fathers have,
the Knights next, afterward
The order then which follows,
is the Commenaltie by name,
Which does include a multitude,
deuoide of skill or fame:
So Nature has ordaind degrees
of stars in stately sky,
Some like to Lords, and some again
Inferiors to supply.
But multitude of stars is made,
of mean and slender might,
For if all stars should once contend
with equal flame of light,
The Element could not endure
to feel such fervent heat,
But with heaven fyered, all the world
should burn with blazing great.
Touching the Earth, he says, It is full of the goodness of the Lord: for who
would not of right marvel at the effectual property of the Earth, and at
the fruitfulnes thereof in all kind of growing things. We enjoy and have daily
use of so many herbs, so many remedies, such diversity in iuyces and smells
which the self same earth brings forth, all which spring up, and grow out
of one and the same Earth, and do flourish with a most incomprehensible and a
most hidden increase. Neither indeed in the outward face only does she
send forth these riches to us, but also holds diverse kinds of Metals
conceived in her very bowels, most excellent precious stones, and other
miracles, with admiration whereof, David being amazed, rightly cries out, The
Earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.

Lastly, touching the Sea, he adds that the fame has an incredible
greatness, as it were shut up in a womb or belly, least bursting the
bancks, it overcome all, and with a deep surge, getting over all opposite
stops, runs with rage carried into the open grounds, with such increase,
and through all the fields, that it carries away by force, both the Cattle
and their harboring places. But he rightly compares the depth of the Sea unto
a Treasure house, seeing that in them are many kinds of Fishes secretly
hidden, whereof some in their hugeness far exceed other living beasts
upon the Land. I might here desire in this place, to run into the History
of the notable and singular ornaments of all the parts of the world: but I
need not to stay any longer upon these, seeing there are Books abroad,
largely and notably written of the Heavens, and of the whole world. Therefore
letting pass the hystoricall commemoration: I will admonish the Reader
touching five circumstances of the creation and preservation of all things.

The first whereof is, that the Creation is a common work of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost: that indeed does the meaning of this Psalm teach,
which expressly recites the names of the persons, By the word of the Lord,
Caeli, that is, by the word of the Father of Heavens, and by the spirit of his
mouth, (not indeed created, but creating) all the hosts of them. The second
circumstance is, that all things are made of nothing: of this sentence this
very Psalm is a manifest witness, when it says in the ninth verse, He spoke
the word, and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast. That is, when God
spoke or commanded, the things were begun: then not of any former matter were
they begun, as the Stoics feigned two eternal things, The Mind, and The
Matter.

The third circumstance is, that God freely and willingly, then when it
pleased him, did make the world, and that he did this work most freely, and
not of necessity did erect this frame. Touching this circumstance, let the
sayings be retained of the 114. Psalm. The Lord has done all things as it
pleased him And of the 135. Psalm. What soever the Lord pleased, that did he
in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, and in all the deep places. verse. 6. The
fourth circumstance is, that he departed not from his work, but was and is
present with every creature, and preserves the circumstances of things, that
he vpholdeth the Heaven, and heavenly motions: that he makes the Land
fruitful, brings forth the fruit on the earth, and gives life unto all
creatures living. This presence of God do these testimonies confirm. In him
we live, move, and have our being. Acts. 17.28, Bearing up all things by his
mighty word. Heb, 1, 2. By him all things were created. etc. Col. 1, 16. He
quickens all things. 1. Tim. 6.13. The fifth circumstance is, that he is not
tied unto second causes: touching this circumstaunce the godly minds are to be
instructed, to know, that God is not a Stoicall God, but doing freely that he
does, and not tied to second causes: yea, that he for our sighings or
sorrows, does moderate second causes, or hinder or change them: but I need
not to bring hither any more things touching these circumstances, seeing they
are at large explicated elsewhere.

Verse. 8. Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him all ye that
dwell in the world.

Verse. 9. For he spoke, and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.

I said in the Argument, that this Psalm contained, not only Thanksgiving,
but also doctrine touching The fear of God, and Faith in him. He therefore
exhorts in this verse, all mankind, and specially the Church, to fear the
Lord, whose power is so great, that all things are by him created at his only
word even from the beginning: and that he thenceforth preserves and governs
the same. For as the name of Father, which is attributed unto GOD, procures us
to believe: so the description of Gods power and Majesty, styrreth up fear in
us.

Verse. 10. The Lord brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught: and
makes the devises of the people to be of none effect, and casts out the
counsels of Princes.

Verse. 11. The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever, and the thoughts of
his heart from generation to generation.

He amplifieth the power of God, by an Antithesis, or contrariety: the
counsels and enterprises of men without the help of God, are frustrated and
made void, but the will of GOD is immooueable and everlasting. All Books are
full of the examples, which confirm and set forth this contrariety.

They of Carthage contended for rule with the Romans a long time: but all these
enterprises, in as much as they were not helped by God, were vain, and made
ridiculous: and at length, Carthage being utterly destroyed, could not any way
withstand or let the Romans from obtaining the rule or government of them both.

Nicanor the Captain of King Antiochus, did proudelie threaten the destruction
of the Temple at Jerusalem: 1, Mac. 7.35. 2. Mac. 15.30
but this proud Captain together with his Host, did Judas Maccabaeus
overthrow, and causing his members, both head hand and shoulder to be heawen
off from the body, they hanged them on the other side of Jerusalem.

Arbogastus Francus, when he came to Millan, being furnished with an Host of
most cruel Nations, barbarously enough threatened, that he would change the
Churches into stables for horses: but this seditious person, did the good
Emperor Theodosius overcome in a great battle, and as he was fleeing away,
brought him into such a straight of perplexity, that he slew himself.

The time might fail me, if I would commemorate, not only ancient Histories,
but also the examples of our time, which sufficiently do show, that the
enterprises of wicked counsels (even for the welfare sake of Gods Church,) have
been overthrown, and that the counsel and enterprise of GOD, has and shall
remain immooueable in the government of his Church.

Verse. 12. Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Jehovah; and blessed
are the folk that he has chosen to him, to be his inheritance.

He annexeth unto the amplification a notable conclusion touching the Church,
which contains most plentiful doctrine and consolation: for he teaches
which is the true Church, namely, the Congregation hearing and embracing the
word delivered from God, as touching the Creation, and other Articles, and
calling upon Iehoua the Lord of Hosts, that is, the true and living God,
manifested unto the people of Israel.

And he therewith also affirms, that the Church of God shall remain for
ever, and that the preaching of the Gospel cannot be utterly extinguished: for
if the Church be the inheritance of God, (as oftentimes it is called elsewhere)
no man shall be able to shake the same out of Gods hands, no though he bluster
out fire and lightnings. But, because these consolations are often repeated,
and are not unknown to the godly ones, I proceed unto the verses following.

Verse. 13. The Lord looked down from heaven, and beheld the children of men:
from the habitation of his dwelling he considers all them that dwell upon
Earth.

Verse. 14. He facioneth all the hearts of them, and understands all their
works.

Like as he spoke before of the Creation, so now he disputes of Gods
providence: Man's infirmity, although it do think that God is the Creator,
yet it afterward imagines thereof as if the Shipwright departs from his
ship new builded, and leaves the same to the government of the Seamen:
that so God departs from his work, and that his Creature is only left to
the government of it self. This imagination seperateth God from his
Creatures, and faineth him to be idle: against this filthy error, men's minds
must be taught, that God, highly discerns of mankind, and what manner of
person every one is, what he does, what he takes upon himself, with what
mind, with what godliness he embraces Religion, this God beholds, and has
regard of the godly and ungodly ones.

But, although he supporteth the Creatures in their natures and substances, and
for a great part preserves the order of the bodies which he has ordained: yet
in his unspeakable mercy he moderateth many parts, and either helps or
hinders second causes, and oftentimes changes them, as the examples of the
Miracles, recited in the Prophetical and Apostolical history declares. But
most often he turns men's wills and counsels whither it pleases him, without
second causes: as when he moved King Alexanders mind to fight against the
Persians, and after that governed the warriors right hand: or when he made
the enemies afraid in their running away. As the 76. Psalm says: He shall
refrain the Spirit of Princes, and is wonderful amongst the Kings of the
earth. verse 12. So let us know, that God most freely in men's natures and wills,
with his wisdom and mercy moderateth many things, yea and that besides
second causes.

But many ask the question: why are evil things done, seeing God is present
at his workmanshyp? Touching this question, let that most true and most simple
answer be always in our sight: That God does work most freely, and freely
is present at second causes, and moderateth many things in them, and works at
once so far, as according to his unspeakable wisdom he judges is to be
wrought at once.

Verse. 15. There is no King that can be saved by the multitude of an host:
neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength.

Verse. 16. A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall
he deliver any man by his great strength.

This is a contrariety between Gods help and humane defenses. All things
pertaining to men are uncertain and frail, and soon fall away as little
flowers: but Gods help is assured and safe in our vocation, and in our
necessary business, whether second causes do help us, or that they seem to
forsake us. Let it suffice to declare this sentence by the example of Tygranes.

Tygranes King of Armenia and Syria, going about to defend his Sisters son
Mithridates King of Pontus, against the power of Lucullus and the Romans, had
gathered an host of two hundred and fifty thousand Soldiers: and being
highly proud of this jolly company, he burst out into many haughty speeches,
like as if not Gods help, but humane expedition and force were the cause of
victory. But this proud King did Lucullus, with a small power overcome and put
to flight before the battle was begun, having slain in the Host, 150000.
enemies, as says Plutarch in the history of Lucullus. Let us therefore learn,
that the facioned figure of this world, is a slender shadow and vanquishing
dream, and that in God alone all our hope of salvation ought to be reposed.

Verse. 17. Behold, the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him: and upon
them that trust in his mercy.

Verse. 18. To deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in the time
of dearth.

He spoke before of the general providence wherewith God provides for all
humane kind: now he most sweetly makes mention, of the special care
wherewith God embraces, meruailously governs, defends and preserves his
Church. Behold, says he, the eyes of the Lord are firmly bent upon the
members of the true Church, which both fear God and call upon him, the
acknowledgement and confidence in the Mediator Jesus Christ, first shining
forth in their minds.

He says these are taken out of a thousand dangers, which threaten present
death, and are nourished with food, even in penury of victuals in vacation
time. So did he preserve Elias, when Iesabell raged, and gave him
intertainement with the woman of Sarepta. 1, Reg. 17, 15. and 19.2. So in like
manner preserves he mercifully us, miserable and unworthy persons, in the
common shypwracke and fire flame of Germany, and that he would thenceforth
mittigate these punishments which we have deserved, we most humbly beseech him.

Verse. 19. Our soul has patiently tarryed for the Lord: for he is our help
and our shield.

Verse. 20. For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have hoped in his
holy Name.

This is a conclusion which of greatest consequence agrees with the whole
Psalm: seeing that God has created and preserved all things, and is able,
(such is his wisdom and goodness) to withstand and hinder all the sinister
practices which are prepared for the destruction of his Church, and seeing he
is true in keeping his promises, and tempereth his justice with a wonderful
clemency, may we any thing doubt, but that our hope ought to be fixed and take
root in God, who is our helper and our shield, both in other dangers, and
even then specially in that clause when we are destitute of all creatures? Let
us therefore go on, with cheereful lightsome courage, and in this hope, let us
assuage these calamities and difficulties: in that we know assuredly, that God
will be present with us, yea though the broken shiuered boordes of the ship
forsake us utterly, as it were suffering shypwrack.

Verse. 21. Let thy merciful kindness (o Lord) be upon us: like as we do
put our trust in thee.

There can be no Thanksgiving without Prayer: for these two worshippings are so
in themselves knitte together, that they may rather be separate in thought then
in deed. He therefore concludes this most sweet Psalm with a prayer, then
which nothing can be thought more sweet: as if he said. Embrace us lovingly
with thy mercy and goodness, and not only forgive us eternal punishments, but
also mittigate those that are present, least our hope be vain and frustrate,
but rather indeed effectual and safe. And that vouchsafe thou to do, both
for thy excellent glory and fame, and also for and in respect of our
infirmity: touching which, all is lost with us, except thy mercy do recreate
and refresh the same.

A Psalm of David's thanksgiving after deliverance. Benedicam Domino in omni
tempore. 1. Sam. 21, 11
etc.
Of the Title.
IT is hard to set down the seasons of times, wherein Saul was cast away
from God, and David was anointed of Samuel: but seeing it is manifest, that
David after Saules death reigned forty years, and that the history of the
first Book of Kings, declares David to be made King when he was but young,
it stands well agreeable to truth, that David was called to govern the
people of Israel about the twenty year of his age. There shall be then
according to this computation, ten years from the time he was called unto
his kingdom, to the tragical end of Saul. All those ten years space,
continual snares were laid for David, and all things made ready for his
destruction, when Saul sought all the means he could to dispatch out of
this life the successor of his Kingdom. Whereby it is a thing most manifest,
with what storms and raging floodes of mischiefs David was tossed, and how
often his life was set even upon the very edge of the Razor, that is, in
extreme danger and utmost perrill of death.

And to omit the other parts of the history of David, who would not be
thoroughly moved with pity, reading the circumstaunces set down in the 1.
Sam. 21. which witness David to be brought into so great distress, that he was
compelled to flee unto the King of that wicked Country of the Palestines,
which he knew with deadly hatred disagreed from the Church or Religion of the
people of Israel: and not that only did he, but also to escape the snares
laid for his life, was enforced with unseemly behavior and gestures most
unfitting such a personage, to deforme himself, and feign himself as one out
of his wits.

Let us therefore know, that in this Psalm a Thanksgiving is contained, not
only for deliverance in particular, whereof mention by name is made in the
title, and in the first of Sam. 21. but also for all his ten years defense
and cherrishing, while he was banished and was laid open for all the weapons
of an ungodly King, and became as it were a cast away from God. But although
David in this long exile escaped diverse mischaunces, and many distresses: yet
notwithstanding, the calamities of his six months banishment, which was the
punishment for his adultery and other sins, did more grieve David, then the
distresses and dangers of so many years. For, a good conscience in adversity
is a great solace, according to those common sentences of the Poets.

Est aliquid magnis, crimen ab esse malis.
Some fault yet sure remains in me,
From mischiefs great though I be free.
Again, according to that saying: Conscia men's recti, miseris tutissima res
est.

The mind assured of her doing well,
In miseries, most safely sure does dwell.
For it is a light matter to suffer calamities, and feel no wound in
conscience. But that is a grievous thing, and I know not whether any thing be
more hard, then for a man to bear about the signs of guiltines, and to be
cast down and grieved with the greatness of calamities for certain sins,
which horribly do wound his conscience. Wherefore, if there had been no
other cause why to eschew sins, yet this had been great enough, whereby we
might the easilier bear or endure the greatness of calamities laid upon us.
But of the title, thus far enough: it follows that I now speak touching
the Argument of this Psalm.

The Argument.
LIke as a garland finished of diverse flowers, is not only pleasant in sight,
but also meruailously refreshes with smell thereof the sense of the
nosethrils: even so this Psalm, with the goodness of the words and sentences
thereof, allureth and inuiteth the Reader unto it. For it comprehends most
grave precepts, most sweet promises, most severe threatenings, and delectable
exhortations: and amongst all these, he has comprised his own example,
wherein he bids us look, least either by our unworthiness, or by the vain
dream of particularitie, we be driven from God, and from calling upon him.

Our unworthiness murmureth against us, so often as we pray, and endeavors to
take away all hope of his hearing us. To the same end tends the cogitation
of his election, as if the benefits of God, pertained but to certain persons,
as the benefits of Princes Courts, appertain unto some few persons. David in
this Psalm heals both these doubts, affirming that God hears him, yea
wretched and unworthy as he was, and bidding that others also confirmed by
this example be less afraid to come unto God, and that they do not imagine,
there is any acception or respect of persons with God, seeing God is just,
according to one rule which he has set down, and does not admit of any
prerogative besides this rule. Therefore we being encouraged with both
consolations which is delivered in the Gospel, that the promise of grace
depends not of our worthiness, and is universal, let us more willingly and
fervently call upon God: and let us not doubt, but that he will mercifully, and
very fatherly hear our prayers, yea though we be unworthy and deserve
punishments, so we do turn in time unto him, and cease to offend against our
conscience. What shall I say touching the lightsomnes of the words, which like
notable precious stones do shine in this Psalm? He bids us not only to look
up to the Lord, but is an exhorter unto all that are afflicted, that they
would make haste unto God, and without tarrying run to him, forgetting their
unworthiness, and their filthiness.

How greatly does the Military metaphore delight me, wherein he most
pleasantly describes the watches and guardes of Gods Angels over us. The
Angel of the Lord (says he) tarrieth round about them that fear him: and
delivers them. ver. 7. Furthermore, where he says, O taste and see how
gracious the Lord is. etc. verse. 8. does signify, that the merciful loving
kindness of God is so evident, as it runs not only in to the eyes and
ears, which are called the senses of doctrine, but also is embraced with the
hands, and may almost be perceived in taste. But these I will with more words
expound, as I am expressing this Psalm.

The Psalm, and exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be
in my mouth.

Verse. 2. My soul shall make her boaste of the Lord: the humble shall hear
thereof and be glad.

Verse. 3. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name together.


THE Kingdom of God (says the Apostle,) is not meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17. The heart of
man being replenished with this spiritual joy, does not marvel at, nor
magnify any thing, nor prayseth nor extolleth any thing, but the Lord only:
who bestows himself wholly upon us, in manifesting himself, in sending his
Son, and enduing us with his holy Spirit, in forgiving our sins, in giving
us life everlasting, and in distributing unto us his benefits, which are the
helps and furtheraunces of our present life and vocation.

For it cannot be, but the bestowing of so many and so great benefits, does
stir up the godly mind, to sing a song of Thanksgiving for the same: but
let the destruction of times elsewhere often recited be here considered. For
like as Christ the head of the Church, rejoicing in the Spirit, gave thanks
unto his Father, that he had made known his Gospel unto the slender flock,
when it was hidden and not known to the wisemen of the world.

Again also, he being at his Passion oppressed with greatness of sorrows,
cried out: My GOD, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Mark, 15.34. So all the
godly ones do feel the enterchange of gladness and sorrow, and being indeed
glad, do give thanks unto GOD, using the very verse of this Psalm. I will
always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth. But
they that are brought low, and almost crushed with greatness of calamities, do
sing their funeral songs, such as these are. I said in my heaviness, I am cast
away from the sight of thine eyes. Psalm. 31, 21. Again, How long will thou be
angry (o Lord) for ever. etc. Like as therefore in the nature of things, there
are interchanges of the day and of the night, of Summer and of Winter: so in
the hearts of men, does the feeling of blessedness and gladness shine forth, out
of some more, and out of some less. Therefore notably said the ancient
Writers as touching spiritual joy.

Rara hora, breuis mora.
The sildest happy hour of day,
Has in our time the shortest stay.
For indeed our flesh keeps us under, as it were a certain burden, and
does not suffer us always to lift up our mind and eyes unto heaven. We
are also assaulted by the devil and the world by innumerable sleights, as the
Rock in the Sea is dashed upon with raging waves. In these conflicts, the same
thing befalls us, which happened unto Paul who says: Inward fears,
outward frightings.

In the second verse, ( My soul shall make her boast of the Lord, etc*) Let
there be considered a contrariety: a man may see some Idiots or sottish
persons, foolishly flattering themselves for their shadow, or small smoke of
wisdom or eloquence, or power, or riches, or other gyfts, which are only
the vanishing shadows or figures of this world. But David here glories or
boasts in the Lord, whom he believes is his wisdom, righteousness,
holiness, redemption and blessedness: as if he said: I as for other good gyfts
either of body or mind, also I add outward good things whatsoever, they are
uncertain, and more vehemently vanishing the^ the wate^ flood.

Doubtless small is all man's wisdom, as Cicero cries out: O me nunquam
sapientem, et aliquando id, quod non eram frustra existimatum. A lack for me
that was never yet wise, and sometimes have been that, which I was not in
vain reputed for. How feeble a thing man's virtue is, and how soon she is cast
out of her stacion, examples of knightly personages do show, touching which I
have spoken in another place: doubtless nothing is more uncertain then the
wealth of this world, and he is soon a poor Irus, which of late was a rich
Craesus. Which things, since so they be, let us lift up our hearts for the
Lords sake, who can give us the principal, the best, the greatest, yea, the
everlasting and endless good, which no assiduitie or continuance of time can
exhaust or dry up. In the third verse there is a consolation or comfort,
whereby he exhorts the universal Church to worship and magnify GOD. For
as in our prayer we ought to ask and crave those things which are for the
peace of Jerusalem, and unto the peticion to adioyne supplications, for our
own business or necessities, for the welfare of the whole body: so
Thanksgiving must be referred to three purposes, whereof the first is, that
glory may be given unto God for his power and presence in in the Church, and
that Epicures, Stoics, and other blasphemous persons may be refuted. The
second is, that we admonish our selves, benefits are not bestowed upon us by
chance, but that God indeed has care over us, that he hears our prayers,
and that the same God helps us.

The third is, that this our confession may be a testimony amongst other men,
touching Gods providence, and confirm others to believe undoubtedly, that God
has care over humane matters, and that the prayers of the Church are heard of
him.

Verse. 4. I sought the Lord and he heard me: yea he delivered me out of all
fear.

Verse. 5. They had an eye unto him and were lightened, and their faces were
not ashamed.

Verse. 6. Lo the poor cries, and the Lord hears him: yea and saves him
out of all his troubles.

He passes here from the figure Hypothesin, that is, from the ground of the
matter unto Thesin, that is his determinate purpose. That is to say, he
sets down his own example to be followed by the universal Church: for we
must not imagine, that Gods promises do pertain but only to a few, as
privileges belong unto certain persons only, but let us most steadfastly
believe, that the promise touching the Gospel, is universal, and freely made,
according to Christ's saying: Come unto me all ye which labor and are laden,
and I will refresh you. Math, 11. verse, 18. Also as S. Paul says. Therefore
is it of faith freely, that the promise may be sure. Gala. 3.14.

These things since so they be, let us learn, that though we be wretched and
unworthy, yet we are regarded, helped, and heard of God: and when we be helped,
let us acknowledge, confess, and declare unto our selves and to others, that
God is the Actor of our benefit, and that not by chance or humane industry, but
by God our helper, dangers are driven away.

Verse. 7. The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about the^ that fear him: and
delivers them.

Here is a notable consolation, touching the watches and safeguard of Gods
Angel over us: for the devil cruelly assaulteth the Church: as the verse
says: VElut celsum oppugnat qui molibus Vrbem,
Aut montana sedet circum castella sub armis,
Nunc hos nunc illos aditus, omnemque pererrat,
Art locum, et variis assultibus irritus vrget.
AS one with mighty Engines, which
assaults a City great,
Or all in Arms about the Bulwarks
stately has his seat:
Now gives he these attempts,
now others, and by every slight
Inuades each place with diverse faults,
yet vain both force and fight.


Against this enemy we are environed with necessary defenses and sauegardes of
Angels, which repress and danquish the violent rages of evil spirits: these
things though we see not with eyes, and profane persons do deem them things
fabulus: yet that thus indeed it is with us, many notable testimonies in
hystories, and among the sayings Prophetical and Apostolical sufficiently
do show the same. The histories of Jacob, Elias, and Elizeus are known: and
David says: For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways. Psalm. 91. verse. 11. Let us therefore render thanks unto God,
that he has given us his Angels to be our preseruers, and with so much more
quiet minds, let us dutifully employ our selves in our vocation.

Verse. 8. O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that
trusts in him.

A conclusion celebrating the goodness of God, and the confidence in his
unspeakable goodness: and although no speech may suffice for the greatness
of such a matter, yet I will follow the principal points of things, and will
briefly show how gracious the Lord is, and how much a friend unto mankind.
First of all it is sufficiently apparent, that all and every other thing, was
made for the use of mankind, and the same man so created and expressed to the
Image of God, that God was delighted and full pleased in him, as in his last
and most excellent work: for that signifies the Saboth which GOD ordained
after the creation of the man and the woman. But afterward when they had
fallen and deserved everlasting perdition amongst the devils, God of his
unspeakable mercy, restored his ruined Church, by setting forth his promise
of the Savior to come: which being heard, wretched man and woman then knew,
that they were received again into Gods favor, and thereby conceived assured
hope of life everlasting. This promise did he after that eftsoons repeat, and
make known in speaking with the Fathers or Patriarks and Prophets: and at
length, according to his promise so often repeated, God sent his only begotten
Son, taking upon him our nature, and pacifying by his death, the most just
wrath of God against our sins: he also poured out of his own and his Sons
bosom, his holy Spirit upon his Apostles, and other true believers, which
bare witness that we are the Sons of God, and heals our infirmity, and
sanctifies us unto life everlasting.

This unspeakable goodness of God does S. Paul celebrate or reverence, in the
third Chapter to Tytus, saying: But when the bountifulness and love of God
our Savior toward man appeared; Not by the works of righteousness which we
had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new
birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost. Which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior. That we being justified by his grace, should
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. verses. 4, 5.6.7. But
go to, (that we speak not always of spiritual gyfts) what have we that is
not bestowed upon us by the bountiful hand of God, toward the sustentation
of this our mortal life? For he is our life, and the length of our days,
through his goodness the silly bird indeed sterueth not, as I may say with the
Christian Poet. By the grant and gift of this Lord, we enjoy peace;
habitations, mean governments in Commonwealths and Schools, honest and
quiet wedlocks, learning, and finally other helping releefes, almost
innumerable for our vocation and life. So often therefore as we enter into
cogitation, both of this plenty and pleasure of benefits, let us say aloude
with David, O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, and let us repose all our
inward cares upon so great goodness, according to that saying of S. Peter: Cast
thy care upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee. 1. Peter. 5, verse. 7.

Verse. 9. O fear the Lord, ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him,
lack nothing.

This verse contains a precept and a promise: for, he exhorts the godly
ones, that they would live in the fear of the Lord, whereunto faith is
adjoined, or rather most near: and unto these he promises plenty of all
things necessary and wholesome. The examples of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are
known, whom God in greatest scarcity of victuals nourished.

Also let there be in our sight three causes, for which God delivered his
promises touching corporal things. The first is, that we imagine not these
benefits are brought us by chance, but let us believe that they are distributed
unto us, by the unspeakable goodness of God. The second is, that we may
know, God will always preserve some Congregation, which will keep his
doctrine, who doubtless has need of harbourings and other helps. The third
cause is, that we may in prayer and expectation of and for such helps, exercise
our faith: but these were wont to be more plentifully discussed upon in the
sum of Christian doctrine.

Verse. 10. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they which seek the
Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is good.

He amplifieth a promise with a contrariety: the rich, which lyonlike do
seize, upon all things for themselves, are oftentimes shaken out of all their
possessions: some also pine away with hunger: as Pithius who was Purueyor of
the victuals for Xerxes host, is said to have dyed with very hunger. But the
godly ones which seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, are not
destitute of necessary benefits for the body: that is, are by God nourished and
defended meruailously. Like as in the time of Ierusalems destruction, six
thousand of the godly ones, at the forewarning and bidding of an Angel,
departed into the City Pella, within the Country of Decapolis, and were
there preserved and defended against all men's opinion. So at this day amongst
so many troubles of Germany, God preserves the needy and poor Congregation
trusting in the Name of the Lord.

Verse. 11. Come ye children and harken unto me, I will teach you the fear
of the Lord.

Verse. 12. What man is he that lusts to live, and would feign see good
days: keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speeake no guile.

Verse. 13. Eschew evil and do good: seek peace and ensue it.

In the holy Scripture are three things specially deliueuered. First, doctrine
touching the Articles of our faith. Next unto that, consolations: which are the
remedies of sorrows. Last of all, precepts of actions. As therefore in other
Psalms, sentences are set down, touching the true acknowledgement and
calling upon God, besides consolations: so in this Psalm are rules touching
life and manners, which shine as it were certain precious stones, and the sum
of the precepts are these: So run, that thou may have an eye to thy mark,
and take good choice of the means leading thee to the mark. Let the Mark of
our studies and labors be the glory of God, and the flourishing and peaceable
state of the Church: the means or ways leading unto this Make, let be the
studies of the heavenly doctrine, conjoined with the love of righteousness,
chastity, truth, and public concord: for the safe and sure estate of the
Church, touching which I have said, cannot without these and many other
virtues, either be ordered or retained in right course. The foundation of this
excellent and most beautiful estate, is the sweet agreement in the true
doctrine, and a bitter hatred of Sophistical or cauilling doctrine. Therefore
the Son of God Christ Jesus, prays for the Church. Father sanctify them
with thy truth, thy word is truth. John, 17, verse, 17. Unto this study of
truth, let love of universal righteousness be adjoined, which is, the avoiding
of vices, and study of well doing: finally, let us have such moderation of
minds, that we may be able to suffer and bear with certain inconveniences,
though against our wills, to the end that public concord be not thereby
disquieted.

These most wise, and most cheefely wholesome precepts, are delivered in two
little verses: Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no
guile; Eschew evil, and do good, seek peace and ensue it.

Verse. 14. The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears hears
their prayers.

A most sweet promise describing the providence of God, beholding and hearing
his Church and all the godly ones. In Creete men say there was Jupiters Image
made without ears, which a certain Epicure there set up: (as he signified)
God to be deaf, and did not hear men's prayers. Against these vile obscurities
or absurdities, David confirms us: nay, (says he) God is neither deaf nor
dumb, but sees and hears all things which are done in the Church, neither
is he an idle beholder of men's matters, but unfeignedly cares for, keeps,
governs, and defends his Church. For it cannot be, that he which with
marvelous workmanshyp made both the eye and the ear, should be void of
seeing and hearing, according to that saying in the 94. Psalm. He that planted
the ear, shall he not hear? or he that made the eye, shall he not see?
verse. 9. But who be righteous, that must be learned out of the Gospel: for
the word of the Gospel does teach, we are righteous, not in our own
sincerity, (seeing all are sinners, and have need of the glory of God,) but
by imputation for the Son of Gods sake: this consolation must we set
against our own unworthiness, which drives us away from praying unto God.

Verse. 15. The countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil: to
root out the remembrance of the^ from the earth.

It should be too long a Catalogue, if we here recited the destinies of
mighty personages, which were horribly overthrown, and came to utter ruin:
as of Hercules, Achilles, Ajax, Jason, Phillip of Macaedonia, Pompey, Caesar,
Anthony, and others innumerable: the tragical ends of these personages, do
well declare this sentence or verse. The countenance of the Lord is against
them that do evil, to root out the memory of them from the earth. And
although it may be disputed upon, why he says: [To root out the memory of the
ungodly,] when of truth in sacred and profane histories, there are long
descriptions of the ungodly ones: yet notwithstanding, the explication or
meaning hereof is simple and plain, if unto their universal end or
destruction you will apply this form of words. God destroyed the whole race
and offspring of Saul, excepting the posterity of Ionathas: 2. Sam. 3.1. 2,
Sam. 7.13.
so an universal destruction oppressed the whole race of King Alexander. The
whole progeny of the Kings of Syria and Egypt, for their heinous offenses, was
plucked up by the roots. Let therefore not only obscure and base persons fear
the judgment of the Lord, but also even they which excel in power: for there
is no power so great, nor so flourishing in glory and wealth, but God can easily
turn topsituruie or vpside-downe, as the history of all ages do show.

Verse. 16. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them: And delivers them
out of all their troubles.

Verse. 17. The Lord is nigh unto them, that are of a contrite heart: and will
save such as be of an humble Spirit.

How hard it is to embrace in calamity this consolation, experience teaches:
for man's reason judges not that GOD is present with wretched persons: but the
doctrine of the Gospel witnesses, that men are not cast away from God by
reason of their misery, but rather, that God even then promises help, and
mittigation and deliverance from mischifes. Let us therefore gather here some
promises of help, mittigation of punishments, presence and deliverance of God.

The Lord is good, and as a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows
them that trust in him. Nabum. 1. verse. 7. Turn unto the Lord your God, for
he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. Joel, 2, 13. The Lord heals those that are broken
in heart, and binds up their sores. Psalm. 147. verse, 3. Call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 50.
verse. 15. Dwelling with the broken and humble spirit, that he may quicken the
hearts of the sorrowful. Esaias. 57. To him will I look, even to him that is
poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. Esaias. 66. verse. 2.
That is, a contrite and humble heart, is the storehouse of GOD.

Verse. 18. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
him out of all.

Verse. 19. He keeps all his bones, so that not one of the^ is broken.

GOD at length delivers his Church out of all miseries, but in mean time,
while we live here, needful it is, that we obey in some calamities: because
he will have his Church subject unto persecution, and yet delivers he many
daily, yea even out of corporal miseries, and when he does not altogether
deliver, yet he mittigateth their punishments.

This mittigation does the Prophet often describe and pray for, and let us
learn also to pray for the same. For this weak nature of man, were not able
to abide the greatness of Gods wrath, if he should be hotely angry against us
as our sins deserve.

Therefore cries David out in the 6. Psalm. Lord reprove me not in thy
wrath. Again, in the hundred and thirty Psalm. If thou Lord wilt be
extreme to mark what is done amiss, o Lord who may abide it. verse. 3.

Verse. 20. But misfortune shall sley the ungodly: and they that hate the
righteous shall be desolate.

All man's life long is full of examples, which confirm and set forth this
sorrowful sentence: but now for brevity sake, I will be content with the
History of Marcus Crassus.

Marcus Crassus, purposing to fight against the Parthians, came into Syria, the
next year after his Consulship, the year fifty and one before Christ our
Savior was borne. This Crassus, when he had understood that there was a
great mass of money hidden in the Temple of the Jews, went to Jerusalem, and
having leave to come into the secret places of the Temple, (against his
promise made unto them) took away from thence more then a thousand Talents,
that is, threescore tons of Gold: but within a while after, this
extraordinary Consul, (most covetous as he was,) paid the price of his
perjury and sacrilidge, together with his son Publius a most excellent young
man being slain, himself more then threescore years old: where with him,
thirty thousand Roman Soldiers were overthrown and taken prisoners.

Verse. 21. The Lord delivers the souls of his servants, and all they that
put their trust in him, shall not be destitute.

The most part of men do openly despise and hate the Gospel: after that, the
Ministry, that is, the office of teaching do they judge to be the fyer-brand
of seditions, and of the scattering of al mankind: And truly S. Paul himself
with notable words describes the bitterness of men's hatred against the
Teachers of the Gospel, where he says: The Apostles are reputed as men
appointed to death, and are made a gazing stock unto the world. 1. Cor. 4.
verse, 9.

That is, for execrable forlorn persons, wherewith God is angry, without
pacifying, from whom all and every creature abhors, and whose shadow hurts
(as it were a contagion) the whole society of men: but although the greater
part of the world, burdeneth and ouerchargeth the Gospel with these exceeding
crimes, yet S. Paul with a mighty mind cries out against these false
judgments: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believes. Romans 1, verse. 16.

So David with his voice confirms us, All they that put their trust in him,
shall not be destitute. With this consolation let all good men, especially they
which have authority in the Church, comfort themselves against unrighteous
judgments: and let them know, that God has care over them, who shall
doubtless deliver the souls of his Servants. So be it.

FINIS.
Psalm. 9. verse. 14. That I may show all thy praises within the ports of the
daughter of Syon: I will rejoice in thy salvation.

Ecclus. 14. verse. 16. Give, and take, and sanctify thy soul. etc.

Revel. 19. verse. 1. Hallelu-iah: Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power
be to the Lord our God.

Radiantem Solemn non restringam. Per me Ric. Robinson.

Faults escaped, thus corrected.
PAge 27. for vacantibus, read vocantibus.

Page 29. for arcem, read acrem.

Page 112. for vnfeeble, read t'enfeeble.

Page idem. for disertus, read desertus.


