THE Second part of the Anatomy of Abuses, containing The display of
Corruptions, with a perfect description of such imperfections, blemishes and
abuses, as now reigning in every degree, require reformation for fear of Gods
vengeance to be powered upon the people and country, without speedy repentance
and conversion unto God: made dialogwise by Phillip Stubbes.

Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. LONDON. Printed by R. W. for
William Wright, and are to be sold at his shop ioining to S. Mildreds Church in
the Poultrie, being the middle shop in the row.



To the christian Reader, grace, mercy and peace.
THere was never any age, or time (christian reader) since the beginning of the
world how corrupt so ever, that was comparable to this our thrice unhappy age
in all kind of corruption, wickedness, and sin, with grief of conscience I
speak it, with weeping eyes I behold it, and with sorrowful heart I lament it.
And therefore seeing wickedness does so abound, the Lord (least his children
frosen in the dregs of their sin should perish with the wicked) raises up in
his mercy good men (as we see he has done our good brother the author hereof)
to pluck off the visors of sin from their faces, and to lay them open to the
view of the whole world, to the end that every one seeing the dung of his
wicked ways, and the filthy dregs of sin thrown in their faces, may blush
at the same, be ashamed, repent, amend, and turn to the Lord Jesus, and so
eternally be saved To this end and purpose has the author hereof (for whose
singular towardnes in his primar years the Lord Jesus be praised) taken in hand
the compiling of this little treatise, containing a summarie of certain
corruptions and abuses, as well in the temporaltie, as in the clergy.
Wherefore good Reader read over the same mature, advisedly, judge of the same
imparcially, and at no hand condemn not temere, rashly, but compare every
thing with the truth of Gods word, and the state of time, and as it shall agree
or disagree from the word of God. so to like or dislike of the same. For I am
persuaded that there is nothing comprised in this whole book, but what is
agreeable to the word of God, saving that in a few points the author bearing
with the infirmity of the time, has somewhat qualified both his style and
matter, in hope of speedy reformation to ensue, which God grant. Therefore
gentle Reader, let me obtain thus much at thy hands, as to accept his good
meaning, as well toward the truth, as toward the professors thereof, to rest
thankful to God for him, and to help him with thy prayers, that as hitherto
even from his youth he has borne a zeal to the truth of Christ's religion, so
he may continue to the end, expressing (as he has begun) in life and
conversation for ever through Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Thy fellow laborer. I. F.

To the Right HONORABLE, and his singular good Lord Phillip Earl of Arundell,
Phillip Stubs wishes all prosperity in this life, with increase of honor,
and eternal felicity in the heavenly hierarchy by Jesus Christ.
Having made the first part of the Anatomy of abuses (Right honorable, and my
very good Lord) and dedicated the same to your good Lordship, I thought I
should then have taken mine Vltimum vale, for euer-needing to write any more
of this argument again. But seeing the devil our ancient adversary in the
fullness of his malice has since spued out his poison* and powered out his
filthy dregs of infinite corruptions, blemishes, and abuses (al which to
comprehend in number were Infinitum finito comprehendere) amongst us of late
days more than ever were heard of before. I was compelled for the health of
their souls, and benefit of my country, to take in hand afresh this new
tractation, entitled The display of Corruptions, wherein are laid open diverse
and sundry abuses, corruptions, and blemishes crept as well into one sort of
men as into another. And having finished the same, and committed it to the
press, I stood in suspense, douting to whom I might dedicate the same, as well
for the argument, and matter which it handeleth (being a ^otch, which some
frosen in the dregs of their sin cannot in any wise abide to be touched) as
also for the inhability and indignity of the author But at the last
considering with my self the proximitie, the semblance, and neerenesse of the
arguments, as well of my first book of the Anatomy of abuses as also of this
the Display of Corruptions, I could do no less than to dedicate the same to
your excellent Lordship, to the end, that your Honor (whom the Lord has made
the mirror of true nobility) might see, as it were in a glass) a brief
summarie of the corruptions and abuses that reign in these days. And not
only for this cause was I incited to commit the defense of this little
treatise to your Honorable Lordship, but also and in especial, in
demonstration of my thankful heart, and unfeigned goodwill toward your Honor*
in that it pleased the same (far beyond either my desert or expectation) not
only to accept, and take in good part my former simple book of the Anatomy
of Abuses, but also most honorably to shield the same under the wings and
guardance of your Lordships protection. In recompense whereof, if mine
ability were answerable to my faithful heart, and goodwill borne to your
Honor, then should this present gift be as great, as now by reason of the
contrary it is small and contemptible. And although I may be adjudged of some
to be over presumptuous in dedicating this book unto your Honor, yet if they
will consider, that such treatises as this (and especially in these corrupt
days, wherein no man can abide to hear of his faults) are not to be dedicated
to every one without exception, but to such whom GOD has blessed (as his
glorious name be praised therefore he has done your Honor) with all graces
and gifts. either spiritual, or corporal whatsoever. And therefore have I had
a special regard, that as this my book does discover and lay open to the view
of the world, many and sundry corruptions, abuses, and blemishes in every
degree, so I might dedicate the same to one free from all the same blemishes
and corruptions, least otherwise it might happily be a prick to his eyes* and
an offense to his mind. For this (right Honorable and my very good Lord) I
hold for a Maxim, that he who is licenciously and dissolutely inclined, can
hardly in any sauce brook or digest good books, which reprove such things
as he so greedily thirsts after. This makes many a one of a guilty
conscience (when he cannot abide to hear his faults ripped up, because he is
faulty) to cast away good books, and to contemn both them and the authors,
who with great study labor and pains have finished the same for the glory
of GOD* and benefit of their country. But had every one tasted of the
favorable acceptance of their patrones, to whose tuition they commend their
labors, as well as I have of your good Lordships not only acceptance, but
also most bountiful remuneration, they should not need to fear any refusal
of their faithful good wills in exhibiting good works unto their protection and
defense. Which thing though I can never sufficiently in effect regraciate, yet
in affect I will not fail (Christ willing) to the end of my life faithfully to
supply. And truly not without great cause am I bound so to do, and not only
I, but even all that in any respect have to deal with your honorable Lordship.
For what is the common bruit noised of your Honor? Truly this. That your
Lordship for gentleness and affability (whereof I have tasted to my singular
comfort) is surpassing any, in good conscience, mercy, and compassion
inferior to none, in noble prowess, valiancie, and magnanimity comparable
with the best. In wisdom and understanding singular, in zeal to the truth
and christian religion famous, in defending of equity and justice renowned.
Finally, in all kind of virtue equal with any, so as I will not fear to call
your good Lordship a perfect pattern of true nobility in all respects. Thus
having rather as the peinter does, to draw the lineaments of your Lordships
virtues with my rude pensill, than to display the lively proport on of the
whole body thereof, which is impossible, I will surcease the same For if I
should take upon me to discipher forth the whole body of your Lordships
deserved commendations, I should rather not know where to end, than where to
begin. But least I might seem to aggrauate your sacred ears, occupied with
grauer and sager matters than these, I will draw to an end, most humbly
beseeching your good Lordship to receive this little treatise into your Honors
patronage* with like plausible alacritte as your Honor received my former
dedication. And not only to receive the same into your Lordships protection,
but also to remain the just defender thereof against the filthy crew of
flowting Momus, and railing Zoilus, with their accomplices of bragging Thrasos,
and wrangling Phormions, to whom as the Greek proverb says: (...), It is
easier to carp, and to find fault with, than to imitate, or amend. And thus
craving pardon at your good Lordships hand, for this my bold attempt, I most
humbly take my leave, committing your Honor with my good Lady your wife, and
all the rest of your honorable progeny, and aliance to the tuition and
protection of the blessed God, who keep and preserve the same, in his faith,
fear, and love all the days of your life, with increase of much honor, and
eternal beatitude in the heavens by Jesus Christ.

Your Honors most humble, and Obedient to command, Phillip Stubbes.

The Author to the gentle Reader.
I Am constrained (gentle reader) before I go any further to make this request
unto thee. That wheresoever thou shall chance in the reading of this little
treatise, to find any faults or escapes either in the print, or in the matter
(as there be too many) thou will either friendly bear with them, or else
courteously amend them with thy pen. And if it be so, that any position or
assumption in any part of my book do seem strange unto thee (as many things
may do peradventure at the first blush, especially being uttered in these
dainty days) that thou will of thy friendly courtesy, and zeal which thou
bear to the truth, to the glory of God, to good letters, and to the
edification of the church of GOD, either expunge them with thy pen, qualify
them with the oil of thy favorable judgment, or else at the least so to
construe and interpret them as they both may stand with the truth, with the
time, and with the mind, good meaning, and intent of the author, whose mind
was (I call heaven and earth to witness) to profit all, and to offend none.
And therefore if any be offended at any thing in this book, it is Scandalum
acceptum, non datum, Offense taken, not given. For the avoiding whereof (God is
my judge, who knows the secrets of all hearts) I have abstained from some
things which I ought to have spoken of, and othersome which I have spoken of, I
have so qualified, that I may seem rather to bear with the corruption of the
time, than the truth of the cause, and rather to love any thing better than
schisms and dissentions in the church of GOD, about matters of small
importance. Therefore (good Reader) in christian charity I beseech thee to
respect my simple meaning, which was to set forth the glory of Christ Jesus,
and the truth of his word, to the edifieng of his militant church upon the
earth, and withal to consider the mark that I shoot at (namely, to insinuate
the truth, and to weed out all corruptions, etc.) the end, and purpose of my
drift, and to defend this little book against flouting Momus, bragging
Thrasos, and wrangling Phormions, Quibus omnia bona odio habentur, to whom al
good things are had in contempt. Thus I commit thee to God (most Christian
reader) and to the power of his might, who bless thee with all graces
spiritual and corporal in this life, that long may thou read, and much
may thou profit, and in the end grant thee eternal life in the heavens, thy
inheritance purchased with the body of Christ Jesus, to whom be praise,
glory, honor, and dominion in all congregations for ever. Amen.

Thine to is power in the Lord to command, Phillip Stubbes.

I.S, in commendation of the Author, and his book.
THe state of these unhappy days,
alas lament we may:
Since that the same so fraughted are,
with wickedness each way.
O England dear, my native soil,
I sorry am for thee:
For that thou will not leave thy sin,
and eke repentant be.
But day by day, from naught to worse,
thou daily do proceed:
Both temporaltie and clergy they,
to work sin have decreed.
Have thou forgot there is a God,
that wickedness does hate:
And who will one day punish it,
in each degree and state?
And do thou not remember well,
the dangers manifold:
Wherein of late thou stoodest (alas)
more than can well be told?
And have tbou also clean forgot,
and out of mind let fall:
How that the goodness of thy God,
deliuerd thee from all.
Praise him therefore with heart and voice,
show not thy self unkind,
And let not these his mercies great,
fall out of grateful mind.
His judgments great are toward thee,
his mercies are much more:
And all to allure thee from thy sin,
his name be praisd therefore.
Let either the one, or the other then,
move thee to leave thy sin:
Then God to power his blessings store,
upon thee shall not linne.
Read over then this little book,
and that with single eye:
And thou the state of this our age,
as in a glass shall see.
Be warnd therefore, thy life amend,
while thou have time and space:
That in the end in heaven bliss,
thou may have thy solace.
Thine in the Lord. I.S.

THE DISPLAY OF corruptions, requiring reformation for fear of Gods judgments
to be powered upon the people and country without speedy amendment.
The speakers THEODORUS and AMPHILOGVS. GOD bless you my friend, and well
overtaken.

Amphilogus. You are heartily welcome good sir with all my heart.


Theod. How far purpose you to travel this way by the grace of God?


Amphil. As far as Nodnol if God permit.


Theod. What place is that I pray you, and where is it situate?


Amphil. It is a famous city; and the chiefest place in Dnalgne, have you not
heard of it?


Theod. No truly. For I am a stranger, and newly come into these countries,
only to see fashions, and to learn the state and condition of those things
whereof I am ignorant.


Amphil. What country man are you, I pray you, if I may be so bold as to ask?


Theod. I am of the country and nation of the Idumeans, a cruel, fierce, and
servile kind of people.


Amphil. I have been in those countries my self ere now, and therefore it is
marvel that you know me not.


Theod. Me think I should know you, but yet I cannot call your name to
remembrance.


Amphil. My name is Amphilogus sometime of your acquaintance, though now you
have (through tract of time, which is Omniu^ rerum edax, A deuourer of al
things) forgot the same. But notwithstanding that you have forgot me, yet I
remember you very well: is not your name Master Theodorus?


Theod. Yes truly my name is Theodorus, I neither can, nor yet will ever deny
the same.


Amphil. What make you in these countries, if I may ask you without offense?


Theod. Truly I came hither to see the country, people, and nation, to learn
the tongue, and to see (as I told you) the state generally of all things.


Amphil. You are most heartily welcome, and I having been a traueler, borne in
these countries, and knowing the state thereof in every respect, to
congratulate your coming, will impart unto you the substance and effect thereof
in as few words as I can.


Theod. I pray you then give me leave (under correction) to ask you such
necessary questions, as are incident to my purpose, and which may serve for my
better instruction in all the foresaid premises?


Amphil. Go to then, ask on in the name of God, and I will address my self
to satisfy your reasonable requests in any thing I can.


Theod. What be the inhabiters of this country? Be they a virtuous, godly,
and religious kind of people, or other wise clean contrary?


Amphil. Surely they are as all other countries and nations be for the most
part, inclined to sin, and wickedness, drinking up iniquity as it were water,
but yet I am persuaded that albeit all flesh has corrupted his way before the
face of GOD, yet is there not any nation or country under the sun that for
pride, whoredom, droonkennes, gluttony and all kind of oppression, injury,
and mischief, may compare with this one country of Dnalgne, God be merciful
unto it, and hasten his kingdom that all wickedness may be done away.


Theod. Then as in all other countries, where ever I have traveled, so in this
also, is verified the old adage, namely, that the first age of the world was
called Aurea aetas, the golden age, for that men lived godly, and in the fear
of God, the second age was called Argentea aetas, the silver age, for that men
began somewhat to decline, and fall from their former holiness, and integrity
of life, to sin and wickedness: the third and last age, which is this that we
are fallen into, is and may justly be called Ferrea or Plumbea aetas, the iron
or leaden age, in as much as now men are fallen from all godliness whatsoever,
and are as it were wedded to iniquity, committing sin without any remorse,
and running into all kind of abomination and impiety, without restraint. All
which things duly in the good heart of a faithful christian considered, and
weied, may easily persuade a wise man to think their destruction to be at
hand, except they repent.


Amphil. You say very well. Therefore I would wish them to take heed to
themselves, and to leave their wickedness before the Lords wrath be gone out
against them, for let them be sure, that when the measure of their wickedness
is full, then will the Lord cut them off from the face of the earth if they
repent not, and truly turn to the Lord. The wise man says, that a little
before destruction come, the heart of man shall swell into pride, and wickedness.
Our savior Christ says, when men flatter themselves, and say peace, peace,
al things are well, we need not to fear any thing, then even then shall
sudden destruction fall upon them, as sorrow comes upon a woman traveling
with child, and they shall not escape, because they would not know the Lord,
nor the day of his visitation. Which thing we see to be true through all the
histories of the sacred Bible, for when the Sodomits, and Gomorreans had filled
up the measures of their iniquity, and faciate themselves in sin, then came
there fire and brimstone raining from heaven upon them, and their city, and
consumed them all, from the upper face of the earth. When all the world in the
days of Noah, was given over to sin, and wickedness, immediately came the
flood of Gods vengeance, and destroyed them all, eight persons to wit, Noah,
his wife, his three sons, and their wives, who served the Lord in true
simplicity of heart, only excepted. The Hierosolimitanes when their sin was
ripe, were they not confounded, and put to the edge of the sword? When Pharao
the king of Egypt his sin was ripe, did not the Lord harden his heart to
pursue the Israelits, and so drowned him, and all his retinue in the read sea?
Herod and Nabuchadnezer swelling in sin, and rising up against the majesty
of God in the malice of their hearts, was not the one stricken dead in a moment,
and eaten up with worms, the other deposed from his kingdom, and constrained
to eat grass with the beasts of the earth, with the like examples, which for
the avoiding of prolixitie, I omit. By all which it appears, that when
destruction is nearest, then are the people the securest, and the most indurate
and frosen in the dregs of their sin, and being so, the sequel is either
confusion in this life, or perdition in the world to come, or both. And
therefore I beseech the Lord that both this country, and all others may repent,
and amend every one their wicked ways, to the glory of God and their own
salvation.


Theod. Is this country fruitful, and plenty of all things or barren, and
empty?


Amphil. There is no nation or country in the world, that for store, and
abundance of all things, may compare with the same, for of all things there is
such plenty (God have the praise thereof) as they may seem to have need of
no other nation, but al others of them. In so much as if they were wise people
(as they be wise enough, if they would use their wisdom well) to keep their
own substance within themselves, and not to transport it over to other
countries (as many covetous wretches for their own private gain do) they
might live richly and in abundance of all things, whilst other countries
should languish and want. But hereof more shall be spoken hereafter.


Theod. I pray you how is this country adjacent, upon other countries?


Amphil. It lies environed with the occean sea round about, upon the one side
eastwarde, it bordereth upon the confines of France: upon the other side
westward, upon Irelande, toward the septentrionall or north part upon
Scotland, and upon the south side, it respects Germany. And is inhabited
with three sundry sorts of people, Englishmen, Cornishmen, and welchmen, all
which if not in laws, and constitutions, yet in language do differ one from
another. But as they do differ in tongue, and speech, so are they subject (and
that Patrio iure, By justice, and law) to one Prince, and governor only to
whom they owe their allegiance.


Theod. Is the country quiet, peaceable, and at unity within it self, or
otherwise trobled with mutenies, wars, and civil dissentions?


Amphil. The whole land (God be praised therefore, and preserve her noble
Grace by whom it is governed, and maintained) is, and has been at peace, and
unity not only within it self, but also abroad for this four or five and
twenty years. During all which time there has been neither wars, invasions,
insurrectione, nor any effusion of blood to speak of, except of a fort of
archtraitours, who have received but the same reward they deserved, and the
same that I pray God all traitors with their accomplices may receive hereafter,
if they practice the same, which they have done. The like continuance of peace
was never heard of not this hundred years before, as this country has inioied
since her majesty's reign the Lord preserve her grace, and royal Majesty for
ever.


Theod. Are the other countries, lands, and nations about them (for as I gather
by your former intimations this country is situate as it were in the centrie,
or midst of others) their friends, and welwillers, or their enemies?


Amphil. It is an old saying and true: Ex incertis, and ambiguis rebus optimu^
tenere sapientis est: Of things uncertain a christian man ought to judge, and
hope the best. They hope well that all are their friends and welwillers: but it
is thought (and I fear me too true) that they are so far from being their
friends ( Nisi verbo tenus, From mouth outward only) that they have vowed and
sworn their destruction, if they could as easily atchiue it, as they secretly
intend it. Which thing to be true, some of their late practices have (yet to
their own confusion, Gods name be praised) proved true. For how many times
has that man of sin, that son of the devil, that Italian Antichrist of
Rome interdicted, excommunicated, suspended, and accursed with book, bell, and
candle, both the Prince, the Nobility, the Commons, and whole Realm? How
often has he sent forth his roaring bulls against her Majesty, excommunicating
(as I have said) her Grace, and discharging her Highness liege people, and
natural subjects from their allegiance to her Grace? How often has he with
his adherents conspired and intended the death and overthrow of her Majesty,
and Nobility by coniuration, necromancy, exorcismes, art magike, witchcraft,
and all kind of diuelrie besides, wherein the most part of them are skilfuller,
than in divinity? And when these devises would not take place, nor effect as
they wished, then attempted they by other ways and means to overthrow the
estate, the Prince, nobles, people, and country: sometime by secret irruption,
sometime by open invasion, insurrection, and rebellion, sometime by open
treason, sometime by secret conspiracy, and sometimes by one means, sometimes
by another. And now of late attempted they the overthrow and subversion of her
Majesty, people, country, and all, by sending into the realm a sort of
cutthrotes, false traitors, and blood thirsty Papists, who under the pretense
of religious men (in whom for the most part there is as much religion as is in
a dog) should not only lurk in corners like howlets that abhor the light,
creep into noble men's bosoms, thereby to withdraw her Majesty's subjects from
their allegiance, but also move them to rebellion, and to take sword in hand
against Prince, country, yea and against God himself (if it were possible) and
to dispense with them that shall thus mischieuouslye behave themselves. And
forsooth these goodly fellows, the devils agents, that must work these
feats, are called (in the devils name) by the name of Jesuits, seminary
preests, and catholics, usurping to themselves a name never heard of till of
late days, being indeed a name very blasphemously derived from the name of
Jesus, and improperly alluded and attributed to themselves. But what will it
prevail them to be like unto Jesus in name only, or how can they, nay how
dare they arrogate that name unto themselves, whereas their doctrine, religion,
and whole profession, together with their corrupt lives and conuersations are
directly contrary to the doctrine, religion, life, and profession of Christ
Jesus? There is nothing in the world more contradictorie one to another, than
all their proceedings in general are to Christ Jesus, and his laws, and yet
will they under the pretense of a bare and naked name, promise to themselves
such excellency, such integrity, and perfection, as GOD cannot require more,
yea such as does merit Ex opere operato, Eternal felicity in the heavens.
And thus they deceive themselves, and delude the world also with their trash:
but of them enough.


Theod. Surely that country had need to take h^ed to it self, to fear, and
stand in awe, having so many enemies on every side. And above all things next
unto the serving of God, to keep themselves aloof, and in any case not to
trust them what fair weather soever they make them: but rather to think thus,
that when they flatter them the most, then intend they the most mischief
against them. The sweeter the Siren sings, the dangerouser is it to lend her
our ears: the Cocatrice never means so much cruelty, as when he fawneth
upon thee, and weepeth, then take heed, for he means to suck thy blood. The
stiller the water stands, the more perilous it is. Let them remember it is an
old and true saying: Sub melleiacet venetium, Under honey lies hid poison. Sub
placidis herbis latitat colube^, under the pleasantest grass, lurketh the
venemoust adder. Take heed of those fellows that have Mel in ore, verba
lactis, sweet words, and plausible speeches: for they have Fell in cord, and
Fraudem factis, Gall in their hearts, and deceit in their deeds. So falls it
out with these ambidexters, these hollow hearted friends, where they intend
destruction, then will they cover it with the cloak or garment of amity and
friendship, therefore are they not to be trusted.


Amphil. You say the truth. For I am thus persuaded, that he who is false to
God (as all Papists with their accomplices and adherents are) can never be true
and faithful, neither to prince nor country. Therefore God grant they may be
taken heed of betimes.


Theod. Considering that this country of Dnalgne is envied abroad with so many
enemies, and infested within by so many seditious Papists, and hollow hearted
people, it is great marvel, that it can stand without great wars, and
troubles. Belike it has a wise politic prince, and good governors, either
else it were impossible to preserve the same in such peace and tranquillity,
and that so long together. I pray you therefore by what prince is the same
governed, and after what manner?


Amphil. The whole realm or country of Dnalgne is ruled, and governed by a
noble Queen, a chaste Maid, and pure Uirgin, who for all respects may compare
with any under the sun. In so much as I doubt not to call her sacred breast
the promptuarie, the receptacle, or storehouse of all true virtue and godliness.
For if you speak of wisdom, knowledge and understanding, her Grace is
singular, yea, able at the first blush, to discearne truth from falsehood, and
falsehood from truth in any matter, how ambiguous or obscure soever: so as it
may justly be called into question whether Solomon himself had greater light
of wisdom instilled into his sacred breast, then her majesty has into her
highness royal mind. If you speak of learning and knowledge in the toongs,
whether it be in the Latin, Greek, French, Dutch, Italian, Spanish, or any
other usual tongue, it may be doubted whether Christendom has her peer, or
not. If you speak of sobriety, modesty, mansuetude, and gentleness, it is
wonderful in her Highness, yea, so affable, so lowly and humble is her
Grace, as she will not disdain to talk familiarlie to the meanest, or poorest
of her Graces subjects upon special occasions. If you speak of mercy, and
compassion to every one that has offended, I stand in suspense whether her
like were ever borne. If you speak of religion, of zeal and feruencie to the
truth, or if you speak of the upright execution or administration of justice,
all the world can bear witness, that herein (as in all godliness else) her
Highness is inferior to none that lives at this day. So that her Grace seems
rather a divine creature, then an earthly creature, a vessel of grace, mercy,
and compassion, whereinto the Lord has powered even the full measures of his
superabundant grace, and heavenly influence. The Lord increase the same in her
Highness royal breast, and preserve her Grace, to the end of the world, to the
glory of God, the comfort of her Majesty's subjects, and confusion of all her
enemies whatsoever.


Theod. What is her Majesty's Council? It should seem that they must needs
be excellent men, having such a virtuous Lady and Phoenix Queen to rule over
them?


Amphil. The Council are Honorable and noble personages indeed, of great
gravity, wisdom, and policy, of singular experience, modesty and
discretion, for zeal to religion famous, for dexterity in giving counsel
renoumed, for the administration of justice, incomparable, finally, for all
honorable and noble exploits inferior to none, or rather excelling all. So as
their worthy deeds through the golden trumpe of fame are blown over all the
world. The whole regiment of the Realm consists in the execution of good
laws, sanctions, statutes, and constitutions enacted and set forth by her
royal Majesty, and her most honorable Council, and committed by the same to
inferior officers, and maiestrates to be put in practice, by whose diligent
execution thereof, justice is maintained, virtue erected, injury repressed,
and sin severely punished, to the great glory of God, and common
tranquillity of the Realm in every condition.


Theod. Is the land divided into shires, counties, precincts, and several
exempt liberties, to the end justice may the better be maintained? And has
every county, shire, and precinct, good laws in the same for the deciding, and
appeasing of controversies that happen in the same, so that they need not to
seek further for redress than in their own shire?


Amphil. The whole land indeed is divided (as you say, into shires, connties,
and several precincts, (which are in number as I take it 40. In every which
shire or county be courts, law days, and lee^s* as they call them, every
month, or every quarter of a year, wherein any controversy (lightly) may be
heard and determined, so that none needs (except upon some special occasions)
to seek to other courts for deciding of any controversy. But as there be good
laws if they were executed duly, so are there corruptions, and abuses, not a
few crept into them. For sometimes you shall have a matter hang in suit after
it is commenced a quarter of a year, half a year, yea, a twelve month, two
or three years together, yea, seven or eight years now and then, if either
friends or money can be made. This deferring of justice is as damnable before
God, as the sentence of false judgment is, as that blessed martyr of God
Master Latimer has said in a sermon made before King Edward the sixth. Besides
this deferring and delaieng of poor men's causes, I will not say how judgment
is perverted in the end. I reed them take heed to it that be the authors
thereof. Therefore the reformed churches beyond the seas are worthy of
commendations, for there the Judges sit in the open gates, streets, and high
ways, that every man that will may speak unto them, and complain if he have
occasion. And so far from delaieng, or putting of poor men's causes be they,
as they will not suffer any matter how weighty soever to hang in suit above one
day, or two, or at the most three days, which happens very seldom. But if
the laws within every particular county or shire were duly administered
without parcialitie, and truly executed with all expedition, as they ought, and
not so lingered as they be, then needed not the poor people to run 100.200, yea
300. or 400. miles (as commonly they do) to seek justice* when they might
have it nearer home: through the want whereof, besides that their suits are
like to hang in balance peradventure seven years, they having spent al in the
end fall to extreme beggerie, which inconvenience might easily be removed, if
all matters, and causes whatsoever were heard at home in their own shire, or
county with expedition. And to say the truth, what fools are they (yea
worthy to be inaugured fools with the laurel crown of triple folly) that
whilst they might have justice at home in their own country, and all matters
of controversy decided amongst their neighbors and friends at home, will yet
go to law two or three hundred miles distant from them, and spend all that
they have to enrich a sort of greedy lawiers, when at the last a sort of
ignorant men of their neighbors must make an end of it whether they will or
not. This me think, if every good man would perpend in himself, he would
neither go to law himself, nor yet give occasion to others to do the like.


Theod. I gather by your speeches that these people are very contentious and
quarellous, either else they would never be so desirous of revenge, nor yet
prosecute the law so severely for every trifle.


Amphil. They are very contentious indeed. Insomuch as if one give never so
small occasion to another, suit must straight be commenced, and to law go they
as round as a ball, till either both, or at least the one become a beggar all
days of his life after.


Theod. But on the other side, if they should not go to law, then should they
sustain great wrong, and be iniuried on every side.


Amphil. Indeed the law was made for the administration of equity and
justice, for the appeasing of controversies and debates, and for to give to
every man (Quod suum est) That which is his own, but being now perverted and
abused to clean contrary ends (for now commonly the law is ended as a man is
frinded) is it not better to suffer a little wrong with patience, referring the
revenge to him who says: Mihi vindictam, and ego retribuam, Uengeance is mine,
and I will reward, than for a trifle to go to law, and spend all that ever he
has, and yet come by no remedy neither? Our savior Christ bids us if any
man will go to law with us for our cote, to give him our cloak also, and if any
man will give thee a blow on the one cheek, turn to him the other, whereby
is meant, that if any man will injury us, and do us wrong, we should not
resist, nor trouble our selves, but suffer awhile, and with patience refer the
due revenge thereof to the Lord.


Amphil. Why? Is it not lawful then for one Christian man, to go to law with
another?


Amphil. The Apostle says many things are lawful which are not expedient, and
therefore although it be after a sort lawful, yet for euely trifle it is not
lawful, but for matters of importance it is. And yet not neither, if the
matter might otherwise by neighbors at home be determined.


Theod. Yet some doubt whether it be lawful or no for one Christian man to go
to law with another for any worldly matter, bringing in the apostle Paul
rebuking the Corinthians for going to law one with another.


Amphil. The apostle in that place reprehendeth them not for going to law for
reasonable causes, but for that they being christians went to law under
heathen judges, which tended to the great discredit, and infamy of the
Gospel. But certain it is though some Anabaptists Quibus veritas odio est,
and certain other heritikes have taught the contrary, yet it is certain,
that one christian man may go to law with another for causes reasonable. For it
being true as it cannot be denied, that there is a certain singularity,
interest, and propriety in every thing, and the law being not only the mean
to conserve the same propriety, but also to restore it again being violate is
therefore lawful, and may lawfully be attempted out, yet with this prouiso,
that it is better, if the matter may otherwise be apeased at home, not to
attempt law, than to attempt it. But if any schismatikes (as alas the world
is too full of them) should altogether deny the use of the law, as not
christian, besides that the manifest word of God in every place would easily
convince them, the examples, and practices of all ages, times, countries and
nations, from the first beginning of the world, together with the example of
our savior Christ himself, who submitted himself to the laws then
established, would quickly overthrow their vain imaginations. The law in it
self, is the square, the level, and rule of equity, and justice, and
therefore who absolutely contendeth the same not to be christian, may well be
accused of extreme folly* But if the laws be wicked and antichristian, then
ought not good christians to sue unto the^, but rather to sustain all kind of
wrong whatsoever.


Theod. Then it seems by your reason, that if the law be so necessary, as
without the which Christian kingdoms could not stand, then are lawiers
necessary also for the execution thereof.


Amphil. They are most necessary. And in my judgment a man can serve God, in
no calling better, than in it, if he be a man of a good conscience, but in
Dnalgne the lawiers have such chauerell consciences, that they can serve the
devil better in no kind of calling than in that: for they handle poor men's
matters coldly, they execute justice parcially, and they receive bribes
greedily, so that justice is perverted, the poor beggered, and many a good man
iniuried thereby. They respect the persons, and not the causes, money, not the
poor, rewards, and not conscience. So that law is turned almost topsie turnie,
and therefore happy is he, that has least to do with them.


Theod. The lawiers must needs be very rich if they have such large
consciences.


Amphil. Rich quoth you? They are rich indeed toward the devil, and the
world, but toward God and heaven, they are poor enough. It is no marvel if
they be rich and get much when they will not speak two words under an angel
(for that is called a councellers fee.) But how they handle the poor men's
causes for it, God and their own consciences can tell, and one day I fear me,
they shall feel to their perpetual pain, except they repent and amend.


Theod. How be judgments executed there upon offenders, transgressors, and
male factors, with ^quitie, and expedition, or otherwise.


Amphil. It greeueth me to relate thereof unto you, the abuses therein are so
inormous. For if a felone, homicide, a murderer, or else what grievous
offender soever, that has deserved a thousand deaths, if it were possible,
happen to be taken and apprehended, he is straightway committed to prison, and
clapped up in as many cold yrons as he can bear, yea, thrown into dungeons, and
dark places under the ground, without either bed, clothes, or any thing else
to help himself withal, save a little straw or litter bad enough for a dog
to lie in. And in this misery shall he lie amongst frogs, toades, and other
filthy vermin, till lice eat the flesh of his bones. In the mean space
having nothing to eat, but either bread and water, or else some other modicum
scarce able to suffice nature, and many times it happens, that for want of the
same pittance they are macerate and shronke so low, as they either look like
ghosts, or else are famished out of hand. And this extreme misery they lie in
sometime (perhaps) a quarter of a year, sometimes half a year, a
tweluemonth, yea, sometimes two or three years, and perchance all their life
though they have deserved death, by their flagitious facts committed. Who sees
not that it were much better for them to die at once, than to suffer this
extreme misery? Yea the sufferance of this extremity is better unto them,
than the taste of present death it self. And therefore in the cities reformed
beyond seas, there is notable order for this: for as soon any fellon or
malefactor whatsoever, that has deserved death is taken, he is brought before
the magistrate, witness comes in, and gives evidence against him, and being
found gilty, and convict by justice, is presently without any further
imprisonment, repriuation or delay, condemned, and being condemned, is led
presently to the place of execution, and so committed to the sword.


Theod. What is the cause why they are kept so long before they go to execution
in Dnalgne.


Amphil. Sometimes it comes to pass by reason of (will do all) otherwise
called money, and sometimes by friends, or both, for certain it is, the one
will not work without the other. Hereby it comes to pass, that great abuses
are committed. For if any man that has friends and money (as money always
brings friends with him) chance to have co^mmitted never so heinous, or
flagicious a deed, whether robbed, stolen, slain, killed, or murdered, or
whatsoever it be, then letters walk, friends bestir them, and money carries all
away: yea, and though the law condemn him, justice conuicteth him, and good
conscience executes him, yet must he needs be repriued, and in the mean time
his pardon by false suggestion forsooth must be purchased, either for
freendship or money.


Theod. That is a great abuse, that he whom the law of God and of man does
condemn, should be pardoned. Can man pardon or remit him, whom God does
condemn? Or shall man be more merciful in evil, then the author of mercy
himself, it is God that condemns, who is he that can save? Therefore those
that ought to die by the law of God, are not to be saved by the law of man.
The law of God commands that the murderer, the adulterer, the exorcist,
magician, and witch, and the like, should die the death. Is it now in the power
or strength of man to pardon him his life?


Amphil. Although it be wilful and purpo^sed murder, yet is the prince borne
in hand that it was plain chance medley (as they call it) mere casual, and
fortunate, and therefore may easily be dispensed withal. Indeed the wisdom
of God ordained, that if any man chanced to kill an other against his will, he
should fly to certain cities of refuge, and so be saved, but if it were
proved that he killed him wittingly, willingly, and prepensedly, then he
should without al exception be put to death. And herein is great abuse, that
two having committed one and the same fault the one shall be pardoned, and the
other executed. If it be so that both have committed offense worthy of death,
let both die for it, if not, why should either die, Experience proves this
true, for if a Gentleman commit a grievous offense, and a poor man commit the
like, the poor shall be sure of his Sursum collum? But the other shall be
pardoned. So Diogenes seeing a sort of poor men going to hanging fell into a
great laughter. And being demanded wherefore he laughed, he answered at the
vanity, and folly of this blind word. For says he, I see great thieves lead
little thieves to hanging. And to say the truth, before God, is not he a
greater thief that robs a man of his good name for ever, that takes a man's
house over his head, before his years be expired, that wresteth from a man his
goods, his lands, and livings, whereupon he, his wife, children and family
should live, than he that steals a sheep, a cow, or an ox, for necessities
sake only, having not otherwise to relieve his need? And is not he a great
thief that takes great sums of money of the poor (under the names of ^ees,
and does little or nothing for them? Though this be not theft before the world,
nor punishable by penal laws, yet before God it is plain theft, and
punishable with eternal torments in hell. Let them take heed to it.


Theod. Cannot the prince then pardon any malefactor?


Amphil. Some are of opinion that the prince by his power imperial and
prorogatiue may pardon and remit the penalty of any law, either divine, or
humane, but I am of opinion that if Gods law condemn him, no prince ought to
save him, but to execute judgment, and justice without respect of persons to
all indifferently. But in causes wherein Gods law does not condemn him, the
prince may pardon the offender, if there appear likelyhoode of amendment in
him. And yet let the prince be sure of this, to answer at the day of judgment
before the tribunal seat of GOD, for all the offenses that the party
pardoned shall commit any time of his life after. For if the prince had cut
him off when the law had passed on him, that evil had not been committed. To
this purpose I remember I have heard a certain pretty apotheg^e uttered by a
iester to a king. The king had pardoned one of his subjects that had committed
murder, who being pardoned committed the like offense again, and by means
was pardoned the second time also, and yet filling up the measure of his
iniquity, killed the third, and being brought before the king, the king being
very sorry, asked why he had killed three men, to whom his iester standing by
replied, saying: No (O king) he killed but the first, and thou have killed the
other two: for if thou had hanged him up at the first, the other two had not
been killed, therefore thou have killed them, and shall answer for their
blood. Which thing being heard, the king hanged him up straightway as he very
well deserved: yet notwithstanding I grant that a prince by his power regal,
and prerogative imperial may pardon offenders, but not such as Gods laws and
good conscience do condemn, as I said before. The power of a prince is
comprehended In Rebus licitis in Deo, but not In Rebus illicitis contra Deum:
In things lawful in God, not in things unlawful contrary to God. No power or
principality upon the earth whatsoever may dispense with the law of God, but
what it sets down must stand inviolable. Therefore if it be asked me
wherein a prince may pardon any malefactor, I answer for the breach or
violation of any humane law, ordinance, constitution, statute, or sanction,
but not against Gods word and law in any condition.


Theod. How is justice ministered there, sincerely and truly, so as the poor
have no cause justly to complain, or otherwise?


Amphil. If any have cause to complain (as alas too many have) it is for want
of due execution of the laws, not for lack of good laws. For God be praised
there be many good laws, but indeed now and then through the negligence of the
officers they are coldly executed. But if the laws there in force were without
parcialitie duly executed, there should be n^iust occasion for any to
complain. And truly to speak my conscience there is great parcialitie in the
magistrates and officers, nay great corruption. For if a rich man, and a poor
man chance to have to do before them, the matter I warrant you shall quickly
be ended, and my life for yours shall go upon the rich man^ side,
notwithstanding the poor man's right be apparent to all the world. But if two
poor men of equal estate go to law together, then their suit shall hang
three or four years, peradventure seven years, a dozen, ye^ twenty years
before it be ended, till either the one, or both be made beggars. For
reformation whereof I would wish judges and officers to respect the cause, not
the persons, the matter, not the gain? and not to regard either letter or any
thing else, which might be sent them to pervert true judgment. And justice
being ministered, then to read over their commendatorie letters in Gods name,
remembering what the wise man says: Gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert judgment. The lawiers I would wish to take less fees of their
clients. For is not this a plain theft before God to take ten, twenty, or
forty shillings of one poor man at one time, and so much of a great sort at
once, and yet to speak never a word for the most part of it? And
notwithstanding that they can be present but at one bar at once, yet will
they take diverse fees of sundry clients to speak for them at three or four
places in one day. The other officers who grant forth the warrants, the
Subpoenas, the Scire facias, and diverse other writs, and those who keep the
seals of the same, I would wish to take less fees also. For is not this too
unreasonable to take a crown, or ten shillings for writing six or seven lines,
or little more. And then the keeper of the seal, for a little wax, he must
have as much as the other. And thus they suck out (as it were) even the very
marrowe out of poor men's bones. The shirifs, bailifs, and other officers also,
I would wish, for fees, for bribes, for friendship and rewards, not to return
a Tarde venit, or a Non est inuentus, when they either have sent the party
word to avoid covertly, or else looking through their fingers see him, and will
not see him, forcing herby the poor plaintiff to lose not only his great and
importable charges in the law, but also peradventure his whole right of that
which he sueth for. Thus let every officer by what kind of name or title soever
he be called, or in what kind of calling soever he be placed, do all things
with single eye, and good conscience, that God may be glorified, the common
peace maintained, justice supported, and their own consciences discharged
against the great day of the Lord, when all flesh shall be conuented before
the tribunal seat of GOD all naked as ever they were borne, to render
accounts of all their doings, whether they be good or badde, and to receive a
reward according to their deeds. By all which it appears that if any for
want of justice have cause to complain, it is through the corruption of
iniquity, avarice, and ambition of greedy and insaciable cormorants, who for
desire of gain, make havoc of all things, yea, make shipwreck of bodies and
souls to the devil for ever, unless they repent.


Theod. How far are princes laws to be obeyed, in all things indifferently
without exception?


Amphil. In all things not contrary to the law of God and good conscience,
which if they be against God, and true godliness, then must we say with the
apostles, Melius est deo obedire, quam hominibus, It is better to obey God than
man.


Theod. If the prince than do set forth a law contrary to the law of God,
and do constrain us to do that, that Gods words commands us we shall not
do. In this or the like case, may subjects lawfully take arms, and rise
against their prince?


Amphil. No, at no hand, vnlest they will purchase to themselves eternal
damnation, and the wrath of God for ever. For it is not lawful for the
subjects to rise up in arms against their liege prince for any occasion
whatsoever. For proof whereof we read that our savior Christ was, not only
obedient to the maigistrates, and superior powers in all things, but also
taught his apostles, disciples, and in them all people and nations of the
world, the very same doctrine. And therefore the apostle says, Omnis anima
potestatibus superioribus subdita sit? Let every soul submit himself to the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God. And he that resists this
power, resists the ordinance of God, and purchases to himself eternal
damnation. Peter also gives the like charge, that obedience in all godliness be
given to the superior powers, and that prayers and intercessions be made, for
kings and rulers, and gives the reason why, namely, that we may lead Vitam
pacificam, A peaceable life under them.


Theod. Why? How then? If we shall not resist them, then we do obey them in any
thing either good or bad.


Amphil. No, not so neither. In all things not contrary to Gods word we must
obey the^, on pain of damnation. But in things contrary to the word and truth
of God, we are thus to do. We must depose and lay forth our selves both
body, and goods, life, and lime, (our conscience only excepted, in the true
obedience whereof, we are to serve our God) even all that we have of nature,
and committing the same into the hands of the prince, submit our selves, and
lay down our necks upon the block, choosing rather to die than to do any
thing contrary to the law of God and good conscience. And this is that, that
the apostles meant when they said: It is better to obey God than man. Not that
obedience to man in all godliness is forbid, but that obedience to God is to
be preferred before the obedience to man.


Theod. What if the prince be a tyrant, a wicked prince, and an ungodly, is he
notwithstanding to be obeyed?


Amphil. Yea truly in the same order as I have showed before. For whether the
prince be wicked, or godly, he is sent of GOD, because the Apostle says:
There is no power but of GOD. If the prince be a godly prince, then is he
sent as a great blessing from GOD, and if he be a tyrant, then is he raised of
GOD for a scourge to the people for their sins. And therefore whether the
prince be the one, or the other, he is to be obeyed as before.


Theod. And be kings and rulers to be beloved, and prayed for of their
subjects?


Amphil. That is without all doubt. For he that hates his prince in his heart,
is a contemner of Gods ordinance, a traitor unto GOD, and to his countreye:
yea he is to love his prince as well as himself, and better, if better can
be, and to pray for him as for himself. For that an infinite number do rest
and depend upon his Majesty, which do not so upon himself. So that the
miscarrieng of him, were the destruction (peradventure) of many thousands.


Theod. This being so, then has Dnalgne great cause to pray for their prince,
by whose woorthye endeavor, and wise government, the state of that realm is
so peaceably maintained.


Amphil. They have great cause indeed not only to love her Majesty, but also
to pray for her Grace, and whosoever will not do so, I beseech the LORD in
the bowels of his mercy, to stop their breath, and to take them away
quicklye from the face of the earth. For by her Highness wise government, the
realm is in peace, Gods word flourishes, and abundance of al things flows
in the same, the Lord God be praised therefore, and preserve her noble Grace
long to reign amongst us. Amen.


Theod. Let us proceed a little further, I pray you how is the youth of that
country brought up in learning, or otherwise?


Amphil. The youth truly is well brought up, both in good letters, nurture,
and manners for the most part. For the better performance whereof, they have
excellent good schools, both in cities, towns, and countries, wherein
abundance of children are learnedly brought up, But yet notwithstanding some
parents are much to be blamed in the education of their children, for the most
keep their sons to school, but for a time, till they can write and read,
and well if all that too, and very seldom or never do they keep them so long
at their books, as until they atteine to any perfect knowledge indeed. So
that by this means learning does and is like greatly to decay. And if one ask
them, why they keep not their children to school till they prove learned,
they will answer, Because I see learning and learned men are little esteemed,
and me think the best of them can hardly live by the same. And therefore I
will set him to an occupation, which will be always sure. As herein they say
true, so I cannot but lament the small preferment now adays that learning
gets in the world amongst men, and the small account that is made of the
same. This is the cause why learning does, and will in time greatly decay. For
who is he that having spent all his substance upon learning, yea his body,
strength, and all, and yet can hardly live thereby, and maintain himself
withal, that will covet after learning, which is both so chargeable, and
painful to be come by?


Theod. Be there not Uniuersities, colleges, and free schools, where youth
may be brought up in learning Gratis without any charges to their parents?


Amphil. There are such places indeed. But alas they are abused and perverted
to other ends than was intended by them at the first. For whereas those places
had great livings, rents, revenues, and possessions given to them, it was to
this only end and purpose, that those poor children whose parents were not
able otherwise to maintain them at learning, should be brought up upon the
charges of the house, and not those whose parents are able to maintain them of
themselves. But now we see the contrary is true, and whereas they were given
to maintain none but the poor only, now they maintain none but the rich
only. For except one be able to give the regent or provost of the house, a
piece of money, ten pound, twenty pound, forty pound, yea, a hundred pound, a
yoke of fat oxen, or a couple of fine geldings, or the like though he be
never so toward a youth, nor have never so much need of maintenance, yet he
comes not there I warant him. If he cannot prevail this way. Let him get him
letters co^mendatory from some of reputation, and perchance he may speed, in
hope of benefit to ensue. So that the places in the universities and free
schools, seem rather to be sold for money and frienship, then given gratis,
to them that have need, as they ought to be.


Theod. Are there not many inferior schools in the country besides, both for
the instruction and catechizing of youth?


Amhpil. There are so, almost in every parish. But alas, such small pittance is
allowed the schoolmaisters, as they can neither buy the^ libraries, nor which
is less, hardly maintain themselves, which thing altogether disuadeth them
from their books, and is occasion why many a one snorteth in palpable
ignorance all days of their life.


Theod. Would you have any man without exception, to take upon him the office
of a schoolmaister, and to teach the youth?


Amphil. No at no hand. First I would wish that every one that is a
schoolmaster, how learned, or unlearned soever, should be examined, as well for
his religion, and his sufficiency in knowledge, as also for his integrity of
life, and being found sound in them all, to be allowed and admitted to teach.
For if every one that would should take upon him to teach without further
trial, then might there great inconvenience follow. For papists and other
schismatikes, apostataes, or else whatsoever, might thrust in themselves, and
so corrupt the youth. Ignorant and unlearned would take upon them high
learning, and so delude their schoolers. And if his life should not be
answerable to his profession, then should he pervert his auditorie also,
Therefore in my judgment is there great choice to be made of schoolmaisters.
Thus they being tried, let them be admitted gratis, by authority. But now
there is great abuses herein, for being found sufficient in all respects, yet
must he be constrained to take a license, whether he will or not, and must pay
x.xvi. or xx. shillings for it and yet will this serve him no longer, than he
tarieth in that dioces, and coming into another he must pay as much there for
ye like license also, whereas peradventure he shall scarcely get so much clear
in three or four years, in that dioces, they have such fat pasture. But if
they would needs have them to have licenses, (which I grant to be very good.)
I would wish they might have them gratis, without money, for if it be lawful
for them to teach for money, it is also lawful without. And if they be not
worthy, it is pity that money should make them worthy, and again, if they
be worthy, it is pity that without money they cannot be so accepted.


Theod. What way were best to be taken for the good education of youth?


Amphil. It were good (if it might be brought to pass) that in every parish
throughout the Realm, there were an indifferent able man appointed for the
instruction of youth in good letters, having a reasonable stipend allowed him of
the same parish for his pains. But now they teach and take pains, for little
or nothing, which utterly discourageth them, and makes many a cold schooler,
in Dnalgne, as experience daily teaches.


Theod. Be there men of all kind of trades, occupations, and arts, as there
be in other countries.


Amhpil. Yea, truly: there are men of all sciences, trades, mysteries,
faculties, occupations, and arts whatsoever, and that as cunning as any be
under the sun. Yea, so expert they be, as if they would let a thing alone
when it is well, they were the brauest workmen in the world. But as they seek
to excel and surpass al other nations, in finenes of workmanship, so now and
than they reap the fruits of their vain curiosity, to their own detriment,
hinderance, and decay.


Theod. How live the merchant men amongst them, are they rich and wealthy, or
but poor?


Amphil. How should they be poor, gaining as they do, more then half in half
in every thing they buy or sell? And which is more, sometimes they gain
double and triple, if I said quadruple I lied not.


Theod. I pray you how can that be so?


Amphil. I will tell you. They have money to lay forth upon every thing, to
buy them at the first, and best hand, yea, to ingrosse, and to store themselves
with abundance of al things. And then will they keep these merchandise till
they wax very scarce, (and no marvel for they buy up all things) and so
consequently dear. And then will they sell them at their own prices, or else
(being able to bear the money) they will keep them still. By this means they
get the devil and all, besides these, they have a hundred flights in their
budgets to rake in gain withal.


Theod. I pray you what be those?


Amphil. They will go into the countries, and buy up all the wool, corn,
leather, butter, cheese, bacon, or else what merchandise soever they know will
be vendible, and these they transport over seas, whereby they gain infinite
sums of money.


Theod. That is wonderful that they are so permitted: are there no laws, nor
prohibitions to the contrary, that no wool, corn, or leather, should be
transported over seas?


Amphil. There are good laws, and great restraints to the contrary, in so much
as they be apparent traitors to God, their prince and country, that carry any
of the foresaid things over without special license thereto. Yet
notwithstanding, either by hook, or crook, by night or day, by direct, or
indirect means, either known or unknown, they will conueigh them over, though
their own country want the same. But to avoid all dangers, they purchase a
license, and a dispensation for money, bearing the prince in hand that they do
it for some good cause, when indeed the cause is their own private gain. And
for the speedier obtaining of their desires, they demand license for the
carriage over but of so much and so much, when in truth they convey over under
the color of this their license ten times, twenty times, yea, a hundred times,
five hundred times, yea, a thousand times as much more. And thus they delude
their prince, impouerish their country, and enrich themselves, feeding,
clothing and enriching our enemies with our own treasure. Hereby it comes to
pass that all things are deerer, and scarser, than otherwise they would be, if
restraynt were had, and I warrant them many a black curse have they of the
poor commons for their doing.


Theod. Would you not have licenses granted for the transporting over of such
things for no cause?


Amphil. Yes. But first I would have our own people served that they want not
in any case. For it is very unmeet to feed foreign nations, and our own
country famish at home. But if it were so, that Dnalgne flowed in abundance and
plenty of all things, whatsoever are necessary for the use and sustentation
of man in this life, and other nations (provided that they be our friends and
of christian religion) wanted the same, then would I wish that some of our
superfluity might be erogate to them, to the supply of their necessities, but
not otherwise. And this stands both with the laws of God, charity, and good
conscience.


Theod. These are marvelous sleights to get money withal. But I pray you have
they no more?


Amphil. They want none I warrant you, for rather than to fail, they have
their false waights, their counterfeit ballanc^s, their adulterate measures, and
what not, to deceive the poor people withal, and to rake in money. But the
Wise man tells them, that false balances, counterfeit weightes, and untrue
measures are abomination to the Lord. And the Apostle tells them, that God
is the just revenger of all those that deceive their brethren in bargaining.
And yet shall you have them in the sale of their wares to swear, to tear* and
protest, that before God, before Jesus Christ, as God shall save my soul, as
God shall judge me, as the Lord lives, as God receive me, as God help me, by
God and by the world, by my faith and troth, by Jesus Christ, and infinite the
like oaths, that such a thing cost them so much, and so much, and it is worth
this much, and that much, when in truth they swear as false, as the living
Lord is true, as their own consciences can bear them witness, and I fear me
will condemn them at the day of the Lord, if they repent not. For if a thing
cost them ten shillings, they will not blush to ask twenty shillings for it.
If it cost them twenty shillings, they will not shame to ask forty shillings
for it, and so of al others, doubling, tripling, and quadrupling the price
thereof without either fear of God, or regard of good conscience.


Theod. What say you of the Drapers, and cloth sellers, live they in the same
order that the other do?


Amphil. Of Drapers I have little to say, saving that I think them cater
cosins, or cousin germans to merchants. For after they have bought their cloth,
they cause it to be tentered, racked, and so drawn out, as it shall be both
broader, and longer than it was when they bought it almost by half in half,
or at lest by a good large sise. Now the cloth being thus stretched forth in
every vain, how is it possible either to endure, or hold out, but when a
shower of rain takes it, then it falls and shrinketh in, that it is shame
to see it. Then have they their shops and places where they sell their cloth
commonly very dark and obscure, of purpose to deceive the buiers. But Caveat
emptor (as the old saying is) Let the buiers take heed. For Technas machinant,
and retia tendunt pedibus, as the saying is: They mean deceit, and lay snares
to entrap the feet of the simple. And yet notwithstanding they will be sure to
make price of their racked cloth double, and triple more than it cost them. And
will not stick to swear, and take on (as the other their confraters before)
that it cost them so much, and that they do you no wrong. God give them grace
to have an eye to their consciences, and to content themselves with reasonable
gains.


Theod. I think there is great fault to be found in the first makers of the
cloth, for the naughtiness thereof, as well as in the Drapers, is there not?


Amphil. No doubt of that. For some put in naughty wool, and cause it to be
spun and drawn into a very small thread, and then compounding with the Fuller
to thick it very much, and with the Clothier also to sheare it very low, and
with some liquide matter, to lay down the wool so close, as you can hardly
see any wale, and then sells it as though it were a very fine cloth indeed.
Other some mix good w^^ll, and naughty wool together, and using i^ as before,
they sell it for principal good cloth, when it is no thing less. And then for
their further advantage, every vain, every joint, and every thread must be so
tentered and racked, as I warrant it for ever being good after. Now it being
thus tentered at his hands, and after at the Drapers hands, I pray you how
should this cloth be ought, or endure long?


Theod. Be there Goldsmithes there any store also, as in some other countries
there be?


Amphil. There are inow, and more than a good meanie. They are (for the most
part) very rich, and wealthye, or else they turn the fairest side outward as
many do in D^algne. They have their shops and stalles fraught and bedecked
with chains, rings, gold, silver, and what not wonderful richly. They will
make you any monster, or antike whatsoever of gold, silver, or what you will.
They have store of all kind of plate whatsoever. But what? Is there no deceit
in all these goodlye shows? Yes too many. If you will buy a chain of gold, a
ring, or any kind of plate, besides that you shall pay almost half in half
more than it is worth (for they will perusade you the workmanship of it comes
to so much, the fashion to so much, and I cannot tell what) you shall also
perhaps either have that gold which is naught, or else at least mixed with
other drossie rubbage, and refuse metal, which in comparison is good for
nothing. And sometimes or for the most part you shall have tin, lead, and the
like mixed with silver. And again in some things some will not stick to sell
you silver gilt for gold, and well if no worse too now and then. But this
happens very seldom, by reason of good orders, and constitutions made for
the punishment of them that offend in this kind of deceit, and therefore they
seldom dare offend therein, though now and then they chance to stumble in the
dark.


Theod. Have you good wines in Dnalgne?


Amphil. Indeed there are excellent wines as any be in the world, yet not made
within the Realm, but coming from beyond seas: which when the vintners have
once got into their clouches, and placed in their sellers, I warrant you they
make of one hogshead almost two, or at lest, one and a half, by mixing and
blenting one with another, and infusing other liquor into them. So that it is
almost impossible, to get a cup of pure wine of it self at the tavern. But
harshe, rough, stipticke, and hard wine, neither pleasant to the mouth, nor
wholesome to the body. And notwithstanding that they gain (welneare) one
hogshead in another, yet shall their measures, their gallons, pints, and quarts
be so spare, and their prices so hie, that it is wonderful to see. And if a
poor simple man go to drink a pint of wine for the strengthening of his
body, and for necessities sake only, he shall be sure to have that wine
brought him, that is too bad, though his money (I am sure) is as good as the
rich man's. But if a man of countenance come to drink for pleasure and
niceness, he shall have of the best wine in the seller, though his money be no
beter than the poor man's. With infinite the like abuses, which I omit.


Theod. Have you any thing to say of Butchers, and those that kill and sell
meat to eat?


Amphil. Nothing but this: that they are not behind in their abuses, fallacies,
and deceits. For whereas they pay a certain price for a fat beef, they are so
impudent that they think their market is naught, except they may gain half
in half, or the best quarter at the least. And to the end their meat may be
more saleable to the eye, the fairer, and the fatter, they will kill their
beasts, and suffer the blood to remain within them still, for this cause that
it may incorporate it self in the flesh, and so thereby the flesh may not
only be the weightier (for in some places they buy all by weight) but also may
seem both fresher, fairer, newer, tenderer, and younger. And which is more
commonly they use to blow, and puff it up with wind, to the end it may seem
bigger, fatter, and fairer to the eye. Or if the meat it self be lean, and
naught, then will they take the fat of other meat, and pin upon the same very
artificially, and all to delude the eyes of the beholders. And though it be
never so old meat, tough, and stale, yet will they swear, protest, and take
on woonderfully, that it is very new, fresh, and tender. So that no more in
them than in others, there is little conscience at all. There be some of them
also now and then that will not stick to sell meat which has died
(perchance) in a ditch, if it be worth the eating (which is most lamentable)
and yet will bear the world in hand that it is excellent meat, that it died
kindly, and so soorth. So that hereby infinite diseases are caught, and many
times present death insueth to the eaters thereof.


Theod. Is meat dear or good cheap there for the most part?


Amphil. It is commonly dear, seldom good theape, and the reason is, because
a sort of insaciable cormorants, greedy grasiers I mean, who having raked
together infinite pasture, feed all themselves, and will not sell for any
reasonable gain, and then must the Butchers needs sell dear, when as they
buie dear.


Theod. Why? would you have no grasiers, then how could there be any meat
fatted?


Amphil. Yes I would have grasiers. But I would not have a few rich cobs to get
into their clowches almost whole countries, so as the poor can have no relief
by them. For by this means pastures and grounds are not only excessiuely
dear, but also not to be got of any poor men for money, whereby it comes to
pass, that the poor are impouerished, and the rich only benefited. Yea so
greatly are the poor hereby inthralled, that they can hardly get a piece of
ground to keep so much as a poor cow or two upon for the maintenance of
themselves, and their poor families. This is a great abuse: for by this means
rich men eat^ up poor men, as beasts eat up grass.


Theod. Do the gentlemen and others, take in commons and enclosures (as your
words seem to implie) for their better feeding?


Amphil. Yea, almost all indifferently. For whereas before was any commons,
heathes, moors, plains, or free places of feeding for the poor and others,
even all ingenerall, now you shall have all several, enclosed, and appropriate
to a few greedy gentlemen, who will never have enough, till their mouths be
full of clay, and their body full of gravel. Commons and moors which were
wont to be the only stay of the poor, and whereupon each might keep cattle,
both neat and sheep, according to his estate, are now taken from them, whereby
many are constrained either to famish, or else to beg their bread from door
to door. So that in process of time if these enclosures be suffered to
continue, the state of the whole Realm will mightily decay, a few shall be
enriched, and many a thousand poor people both men, women, and children, in
city and country, utterly beggered. Oh it was a goodly matter, when the
poor man might turn out a cow, or two, and certain numbers of sheep to the
commons, and have them kept well upon the same, both winter and summer, freely
without costing them ought, whereas now they are enclosed, made several, and
employed to the private commodity of a few ambicious gentlemen, so as the
poor man cannot keep so much as a pig or a goose upon the same.


Theod. It is great pity that such oppression of the poor should be borne
withal or suffered in any of what degree soever.


Amphil. It is so. But what than. You shall have some that not for the benefit
of grafing, and feeding only will take in commons, and enclosures, but also
some that for vain glory, worldly pomp, promotion and foolish pleasure, will
not stick to pull down whole towns. subvert whole parishes, and turning
forth all a begging, rather then to fail, make them parkes, chases, warrants
and I cannot tell what of the same. And when they have thus done, their bucks,
their does, their stags, hearts, hinds, conies and the like, not only not fead,
intra gyrum suum, Within their circuit, but eat up and devour all the poor
men's fields, ^orne, grass and all. So that it is hard if any poor man's corn
escape their fangs within a dozen miles compass, which is a pitiful and a
lamentable case.


Theod. Would you not have parkes, and chases for game?


Amphil. I disalow them not. But I would not have them to be made of the poor
men's livings, nor yet to stand to the prejudice of the whole country adioining.
Therefore if they will have parkes and chases. First let them see that they be
of their own proper land, and then that they be no annoiance to the country
about, and then let them have them in the name of God.


Theod. Be there any grasiers of sheep there also.


Amphil. Two many, if it pleased God. For now every mean gentleman if he
can pretend (though never so little) title to any common, heath, moore, or
pasture, he will have it, quo iure, quaue iniuria, Either by hook or crook.
And whereas before time there has bin a whole parish or town maintained upon
the same, now is there no body there dwelling, but a sheepeheard and a dog
folling under a hush* Thus are whole parishes and towns made prays to rich
grasiers. Yea, you shall have some grasiers to keep five hundred, a thousand,
five thousand, ten thousand, twenty thousand sheep of his own at one time,
now judge you what infinite commodities arises hereof. Besides that, when they
fell their wool (as though they gained not enough otherwise) it is a world to
see what subtilties, (I will not say what falsities) they use in the sale
thereof. As first, to intermixed and blente the good and naughty wool
together, to wind it up clooselie that if shall not be seen within. And
which is more, because they sell all by weight, they will not stick to use
sinister means to make it pease well in weight. Some lay it after it is
clipped from the sheep back in a moist seller, underneath the ground to the
end that the moisture, humiditie, and wette of the seller may instill into it,
and so may pease the more. Othersome will cast wette salt into it, which in
time will liquifie, and cause it to be the waightier. With many other the like
wicked sleights, and legerdimeanes, whereof for that I would rather give them a
taste in hope of amendment, then a plain description for fear of displeasing
them, at this time I will omit to speak any more till further occasion be
offered.


Theod. Is the land there possessed in common, or else is their property in
all things, and so consequently landlords?


Amphil. There is not only a property in lands there, but also in all things
else, and so landlords inow more then be good ones iwis.


Theod. Do they let out their lands, their farms, and tenements, so as the
poor tenants may live well upon them.


Amphil. Oh no. Nothing less. But rather the contrary is most true. For when
a gentleman or other has a farm, or a lease to let: first he causes a
surueior to make strict inquiry what may be made of it, and how much it is
worth by year, which being found out, and signified to the owner, he racketh
it, straineth it, and as it were so sets it on the tenter hooks, stretching
every vain, and joint thereof, as no poor man can live of it. And yet if he
might have it freely for this racked rent too, it were somewhat well. But (out
alas, and fie for shame) that cannot be. For though he pay never so great an
annual rent, yet must be pay at his entrance a fine, or (as they call it) an
income often pound, twenty pound, forty pound, threescore pound, an hundred
pound, whereas in truth the purchase thereof is hardly worth so much. So that
hereby the poor man if he have scraped any little thing together, is forced
to disburse it at the first dash before he enter the doors of his poor farm,
wherein, what through the excessive fine, and the unreasonable rent, he is
scarce able to buy his dog a lofe, living like a beggar, or little better all
his life after. The time has been, and not long since, when men feared God,
and loved their brethren, that one might have had a house, with pasture lieng
to it, yea good farms, leases, and livings for little or nothing. Or (as some
hold) for a Gods penie as they called it. But howsoever it be, certain it is,
that that farm or lease, which one might have had then for ten shillings, is
now worth ten pound. For twenty shillings, now is worth twenty or
threescore pound. For forty shillings, is now worth forty pound, or an
hundred pound and more.


Theod. Then I perceive, they let not out their land after the old rent: do
they?


Amphil. No. You may be sure of that, they love nothing worse. They cannot at
any hand brook or digest them that would counsel them to that.


Theod. Why? Have not landlords authority, and may they not make as much of
their own lands as they can? They count that good policy, and I have heard
them say: Is it not lawful for me to live upon mine own, and to get as much
for it as I can?


Amphil. They must first consider that the earth is the Lord (as the
Psalmograph says: Domini est terra, and plenitudo eius, The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof) and all that dwells therein. And therefore
being the Lords in property, it is theirs but in use only. And yet not so.
But that they ought to lay it forth to the support of the poor, that all may
live jointly together, and maintain ye state of the common wealth to Gods
glory. For otherwise if a few rich cobs should have al, and the poor none* it
should come to pass; that the state of the common wealth would soon decay, and
come to confusion. They ought also to consider how they came by their lands,
whether by right or wrong. If by right, then are they bound by Gods law, and
good conscience to let forth the same so as the poor may well live upon them.
But if they posses the wrongfully, then ought they to surrender their title,
and give it to the right heir: but take them with that fault and cut of their
necks. No man ought to poole and pill his brother, nor yet to exact, and extort
of him more than right, and reason requires, being sure that the same measure
which he measures to others, shall be measured to him again* Every one must so
deal with his own, so let it out, and so live as others may live by him and
not himself alone, for the earth is common to al Adams children, and though
fortune have given more abundance to some than to other some, yet dame nature
has brought forth al alike, and will receive them again into her womb alike
also. And therefore ought every christian to do to others, as they would wish
to be done to, which law if it were observed well, would cut of al oppression
whatsoever.


Theod. I pray you how came noble men, and gentlemen by their lands at the
first?


Amphil. Cicero says that in the beginning before the world was impeopled men
coming into huge and wast places inhabitable, either took to themselves as much
land as they would or else wan it by ye sword, bought it by purchase, had it by
gift, or else received it from their forefathers, by lineal descent, or
hereditary possession. Which saying of his must needs be true both in the
people of the former world and in us also. Then seeing this is so, ought not
every good christian to set forth his land so as poor men may live upon it
as well as himself* whosoever does not this, eschewing al kind of exaction
polling, pilling and shauing of his poor tenants, he is no perfect member of
Christ, nor does not as he would be done by.


Theod. You talked before of fines, and incomes, what if a poor man be not
able to pay them, what then?


Amphil. Then may he go sue ye goose, for house gets he none, ye deui^l shall
have it before him, if he will give him money enough: no, if ye fine be not paid
(though ye rent be never so great) he shall have a fig, as soon as a house. If ye
a poor man have got never so little a stock to live upon, and to maintain his
occupation or trade withal, yet shall he be constrained to sell the same, yea,
peradventure all the goods and implements he has to pay this fine, so that
during ye whole term of his life, he shall hardly recover the same again. And
then his lease being expired, out of doors goes he, for that he is not able to
pay as great a fine or greater than before. Thus are many a one with their
wives, children, and whole families turned out a beging, and die not a few of
them in extreme misery.


Theod. I thought one might have had a farm, or a lease for a reasonable rent
yearly, without any fine or income paieng.


Amphil. One would think so. For paieng as much yearly, as can be made of the
thing it self, I wonder what devil put it into their heads, to receive such
fines and incomes to undo the poor withal. The devil himself I think will
not be so strait la^^d, nor yet so nigard to his servants, as they are to
their poor tenants. For whereas they will not let out a farm or a lease for
one and twenty years without a great fine, the devil will give them his
whole territory and kingdom of hell, to their inheritance for ever, and that
freely, paieng nothing for the same. And yet notwithstanding all this. There
are some landlords, (nay lewdlords) that having racked their rents to the
uttermost, exacted fines, and made all that ever they can of their farms, will
yet proceed further, and as men never content with enough, will have their
poor tenants to pay a year or two years rent before hand, promising them
(before they have it) that they shall pay no more rent yeerelie, till the same
be run up. But when they have it, they pay their yearly rent
notwithstanding, and never receive any restitution for the other. And at every
change forsooth they must take new leases, and pay new fines, being borne in
hand that their leases before are insufficient, and of no effect. And sometimes
four or five years yea, ten, twenty, forty, or fifty years before their
former lease be expired, shall they be constrained to renew their leases, and
disburse great somes, or else have their houses taken over their heads.
Besides, as though these pollages and pillages were not ill enough, if their
leases be not warely and circumspectly made (all quirks, and quiddities of the
law observed) they will find such means (or else it shall go very hard) that
the poor man shall forfait his lease, before his lease be expired: which thing
if it happen, out goes the poor man, come on it what will.


Theod. Are the instruments, the writings, and co^ueia^ces in that land so
intricate, as they are hard to be kept, for so I gather by your words?


Amphil. Yea truly. For whereas in times past when men dealt uprightly, and in
the fear of God, six or seven lines was sufficient for the assurance of any
piece of land whatsoeeuer, now 40.60.100.200.500. nay a whole skin of
parchment, and sometimes 2. or 3. skins will hardly serve. Wherein shall be so
many prouisoes, so many circumstances, so many exceptions, particles, and
clauses, and so many obseruances, that it is hard for a poor ignorant man to
keep half of the^: and if he fail in one of the lest, you know what
follows. In former time a ma^s bare word was sufficient, now no instrument,
band, nor obligation can be sure enough. Fie upon us, what shall become of us? we
are they of whom the prophet speaks, saying: There is no faith, there is no
truth nor righteousness left upon the earth. God be merciful unto us.


Theod. Seeing that farms, and leases are so dear, I am persuaded that every
thing else is dear also: is it not so?


Amphil. Yea truly it cannot be chosen. And yet it is strange, that in
abundance of althings there should be dearth of all things, as there is.


Theod. Who is it long of, can you tell?


Amphil. Truly of the landlords only in my simple judgment: for when as they
inhance the rents, and set their fines on tenter as they do, how should the
poor man do? Must he not sell al his things a great deal the deerer? Else how
should he either save himself, pay his rent, or maintain his family? so that
these greedy landlords are the very causers of all the derth in Dnalgne for
truly they are worse than the caterpillars and locusts of Egypt, for they yet
left some thing vndeuoured, these nothing, they spoiled but for a time, these
for ever: those by commandment from God, these by commission from the devil.


Theod. How I pray you do these iollie fellows spend these wicked gotten
goods?


Amphil. I shame to think, and I blush to tell you how. For, for the most
part, they spend it in dicing, carding, bowling, tennise plaieng, in rioting,
feasting, and banketing, in hauking, hunting, and other the like profane
exercises. And not only upon these things do they spend their goods (or rather
the goods of the poor) but also in pride their Summu^ gaudiu^, and upon their
dansing minions, that minse it full gingerlie God wot, tripping like gotes that
an egg would not brek under their feet. But hereof enough, and more than
perchance will plese their dein^y humors.


Theod. Do they exceed in pride of apparel, or are they very te^perate, and
sober minded people?


Amphil. They are not only not inferior to any nation in the world in the
excess of apparel, but are far woorser, if woorser can be, For the taylers
do nothing else but invent new fashions, disguised shapes, and monstrous
forms of apparel every day. Yea surely I think they study more in one day
for the invention of new toies, and strange devises in apparel, than they do
in seven years, yea, in all the days of their life for the knowledge of Gods
word.


Theod. Me think then by your reasons it seems, that Tailors are the causers
of all that monstrous kind of attire worn in Dnalgne, and so consequently are
guilty of all the evil committed by the same.


Amphil. You say very truly. For Mali alicuius author, ipsius mali, and malorum
omnium quae ex inde orientur, reus erit coram Deo, The author of any evil, is
not only guilty before God of the evil committed, but also of all the evil,
which springs of the same. Therefore I would wish them to beware, and not
Co^municare alienis peccatis, To be partakers of other men's sins, for be sure
they shall find enough of their own to answer for. But so far are they from
making conscience hereof, that they heap up sin upon sin. For if a man
ask them how much cloth, velvet, or silk will make a cote, a dublet, a cloak,
a gown, hosen, or the like, they must needs have so much, as they may gain
the best quarter thereof to themselves. So play they with the lace also: for if
ten yards would serve, they must have twenty, if twenty would serve, they
must have forty, if forty would serve, they must have sixty, if sixty
would serve, they must an hundred, and so forward. Besides that, it must be so
drawn out, stretched, and pulled in in the sowing, as they get the best
quarter of it that way too. Then must there as much go for the making, as half
the garment is worth. Besides this, they are in league, and in see with the
Drapers and Clothsellers, that if a man come to them to desire them to help
them to buy a piece of cloth, and to bring them where good is, they will
straightway conduct them to their feer, and whatsoever price he sets of the
cloth, they persuade the buier it is good, and that it is worth the money,
whereas indeed it is nothing so, nor so. And thus they betwixt them divide the
spoil, and he (the tailor) receives his wages for his faithful service done.
If a man buy a garment of them made, he shall have it very fair to the eye
(therefore it is true: Omne quod gliscit non est aurum, Every fair thing is
not the best) but either it shall be lived with filthy baggage, and rotten
gear, or else stretched and drawn out upon the tenter, so as if they once
come to wetting, they shrink almost half in half, so as it is a shame to see
them. Therefore I advise every one to see to his garments himself* and
according to the old proverb: Sit oculus ipsi coquus, Let his eye be his best
cook, for fear lest he be served of the same sauce, as many have been to
their great hinderance.


Theod. I have heard it said that they use great ruffes in Dnalgne, do they
continue them still as they were wont to do, or not?


Amphil. There is no amendment in any thing that I can see, neither in one
thing nor in other, but every day woorser and woorser, for they not only
continue their great ruffes still, but also use the^ bigger than ever they did.
And whereas before they were too bad, now they are past al shame and honesty,
yea most abominable and detestable, and such as the devil himself would be
ashamed to wear the like. And if it be true, as I hear say, they have their
starching houses made of purpose, to that use and end only, the better to
trim and dress their ruffes to please the devils eyes withal.


Theod. Have they starching houses of purpose made to starch in? Now truly that
passes shall that ever I heard. And do they nothing in those brothell houses
(starching houses I should say) but only starch bands and ruffes?


Amphil. No, nothing else, for to that end only were they erected, and therefore
now are consecrate to Beelzebub and Cerberus archdiuels of great ruffes.


Theod. Have they not also houses to set their ruffes in, to trim them, and to
trick them as well as to starch them in?


Amphil. Yea marry have they, for either the same starching houses (I had
almost said farting houses) do serve the turn, or else they have their other
chambers and secret closets to the same use, wherein they trick up these
cart-wheeles of the devils charet of pride, leading the direct way to the
dungeon of hell.


Amphil. What tools and instruments have they to set their ruffes withal. For
I am persuaded they cannot set them artificially enough without some kind of
tools?


Amphil. Very true: and do you think that they want any thing that might set
forth their diuelrie to the world? In faith sir no, then the devil were to
blame if he should serve his clients so, that maintain his kingdom of pride
with such diligence as they do. And therefore I would you wist it, they have
their tools and instruments for the purpose.


Theod. Whereof be they made I pray you, or how?


Amhpil. They be made of iron and steel, and some brass, kept as bright as
silver, yea and some of silver it self, and it is well, if in process of time
they grow not to be gold. The fashion whereafter they be made, I cannot
resemble to any thing so well as to a squirt, or a squib^e, which little
children used to squirt out water withal, and when they come to starching, and
setting of their ruffes, than must this instrument be heated in the fire, the
better to stiffen the ruff. For you know heat will dry, and stiffen any
thing. And if you would know the name of this goodly tool, forsooth the
devil has given it to name a putter, or else a putting stick, as I hear
say. They have also another instrument called a setting stick, either of wood
or bone, and sometimes of gold and silver, made forked wise at both ends, and
with this (Si diis placet) they set their ruffes. But because this cursed fruit
is not yet grown to his full perfection of ripeness, I will therefore at this
time say no more of it, until I here more.


Theod. What is the leather in that country excellent good, and well tanned, or
but indifferently. I have heard some complain of it.


Amphil. There is of both sorts as of all things else, but as there is some
naught (I can not deny) so is there othersome as good, as any is under the
sun. And yet I must needs confess, there is great abuse in the ^anners,
makers, curriers, and dressers of the same: for you shall have some leather
scarcely half tanned, so that within two or three days or a week wearing
(especially if it come in any weat) will straight way become brown as a hare
back, and which is more, fleet and run abroad like a dishclout, and which is
most of all, will hold out no water, or very little. And the saying is (
Erubesco dicere, I shame to speak it) that to the end they may save lyme and
bark, and make the speedier return of their money, they will take up their
hides before they b^e half tanned, and make sale of them. And as herein they
are faulty and much to be blamed, so in the surprising of their hides, they
are worthy of reprehension. For that which they buy for ten shillings, they
will hardly sell for twenty shillings, that which they buy for twenty
shillings they will not willingly sell for forty shillings. And thus by this
means, they make shoes unreasonable dear.


Theod. Then the fault is not in the shoomakers only, that shoes be so dear?


Amphil. There is fault enough in them also. For whereas the others inhause the
price of their hides excessively, these fellows, rack it very vnconcionably.
And yet if the shoes were good, though dear, it were somewhat tolerable, but
when they shall be both naught, and yet dear too, it is too bad, and
abominable. Now if you ask the shoomakers in whom the fault does consist,
they will answer you strait in the ^anner. But this is certain, that as there
is a horrible fault in the tanner, so there is more, or as much in the
shoemaker. For first of all the shoemaker liquoreth his leather, with waterish
liquor, kitthen stuff, and all kind of baggage mingled together. And as
though that were not ill enough, they say they use to put salt in the liquor,
wherewithal they grease the leather of purpose, to the end that the leather
shall never hold out water. And truly it is very likely, they do so, or
some such like thing, for surely almost none of their leather will hold out
water, nor scarcely dirt neither. Besides this it is a world to see how
lowsely they shall be sowed, with hot alles, and burning threedes, every
stitche an inch or two from another, so as with in two or three days you shall
have them seamerent and all too betorne. And yet as though this were not ill
inoughe they add more. Sometimes they will sell you calves leather for cow
leather, horse hides for ox hides, and truly I think rotten sheep skins
for good substantial and dureable stuff. And yet shall a man pay for these as
well as for better stuff. And to the end they may seem gaudie to the eye,
they must be stiched finely, pincked, cut, karued, rased* nickt, and I
cannot tell what. And good reason, for else would they never be sold. The
inward soole of the shoe commonly shall be no better then a cattes skin,
the heels of the shoes shall be little better. And if the sooles be naught
(as they be indeed, yet must they be vnderlaied with other pieces of leather,
to make them seem thick, and excellent stuff, whereas indeed they are
nothing less. And to make the sooles stiff, and hard, they must be parched
before the fire, and then are they most excellent sooles, And such as will
never be worn, no I think not in half a coopple of days, which is a
wonderful thing. Oh, farewell former world, for I have heard my Father
say, and I think it most certeinely true, that a pair of shoes in those
days would have kept a man as dry as a feather, though he had gone in water
all the day through, Yea, all the week through, to the very last day, and
would have served a man almost a whole year together, with a little repairing.
But now five or six pair, half a score, yea, twenty pair of shoes will
scarsely serve some a year, such excellent stuff are they made of. But let
all shooemakers tanners, and the rest, take heed, for at the day of judgment
they shall render accounts for this their doing. And hereof hitherto.


Theod. Be there any Brokers, or such kind of fellows in your country?


Amphil. If it be a thing that is good, it is a doubt whether it be there, or
no, but if it be naught (as brokerie is) then past peradventure it is there.


Theod. What manner of fellows are those Brokers, for truly their profession,
and the use thereof is unknown to me, save only that I have heard of some of
their dealings?


Amphil. Seeing that you are ignorant of this goodly mystery, and high
profession of brokerie, and also so desirous to know the truth of them, I will
in few words (as briefly as I can) declare unto you the substance thereof.
These Brokers are jolly fellows forsooth, and such as in the heginning of
their occupation, have either just nothing, or else very little at all, who
when they have attempted, and assaied by all kind of means, and ways to live,
and cannot by any of them al either any thing thrive, or which is less, not so
much as maintain their poor estate withal, though but meanly, then fall they
into acquaintance with loose, dissolute, and licentious persons, either men or
women, to whom all is fish that comes to net, and who have limed fingers,
living upon pilfering, and stealing, and of these they-buy for little or
nothing, whatsoever they shall have filched from any. And thus by this means in
process of time, they feather their nests well enough, and grow (many of
them) to great substance and wealth.


Theod. Will they buy any thing whatsoever comes to hand?


Amphil. Yea all things indifferently without any exception. All is good fish
with them that comes to net. They will refuse nothing whatsoever it be, nor
whom soever brings it, though they be never so suspicious, no although it be
as clear as the day, that it has been purloined by sinister means from some
one or other. And can you blame them? For why? They have it for half it is
worth.


Amphil. What wares be they (for the most part) which these Brokers do buy and
sell?


Amphil. I told you they will refuse nothing* But especially they buy remnants
of silks, veluets, satins, damasks, grograins, taffeties, lace either of silk,
gold, silver, or any thing else that is worth ought. Othersome buy cloakes,
hose^ dublets, hats, caps, coats, stockings, and the like. And these goodly
merchandise, as they have them good cheap, so they will sell them again to
their no small gains.


Theod. If this be true, that they will receive all, and buy all that comes to
hand, than it must needs he that this is a great provocation* to many wicked
persons, to filch and steal whatsoever they can lay their hands upon, seeing
they may have such good vent for ye same? Is it not?


Amphil. You say very true. And therefore I am persuaded that this dunghill
trade of brokerie newly sprung up, and coined in the devils minting house the
shop of all mischief has made many a thief more then ever would have bin,
and has brought many a one to a shameful end at Tiburne, and else where. Yea
I have hard prisoners (and not any almost but they sing the same song) when
they have gone to execution, declaime, and cry out against brookers. For said
they, if brokers had not bin, we had not come to this shameful death, if they
would not have received our stolen goods, we would never have stolen them,
and if we had not stolen them we had not bin hanged.


Theod. Then it seems by your reasons, that brokers are in effect accessory to
the goods feloniouslie stolen, and are worthy of ye same punishment y^ the
others that stale the^ are worthy of?


Amphil. They are so, if before they buy them they know precisely that they are
stolen, and yet notwithstanding will not only willingly buy them, but also
rather animate, than disanimate them to persevere in their wickedness, as this
their greedy buieng of their wares does argue yt they do. This makes many a
tailer to ask more cloth, more silk, velvet, and lace, than he needs, and all
to the end the broker may have his share, for be they never so little scraps or
shreds or short ends of lace, or small pieces, of velvet, satan, silk or ye like,
the broker will give money for the^, with a wet finger. This makes many servants
to pilfer, filch, and purloin from their masters, some a yard or two of velvet,
satin, taffety, lace silk, and what not, some hats cots, cloks, and the like
and some one thing, some another: this hinders the merchant man, is
discomodious to ye tailer, and beneficial unto none, but to themselves: and
therefore as they be the seminaries of wickedness, so I beseech God, they may be
supplanted, except they amend, which I hardly look for at their hands.


Theod. What would you have them to do, that they may exercise their trade,
with good conscience, both before God, and the world?


Amphil. I would wish them to do thus, which if they would do, they might use
their trade in the fear of GOD, both with good conscience before the Lord,
with honesty before the world, and finally to the less detriment of the
common wealth. First let them be sure, that the goods which they buy be truly
and justly come by of the sellers thereof. And to the end, that herein they may
not be deceived. Let them examine the matter strictly, where they had it, whose
it is, upon what occasion they would sell it. And in conclusion not to buy it,
until they have gone themselves to the right owners of the goods, and if they
find all things well, that they may with good conscience buy it, let them give
reason for it, else not. And if every brooker would deal thus, their would not
so many false knaves bring them such lavish of stolen goods, as they do,
neither should their trade grow as it does into hatred, and contempt.


Theod. You said before (except I be deceived) that if they know before they
buy any wares, that the same is stolen, if they than buy them, they are
accessory to the same goods so felonously stolen, and so are worthy of the
same punishment, that the principals are worthy of, I pray you what
punishment is inflicted upon accessaries in Dnalgne.


Amphil. Accessories are punishable by the laws of Dnalgne with the same
punishment that the principals are to be punished withal (for so the law
stands) but in the execution thereof, we see the clean contrary practiced.
For when as a thief, or a fellon steals any thing, he brings it to his
receiver, who though he know it to be stolen, yet with alacrity admits it
into his custody, and reteineth it, hereby making himself accessorie, and
guilty of the felony committed. And yet notwithstanding when execution is to
be done for the same, the principal is (peradventure) hanged up, the other
that is the accessorie is not once spoken of, nor none can say black is his
eye. But howsoever it be, I cannot be otherwise persuaded, but that the
receivers, and accessories are a great deal more worthy of death (by the
penal laws) than he who steals the thing it self whatsoever it be. Because
if they had not any to receive their stolen goods they would not steal at all.
And therefore are the receivers (in my simple opinion) rather the authors, and
the principals (especially if they know before they receive it, that it is
stolen) then they that commit the fact, and being the authors of the evil
committed, they are to be punished rather than the perpetrators of the fact it
self. But for want of due punishment to be executed as well upon the one as
upon the other, we see grievous crimes, and flagicious facts without all
remorse, or fear of God, daily committed. Good laws there are, both for the
repressing of these, and al other enormities whatsoever, but the want of the
due execution thereof, is the cause why all wickedness and mischief does
reign and rage every where as it does, God amend it if it be his good
pleasure. And thus much briefly of the noble science of brokerie.


Theod. What hospitality is there kept, or relief for the poor?


Amphil. Uery small. For as for the poor tenants and commons, they are not able
to maintain any hospitality, or to give any thing to the poor, their rents
are so raised, and their fines so inhansed, and yet notwithstanding they
minister (I am persuaded) more relief to the pore than the rich and welthie
do: more poor are fed at their doors than at the rich: more clothed at their
hands than at the rich, and more lodged and harbored in their poor houses,
than in the rich. But yet can I not deny but that the gentlemen, and others
keep sumptuous houses, lusty ports, and great hospitality, but so as the pore
has the lest part thereof, or rather just nothing at all. If the poor come to
their houses, their gates be shut against them, where they standing frost and
snow, hail, wind or rain whatsoever, are forced to tarry two hours, 3.4. yea
sometimes half a day, and then shall they have but the refuse, and the very
scraps neither. And well if they have any thing too, in steed whereof they are
sometimes sent to prison, clapped in irons, manicled, stocked, and what not. This
is the alms that most men give.


Theod. Then it seems that the poor are simply provided for?


Amphil. They are so indeed, God amend it. And yet I am not so full of foolish
pity that I would have all kind of beggars indifferently without any
exception to be fed and nourished upon the sweat of other men's brows.


Theod. Do you make a difference of beggars then? Are there two sorts of them?


Amphil. Yea, there are two sorts. One sort is of stout, strong, lusty,
courageous, and valiant beggars, which are able to work, and will not. These
at no hand are not to be relieved (for qui non operatur non manducet, says the
apostle, He that will not work, let him not eat) but are to be compelled to
work, and not to live upon other men's labors. For he that releeueth these,
maintains them in their idleness, and takes away the childrens bred, and
gives it to dogs. These are as drone bees, that live upon the spoil of the
poor bees that labor and toil to get their ^itting with the sweat of their
faces. If such fellows as these will not work, but live upon begging, let
them be punished and imprisoned till they be content to work. The other sort
of beggars are they, that be old, aged, impotent, decrepite, or lame, sick,
sore, or diseased, these I would wish should be looked unto: and these are they
that every Christian man is bound in conscience to relieve.


Theod. What order would you have observed in these respects?


Amphil. The former sort of sturdie valiant beggars, which are able to work
and will not, I would wish them to be compelled to work, or else not to have
any relief given them. And if they would not work, to punish them, if that
will not serve, to hang them up. But herein I would wish a prouis^, that being
content to work, they might have masters provided the^, with reasonable
wages, for many would feign work, and can get none, and than if they will not
work, to Tiburne wish them. The other sort of beggars which are either halt,
lame, impotent, decrepi^e, blind sick, sore, infirm, and diseased, or aged
and the like, I would wish that they should be maintained every one in his
own parish, at the costs and charges of the ^ame. And if the parish be not
able to maintain so many, then that there should be collections and
contributions made in other parishes to supply their want, and ^o the former
poor people to be maintained thereupon. For want of which godly order, and
constitution, there are infinite of the foresaid persons that die some in
ditches, some in holes, some in caves, and dens, some in fields, some in one
place, some in another, rather like dogs than christian people. For
notwithstanding that they be never so impotent, blind, lame, sick, old, or
aged, yet are they forced to walk the countries from place to place to seek
their relief at every man's door, except they will sterue or famish at home,
such unmercifulness is in Dnalgne. Yea, in such troops do they flock, and in
such swarms, do they flow, that you can lightly go no way, but you shall see
numbers of them at every door, in every lane, and in every poor cave, and
as though this were not extremity enough they drive them from city to city,
from parish to parish, from town to town, from hundred to hundred, from shire
to shire, and from country to country like flocks of sheep. Here they dare not
tarry for this Justice, nor there for that Justice, here for this man, nor
there for that man, without a license or a pasport, whereas a man would think
their old age, their hoare hairs, their blindness, lamenesse, and other
infirmities should be pasports good enough for them to go abrod withal* if
they cannot get relief at home. But if the former order that every parish
should maintain their poor were taken, then should they neither need to go
abroad, nor otherwise want their daily relief.


Theod. Are there no hospitals, spittles, la^ar houses, alms houses, nor the
like, for the relief of these poor people?


Amphil. Yes there are some such in cities, towns, and some other places,
wherein many poor are relieved, but not the hundred part of those that want.
For the supply whereof would God there might be in every parish an alms house
erected, that the poor (such as are poor indeed) might be maintained, helped*
and relieved. For until the true poor indeed be better provided for, let them
never think to please God. Is it not great pity when a man can pass no way
almost neither city nor country, but shall have both halt, blind, lame, old
aged, sick, sore and diseased hanging upon his sleue, and craving of ^eleefe*
Whereas if the former order were established, then should none at al need to go
abroad, but al should have sufficient at home. The reformed churches beyond
seas, and even the French, Duch, and Italian churches in Dnalgne are worthy of
great co^mendations herin, and shall rise up the day of judgment to our
codemnation except we repent and amend our unmercifulness toward the poor.
These good churches following the counsel of the almighty who ^iddeth that there
be no beggar amongst us, suffer never a one of their countrymen, nor yet any
other dweling in their parish to beg or ask alms without his parish, nor yet
in his parish neither, but by mutual contribution and collectio^s maintain
them, and minister to their necessities in all things, Which thing GOD grant
the churches of Dnalgne may once begin to practice amongst themselves, that God
may be glorified, and the poor members of Christ Jesus relieved and maintained.


Theod. Be there husbandmen there, and such others as manure and till the
ground, for the further increase of fruits, to the maintenance of the
commonwealth*


Amphil. There are of such indeed good store and as excellent men in that kind
of exercise, as any be upon the earth. They know exactly I warrant you, the
times and seasons of the year, when every kind of grain is to be sowed, and
what ground is best for every kind of corn. They are not ignorant also, how
to culture and dress the same, and if it be barren what kind of dung is best
to fatten the same again. They know the nature, the property, and quality of
every soil, and what corn it will bring. They know also when the ground is
to be tilled, when not, how long it will bring forth good corn, how long not,
when it ought to rest, when not, with all things else incident to the same.


Theod. I think they have good farms, and teneme^ts, that are able to furnish
their ground in this sort, for otherwise they were not able to keep their
oxen, their horses, their servants, and other necessaries, belonging thereto,
have they not so?


Amphil. No truly have they not. For some have such fat farms, and
tenements, as either will bring forth no corn at all (in a manner) or if it
do very little, and that not without great cost bestowed upon it. Othersome
have houses with no lands belonging to them at all, and yet notwithstanding
shall pay a good round some for the same also. And no marvel, for landlords,
and gentlemen take all the lands, and lyuelode whereupon there poor tenants
should live into their own hands, and suffer not the poor husbandmen to have
so much ground as will find them corn for the maintenance of their poor
families, nor which is more, scarcely to keep one cow, horse or sheep upon,
for their continual relief. Or if they have any they shall pay ten times so
much as it is worth, to their utter undoing for ever. But if landlords would
consider that the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, and that it is
theirs, but only in title, interest, and property (having the souereigntie,
or chieftie thereof) and the poores in use and possession, and if they would
remember that the poor ought to live upon the earth as well as they, than
would they not use such tirannie, such exactions, such pooling, and pilling and
the like as they do without all compassion.


Theod There being such store of husbandmen, and the same so expert in their
agriculture as your words import they be, it must needs follow, that there is
great plenty of corn, and all kind of other grain, and the same very good
cheap, is it not so?


Amphil. There is great store of corn, and all kind of grain, no nation under
the sun like unto it, but as I told you before, through the insatiable
greedines of a few covetous cormorants, who for their own private commodity,
transport over seas whole mountains of corn, it is made sometimes very
scarce. Otherwise there would be great store at al times. And whereas you say it
is good cheap, it is nothing less, as every days success proves true.


Amphil. How can that be, that there being such store of corn, yet should be
dear also.


Amphil. I will tell you. It comes to pass three manner of ways. First, for
that landlords rack there rents so extreemely, and advance their fines so
unreasonably, that the poor man is forced to sell every thing dear,
otherwise he should not be able to pay his land lord his due, whereas if he had
his fearme good cheap, he might afforde to sell good cheap. The second cause
is (as I have said) for that the same is carried and conueighed over Sea^. The
third cause is, through a sort of ingrators, or forestallers, who intercept
every thing before it come at the market, or else being come to the market,
and having money at will, buy up either all, or the most part, and carieng it
into their celles, and garners at home, keep it till time of the year that
corn is scarce, and so consequently dear. And when there is want of it, then
they sell it dear, and when there is plentye, then they make it deerer by
buying it up in whole heaps as they do. Thus you see by this means, these
hellishe ingratours, and forestallers make corn and all things else dear,
all times of the year, Now judge you what a horrible abuse is this for one
man to buy up all things, and that not for any need or want in himself,
but to sell it again, deerer then they bought it, thereby to inriche himself
with the impouerishing of many a thousand.


Theod. Is there not punishment for this horrible abuse, for me think great
inconveniences do follow it?


Amphil. There be great penalties, and forfaitures ordained, as well for the
repressinge of this, as of any other outrageous abuse, but they play with this
as with all other good laws, they inuente quirckes* and quiddities, shifts,
and put offes enough to blind the eyes of the magistrates, and to deliver
themselves (trimly trimly) from the danger and penalty of the law. For they
will say that they buy but for the necessary provision of their own families,
and not to sell again. And then when they do sell it again, they will bear
you in hand it was of their own tillage. Or if this way will not serve the
turn, then procure they another man to buy it with their own money under his
own name, and so to sell it again when he sees time, but who has the
commodity, judge you. But if all these ways fail, then buie they it
covertly, and sell it again as covertly, and thus they buy and sell their own
souls for corruptible money, which in the last day shall bear witness
against them, and consume them: yea as Saint James says: The money which they
have unjustly got with the polling and pilling of the poor, shall rise up in
judgment against them, and the rust thereof shall eat and devour their flesh
as it were a canker. But let these iollie fellows (as subtle and as politic as
they would seem to be) take heed unto themselves and beware: for though they
can blind men's eyes, and deceive their judgments, yet let them be sure, that
they can not deceive the judgment of the Lord, but he that made the eyes shall
surely see, and he who knows the secrets of all hearts, shall one day declare
the same to their perpetual confusion except they repent.


Theod. What be these husbandmen, honest, plain dealing, and simple persons,
and such as in whom, there is no abuse, or else fraudulent, deceitful, and
crafty persons?


Amphil. They are for the most part very simple and plain men in outward
appeerance yea such as if you saw them, and heard them talk, you would think
they had no gall, or that there were nothing in them in the world. But if you
look into their daily exercises, practices, and deeds, you shall find them as
crafty and subtle in their kind, as the devil is in his, if it be possible.
For the simplest of them all, if he make a bargain with another, he will be
sure to make it so as he himself may gain by it. And it is well too, if the
other though never so wise, circumspect, or provident, be not utterly deceived
(or to speak in plainer terms cosoned at their hands) such subtlety, such
policy, and such crafty conueiance they practice under the garment of
simplicity. Yea truly it is grown to be almost their profession to deceive,
defraud, and beguile their brethren, insomuch as they count him a wise man, a
worldly fellow, and such a one as will live in the world that can not deceive,
and beguile men in bargaining. This is there Columbina simplicitas, (Nay
rather, Vulpina, et serpentina astutia) which Christ would have al his children
to practice in all things all days of their life. But so far from this
christian simplicity are many, that their whole life (almost) is nothing else,
than a continual practice of fraud, and deceit, as for example. You shall have
some that sending corn to the market to be sold, they will put good corn in
the top or mouth of the bag, to seem fair to the eye, and in the bottom of
the sack, very good also (that when it is powered forth of the same, it may yet
seem exceeding good still, but in the midst shall be never a good corn, but
such as is mustie sprouted, and naught. Whereof can be made neither good bread
nor drink, for man's body. I have known othersome, that having a barren cow,
and being desirons to put her away have taken a calfe from another melch cow,
and so sold the former barren cow with her adulterate calfe, for a melche
cow, whereas she was nothing less. With infinite the like sleights, which
for breuities sake I omit.


Theod. I perceive then it is good for a man to be wary that deals with these
simple fools?


Amphil. It were good so indeed, else he may chance to cough himself a dawe
for his labor. For I tell you the fox for all his craft may go to school to
these fellows, to learn the rudiments of deceit and craft. Such skillful
Doctors are they herein. If they sell you a cow, an ox, a horse or a mare,
they will set the price on him I warrant you, and with all will protest and
take on woonderfullie, that he is but this old, and that old, this yoongue,
and that yoongue. And which is woorst of all, though they know a hundred
faults by them, yet will they not reveal any unto him that buyeth the same,
which is a plain, and a manifest deceit before the LORD, and one day shall
be answered for, I dare be their warrante.


Theod. Would you have every man to declare to the buyers the faults and
imperfections, which they know to be in those things that they sell, then
should he sell but a little?


Amphil. Every true christian ought to do so, or else besides that he does not
to others, as he would wish to be done to (for this is the chain wherewith
every christian is bound to another*) he also breketh the cords of charity and
commiteth most horrible cosonage, and wilful presumptuous deceit before God,
which is a fault punishable in the justice of God, with eternal death, in the
lake that burns with fire and brymestone for ever. And seeing we ought to do
to others as we would wish to be done unto us, let ye deceiuer ask of himself
when he goes about to deceive, these questions. Would I my self be deceived?
Would I be coosoned? Would I be undone and spoiled? Would I count him an honest
man, or a good christian that would supplant me in bargaining? Oh no. No more
ought I to do to others, that which I would not should be done to my self.
Besides this, consider that the apostle says, The Lord is the revenger of all
such as deceive their brethren in bargaining. If they would fall into this or
the like consideration I doubt not, but fraud, deceit, lieng, dissimulation
coosonage, and guile, would be abandoned and put to flight in short time which
God grant.


Theod. Well, notwithstanding I cannot see how we could live without husbandmen
any manner of way, could we?


Amphil. No truly. Neither king, prince, earl, duke, lord, knight, esquire,
high nor low, rich nor poor, nor yet any potentate, power or principality
upon the earth (how great a monarch soever) could live or continue without the
use of husbandry and husbandmen. And therefore they are not only to be beloved
of us, but also to be preferred and to be made much of amongst us, without
whose industry and labor no man could live long upon the face of the earth.
For this cause we read the use of husbandry to be commended unto us in sundry
places of holy scripture, and which is more the kingdom of heaven many times
to be compared and assimiled to the husbandman for diverse purposes and
respects. And when Adam our first parent was expulsed paradise he was by God
himself inioined to manure to dress and till the ground, whereby we may see
both the antiquity, auncientie, and excellency of husbandry, even from the
very beginning of all things. And therefore doubtless is it to be had in
reverence and estimation of all men. But hereof enough.


Theod. Be there any Chandlers there as be in other places?


Amphil. Yea that there are inow I warrant you, and more than deal justly in
every respect.


Theod. What do they sell for the most part?


Amphil. Almost all things, as namely butter, cheese, fagots, pots, pannes,
candles, and a thousand other trinkets besides.


Theod. What be the abuses which they commit I pray you?


Amphil. Abuses quoth you? They dare not commit any I trow. But seeing you
would so feign know, I will give you an inkling of them. First they buy that
butter, cheese, and other things, which is naught, because they may have it for
a little money, and then sell it for very good, this many a poor prentise
and other can tell to be true. Or if they buy that which is good, then they
either sell it wonderful dear, or else keep it till it be past the best, and
yet utter it for as much and more than it cost them. Besides this that they
keep their butter and cheese till it be mustie and mould, yea till it smell
that no man can eat it, they have also their false waights and counterfeit
measures to deceive the poor people withal. And notwithstanding that they buy
sometimes 2. or 3. fagots for a penie, yet will they not sell one be it never so
little, under a penie, gaining above the one half in the other. And as for the
stuff whereof they make their candles, I am ashamed to speak of it. For
whereas they should make them of good liquor and sweet, they make them of all
kind of kitchen stuff, and other stinking baggage, so that they shall waste and
consume away like unto wax against the fire, and yet shall never burn clear,
nor give good light, but run over, and about the candlestick too shamefully.
And as for the wikes within the^, they are of hurds, rope ends, and such other
good stuff. Besides all this they have sleights to make the liquor of the
candles always to remain soft, to the end it may waste and consume the
faster, with legions of the like diuises, God be merciful unto us.


Theod. What say you of the barbers, and trimmers of men, are they so neat,
and so fine fellows as they are said to be?


Amphil. There are no finer fellows under the sun, nor experter in their
noble science of barbing than they be. And therefore in the fulness of their
ouerflowing knowledge (oh ingenious heads, and worthy to be dignified with the
diadem of folly and vain curiosity) they have invented such strange fashions
and monstrous manners of cuttings, trimmings, shauings, and washings, that you
would wonder to see. They have one manner of cut called the French cut, another
the Spanish cut, one the Dutch cut, another the Italian, one the new cut,
another the old, one of the brauado fashion, another of the mean fashion. One
a gentleman's cut, another the common cut, one cut of the court, another of the
country, wish infinite the like vanities, which I ouerpasse? They have also
other kinds of cuts innumerable, and therefore when you come to be trimed they
will ask you whether you will be cut to look terrible to your enemy, or
amiable to your friend, grime and stern in countenance, or pleasant and demure
(for they have diverse kinds of cuts, for all these purposes or else they lie.)
Then when they have done al their feats, it is a world to consider, how their
mowcha^owes must be preserved and laid out, from one cheke to another, yea,
almost from one ear to another, and turned up like two horns toward the
forehead. Besides that, when they come to the cutting of the hair, what
snipping and snapping of the ^ycers is there, what tricking, and triming, what
rubbing what scratching, what combing and clawing, what trickling and toying,
and al to tawe out money you may be sure. And when they come to washing, oh how
gingerly they behave themselves therein. For then shall your mouth be bossed
with the lather, or foam that rises of the balls (for they have their sweet
balls wherewith all they use to wash) your eyes closed must be anointed
therewith also. Then snap go the fingers, full bravely god wot. Thus this
tragedy ended comes me warm clothes to wipe and dry him withal, next the
ears must be picked, and closed together again artificially forsooth. The
hair of the nostrils cut away, and every thing done in order comely to behold.
The last action in this tragedy is the payment of money. And least these
cunning barbers might seem unconscionable in asking much for their pains,
they are of such a shamefast modesty, as they will ask nothing at all, but
standing to the courtesy and liberality of the giver, they will receive all
that comes how much soever it be, not giving any again I warrant you: for
take a barber with that fault, and strike off his head. No, no, such fellows
are Rarae aues in terris, nigrisque similimi cygnis, Rare birds upon the earth,
and as geason as black swans. You shall have also your orient perfumes for
your nose, your fragrant waters for your face, wherewith you shall be all to
besprinkled: your music again, and pleasant harmony shall sound in your
ears, and all to tickle the same with vain delight. And in the end your cloak
shall be brushed, and God be with you Gentleman.


Theod. All these curious conceits in my judgment are rather done for to
allure and provoke the minds of men to be bountiful and liberal toward them,
than for any good else, which they bring either to the body or health of man?


Amphil. True it is that you say, and therefore you must needs think they are
masters of their science that can invent al these knacks to get money withal.
But yet I must needs say (these nisities set apart) barbers are very
necessary, for otherwise men should grow very ougglisom and deformed, and
their hair would in process of time ouergrowe their faces, rather like
monsters, than comlie sober christians. And if it be said that any man may cut
off the hair one of another, I answer, they may so, but yet not in such
comely, and decent manner as these barbers exercised therein can do, and
besides they know that a decorum in every thing is to be observed. And
therefore I cannot but marvel at the beastliness of some ruffians (for they
are no sober christians) that will have their hair to grow over their faces
like monsters, and savage people, nay rather like mad men than otherwise,
hanging down over their shoulders, as women's hair does: which indeed is an
ornament to them, being given them as a sign of subjection, but in man, it is
a shame and reproach as the Apostle proves. And thus much of barbers, and
their science.


Theod. Have you surgeans, and physicians there, as in other places, and are
they skillful and expert in their mystery, and not only skillful, but also
conscionable in their dealings, as well toward the poor as toward the rich?


Amphil. There are both surgeans and physicians good store. And as they be
many, so are they very unconscionable in their dooinges, for as for both the
one and the other so far from godliness and good conscience in all things
are they, as if a poor man that has not money to give them at their pleasure,
stand in need of their help, they will either not come at him, or if they
do, they will so handle him, as it were better for him to be hanged than to
sustain the pains, that they will put him to. But for the most part, neither
of them both will come at him, but rather contemn him, and reject him as a
thing of naught, yea as much will they do for the devil himself, as for a
poor man, if he have not money. And again as long as money runs, they
will apply gentle and easy potions, medicines, and salues, bearing their
patient in hand that he shall recover without all doubt, with what disease
malady, or sore soever he be infected, whereas in truth they can do nothing
less. But Deficiente pecunia. Money wanting, they apply bitter potions,
nipping medicines, gnawing corrosiues, and pinching plaistures to grieve their
patient withal, thereby to strain out what liquor of life (that is what money
or goods) they are able to give. And thus they abuse their gifts to the
dishonor of God, the hurt of their fellow brethren, and their own damnation
except they repent.


Theod. Are surgeans and physicians then necessary in a common wealth, as you
seem to infer?


Amphil. Solomon says the Physician (by the which word he understands both
the physician and the surgean, because the one is coosin german to the other)
is to be honored for necessity. And if for necessity then must it needs
follow, that the same is most necessary in a common wealth. But as the good,
learued, and discreet physicians and surgeons, are necessary, and may do much
good, so the unlearned, and naughty (as the world is to full of them) may and
do much hurt daily as experience teaches.


Theod. You say truth. But are all indifferently suffered to practice the same
noble mysteries of physic and surgerie, without any choice or exception at
all?


Amphil. There is to great liberty permitted herein. For now a days every
man tagge, and ragge, of what insufficiency soever, is suffered to exercise
the mystery of physic, and surgerie, and to minister both the one, and the
other, to the diseased, and infirmed persons, but to their woe you may be sure.
Yea, you shall have some that know not a letter of the book (so far are they
from being learned, or skil^ul in the toongs, as they ought to be, that should
practice these mysteries) both men and women. young and old, that presuming
upon experience forsooth (for that is their greatest skill) will arrogate great
knowledge to themselves, and more then the learned doctor upon the earth will
do. And yet notwithstanding can do in manner nothing at all. But if they
chance at any time to do any good (as forte luscus capiat leporem sometime by
chance a blind man may catch a hare) it is by mere chance, and not by any
knowledge of theirs. And yet shall this exploit of theirs be sounded forth
with a trumpet, which indeed may hardly be blown up, with an oten pip^ ^or
any praise it deserves. This brings the laudable sciences of physic and
surgerie, into hatred, obloquy, and contempt, makes it of no estimation in the
world, and utterly discrediteth it amonst men. For when as any sick, infirmed,
or diseased, either miscarieth under the hands of his physician, or surgean, or
else when the medicine, or salve works not his effect then fall they to
accuse the science it self, and to reproach it altogether, whereas in truth the
whole blame consists in the ignorance of the practicioner himself. Great
pity it is therefore, that there is such liberty in permitting every one that
lust to profane and to abuse these venerable sciences of physic and surgerie
as they do. For every man though he know not the first principles, grounds or
rudiments of his science, ye lineaments, dimensions, or compositions of man's
body, the poores, arteries, temperament, or constitution, no nor yet so much as
the natural complexion, quality, or disposition of the same, will yet
notwithstanding take upon him the habit, the title, y^ name, and profession of
a physician, or surgean. This we see verified in a sort of vagarants, who run
straggling (I will not say roging) over the countries, and bear men in hand of
great knowledge when as there is nothing less in them. By which kind of theft,
(for this coosoning shift is no better) they rake in great somes of money, which
when they have got, they leave their cures in the dust I warrant you, and
betake them to their heels as to their best refuge. And thus be the noble
sciences of physic, and surgerie utterly reproched, the world deluded, and
many a good man and woman brought to their ends, before their time.


Theod. If physic be good, would you not have every man to practice it that
will, without restraint?


Amphil. Physic is good, and yet would I not have every ignorant doult that
knows not the use, nor benefit thereof to practice the same. For that makes
it to take so little effect, and so smally to be esteemed of as it it is now a
days (for reformation whereof) I would wish that every ignorant doult, and
especially women that have as much knowledge in physic or surgery as has
Iackeanapes, being but smatterers in the same noble sciences (nor yet all that)
should be restrained from the public use thereof, yet not from private
exercise thereof either for their own singular benefit, or any other of their
friends (provided that they do it gratis) not making an occupation of it, but
rather for desire to help then for lucre of gain. Than would I wyshe that
the others who should exercise the use of Physic and Surgerie should first
be Graduates in either of the universities, and being graduates yet not to be
admitted therefore, but first to be tried and examined as well for their
knowledge, discresion, and sufficiency in their art, profession and calling,
as also for their godliness, christian zeal, pure religion, compassion, and
love to their brethren, and being found sufficient for the foresaid respects,
to be admitted and licensed, under hand and seal authentike by those that be
of authority. And if he abuse himself or his faculty, then out with him, let
him be Officiperda, Jack out of office, make him a Quondam, and let him go to
plow and cart, rather than to rob the poor (as many of them do) yea to
murder and kill them without reprehension. And as I would wish none but godly,
learned, and such as fear God to be admitted to the exercise and practice
hereof, so I would wish, that either they might be allowed anual stipends, for
their better succouring of the poor diseased, or else might be constrained to
take less of their poor patients than they do. For now they ruffle it out in
silckes, and veluets, with their men attending upon them, whereas many a poor
man (GOD wot) smarteth for it. Yea, so unreasonable, and so vnconcionable are
they, as some of them will not set one foot out of his own doors, without
twenty shillings, forty shillings, three pound, twenty nobles, ten pound,
twenty pound, and some more some less. And having this importable fee, If
they minister any thing to the party diseased, than besides, must they have
twenty shillings, for that that stands them not in twenty pins, forty
shillings, twenty nobles, for that that cost them not twenty pence, and so
foreward. This is a great wickedness, God be merciful unto us, and such as the
Lord will one day revenge, if they prevent not his judgments by speedy
repentance. Besides these abuses, there are othersome, that if they owe evil
will to any, man or woman being sick, or if they hope for any preferment by
their deaths, will not make any conscience of it, to give them such medicines,
such potions, and drinks, as will soon make a hand of them, and this shall be
done invisible in a cloud. Under the pretense of physic forsooth, and if he
die, why it was not the medicine that killed him (no it were Blasphemia in
sanctos ruminare, blasphemy to think it of these holy fathers) but it was
death that cruel tiger that spares none. And to such corruption are they
grown that for money I am persuaded they can make away with any whom they have
access unto. Therefore I advise every man to be careful to whom he commits
the cure of his body. They are likewise in league with the apothecaries in
whom there are great abuses also, as well in compounding, and mixing of their
elements, and simples together, as also in selling chalk for cheese, one thing
for another, and the like, so as it is hard to get any thing of them that is
right pure and good of it self, but druggie baggage, and such counterfeit
stuff as is stark naught. But of them enough. Let us speak a word or two of
a certain kind of curious people, and vaineglorious, called astronomers, and
astrologers, the corruptions and abuses of whom are inexplicable. This done we
will make a final end at this time of speaking any further conserning the
abuses, corruptions, and imperfections, of the temporaltie till occasion of
more matter her ca^ter shall be offered.


Theod. These names of astronomers, astrologers, prognosticators, and the like
are so vnquoth and strange to my ears, that I know not what to make of them.
Wherefore I pray you show me as near as you can the meaning of them and what
kind of merchants the professors thereof be?


Amphil The astronomers, astrologers, prognosticators (and all others of the
same society, and brotherhoode, by what name or title soever they be called)
are a certain kind of curious fantastical and vaineglorious fellows, who
secreta dei temere remantes, Searching the secrets of God rashly, which he
would have kept close from us, and only known to himself, take upon them and
that upon these grounds (forsooth) namely the observations of times and
seasons, the aspects and conjunctions of the signs and planets, with their
occurrents, to presage, to divine, and prognosticate whai shall come or happen
afterward, as though they sat in Gods lap, knew his secrets, and had the
world and the disposement thereof in their own hands. It is an old saying, and
very true. Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos, Those things that are above our
reach, conserne us not, and therefore we ought not to enter into the bowels and
secrets of the Lord (for as the wise man says Qui scrutatur abscondita dei,
obruetu^ gloria eius, he that searches out the hidden things of GOD, shall
be overwhelmed with the glory of the same, but to content our selves with so
much as he has revealed unto us in his sacred word, committing the event,
the success, and disposement of all things else to his sacrede Majesty, the
GOD of all glory. For to them that go about, and labor so buselye by
speculations, by astronomy, astrology, and the like curious arts to judge of
things to come, and think they can tell all things by the same (but Dum
parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus, whilst the mou^tains do travel a
seely mouse will be brought forth) Christ our savior says, Non est vestrum
nosse tempora, and momenta temporum, quae ipse pater in sua ipsius constituit
potestate, It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Lord God
has reserved to himself. And how much our savior Christ disliketh this vain
curiosity, of astronomicall, and astrologicall speculations, we may gather by
that vehement reprehension, or commination in the 16. of Matthew, thundered out
against the people of the Jews, who were as it seems too much addicted to
the same. Where he sharply rebukes them, and calls them dissembling
hypocrites, in that they observed and marked with such serious attention and
diligence, the elemental signs and tokens in the firmament, being in the mean
time, ignorant of greater things, namely of the signs and tokens of the son
of GOD Christ Jesus, the true Messiah, and savior of the world.


Theod. Upon what grounds, certeinties, rules, and principles does this
curious science consist?


Amphil. It stands upon nothing else, but mere conjectures, supposals,
likelihods, ghesses, probabilities, observations of times and seasons,
conjunctions of signs, stars, and planets, with their aspects and
occurrents, and the like, and not upon any certain ground, knowledge, or
truth, either of the word of God. or of natural reason. But to argue the
untruth and the uncertainty of this foolish curious science, we need not to go
far for examples and arguments. For the contrariety that ever has been in
all ages amongst the very doctors and masters themselves, but most specially
of late does approve the same to be most fantastical, curious, vain,
uncertain, and mere profane. For there being a marvelous strange conjunction
(as they said) of two superior planets. So many as writ of the same, neither
iumped together in one truth, nor yet agreed together either of the day, hour,
or month, when it should be: but in all things showed themselves like
themselves, that is plain contradictorie one to another. Insomuch as they writ
in defense of their errors, and confutation of the contrary, one against
another shamefully to behold. By which more than presumptuous audacitie, and
rash boldness of these, they brought the world into a wonderful perplexity
and cease, expecting either a wonderful alteration of states and kingdoms
(as these foolish star tooters promised) or else a final consummation, and
overthrow of all things. Or if not so, yet the strangest things should happen,
that ever were heard or seen since the beginning of the world. Whereas God be
thanked at the very hour, and moment when (as some of them set down) these
woonders and portents should have happened, there was no alteration nor change
of any thing seen or heard of, the element being as fair, as bright, as
calm, and as pleasant, and every thing as silent, and in as perfect order and
form, as ever they were since the beginning of the world. By all which
appears the vanity, and uncertainty of their curious science. I wonder
where these fellows sat, whether upon the earth, or in the firmament of
heaven when they saw these conjunctions. Or with what eyes they could see
that, that no man else could see. But peradventure they have Argus eyes, and
can see all things, even those things that be not. I marvel whether they have
dwelt in the region of the air, and who told them the names, the situation,
the houses, aspects, and local places of the signs and planets, of the sun,
moon, and stars, with the number thereof also, which indeed are innumerable.
I wonder what spirit told them which planets were higher than other, and
which lower than other, which be good, and which be evil, which be moist, and
which be dry, which be cold, and which be hot, which be gentle and
affable, and which be cruel and terrible, which give good fortune, and which
give evil, which be good to* take iourneies in hand, or to attempt any great
thing, and which be naught, which be good for a man to take a wise in, that
she may be amiable, and gentle, and which be contrary, which be dangerous to
take diseases in, or to fall sick, and which be not, with infinite the like
fooleries, which I ouerpasse. Now from whence they have learned these things I
cannot tell, but certain I am, that out of the book of GOD, they never
fetched them, the same being in every point contrary unto them, and
reproouing, yea condemning to hell their vain curious searching of Gods
secrets, and the success of things by such fallible and uncertain accidents.


Theod. Me think this is the next way to withdraw men from GOD the Creator,
to depend and hang upon creatures, is it not?


Amphil. It is the only way. For who hearing that the creatures as the sun,
the moon, the stars, the signs and planets, do give both good things and
evil, blessing and cursing, good success, and evil success, yea, life and
death, at their pleasure (as these brainesick fools hold they do) and that
they rule, govern, and dispose al things whatsoever, yea both the bodies and
souls of man (for so some shame not to say) who hearing this I say, would not
fall from God, and worship the creatures, that give such blessings unto man?
What can be a nearer way to withdraw the people not only from God, but also
to hale them to idolatry, and wholly to depend upon creatures as the heathen do
to their eternal damnation for ever. But say they, though we give authority,
great power, great rule and government to the treatures, yet we give unto God
the cheifest stroke and the cheifest rule in all things, all other creatures
being but the isntrumental, or secundarie causes, or (that I may speak
plainly) as it were his deputies, substitutes, or instruments whereby he
rules and works all things. Is this any thing else, than to say with
certain heretics, that though God made all things, yet he rules them not,
nor has no care over them, but has committed the rule and government of them
to his creatures. Then which what blasphemy can be greater? is not this a
flat denial of the providence of God, which scripture so much sets forth,
and commends unto us? Shall we think that God made all things, and now as
one weary of his work, commits the gouernmente of them to other creatures?
Says not our Savior Christ Pater et ego operamur, my father works, and I
work? Meaning thereby that as he wrought in creating of all things, so he
works still in ruling them by his power, gouerneing them by his wisdom, and
preserving them by his providence, and will do to the end of the world. But
when they have proved that he has committed the rule and government of his
creatures, to his creatures, then I will say as they say. In the mean time I
say and hold that it derogateth greatly from the glory and majesty of God,
to say or affirm that creatures have the government of all things committed
unto them. For if there should be many kings, princes and rulers in any one
realm or country, must not the dominion and rule of the chief prince or regent
be lesser, than if he ruled, and governed alone? Woe were us, if we were at
the rule and government of creatures, but blessed be our God, who as he
knows our frailty (having therefore compassion of our infirmities) so he
rules and governs all things, whether in heaven, earth, hell, or else
whersoeuer according to the good pleasure of his will. In the 1. and 2.
chapters of Genesis, besides infinite the like places of holy scriptures, we
read that the sun, the moon, the stars, with all creatures else were created
and made for the use and commodity of man, being made subject to him, and he
constitute lord over them. and yet notwithstanding are they become now his
lords, and he their subject, vassal, and bondslaue? This is preposterous
gear, when Gods ordinance is turned topsie turuie, vpside down. It is time
these fantastical fellows were looked to in time, that will go about to
disthronize the mighty God Iehoua of his regal throne of majesty and glory,
making an Officiperda of him, a jack out of office, and to pull him (as it
were) E caelis, Out of the heavens, down to the earth, giving him no power nor
authority at all.


Theod. Have the signs and planets then no power nor authority at all upon
things on the earth?


Amphil. Yes they have their power, their operation, force, strength and effect
in those things whereto GOD has created them, as namely in the growing,
increasing, cherishing, fostering, renewing, comforting and reviving of all
natural things, And also they have their influence and operation in man's body,
for letting of blood, receiving of purgatio^s, and the like. But to say that
they work these effects of their own proper force and strength, or that they
rule or dispose the spirits and souls of man, is utterly false and at no hand
true. And yet notwithstanding is far infatuat are these busy heded
astronomers, and curious serching astrologers, that they attribute every part
of man's body to one particular sign and planet, affirming that part of the
body to be ruled by that sign, or planet. And therefore to Aries they have
assigned the government of the head and face. To Tau. the neck and throat. To
Gem. the shoulders, the arms and the hands? To Leo the heart and back. To Can.
the breast, stomach, and lungs. To Lib. the raines and loins. To Uir. the guts
and belly. To Scor. the prime parts and bladder. To Sag. the thighs. To Cape.
the knees. To Aqu. the legs. To Pisc. the feet. And thus have they and do
bear the world in hand that the whole body of man both Interne and externe,
within and without, is ruled and governed by the xij. signs, by stars, and
planets and not by God only. For the confirmation of which fained untruth, they
pretend the xij. months in the year to be ruled and governed by the xi^.
signs in the element, and the seven days in the week to be ruled by the
seven planets also. Besides this they have their particular hours, times, and
seasons, wherein they chiefly work their effects, and have greatest strength.
So that by their reasons, no month in the year, nor day in the week, nor no
hour in the day nor night, but it is ruled and governed by the influence and
constellation of the stars and planets, and nothing is effected or brought to
pass, but what they will, and intend.


Theod. Are the signs and planets living creatures and reasonable, or
insensible creatures, and things without life?


Amphil. They are no living or reasonable creatures, it is without all
controversy, but merely insensible, and without life. And being without life
and reason, how is it possible that they should bring life or death (as these
fellows hold) sickness or health, prosperity or adversity, heat or cold,
fair weather or foul, beauty or deformity, long life or short, or any thing
else? And if they be not able to give these things, how much less able are
they then to govern, rule, and dispose all thing in heaven, earth, the air,
or else whersoeuer, so overthrow monarchies, kingdoms, nations, countries, and
people, and finally to work althings after their own desire and will? Will
they have dumb and unreasonable creatures to rule the reasonable? If that were
true, why should God be praised either for his mercy, or feared for his
justice and judgment, and not rather the planets, signs, and stars; which
work all in all in all creatures? If blessing come by the influence of stars
and planets, then let men praise them and not God for the same. And if curses
proceed from the stars, let them be feared for them. Briefly if life and
death, and all things else come by the force of the elementall creatures, and
celestial bodies, then let them be honored with divine worship. If these
effects issued from creatures. then why should the homicide, the murderer,
adulterer, or wicked person be punished, whereas he might say, it was not I, it
was Planetarum iniuria, The force of the planets that compelled me to sin? Or
why should the godly man be praised for doing well, whereas he is enforced
thereto, by the stars and planets? In Summa, why should not planets and
scarces be adored and worshipped as gods, if they could work these effects?
They that attribute thus much to the stars, not only rob the majesty of
God of his honor, but also strenhthen the hands of the heathen, pagans,
infidels, and idolatrous people, to persevere in their cursed idolatie still.
Nay do they not rather shake hands with them, that as they worship the son,
the moon, the stars, fire, water, and other creatures, for their God, so do
these worship the same, though not for their chief Gods, yet for their second
gods, whereby they commit most filthy idolatry and are guilty of most heinous
transgression. Indeed I confess they have effects and operations, but yet are
they not the efficent causes of any thing either good or bad. Otherwise than
thus, that it pleases the majesty of God to work by them, as by his
instruments whatsoever is his good will and pleasure, and not after any other
sort.


Theoe. I have heard of some of these astronomers that would take upon them to
tell a man's fortune, only by their constellation forsooth is it possible
suppose you?


Amphil. No at no hand. For if it were so, that all things were and man
himself governed, and ruled by the stars alone (as who is so forsaken of God
to believe it?) And that they knew the minds, the purposes, the intents, the
inclination, the disposition and qualities of every star, then might it be
(peradventure) true, that they might tell the fortune, and desteny of any man*
But otherwise they can tell as much as a horse, I would feign learn of these
star gaisers, who teach that man is drawn to good or evil by the
constellations, and influence of stars, whether all the people that were ever
borne since the beginning of the world, or shall be borne to the end of the
same, were al borne under one planet or star? For they had all one fortune, all
sinned in Adam, and all were in the justice of God condemned to everlasting
fire. I would know also whether all the Sodomits and Gomorreans being consumed
with fire, and brimstone from heaven were borne all under one star or planet?
For they had all one destiny, and all one end. Whether all the whole world in
the days of Noah, was borne under one, and the same star, or planet, for they
had all one destenie, being overwhelmed with an universal deluge. Whether the
whole host of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, were borne all under one star, or
planet, who had al one judgment one destiny, and one kind of death. Whether
all the host of Pharao were borne under one, and the same star, and planet,
who all sustained one kind of death, and had all one destiny. Whether Esau,
and Jacob were not borne both in a moment, and both at one birth, and yet had
they contrary natures, qualities, dispositions and ends. Finally I would
learn of them, whither none that ever lived since the first beginninning of
the world, nor any that shall be borne to the end of the same, has not, or
may not be borne in the same hour, and under the same planet, and
constellation, that Christ Jesus was borne in. If they say there have not been
any borne in the same hour that Christ Jesus was borne in, common reason, and
daily experience would disprooue them, for there is not one minute of an hour
wherein there are not infinite children borne into the world. And if they say
that there are that have been borne in the same hour, and under the same
star, and planet, than must it needs follow (if man should necessarily be
ruled, governed, disposed and affected, according to the natural disposition,
and inclination of the planets and stars) that he that has bin is or shall be,
borne in the same hour, and under the same planet or star that Christ Jesus
was borne under, should be as good and as perfect in every respect, as Christ
Jesus himself, and so should we have had many christ's before this time. But
God bless all his children from once thinking of any such impiety, and
blasphemy. By all which reasons and arguments it apeareth manifestly that man
is nothing less, than ruled, governed, or destined, after the inclination, or
influence of stars or planets, but only by the living God, who does
whatsoever pleases him in heaven and in earth. This being so, twice unhappy be
those parents that think any month, day or hour unfortunate for their
children to be borne in, or that some be more fortunate and happy than
othersome. And thrice cursed be those wicked devils, that taught them those
lessons. What? Do they think that the Lord is a sleep those hours, or
being wake has no power to rule? Has he not made all things pure and good?
Then cannot the good creatures of God make us evil, or incline us to sin. But
it is the malice of the devil, the corruption of our nature, and the wickedness
of our own hearts, that draws us to evil, and so to shameful destinies, and
infamous ends, and not the stars, or planets. Whereof if we were truly
persuaded, we would leave of when we come to any shamfull end, to say? Oh, I
was borne to it, it was my destonie, and I cannot tell what: whereas in truth
we were borne to no such ends. But rather to glorify our heavenly father by
integrity of life and godliness of conversation, whilst we live upon the face
of the earth. Certain it is that God by his providence, and prescience, does
foresee that such a man through his wickedness shall come to such an end, yet
did not the Lord foreordeine, or foreappoint him to the same, but rather
dehorteth him from comitting that wickedness, which may purchase such an end.
Wherefore to conclude. Seeing it is sin that brings man and woman to
shameful ends, and neither fate, destonie, birthstar, sign, or planet,
constellation, nor any thing else whatsoever, let every one endeavor himself
to serve his GOD truly, in singleness, and pureness of heart, and himself
to live well and vprightlie. Walking in the laws, and commandments of the
Lord, and I warrant him for ever coming to any evil end or destiny. That
God whom he has served, will keep him as he kept Sidrach, Misaac, and
Abednago, from the rage of the fire, Susanna from the stake, Daniel, from ye
chawes of the greedy lions, and many others that served him in fear.


Theod. I have head some that would take upon them to tell a man whither he
should be poor or rich, a servant, or a lord, a thief or a true man, cruel
or gentle, and what kind of trades he should have prosperous success in, how
should they do this?


Amphil. I will tell you how they pretend to do it. There are (as they say)
certain signs in the element (but yet I marvel what Apollo told them so,
when they were there, and saw them, or how they knew the shape, and prooortion
of them) as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Uirgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricornus, and Pisces, with their planets, and aspects, as Sol,
Luna, Mars Mercury, Jupiter, Uenus, and Saturn. Now say they, he that is
borne under Aries, (which is a sign in the Nusquam region, Like to a ram, or
sheep upon earth) shall be a rich man and too too wealthy. And why so?
Mark their droonken reason. Forsooth because the rame is a fruitful beast
upon earth, and yeldeth to his master two or three fleeces a year. Again he
that is borne under Taurus (which is a sign (say these liers) in the element
like unto a bull, upon earth) now si^ he that is born under him, shall be pore,
and a bondslaue all his days. And why so? Mary say they because the bull on
earth is a beast used to the yoke, and to much slavery and drudgery. He that
is borne under Leo, (which is a sign quoth these iuglers like to a lion) shall
be strong, courageous and feared, of al men, and shall be lord and ruler over
many. And why so? Because ye lion is a strong and mighty beast, and is lord
and king over all other beasts. He that is borne under Scorpio, shall be a
murderer, a robber, a thief, and a wicked person. Why so? Forsooth because
the Scorpion, is a serpent full of poison, and malice upon earth. He that is
borne under Gemini shall be rich, and have many children, because Gemini is a
sign of two twins. He that is borne under Uirgo shall be beloved of women,
shall be amiable, fair, gentle, and I cannot tell what, because maids are so
affected. He that is borne under Cancer, shall be crabbed and angry, because
the crab fish is so inclined. He that is borne under Libra, shall be fortunate
in merchandise, in waights and measures, because Libra is a sign of a pair of
balance. He that is borne under Sagittarius, shall be a good shooter, because
Sagittarius is a sign like to a shooter. He that is borne under Capricornus
shall be a slouenly, ill favored, and unclean fellow, because the got is a
beast filthy stinking, and unclean. He that is borne under Aquarius and
Pisces shall be fortunate by water, because watermen haunt the waters, and
fishes swim in the same. These be cupstantiall reasons, and well seasoned
arguments, and as strong to prove their purpose, as a castle of paper to
resist the enemy. Thus you may see they have no other reasons, than to heap
one lie upon another. As first that these signs and planets in the heavens are
like to earthly creatures, then that their natures, and qualities are known by
the natures and qualities of earthly creatures. Jesus God what cunning fellows
are these, that can know the nature of heavenly bodies, and celestial
creatures, by these terrestrial bodies, and earthly creatures? These are
profound fellows indeed, and by all likelihood, have dwelt long in the clouds
that are so perfect in every thing there. and can judge of future accidents
with such singular dexterity. By this time I think they are ashamed of their
profession, therefore I need to say no more of them, till further occasion be
offered, beseeching the Lord God to give them grace to search for the truth of
the word of God, letting all such curious searchings of Gods secrets alone to
God, who only knows all secrets whatsoever.


Theod. If you condemn astronomy, and astrology altogether, as you seem to
do, then it follows that you condemn prognosticators, and such as make
almanacks for every year, do you so?


Amphil. I neither condemn astronomy nor astrology, nor yet the makers of
prognostications, or almanacks for the year. But I condemn the abuse in them
both, and wish they were reduced to the same perfe^tion that they ought, and to
be used to the same ends and purposes which they were ordained for. The sun,
the moon, the stars, and the celestial bodies whatsoever, created by the
Lord not only to fructify and increase the earth by their influence, but
also to shine and give light to man in this life, and to divide the light from
darkness, the day from the night, winter from summer, and to distinguish one
season and time from another. Now how much may make or conduce to the knowledge
hereof, so much I doubt not is very tolerable, and may be used. But when we
go about to enter into Gods secrets, and to divine of things to come, by
conjectures, and gesses, then make we the same wicked, and unlawful. Therefore
prognosticators are herein much to be blamed, for that they take upon them to
foreshew what things shall be plenty, and what scarce, what dear, what good
cheap. When shall be fair weather, when foul, and the like, whereas indeed the
knowledge of these things are hid in the secrets of GOD, and are beyond their
reach, therefore ought they not to meddle with them. But if they would keep
them within their compass, as namely to show the times and seasons of the
year, festiuals, vigils, to distinguish winter from sommner, spring from
harvest, the change of the move, the fall of every day, the e^clipses,
epacts, dominical letter, golden number, circle of the sun, leap year, and
other the like necessary points, then were their profession laudable, and
greatly for the commodity of the commonwealth. And thus much with their
patience be it spoken briefly hereof.


Here end the abuses of the Temporaltie.
THE CORRVPTIONS AND ABUSES OF THE SPIRITVALTIE.
Theodorus. Having now spoken sufficiently of the corruptions and abuses of the
temporaltie, if I might be so bold, I would request you somewhat to say
concerning the corruptions and abuses of the spirituality, or (as some call it)
of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. For I am fully persuaded that the one being
so corrupt, the other can hardly be without blemish.


Amphil. I am very loath to enter into that field, the view whereof offers
such store of matter to entreat of, as if I should enter the same, I should
rather not know where to end, then where to begin. Besides, you know the old
proverb, Non bonum est ludere cum sanctis, It is not good to meddle with these
holy ones, for fear of thunderbolts, to ensue. But for that he is not only a
false prophet, and a traitor to the truth, that teaches false doctrine, but as
well he that knows the truth, and either for fear of death, or desire of
life, will not express the same to the world. And for that, not only the
author of any evil or mischief is guilty of offense before God. But also he
that might vy discovery thereof prevent the same, and yet either will not, or
for fear of death dares not. And for that as the old proverb says Qui ^acet
consentire videtur, he that concealeth the truth, seems to consent to errors,
for these and the like causes, I will lay down unto you some such corruptions
and abuses, as seem to be inormous, and stand in need of reformation,
omitting in the mean time to speak perticularly of all (for that they be
innumerable) until I see how these few will be brouked of them. For it is a
point of good physic you know, to see how the former meat received into the
stomach, will be digested, and concocted, before we receive any more into the
same.


Theod. You say very well. Give me leave then (by your patience) to ask you
such questions, as I think convenient for my further instruction, that by your
good means I knowing the truth, may praise God in you, and also have just
occasion to give you thanks for the same.


Theod. Ask what you think good in Gods ^ame, and I will do the best that I
can, to resolve you in any thing that you shall demand.


Theod. Then this shall be my first demand. Be the churches, congregations, and
assemblies there distincted into particulars, as into parishes and precincts,
one exempt from another, or are they dispersed here and there abroad, without
any order, exemption, or limitation of place at all?


Amphil. Every particular church, congregation, assembly, or conuenticle is
divided one from another, and distincted into parishes, and pre^incts, which
several precincts and parishes are so circum^ired and limited about with
bounds and marks, as every one is known of what parish he is, and under whose
charge he lives. So that every shepherd knows his flock, every pastor
his sheep. And again^ every flock knows his shepherd, and every sheep
his pastor very orderly, and well in my simple judgment.


Theod. Do you allow then of this partition of churches, and of one particular
congregation from another?


Amphil. Yea truly. It is not amiss, but a very good order, for thereby
every pastor does know his own flock, every shepherd his own sheep,
which without this division could not be. Besides that we read that even in the
apostles days (who writ to particular churches themselves, as to the Romans
Corint. These. Phil, etc.) in the days of Christ, and in the times of the
prophets before Christ, churches, assemblies, and congregations were ever
distincted one from another, and divided into several flocks companies, and
charges. So that although they had not the name of this word parish amongst
them, yet had the thing meant thereby in effect.


Theod. Then it follows by your reason, that there are infinite churches in
Dnalgne, and I have learned out of the book of God, that there is but one true
church, and faithful spouse of Christ upon the earth. How reconcile you these
two places?


Amphil. Uerie well. For although there be infinite particular churches,
congregations and assemblies in the world, yet do they all make but one true
church of God, which being divided in time and place, is notwithstanding one
church before God, being members of the mystical body of Christ Jesus, and
fellow members one of another, so as they can never be divided neither from
themselves, nor from their head Christ.


Theod. Who do you constitute the head of the universal church of Christ
upon earth, Christ Jesus, the pope, or the prince?


Amphil. Christ Jesus, whose the body is, must needs ^e, and is the only true
head of the universal church. Then next under him every christian prince in
his kingdom. And as for the pope he is head over the malignant church, the
church of the devil, and not of Christ Jesus. No he is so far from being head
over the universal church of Christ, that he is no true member of the same, but
rather the child of perdition, the first borne of satan, a devil incarnate,
and that man of sin (even Antichrist himself) that must be destroyed with the
breath of Gods mouth.


Theod. By whom be these particular churches and congregatious governed and
ruled?


Amphil. By bishops, pastors, and other inferior officers.


Theod. Do you shut out the prince then f^ont governing the church?


Amphil. No God forbid. For take away^ Brachium seculare, The lawful power,
and government of the temporal magistrate from the regiment of the church, and
overthrow the church altogether. And yet notwithstanding the necessity hereof,
the dooting anabaptists and brainesicke papists have most deuilishly denied the
same. The anabaptists deny (most absurdly) the authority of the magistrate
altogether. The papists seeing themselves convinced by the manifest word of GOD
deny not their authority absolutely, but that their authority extends to the
government of the church, forsooth they utterly deny, hereby exempting
themselves, and plucking away their necks from under the yooke of christian
obedience due unto migistrates, contrary to the express word of our savior
Christ, and his apostles who says Omnis anima subdita sit potestatibus
supereminentibus? Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is
no power but of God. And therefore they are to be obeyed as the ministers of
God of all whatsoever.


Theod. Well than I gather thus much that every king prince, or potentate is
supreme head next under God, over the church of GOD dispersed through his
kingdoms, and dominions, is not this true?


Amphil Uerie true. And therefore that antichrist of Rome, has plaide the
traitor a long while, both to Christ Jesus and all christian kings, in
arrogating and usurping to be supreme head over all the world. Whereas indeed
he being a greasy priest, and smered prelate, has no more authority than
other oiled shauelings have, nor so much neither, and yet that authority is
but over the maligant church of antichrist, and not of Christ Jesus. I beseech
the Lord therefore to break of that power, to grind in pieces that stumbling
block of offense and to wipe off the heads of that monstrous hidra, so as
never any mo may grow thereof again.


Theod. Seeing you say that every prince is supreme head over the church of
God within his dominions, what authority therefore assign you to the prince to
execute in the church.


Amphil. It is the office and duty of a prince not only to see elected, sent
forth, and called, good, able, and sufficient pastors, for the instruction of
the church, but also to see that good orders, constitutions and rites be
established, and duly performed, that the word be preached, the sacraments
truly ministered, excommunication, discipline and ecclesiastical censures
orderly executed to the honor of God, and benefit of his church. But if it be
said that these things are to be executed of the ecclesiastical persons
only. I answer true it is, but if the ecclesiastical magistrate be
negligent, secure, slothful, and careless about the execution hereof (as who
sees not some be) than ought the prince to show his authority in commanding
and inioining them to do their office. Besides this it is the office of the
prince to see all kind of sin, as well in the church men themselves, as in
all others of the church severely punished. And though I grant the prince to
have the sovereignty and primacie over the church of GOD, within his
dominions, yet my meaning is not, that it is lawful for the prince to preach
the word, to minister the sacraments, or to execute the sentence of
excommunication, and other ecclesiastical discipline and censures of the
church, but (as before) to see them done of them, to whom it apperteineth. For
says the apostle nemo sumat sibi, honorem nisi qui legittime, vocatus fuerit
vt fuit Aaron. And again, vnusquisque in ea vocatione, qua vocatus est maneat
apud deum? But in times past the papists bare the world in hand, that no
temporal power whatsoever could nor ought not to meddle with the clergy, and
therefore made they vassals of most christian Princes. Yea that pernicious
antichrist of Rome, in those days of ignorance has not been ashamed to make
Kings, Queens, Emperors, Dukes, Lords, and all other how honorable or noble
soever, his lackeis, his pages, his horsekeepers, and compelled them to hold
his stirups, to lead his horse, and to prostrate themselves before him,
whilst he trod upon their necks. But God be praised, this great antichrist is
discovered to all the world, and his shame so laid open, as every child
justly laugheth him to scorn.


Theod. You said before that the churches there were governed by bishops, and
pastors, how by them?


Amphil. The bishops are grave, ancient, and fatherly men, of great gravity,
learning, and judgment (for the most part) constituted by the Prince over a
whole country, or province, which they call their dioces. These grave fathers
having authority above all other of the ministry, in their dioces, do
substitute under them in every particular church a minister, or ministers
according to the necessity of the same. And thus does every bishop in his
own dioces through out the whole realm. So that no church how small soever,
but it has the truth of Gods word, and of his sacraments truly delivered unto
it.


Theod. Are those preaching prelates that the bishops do place in every
congregation or else reading ministers?


Amphil. It were to be wished that all were preaching prelates, and not reading
ministers only, if it could be brought to pass, but though all be not
preachers, yet the most part be, God be praised therefore.


Theod. Be any readers only, and not preachers, that is a great abuse. For I
am persuaded that he that cannot preach, ought not to supply a place in the
church of God to read only, how say you?


Amphil. It is no good reason to say because all ought to be preachers, that
therefore readers are not necessary. But indeed I am of this judgment with
you, that whosoever can but read only, and neither is able to interpret, preach,
expound, nor explane the scriptures, nor yet to refell and convince the
adversary, nor to deliver the true sense and meaning of the scriptures, ought
not to occupy a place in the church of God, as the pastor thereof. For God
commands that the pastors be learned, saying: Labia sacerdotum custodiant
voritatem, and ediscant populi verbum dei ex ore eorum, Let the lips of the
priests preserve knowledge, and let the people learn the truth out of their
mouths. And therefore those that have not this dexterity in handling the
word of God, they are not sent of God, neither are they Christ's vicegerents or
pastors to instruct his flock. To such the Lord says: They rule, but not by
me, they run, but I sent them not, they cry thus says the Lord, whereas he
never spoke it. These are those woll shepherds, and dumb dogs, of whom
speaks the prophet, that are not able to bark against sin. And therefore I
beseech the Lord to remove them, and place able and sufficient pastors over
his church, that GOD may be glorified, and the church edified in the truth.


Theod. Bare reading I must needs say is bare feeding, but what then? Better it
is to have bare feeding than none at all.


Amphil. Uerie true. And therefore are not they more scrupulous than they
ought, more curious than needs, and more precise than wise, that because they
cannot have preaching in every church, do therefore contemn reeding, as not
necessary? This is as though a man should despise mean fare, because he
cannot come by better, whereas I think it is better to have mean fare then
none at all, or as though a man because he cannot come by the carnell at the
first, will therefore ca^ away both the nut and the carnell. It were good (as
says the apostle) that all could prophecy, that is, that all could preach,
and expound the truth, but because that al have not the gift, is therefore
reading naught? And therefore a sort of nouatians lately sprung up, have
greatly faulted herein, in that they hold that no reading ministers only ought
to be permitted in the church of God, as though (as I say) because a man can
not have dainty fare, therefore it is good to have none at all. But to be
plain, as I will not defend a dumb reading ministry only, so I will not
condemn it for necessities sake, when otherwise every place cannot be
sufficiently furnished at the first with good and sufficient men as it ought.


Theod. But it is thought that there are inow able men in the universities, and
elsewhere to furnish every particular church with a preaching minister?


Amphil. Truly I think there are so, if they were sought for and preferred:
but alas those that are learned indeed they are not sought for nor promoted,
but the unlearned for the most part, sometimes by friendship, sometime by money
(for they pay well for their orders. I hear say) and sometimes by gifts (I dare
not say bribes) are int^uded. This makes many a good schooler to languish,
and discourageth not a few from going to their books. Whereby learning
greatly decaieth, and barbarism I fear me will ouerflow the realm if
speedy remedy be not had herein.


Theod. As far as I can gather by your speeches, there is both a reading and
a preaching ministry, whether do you prefer before the other.


Amphil. I prefer the preaching ministry before a reading ministry only:
and yet the reading ministry if the other can not be had, is not therefore
evil, or not necessary.


Theod. But tell me this. If there might a preaching ministry be gotten ought
not the reading ministry to give place to the same?


Amphil. Yea, doubtless. And therefore the bishops ought to seek for the
learned sort, and as it were to sue and make instance to them, and finding them
worthy as well for their life, as doctrine to call them lawfully according to
the prescript^ Gods word, and so to send them forth into the ^^rds harvest.
And where the foresaid dumb ministry is, to displace the same, and place
the other. By this means the word of God should flourish, ignorance (manger
the head of satan) be abandoned, the church edified, and many a one encouraged
to go to their books, whereas now they practice nothing less, and all by
reason that by their learning they have no promotion nor preferment at all.


Theod. Do these preaching ministers preach only in their own cures, flocks
and charges, or else indifferently abroad else where?


Amphil. They preach for the most part in their own charges, and cures
whereouer the holy Ghost has made them overseers, and for which they shall
render a dreadful account at the day of iudgemennt, if they do not their
duty, diligently as God has commanded. But though they preach most commonly
in their own cures, yet do they sometimes help their fellow brethren to
break the bread of life to their charges also. Wherein me think they do not
amiss. For if a watch man appointed by a whole city, or town to give warning
when the enemy comes, seeing an other city, or town to be in danger,
gives sufficient warning to his own city, and goes and warns the other
city also, and so by this means delivers them both, I say, that in so
doing, he does well, and according to charity. And yet notwithstanding diverse
new phangled felows sprung up of late, as the Brownists, and there adherents,
have spoken very blasphemouslie hereof, teaching in their railing pamphletes,
that those who are lecturers or preach else where than in their own cures, are
accursed before god. Than the which, what can be more absurdlie, or untruly
spoken? For if they grant (as they cannot deny) that the word of God is good,
then cannot the declaration of that which is good in one place be hurtful in
another. And read we not that the apostles themselves went from place to place,
preaching the word to every congregation? Christ Jesus did the same, and also
taught us, that he came not to preach to one city only, but to many?


Theod. Do the reading ministers only continue and read altogether in their
own charges or not?


Amphil. The reading ministers after they be hired of the parishes (for they
are mercenaries) they read commonly in their own charges, and cures, except
(which is a horrible abuse) that they have two or three cures to serve all upon
one day, and peradventure two or three miles distant, one from another. Which
makes them to gallop it over as fast as they can, and to chop it up with all
possible expedition, though none understand them, and as few be edified by
them.


Theod. Be these reading ministers well provided for, so as they want nothing,
or not?


Amphil. No truly. For if the other preaching ministers be not well provided
for (as in truth they be not) then how can the other be well maintained? And
therefore they have some of them ten pound a year (which is the most) some eight
pound, some six pound, some five pound, some four pound, some forty
shillings, yea and table themselves also of the same. And sometimes failing of
this too, they run roging like vagarents up and down the countries like
maisterlesse men, to seek their maintenance. Whereby some fall to one
mischief, some to another, to the great slander of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and scandal of the godly. And yet part of these reading misters be
too well provided for, for some of them have two or three, yea four or five
benefices apeece, being resident but at one of them at once, and peradventure
at never a one, but roist it out elsewhere, purchasing a dispensation for their
discontinuance, and then may no man say: Domine cur ita facis? Sir why do you
so? For he has plenarie power and authority granted him so to do.


Theod. That is an horrible abuse that one man should have two or three, or
half a dozen benefices apeece as some have, may any man have so many livings
at one time by the law of God, and good conscience?


Amphil. As it is not lawful for any man to have or enioie two wives at once,
so is it not lawful for any man how excellent soever to have mo benefices, mo
flocks, cures, or charges in his hands than one at once. Nay I am fully
persuaded that it is more tolerable (and yet it is a damnable thing) for a man
to have two wives or mo, than for a man to have two benefices at once or mo.
For by possibility a man might discharge the duty of a good husband to two or
three wives (yet to have mo than one is the breach of Gods commandments) but
no man though he were as learned as Saint Paul, or the apostles themselves to
whom were given supernatural and extraordinary gifts and graces, is able
sufficiently to discharge his duty in the instruction of one church, or
congregation, much less of three or four or half a dozen as some have. And
as one father cannot be many fathers, one pastor many pastors, nor one man
diverse men, so one sheepeheard or pastor cannot, nor ought not to have diners
charges, and flocks at once. Is it possible for any shepherd though he were
never so cunning a man, to keep two or three flocks or mo at once, and so feed
them well and in due season doing the duty of a good shepherd in every
respect, they being distant from him, ten, twenty, forty, sixty, an hundred.
two hundred, or three hundred miles? Much less is there any man able to
discharge the duty of a good pastor over so many flock^, churches, and
congregations so far distant in place, whereas the simplest flock that is,
re^^^reth a whole, and perfect man, and not a piece of a man. Therefore I advise
al benefice mongers, y^ have mo charges then one, to take heed to themselves,
and to leave them in time, for the blood of al those within their cures, or
charges, that die ghostly, for want of the truth of Gods word preached unto
them, shall be powered upon their their heads, at the day of judgment, and be
required at their hands.


Theod. If they have so many benefices a piece, and some so far distant from
another, then it is not possible that they can be resident upon them all at
once. But the matter is in dispute, whether they may not as well be absent, or
present, what is your judgment of that?


Amphil. To doubt whether the pastor ought to be resident with his flock, is
to doubt whether the soul should be in the body, the eye in the head, or the
watchman in his tower. For this I am fully persuaded of, that as the soul is
the life of the body, and the eye the light of the same, so the word of God
preached is the life, and light as well to the body as to the soul of man.
And as necessary as the one is to the body, so (and much more) necessary is
the other both to soul and body. Now certain it is, these things cannot be
applied without the presence of the preacher or pastor* and therefore is his
absence from his flock a dangerous and a perilous thing, and as it were a
taking away of their life and light from them; which comes by the preaching
of Gods word unto them.


Theod. But they say though they be not present by themselves, ^^t be they
present by their substitutes and deputies, is no^ that a sufficient d^scharge
for them before God?


Amphil. I grant they are present by their deputies and substitutes, but if a
man should ^ooke into a great sort of them, he should find them such as are
fit^er to feed hogs, than christian souls. For as for some of them are they
not such as can scarcely read true english? And for their zeal to Gods word
and true religion, are they not such as can scarce tell what it means? The
truth of Gods word they cannot easily preach nor expound. The adversary they
cannot refell: bark against sin they dare not, because their lives are
licentious. They will read you their service fair and cleanly (as the doting
papists did their blasphemous) masses out of their porcesses) and when they
have done, they will to all kind of want on pastimes and delights, with come
that come will, and that upon sabbath day, festival day, or other, no day is
amiss to them. And all the week after, yea all the year (if I said all the
years of their life I lied not) they will not stick to keep company at the
alehouse from morning till night, tippling and swilling till the sign be in
Capricornus. Insomuch as if you would know where the best cup of drink is, go
to these malt woormes, and I warrant you you shall not miss of your purpose.
By these mercenaries their deputies, and the like, I grant they are present in
all their flocks, but so as it were better* or as good they were absent for any
good they do, but rather hurt by their evil example of life. The residence of
these their deputies is no discharge for them before the tribunal seat of
God: for notwithstanding the same, let them be sure to answer for the blood of
every one of their sheep, that miscarrieth through their default, or their
deputies. Their deputies shall not excuse them at the day of judgment I dare be
their warrant. Therefore I wish them to take heed to it betime, least afterward
it be too late.


Theod. But I hear say, that what is wanting either in their deputies, or in
themselves for not being daily resident, they supply either by preaching their
quarter sermons themselves, or else (if they be not able) by procuring of
others to do it for them. Is not that well?


Amphil. It is as though a man every quarter of a year once, should take his
plow, and go draw a furrow in a field, and yet notwithstanding should look for
increase of the same: were not be a foolish husbandman that would do thus? And
even so is he no less unwise that plowing but one furow, that is, preaching
but one poor sermon in a quarter of a year (and perchance but one in a whole
year, nay in 7. years) will notwithstanding look for great increse of the same.
Now the cause why this ground brings not forth fruit is, for that it is not
plowed, furowed, and tilled al together as it ought to be. So the cause
wherefore the pore churches do not bring forth fruit is, for that they are not
furrowed, manured, and tilled, as they ought, and because the word of God is
not preached unto them, and as it were braied, punned, interpreted, and
expounded, yt it sinking down into the good ground of their hearts, might bring
forth fruit to eternal life. If the strongest man's body that lives upon the
earth should be nourished with nothing for a whole quarter of a years space,
but only with two or three drops of aqua vite, aqua angelica, or the like,
every day, and at every quarters end should be fed with all manner of dainties,
I am persuaded that his body notwithstanding would soon be weak enough. Nay
do you think it were possible to live one quarter of a year? Even so falls
out in this case. For although our souls (which live by the word of God, as
our bodies do by meat) be daily fed with hearing the word read as it were
with aqua vite, or sweet necter, and at every quarters end, have a most
excellent and sumptuous banquet to pray upon, yet may they macerate and pyne
away notwithstanding for lack of the continuance of the same. And therefore the
word of God is to be preached night and day, in time, and out of time, in
season, and out of season, and that without ceasing, or intermission. And if
that saying of the prophet be true (as without all controversy it is most true
(that he is accursed. Qui fecerit opus domini negligenter, That does the work
of the Lord negligently, or fradulently, then must it needs be, that those who
having cure of souls, and do seldom, or never preach, are within the
compass of this curse. Let them take heed to it. The apostle Paul said of
himself, Vae mihi nisi euangelizauero, Woe be to me, if I preach not the
gospel, and do they think that the same woe is not proper to them if they
prech not? Have they a greater privilege than the blessed apostle saint Paul
had? No, no, these vain excuses will not serve them, therefore as they tender
the salvation of their own souls, and many others, I wish them to take heed,
and to show themselves painful laborers in the Lords harvest.


Theod. As far as I remember by the laws of Dnalgne there is a restraint, that
none shall have no more benefices at once than one, how is it then, that they
can hold so many a piece, without danger of the law?


Amphil. They make the laws (as it were) shipmens hoos^n, or as a nose of
wax, turning and wresting them, at their pleasure to any thing they lust. But
because they will avoid the laws, they purchase a dispensation a license, a
commission, a plurality, a qualification, and I cannot tell what else, by
virtue whereof they may hold totquots so many, how many soever, and that with
as good a conscience as Judas received the money for the which he sold Christ
Jesus the Savior of the world. Or if this way will not serve, then get they to
be chaplines, to honorable, and noble personages by prerogative whereof they
may hold I cannot tell how many benefices, yea as many as they can get. But
I marvel whether they think that these licenses shall go for good payment at
the day of judgment. I think not. For sure I am that no license of man can
dispense with us, to do that thing, which is against Gods word (as these
totquots is) and therefore unlawful. They may blind the foolish world with
pretensed dispensations, and qualifications, but the Lord will bring them to
account for it in his good time, GOD grant they may look to it?


Theod. In whom does the patronage, right, and gifture of these ecclesiastical
promotions, and benefices consist, in the churches themselves, or in whom else?


Amphil. Indeed you say well. For who should have the patronage, the right,
the interest, and gifture of the benefices, but the churches themselves, whose
the benefices are by right, and to whom Proprio iu^e, They do apperteine? For
do not the benefices consist either in tithes, or contributions, or both?
Now, who gives both the one and the other? Do not the Churches? Then by good
reason ought they to have the gifture and bestowing of them, and the right and
interest thereof ought to remain in the power of the church, and not in any
other private man whatsoever.


Theod. Why? Then I perceive you would not have any private or singular man of
what degree soever, to have the patronage the right, or gifture of any
ecclesiastical living, but the churches themselves, is not that your meaning?


Amphil. Yes truly, that is my meaning, and so I am of opinion it ought to be.


Theod. Why so I beseech you?


Amphil. Because one man may easily be corrupted, and drawn to bestow his
benefice either for favor, affection, or money, upon such as be unworthy,
the whole Church will not so. Again, the whole living is nothing else but
either pure alms, or devotion, or both, the Gentelman or other that pretends
the gifture thereof, gives not the whole living himself, ergo he ought not
to have in his own power, the only gifture of the same. Thirdly the whole
church will not give the same for simonie, one private man may be induced to
do it. Fourthlie, the church will keep no part of the living back from the
pastor, if he do his duty, nor imploie it to there own use, the singularity
of one man may easily be abused: nay the most patrones keep the fa^test
morsels to themselves, and give scarcely the crumbs to their pastors. But if the
benefice be worth two hundred pound, the will scarcely give their pastor four
score. If it be worth an hundred pound, they will hardly give forty pound. If
worth forty pound it is well if they give ten pound, imploieng the better
half to their own private gain. Now if this be not sacrilege, and a robbing
of the poor churches of their substance, as also a defrauding of the Lords
minister of his duty and right, then I know not what sacrilege, and fraud
means. Yea there are some, that having ground in another parish, than where
they dwell, against the time that their sheep, kine, and other cattle should
bring f^^rth increase, will drive them thither, so that the fruit falling in
the other rar^sh, he shall not need i^ pa^ tithes for the same to his own
pastor where he dwells. And against the time that the other pastor of that
parish where his cattle ^^ll, shall demand his tithes thereof, they will have
fetched home their cattle, so that by these sinister kind of means, they will
neither pay in the one parish, nor in the other. But if the one commence suit
against him, he answers, they fell not in his parish: if the other do the
same, he pleads that he is not of his parish, nor dweth him ought. But indeed
they will pay for their ground in the other parish a little herbage (as they
call it) a thing of nothing to stop his mouth withal. So that hereby the poor
pastors are detained from their right, and almost beggered in most places that
I have come in.


Theod. How came temporal men by the right of their patronages, and how fell
they into their clowches, can you tell?


Amphil. I will tell you as far as ever I could conjecture how they fell into
their hands. In the beginning when Antichrist the pope exercised his usurped
authority, and challenged the title of supreme head over the universal church
of Christ upon the face of the earth, to whomsoever would either erect
churches, temples, and oratories (as then the world was given to blind
superstition as to instaurate ^^beies, prieries, nunries, with other sumptuous
edefices, and houses of religion, thinking the same a work meritorious, and to
gilte, crosses images, and the like fooleries) or else give ground for the same
to be built upon, his unholy holiness, did give the patronage, and pretensed
right of the same church, and benefice belonging to the same. Othersome think
(to whom I willingly subscribe) that the Churches (consisting of simple, and
ignorant men for the most part) abusing the same benefices, and bestowing them
upon unmeet persons, the princes have taken them out of their hands, and
given the right patronage, and possession of the same to the temporaltie, to
the end they might bestow them better. But as they were taken from the
churches for some causes, so ought they to be removed and given again to the
Churches for greater causes. For now are they bought and soulde for simonie,
even as an ore or a cow is bought and sold for money.


Theod. Are there no laws for the restrainte of simonie, being so horrible,
and detestable a vice in the church of God?


Amphil. Yes that there are. As he that is patron taking money for his
benefice, to loose the patronage of the same, and the ecclesiastical person,
that gives it, to loose the same benefice, the money given or promised to be
given, and to remain incapable of any other ecclesiastical promotion
afterward for ever. But do you think they are fools? Have they no shift to
defeat the law. Yes I warrant you. For though they give two hundred, or three
hundred pound for a benefice, yet it shall be done so cloosely, as no dogs
shall bark at it. But because at the time of their initiation, institution,
induction, and admission they are sworn whether they came by it by simonie or
no, whether they gave any money for it, or no, therefore to avoid the guilte
of perjury, they the pastors themselves will not give any money, but their
friends shall do it for them, and than may they swear (with as good a
conscience as ever Judas betrayed Christ) that they gave not a penny, but came
by it freely, as of gift. Or if this way fail them, than must they give the
patrones a hundred pound, or two hundred pounds upon some bargayne, that is
not worth a hundred pence, and then may they swear if need be, that they
came by the bene^^ce frankelye, and freelye, and that they gave the money upon
such and such a bargain, without some of these practices, or without such a
dish of apples, as Master Latimer talks of with thirty angels in every apple,
though he be never so learned a man, I warrant him, he gets nothing. But if he
can get a graffe of this tree laden with such golden apples, it will serve him
better, then all Saint Paul's learning. For these and the like abuses infinite,
if the patronages were taken away from them, that now enjoy them, nay, that
make ha^ocke of them, and either to rest in the right of the Prince (as they
ought) or else in the right of the churches, who will not be corrupted, it were
a great deal better, than now they be. For now the poor pastors are so
handled at the hands of their patrones, that they neither have money to buy them
books withal, nor which is less not to maintain themselves upon though but
meanelye, but are many times constrained either to wander abroad to seek
their livings or else to take up their Inn in an alehouse, or in some od corner
or other, to the great discredit of the gospel of Christ, and offense of the
godly. This argues flatly that we love not Christ Jesus, who make so little
of his messengers, and ambassadors. He that despises you, despises me, and he
that receaueth and makes much of you, he receives me, and makes much of me
says Christ. The beathen gentiles, and pagans, provide better for their
idolatrous priests, then we do for the true preachers of the gospel, and
disclosers of the secrets of God. For when the Egyptians were sore pooled of
Pharao, the priests by his commandment were excepted, and permitied to have
all necessary maintenance whatsoever. But we are of another mind, for we think
whatsoever we get of the^ is won, it is our own good, whereas in truth, what we
withdraw from the^ (provided that they be diligent preachers of the pospell)
we withdraw it from God, and ferrie it to the devil. But hereof more shall be
spoken (Christ willing) hereafter, when we come to this question, whether it be
lawful for preachers and ministers of the Gospel, to receive wages and
stipends for preaching of the word.


Theod. By what law may a minister of the Gospel make claim to tithes, and
other profits, emoluments, duties and commodities, belonging to him, by ye law
of God, or of man?


Amphil. God in the law of Moses, gave special commnandement that tithes, and
other oblations, commodities, and profits should be given to the priests, to
the end that they might attend upon the divine service of God, and not busy
themselves in worldly affairs, which ordinance or fanction being mere
ceremonial* is now fully abrogate by Christ (for in him the truth, al
ceremonies, shadows, types and figures ceased, and took their end.) And
therefore cannot a preacher of the Gospel claim his tithes by the law of
Moses, but by the positive laws of Christian princes, which are to be obeyed
in all things (not directly against true godliness) upon pain of damnation.


Theod. Are tithes then due to be paid by the positive law of man, and not by
the law of God?


Amphil. Yea truly by the positive law of man: which godly constitution is
now no less to be obeyed under the Gospel (being commanded by a christian
prince) than the ^iuine institution was to be obeyed under the law. And
although tithes be due by the positive laws of man, yet are the same grounded
upon the word of God, and commanded as well by God as by man. And therefore he
that breaks this ordinance (being an excellent policy) violateth the
commandments of God, and breketh the constitution of his liege prince to his
damnation, except he repent.


Theod. Must every one pay his tithes truly to every pastor whether he be
ought, or naught, learned or unlearned, without any exception, or may he
deteine it with good conscience from him that is an unfit and unable minister?


Amphil. If he be a good pastor and diligent in his calling, and withal able to
discharge the duty of a faithful shepherd over his flock, then ought he to
have al tithes paid him whatsoever with the better, and if any should withhold
the lest mite from him, he sins against the majesty of God most grievously.
And although he be a wicked man, and not able to discharge his duty, though
but in small measure, yet ought every man to pay him his due faithfully and
truly. For in denieng him his duty, they might seem to withstand authority,
which they ought not to do. In the mean time giving themselves to prayer, and
suing to them that have the authority for his displacing, and placing of
another that is more able in some measure to discharge the duty of a faithful
pastor. Notwithstanding I know some are of opinion that if any man give either
tithes, or any duty else to their pastor being an unfit, and an unable
person, he is partaker with him of his sin, he communicates with other men's
offenses, and he maintains him in his idleness, sloth, ignorance, and
security, and therefore offends grievously. But I am of opinion that every
man ought to pay their duty (for else he might seem as I said to resist the
power) and if he be not able to discharge his duty, to pray for his remoouing,
and to make instance to them that are in authority appointed for the redress
of such inormities, for his displacing, and so not to attempt any thing without
good and lawful authority grounded upon the word for the same*


Theod. May a pastor that has a charge and a flock assigned him to watch over
(having and maintainable living allowed him of his flock) preach in other
places for money*


Amphil. He may sometimes obteining license for some reasonable cause of his
own flock, preach the word of God abroad in other places, but then he ought
to do it gratis, co^tenting himself with the living allowed him at home of
his own parish. Notwithstanding, if the other churches where he shall have
preached, will voluntarily impart any thing to the supply of his necessities,
in respect of his pains taking, he may thankfully receive the ^ame. but he may
not compel, nor constrain them to give it him whether they will or not
against their wills, as many impudently do^e


Theod. Then I perceive if it be not lawful for a pastor that has a flock,
and a stipend appointed him, to receive money upon constraint of strangers for
preaching the word abroad in other places, then is it not lawful for him to
take money in his cure for preaching funeral sermons, marriage sermons,
christening sermons, and the like, as many do. What say you to this?


Amphil. There are many worthy of great blame in this respect. For though
they rec^iue forty pound, a hundred pound, or two hundred pound a year, of
some one parish, yet will they hardly preach once a month, nay happily not
once in a quarter of a year, and sometimes not once a twelve month, for the
same. And if a man request them to preach at a burial, a wedding, or a
christening, they will not do it under an angel, or a noble at the lest. And
therefore the papists, and adversaries to the Gospel call our Gospel, a polling
Gospel, our sermons royal sermons, angel sermons, and noble sermons. You call
say they our blessed mass a polling mass, but say they your preachings are
more polling. For we say they would have sold a mass for a grote, you will not
sell a sermon under a royal, or a noble. And thus these fellows are a slander
to the Gospel, and robbers of their fellow brethren. If I should hire a man
for forty pound, an hundred pound, or more, or less, to teach my children
nurture and knowledge, if he for the execution thereof should ask me more for
the same than we agreed for, were not this man a naughty, exacting, and
fraudulent fellow? Nay if I compound with him to teach them in the best manner
he is able for so much, and he does it not, and yet receive my money, have not
I good law against him? If he should say unto me, I will not do it except you
give me more, were not this a very unreasonable man? For having his money that
was covenant, is he not bound both by law and conscience to teach them to the
uttermost of his power? Or if he shall not do it, and yet take my money, is
not he a thief and a robber? Is this true in a private man, and not in an
ecclesiastical person? Is he not hired to that end and purpose to preach the
word of God to his flock? And has he not wages for the same? Shall he now
deny to preach the same word except he have more money? Or is he not bound in
conscience to preach the same night and day without ceasing? And if he do not,
is he not a deceiuer, a thief, and a robber? The pastor therefore having taken
upon him the cure and charge of his flock, and having his stipend appointed
for the same, is bound to preach the word of God to all his flock
indifferently whether it be at burial, wedding, christening (yea then
especially) or at any other time whenever, without taking, or requiring of
any more money, than the stipend he was hired for. For if he take any more, it
is plain theft before God, and one day shall be answered for: let them be sure
of it.


Theod. You condemn not funeral sermons then, so that they be good, do you?


Amphil. No, God forbid. Why should not godly sermons be as wholesome (and as
necessary) at the burials of christians, when we have such lively spectacles
before our eyes, of our mortality, misery, and end, as they be at all other
times? Yea truly at that present I think godly sermons very necessary to
put the people in remembrance of their mortality, of their great misery, and
frailty, of their fatal end, of the immortality of the soul, of the
general resurrection at the last day, and of the joy, felicity, and
beatitude of the life to come, with the like godly instructions, that they may
the better prepare themselves to the same when God shall call them hence to
himself. And although of late some fantastical spirits have taught that the
use of them is naught, in that they stand in place of popish diriges, and I
cannot tell what, yet cannot I be easily drawn to assent unto them, for that
I see them in that respect a great deal more curious than godly wise.


Theod. Is it lawful think you for ministers, and preachers of the Gospel to
receive stipends, and wages for their preaching?


Amphil. Why not? Otherwise how should they be able to keep themselves free
from worldly occupations, and travels of this life (as they ought) to apply
their studies for the discharge of their duties, to maintain themselves, their
family, and household, or how should they keep hospitality for the relief of
the poor, all which they are bound to do both by Gods law, and good
conscience? Therefore take away livings, and wages from the preachers, and
overthrow preaching altogether, the ordinary mean to salvation in Christ.
This caused the apostle to enter disputation of this point, where he proves
by invincible arguments, that a preacher or minister of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, may ( Salua conscientia, With a good conscience) receive wages, and
stipends for his pains sustained in the affairs of the Gospel, and that for
the causes abouesaid. Therefore says this apostle: Boui trituranti non ligabis
os, Thou shall not mussle the mouth of the ox that treads forth the corn.
Whereby is meant, that he that laboreth, and takes pains in any good exercise,
ought not to be denied of his meed for his pains. Again he says: Dignus est
operarius mercede sua, The workman is worthy of his reward. And still
insisting in the same argument, he says: Qui euangelium praedicant, ex
euangelio viuant, They that preach the Gospel, let them live upon the Gospel.
And yet further prosecuting the same more at large, he says: Quis militat,
etc. Who goes on warfare at any time of his own charges? Who planteth a
vineyard, and eats not of the fruit? Who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock. By all which reasons, and arguments it appears, that
he who preaches the Gospel ought to live of the Gospel. But as every pastor
that has a peculiar stock assigned him may with the testimony of a good
conscience receive wages, and maintenance of his flock, for his pains taken
amongst them: so may he not, nor ought not to take wages or salarie of any
other flock adioining, if so be it, that either upon request, or his own
voluntary good will, he preach the word of God amongst them. To them that are
thus provided for, Christ our savior says: Gratis accepistis, gratis date,
Freely you have received, freely give again. But if any have not a special
flock, or charge assigned him, then may he with good conscience receive the
beneuolencie, the friendly contributions, and rewards of the churches to whom
he has preached. And this is probable both by the word of God, and the
examples of the apostles themselves.


Theod. What say you of preachers, and lecturers, that have no peculiar
flocks, nor charges appointed them, are they necessary, and may they receive
wages with a good conscience of the flocks, and charges where they preach the
word of God?


Amphil. First you ask me whether preachers, and lecturers that have no
peculiar ^locks nor charges of their own to attend upon, be necessary.
Whereto I a^swere. That considering the s^ate, and condition of the church at
this day, they are most necessary. But if it were so, that every church and
congregation had his preacher (as every one ought to preach, else is he not
sent by the Lord) then were they not so necessary, but considering that most
churches are planted and fraught with single reading ministers, they are very
behouefull to help to supply the defect of the others, that through the good
industry as well of the one, as of the other, the churches of GOD may be
instructed and nourished with the word of GOD to eternal life. Then you ask
me whether these lecturers and preachers may receive wages of the churches to
whom they preach, with a good conscience, whereto I answer, that they may. But
yet I am persuaded, that it were much better for them to have particular flocks
of their own* to the end that they receiving sufficient maintenance of them,
might (if they were at any time disposed to bestow any spiritual graces
abroad) do it Gratis, frankly and freely without any charges to the poor
churches of Jesus Christ.


Theod. But what if the pastors living be not maintaineable nor sufficient for
him to live upon, may he not take wages of other flocks abroad?


Amphil. I am persuaded no. For if his living be too little, then ought the
church to mend it, but if the church either for want of zeal will not, or
through extreme poverty cannot increase his living, then ought the pastor to
content himself with that little, which God has sent him, following the
example of the apostle, who bids the children of GOD to be content with
their wages, be it little or be it much: for if they have meat, drink, and
cloth, it is enough, and as much as nature requires. We brought nothing (says
he) into this world, neither shall we carry any thing out. Again, those that
will be rich, fall into diverse temptations, and snares of the devil, which
drown men in perdition and destruction. Therefore if it be s^fficient to
yield him meat, drink, cloth, and other necessaries, he is bound to content
himself with the same. Which if he do (for the zeal he bears to his
flock) I doubt not but the Lord will open the hearts of his flock toward him,
and both make them able, and willing to support his necessities. For if he
deliver unto them spiritual things, doubtless the Lord will move them to give
unto him temporal things. And therefore ought he to persevere, and in his good
time, without all peradventure the Lord will look upon him, as he has
promised.


Theod. Do you allow of that vagarant ministry, which is in many countries,
but most specially in Dnalgne sprung up of late, to the discredit of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and offense of the brethren?


Amphil. Allow of it qouth you? No God forbid. But I rather deplore it with all
my heart, knowing that it is most directly against the word of God, the example
of the primitive age and all good reformed churches thorough the world. Is it
not a pitiful case that two hundred, three hundred, five hundred, a thousand,
five thousand, yea possible ten thousand shall be called into the ministry,
in one country, not a quarter of them knowing where to have any living or
charge? And what do they then? Run straggling, and rouing over countries, from
town to town, from city to city, from shire to shire, and from one place to
another, till they have spent all that ever they have, and then the most of them
either become beggars, or else attempt wicked and unlawful means to live by,
to the great dishonor of God, and slander of the word.


Theod. Me think this is a great abuse, that so many, or any at all should be
called into the ministry, not having flocks, and charges provided for them
before.


Amphil. It is a great abuse indeed. For if pastor come of Pasco, to feed, if
he be not a shepherd that has no flock, and if he be not a feeder, that
gives no sustinance, nor a father that has no child, then are they no
shepherds, nor no watchmen sent from the Lord, that have neither flocks, nor
charges to watch over. For he that is made a shepherd (or a minister) that
has no particular flock ready to receive him, is so far from being a lawful
shepherd, by reason of his former admission, that he is rather made a pastor
by the church that hireth him to be their watchman and guide, than of him that
first called him into that function. And therefore would I wish that bishops
and others to whom it does ( Ex officio) apperteine to call, and admit
pastors, and teachers in the church of GOD, to be very careful herein, and
not rashly to lay their hands upon any, before they have had sufficient trial
as well of their life and doctrine, as also of the flock and charge where they
shall be resident, that they go not like maisterlesse hounds up and down the
countries to the slander of the Gospel.


Theod. Why? Then I perceive you would have none called into the ministry,
before there be a place void for him, is not that your meaning?


Amphil. That is my meaning indeed.


Theod. But are you able to prove your assumption, out of the word of God, or
else I will give but small credit to you in such matters of controversy as
this is?


Amphil. I have not, neither do I mean to speak any thing unto you touching
these matters, but what I am able (I trust) to prove by the word of GOD. And
yet I grant Errare possum (for Hominis est labi, and decipi, Man may be
deceived and fall) but Hereticus esse nolo, Err I may, but heretic I will not
be. No, so soon as I shall be convinced by the manifest word of God, of any
of my former positions or assertions, I will willingly subscribe to the truth.
But being persuaded as I am, give me leave, I beseech you (under correction) to
speak what I think. But now to the purpose. In the first chapter of the Acts
of the apostles recorded by the Evangelist Saint Luke, we read that Matthias
succeeding Judas the traitor in the administration of the apostleship, was not
chosen nor elected (notwithstanding that the apostles by the revelation of the
spirit of GOD, knew that he should fall from the same in the end) until the
place was void, and empty. In the sixth chapter of the Acts of the apostles
we read also of seven deacons, which were chosen for the daily ministering to
the poor, but when I pray you? Not before the church (destitute of their
service) had need of them, nor before there were places ready to receive them,
wherein they might exercise their function, and calling. Then if the apostles
would not choose not so much as deacons, which is an office in the church of
God far inferior to the office of the pastor, or preacher, before places
were void and ready to receive them, much less would they, or did they choose
or call any pastor into the church of God, before the church stood in need of
him, and before there be a place ready to receive him. Besides that, we read
not thorough the whole evangelical history, that ever the apostles called any
to be pastors and preachers of the word, before such time as there were places
void for them. Common reason me ^^inke, and daily experience should teach us
this truth sufficiently, if we were not wilfully blinded, that when any church
or congregation is destitute of a pastor, it were better to place there one
able person, than to make two or three hundred, or mo unable fellows, and they
for want of living to run straggling the countries over, without any living or
maintenance at all, being glad of any thing. For as the old saying is: Hungry
dogs eat sluttish puddings.


Theod. What order would you have observed in this?


Amphil. Me think this were a very good order. That every church or
congregation being destitute of a pastor should present to the bishops, and
others to whom it does appertain, one or two, three or four able persons, or
mo, or less, as they conveniently can, whose lives and conuersations they have
had sufficient trial of, whose soundness in religion, integrity of life, and
godly zeal to the truth they are not ignorant of. Then the bishops and others
to whom it does apperteine, to examine and try them thoroughly for their
sufficiency in learning, soundness in doctrine, and dexterity in teaching,
and finding them furnished with sufficient gifts for such an honorable calling
to admit them, to lay their hands upon them, and to send them forth (the
chiefest of them) to that congregation or church so destitute. Which order if
it were strictly observed and kept (as it ought to be) then should not so many
run abroad in the countries to seek livings, then should not churches be
pestered with insufficient ministers. Then should not the bishops be so
deceived in many as they be. And no marvel. For how should the bishop choose
but be deceived in him, whom he never saw before, whose conversation he
knows not, whose disposition he is ignorant of, and whose qualities and
properties in general, he suspecteth not? Whereas if this order were
established, that every church destitute of a pastor should present certain
able men, whose conversation and integrity of life in every respect they
perfectly know (for the whole church is not likely to err in judging of their
conuersations, who have been either altogether, or for the most part
conversant amongst them) then (as I say, should not the bishop be deceived in
any, nor yet any church scandalized with the wicked lives of their pastors (or
rather depastors) as they be. For now it is thought sufficient for the
certeintie of his conversation, if he either have letters dimissorie from one
bishop to another (whereas they little or nothing know the conversation of the
man) or else letters commendatorie from any gentleman, or other, especially if
they be of any reputation. If he can get these things, he is likely to speed I
warrant him. Which thing is scarce well in my judgment. For you know one
private man, or two, or three, or four may peraduerture either write upon
affection, or else be corrupted with bribes or gifts, whereas the whole church
cannot, nor would not. Therefore is the other the surer way.


Theod. How prove you that the churches that are destitute of a pastor, ought
to present him whom they would have admitted, to the bishop, and not the bishop
to intrude upon the church whom he will?


Amphil. In the first chapter of the Acts of the apostles before cited, we
read, that after the defection of Judas the traitor, the apostle Peter knowing
it necessary that one should be chosen in his place, to give testimony and
witness of the resurrection, and ascension of Christ Jesus, commanded the
church to present one or two, or mo, as they thought good, that he with his
fellow brethren might confirm and allow them. And therevppon says the text,
they chose two, to wit, Matthias, and Joseph, surnamed Bersabas. And the church
having presented them, they were elected, confirmed, and allowed of the
apostles and elders. Also in the foresaid sixth chapter of the Acts of the
apostles when the deacons (whose office was to make collections for the poor,
and to see the same bestowed upon them without fraud or deceit) were to be
chosen, the text says, that the apostles desired the church to choose forth
seven men from amongst them, of honest report, and full of the holy Ghost,
which they might appoint to that business. By all which reasons appears, that
the church ought to present him, or them, whom they would have to be admitted,
and not that the bishop ought to present, to allow,, or to intrude him upon the
church at his pleasure against the will thereof.


Theod. Why would you not have pastors to be thrust upon the churches, whether
the churches will or not?


Amphil. Because it is manifest that no church will so willingly receive, nor
yet so lovingly embrace him that is intruded upon them against their wills, as
they will do him that they like of, choose, and allow of themselves. And if
the churches bear not a singular love, favor, good will, and affection to
their pastor, it is impossible that they should hear him, or learn of him
with profit to their souls. And if they hear him not Auide and sitienter (as
we say) Greedily and thirstily thereby to profit, then shall they perish
everlastingly, in that the word of God is the ordinary mean appointed by the
divine majesty. And therefore in conclusion if there be not a mutual amity,
love, and affection betwixt the pastor and his flock* and if that the one l^ue
not the other, as themselves, it is not to be looked for that either the one
shall teach, or the other receive any thing to their souls health, but rather
the clean contrary.


Theod. I pray you what is your judgment in this? What if a man be once
lawfully called into the ministry, may he ever upon any occasion whatsoever,
leave off the same function, and apply himself to secular affairs?


Amphil. There is a twofold calling. The one a divine calling immediately from
God, the other a humane calling immediately from and by man. Now he that has
the first divine calling (his conscience suggesting the same unto him, and the
spirit of God certifieng his spirit of the certeintie thereof) being furnished
with gifts and graces necessary for such a high function and office (as God
calls none, but he indueth them first with gifts, and graces necessary for
their calling) and afterward is lawfully called of man according to the
prescript of Gods word, having a flock appointed him whereupon to attend, this
man may not, nor ought not at any hand to give over his calling, but to
persevere in the same to the end, for that he has both the divine and humane
callings, being furnished with all gifts, and graces necessary (in some
measure) for the discharge of his high function and calling. Yet
notwithstanding in time of extreme persecution, when Gods truth is persecuted,
and his glory defaced, if he have not wherewithal to maintain his estate
otherwise, he may for the time give himself to manual occupations, and
corporal exercises in the affairs of the world, as we see the apostles
themselves did, who after Christ Jesus was crucified gave themselves to their
old occupations of fishing, making of of nets, tents, pauilions, and the like.
But upon the other side, if a man have not this divine calling, his conscience
bearing him witness thereof, nor yet the graces, gifts, and ornaments of the
mind, fit for his calling (which whosoever has not, it is a manifest argument
that the Lord has not sent him, for those that he sends, he furnishes
with all kind of graces, and gifts necessary for their callings) this man
though he be called by humane calling never so precisely, yet he may, nay he
ought to leave his function, as unworthy to occupy a room in the church of
God, representing (as an idol does) that thing which he is not. Besides, he
that is compelled, and enforced either by friends (as many are) or by
poverty (as not a few be) or for any other respect else to take that high
function upon him, without the testimony of a good conscience, being not
furnished with gifts, and graces fit for such a calling (which argues directly
that God has not called him) he I say is so far from being bound never to
leave his function and calling, that he ought not one minute of an hour to
continue in the same, though he be called by man a thousand times. Therefore
he that is a minister, and has charge of souls committed unto him, let him if
he be not furnished with such gifts ^s his high calling requires, in the
name of GOD make no doubt of it to give over his function unto others that are
able for their gifts to discharge the same, in the mean time giving himself
to godly exercises of life, as God may be glorified, his conscience
disburthened, and the commonwealth profited.


Theod. But I have heard of some that considering the naughtiness of their
calling, and their own insufficiency to discharge the same, have therefore
left off their function, giving themselves to secular exercises, and in the
end have been enforced to resume their former function upon them again, and
that whether they would or not. How think you of this?


Amphil. I think truly that they who compelled them to take again that
function which they were not able to discharge, and therefore lest it have
grievously offended therein. This is as if I knowing a simple ignorant fool
presumptuously to have taken upon him a great and weighty charge, yea such a
charge as all the wisdom in the world is not able thoroughly to perform, and
when he in taking a view of his own insufficiency, should be moved to leave
his charge to others better able to execute the same than he, I should
notwithstanding not only counsel, but also compel him to resign again his
former great charge which I know he is neither worthy, nor yet able ever to
accomplish. Think you not that he that compels him to take again that
office or calling which before he had least for his inabilitie, shall not
answer for the same, yes truly, you may be sure of it? In conclusion, he that
is sufficiently furnished with such gifts as are necessary for his calling,
and withal is found able to discharge in some sort his duty ought not to leave
his function (for to such a on that so does, Christ says he that lays hand
upon the plough, and looks back, is not fit for the kingdom of God.) But
again, he that has not these gifts, and graces sufficient for his calling, to
the discharge of his duty ought not to occupy a place in the church of God,
as the pastor thereof, much less ought he when he has (for his inabiltie)
leaft the same to be constraied to resume again his former function, and
calling, which he is not able to discharge. But hereof enough.


Theod. Then I perceive that any minister or ecclesiastical person that has
not gifts sufficient to discharge his duty may with good conscience leave their
functions, and give themselves to live by their labors, as others temporal men
do, may they not?


Amphil. Yes, with a better conscience than to retain them being not able to
discharge them in any small measure. For with what conscience can he receive
temporal things of his flock, and is not able to give them spiritual? With
what face can a shepeheard receive of his sheep, the milk, the wool, and
fleece, and yet will not, or cannot give to the same either meat or drink
sufficiently? With what conscience can he receive forty pound, a hundred
pound, or two hundred pound, a year of his poor flock, and is not able to
break to them the bread of life, in such form, and manner as he ought? Nay
how can he ever have quiet conscience that knowing that the blood of all those
that die ghostly for want of instruction shall be powered upon his head at the
day of judgment, and be demanded at his hands, will yet notwithstanding
refeane the same charge, and function to himself still, not being able to
discharge the least jot of the same? Therefore would I wish every man of what
office, function, or calling soever he be, if he be not able to discharge his
duty in the same, to give it over, and not for greediness of a little mucke
or dung of the earth, (For money is no better) to cast away their souls, which
Jesus Christ has bought with his most precious blood.


Theod. Is it lawful for a pastor or minister that has a flock to depart
from the same. In the time of plague, pestilence, or the like, for fear of
infection?


Amphil. Is he a good sheepeheard that when he sees the wolves coming, will
take him to his heels and run away? Or is he a sure friend that when a man
has most need of his help, will then get him packing, not showing any
freendship toward him at all? I think not? And truly no more is he a good
pastor, or minister, (but rather a depastor, and minisher) that in time of any
plague pestilence or sickness, whatsoever will convey himself away from his
flock, for fear of infection, at the hour of death, when the poor people
have most need of comfort above all other times, then is he their pastor that
should feed them, the furthest from them. When they stand upon the edge as
it were of salvation, or damnation, then permits he the wolf to have the rule
over them. Our Savior Christ says Bonus pastor animulam dat pro ouibus* A
good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, but these fellows are so far
from giving their lives for their sheep, that they seek to save their own
lives with the destruction of their whole flock. This is the love that they
bear unto their flock, this is the care they have over their souls health,
which Christ Jesus bought so dear with the price of his blood. Out upon those
shepherds that for fear of incurring of corporal death (which is to the
Godly an entrance into parpetuall glory) will hazard many a thousand to die
a corporal and a spiritual death both, yea, and death of damnation both of
body and soul for ever. Do they think that their blod shall not be asked at
their hands at ye great day of the Lord. Do they think yt their flieng away
from their flock, is a mean to preserve their lives ye longer upon earth: Is
not God able to strike them as well in the fields, as in the city, as well in
the country as in the town, in one place, as well as in another? Is not his
power eueriewhere? Is not his messenger death in all places? Says he not in the
book of Deuteron* that if we do not those things, which he has commanded us
in his sacred word, cursed shall we be at home, and cursed in the fields. And
says he not further, that the plague and pestilence, the botch, bile, blaine,
or else what deadly infection soever shall follow us, and lay hold upon us, in
what place soever we be, and shall never depart from us, till it have quite
consumed us from the face of the earth? And do these fugitives that ouerrun
their flocks in time of infection, think that they shall escape the heavy
wrath and vengeance of God for their tergiuersation and backsliding from their
duties? Do they think that God cannot save them frm corporal death, but with
the breach of their duties toward God? Is not the Lord as well able to defend
them from any deadly infection if it be his good pleasure, as he was to defend
Sidrach, Misaach, and Abednego from the flaming fire? Daniell from the mouth of
the lions, Jonas from the jaws of the mighty whale, with many others that
trusted in him? Do they think that his arm is shortened, or his power
weakened? Is he not able to deliver his children, that in doing of their
duties depend upon his providence? And to be plain with them, me think that
in flieng away from their flocks, they show themselves to think that either
God is not almighty, or else noc merciful, or neither. For if they believed
that he were almighty, and that he were able to save them, then they would
never run away from their flock, but depending upon his providence, believe
that he is as well able to deliver them in one place as in another, if it be
his good pleasure. And if they believed that he were merciful, then would they
rest upon the same, not doubting, but as he is almighty, and omnipotent, and
therefore can do al things, so he is most merciful, and therefore will preserve
al those that put their trust in him. If a temporal magistrate that exercises
but a civil office in the commonwealth should go away from his charge for fear
of infection or plague, whereas his present abode might do more good than his
absence, he greatly offends, how much more then offends he, that being a
pastor or feeder of souls, flies away from his charge, whereas his presence
might do a thousand times more good than his absence? And if it please the
Lord to take them away to himself, are they not most happy? Enter they not
into eternal glory? And have they not an end of all miseries and pains in
this life, and the perfect fruition of perpetual joy in the heavens? Are they
not blessed, if when the Lord shall call them, he find them so well occupied as
in feeding, and breaking the bread of life to the pore members of Christ Jesus
for whose sakes he shed his heart blood?


Theod. But they say, we ought not to tempt God, which thing they must needs
do if they should tarry when they see death before their face. And they say
further, that it is written that we must keep the whole from the sick, and
the sick from the whole. Besides say they, Natura dedit, potestatem tuendi
vitam omni animanti, Nature has given power of defending of life to every
living creture. Again, every thing flees from his contrary, but death is
contrary to nature, for it came through the corruption of nature, therefore we
fly from the same by the instinct of nature. These and the like fond reasons
they allege, for their excuse in flieng from their flocks, and charges, what
say you to them?


Amphil. I can say little to them. But only this, that none of all these
reasons do privilege them to discontinue from their flocks and charges. And
whereas they say, that their staieng were a tempting of God, it is very
untrue, it is rather a reverent obedience to this tripled commandment, Pasce
oues meas, pasce oues meas, pasce oues meas, Feed my sheep, feed my sheep,
feed my sheep. But indeed if it were so that a private man who has no kind
of function nor office, neither ecclesiastical nor temporal, seeing himself
if he stay still in great danger of death, and might avoid the danger by
flieng, and so by the grace of God prolong his life, and yet will not, this man
if he tarry tempts the Lord, and is a murderer of himself before God. And
to such it is said, thou shall keep the whole from the sick, and the sick
from the whole. This is the meaning and sense of these words, and not that they
do privilege any man for not doing of his duty. But notwithstanding all that
can be said in confutacion of this great and extreme contempt of their duties,
I have known and do know some ministers (nay wolves in sheep clothing) in
Dnalgne that in time of any plague, pestilence or infection, though there has
bin no great danger at all that have bin so far from continuing amongst their
flock, yt if any one of them were sick, although of never so common or usual
disease, yet fearing to be infected with the contagion thereof they have
absented themselnes altogether, from visiting ye sick according as they ought,
and as duty does bind them. Yea some of them (suppose you of mercenaries, and
hirelings, but not of god pastors) are so nice, so fine and so fearful of
death forsooth ye in no case they cannot abide to visit the sick, neither by
day nor by night. But in my judgment it is as incident to their office and
duty, to visit, to comfort, to instruct, and relieve the sick, at the hour
of death, as it is for them to preach the word of God to their flock all the
days of their life. And peradventure they may do more good in one hour at
the last gasp, then they have done all the days of their life before. For he
that in his life time has had in small estimation the blessed word of God,
but following his own humors in hope to live long, has lead a very wicked and
impenitent life, now through the consideration and sight of death, which he
sees before his eyes, together with godly exhortations, admonitions, and
consolations, out of the word of God, may easelie be withdrawn from his former
wicked life, and dieng in the faith of Jesus Christ, with true repentance for
his sins, to fore committed, live for ever in joy both of body and soul,
whereas if exhortations had not bin, he might (happily) have died irrepentant,
or utterly desperate to his everlasting destruction for ever. Yea, it is
commonly seen, that those who could never be won to Christ Jesus, all the
days of their life before, yet at the last hour they are soon recovered.
Therefore ought not the pastors to neglecte their duties therein, but warely,
and carefully to watch over their flocks, night and day without ceasing that
when the great shephard of the sheep comes, he may reward them with the
immercessible crown of eternal glory. And thus much be it spoken hereof.


Theod. In whom does the election of the minister or pastor consist in the
church only or in the bishops?


Amphil. I told you before (as I remember) that the church might examine the
life, the conversation, and disposition of him, or them, whom they would have
to be their pastor, and finding the same good to present him, or them, to the
bishops, or elders to whom it apperteineth, to examine for his sufficiency in
knowledge, and dexterity, in teaching and handling the word of God, and
finding him a man furnished with gifts and graces necessary for such a high
vocation, to call him lawfully according to the word of God, and so to send
him forth into the Lords harvest, as a faithful laborer therein.


Theod. But some are of opinion that the churches themselves of their own
absolute, and plenarie power ought to choose their pastor, and not bishops,


Ampil. The churches have no further power in the election of their pastor,
than as I have told you, that is, to judge of his conversation and integrity
of life, referring the whole action besides to the bishops, and elders. For if
the churches should elect their minister or pastor of themselves absolutely,
besides that it would breed confusion (for some would choose one, some another,
some this, and some that, never contenting themselves with any) the church
should do that also, which were directly contrary to the word of God. For
certain it is the church has no absolute power by the word of God to elect
their pastor, to choose him, to call him orderly in such form as is appointed
in the word, observing all kind of rites, ceremonies, and orders belonging
thereto. Neither was it ever seen that any church did ever practice the same.
For in the dais of the apostles did the churches any more than choose forth
certain persons of a tried conversation, and presented the^ to the apostles?
And did not the apostles then whom our bishops now in this action do represent)
lay their hands upon them, approve them (after trial had of their sufficiency
in knowledge) and sent them forth into the Lords vineyard? The churches laid
not their hands upon them, or as some call it consecrated them not, nor used
not any other ceremonial rite in the election of them, as the apostles did.
But as I grant that the church for some cause, and in so^ respects is not to be
excluded from a consultatiue voice (as before) or from being made privy at al
to the election of their pastor, so I deny that the church may absolutely of
his own plenarie power call their pastor, all ceremonies and rites thereto
belonging observed, for that is to be don and executed of the bishops and
elders, and not of the churches consisting of lay men, and for the most part
rude, and unlearned.


Theod. What say you to a seigniorie or eldership, were it not good for the
state of the church at this day that ye same were established in every
congregation, as it was in ye apostles days.


Amphil. The several estates and conditions of the apostolical churches, and
of ours (al circumstances duly considered) are diverse, and much different one
from another, and therefore though a seigniorie or eldership then in every
particular church were necessary, yet now under christian princes it is not so
needful. The churches then wanted christian princes and magistrates to govern
the same, and therefore had need of some others to rule in the church. But God
be thanked we have most christian kings, princes, and governors, to rule and
govern the church, and therefore we stand in less need of the other. And yet
notwithstanding I grant that a seigniorie in every congregation were to be
wished, if it could be brought to pass, yet cannot I perceive, but that it
would rather bring confusion, than reformation, considering the state of the
church at this day. For in the apostles times when seigniories were ordained,
we read not of any shires, dioces, or precincts, where bishops and
ecclesiastical magistrates might exercise their authority and government, as
now they do, and therefore, there being neither bishops, ecclesiastical nor
civil magistrates (as we have now) it was necessary that the seigniories
should be ordained. But now we having al these things, stand not in such
necessity of them, as the churches in the apostles days did. Besides, the
institution of elders was but mere ceremonial, and temporal, and therefore
not to continue always, neither ought the necessity thereof to bind all
churches. Neither do I think that all churches are bound for ever to one
form of external government, but that every church may alter, and change the
same, according to the time, and present state thereof, as they shall see the
same to make for the glory of God, and the common peace of the church.


Theod. What say you to deacons? Is their office necessary or not in the
church of God at this day?


Amphil. Their office (which was to make collections for the poor, to gather
the beneuolencies, and contributions of every one that were disposed to give,
and to see the same bestoed upon the poor and needy members of the church) is
very necessary, and without doubt ought to be continued for ever. But yet is
not the church tied to their names only, but to their office. Which office is
executed by honest substantial men (called Churchwardens or the like) chosen
by the consent of the whole congregation to the same end and purpose, who daily
gathering the friendlye beneuolencies of the churches, bestow, or see the same
bestowed upon the poor, and indigent of the same church, which was the
greatest part of the deacons duties in the apostles days. So that albeit we
have not the name, we yet hold their office in substance and effect.


Theod. What is your judgment, ought there to be any bishops in the churches
of christians?


Amphil. To doubt whether there ought to be bishops in the churches of
chr^stians, is to doubt of the truth it self. For is there not mention made of
their names, dignities, functions, and callings, almost in every chapter of the
new testament, in all the epistles of Paul, of Peter, of John, of Jude, and of
all the rest? Besides that did not the apostles themselves constitute and
ordeine bishops and elders, and do they not woonderfully commend the
excellency of their calling, inferring that those that rule well, are worthy
of double honor? Whereby appears that bishops are not only needful in the
churches of christians, but also most needful, as without whom I can scarcely
see how the state of the church could well be maintained. And therefore those
that contend that they are not necessary in a Christian Common wealth, show
them selves either wilful, waiwarde, or maliciouslye blind, and striving to
catch their own shadows, they labor all in vain, giving manifest
demonstration of their more than extreme folly to all the world.


Theod. Well. Let it be granted (as it cannot be denied) that they are most
necessary, yet in this I would very gladlye be absolved, whether they may
lawfullye vendicate or challenge to themselves superiority, and primacie above
their fellow brethren of the ministry or no, for some hold that there ought
to be equality in the ministry, and no superiority at all, how say you?


Amphil. They do not vendicate or challenge any superiority or primacie to
themselves over their brethren in respect of their common callings, and
functions (for therein the poorest pastor or shepherd that is, is coequall
with them, they themselves will not deny) but in respect of dignity,
authority, and honor, which the prince and church does bestow upon them. So
that the superiority that they have over their brethren, rests in dignity,
authority, and honor, which it has pleased the prince to dignifie them
withal above their fellow brethren, and not in calling, function, or office,
for therein they are all coequall together. But if any curious he^^s should
demand why the prince should advance any of the clergy to such high dignity,
authority, and primacie above his brethren, I answer as it is in the Gospel:
Is thine e^e evil, because the prince is good? May not the prince give his
gifts, his, dignities, and promotions to whom he will? And if the prince of his
royal clemency be minded to bestow upon his subject any dignity or
promotion, is it christian avedience to refuse the same? Nay is it not extreme
ingratitude toward his prince? Besides, who sees not, that if there should be
no superiority (I mean in dignity, and authority only) the same honorable
office or calling would grow into contempt? For is it not an old saying, and a
true, Familiaritas, sieve aequalitas parit contemptum, Familiarity, or
coequallitie does ever bring contempt. And therefore take away authority, and
honor from the magistrates either temporal or spiritual, and overthrow the
same altogether. If authority should not be dignified, as well with glory,
and external pomp the better to grace the same, and to show forth the
majesty thereof, would it not soon grow to be despised, vilipended and naught
set by? And therefore the more to innoble, and set forth the excellency of
this honorable calling of a bishop, has the prince, and the churches thought
it good to bestow such authority, dignity, and honor upon them, and not for
any other cause whatsoever. And therefore seeing it is the pleasure of the
prince to bestow such dignity, authority, and honor upon them, me think,
any sober christians should easily tolerate the same.


Theod. Yea, but they say, that there ^ught to be no superiority in the
ministry, bringing in the example of the apostles themselves amongst whom was
no superiority, inequality, or principallitie at all?


Amphil. Indeed amongst the apostles there was no superiority, I grant,
neither in office calling, authority, nor otherwise, but al were equal in each
respect, one to another. But what than? The apostles were sent to preach, to
the churches, and not to govern (and therefore they choose elders to rule the
same) but our bishops are as well to govern, and to rule the churches in some
respects, as to preach the word. And therefore though there were no
superiority amongst the apostles, yet may there be amongst our bishops in
respect of government, dignity, and authority. And whereas they say there
ought to be no superiority in the ministry at all, I answer no more there
is in respect of every ones function, form of calling, and office to preach
the word and minister the sacraments. But in respect of government,
authority, dignity, and honor, there is superiority, and I am persuaded so
ought to be. In which opinion, until they have disprooued it, I mean Christ
willing to persiste.


Theod. But they add further, and say that it strengthens the hands of the
adversaries, the papists. For say they the papists may as well affirm that
christian emperors kings, and potentates, and even the churches of God
themselves have given to the pope that authority, that dignity, and honor
which he has or claims above his fellow brethren, as well as the bishop may
say so. Besides it confirms the opinion of sovereignty over at the churches
in the world, For say they may not the pope say that he received plenarie
power to be head over all the world, from christian kings, emperors, and
potentates, as well as the bishops may say, we received this power to be
superior to our brethren from christian kings and princes. Now whether these
reasons be a like I would gladly know.


Amphil. They be very unlike, and so unlike as there is no equallitie
comparison, or semblance betwixt them. For first of all let the^ note, that the
pope nor any of his accomplices, and adherents do not hold, nor pretend to
hold (no they dare as well eat off their fingers as to say so, for then were
their state in a woeful case) that their archdiuell, their god the pope I
should say does receive his power either of authority, superiority, primacie,
souereigntie, or head over all the world from any earthly creature, but
immediately from God himself. But whereas he says that he received his
power of superiority over all the world from no earthie creature, but from
God himself, it is manifest that he received it neither from God, (for his
usurped power is contrary to God, and to his words in every respect) nor
from any christian man, but from the Devil himself, whose vicegerent or
Liefetenant general in his kingedome of impiety he shows himself to be.
Than let them note, that although he pretended to hold his usurped authority
from man (as he does not,) yet is there no man how mighty an Emperor, King,
Prince, or Potentate soever, that is able proprio iure to give him authority
over all the world, without great and manifest iniurye done to all other
Princes, as to give the sovereignty, or chieftie of their Lands from them, to
a stranger. But a Prince may lawfullye bestow, and give to his subjects any
prerogative, title, authority, office function, government, or superiority of
any thing within his own dominions and kingdoms, but no further he may not.
And therefore this reason of theirs holds not, that the Pope may as well
arrogate the one to himself, as the Bishops may the other to themselves.


Theod. Seeing now it cannot be denied, but that bishops are most necessary,
and that they may also lawfully hold superiority over their brethren (in
respect of government, regiment or authority) being given them of the prince,
what say you then to this? Whether may a bishop be called by the name of an
archbishop, metropolitan, primate, or by the name of my Lord bishop, my Lords
grace, the right honorable, and the like, or not? For me think these titles
and names are rather peculiar to the temporaltie than to them, and do savor of
vainglorie, and worldly pomp, rather than of any thing else. And which is
more, me think they are against the express word of God. Wherefore I covet
greatly to hear your judgment thereof?


Amphil. These names and titles may seem to savor of vaineglorie indeed, if
they should arrogate them to themselves Iure diuino, as they do not. But if
you will consider by whom they were given them, and how they do require them,
you will not think it much amiss, nor far discrepant from the sincerity of
the Gospel. First therefore note that they were given them by christian
princes to dignifie, to innoble, to decore, and to set forth the dignity, the
excellency, and worthiness of their callings. Secondly let them note that they
require them as due unto them by the donation and gifture of men, and not Iure
diuino, and therefore being given them for the causes aforesaid by christian
kings and princes, they may in that respect hold them still without any offense
to the divine goodness, or his faithful spouse upon the earth. But if they
should claim them as due unto them by the law of God, as they do not, then
should they offend. For our savior Christ seeing his disciples and apostles
ambiciously to affect the same vaineglorious titles and names, set before them
the example of the heathen kings, thereby the rather to withdraw them from
their vain humor, saying: Reges gentium dominantur eis, etc. The kings of the
gentiles bear rule over them and those that exercise authority over them, be
called gracious Lords, but Vos autem non sic, You shall not be so. In the which
words he utterly denies them (and in them all others to the worlds end, that
in the same office and function of life should succeed them) the titles of
Lords, graces, or the like. The apostle also bids them to beware that they
challenge not those vain titles to themselves by the law of God, when he
says (speaking to bishops and pastors) Be not Lords over your flocks, etc. By
these and many other the like places of holy writ, it is clear that they
cannot arrogate these names, or titles to themselves by ye word of God, neither
do they, but (as I have said) by the donation, the benevolence, and gifture of
christian Princes for the reverent estimati- they bare and ought to bear to
their high function and calling, in that they are his Liefetenants, his
vicegerents in his Church, his messengers, his Ambassadors, the disclosers and
proclaimers of his secrets, and his Angels, (for so are they called in the
scriptures) and therefore in respect of the excellency hereof, these names
were given and attributed unto them. And truly to speak my simple judgment,
I see not but that these names do dignifie their callinges, show forth the
majesty thereof, and des move the Churches to have the same high calling in
more reverence, and honor, than otherwise they would, if they were called by
bare and naked names only. But notwithstanding either this that has been
said, or any thing else that can be said herein, there are some waiward
spirits lately revived, who held the same names to be mere Antichristian,
blasphemous and wicked, and such as at any hand a Minister of the Gospel
ought not to be called by. But whereas they hold them to be Antichristian, I
hold them to be Christian names, and given by Christian Princes to the
innobling and garnishing of their offices, functions, and callinges, which
doubtless is a glory to God deny it who will, or who can. And therefore in
conclusion I say, that Bishops though not by the law of God, yet by the
positive law, donation, and gifture of Christian Princes, may lawfully assume
the said titles, and names to them for the causes before cited. And therefore
these names and titles being mere indifferent, and not derogating from the
glory of God, but rather making for the same, they are not of any wise,
sober, or faithful Christian, neither to be inueighed against nor yet to be
in any respect dislyked being used as before. And thus much of the names and
titles of Bishops.


Theodo. May Bishops exercise temporal authority together with
Ecclesiastical, and may they be Justices of peace, Justices of Quorum,
Justices of Assizes, Ewer, Determiner, and the like, or may they as Capytall
Judges give desinytiue sentence of life and death upon malefactors and others,
that by the judicial law of man have deserved to dye?


Amphil. There is neither of the callings temporal, nor ecclesiastical, but
it requires a whole and perfect man, to execute the same. And if there were
never found any one man yet so perfect, as could thoroughly, and absolutely
perform his office in either of the callings temporal or ecclesiastical, much
less can there ever one man be found, that is able to discharg them both. It
is hard therefore that these two callings should concur in one man. This is
as though a man having an importable burden already upon his back, should
yet have an other almost as burthenous urged upon him. And therefore as it
were absurd to see a temporal magistrate mount into the pulpit, preach the
word, and minister the sacraments so absurd it is to see an ecclesiastical
magistrate exercise the authority temporal, and to give sentence
condemnatorie of life, and death, upon any criminous person, which properly
^elongeth to the temporal power. Besides, it is a great discredit to the
temporal magistrate, because it may be thought that they are not wise nor
politic enough to execute their office, nor discharge their duties without
the aid, and assistance of the other. And which is more it hinders them from
the discharge of their duties in their own calling, for it is written, no man
can serve two masters, but either he must betraie the one or the other. When
the woman taken in adultery was apprehended, and brought unto Christ, he
refused to give judgment of her, and yet it was a matter in effect
ecclesiastical, and appertained to an ecclesiastical judge. Then what ought
they to do in matters mere civil? Again our savior Christ, when the young man
requested him to divide the inheritance betwixt his brother, and him, refused
the same saying, Quis me constituit iudicem inter vos? Who made me a judge or a
deuider betwixt you. Whereby appears how far ecclesiastical persons ought
to be from having to do, with temporal matters. But whereas they say the
bishops of Dnalgne do exercise temporal authority, and do it as judges
capital, giving sentence condemnatorie of life, and death, it is very untrue
otherwise than thus, to be present at the same, and to have a consultatiue
exhortatiue, or consentatiue voice only. Which use me thinks is v^rie good
and laudable in my judgment. For whereas the temporal magistrates not
understanding in every point the deapth of Gods law if they should do any
thing either against the same, or the law of a good conscience, they might
inform them thereof, that all things might be done to the glory of God, the
comfort of the poor members of Christ Jesus, and the benefit of the commonwealth.


Theodo. What fashion of apparel do the pastors, and Ministers wear usually
in their common affairs?


Amphil. The same fashion that others do for the most part, but yet decente,
and comlie, observing in every point a decorum. But as others wear their
attire, some of this color, some of that, some of this thing, some of that,
so they commonly wear all their apparel, at least the exterior part of
black color, which as you know is a good, grave, sad, and ancient color.
And yet notwithstanding herein some of them (I speak not of all) are much to
be blamed, in that they cannot content themselves with common, and usual
fashions, but they must chop and change every day with the world. Yea some
of them are as fond in excogitating devising and inuenting of new fashions
every day, and in wearing the same, as the veriest Royster of them all. And as
they are faulty in this respect, so are they herein to be blamed, in that they
cannot content themselves with cloth though never so excellent, but they must
wear silks, veluets, satan's, damaskes, grograms, taffeties, and the like. I
speak not against those that are in authority for wearing of these things
(for they both may, and in some respects ought to wear them for the
dignifiyng of their offices and callings, which otherwise might grow into
contempt) but against those that be mean pastors, and Ministers, that
flaunt it out in their saten doblets, taffetie doblets, silk hosen, guarded
gowns, cloakes, and the like. Alas how should they rebuke pride, and excess
in others, who are as faultye therein as the rest? Therefore said Cato very
well, Quae culpare soles, ea tu ne feceris ipse* for says he, Turpe est
doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Which is, those things which thou blamest
in others, see that thou thy self be not guiltye in the same, for it is a
foul blemish and a great shame and discredit, when that evil which thou
reprouest in an other, is apparent in thy self. For in so doing, a man
reprehendeth as well himself as others, is a hinderance to the course of the
Gospel, and what he builds with one hand, he pulls down with the other.
Christ Jesus the great pastor of the sheep was himself contented to go daily
in one poor coat, being knit, or wouen all over without seem, as the manner
of ye Palistinians is to this day. This me think was but a simple cote in the
eye of the world, and yet Christ Jesus thought it precious enough. Samuel was
accustomed to walk in an old gown girded to him with a thong. Elias and
Elizeus in a mantell, John the baptist in camels hair with a girdle of a skin
about his loins. The apostle Paul with a poor cloak, and the like, whereby
appears, how far a minister of the Gospel ought to be from pride, and
worldly vanity, observing the rules of christian sobriety, as well in
apparel, as in all things else, knowing that he is as a city set upon an
hill, and as a candle set upon a candlestick to give light, and shine to all the whole church of God. Therefore says Christ: Sic luceat lux vestra coram
hominibus, etc. Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good
works, may glorify your father which is in heaven: which God grant we may all
do.


Theod. Have they no other kind of apparel different from the common sort of
men?


Amphil. Yes marie have they. They have other attire more proper, and peculiar
unto them (in respect of their functions and offices) as cap, tippet,
surplesse, and the like. These they wear, not commonly, or altogether, but in
especial when they are occupied in, or about the execution of their offices and
callings, to this e^nd end purpose, that there may be a difference betwixt
them, and the common sort of people, and that the one may be distinct from
the other by this outward note or mark.


Theodo. Is it of necessity than required, that the Pastors and Ministers of
the word, should be distincted from other people, by any several kind of
attire?


Amphil. It is not required as of necessity, bnt thought meet and convenient
to be used for a decency, and comlines in the Church of God. But
notwithstanding the chiefest thing whereby a pastor or minister oght to be known
from the common, and vulgar sort of people is, the preaching of the word of
God, the administration of the sacraments, the execution of ecclesiastical
discipline, and other censures of the Church, and withal his integrity of
life, and soundness of conversation in every respect. These are the true
notes, and marks whereby a Minister of the Gospel ought to be known and
distincted from the other common sort of people. And yet though these be the
chiefest notes whereby they are distinct from others of the temporaltie and
laity, yet are they not the only notes, or marks, for they are known and
discerned from others also, by exterior habit, and attire, as namely by
cappe, tippet, surplesse, and such like: That as the first does distinguish
them from others, whilst they are exercised about the same, (for who is so
doltishe that seeing a man preach, minister the sacraments, and execute other
ecclesiastical censures of the church, that will not judge him to be a
Minister of the Gospel?) so the other notes of apparel (the surplesse except)
may make a difference, and distinguishe them from others of the laity abroad.
To this end, that the reverence which is due to a good pastor, or minister of
the Gospel may be given unto them. For as the Apostle says, those elders that
rule well, are worthy of double honor.


Theod. But I have heard great disputation and reasoning pro and contra, to and
fro, that the pastors and ministers of the Gospel, ought not to be disseuered
from the common sort of people, by any distinct kind of apparel, but
rather by sounding the Lords voice on high, by ministering the sacraments, and
the like, what say you to the same?


Amphil. Indeed there are some I confess, that are of that opinion, and they
bring in the example of Saul, enquiring of Samuel for the feers house,
inferring that the Prophet was not distinct from other common people in his
attire, for than Saul should easelie have known him by the same. And the
example of the damsel, that spoke to Peter, inferring that whereas the maid
said, Thy speech bewrays thee, if he had been distinct from others in
attire, or outward apparel, she would than have said, Thy apparel shows
thee to be such a fellow. These with the like examples they pretend to
prove that pastors and Ministers are not to be discerned and known from the
lay people, by any kind of apparel. But as I will not say that they are to
be known, and discerned from others by apparel or habit only, (but rather
by the lifting up of their voices like Trumpetes as says the Prophet) so I
will not deny the same to be no note or mark at all to know a Pastor or
Minister of the Gospel by from others of the temporaltie, and laity. And
truly sor my part, I see no great inconvenience, if they be by a certain
kind of decente habit (commanded by a Christian Prince) known and discerned
from others. Yet some more curious than wise, before they would wear any
distinct kind of apparel from others, they have rather chosen to render up
both lininges, goods, families, and all, leaving their flocks to the mouth of
the wolves.


Theod. Is it lawful for a minister of the Gospel to wear a surplesse, a
tippet or forked cappe, and the like kind of attire?


Amphil. As they are commanded by the Pope the great Antichrist of the world,
they ought not to wear them, but as they be commanded, and enjoined by a
Christian Prince, they may wear them without scruple of conscience. But if
they should repose any religion, holiness or sanctimonie in them, as the
doting Papists do, than do they greeuouslie offend, but wearing them as
things mere indifferent (although it be controuersiall whether they be things
indifferente or not) I see no cause why they may not use them.


Theod. From whence came these garments can you tell, from Rome, or from whence
else?


Amphil. The most hold that they came first from Rome, the poison of all the
world, and most likely they did so, but other some searching the same more
narrowly, do hold yt they came not from Rome, but rather from Grecia, which
from the beginning for the most part, has ever been contrary to the Church of
Rome. But from whence soever they came it skilleth not much, for being mere
indifferent, they may be worn or not worn without offense, according to the
pleasure of the Prince, as things which of themselves be not evil, nor cannot
hurt, except they be abused.


Theod. Notwithstanding they hold this for a maxim, that in as much as they
came first from the Papists, and have of them been idolatrouslie abused, that
therefore they are not, nor ought not to be used of any true pastors, or
Ministers of the Gospel. Is this their assumption true, or not?


Amph. It is no good reason to say such a thing came from the Papists, ergo it
is naught. For we read that the Devils confessed Jesus Christ to be the son
of God, does it follow therefore that the same profession is naught, because a
wicked creature uttered the same? All things are therefore to be examined,
whether the abuse consist in the things themselves, or in others that abuse
them. Which being found out, let the abuses be removed, and the things remain
still. A wicked man may speak good words, do good works before the world,
(but because they want the oil of faith to souple them withal, they are not
good works before the Lord) and may ordain a good thing which may serve to
good ends, and purposes. And because the same has afterward been abused,
shall the thing it self therefore be quite saken away? No, take away the
abuse, let the thing remain still, as it may very well without any offense,
except to them, quibus omnia dantur scandalo, to whom all things are offense.
And further, if these presicians would have all things removed out of the
Church which have been abused to Idolatry, than must they pull down
Churches, (for what has been abused more to Idolatry and superstition?)
pulpits, belles, and what not. Than must they take away the use of bread and
wine, not only from the church, but also from the use of man in this life,
because ye same was abused to most shame full idolatry, iu being dedicate to
Ceres, and Bacchus, two stinking Idols of the Gentiles. Than must they take
away not only the Epistles, and Gospels, but also the whole volume of the holy
scriptures, because the Papists abused them to idolatry. By all which reasons
with infinite the like, it manifestly appears, that many things which have
been instituted by Idolaters, or by them abused to Idolatry, may be applied
to good uses, and may serve to good ends, ye abuses being taken away. Yet would
I not that any thing that has been idolatrously abused by the papists, should
be retained in the churches of Christians, if by any means they might be
removed, and better put in place.


Theodo. Is the wearing of these garments a thing mere indifferent, or not?
for some hold it is, some hold it is not?


Amph. It is a thing without al co^trouersy mere indifferent, for whatsoever gods
word neither expressly commands, neither directly forbids, nor which
binds not ye conscience of a christian man, is a thing mere indifferent to be
used, or not to be used, as the present state of y^ church, and time requires.
But it is certain that the wearing of this kind of attire is not expressly
commanded in the word of God, nor directly forbid by the same, and therefore is
mere indifferent, and may be used, or not used without burden of conscience,
as ye present state of time shall require. And therefore seeing they be things
indifferent, I would wish every wise christian to tolerate ye same, being
certain that he is neither better nor worse, for wearing or not wearing of them.


Theod. Being things as you say mere indifferent, may any man lawfully refuse
ye wearing of the^ against the commandment of his prince, whom next under God
he ought to obey?


Amphil. Every man is bound in conscience before God to obey his prince in all
things, yea in things directly contrary to true godliness he is bound to show
this obedience (but not to commit ye evil) namely to submit himself life,
lands, livings, or else whatsoever he has to ye will of his Princes, rather then
to disobeie. If this obedience than be due to Princes in matters, contrary to
true godliness, what obedience than is due to the^ in matters of small weight,
of small importance, and mere triflles as these garments be, judge you? He
that disobeieth the commandment of his Prince, disobeieth the commandment
of God, and therefore would God all Ecclesiastical persons that stand so much
upon these small points, that they break the common unity, and band of
charity in the church of God, would now at the last quallifie themselves,
show obedience to Princes laws, and fall to preaching of Christ Jesus
truly, that his kingdom might daily be increased, their consciences
discharged, and the Church edefied, which Christ Jesus has bought with the
shedding of his precious heart blood.


Theod. May a pastor, or a Minister of the Gospel forsake his flock, and
refuse his charge for the wearing of a surplesse, a cappe, tippet, or the like,
as many hane done of late days, who being enforced to wear these garments,
have given up their livings, and forsaken all?


Amphil. Those that for the wearing of these garments, being but the
inventions, the traditions, the rites, the ceremonies, the ordinances and
constitutions of man, will leave their flocks, and give over their charges, not
caring what become of the same, do show themselves to be no true shepherds,
but such as Christ speaks of, that when they see the Wolf coming will fly
away, leaving their flock to the slaughter of the greedy wolf. They give
evident demonstration also, that they are not such as the holy Ghost has made
overseers over their flock, but rather such as being possessed with the
spirit of pride and ambition, have intruded them selves, to the destruction of
their flock. If they were such good shepherds as they ought to be, and so
loving to their flock, they would rather give their life for their sheep if
need required, than to run from them, leaving them to the bloody teeth of
the merciless wolves. Is he a good shepherd that watches daily upon his
flock, or he that runs from them for every light trifle? I think we would
count him a very negligent shepherd. And shall we think him a diligent, or
a good pastor, and one that would give his life for his sheep, as a good
pastor should do, that for such trifles will estrang himself from his flock
for ever? Therefore I beseech God to give them grace to look to their charges,
and to let the other trifles alone, being no part of our salvation or damnation.


Theod. But they say they refuse the wearing of these garments, because they
are offensive to the godly, a scandal to the weak brethren, a hinderaunce to
many in coming to the Gospel, and an induration to the papists hardening their
hearts, in hope that their trumperie will once come in again to their singular
comfort.


Amphil. It is an old saying. Better a bad excuse, than none at all. And truly
it seems they are driven to the wall, and sore graueled, that will fly to
these simple shifts. But whatsoever they say or affirm, certain it is, that
offensive to the godly they cannot be, who have already learned to distinguish
betwixt the things abused, and the abuses themselves. And who know also how to
use things mere indifferent to good ends, and purposes. And therefore this
question thus I shut up in few words, that the wearing of these garments
being commanded by a Christian Prince, is not offensive, or scandalous to
any good Christians, and to the other it mattereth not what it be. For they
are such as the Lord has cast off into a reprobate sense, and preiudicate
opinion, abusing all things, even the truth it self to their own destruction
for ever except they repent, which I pray God they may do, if it be his
blessed will.


Theodo. I pray you why do they wear white in their surplesses, rather than
any other color? and why a forked cappe rather than a round one, for the
Papists (if they were the authors of these garments) have their mysteries,
their figures, and their representations in all things. Wherefore I desire to
know your judgment herein.


Amphil. You say the truth, for the Papists have their mysteries in all
things after their manner. Therefore thus they say that white does signify
holiness, innocence, and al kind of integrity, putting them in mind what they
ought to be in this life, and represents unto them the beatitude, the
felicity, and happiness of the life to come. And this they prove ab exemplis
apparitionum, from the example of apparitio^s and visions, in that angels, and
celestial creatures have ever appeared in the same color of white. Therefore
forsooth they must wear white apparel. The cornered cappe say these
misterious fellows does signify, and represent the whole monarchy of the
world, East, West, North, and South, the government whereof stands upon them,
as the cappe does upon their heads. The gown say they does signify the
plenary power which they have to do all things. And therefore none but the
Pope, or he with whom he dispenceth, may wear the same every where,
because none have plenariam potestatem plenarie power in every place, but
(Beelzebub) the Pope. Yet the Ministers says he, may wear them in their
Churches, and in their own iurisdictions', because therein they have full
power from him. Thus foolishlie do they deceive themselves with vain shows,
shadows, and imaginations, forged in the mint of their own brains to the
destruction of many. But who is he, that because these sottishe Papists have
and do greeuouslie abuse these things, will therefore have them clean
removed? If all things that have been abused should be removed because of
the abuse, than should we have nothing left to the supply of our necessities,
neither meat, drink, nor cloth for our bodies, neither yet (which is more) ye
word of God, the spiritual food of our souls, nor any thing else almost. For
what thing is there in ye whole universal world, that either by one Heretic
or other has not been abused? Let us therefore take the abuses away, and the
things may well remain still. For may not we christians use these things
which the wicked Papists have abused to good ends, uses, and purposes? I see no
reason to the contrary. And therefore in conclusion I beseech the Lord that
we may all agree together in one truth, and not to divide our selves, one from
another for tris^es, making schisms, ruptures, breaches, and factions in the
church of God, where we ought to nourish peace, unity, concord, brotherly
love, amity, and friendship, one amongst an other. And seeing we do all agree
together, and iump in one truth, having al one God our father, one Lord Jesus
Christ our savior, one holy spirit of adoption, one price of redemption, one
faith, one hope, one baptism, and one and the same inheritance in the kingdom
of heaven, Let us therefore agree together in these external shadows,
ceremonies, and rites. For is it not a shame to agree about the marow, and to
strive about the bone? to contend about the karnell, and to vary about the
shell? to agree in the truth, and to brabble for the shadow? Let us consider
that this contention of ours among our selves, does hinder the course of the
Gospel from taking such deep root in the hearts of the hearers, as
otherwise it would do. And thus for this time brother Theodorus, we will
break off our talk concerning this matter, until yt please God that we may
meet again. Which if it please God we do, I promise you in an other work
to discourse of the same more at large. In the mean time let us give our selves
to fasiing, and prayer, most humbly beseeching his excellent majesty to bless
our noble Queen, and to keep her grace as the apple of his eye from all her
foes, to maintain his word, and gospel amongst us, to plant unity, and
concord within our walls, to increase our faith, to grant us true and
unfeigned repentance for our sins, and in the end eternal life in the kingdom
of heaven, through ye precious death, passion, bloodshedding, and obedience of
Christ Jesus our Lord, and only savior, to whom with the father and the holy
ghost, one true, and immortal God, be al honor, praise, power, empire, and
dominion throughout all congregations for evermore. And thus brother Theodorus
I bid you farewell in the Lord, till I do see you again.


Theodo. And I you also good brother Amphilogus, beseeching the Lord that if we
meet not upon earth, we may meet yet in the kingdom of heaven, there to
rest in perfect felicity for ever.


Amphil. The Lord grant it for his mercies sake. Amen.


FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Roger Ward for William Wright, and are to be sold at his
shop joining to Saint Mildreds Church in the Poultry, being the middle shop in
the row. 1583.


