A FIFTH PROCEEDING in the Harmony of King David's Harp.

That is to say, a godly and learned Exposition of 5. other more Psalms of the
princely Prophet David: beginning with the 68. and ending with the 72. Psalm,
being the last part of the first Tome, or one half of the book of Psalms.

Written in Latin by the reverend Doctor Victorinus Strigelius: professor of
Divinity in the University of Lipsia in Germany. Anno. 1576.

Translated into English by Richard Robinson Citizen of London. 1594.

Seen, and allowed.

Psalm 36. verse 10.O continue forth thy loving kindness to them that know
thee: and thy righteousness unto them that are true of heart. Psalm 37. verse
35.Hope thou in the Lord and keep his way, and he shall promote thee: that
thou shall possess the land, when the ungodly shall perish thou shall see it.
AT LONDON, Printed by P.S. for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop
under S. Dunstons Church in the West. 1598.

To the Right Reverend father in God, Richard by Gods providence Bishop of
London; To the Right Honorable Sir Richard Saltonstall Knight, Lord Mayor of
London; and to the Right worshipful his Brethren the Aldermen and Sheriffs of
the same City: grace, mercy, peace and plenitude of temporal and eternal
beatitude in the sacred Trinity.
OUR Lord and Savior Christ Jesus (right reverend Father in God, honorable
Lord, John. 14. 6
and right worshipful Patrons) as he rightly called himself the way, the
truth, and the life of all faithful believers and good livers, and was so in
deed: the way by example not erring; the truth, by promise not failing; and the
life by reward never ending: so on a time ascending up a certain hill (after
he had in a prolix sermon instructed his Disciples, and a multitude of others
his followers in the way, truth, and life of perfect blessedness upon earth,
and the fruitful effects thereof in the life everlasting) said unto them; ye
are the salt of the earth, and the light of the world: Matthew. 5. 13 14
As it might well seem attributing the first title ( salt of the earth) unto
his disciples, as they which (with the table of the Testament) delivering
sincere doctrine, and it (with the pot of Manna) ministering the sacraments by
Christ's institution (seasoning the souls of Gods servants) and (with Aarons
rod) executing discipline upon disordered livers within the Church: And by the
second title, light of the world, fully attributing unto temporal magistrates
(as to the learned in the laws divine and humane) the light of righteousness,
sword of truth, and balance of justice, with judgment to cherish the good and
punish the evil livers in the common wealth. And so making of both a blessed
and happy conjunction or incorporation of good government, he added hereunto
this rare and notable conclusion, A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid:
signifieng thereby a City so governed, is a right Hieropolis or sacred City;
and a kingdom so administered is a right Hierarchia or sacred principality,
known, beloved of friends; feared and made famous among enemies both near and
far off. Such in truth (blessed be the true omnipotent and immortal God) has
been the happy state of this city of London, yea and whole kingdom of
England, though low insituation, yet high in acceptance with God and good
people of all nations: unto which as I a poor member thereof ( God be my
witness, defender, Judge, and revenger) have always wished well in goodwill,
goodworde, and good works (to my poor power,) so eleven years now past I
signified the same specially by translating the learned Vrbanus Rhegius his
godly exposition upon the 87. Psalm, entitled the Solace of Sion and joy of
Jerusalem; and dedicating the same unto the then Right Honorable Sir George
Barn Knight, Lord Mayor of this City, who thankfully accepted my good will
therein. For it carried this credit with it, Her foundations are upon the holy
hills, and holy, innocent and the best members of this our Church and common
wealth have profited thereby I doubt not: But now if there be any unholy,
nocent and bad persoyet remaining, either within or without the gates of that
Jerusalem or vision of peace, (as God which once promised to search it does
best see; Sopho. 1. 12
for man sees not as God sees. 1. Sam. 16. 7.) whether he be a forger of
falsehood. Iere. 10. 14 slanderous servant. Pro. 13. 5. evil nurtured child.
Ecclus. 22. 7. and so a carnal master, John. 3. 10. and a careless parent, 1.
Tim. 5. 8. with blind seer and deaf hearer, Esaias. 42. 8. (whereof too many I
have found as I can convince) I pray to God humbly and heartily these either
speedely (if it be his heavenly holy will) to convert by doctrine and
discipline in the church; or (if so they will not be conuertible) at his good
pleasure, in his justice and judgment, to subvert them perseuering in their
malignities inflexible. In the mean time with all humble and hartifull duty I
commend this my present poor labor to the advancement of Gods glory
ineffable, her majesty's continual honor, and your honors and worships
favorable protection; first as unto that Aaron whose sincere doctrine with
example of life, and discipline as your rod (which God long make to bud and
blossom in blessedness,) and consequently as unto that Mercury which tuning
this my harp in right concord of goodwil (as I deliver it / may send the
sweet solace thereof from your sincere breasts, not unto an earthly Apollo to
regratifie you with an earthly scepter, but to the heavenly Iehoua, who may
best reward you with all abundance of heavenly happiness in the life
everlasting, which God for his son Christ's sake grant unto your honors and
worships.

At my poor house in S. Brides parish in fleetstreet, this 24. of August.
1598. Your honorable good Lordships, and worthy worships, humble poor Orator.
Richard Robinson, Citizen of London.

PSALM. LXVIII. Exurgat Deus and dissipentur Inimici, etc.
TO HIM THAT EXCELS.
A Psalm or Song of David demonstratiue touching the wonderful mercies of God
toward his Church, in respect of his pormises, graces, and victories which he
gives her: and it is exhortatorie: that his Church should therefore praise God
for ever.
The Argument.
THIS Psalm is a glorious and plentiful prophecy, touching the resurrection
and triumph of Christ in his ascension, touching his gift of the holy ghost,
his gathering of the Church by the ministry of the Apostles, the destruction of
the Jewish policy or state, and the benefits of his new and everlasting
kingdom. And like as the fine verses of Poets do edify, uttered from a
sincere and sacred breast: So no doubt of it, David's pen in the writing of
this Psalm was filled with spiritual joy, which exceeds all capacity and
consideration of man: For he uses not a simple kind of phrase describing the
magnificence of Christ's kingdom, but most e-legantly with figures he
describes even as it were the triumphant pomp of this King: For he frames
his beginning of impracation or cursing, and of gratulation or rejoicing: For
he curses the enemies of Christ; but he rejoices at the welfare of the godly
ones. The declaration of the Psalm comprehends the description of the pomp,
The Lord comes and brings with him his host of them which preach the
Gospel: Out of these are described the Apostles and Bishops as it were Princes
of provinces or countries, which do comfort and refresh these countries
afflicted and persecuted: The Lord ascends upon high, he leads in his
triumph the captives, he distributeth his gifts unto his soldiers and people,
and threatens punishment unto his enemies: The people go before, and one
comes after which sings the song of triumph. This is almost the scope of
this Psalm: which let the godly ones read not so much for the wonderful and
delectable divine excellency of eloquence wherewith it abounds.

The Psalm and Exposition thereof.
Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered; Let them also that hate him
flee before him. Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away:
and like as the wax melts at the fire, so let the ungodly perish at the
presence of God. LIKE as the next Psalm following describes Christ humbled
upon the Cross; and (by reason of our sins) sirtuing with most bitter
sorrows: in this Psalm sets forth Christ risen from death to life and
gloriously sitting at the right hand of his Father: The glorious effects of
Christ's resurrection.
He begins then with the effects of the most joyful resurrection of Christ;
namely by the destruction and scattering abroad of his enemies, and by the
reviving or restoring of his church: as if he said, when Christ was dead and
buried, not only the blind and raging Jews leaped for joy, but also the
Devil and his companions, namely sin and death, triumphed at full, as if
Christ should so for ever remain in the grave. But this graund guide of life
the third day rising again had a glorious triumph over the Jews, and the
whole kingdom of the Devil, often times repeating that saying of the Prophet
Osea cap. 13. 14. O death I will be thy death, O grave I will be thy
destruction. For although the stubborn and incurable Jews carried stately
minds as then, and resisted the Apostles with a malignant countenance: yet in
the xl. year after Christ's resurrection, they suffered grievous and just
punishments for their outrages. And the kingdom of the devil, sin and
death is so broken and crushed in pieces by Christ, that it can bring no danger
unto the godly ones: Let us therefore with S. Paul sing this triumph song 1.
Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? The
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law: But thanks be
to God which has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. verse 56.
57. And what is more elegant then the describing of these enemies which he here
uses, comparing them unto smoke and ware? Great is the pride of smoke when it
bursteth out of the top of the chimney and his spreading heat covers the
air. So an Image of wax makes both a terrible show of gravity ^ of hardness;
but as the smoke which seems to pearce the very firmament is scattered by
the wind here and there: and as the image of ware laid to the fire melts
quite away: So the enemies of the Gospel and of the Church (by the breath of
Christ's mouth, which is both wind and flame) are either healed, or taken
utterly away and destroyed altogether: So in like manner, Athanasius compared
Julian the Apostat unto a little cloud, whom the Sun within a while after
should so drive away and vanquish, that no man should see any trace thereof
more: With these debasings and downfalles of the enemies of the gospel and of
the church agrees that sentence of Isay ca. 51. 7. Fear ye not the reproach of
men; neither be ye afraid of their rebukes. verse 8. For the moath shall eat
them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool.

But let the righteous be glad and rejoice before God: Let them also be merry
and joyful. An other effect of Christ's resurrection, is the reviving or
restoring of his Church: for as Saint Paul says, Romans 14. 17. The kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in the holy
Ghost. It is indeed Righteousness, as thus: free remission of sins,
reconciliation with God, The joy of the faithful in the triumph of Christ.
and free acceptance unto life everlasting. It is Peace thus: Tranquillity of
heart rising from faith, hope and a good conscience. Finally, it is Joy, thus:
Consolation, which is the vanquisher of all fears and doubtings: All these
benefits are the effects of Christ's passion and resurrection, which saint
Paul acknowledges, Phil. 3. 12. He has not yet attained unto, but he
took(he said) the right course whereby he might attain unto this reach of
wisdom. The same thing let us also confess and crave of God, that he would
illumine and increase in our hearts this light acknowledging the benefits of
Christ.

O sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name: magnify him that rides upon
the heavens, as it were upon an horse: praise him in his name, yea and rejoice
before him. Not only in the heart (says David) let true knowledge of Christ
shine, whereto is joined spiritual joy, but let the tongue also magnify this
Lord risen from death to life, and reigning for ever: who though he be the
son of David after the Sencalogie, yet is he declared the Son of God by
his rising from death to life, and by sending his holy spirit, as in Romans cap.
1. ver. 3. 4 it is said, This Lords divinity united to his humanity, and his
victory, triumphs, and benefits, see that ye honor (says David) and in them
rest and sweetly repose your selves For he does not thumpe nor thunder it out,
but is carried fair and softly, and suffers suitors to have easy access
unto him. Let no man therefore be driven from him, but let all and every one
come unto this Lord, trusting in his most sweet promise, who says, Matthew. 11,
28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, and I will refresh you. And
where he says, Magnify him that rides upon the heavens, that may be
understood, Make your way before him, and is spoken as touching our true
repentance not fained with amendment of life: for the first step unto health
is, To know the disease, and seek a Physician. But contrariwise, it is a
heavy sign, if the mind being sick, know neither the disease, nor looks
for physic. Let us therefore acknowledge our maladies, namely, sin and death,
and let us crave to have right medicine laid to these miseries by the
physician and shepherd of our souls, even the son of God, who came
therefore into the world, to save sinners.

He is a father of the fatherless, and defends the cause of the widows:
even God in his holy habitation. Although the Church is doubtless in the world
a widow, and an Orphane (for she is both of enemies cruelly persecuted, The
Church is as a widow and orphane in the world, yet comforted and defended by
Christ.
and of false friends forsaken) yet the son of God leaves her not without
defense and succor, but partly nourishes her with inward consolation (which
is called here, His holy habitation,) and partly he provides for her some
resting place for succor, and gives her Halcion days, that she may happily
naurish and bring up her birds. Hither to pertains that notable saying of the
son of God, Ioh. 14. ver. 16, 18 I will not leave you comfortless, but I
will come unto you: I will ask my father, and he shall give you another
comforter, even the spirit of truth, which shall abide with you for ever.

And whatsoever is true touching the whole body, the same may in like manner
be applied of all the members thereof: For to let pass the examples of other
Orphnaes, and speak of my self, surely even me (who have been left an Orphane
even from the very third year of my age) has Christ the son of God
succored and helped, not only with things necessary for my body, as meat
and drink, defense from harm, good health, and honest residence or dwelling
place among men, etc. but also unto these adding greater benefits, as for
example, bringing me out of the kingdom of darkness, and translating me into
the kingdom of this son of God, wherein we have by his blood full remission
of our sins: To the end therefore a public testimony of my thankfulness
may appear, I give unto this father of Orphans, and Judge of widows causes,
so great thanks as my mind is able to conceive for his cherishing and
mainteining of me so many years, and for his benefits necessarily bestowed
upon me, both for, my body and soul which in the life to come everlasting, I
shall more fervently commemorate, and magnify his name therefore.

He is the God that makes men to be of one mind in an house, and brings the
prisoners out of captivity: but lets the runnagates continue in scarceness.
Christ (in the 9. cap. of Isay, verse. 6.) is called not without cause, The
everlasting father, because in all ages by the ministry of his word and
sacraments, he regenerateth many unto life everlasting, whom the Church
fostereth and brings up, and so is she made of a barren or solitary woman,
a mother of many children: according to the prophecy of Isay. Cap. 54. verse
1. Rejoice O barren that did not bear, break forth into joy and
'reioyce, thou that did not travel with child, for the desolate has mo
children then the married wife has. Of this consolation the godly ones have
need, The Lord is careful for the deliverance of his servants.
least they take offense at the small number of true believers, and the great
number of other sects. Also this Lord in time convenient sets Captives at
liberty, that is, not in such sort as we think, but in his marvelous
providence, as in the 4 Psalm it is said, The Lord knows how to deliver his
holy one, verse 3. And the prison out of which we are delivered, as S. Paul
says 2 Cor. 7. 5. Are inward fears, etc. outward fightings. For the godly
ones for most part are tossed with inward and outward storms of calamities,
and at length getting out of the great storms of trouble do see their wished
haven: But altogether neglects the ungodly ones.
But the ungodly ones and disobedient persons he despises as the base gotten
children of this world, neither chasteningnor comforting them till they come
to utter destruction.

O God, when thou wentest forth before the people: when thou wentest through
the wilderness: The earth shook, and the heavens dropped at the presence of
God: even as Syna also was moved at the presence of God, which is the God of
Israel. Thou O God sentest a gracious reign upon thine inheritance: and
refreshed it when it was weary. Hitherto has he made the hearer or learner
attentive and docible, as in beginnings it is a thing usual: now goes he to
the height of the cause, namely into the place mentioning of Christ and the
Gospel, and compares the publishing of the law, with the propagation of the
gospel, where he says, When thou publishedst the law, the earth was in one
place moved, and the heavens dropped at thy presence: But now that the gospel
by preaching is spread abroad of the Apostles, all the whole earth is moved: as
in Haggias the Prophet it is said cap. 2. verse 7. Yet a little while and I will
shake the heavens, the earth, the sea, and the dry land, etc. and a gracious
rain is powered upon all parts of the world, where by the Church is gathered
both from among the Jews and Gentiles, and is watered as it were the
inheritance of God. And what is there more sweet, then that the preaching of
the Gospel is not only compared unto thunder, A sweet Allegory of the
preaching of the Gospel, how it is compared unto thunder and rain.
but unto rain also? For like as the earth brings forth fruit, partly made
warm with the heat of the sun, and partly watered with rain and waters: So
the Church is refreshed and recreated of the holy Ghost by the ministry of
the Gospel. Let no man therefore keep back this rain from his Orchardes,
but let even all our furrows, and glebe lands receive the same with great
desire: That is, let our hearts without loathing and surfeiting hear the
doctrine of the Gospel, that they may take thereby most ample fruit and
profit. Touching which saint Paul speaks Romans 1. 16. The Gospel is the
power of God unto salvation for all that believe. Further, more Christ is here
called the God of Sinay, and of Israel, by reason of the testimonies of his
manifestations or appearings made in mount Sinay, and in this people: For the
policy or government of Moses was no other thing, but a storehouse of divine
appearences and witnesses.

Christ is our shepherd because he teaches us, Christ the shepherd of our
souls.
comfort, governs and defends us, heals up our wounds, and finally
carries us lying as it were upon his shoulders; not pretermitting any kind of
duty which a faithful sheep, heard might use, or is able to bestow upon
silly and weak sheep: Let us therefore remember in our daily prayer that we
are the sheep of this shepherd, and let us run for succor unto him; and let
us crave help, government and defense of and from him: But touching this
purpose I have spoken sufficiently enough in the xxiii. Psalm.

The Lord gave the word; great was the company of the Preachers. S. Paul in
the 3. Gal. 19. and Heb. 2. verse 2. says, The publishing of the law and
preaching of the Gospel.
The law was given by the ministry of Angels, but the preaching of the Gospel
was immediately published by the son of God, and commended to his Apostles as
an excellent gift and treasure of great price. For although the world
outraglouslie despise the preachers and teachers of the Gospel, and judges
them as S Paul says 1. Cor. 49. as gasing stocks unto the world: yet in
very truth, the chiefest and greatest blessing upon earth is, when men may
hear the preachers and teachers stirred up by God to advance and set forth the
doctrine of the Gospel, wherein true acknowledgement of God and prayer unto
him are showed, which are the consolation of men's minds and direct rules of
good life.

Kings with their armies did flee and were discomfited: and they of the
household divided the spoil. Christ our Savior in the 9. cap. of S. Marks
Gospel verse 49. gives charge unto the Apostles and to the teachers of the
gospel, The salt of the earth purity of doctrine* and the unity of the
teachers.
That they have salt in themselves; that is, to retain the purity of
doctrine, and to be at unity and concord amongst themselves. And in S. John's
Gospel cap. 17. verse 17. and 21. Christ in his agony prays, that, God
would sanctify us in his truth: and make us to be one in him: For the chief
ornaments of Gods church are purity of doctrine, and concord of teachers: So in
this place the Psalm affirms, that the Apostles should be all of one mind,
and not trouble their godly consent with Ambition or other foolish desi^es.
But how rare a thing such concord is amongst the other teachers, not only
ancient histories, but also the examples of this age sufficiently declare.
Eusebius bishop of Caes^ia sorrowed in seeing Basil to prosper, and oppressed
him what he could. Between Epiphanius and Chrysostom there was such a
contention and controversy, Examples of hurtful emulation, even in the ancient
Bishops of the Church.
that Epiphanius in heat of anger said, Thou shall not die O Chrysostom
within thy jurisdiction. And Chrysostom made and answer, That Epiphanius
should not return alive into his country. To these cursings or gainsayings the
event it self answered. For Epiphanius sailing into the I Will of Cyprus died
before he came thither: and Chrysostom not long after was banished his
Country. S. Hierome framed his inuectiue against Ruffinus with whom he lived
many years most lovingly and most familiarlie. But why do I recite old
examples, seeing this our age abounds with such examples?

For like as with Epaminundas prince of Thebes the liberty or freedom of his
country was also buried, and utterly extinguished: even so, when D: Luther
departed this life and was buried, Discord arising felse brethren.
then also ceased the concord of teachers. For now, Some not with learned
speech contend: But with evil terms their cause defend; as the Poet Ennius
says. And the teachers, like unto Cadmeys brethren, strive one against another
with hatred, ambition and slanders. Therefore more are the subtle deceits of
false brethren to be feared, then the enterprises and practices of our enemies.
But I cut short this complaint, and I beseech God to cure our wounds and to
restore unto his Church a godly and prosperous concord. Why the Apostles and
good Bishops are called Kings with their hoasts.
And further it is not indeed a thing obscure to consider why the Apostles and
Bishops are here called [ Kings with their hoasts] because they fight the
battles against the Devils and their instruments; and are furnished not with
brazen pieces, but with the word and prayer. For the son of God armeth and
sets forth his soldiers with a mouth and wisdom, which all the enemies
are not able to resist, Luke 21. 15. Verses 4. 5. 6
And as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. 6. The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty to cast down holds, which brings to captivity every
thought unto the obedience of Christ, and having ready the vengeance against
all disobedience, etc. Finally, [ they of the houshould] That is, the spousesse
or church of the son of God.

Though ye have line among the pots: yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove,
that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. He compares the
teachers of the gospel unto Doves of diverse colors, because of the diversity
of gifts: For one excels in the knowledge of languages, an other has the
gifts of interpretation, another judges right soundly the controversies
touching opinions. Finally, The holy ghost gives unto every one some gifts,
Teachers of the Gospel compared unto doves, for the diversity of their gifts.
for the building up of the church as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 12. 28. He also
here alludeth unto the simplicity of Doves, as Christ says, Matthew. 10. 16. Be
ye simple as Doves. For the Dove is without gall, hurts not with her bill,
and has harmless clees. Furthermore, like as Goshawkes and kites do assault
and devour silly Doves: So tyrants practice all means they can utterly to
subvert all godly teachers. The Church therefore is an host of doves, which
are laid open for all the weapons of tyrants.

But if any man in this place had rather apply the mixture of silver and
golden color, unto that show which polished or bright shining armor, and
warlike furniture has, with Ensigns and weapons displaied in tents where
fields are fought. Against this I nothing contend any way.

When the almighty scattered Kings for their sake: then were they as white as
snow in Salmon. This verse admonishes the Reader of two things: The vocation
or calling of the Minister.
The first touching the vocation of ministers, concerning which in 10. Romans 15.
it is said, How shall they preach except they be sent? And in 9. Matthew. 9. 38.
Christ says, Pray ye unto the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust
forth workmen into the harvest. Let us therefore acknowledge, that the
ministers which deliver sound doctrine, are the excellent and singular gifts
of God, and as it were the mothers own breasts wherewith she gives us suck.
Secondly, let us learn what is the effects of the gospel: namely to restore
light by driving away most filthy darkness, such as are heathen and popish
errors: The 3. effects of the Gospel.
Therefore S. Peter compares 2. Pet. 1. 19. the scriptures prophetical unto a
lantern with a candle giving light in a dark place. And this our Prophet
David says, Psalm. 1 19. Patt. 10. versse 1. Thy word (O Lord) is a Lantern
unto my feet, and a light unto my steps. For without this light men do wander
in greatest darkness of error, and in the ignorance of the chiefest matters.
For no man (except Gods word first give him light) knows the essence and will
of God; no man rightly repents him, neither does any man rightly call upon
God, John. 12. 35.
Except he follow the guide and good government of Gods word. Let us then walk
in the light while we have light, least the darkness do oppress us. Then
which case nothing can be thought more sorrowful.

As the hill of Basan, so is Gods hill; even an high hill as the hill of Basan.
Why hop ye so ye high hills? This is Gods hill, in the which it pleases him to
dwell: yea the Lord will abide in it ever. The first effect of the gospel, as
I said, is a light showing the true acknowledgement and prayer unto God: The 2.
effect of the Gospel.
The other fruit is fatnes, that is a consolation to be opposed against sin
and death: For they which are destitute of this fatness they must needs wax
lean: that is, he plunged into desperation. For Philosophical consolations
are nothing but idle pratings and ^anlings, and do heal the scarres only but
not the wounds: wherefore seeing Philosophy may confess her darkness, and
acknowledge her leanenesse, let us seek for the fat hill bringing forth
effectual and wholesome remedies for our sorrows.

And such a hill is the true Church, which embraces and professes the
doctrine delivered from God, and showing consolations healing the wounds of the
heart.

The third effect or fruit of the Gospel, The 3. effect of the Gospel.
is, that they which with says and good conscience embrace this doctrine,
profess the same, and practice to propagate or advance the same, are made
according to the saying in the 14. v. 23. of saint John's Gospel, The Temples
and dwelling places of God: Namely, If any man love me he will keep my
word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our
dwellings with him.

But in other sects does not God dwell, but he hates and detesteth them, yea
though they he high hills, that is, though they excel others in dominions and
political glory. Of this doctrine and consolation have we now need
especially, least our minds taking offense, and being carried away with
admiration at the power and success of the Turkish nation, do decline or start
away from God: And let not us judge by fortune (but by the word of God) which
is the true Church of God, and let us become and remain Citizens of the same
yea although all fears, and all dangers should hang over our heads.

The Charets of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: and the
Lord is among them as in the holy place of Sinay. Solomon says well Prou. 14.
28. The multitude of the people is the honor of the Prince. The exceeding
great train of Christ our triumphant king.
So here he adds unto this victorious king an exceeding great train, namely
the church of the Fathers, Prophets, and Apostles, and these remnants now in
the old age of the Church: for they go before the chariot of Triumph; we
silly souls follow the same, and yet are we fellows and companions of this
glorious triumph, then which benefit nothing may be thought better or more
wishfull.

Thou art gone up on high, thou hastled captivity captive, and received gifts
for men: yea even for thine enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them.
Like as Paulus Emilius ascended up into the Capitol to give thanks unto
Jupiter, led Perscus as his prisoner in the triumph, and gave unto his own
associates large gifts of spoils: so the son of God is ascended into
heaven, and in his triumphant pomp gloriousslie showed his prisoners the
princes of darkness tied in Chains, and dealt most ample benefits unto the
Apostles, and to the universal Church.

But seeing this verse of all other in this Psalm shines like a precious stone
of rare virtue, let the waightines of all the words be most diligently
considered. And first indeed let the article touching Christ's ascension into
heaven be understood according to the declaration of the godly old rule.
Athanasius in his disputation against Arius, The saying of Athanasius, (against
Arius) of the ascension of Christ:
says thus. Eius est ire and venire qui aliquibus locorum terminis
circumscribitur, and eum in quo erat deserens locum ad eum vbi non erat,
veniat. Ceterum verbi diuinitas vniuersa implens nullis locorum terminis
concluditur, sicut nihil est vndediseedat, it a nihil est quo veniat, etc. In
English thus. It is for him to go and come, who is prescribed for certain
places limited, and forsaking that place wherein he was, that he may come
thither where he was not: but the Godhead of the word filling all places, is
not prescribed to any limits of places: for as it is not material from whence
it departed, so is it not material whither it comes. And so speaks Cyprian
in his rehearsal of the Creed. Ascendit ad coelis non vbi verbum Deus, antea
non fuerat, quippe qui erat semper in coelo, and manebat cum Patre; sed vbi
verbum caro factum antea non sedebat. That is: He ascends up to the heavens,
not where God the word was not before, because he was always in heaven, and
remained with the Father, but where the word become flesh, fate not before.

[ Thou have led captivity captiue] That is: The deliverance of the captives.
thou half redeemed mankind, or reduced him into his old liberty and dignity
when he was holden captive of the Devil, that Lord of death and sin; as in the
2. cap. 14 to the Hebrews, it is said; And have led thy enemies captive in the
triumph, according to that notable saying extant in the 2. Coloss. 15. The
captiuing of the enemies and the spoiling of them.
Spoiling the Principalities and powers, have made a show of them openly, and
have triumphed over them, etc. So often then as fear of death and dangers of
hell do rush together upon us, and the devil with innumerable sleights
assaulteth us, let us be converted in mind and thought unto this triumph, and
let us crave that this captain and conqueror would tread down satan under
our feet, and would give us victory against sin and death.

The latter particle rests touching gifts. [ Thou have received gifts for
men.] The special gift of this triumph is, The holy Ghost powered out with a
manifest light upon the Apostles, and their scholars: Touching this gift, saint
Peter in the 2. cap. Acts. ver. 33. says. He being exalted at the right hand
of God, receiving the promise of the holy Ghost from the Father, has poured
out this which ye now see and hear. O the exceeding great goodness of God,
pouring out his spirit upon all flesh. Sine ^uius numine nihil est in homine
nihil est innoxium. Without whose divine grace in man, naught well he does,
nor well he can: As the Church sings godlilie. And although Paul applies
this particle unto the ministry of the Gospel, which is the instrument of the
holy ghost, yet may it be rightly applied unto all gifts necessary for the
body and the soul: amongst which is not the last gift the stabilitie of his
Church, and subduing of his enemies, which are so brideled and restrained by
Christ. that they cannot outrage nor hurt so fore as they would. Whereas then
all the world is not full of Turkish tyranie, and beastly cruelty, but that as
yet there is a holy seed; that must not we ascribe and attribute unto humane
enterprises and defenses, but unto the triumph of the son of God. But so
great is the plenty and abundance of effect in this little verse, that it can
not be considered or described with any eloquence, I do therefore pass on to
the rest which remain in this Psalm.

Praised be the Lord daily, even the God which helps us, and powers his
benefits upon us. He is our God* even the God of whom comes salvation: God is
the Lord by whom we escape death. Seeing Gospel is a witness of the cross,
he comfort the Church burdened with the cross, by reason of our
confession, A comfort unto the Church burdened with the cross.
and the remnants of sin. But a special consolation is the promise of Gods
presence and help in calamities: Also his mitigation and deliverance from the
same. And it is a special deliverance: whereas by Jordan, that is, by the
miseries of this life the son of God leads us into the land of Canaan, that
is, into the life everlasting. But the whole doctrine touching causes and
remedies of humane miseries is elsewhere plentifully expounded. He that will
may from thence borrow more matter. For we do not now write of places, but we
interpret Psalms, and least this Commentary appear too much in matter, we are
contented with the direction of those places which are extant in all men's hands.

God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalpe of such a one as
goes on still in his wickedness. The Lord has said I will bring my people
again, as I did from Basan: mine own will I bring again, as I did from the
deep of the sea. That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies:
and that the tongue of thy dogs may be red through the same. He adds unto
the description of the triumphant pomp a prophecy touching the destruction of
the Jewish nation for their blind obstinacy, A prophecy touching the
destruction of the Jewish nation.
striving and setting themselves against the Gospel: And this prophecy agrees
with the saying of Christ, Luke. 19. 44. All those things shall come upon thee,
because thou have not known the time of thy visitation. Now indeed it is
sufficiently apparent that the Jews (for their contempt of Christ) having
lost their kingdom and priesthood, do wander in perpetual banishment, and
are the most miserable persons of all others upon whom the sun shines. And
although the greatest multitude of the Jews be with tragical punishments
oppressed, yet notwithstanding out of this skum of mankind God has culled or
picked out some remnantes, as in the 2. cap. Acts: When Peter's preaching was
heard, 3000. Jews were converted unto Christ: and in the next year after the
resurrection of Christ, Paul the apostle was converted: And there is extant in
the 11. cap. of S. Paul to the Romans 27. a prophecy touching the downfall of
the Chruch of the Gentiles, and of the conversion of the Jews.

It is well seen, O God, how thou go, how thou my God and King go in
thy sanctuary. The singers go before, the minstrels follow after: in the midst
are the Damsels playing with the timbrels. He returns unto the triumphant
pomp, whose ornament was music: The sweet ioies of this triumph.
For the greek (...) has his name (...), that is, by the description of a
figs leaf, and the foot Iambus in verse. For nothing is more sweet then
victory, and the foot Iambus is most specially applied unto the following of
enemies which are led captives in the triumph. And what manner of song, the
people both going before and also following the chariot ought to sing, S. Paul
in the 5. Ephesians. v. 19. and 4. Coloss. verse 2. there prescribing the rule of
spiritual music teaches us at large.

Give thanks O Israel, unto God the Lord in the congregations from the
ground of thy heart. This little verse is short, but it admonishes the Reader
touching the greatest matters: God will not have us to serve him with the
sacrifice to Ceres shut up in close place of us. For as Christ says, Matthew. 5.
15. No man lights a candle, and afterward puts it under a bushel: A
thanksgiving of the church for the victory by Christ obtained.
But he will have the church to be a visible congregation and to have honest
meetinges publikelie, wherein the preaching of the Gospel may sound and he
heard touching the son of God. And therefore does he with a marvelous power
save, yea and shall preserve his church in honest congregations: and he will
have every man to help and maintain the preservation of these public
meetings, that the ministry of teaching may be preserved. There will God
have a common prayer and thanksgiving to be made, there will he have
confession to be showed: which kind of doctrine every man may embrace. And he
bids us to take the doctrine of the church not out of the cesterns of man's
traditions, nor out of Aristotle's Ethickes, but out of the holy and sacred
fountains of Israel, that is, from the Prophets and Apostles: for all other
sects without the true church, do only teach a particle of the law, touching
external and civil duties, and some of them do bring with them other
worshippings of Idols. But they are altogether ignorant of the son of God and
of his gospel, that is the promise of the free remission of sins, also of
our reconciliation, and of our inheritance of life everlasting to be given us
by faith in the son our Mediator. But the Church draws out of the welspring
of Israel the sound, perfect and vncorrupt doctrine of the law and the gospel,
and the pure knowledge of the son of God for us crucified and raised from
death to life.

There is little Benjamin their ruler, and the Princes of Judah their Counsel:
The princes of Zabulon and the princes of Nephthaly. Although the world do
judge the Apostles to be miserable wandering persons, and hates and curses
them as gasing stocks, and the ofscourings of the world, 1. Cor. 49. 13. yet
the holy ghost adorneth these ministers with the most praise worthy title of
princes: For the Apostles have the testimony of the holy ghost, that they do
not err in doctrine: The order of the Apostles marching as Princes in the
triumph of Christ.
These Captains do other teachers and preachers in the church follow; unto
whom no credit must be given, except their confession do agree with the
foundation of the Apostles as S. Paul says 2. Ephesians. 20. And are built upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone.

But why does he here say [ There is little Benjamin their ruler] Certes, it
may signify that only of all the Apostles; Paul being borne of the tribe of
Benjamin, a great and good part of the Church should be gathered out of Europe
and Asia: I stand not to be precise, touching the special dignity of any
apostle, but I reverence them al as the instruments of God sounding forth the
preaching of the gospel throughout all the world: And yet cannot this be
denied that Paul himself with a lively voice witnesses of himself, and
letting pass most upright testimonies of others: He did greater things then
the other Apostles, like as he himself not untruly glories, Let us therefore
give thanks to God for this excellent Organ or instrument, and like little
hounds let us lick up the crumbs falling from Paul's table, which are full of
excellent words and sentences.

Thy God has sent forth strength for thee: Stablish the thing (O God) that
thou have wrought in us. First, in this verse let the mystery of the Trinity
be well marked: For like as in 45. Psalm, the persons of the godhead are
discerned, where he says in the 8. ver. of the psalm. Therefore God even thy
God has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows, So in this
place is the Messiah cleerelie and perspicuouslie distinguished from the
eternal father. Here he says [ Thy God has sent forth strength] that is, thy
eternal father (from whom thou art sent to publish and preach the gospel and
to redeem mankind) has instituted and ratified thy kingdom: The stability
and felicity of Christ's church and kingdom.
it shall therefore stand immovable, and shall not be weakened by any force,
neither shall it by any means possible be removed out of place. Of this
consolation stood the church in need when Diotlesian and the other tyrants
ruled and reigned, who seemed to do what they could utterly to race out the
name of Christ from the memo^ie of all posterity: For writers affirm^ when
Dioclesian reigned there were every day at the least xx. godly persons put
to death in the City Alexandria, for profession of the gospel. And now also
in this old age of the church, the Church likewise needs the same
consolation: For from the East ^arts the Turkish tyrant assaulteth her, and
from the West parts the Pope armed and fortified with the defense and cruelty
of many kings vexes her.

What is then remaining where with we may defend our selves from this Turkish
and Popish outrage, but this most strong wall [ Thy God has sent forth
strength for thee: Stablish the thing O God, that thou have wrought in us:] For
seeing God is the guide and giver of this kingdom, doubtless he will be also
the effecter and worker in us, and he only will be the foundation thereof.
Neither indeed let this prayer and promise be understood only touching the
whole body of the Church, but let it also be applied unto every particular
member; and let it always sound in our minds, ears and tongues. Let us
daily with seruent sighing say. Seeing O God thou have translated us out of
the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of thy light, and that these
beginnings of life everlasting are diverse ways assaulted, partly by the
Devil, partly by the world, and partly of our own flesh (in which word I
comprehend our wandering opinions and affections) I humbly beseech thee that
thou would establish that benefit thou have begun in us, and defend us
against our enemies domestical and external. For as he that builds any
thing does not only frame the foundations, but goes forward in setting up
the whole building whatsoever it be: So God will not have us begin our
conuersions and turnings unto him, but much more will he have our salvation to
be perfected by him: for as it is said, 2. Phil. 13. It is God that works in
us the will and the deed even of his good pleasure, to the end some acceptable
services may be done unto him.

For thy temples sake at Jerusalem: so shall kings bring presents unto thee. He
foresheweth hereby, David's prophecy of kings and princes which should be
patrones of the Church.
that some kings and princes shall be associates of the true church, nursing
fathers of them which teach and learn in the same, and shall surely be made
members of life everlasting. For although Religion do bring forth Riches, as
one says elegantlie, yet the daughter like an unthankful Stockedoue has
devoured her mother. For the Bishops in some ages have not been so upright or
sincere, as that their estate of life might agree with their calling: that is,
they taught not the Gospel soundly, nor administered the Sacraments rightly:
no, they cared not for edifying the people with true doctrine, but became
stately Lords in kings courts, and being ordained to sacred business, they
intermedled themselves with profane matters nothing agreeable to their
calling. Therefore both of these are best, Mean wealth, and mean poverty, in
such like persons.

When the company of the spearemen, and multitude of the mighty are scattered
abroad among the beasts of the people: (so that they humbly bring pieces of
silver) and when he has scattered the people that delight in war. He adds
unto this prophecy of the calling of the Nations a heavy effect, David
denou^sceth a downfall and destruction of Antichrist, and his cruel bloody
beastly* warriors.
touching the kingdom of Antichrist, whose chiefest members, and as it were
twins at one birth borne 900. years agone, are the Pope and Mahomet: These
he compares unto mighty strong Bulls treading under foot the true
doctrine, and true worshippings of God, for to establish their own power.
Against these is this Verse, as if we in our time should now say: O God
restrain and overthrow the practices of these, least the true knowledge of thy
most holy name be extinguished in mankind: For thy name, for thy name sake, O
God do thou this, that thou be not blasphemed: Help us O God our Savior, and
for the glory of thy names sake deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins
for thy names sake, least at any time the Gentiles do say unto us: Where is
now thy God? Psalm. 79. 10.

Then shall the Princes come out of Egypt: The Morians land shall soon stretch
out her hands unto God. This is a notable prophecy touching the calling of the
Gentiles: and I have often elsewhere said, David recites a prophecy touching
the calling of the Gentiles to the church of God.
that the Reader is to be put in mind of the chiefest matters, so often times
as the Prophets do make mention touching the calling of the Gentiles. For
first, this calling is a notable testimony implying that saying of saint
Paul, Romans 5. 15. 20. Grace oueraboundeth above sin. For if so great force
or effect were not proceeding from the loving savor and mercy of God, he
would not have received into favor nations polluted with Idolatry, lusts, and
other most filthy and foul sins, which are partly so filthy, and partly
so flagitious, that they seem even filthy to speak of them.

Secondly, the same calling of the Gentiles witnesses that the promise of the
Gospel is universal, and pertains unto all persons that do truly call upon
God: for in God there is no courtlike respect of persons, but God is indeed
equal to the equal: that is to them which truly repent, and fly unto the
Mediator. Touching this consolation mo things are spoken by Paul, Romans 10.
verses, 6, 10, 11, 13, 14. Finally this self same vocation of the Gentiles
refuteth the Pharisaical opinion, which imagines that ceremonies are
righteousness before God: for the Gentiles are by God received into favor
without Circumcision, and other ceremonies of Moses.

Sing unto God, O ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord.
Which sits in the heavens over all from the beginning: lo he does send out
his voice, and that a mighty voice. Ascribe ye the power unto God over
Israel: his worship and strength is in the clouds. The Epilogue or latter
part of the Psalm is an exhortation: for he exhorts all degrees of men unto
Thanksgiving: As if he said, The Epilogue or conclusion of this Psalm, is a
general exhortation unto thanksgiving for manifold benefits.
seeing the benefits of this king are so great, meet it is that he be
honored and magnified with all speech and writing: [ O sing praises unto God]
that is acknowledge ye his wisdom, righteousness and mercy: It is Mercy,
that we are not consumed, and brought into nothing, nor cast away amongst the
Devils after our first fall. It is Righteousness, that there is no forgiveness
of sins without an equal recompense and redemption equivalent. This when no
creature is able to pay, it is decreed by his wonderful wisdom that his
son should pay the ransom for us. For God declineth not from his
righteousness, and yet by his wonderful wisdom does he temper his
righteousness with mercy. As by the Prophet Oseas, cap. 11. 9. I might indeed
justly destroy thee, but I will not exercise the fury of my wrath: because I
am God and not man, the holy one in the mids of thee. Neither indeed here
must I pass with silence the particle containing a testimony of the efficacy
of the Gospel. [ He shall send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.] as if
he said. The preaching of the Gospel shall not be a vain sound of speech: but
it shall be as saint Paul says most sweetly. Romans 1. 16. and 2. Cor 3. 3.
The power of god unto salvation for all that believe: and the ministry of the
spirit of life, etc.

O God wonderful art thou in thy holy places: even the God of Israel, he will
give strength and power unto his people: Blessed be God. In conclusion, he
teaches that Gods Church is by marvelous means governed, preserved, and
defended; as in the 4. Psalm. 3. it is said: The Lord has chosen unto himself
the man that is godly. For when we seem to be weak, then are we strong.
For, the power of God is made strong in our infirmity. And to let pass other
things: In quietness and hope consists our strength, etc.

To him that excels upon Of Shoshanim, read Psalm 45.
Shoshanim.
A Psalm of David: a Figure of Christ, persecuted by his enemy. Saluum me fac
Deus quoniam, etc:
The Argument.
THis Psalm is memorable in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. For
Saint John the Evangelist in his 2. 15. 19. cap. cites three verses out of
this Psalm: And Peter the Apostle speaking of the punishment which Judas the
traitor had, uses in 1. cap. 18. Act. the words of this Psalm. Finally,
Paul in the 11. and 15. cap. Romans speaks of this psalm in many words: And
it is a prophecy touching the passion of Christ, and the horrible punishments
of the Jewish nation; and of the proper worship appertaining to the Church of
the new Testament. A threefolde Meditation of this Psalm.
But it is a threefold Meditation upon the passion of the Son of God: one of
instruction, an other spiritual, and the third of example or imitatio^.

The instructiue meditation, is to read much and often the interpretations
which are extant in the Evangelists, The instructiue meditation.
touching the passion of this Lord, and to confer them with the histories of
the Prophets; that this conference of the histories and prophecies might
confirm in our minds an assent, whereby we might embrace this article. But
whereas in histories we must not only look for the euentes, but much more
the causes of the events must be sought for this meditation comprehends also
a consideration of the causes, for which the Messiah was made a sacrifice and
Redeemer. For it is needful that the causes of so great a matter be neither
slender nor fained, but great and weighty causes, which we shall thoroughly
behold when God shall be all in all. Now let us diligently learn the elements
which are delivered in the word, and let us crave of God that he would
govern with his holy spirit, our purpose undertaken touching the greatest
matters.

And although some unlearned persons fondly dispute, yt God seeing he is
omnipotent, could restore mankind into his ancient liberty and dignity by
other manner of means: yet let us so hold it determined yt god does not any way
decline from his righteousness which thing since so it is, God must not only have
his place of mercy, but also of righteousness attributed unto him, touching his
secret providence in the redeeming of mankind. As therefore the immense mercy
of God would not behold the universal death and destruction of our nature,
according to that saying of Jeremy, Lament. 3. cap. 22. It is the mercy of the
Lord that we are not consumed: So the eternal and unchangeable righteousness
of God required a satisfaction for the offense and for the punishment. For the
Law of God which is a rule of justice in God, discerns good and evil, and
binds the reasonable creature to become conformable to that rule, and
denounces horrible destruction unto all things which are contrary to that
rule. Wherefore seeing the ransom pacifieng the wrath of God, and satisfieng
the righteousness of God, could neither be paid by Angels nor by any other
creature, because the malice of sin is infinite, and no creature is able to
endure the wrath of God, it is by Gods wonderful wisdom decreed; that the
second person of the Godhead which is called the word should take upon him the
nature of man, and should satisfy the law of God for the fault and punishment
in mankind: That is, that he, which knew no sin, should take upon him to
redeem us from sin, that by him we might be made the righteousness of God.
In this decree, with admiration whereof the very Angels stand amazed at, do
shine the righteousness and mercy of God: also the vnspeakeble humility and
love of God toward us. For there is no remission of sins granted, without
recompense and satisfaction made. For, think, I pray you, how great the force
of Gods wrath is against sin, when he could not be pacified with any other
sacrifice, but by the passion and death of the immaculate Lamb: And we indeed
by the greatness of this remedy may esteem the greatness of our sickness
and sore. For, as Hippocrates says, The saying of Hippocrates.
unto extreme diseases we must lay extreme remedies. Again, how great mercy
is there in God not sparing his only begotten son, but giving him for us all,
and giving us with him all things also? The son of God adorning and
amplifieng this mercy says, John 3. 16. So God loved the world that he sent
his only begotten son, that every one which believes in him should not
perish, The saying of Clement B. of Alexandria.
but have life everlasting. Notably therefore says Clement B. of Alexandria:
Man is beloved of God: For, how should he not be beloved, for whose sake the
only begotten son of God was sent from the bosom of his father?

What shall I say of the humility of the Son, turning upon himself the
reproaches of other men, and for the love he bare toward his church, for whose
sake he put on the shape of a servant and was by all means tempted, like as we
are tempted (except with sin only) that he bring and repossesse this his
spousesse into her ancient liberty. Pontanus.
Pontanus tells, that in his time there was a cettaine husband-mans wife
carried away by the Pirates of Tuneta, and when her husband heard of this
matter, he leapt into the sea, and besought the Pirates with great desire, that
they would also carry him away with his wife: they maruailing at the faith and
mind of the man, took him also with them, and when they arrived at Tuneta, and
had openly showed their prize, they declare unto the King a rare and memorable
act; who though he were a Prince barbarous and enemy to Christianity, yet
merueiling and perceiving the virtue of the man, did set him and his wife both
at liberty, and commanded them to be registered as of the number of those
which were the guard of his person. So the son of God leaped from high and
heavenly beatitude into the sea of our mischiefs and miseries, and of free
became bondsman, of rich poor, that by his virtue and power he might obtain
liberty for us, and coopt us into the society of heavenly blessings: Let us
therefore be ashamed of our pride and impatience, wherein we disdain to suffer
some sorrow to profit the Church thereby.

The spiritual meditation of the passion of the son of God consists in
Fear and in Faith: The spiritual meditation of this Psalm.
Fear is to tremble with acknowledgement of Gods wrath against sin, whose
special testimony is the death of the son of God. For although the
threatenings added unto the Law, and horrible examples of punishments and fears
of conscience do show the judgments of God destroying contemptuous persons:
yet if we look well into this glass of Christ crucified, we shall see a far
more evident sign of Gods horrible wrath, For, seeing God could not be
pacified with the obedience of any creature, but did decree that his Son
should be the propitiator or atonement maker in his blood, as S. Paul says:

Assuredly me must confess that great, earnest, and unspeakable is the wrath
of God against sin. And least this acknowledgement of Gods wrath should leave
in our minds the stinges or darts of servile fear, which is a sorrow without
faith, and a grudging against God, and a horrible fleeing from God, as was in
Saul and Judas, let faith take root in us, whereby the heart is stirred up in
the acknowledgement of Gods mercy promised for his sons sake. For, seeing
God has not spared his only begotten son, but given him for us all, surely
it cannot otherwise be, but with him also he will give us all things:
Therefore spiritual meditation, is not only to know the history touching the
passion, and to believe the same; but also to feel in our heart sorrows and
consolations.

The exemplary or imitatiue meditation of Christ's passion is to follow the
humility and patience of Christ, The exemplary meditation.
as S. Peter says, 1 Pet 2 21. Christ suffered for us leaving us an example,
that we should follow his steps. And although none of us in this our
imbecility or weakness is able to follow the example of Christ, yet
notwithstanding let there be some lineaments agreeable in us with this Image
of imitating Christ.

The Psalm and Exposition thereof.
Save me O God, for the waters are come in even unto my soul. I stick fast in
the deep mire, where no ground is: I am come into deep waters, so that the
floods run over me. I am weary of crying, my throat is dry: my sight
fails me, for waiting so long upon my God. SOme men do merueile why the
Evangelists write, The first part of this Psalm is a prayer to the 31. verse.
That the son of God was grieved with sorrow and vexed in mind, when he was
in the Orchard: seeing it seems a thing unmeet for a strong, grave and
constant person, to weep and wail and ware pale with fear of death, as women
use to do. For of Hercules addressing to cast himself into a burning fire,
Seneca says thus.

Quis sic triumphans laet us in currustetit
Victor? Senecas verses of Hercules.
Quis illo gentibus vultu dedit
Leges tyrannus? quanta paxobitium tulit
Vultus petentis astra, non ignes erant,
Who did so ioufull victor triumph make?
What Tyrant with such austere countenance?
Prescribed laws to Nations for their state,
How great a peace toth' skies did him advance,
No fires they were.
But let us know, that Christ vare upon him a greater burden then Hercules
did: for he was not in anguish and veration of mind for death only, Christ
bare upon him the burden of all our sins.
and for thinking upon the tormenting of his body, but he felt the wrath of
God to be turned upon him against mine, thine, and all men's sins. This
feeling of Gods wrath sore vexed and grieved his most sacred breast. For
although every creature groneth and month when it is burdened above the
ability of bearing the same, yet the greatness of this burden, expressed in
Christ not only tears, but also drops of water and blood mingled together,
which the Grecians call (...). Therefore omitting disputations, let us tremble
with fear in acknowledgement of Gods wrath against our sins, and with the
Prophet Isay let us say: Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows, etc. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. say. 53. verses 4, and 5.

They that hate me without a cause are mo then the hairs of may head: they
that are mine enemies and would destroy me guiltless are mighty: I paid them
the things that I never took. The former three verses contained a description
of fears inwardly in his heart: This verse sets forth his outward enemies:
As in truth for most part always inward fears, and outward fightings and
hostile invasions do meet together. But we are admonished by this saying [
They that hate me without cause, etc.] that we suffer not as murderers and
thieves, etc. but like unto Christians, etc. 1. Pet. 4. 15, 16. That is, for
the confession of the Gospel. And there is a notable ardent affect in the
particle [ without a cause:] As if he had said, They hated me not only as one
neither guilty of sin, nor hurting them, but also most fervently coveting to
do them good, yielding with great humility, and taking upon my self the
punishments which they temselues deserved, not seeking any revenge, but rather
with great sorrow deploring or bewailing their wilful obstinacy and
destruction: For this great good will, and full of sorrow and lamentation for
them, and earnest desire to do them good, do I bear this hatred. Let Teachers,
or Preachers consider this figure, and let them know that it is a common
disease almost in all mankind to be unthankful, Preachers oftimes very,
unthankfully dealt with of those whom they have best deserved of.
and let them for their great good will and great benefits suffer with patience
to have evil will, hatred, reproaches, and other mischiefs rendered them; like
as all Hystories are full of examples of unthankfulness: The City of Athens
kept Miltiades in prison almost even to his very death: and banished
Aristides, Themistocles, and Cimon, who had well deserved of the same City.
Finally, there is an infinite number of such, Examples of the heathen, most
virtuous persons.
whose examples may admonish us, that we for Gods cause be careful to do
well, not for reward of man, and that we be not dismayed when men's endeavors and
duties are not answerable to our good will and deseruings. And that particle
must we diligently consider, where he says: [ I paid them the things that I
never tooke] That is, he has peformed our duties: for every bond is cancelled
and made void when the debt is paid: neither is it material whether he that
owes the debt do pay it, or an other for him. Then this our Redeemer took
quite away, or rather frustrated our obligation wherein we were bound to the
curse of the law and everlasting punishments, because he performed for us the
duty by us owing to the law, according to that saying, Galat. 3. 13. Christ
being made a curse for us, redeemed us from the curse of the law.

God thou know simpleness: and my faults are not hid from thee. How great
humility was that, where Christ prostrating himself before his father did
bear his wrath, as if he had polluted himself with the most heinous sins of
all men? This is no Rhetorical speech nor vain amplification, but indeed such
was the sorrow of Christ taking upon him the wrath of God, as if he himself
had committed these our sins. But who can at full declare the greatness of
this humility? Where the son of God yields himself as a guilty person in
so great and grievous sins. This humility does Paul with excellent words
thus describe 2. Cor. 5. 21. Him that knew no sin made he sin for us,
that by him we might be made the righteousness of God. Most truly said
Aristotle: Iustitiam esse Hespero and Lucifero formosiorem. Aristotle's saying
of justice.
Justice is more beautiful far, then the morning or the evening star. For
there is nothing better nor more excellent then the congruencie with the whole
law, which is a rule of righteousness in the will of God: Contrariwise,
nothing is more filthy then sin wherewith God is horribly angry: For the
Son of God takes and turns unto himself this deformity, and bestows
upon us his obedience, that by his means we might be righteous before God.
But the excellency of this purpose in God, can neither the eloquence of
Angels, nor of men, sufficiently disclose or manifest unto us: I do therefore
exhort the reader, to consider the same diligently, and to give thanks unto
Christ Jesus the son of God for his wonderful humility and seruent love
toward us.

Let not them that trust in thee O Lord of hosts be ashamed for my cause: let
not those that seek thee be confounded through me, O Lord God of Israel. And
why? for thy sake have I suffered reproof: shame has covered my face. The
son of God in this verse applies his sacrifice unto the Church: for it
belongs unto the Priests duty, not only to offer some thing, but he must
have therewith a mind to pray for him touching whom the sacrifice is made, and
testifying that for his sake he performs this obedience. Therefore that these
words in this place, and in the 17. cap. ver. 19, of S. John, are recited by
Christ the son of God, we are faithfullite to remember: I (says he) do
sanctify my self for them, that even they also might be sanctified in the
truth. Again, verse. 9. I pray not for them only, but for all those which
shall believe in me for my wordesake. Here does Christ openly affirm that his
sacrifice is effectual, not only for his Apostles, but for all them that
embrace the gospel. But this application must we firmly take hold upon by
faith, and we must believe that the fruit of this sacrifice pertains unto
us, and that by means of this sacrifice the wrath of god is unfeignedly
pacified toward us, yea, that we are received into gods favor, heard and
saved by him. Therefore says Paul, Romans 3. 34. We are freely justified by his
grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has ordained
our propitiator (or merciful Savior,) by faith in his blood. So (says he) is
he thy merciful Savior, when thou beleeuest that by means of his son
Christ's death, god is pacified with thee. This doctrine of application let us
for ever, and with special care remember.

I am become a stranger unto my brethren: even an aliant unto my Mothers
children. For the zeal of thine house has even eaten me: and the rebukes of
them that rebuked thee are fallen upon me. The word zeal signifies a
displeasure in us driving away the injury from that which we love, The godly
zeal which David had for the advancement of Gods glory.
or striving that the person whom we love be not taken away form us: As when
Sampsons wife was taken from him, even he a man of most mighty courage,
conceived great sorrow and displeasure, that for the love he bare to his wife,
he would either plague and scourge the Philistians, or else have her to him
home again. Also by this zeal are many motions or rather passions of the
mind intermixed in men like as Virgill says: Vrigils verse. Scipios zeal
for his country
Mixta est Insania luctu, Even with very mourning mood, is mixed motion mad or
wood: And the Poet Ovid, with notable words describes this mixture of
affections, where he says: Cor dolet atque it a mixtus abundat amor. The
heart of lovers sorroweth sore, and love abounds by mixture more. So Scipio was
in person present, at three battles where he saine his country overcome. These
overthrows brought him both great sorrow and enflamed his anger to restore the
ancient glory of this country and to subdue or repress Annibal. This great
affection or rather passion did Christ feel in suffering adversity, The
seruent zeal of our savior Christ for our salvation.
which he must and would needs bear to restore the glory of his eternal
father, and to deliver his Church, which he loved fervently, and knew the
would not be otherwise delivered except the himself should be made a sacrifice
for her. Therefore says he in this 9. verse: The zeal of thine house has
even eaten me: That is, consumes me; in that I hasard my life for deliverance
of the congregation which I love: and to vanquish and overcome those reproaches
wherewith God is agreeued, which bring me great sorrow and provoke my anger
against the balsphemous person.

I wept and chastened self with fasting; and that was turned to my reproof. I
put on sackloth also; and they iested upon me. They that sit in the gate speak
against me: and the drunkards make songs upon me. Well it is said by Augustine:
Bona conscientia mihi mea causa opus est, sedbona fama opus est propter
proximum. S. Augustines saying touching a good conscience and a good name.
I had need in any my cause to have a good conscience; but I have need of a
good name, by reason of my neighbor: For although a guiltless conscience may
well scorn lying reports, so far as to the effect of the cause apperteineth,
because the knows that Truth at length will have ye victory over sclanders:
yet ye virtuous or noble mind is sore grieved with the lewd judgments of men,
and had rather suffer great punishments in the body, then to hear the
poisonfull backbitings stickled on with popular and plawsible arguments.
Wherefore, seeing Christ was tempted by all means as we are tempted (except
sin only) let us not marvel that his most sacred breast was vexed and
disquieted touching the peruersitie of men's judgments, which are more fleeting
then the flowing streams: For look whither fortune leads, thither lists
the will of men. And the thing it self shows that enterprises are ballenced
or ratified by the events: For if any man have once good success in any
thing, The blind affection of man,
he is by and by counted a wise man: But if the world go awrie with him, then
every man reprehendeth him. But I omit to be here longer disputing upon a
thing so manifest: whereof we see daily example in our life time.

But Lord I make my prayer unto thee, in an accceptable time. Hear me O God in
the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy saluati^n Take me out of
the mire, that I sink not, and let me be delivered from them that hate me, and
out of the deep waters. Let not the water should drown me, neither let the
deep swallowe me up: and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. Hear me O
Lord, for thy loving kindness is comfortable: Turn thee unto me according to
the multitude of thy mercies. And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am
in trouble, O have thee, and hear me. Draw nigh unto my soul and save it, Oh
deliver me because of mine enemies. Christ teaches us by his example, which
is the gate, the tower, Christ is ye gate and the tower altar of refuge for us
to run unto with hearty and humble prayer.
and altar for the godly ones, whereunto they may safely run for refuge,
when they are tossed with diverse storms in this life: For as Solomon says,
Proverbs cap. 18 10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, etc. That is, true
prayer, whereunto the just person fleeing is delivered. So often therefore as
all manner fears and dangers fall upon us, let us not seek after unlawful
remedies for our sorrows, ut let us crave of God inward consolation and
deliverance or mitigation of calamities according to Gods providence. He that
obeieth and submits himself to this rule, he in very deed shall find,
by proof that prayer unto God is not a vain sound, but obtains greater
things then any man dare ask or look for. Joseph when he was in prison,
Joseph's prayer.
wrongfullie cast (upon the sinister suspicion of adultery) doubtless asked
not of God in his prayer the second room or place in dignity next to the
king, neither gold nor riches; but only defense of his life and good name,
and the bringing of him again into his Country, out of which through the
ungodly and wicked practice of his brethren he was banished: But he obtained
of God not only wished benefits, but also things greater then those: for of
a servant, and in deed a captive or prisoner, he was made the chiefest
counselor and governor of the most flourishing kingdom of Egypt; yea, and
succored his father Jacob with all household, and kept them in greatest penury
and famine fo food. Daniels Prayer.
So when Daniell was cast among the Lions, he desired not of God to be a
governor of countries, nor to have divine gifts of revelations touching
greatest matters; and yet was he so by God delivered, that he afterward ruled
and governed the whole country of Susian, and enjoyed the gift of Gods wisdom
revealing hidden mysteries: namely the sure and certain decription of time
appointed for the coming of the promised Redeemer, and the history of the
church or congregation of Christ, and gouernements of kingdoms even unto the
very end of the world.

Let these examples of Gods promises stir us up unto prayer, and let not the
cogitation of our unworthiness discourage us: Seeing Daniel and all the holy
ones even from the very beginning of the world made their prayers unto God,
not in confidence of their own worthiness, but in the confidence of the
mercy promised for Christ's sake; and for this Lords sake (who says, John
16. 23. Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask my father in
my name he will give it you) they are heard, and obtain their petitions.

For so Daniel prays, cap 9. 17 We pour out our prayers before thee, not in
our righteousness, but in thy manifold mercies, hear us for the Lords sake.
And the same form of prayer is in the 17. verse of this psalm before recited:
Hear me O Lord, for thy loving kindness is comfortable; according to the
multitude of thy mercies, turn thee unto me. Let us therefore set against out
unworthiness the precepts and promises of God: Thou O God have commanded
prayer to be made, and wilt of us in this manner be worshipped and honored: I
acknowledge then that I am bound to obey thy commandment. It is Gods
commandment and will that we should pray unto him, and his promise is assured
performance.
For although I am unworthy, yet thy commandment and thy will is worthy,
whereunto I yield; thy promises worthy whereunto I agree, and repose my full
trust in the same. Wherefore I make my prayer unto thee, not trusting in my
worthiness, but in the worthiness of the name of thy son Christ Jesus, and
of God the father which command and promisest performance of that which I
pray for.

Though have known my reproof, my shame, and my dishonor, mine adversaries
are all in thy fight. Thy rebuke has broken my heart, I am full of heaviness:
I looked for some to have pity on me, but there was no man, neither found I
any to comfort me. They gave me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty, they
gave me vinegar to drink. He adds unto his prayer a complaint of the
falsehoode of his friends, and evil rejoicing which his enemies have at his
calamities. Seeing then that there is likely familiarity between the head
and the members, let us not marvel if the same thing chance unto the Church:
for the in her calamities is both forsaken of her friends, and cruelly
assaulted of her enemies. Like as certain years agone we have seen (not
without great sorrow) many examples thereof. But admit it be so, that we
speak not of the Church: shall I say how much David's prophecy (here
describing the last act of Christ's passion) likes me. For the Evangelist Saint
John declares, The last act of Christ's passion
Cap. 19. verses 29. 30. How Christ the son of God hanging upon the Cross,
when he had first tasted the Vinegar given him by the Soldiers, cried out, It
is finished; and bowing his head, gave up the spirit. This consonancie of this
prophecy which David has, and that History of saint John's Gospel may
confirm us against the venomous doubting which some have touching the
certainite of the doctrine from God delivered us. For seeing the event
answers not in breadth, but in streitnesse unto the predictions or
foretellings of the Prophets: it is not to be doubted, that the whole doctrine
of the Prophets is true, and proceeding from God.

Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withal: and let the
things that should have been for their wealth, be unto them an occasion of
falling. Let their eyes be blinded that they see nor: and ever bow down their
backs. Power out thine indignation upon them: and let thy wrathful
displeasure take hold of them. Let their habitation be void: and no man to
dwelt in their tents. For they persecute him whom thou have smitten: and they
^alke how they may vex him, whom thou have wounded. Let them fall from one
wickedness unto another: and not come into thy righteousness. Let them be wiped
out of the book of the living: and not be written among the righteous. As for
me when I am poor and in heaviness: thy help O God shall lift me up. HItherto,
The 2. part of this Psalm containing a curse against the enemies of Christ
the first part of the Psalm, (namely a prayer full of most sorrowful
affections) is expounded: Now follows the second part, wherein Christ
reckons up against the blasphemous Jews dire and grievous matters: When we
read this cursing, let us tremble with fear in all our body, and let us scare
the wrath of God which is bent against the contempt of the Gospel: for, If God
spare not the natural branches, how much less will he spare the wild
branches? Romans 11. 20. 24. 1 And the first degree of punishments for despising
the Gospel is fury and blindness, Five degrees of punishments inflicted upon
the Jews and wherefore.
which wickedly corrupts the native meaning of the word. The impudency and
sauciness of the Jews of late days is known in perverting the sayings of
the Prophets: As when they interpret the 9. ca. of Isay, they imagine that the
Prophet speaks there of Ezechias king of Judah. With the same face do they
bragginglie strive that the same Prophet in the 53 cap. preaches not of the
Messiah or Savior that was to come, but of the Jewish people. So where they
busy themselves upon the ninth chapter of Daniel, then pervert with their
horrible ignorance and impiety, the race of the kings of the Persians, so as
by all means they do but trifle out the prophecy of Daniel. Finally, the
universal writing of the Prophets, which was sometime a table furnished for
this people with most wholesome meats, is now by their blasphemies no other
thing but a snare and offense of falling, as in this 23. verse is said. 2 The
second degree of punishment, is perpetual thraldom, and most miserable; for
although now and then they have put in practice with wars to recover their
Country, and restore their Church and policy, yet by Gods providence being
overthrown, they acknowledged themselves but to roll the stone with Sysiphus,
and to play at the dice upon a broken board, that is, to be utterly consumed
with vain contention. 3 The third degree is the wrath of God which they cannot
by any means escape. 4 The fourth degree, was the most sorrowful destruction
of their government, and of their Temple. 5 The fifth degree is, that sins are
punished with sins: for they are every day more then other become like mad
dogs, howling, stirring up and heaping up sins and offenses. 6 The sixth and
last degree, is the depriving of them of the life, and righteousness
everlasting. For according to that saying of saint John: He that believes not
in the Son has not life, but the wrath of God rests upon him. This plague
O God vouchsafe thou to turn quite away from us.

I will praise the name of God with a song: and magnify it with thanksgiving.
This also shall please the Lord better: then a bullock that has horns and
hooffes. THe third and last part of this Psalm is a thanksgiving, which
instructs the reader touching the abrogation of Moses ceremonies: The Prophet
says here, The 3. and last part of this Psalm containing a thanksgiving by
David, or rather by Christ, and the manner thereof in 3. degrees.
He will not offer unto God the blood of Bulls and Calves, but the true
signification of thankfulness, wherewith God is more pleased and delighted, then
with the Ceremonies of Leueticall sacrifices. Well do the Lawiers say: Cessante
ratione legis, cessareipsam legem. When the reason or cause of the law
ceasseth, then also ceasseth the very law it self. And the special reason or
cause for which the Lord God ordained these ceremonies, was that they should be
tipes or figures of one only sacrifice taking away the sins of the world.
When this sacrifice was once offered, then by good right and reason ceased the
Leuiticall sacrifice. But what time the Leueticall priesthood flourished, the
slaughter and sacrificing of beasts without faith and moral obedience pleased
not God any thing at all. For it is not enough to do the works by God
commanded, except they be done in such order, as the wisdom of God has
ordained. Now then it appears plainly, that Faith is the foundation of all
worshippings, according to that saying of saint Paul, Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, 2 The second and next degree is moral obedience,
which contains love and other vertnes, according to the commandments 3 The
third degree is the use of ceremonies, which (as I said) please not God, except
there be first a foundation laid, that is, a Pediator acknowledged, and that
remission of sins be had for his sake, reconciliation to God, and moral
obedience begun anew in the heart of man. This order of works do many
Sermons if the prophets lay open unto us: As Isay says, Cap. 1. 11. I will
none of your burnt offerings, etc. But rather, verse. 17. Seek ye judgment and
relieve the oppressed, etc. Again, the same Isay in the 58. cap. 7. Break thy
bread unto the hungry, etc. And the prophet Micheas, cap. 6. 7. Will the Lord
be pleased with thousands of Rams, etc? He has showed thee O man what is
good, and what the Lord requires of thee, surely to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God, ver. 8. And the Prophet
Zacharias says, cap. 7. 6. When ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye
not eat for your selves, and drink for your selves? Thus says the Lord of
hosts, execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion every man to
his brother, oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the
poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart,
verses, 9. and 10, etc.

The humble shall see this and be glad: seek ye after God and your soul
shall live. The chief blessings which the reasonable or sensible creature
has, are Wisdom, righteousness, and joy in God. These blessings being lost
by Adams transgression, The blessings lost by Adam are in and by Christ
restored unto us.
Christ again by his passion and resurrection has restored unto us: For he
died for our sins and rose again for our righteousness, that is, through
his obedience which he performed in suffering his death he delivered the church
from evils; namely from Gods wrath, the curse of the law, sin, everlasting
death, and the tyranny of the devil. But if he had remained still in death,
and in the grave, (which was a thing impossible) he had not restored those
blessings unto us, which are opposed and set against most grievous evils. To
the end therefore, that deliverance should not be only the remoouing of evil
from us, but also the placing of benefits for us: he rose again from death the
third day, and making his glorious triumph, and beginning his everlasting
kingdom in us, he restores us unto righteousness and life everlasting: as
Daniel in the 9. cap. 24. verse says, Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the wickedness, to seal up the
sins, to reconcile the iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
etc. But although this destinction of the effects of the passion and
resurrection of Christ seem vain unto many men: yet notwithstanding seeing
the Apostle S. Paul so often speaks hereof, (and specially in the 3. cap.
Philippians 10. verse. That I may know him and the virtue of his resurrection,
and the fellowship of his afflictions and be made conformable unto his death,
etc.) let us without fear of cauilling follow the speech or saying of Paul,
and let us know that we must consider both the merit and efficacy of Christ
crucified, and risen from death to life: Like as Paul in 5. Romans 6. joins
together grace, and the gift by grace. And S: John Baptist says, 1. cap. verse
17. by Christ came grace and truth. These are not spoken to corrupt the article
of justification, wherein we discern wisely imputation from gifts, and
expreslie do affirm that we have remission of sins and reconciliation with
God, and imputation of righteousness for the only obedience and merit of
Christ: but so that the full and whole benefit of Christ be not thereby
obscured: which is not only imputation, but also a reviving and raising
again from death to life and glory everlasting. To be brief: it is one thing
to speak of the article of justification, and an other thing to speak of the
whole kingdom of Christ, Gratiae priuatiur and positiuae.
which contains (as the ancients do speak) graces privative and positive;
that is, not only deliverances from evils, but also restorings unto or gifts
of everlasting blessings. But so often as we dispute of these matters, in
Churches and Schools, let us follow Paul's rule which bids us, 2. Tim. 2.
15. To divide the word of truth aright: and not indirectlie to confuse or
separate the members from the body against the Analogy of the faith, and
against the simple and native meaning of every article. The Article of
justification admits no copulative, The diverse Epithites of our
justification by Christ.
because of the exclusiues so often repeated: Freely, without works, without
law, in the seed, not in the seeds: And the Article touching the kingdom of
Christ cannot be expounded without coupling together grace, and the gift by
grace: neither do these strive between themselves, because when we seek for
consolation in fears of conscience, we do not dispute of gifts, but we are
troubled touching remission of sins, and reconciliation with God, which is
only obtained by faith for Christ's sake, whom in his bloudshedding, God
has ordained our merciful redeemer and Savior. This is not the wisdom of
vain and secure mind, but of the godly ones, who are mortified and
quickened, yea brought down into hell, and again are plucked as it were out
of the jaws of hell.

For the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners. Let heaven
and earth praise him; the sea and all that moves therein. For God will save
Syon, and build the cities of Judah; that men may dwell there and have it in
possession. The posterity also of his servants shall inherit it; and they that
love his name shall dwell therein. These last verses in this Psalm need no long
decalration, or interpretation: A conclusion. Exhortation,
for they exhort every creature to the aduauncing of the honor of God, and of
his son our Lord Jesus Christ: and they promise stabilitie unto the Church,
according to that saying Matthew. 16. 18. The gates of hell shall not prevail
against her: Wherefore since it needs not to make long commentaries upon
matters so evident; I conclude the exposition of this Psalm; And I beseech God
to seal in the hearts of many men the native meaning of the articles of the
Christian faith, Amen.

To him that excels.
A Psalm of David: to put him in rememberance for his deliverance.
Deus in adiut orium meum intend.
The Argument.
SHort indeed is this Song, The effects of this Psalm are touching faith, and
the force thereof mightily shaken by three means.
but long is the effectual conclusion thereof; For it teaches that by three
Engines the walls of Faith are mightily shaken, whereof, the first is
greatness of temptation and calamities. The second is multitude or concourse
of tempests or storms: and the third is the long continuance of these. For,
whom does not greatness overcome, him the same multitude of calamities do
weaken and bring low; but whom neither of these twain do ouermaster, yet
even him does long looking for help utterly discourage. These all may be
plainly seen in Job, as it were in a looking glass: when word was brought
to this most holy man Job of the loss of all his substance and death of his
children, whom his house slew when it fell upon them: He was so far from
impatience, not showing any token thereof, that he even as it were praised God
with a notable verse saying, cap. 1 verse 21. If we have received good things
of the hands of the Lord, why should we not also suffer evil things? The
Lord has given, Jobs patience in his calamities.
the Lord has taken away, as it has pleased the Lord, so is it come to
pass: blessed therefore be the name of the Lord. But this so holy man when he
could not be removed from his purpose with greatness of calamities, at the
very last of all, being vanquished and sore broken with concourse of
adversities and with the long continuance thereof, cried out cap. 3. ver. 3.
Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night, when it was said, there
is a man child conceived, etc. He therefore that stands let him take heed he
fall not. For the devil knows a thousand sleights wherewith the walls and
towers of faith (except they be by God defended) may easily be raced and
overthrown. And seeing there is much danger in delay: This Psalm three times
rehearses a prayer unto God to hasten his helping hand. verse 1. Have thee O
God, etc. Have to help me O Lord, v. 6. Thou art my helper and my redeemer (O
Lord) make no long tarrying. For althought it is not in our power to prescribe
God any certain mean or certain time of deliverance: yet after a sort, we
must crave, that God would even at the very first instant (according to his
providence) deliver his church, and the godly ones which are exercised in
greatest miseries: This indeed is not only to ask and seek, but also to
knock: Or as the lawyers use to say, to cite God peremptorily: And such a
searching for finding, and knocking for opening, according to that most sweet
saying cease to our most wishful desires: Ask and ye shall have seek and ye
shall find, Matthew. 7. 7. 8
knock and it shall be opened unto you. Thus much for the Argument of this
Psalm.

The Psalm and Exposition thereof.
Haste thee O God to deliver me: make have to help me, O God. Let them be
ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned backward
and put to confusion that wish me evil. Let them (for their reward) be soon
brought to shame: that cry over me, there, there. LIke as when we take an oath
(which is a kind of taking God to witness in calling upon him) we crave that
God would be witness of our promise, The effect of an oath.
and a just Judge in punishing the party which breaks promise: So in every
our prayer, we must crave of God, that he would confirm the work that he
has begun in us: The effect of prayer.
and that he would destroy the works of the devil and his instruments: As
when we recite these words, ( Hallowed be thy name) we do not only crave
that the glory of God may be made more excellent, both by the true doctrine,
and by good examples: but that also all wicked opinions in Religion, and lewd
examples in life, (by reason whereof the name of God amongst ye nations is
blasphemed) might every where be utterly extinguished. So in like manner David
craves help and defense in a good cause, and the subversion of his malicious
cruel enemies; David prays for defense from God in a good cause, and for the
destruction of his enemies.
whose devilish malice and evil custom in working mischief was such, that
both their will was groedilie desirous of hurting, their tongue earnestly
given to manifest the same, and their hands nights and days prepared to shed
the blood of the godly lie ones. Against these poysonfull Aspes prays David
here, for their evil success of their enterprises, and (except they will be
speedily converted) for their universal destruction. So let us crave of God,
We must pray to God to cut off the Pope and Turk, the 2 strong arms of
Antichrist.
that he would with his mighty hand, restrain or utterly cut off both Pope
and Turk the two strong arms of Antichrist; and that he would not long
defer the execution of his most just judgment, but that he would make haste
to punish the enemy, for the glory of his names sake.

But let all those that seek thee be joyful and glad in thee: and let all
such as delight in thy salvation, say always, the Lord be praised. As for me I
am poor and in misery: haste thee unto me, O God. Thou art my helper and my
redeemer: Lord make no long tarrying. Unto the godly ones which exercise faith
in their dailic calamities and dangers, these speeches of David are not
obscure: [ I am poor and in misery:] That is, destitute of man's help and
defenses: Thou therefore, OGod, be my helper and deliverer, and that indeed
without tarrying help and save me, least I perish or be overcome of the cruel
enemy: for thou know thine own creature, out infirmity is known unto
thee. Thou know also that, the Devil goes about and seeks whom he may
devour and destroy, 2. Pet. 5. 8. Wherefore seeing thou art a faithful God, do
not thou suffer us to be tempted above our strenght but give with temptation an
end, that me may be able to endure that thou laiest upon us.

A Psalm of David.
In te Domine speraui, etc.
The Argument.
ALthough certain persons too much lovers of themselves, A debasing of man's
self conceit in his own nature.
do imagine in their minds that they excel in wisdom and strength the first
flower of mankind: yet notwithstanding the thing it self shows that the
nature of man as it were barren, is at this day more weak and of less
strength then it was in the beginning. For most truly is it said of the
learned ones: In prima eatate mundi regnasse rationem gubernatricem, and
inuentricem optimarum artium. Deinde successisse aetatem bellatricem, in qua,
armis imperia constituta sunt, and quatuor Monarchiae orbem terrarum rexerunt.
A description of the 3. ages of the world.
In hac vero Senecta mundi dominars. That is: In the first age of the world
Reason ruled as gouernesse and inuenter of good arts. After that succeeded the
warlike age, wherein by force of arms kingdoms were ordained, and the four
Monarchies ruled and governed all the world. But now in this old age of the
world, concupiscence reigns: for, nature of man being now made weaker,
neither studieth for wisdom as they did of old, neither taken upon her those
toyling labors of warfarre, which strong men did in times past, but as it were
weakened in the sinews, seeks after delites and pleasures. This infirmity of
nature in us does the devil more outragiouslie assault at this day, The devil
stirs up tyrants and heritikes in the last old age of the world most wickedly
weakening the state thereof.
and as it were leaning upon a bending wall stirs up Heretics and tyrants,
partly with craft or guile, and partly with manifest violence to overthrow
and utterly destroy all the holy ones, yea, and extinguish the name of
Christ: whom this foresaid deadly enemy of ours well knows shall hereafter
not long to come and judge all people, and give unto his Congregation
everlasting blessings, and shall cast away these devils with all the wicked
ones into eternal destruction and torments. Therefore now greater and more
difficult is our necessity and cause, then ever it was at any time in the
church, because we have against us the skem and end of the world: that same
extreme outrage of the Pope, and of the Turk: who (as D. Martin Luther
says) seek to devour us. And I pray you how many trouble the Church now in
her old age, with moving unnecessary or needless disputations, and like
peevish old women dancing out of order stir up a great dust, as the Greek
Proverb says. And others like wawling Cats running away out of this life
leave an evil smell behind them. This mass of mischiefs and miseries, David
foreseeing to come in his time, craves most fervently of God, that he would
not forsake nor cast away his Church in her extreme old age, so fowly
deformed: but that he would succor and defend her against the Devil, who in
the end of his tyranny rages more cruelly. Seeing then David foreseeing
future storms and tempests in his time, made such prayers for the ship which
bare the Church, of what mind behooves it us now at length to be, who are
tossed with the very same storms. But the very same thing happens unto us
which did to the Apostles, which neither understood the greatness of Christ's
sorrows, nor are yet greatly grieved in mind therewith: no rather are we
overcome with heavy sleep, as the Apostles were. Let us therefore correct
this security and negligence, and let us crave of God, that he would help,
govern and strengthen us, least either our careless minds fall headlong into
Epicureal contempt of God, or else being oppressed with the burden of
calamities be utterly destroyed with desperation, like as Ely, Saul, and
innumerable others were.

The Psalm and Exposition thereof.
In thee O I orde have I put my trust; let me never be put to confusion: but
rid me and deliver me in thy righteousness; incline thine ear unto me and
save me. WHere as before in the II. Psalm verse 6. and 8. Two effects of this
Psalm.
these words are sufficiently expounded, I will now only admonish the reader
touching the little word [ righteousnesse] which is used in some places
actiuelie, in other some places passiuelie. The righteousness of God
manifested in the law, is a will wherewith God prescribes us to do those
things which are right, The righteousness of God in the law.
and after a certain gladness of his rests well pleased with things
rightly done: and will not have contrary things to be done by any, but with
an unfeigned displeasure repelleth and destroieth them: Touching this
righteousness* It is said in the 5 Psalm verse 4. For thou art the God that
have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall any evil dwell with thee* verse
5. Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hate all them
that work vanity. verse 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing, the
Lord will abhor both the bloudthirsty and deceiptful man.

The righteousness of God manifested without the Law, His righteousness in ye
gospel.
touching which both the Law and the prophets do bear witness, is the free
remission of sins, reconciliation with God, and obtaining unto life
everlasting for Christ's sake the mediator. He therefore craves in this place
to be delivered in the righteousness of God, not indeed legal and active, but
evangelical and passive, as if he said: Though I may surely persuade my
self that I am righteous, not indeed by my own worthiness, but thy
righteousness, that is for thy sons sake imputed unto me: I also crave this
addition, namely deliverance and glorification according to the providence of
thy wisdom; As it is said, Romans 8. 30. For whom he has justified, them
also has he glorified.

That this, interpretation is neither fained, nor forged, the words of D.
Martin Luther upon the 42. cap. of Genesis do witness. D. Martin Luthers
saying upon the first verse of this Psalm.
In times past (says he) when it behooued me to read and pray that part of
the 71. Psalm, verse 1. (Rid me and deliver me in thy righteousness) I
trembled for fear in all the parts of my body, and with all my whole heart I
betested that saying ( Deliver me not thought I) in thy righteousness wherein
thou art righteous actiuely: Therefore passiuelie must I embrace and take hold
of thy righteousness wherewith I am justified. And a little after that he
says, In times past when I came to those propositions, (the righteousness of
God, the work of God, thy work, thy righteousness) they found me work
enough to deal withal. Which if they be understood actiuely, they are death,
but passiuely understood, they are life and salvation.

Be thou my strong hold, whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense and my castle. Deliver me (O my God)
out of the hand of the ungodly, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel
man. All men are careless in their doings so long as they have a refuge and
humane succors or defenses: But when these are once lost, very many are
drowned in desperation, and cry out with that Tyrant, Desertus ab amicis miser
pereo: Tyrants trusting in man's help are desperately deceived.
Wretch that I am, forsaken of friend, I wretchedly now my life do end. But
amongst these rocks is faith safely carried and with great care shunneth both
of them, namely, security and desperation. And neither is she puffed up or
swelling proudly in prosperity, neither is the discouraged in adversity, but
howsoever fortune fare with her, the believes she has God for her merciful
defender and deliverer, and craves of God help and government, and finds
by trial that God does help her according to his promises. David had a most
large kingdom and dominion furnished with wealth, weapons for war, and
hoastes of men: but he reposeth not any thing at all the hope of his help in
these defenses: Afterward, when he was banished out of his kingdom he was
not discouraged in mind, but succoureth himself with this consolation. Psalm
27. verse 12. My father and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord has taken
me up. These matters without some use or exercise in them cannot be understood.
Therefore is the Church sore charged and burdened with the cross that faith
may, The Church sore charged and burdened with the cross
in exercises of the cross, increase and be stronger, which in idleness and
pleasures is utterly extinguished. But David here beseeches God to defend him
not only against the violence of his enemies, but also against the falshoode
of such as he took to be his friends. For a great deal more do the
domestical friends hurt a man then outward enemies do.

For thou O Lord, art the thing that I look for, thou art my hope even from my
youth. Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was borne: thou art he
that took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee. He
annexeth unto the proposition three reasons, whereof the first is derived from
Gods promise, the second from a former benefit, and the third from the cause
final. No doubt of it faith bears her self correlatiuelie to the promise of
God: So often then as mention is made of faith or hope, let us call to mind
the promise given from God: The same then signifies this verse, Thou Lord art
my hope, and thou Lord have promised me help and other necessary benefits. So
as afterward he calls to mind the benefits done him before time, by
reason whereof he conceiueth assured hope of deliverances in time to come. Thou
(says he) have brought me out of my mothers womb, and have bestowed upon me
of thy most bountiful liberality many other benefits. O. vouchsafe therefore
to finish and perfect up the web of thy good will and working goodness, and
do thou never forsake me. Last of all Icraue and look from thee defense
against the violence and guilefull dealings of mine enemies: not to the end
that I may live all at pleasure, but that I may reverently honor thee in
thy benefits, and be a witness of thy true doctrine.

I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee. O
let my mouth be filled with thy praise (that I may sing of thy glory) and
honor all the day long. He adds unto his prayer an ardent affect of his
state. For like as S. Paul says. 1. Cor. 4. 9; The Apostles are counted for
gazing stocks in the world: So Esayas the Prophet in his 8. cap. 18. verse
cries out, Behold, I and my children whom the Lord has given me, are as
signs and as wonders in Israel. These complaints do signify how difficult
and hard a thing it is for us to suffer the unrighteous judgments of the
world: for some do condemn us of heresy, other object unto us the crime
Laesae maiestatis, or as detractors of the supreme authority.

But seeing then that godly men cannot without great sorrow endure slanders or
reproachful taunts though vninst, When good men are unjustly slaundered, it
behooves them to hold fast the consolations left them in the word of God,
against unrighteous judgments.
it is needful that they hold fast the express consolations against
unrighteous judgments, so as they map overcome sorrow and believe that they
are not for such unjust judgments cast away from god, or excluded from the
true church. Let us therefore evermore look upon these sayings, viz. Psalm.
109. verse. 27. Let them curse, but do thou bless. Let my enemies be
confounded, but let thy servant be glad and joyful. Isay. 52. 7. Fear not ye
the reproaches of men. Math. 5. Blessed are you when men revile you, and
presecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake, falselie,
verse. 11. And in such conflicts let the difference between the true Church,
and of that company be known, which falsely arrogateth unto them the title
of the Church: when it is most assured that the enemies of the truth are not
the Church of God, according to these sayings, John 10. 27. My sheep hear my
voice. But of the enemies it is said thus. Ioh. 10. 26. Ye are not of my sheep.
Again, John. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, etc.

Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me. For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul
take their counsel together, saying: God has forsaken him, persecute him and
take him, for there is none to deliver him. The first verse is a principal
proposition of this psalm, A principal proposition of this Psalm, consisting
in a Prayer and a Promise.
which is not only a prayer, but also a promise, according to the rule, All
prayers of the holy Ghost are promises: But I pray you think how necessary a
prayer is this: Like as in aged persons all things are more faintlie seen in
them: so in this old age of the world, the Church is more weak and fuller of
wrinckles in her forehead then the has had before time, because she is not
only grieved with infirmity of her age, but is also fore worn and wrecked
with punishments which are increased by reason of her sins. And again the
outrage of the devils both the more ercaede, because they know within a short
time their judgment draws near, wherein their filthiness shall be
clearelie and openly revealed before all Angels and men. Let us therefore
crave with most seruent prayer, that God would not cast away the remnants of
the Church now in her old age, because of her dotings and other blemishes: but
seeing he knows that old age had need to have quietness and rest, that he
would vouchsafe mercifully to succor, help and comfort his Church now in
extreme old age; as he has promised so to do, Isay. 46. verse 3, and 4 Hear
ye me house of Jacob, and all that remain of the house of Israel, which are
borne of me from the womb, and brought up of me from the birth. Therefore unto
old age, I the same, even I will bear you, until the hoare hairs: I have
made you, I will also bear you. and I will carry you, and I will deliver you.
Let us with this promise comfort our selves, when in these confusions and
ruins of kingdoms we being disquieted, do seek where the Church shall
remain.

The latter of these two verses is easily to be understood of them which do
consider the history or state of these days: For, what sleights has not
Satan exercised by his instruments the Tyrants and Hypocrites of our time, to
oppress and extinguish the light of the refined and purified doctrine? He
moves seditions, he kindles civil wars, he deuiseth odd forms and
orders of fained reformation in religions and opinions of men, he has
troubled our congregations with unneedful and unnecessary disputations.
Finally, he has prepared and practiced all manner of means which might
seem to tend to the destruction of the truth. But like as the foming waves
dashing and mounting upon the rocks do with their own force fall off again
into the sea, when the rocks stand firm and immooueable: so the mischievous
enterprises and practices of Satan (so much as to the effect of the cause
appertains) have been, are, and shall be redounding to no purpose, according
to these sayings of Christ our Savior. Mat. 28. 20. Behold I am with you even
unto the end of the world. Again, Mat. 16. 18. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against her. Furthermore, John. 10. 28. No man shall take my sheep
out of my hands.

Go not sarre from me, O God, my God* make haste to help me. Let them be
confounded and perish that are against my soul: let them be covered with shame
and dishonor that seek to do me evil. Such perspicuitie there is in this
prayer, that he which will expound the same with long Commentaries, shall seem
to lights a Candle even at the midday: Letting pass therefore diligence
unnecessary and needless in this point, I come to the verses next following.

As for me I will pacientlie abide always: and will praise thee more and more.
My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for, I know
none end thereof. I will go forth in the strength of the Lord: and will make
mention of thy righteousness only. Thou O God have taught me from my youth up
until now: therefore will I tell of thy wondrous works. The Church in her
old age promises unto God for his defense and preservation of her some
recompense: namely, The Church in her old age thankful unto God.
Confession and propagation of the true doctrine: And even this is specially to
be observed, that thee affirms she will not be the aduancer of her own
righteousness, but of the righteousness of God, according to that saying 1.
Cor. 3. 1. He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. Again where he
says, 3. Phil. 9. That I may be found in him, not having my own
righteousness which is of works, but that which is from God by faith in
Christ. This pronounced praise (as else where is often said) attributes unto
God and his son Christ true glory, and sets down firm consolation unto
our consciences, and discerns the church from other sects which marvel at
nothing, but the fig leaf (that is) a wretched and unclean hypocrisy of
outward works: And truly when I read these verses, it seems to me that the
holy ghost foreprophesied in them the refining or purifying of the doctrine
which in this age has been made by the ministry of the reverend D. Martin
Luther. For which let us be thankful unto God, and the same as an excellent
gift and treasure of great price, left us by the power of the holy ghost,
faithfully keep, that it may pass and proceed unto our prosteritie, pure and
vncorrupt without any our default therein.

Forsake me not O God in mine old age: when I am gray headed, until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation: and the power to them that are yet
for to come. The repetitions in Psalms are not vain repetitions of the same
things, A prayer for the Church in her old age.
but signs of most fervent affects or motions of the mind. For what thing is
it that with greater force of mind can be craved. of God, then that he would
not suffer the Church his spouse now in her extreme old age (almost dotage,
for or by reason of her manifold deformities) to be either forsaken or cast out
of his favor? Wherefore it is not enough that we make these prayers once, but
that we do repeat them daily, yea every moment, and truly for this cause,
that there may be a propagation or publishing of doctrine in the posterity:
for like as God grants unto the Halcion bird the quietness and calmness
of the sea to hatch and bring forth their young ones, so must we pray that God
in the ruins and confusions of kingdoms in the latter age of the world, would
preserve his church and ministry, that in time to come there want no
publishers of the most mighty works of God.

Thy righteousness O God is very high: and great things are they that thou
have done: O God who is like unto thee? This joyful conlusion which the
Prophet here has, may more easily be understood; The great mercy of God
above man's merit.
if we consider the history of the Church from the beginning when Adam and Eua
had transgressed, and could not be helped by the means of any creature: God
of his immense grace and goodness published a promise touching the Redeemer
which should come: which when these our parents heard, they understood that
they should be received again into Gods favor and brought again from
everlasting death.

Afterward when all mankind miserably perished in the universal deluge,
God according to his wonted goodness preserved Noah and his wife and family,
that they should yet escape the danger of the flood, and remain the young
plants of the Church. And that I may for brevity sake omit particular
deliverances, how glorious was the bringing and delivering of the Israelites
out of Egypt? And no less glorious was the bringing back again of the same
people from out of Babylon, and the restoring of them into their ancient state.
What shall I say of the church gathered from out of the whole world, by the
ministry of the Apostles? What shall I speak of the continual preservation
and defense of this little flock against the violence of Tyrants and wicked
deceipts of heretics* The restoring of the church in the latter days
comparable to the deliverances by God in former ages.
And that I would not repeat all stories, I will comprehend in brief (for so I
purposed) this last restoring of the gospel even by God effected, (maugre the
malice and repugning thereagainst all the gates of hell) to be no less worthy
of admiration then other deliverances of the church, mentioned in the histories
of the Prophets and Apostles: These and other things innumerable when we call
to mind, it cannot be otherwise, but we must needs cry out with David in
this verse. How great things are they O God which thou have done: O God who
is like unto thee?

O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me? and yet did
thou turn and refresh me: yea and broughtest me from the depth of the earth
again. Thou have brought me to great honor and comforted me on every side.
The history of the Church does specially set forth this interchange of
temptations and consolations. The church of the people of Israel had some
rest, peace, and quietness in the time of K. Salomons reign, but a little
while after when the Kingdom was divided, there followed continual civil
wars, 1 Kings. 10
1 Kings 12
2 (...) 13 40
until the ten Tribes were by Salmanazar carried a way into exilement: The
two other Tribes had great trial of diverse changes, calamities and
deliverances even until the coming of our Savior Christ. But the church of
the new Testament, being first grieuouslie afflicted by Tyrants, next of
heretics, and afterward by Antichrist, has had thenceforth some space of
breathing: So let us not doubt but the Church of this last age tossed and
turmoiled with diverse storms and surging seas, The church in the latter age
shall at length descry and attain unto the port of life everlasting.
shall hereafter (not very long to, getting out of these great troubles)
desire and attain unto the port of everlasting life.

Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulness, O God, playing upon an
Instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one
of Israel. My lips will be feign when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul
whom thou have delivered. My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are confounded and brought unto shame that seek to do
me evil. Oftentimes in the Psalms David keeps these degrees of order,
Believing, he is tempted, tempted he prays praying he is delivered, and being
delivered he gives thanks unto God: So the Church beholding the destruction of
her enemies or their purposes disappointed, with joyful mind and mouth
magnifieth and praises God, who knows how to deliver his out of temptation.

A prayer composed by David as touching the prosperity of Salomons Kingdom:
which was a figure of Christ, and his everlasting kingdom, 1. Kings. 3.
Deus iudicium tuum Regi da.
The Argument.
IT IS Psalm with great excellency of words preaches of the person and office
or of Christ's kingdom, The effects of this Psalm with a refutation of the
Jews contrary opinion in two points.
of the calling of the Gentiles, of the worshipping in the new Testament, and
of the Cross which the Church must bear. But first, to begin with all the
Jews must be refuted, which with a blind wilful boldness contend that this
Psalm must not be understood touching Christ, but touching Solomon. verse 5.
That the limits or bounds of his kingdom extend from the rising to the
setting of the Sun, and this King shall rule and reign verse. 17. in all
posterities without end. Because therefore it appears sufficiently that
neither Solomon nor any other King had ever any Kingdom so largely limited
and bounded, and that all and every kingdom in the world have their fatal
periods: Let us here then confess it to be most evident, these things cannot
be spoken of any other King, but of the promised Savior Christ Jesus. Of this
Argument such is the perspicuity, that if the Jews would burst themselves
with vain contention therein, they In his time shall the righteous flourish:
yea and abundance of peace so long as the moon appears: And we know that
the latter end of King Salomns reign was unquiet and troublesome as the
history of the 1. lib. Regum cap. 11. makes mention: Therefore are the
commentaries of the Jewish Rabines far wide from the scope of this Psalm. But
least I seem to be too long in a thing so manifest and plain, I will be
content with the testimony of the Caldean translation, which interprets this
Psalm as touching the promised Savior, Christ Jesus. This ground of the
matter being thus ordained, we must thenceforth seek who is the savior: for
the Jews look for a Guide and a restorer of their kingdom, such a one as
Hercules or Cyrus, or Augustus. The vain dreams of the Jews.
And such a one does Mahomet believe that Christ was; and so have many
heretics always thought and held opinion, as Somosatenus* Nestorius and
others.

And I fear that even this philosophy stirs up great tumults in the minds
of many men at this day: But let the godly ones fully believe, we must so
esteem of God, even as he himself instructs us in his testimonies. These
do affirm that there is not only in Christ human nature, but also the very
divine essence of the son of God, which Saint John calls, cap. 1. verse. 1.
The word which is the image of the eternal father. This Psalm discerns
Christ the savior from all other souerainty for ever
And that for brevity sake I may omit other testimonies, certainly this
Psalm discerns Christ from Moses, and other great personages, when he says
that the Savior shall live for ever, and be always prayed unto and
worshipped, as in the 17. verse. His name shall remain under the Sun among
the posterities. which shall be blessed through him. Again, verse. 5. They
shall fear thee as long as the Sun and the Moon endures, from one generation
to another. Last of all, verse 12. All kings shall fall down before him: all
nations shall do him service for ever. In these words is his eternity most
evidently described: Before the Sun: that is, before the shining Sun in the
heavens was created, he was the Son of God For the Hebrew Text uses in this
place a notable word, signifying doubtless that the Son of God was borne
before any Sun shined in the world. Again also it affirms manifestly,
that this Savior must always be called upon, yea, when he is not seen with
our eyes. He speaks not here then of the gestures of the bodies, which with
reverence is used toward them, but by them toward Christ; and he speaks
generally of all good minds, which do crave of the same our Savior Christ,
that he would have mercy upon us, and be our Mediator unto his father, that
he would forgive us our sins, give us his holy spirit and life everlasting,
and be our defender and helper in the dangers of this life against the furies
of the Devils, and the wicked ones in this world. Such a kind of prayer
yields rightly omnipotency unto the Savior, and witnesses that he is God.
But y^ indeed his kingdom is not a worldly policy, but spiritual and
eternal. These Arguments do confirm the same. The benefit of the Savior
pertains unto the universal Church, from the beginning of the world unto the
end of the same. Now if the kingdom of Christ had bin politic, it should not
have brought any profit or utility unto the Fathers and Prophets which have
departed out of this life, before the coming of the Savior. Therefore nothing
should their prayers and hope differ in this case from the dream of the
golden fish, whereof the fisher rejoiced, as Theocritus reports, Add hereunto
a most ample promise of the calling of the Gentiles, which should be vain and
ridiculous, if the Jews only should carry all the stately port and bear
rule, and the Gentiles be brought into bondage as their slaves. But of all
others chiefly the sayings of the Prophets confirm this opinion which we
would attain unto, The predictions of the prophets touching Christ's suffering
for man's salvation.
because they preach of the death and resurrection of the Savior. D^niel
says plainly, cap. 9. verse. 26. Christ shall be slain. And Isayas says,
cap. 35. 10. He shall lay down his s^ule for sin. Ergo, he shall not have
any corporal rule or government in this life. These and many other such like
when we read, may we doubt any thing, but that the Jews and others (dreaming
of the kingdom of Christ to be political) are wrapped in the greatest error,
and blinded in the ignorance of the greatest matters? Also many were wont to
ask of us what were the benefits of Christ's kingdom: Touching this question
the Psalm makes answer: That the Savior of the world shall not give riches
and Countries, but Righteousness and Peace. But Righteousness signifies in
this place Forgiveness of sins, and reconciliation with God, or imputation
unto righteousness, or acceptance unto life everlasting: wherewith after our
resurrection shall be joined full and perfect newness inflamed with spiritual
motions, such as the law of God requires. This true righteousness differs
infinitely from discipline, which is only a shadow of outward works, and a
miserable and unclean hypocrisy, Peace in this place may not be understood
of a politic peace, which is nothing but a vain name, as Plato says: but it
must be understood touching the true consolation and tranquillity of minds,
which is the ouercommer of death. For true it is which Christ our Savior said:
John. 16. In the world you shall have affliction, but by me Peace. 33. Be ye of
good courage, I have overcome the world, ibidem. Last of all let the sayings
touching the calling of the Gentiles, the worshippings of the new Testament,
and Cross of the Church, be considered in this Psalm. For it interprets
the promise delivered unto Abraham, Gene. 22. 17. In thy seed shall all
nations be blessed. And it witnesses that the worshipping of God in the new
Testament shall not be circumcision or Leuiticall sacrifices, but prayers and
thankesgiuings. As here in the 12. verse, They shall praise him for ever. He
also adds a particle wherein not obscurely he signifies the Church shall be
subject unto the Cross: As in verse 14. Precious (says he) is the blood of
them in the Lords sight. Let these seem to be sufficiently spoken touching the
Argument of this 72. Psalm: Now let us hear the Prophet David excellently
prophesying and preaching of Christ Jesus the Savior that was and is to com^*

The Psalm and Exposition thereof.
Give the king thy judgments (O God:) and thy righteousness unto the kings
son. WHat manner of speaker Thucidides was in his Drations, such a one is the
Prophet David in his Psalms: so plentiful he is in copy of matters, The
excellency of David's art oratoricall in compiling in 4. points.
that the multitude of his words almost are supplied with as many sentences.
Furthermore, so apt and strict he is in words, that a man cannot tell whether
the things are with speech, or the words with sentences more beautified. For I
pray you consider how many great matters are included in one little verse. For
first he teaches what a one God is, namely a just judge, that is allowing
things well done, and disallowing and destroying the contrary. And surely such
a God he is, according to the law: but indeed according to the Gospel, he is
not only just in accusing of sin, but also he makes ungodly ones become
just. which are just by faith in Christ, as it is said, Romans ^. Secondly, he
aduertiseth the Reader touching the mystery of the Trinity. For it is the
everlasting Father which delivers out of his power into the hands of his Son,
both iudgemeent and justice. The son receives the power delivered unto him
from ^is father, according to that saying, Ioh. 5. 22. The Father judges no
man, but has given all judgment unto his Son, which we must so understand
touching the first coming of Christ, that the father judges not alone, but by
his son he judges and makes his judgment known: For by his Son he
makes his Gospel known, preserves the ministry, and gives the holy
Ghost. But touching his second coming, The sentence of Saint Augustine cited
by Prosperus.
let us hold fast that notable saying of Augustine cited by Prosperus, Senten.
337. Although the Father never departs from the sonns, yet is it not said
that he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, but the son shall judge
them, because there neither the deity of the Father, nor of the son shall be
seen, but that form or likeness of the son which he has united unto him by
the mystery of his incarnation. The same form or likeness in him then shall be
Judge, which stood before the Judge; the same shall judge which has bin
judged, that the wicked ones may behold his glory, against whose clemency
they have grudged. Such a Judge therefore shall he appear, as he may be seen
both of them whom he shall crown, and of them whom he shall condemn. But the
Father shall not then appear, because he took not upon him the shape of a
servant, but unto his Son who was also made Man, has be given all power of
judgment. Thirdly, this first verse confirms the Reader to acknowledge
Christ, not only to be the son of David after the flesh, but also the very
son of God. For God gives not his glory unto any other, as Esaias 42. says.
Seeing then he delivers unto this Savior both his judgment and his justice,
we must no time doubt but that the Savior is truly, and by nature God.
Fourthlie, this verse teaches us what are the benefities of this Savior; for
judgment by the phrase of the scripture signifies a remoouing of evil, and
the placing of that which is good, and righteousness is the following of virtue,
the eschuing of vice. Therefore the benefits of this savior, are Deliverance
from sin, eternal death and tyranny of the Devil. the gathering of the
Church by the ministry of the Gospel, the gift of the holy Ghost, Our
excellent benefits by Christ our Savior,
defense and preservation of the remnants of the Church in this life, and
finally the rising of the godly ones from death unto life everlasting. You see
then what a pithie and profound Orator David is here, and what great efficacy
and value every word of his has.

Then shall he judge the people according unto right, and defend the poor.
There is a diverse use of the word judgment, A diverse use of the word
judgment
and in expounding, to observe the same variety it is profitable: sometime it
signifies, The taking away of evil, as when it is said in the 119. Psalm,
part 12. verse 1. I have done judgment and justice, that is, I have eschewed
things forbidden, and done things commanded: in other places it signifies
Government: So the governors of Gods people, are called Judges. Last of all,
to let pass other significations, it is taken for mitigation of extreme law,
as in Ierem. 10. Correct me O Lord in thy judgment, not in thy wrath, least I
be brought unto nothing: That is, mitigate the pains which I have deserved.
do not deal with me according to the exiremitie of the law. This Grammatical
admonition if we rightly consider, this second verse is easily expounded: As
if he said, David's verse interpreted touching the first and second coming of
Christ the chief Judge.
I crave of God that he would send the promised deliverer, that he would
govern his people in his righteousness; that is, in abolishing sin and
death; that he would restore unto his church righteousness and life
everlasting: [ And defend the poore] as if he said, He will not deal
extremely with suitors, or poor in spirit, but he will take upon him to defend
their cause, he will maintain them against their accusers, and he will
strengthen them and stay them free and discharged in judgment: He will also
repress the rage of the Devil, Tyrants and fanaticall persons: and he will
mitigate the thraldom of the bodies of his servants captiued.

The mountains also shall bring peace, and the little hills righteousness unto
the people. The mountains and little hills are the churches or congregations
and their ministers: These bring peace in righteousness; that is, they teach,
The peaceable estate of the Chucrch.
That being justified by faith we have peace with God: For, Who shall accuse
the Elect ones of God? shall God, which justifies? who is it that shall
condemn? is it Christ, who died, yea and rose again, who sits at the right
hand of God and makes intercession for us? And again, John. 5. He that has
my word and bleeueth in him that sent me has life everlasting, and comes not
into judgment, but goes by death unto life. For this righteousness and peace,
let us give so great thanks unto God as the whole scope of our lively heart
can conceive, and let us eschew all contrary opinions and religions which
trouble this peace.

He shall judge the simple folk by their right, defend the children of the
needy, and punish the wrong doer. These are speeches Correlatiues as the
Logicians use thus to say. The manner of Chirsts kingdom governed by his
justice and judgment.
The king and his people, etc. Now then here be desribeth the people of this
king: and the desecription agreeeth with the saying of Sophonias 3. 12. I will
leave in the midst of thee a needy and poor congregation; yet trusting in the
name of the Lord. For the church lives an exile in the world. and in deed as
S. Paul says, 2. Cor.7. tries outward fightinges and feels inward
fears: Therefore both manner of ways it is a congregation poor and needful,
not only because it is destritute of humane helps, but also because it
carries about in the heart sorrows and fears rising from acknowledgement of
sin, and the wrath of God: but there is a two fold kind of consolation set
down; one as the Psalm affirms, The Savior shall heal the wounds of the
heart according to that saying, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye which labor
and are laden, and I will refresh you. The other in that he threatens
punishments unto backbiters, and slanderers, which inflameth minds of kings
and princes against the Chruch. This conclusion since it is necessary for the
universal Chruch, even then specially is it so in the behalf of poor people
and Orphans, which are made open prays for all backbiters and slaunderers.

They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and moon endures: from one
generation to another. To fear God by an usual phrase of the scripture,
signifies not only to fear the wrath and judgment of God, How Christ the
Savior is to be honored in his kingdom
but also in a sort to serve or worship God: And the fear of God signifies
all the worship done unto God, or all the obedience due unto God. This verse
teaches us then that Christ the savior is not honored with expenses or
outward pomp, nor tragedies of captives, but with duties by us done, touching
which the law moral preaches, and therewith affirms that the Church shall
not be utterly destroyed in this world. This promise ought to be acceptable
unto the godly ones, especially when the turkish armies are within their
beholding; which practice no other thing but to destroy the preaching of the
gospel, and scatter abroad the congregation of Gods Church. And although some
dispute whether the kingdom at Christ be everlasting, seeing Paul says, 1.
Cor. 15. 24. Then shall the son deliver the kingdom unto the father: Yet the
kingdom of the son without all doubting is everlasting, because in all
eternity, he reigns together with the father and the holy ghost, and
remains the head of the church: And whereas Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. 24.
That the son in the last day of the world shall deliver the kingdom unto
the father; let that be understood thus: The son shall bring unto the Father
the Church gathered throughout all mankind, and then all the whole godhead
shall be seen in presence and shall reign, not by the ministry of the
gospel, but immediately or without any mean. With this simple understanding
let us be contented, least we seem to seek to be more wise then it behooves
us.

He shall come down like the rain into fleece of wool; even as the drops that
water the earth. There is no doubt but the prophet does allude in this verse
unto the history of Gedeon which is recited in lib. Iudicum. 6. The
application of Daulds verse, first to Gedeons, and secondly to Christ his
victory.
and 7. chapters. But other interpreters do apply this figure taken out of the
history of Gedeon, another way: For some do refer it unto the birth of the
son of God borne of the virgne: as the meaning might thus be, Christ like unto
the deaw of heaven was conceived by the holy ghost in the womb of the virgin
Mary, without all spot of sin. This interpretation, though I reject not,
seeing it agrees with the analogy or rule of faith: yet I do more allow the
application thereof unto the kingdom of Christ: For like as grass reuiueth
and refreshes his color when the deawe falls upon it; so our hearts, when
we hear the preaching of the gospel conceive new comfort, which is the
beginning and taste of life everlasting. Again also, that similitude may well
be considered herein which in the same history is set down: Before Christ
was borne the sinagogue was a fleece of wool wet with heavenly dew: Now the
dry land, that is, the Gentiles are watered with this dew. What shall I say
of the wonderful and almost incredible victory of Gedeon? unto whom Esayas in
the 9. chapter compares the triumph of Christ: For as Gedeon leaves forth a
slender host against the huge multitude of his enemies, and yet by God
obtained the victory: so we wretched and weak souls following the
government and good guide of the son of God our Captain Christ, in the
only preaching of the gospel which we profess, and with the spark of faith
shining in miseries, doc overcome most mighty enemies. viz. sin, death, and
the devil. But this figure very well and excellently does Doct. Martin
Luther set forth in his exposition upon the ninth chapter of Esaias: He
therefore that will may read thereof in that place.

In his time shall the righteous flourish: yea and abundance of peace so long
as the moon endures. He repeateth a sermon as it were of the effects of
Christ's kingdom, Righteousness and peace two effects of christ his kingdom,
namely righteousness and peace: In the Church shall both righteousnesses
flourish: the one of Faith, whereby the person is accepted and pleasing unto
God, freely for the Mediators sake. The other of a good conscience, touching
which let us hold fast that most sweet saying of Nazianzen. Nihil exhilarat
nos ita vt conscientia pura and spes bona. Nothing so much rejoices us as a
pure conscience, and a good hope. And where he says, ( abundance of peace.
etc.) that is tranquillity of the heart rising from faith, hope, and a good
conscience.

Now consider what a thing it is not to be plucked away from God, and to be
able to have access unto God, to call upon him, crave and look for help of
him, as in the 1. Epist. 3. cap. and 20. verse. of saint John. it is said, If
our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God. But the particle
touching the eternity of peace must not be at a blush, as we say, but
thoroughly looked upon. For it contains most sweet consolation, which Isayas
expresses, cap. 54 ver. 10. in these words, The hills shall be moved, and
the little hills shall tremble, but my mercy shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away, says thy merciful Lord:
That is, though down-falles of kingdoms shall shake and terrify the Church
very sore, yet my covenant that I have made with my Church shall be firm, for
ever ratified and immovable. Let us be quietly contented with this league or
covenant. yea though the whole world frushed together fall down about us.

His dominion also shall be from the one sea to the other: and from the flood
unto the worlds end, A great difference between the bounds of Christ's kingdom,
and the kingdoms of earthly Princes, namely is six points
The kings of Babylon and Persia held in their power very rich kingdoms: but
these kingdoms were included within the limits of Asia; Alexander the great
joined some part of Europe unto the Empire of Asia: The Roman Empire greatest
of all others, was extended no further then Euphrate: Finally, no government in
ye whole world was contained in the proper jurisdiction: wherefore seeing
Christ's kingdom is comprehended within the same bounds wherein the whole
world is comprehended, doubtless we must confess that this kingdom is not a
worldly Empire, like as the Jews do dream. But peradventure some man would
ask what manner of kingdom, the kingdom of Christ is? There is nothing that we
may so easily express. The kingdom of the Christ in this life; is to keep
and restore the ministry of the Gospel: also to gather and revive the Church
with his word and holy spirit given, and to protect her wonderfully against
the devils and tyrants, and after this life to raise her members up from death
to life, and bring them to his eternal Father. Out of this description may be
taken the difference of Christ's kingdom and a politic kingdom. Also they
differ in objects, in benefits, in form of government, glory, defenses, and
stabilitie: for, first the politic power governs the part which is moveable,
and brideleth the external members, that they may remain within their duties:
but the kingdom of Christ not only governs external manners, but
reprehendeth and heals the hearts, as in Isay, 61. ver. 1. To bind up the
broken hearted. Secondly, the chief benefits of politic power are discipline
and peace of bodies: but the spiritual and eternal benefits of this kingdom,
are righteousness and peace of conscience before God. Thirdly, they differ in
form government: for other kings and princes choose fit ministers to bear
authority in the Commonwealth, endued with wisdom and eloquence: but Christ
chooses the foolish things of this world to confound the wisdom of the wise:
or as the 8, Psalm, ver. 2. says. Out of the mouth of very babes and
sucklings, he has made perfect his kingdom. Moreover they differ in form of
execution, as in defense, and punishments: for the politic power defends his
subjects with weapons, and punishes disobedient persons with corporal force,
or with the sword: but Christ by the preaching of the Gospel gives
everlasting benefits, remission of sins, the holy Ghost, and life
everlasting, and punishes disobedient persons, not with corporal force, but
with his word, namely lawful excommunication. Fourthlie, they differ in
glory: for the glory of governments is in the excellency of counsel in
civil or peaceable government, and in valiancie and good success in war:
but the proper glory of the Church in this life is, true knowledge of God,
prayer, profession of the true doctrine, and perpetual preservation of the
Church, although she be persecuted in some members. The greatness of minds in
ouercomming or vanquishing all inticements and terrifying torments of the
wicked, the ornament of many virtues wherein the presence of God is perceived
and seen. Fiftlie, the defenses of a politic kingdom are hoasts of men, and
riches necessary in charges of domestical affairs and to maintain wars
abroad: but the Church is not defended with visible helps, but is governed by
the son of God, and has the Angels her super intendents or watchmen.
Lastly, they differ in stabilitie: for all politic gouernements have their
end and limit of time: but of this kingdom there shall be none end, because
the king in eternal, and he gives unto his people eternal life, which is
here begun, and shall be accomplished after the resurrection. These things must
be often recited touching the difference between Christ's kingdom, and
politic kingdoms: not only to refuse the Jews, but even to instruct us
also, least the consolation and invocation upon the Son of God, and our
exercises of faith be obscured or darkened with politic imaginations. For the
eyes being bent upon politic benefits (when they are once gone) do think that
the church is but a castaway from god. This imagination must we refuse, and
steadfastly, believe, that true believers are not therefore, cast away from the
son of God, no though they be in the mids of punishments or torments: for
as saint Paul says, We stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God
not only, but also We rejoice in tribulations, etc. Romans 5. verses, 2. and 3.

They that dwell in the wilderness, shall kneel before him: his enemies shall
lick the dust. The kings of Tharshis and of the Isles shall bring presents:
the kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts. All kings shall fall down
before him: all nations shall do him service. He amplifieth the majesty of
Christ's kingdom: the inhabitants of the wilderness (says he) shall not only
be petitioners unto this king, but even they also which dwell in fair and
sumptuous houses, which are garnishcd with costly works and pictures: and
neither shall his friends but even his enemies also humble themselves and fall
down before this Lord. What shall I say of the kings which shall be nursing
fathers of Christ's kingdom: Of kings and Queens, the nursing fathers and
mothers of the Church from the beginning.
for in all ages from the first beginning of mankind there have been, are, and
shall be some magistrates chosen of God unto everlasting salvation, and called
unto the society of the true Church, as Nebuchadnezar, and Euilmerodach in the
kingdom of Babylon, Darius Medus, Cyrus, and Artaxerxes with the long, hand
so called, in the kingdom of Persia: and Constantine, Valentinian, Theodosius,
Charles the great, and certain other in the Empire of Rome. For as in that
saying, 3. Mat. 5. ver. All Jury went out unto John Baptist, is the figure
Synecdoche, (i. part for the whole) so in this verse [All kings shall fall
down before him] the universal particle must be restrained. For it both not
signify that all kings shall become the friends of Christ, but some cut of all
kingdoms. Now see I pray you, how great a glory it may be, that not only
obscure and base persons shall embrase the preaching of the Gospel, but even
mighty kings and Monarchs: Also unto those kings which are converted to
Christ shall nothing be attributed more glorious, then that they are reputed
and called citizens and members of the true Church of Christ.

For he shall deliver the poor when he cries: the needy also and him that
has no helper. He shall be favorable to the simple and needy: and shall
preserve the souls of the poor. He shall deliver their souls from falsehood
and wrong: and dear shall their blood be in his sight. This is a most sweet
and delectable reason of the former next verses: As if he said, therefore shall
they fall down and worship him, because he helps them that call upon him,
when they are forsaken of earthly creatures. This sentence is greatly set
forth in the example of our first parents. Adam and Eua after their fall could
neither be helped by Angels, The great mercy of God in sending his son Christ
to deliver the distressed.
their own devises, nor yet by any other creature: Here comes Christ the
son of God from his secret seat, receives offenders into favor, and gives
them life. So afterward followed innumerable eramples of this Lords benefits
besides and without second causes: as when he preserved Noah in the deluge:
when he saved Joseph whom his brethren would have slain: when he made an open
way for the people of Israel to pass through the red sea: and afterward
performed many benefits unto them besides and without all second causes or
means. Like as he defended David against Golias, and others: as he saved the
3. men in the burning oven: Daniell amongst the Lions, and Jonas in the whales
belly: And al men which call upon God, may declare and speak of some
deliverances which they have had; when they have been manifestly preserved
besides and without second causes. Furthermore, whereas the church is for most
part rent in pieces with discords of opinions and feels the cruelty of
tyrants; this psalm promises her deliverance from the wicked craft of
heretics, The application of the fable touching the viper and the palm.
and violence of Nero, Dioclesian and such like tyrants. But truly when I
think upon this verse the fable of the Viper and the palm comes into my
mind: For like as the viper is with the palm leaves nourished, and with the
same again destroyed: so Heretics abusing the scripture are refuted by the
testimonies of scripture rightly conferred: as although Samosatenus corrupts
the first chapter of S. John's gospel; yet in the course of the same sermon and
conference of other testimonies he may be evidently refuted or convinced. But
as unto Tyrants appertains this Psalm in this place does notably comfort us;
He shall deliver their souls from falshoode and wrong, etc. That is, he shall
inflame their hearts with joy and gladness the vanquisher of death, and shall
give them life everlasting, according to that saying, John. 10. 28. I give unto
them everlasting life. And their blood shall be precious, because tyrants shall
suffer great and just torments for their cruelty used against the godly ones:
and partly because by this testimony of their death the truth of Christ's
doctrine is sealed and confirmed. But inasmuch as elsewhere I have often spoken
touching the punishments for tyrants, and the sufferings of Martyrs, now I
willingly omit the recital of them in this place.

He shall live, and unto him shall be given of the gold of Arabia: prayers
shall be euermade unto him, and daily shall he be praised. We do remember that
D. Martin Luther oftentimes said: In the old Testament there is a notable
witness of the Godhead Touching the eternail godhead of Christ, and the royalty
of his everlasting kingdom.
of the Savior promised; which affirms that he was called upon, and by this
property the same savior is there discerned from other Prophets. That most
grave witness was by some complained to be obscured and weakened by translating
the same invocation unto other men. And for that one cause (said he) the
custom of praying unto others was to be disallowed. But where the Prophet
David affirms here, that this Savior shall live, etc. Let that be
understood in that meaning touching which Christ says, John, 14. 19. I live,
and you shall live. That is, like as I of mine own power do live, seeing that
I am consubstantiall with the father, and second person in deity: so by my
merit, and through my effectual working you shall live also: for I in dying
have destroyed death, and in rising again have restored life, as in the old
godly verse the Church so sings: Yea I will raise up again your bodies from
death, and these even counited with your souls, I will adorn with gifts
agreeable unto the state of life everlasting.

There shall be an heap of corn upon the earth, high upon the hills: his
fruit shall shake like Libanus, and shall be green in the city like grass
upon the earth. He compares the fruitfulness of the Church or kingdom of
Christ unto the most lightsom flourishing corn, The flourishing state of the
Church with purity of doctrine and concord of the Church.
which is answerable to the husbandmans prayer and expectation. For as the
thick growing corn delights the beholders: so there is no sight more
pleasant then to see the flourishing Churches, wherein unto the purity of
doctrine preached, the concord of the teachers is adioined or annexed. There
is a great force in the Nowne Bar: which signifies most pure wheat: as if he
should say; In the Church of Christ shall not bear sway any vain chafe of
humne traditions, which have no juice in them: but wheat shall flourish, which
with the body of man has great affinity: for eue^ as of lively wheat, the
best blood is increased: so the Gospel delivered without corruption, brings
to the godly ones firm consolation.

His name shall endure for ever, his name shall remain under the Sun among the
posterities, which shall be blessed through him: and all the heathen shall
praise him. This verse glistereth most clearelie like a notable precious stone
throughout the whole Psalm; The everlasting renown of Christ, God and man
eternal king of the faithful, and their everlasting blessedness in and by him.
for it teaches the reader touching the divine nature and benefits of the
savior, and touching the calling of the Gentiles. It cleerelie affirms that
this lord has always bin, as he himself says. John. 8. 5. 8. Before Abraham
was I am. And he uses the word ( Linnon) the generation of the son from the
father eternal. And therefore Micheas says, 1, Mic. 3. This our deliverer
went forth before the days of the world: That is, he was the son of God
before he took upon him nature of man. Let us believe therefore being
confirmed with these and like testimonies, that the Savior is God indeed, and
by nature the son of God, light of light, as in the Creed it is said. But
although there be many descriptions which teach why and for what cause the son
was sent: yet the effect of the matter is briefly in the word [ Blessed]
signified. And for that by the wanting of any thing, the same may be better
esteemed which we have, as by darkness light, let us see what the curse is. All
mankind after our first fall was overthrown with the curse of the law: that
is, of gods wrath, and of everlasting death by reason of sin: as Paul says,
Ephesians. 2, ver. 3. We were by nature the children of wrath, even as others were.
This curse when no creature could take away or blot out, the son of God took
upon himself, both the wrath of God and our punishments, that his father might
be at peace with us. So Paul Gal. 3. 8. interprets the promise given to
Abraham: In thy seed shall all the Gentiles be blessed. Christ became accursed
for us, and redeemed us from the curse, that we might obtain the blessing of
Abraham, Last of all let the particle be considered touching the calling of the
Gentiles. in this verse, The posterities shall be blessed in him, and all the
heathen shall praise him. For the calling of Gentiles is a notable testimony
of Paul's affirmattion, wherein it is said, Ro^ 5. 15. Grace oueraboundeth
above sin: for no man can without some humbling of his mind read the examples
of mischief striving with the first and second table, wherein the Ethnickes
wickedlie and filthily with great rashness and impudency are defiled Let us
therefore give God thanks that he receives such castawayes into savor, and
coopteth them into the society of Christ's kingdom.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things. And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever: and all the earth
shall be filled with his majesty, Amen, Amen. It likes me well in this place
to set down the words of D. Luther, The miracle of miracles in the Messiah
Christ, God and man, king immortal.
expounding the 7. ca. of the prophet Mic: Like as the deliverance in the new
testament is by many ways greater and more excellent then that which was out
of Egypt: so are the new miracles by infinite means far greater then the
old: for what might be more wonderfully said, then that son of God take upon
him nature of man, and was borne of a virgin? What is more to be amazed at,
then when the son of god wrestling, with death and Satan, suffered himself to
be overcome, lays down his life before these enemies, and while he is
overcome, conquereth? So a special miracle it is, that Christ, dying like a
man upon the cross, did the third day rise again from death and (out of the
grave closed up) after this with immortal flesh ascended unto heaven, and
sits at the right hand of God: what may be like notably said, yea or
thought of any other miracles in respect of these? Therefore belssed be God,
who only does these and other miracles. So be it.

FINIS.
Here end the prayers of David the son of Ishai.

