THE ARRAIGNEMENT OF COVETOUSNESS, In three SERMONS.

BY JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Immanuel College
in Cambridge, late of Aldermanbury, LONDON.

PSALM 119. 36. Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness.
LONDON, Printed for John Bellamie, Henry Overton, John Rothwell, Richard
Serger, and Ralph Smith. 1640.

A methodicall Analysis of the chief things treated on in these Sermons on
LUKE 12. 15. as they were perfected by the Author.
A Sermon of Christ.
1 Begun, commending. 1 Sincerity. 1. 2 Magnanimity. 4.
2 Interrupted by a worldling, whose motion 1 Propounded. 13. 2 Answered. 1
Reproved. 14. 2 Improved. 15 in an exhortation against covetousness. 1 Backed,
explicated with strong reasons. 2 Edged, illustrated with a Parable.


3 Continued. 1 Occasionally. 1 Revoking from worldly mindedness. 22. 2
Provoking to heavenly mindedness. 31.
2 Intentionally. Exhorting to 1 Watchfulness. 35. 1 Propounded, from the
condition of 1 Their so doing. 1 Blessedness of duty. 2. Woefulness of
neglect.
2 Masters sudden coming. 40.
2 Reiterated and enlarged.
1 Occasion. 41. 2 Exhortation. 1. Nature. 1 Felicity in duty. 4^. 2 Misery in
defect, Abuse. 45
2 Measure to those that sin of 1 Knowledge, greater. 47. 2 Ignorance, less.
48.


2 Meekness to 1 Bea^e butcherly opposition, which 1 Must be expected. 49. 2
May be presaged. 54.
2 Forbear brotherly contention. 58.



Doct. Covetousness is a vice that is hardly discerned, it is a subtle one;
it is a vice largely spread, it is a general one; it is deep^ly rooted and
rivetted in the souls of men, and will hardly be beaten out with many reasons
and arguments, much working and chasing, it is a vice that is highly to be
abhorred. of a very foul nature and consequence, and therefore a vice, that
all that will be Christ's Disciples should be very curious to observe, and
cautious to avoid, to ward and fence themselves against.

1 Explication* Nature of covetousness. 1 Premise. 1 Prodigal. 2 F^ugall. 3
Liberal.
2 Propound something concerning the 1 Name. 1 Large. 2 Strict. 3 Indifferent
2 Nature. 1 Description, containing the nature 1 General. 1 Vice. 2 Moral. 1
Seat Soul 1 Formal, Affection. 2 Radical, understanding. 3 Vertuall, Actions.
2 State. 1 Line of 1 Mediocritie. 2 Extremity
2 Rule, Gods will written in 1 His own breast. 2 Our hearts. 3 The word.



2 Particular. 1 Object Riches. 2 Manner* in 1 General opposite to 1
Liberality. 1 Frugalitie. 2 Liberality. 3 Magnificence.
2 Prodigality.
2 Special. 1 Infecting whole soul 1 Affections. 2 Apprehensions. 3 Actions 1
Thought 2 Word. 3 Deed.

2 Exceeding what love requires of 1 Getting. 2 Saving.
1 God. 2 Self. 3 Neighbor.

2. Distribution, according to, 1 Subject. in 1 Godly, concomi^an^. 1 Opposed.
2 Neglected.
2 Wicked predominant. 1 Enraged. 2 Restrained.

2 State. 1 Criminal, subservient to 1 Pride. 2 Lust.
2 Capital.
3 Degree. 1 Less, 2 More.





3 Designation of properties. 1 In it self. 1 Subtle, hardly discerned. 1
How in respects 1 General. 2 Special.
2 Therefore take heed you do not lightly 1 Accuse others. 2 Excuse your selves.

2 Universal, largely dispersed in all. 1 Sorts. 1 Wicked. 2 Godly. 2 Rancks,
1 Rich. 2 Poor. 3 Vocarions. 1 Civil. 2 Ecclesiastical. 4 Conditions, in
regard of 1 Sex. 2 Age
3 Tenacious: deeptly rooted, not easily 1 Laid down. 2 Alayed by any cure of
1 Religion. 2 Reason. 3 Time.
4 Dangerous.
Proof. 1 Scripture. 1 Testimonies 1. Colos. 3. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 6 9. 10. 3. Luke
16. 14. Psalm. 119. 36. 4. Cor. 6. 10. compared with Ephesians. 5. 5. 5. Exodus 28
21. 6. 1 Timothy 3. 3. 7. 1 Cor. 5. 10. 11. and Psalm. 10. 3
2 Examples. 1 Negative. 2 Positive. 1 Nabal. 2 Laban. 3 Ah^^ 4 De^^^.

2 Nature, it 1 Opposes all good of 1 Grace. 2 Nature.
2 Exposes to all evil of 1 Sin. 2 Punishment.


2 In respect of us, it is to be avoided by all 1 Means. 1 Watching 2 Warding.
2 Men. 1 Common. 2 Christians.


2 Application. 1 Conviction. 2 Reprehension. 3 Exhortanon to be 1 Jealous. 2
Judicious. 3 Conscientious. 4 Ingenuous, 5 Generous.
1 Examination 2 Hu^iliation. 3. Reformation, remedies to 1 Recover. 2 Prevent.


1 Habitual. 1 General. Grace. 2 Special. 4. Paires 1 First. 1 Humility. 2
Temperance.
2 Second. Love of 1 God. 2 Neighbor.
3 Third. 1 Heavenly mindednes 2 Contentedness.
4 Fourth. 1 Faith. 2 Wisdom.


2 Actual. 1 Watch. 2 Pray. Strive. Meditate of 1 Former arguments in the
Doctrine how it 1 Opposes good of 1 Grace. 2 Nature.
2 Exposes to ill of 1 Sin against 1 God. 2 Neighbor. 3 Selves.
2 Punishment. 1 Wrath. 2 Scorn. 3 Misery.


2 Our Saviors arguments in the Chapter, in 2. degrees. 1 To the disturber in
1 General, felicity not in superfluity 2 Particular, assures not. 1 Secures
not. 2 Delicacy. 3 Wisdom.

2 To the Disciples care.
3 Other arguments from Riches. 1 Riches in superfluity are 1 Inconsiderable.
2 Uncertain. 3 Unprofitable 4 Hurtful. 1 Worldly, is 1 Begetting in men, 2
Hindering. 1 2 3 4

2 Competency. 1 Needless. 24. 2 Fruitless. 25. 3 Brutish. 22, 4 Heathenish.
5 Hurtful. 1 Fetters heart. 34 2 Hinders. 35.
2 Heavenly, more 1 Easy. 31. 2 Happy. 32. 3









LUKE, Chap. 12. Ver. 15. And he said unto them, take heed and beware of
Covetousness.
THis Chapter contains in it an excellent and a divine Sermon of our Savior,
to an innumerable multitude of people, gathered together; so that they trod one
upon another: In which Chapter, to give you the general Sum of it, you may
observe three things.

1. A Sermon begun, in the beginning whereof our Savior exhorts to a double
virtue: 1. Sincerity or simplicity of heart, contrary to hypocrisy, and the
leaven of the Pharisees, which in the first place he wishes them to take heed
of, Verse. 1. 2. Magnanimity, to despise and contemn all difficulties that may
occur, in the free, sincere, and ingenuous profession of a man's religion, not
to be afraid of any difficulties, no, though they go as fair as death, Verse
4. 2. This heavenly discourse of our Savior is interrupted, by the unmannerly
admittance of them which came to this spiritual meeting with carnal hearts,
they came to Church to hear Sermons, but their mind was upon their estate,
and on outward things; and therefore one of the company, a worldly man,
propounds a question to our Savior, which he answers.

1. The question propounded is in the 13. Ver. And one of the company said unto
him, master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me: his
brother, it seems, had the advantage of the possession, and he thought our
Savior was a good man, and it might be easy for him to do a good office* he,
not regarding the employment our Savior was about, troubles and interrupts him
with this unsavory motion.

2. Our Saviors answer is, partly by his reproving, rejecting, condemning of
the motion, in the 14. Verse: And he said unto him, man, who made me a judge or
a divider over you? my office is of another nature, and the meanest Judge in
the world can arbitrate this; It is not fit to leave the Word of God, and to
serve tables, no not in a work of charity; there are things of a higher nature;
but then,

2. He contents not himself with this reproof, but improves this unseasonable
importunity, and takes the opportunity of conveighing a very seasonable
doctrine or exhortation upon this occasion, that strikes at the very root of
the disease which lurked in this man, and so more generally dehorts from
covetousness, which he conceived was the spring of this man's disorder. Now
that is,

1. Backed and replicated with a strong reason, in those words, for the life of
man, or the happiness and content of man, consists not in the abundance of
that he possesses: the world is mistaken in it, it is not that which makes a
man happy, or that which will give a man true content, so I take the meaning of
the word to be, although the world promise much.

2. As it is backed with a strong reason, so it is edged and illustrated with a
sweet Parable; The great rich man he had a great crop, and be thought himself
what to do, to pull down his barnes, and build them greater, and sing a
requiem to his soul, the issue whereof was, Thou fool; and such are all they
which set up their rest here, and think that the life of man consists therein,
and that happiness depends thereon.

3. As our Savior condemns, and reproves, so he improves the unmannerly
proceedings of this man, and takes occasion to continue his heavenly Sermon,
wherein I shall distinguish but these two things.

I. Our Savior goes on in the occasional argument, which this man's request
concerns. Secondly, he intentionally adds something that was in his own mind to
convey, and that is added to the former occasion.

In the occasional argument there be these two branches, and I shall but only
mention them, and desire you at leisure to peruse the place, because in this
place, and that parallel to the 6. of Matthew, is scarce the like argument
handled in the whole book of God, nor all the wit of man cannot have more
excellent suggestions.

1. He revokes his disciples from worldly-mindednesse, by many excellent
incomparable arguments, Verse. 22.

2. He provokes them to heavenly-mindednesse, in the 31. Verse, wishing them
not to seek these things, but the kingdom of God.

II. He proceeds to his former intentionall thoughts, wherein he commends
especially two excellent virtues to all his disciples.

1. Watchfulness, in the 35. Verse, that they would always keep a watchful
posture, preparing for, and expecting the coming of the Lord, to be fitted for
it, whenever it should be, sooner or later, sudden or otherwise, and this is,

Propounded and pressed, and then iterated and enlarged.

It is propounded and pressed, 1. From the condition of a duty, which being
discharged, makes a man blessed, in those words, And if he come in the second
or third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants. 2. From the
misery that will follow upon the neglect hereof, in the following words, If the
good man of the house knew what hour the thief would come, he would watch,
etc. 2. It is pressed from the condition of their masters coming, which is
expressed to be sudden, no man knows the hour; and thus far our Savior
has propounded and pressed this argument of watchfulness. 2. Upon a
particular occasion he does reiterate and enlarge the prosecution of this very
argument: the occasion is expressed in the 41 Verse, Peter steps in, and puts
the question, not so unmannerly as before, but proper enough for the Auditory:
Master, speak thou this parable unto us, or to all? This gives our Savior
occasion to reinforce his former exhortation, wherein are the same arguments I
mentioned before, partly from the fel^city in the discharge of this duty, how
happy and blessed is that man, that when his Lord comes* shall find well
doing, preparing and fitting himself for that meeting; and then the misery and
the woeful condition of the evil servant, who instead of giving a portion to
his Lords servants, shall presume his master will not yet come, but delay and
prolong the time, and fall to beat and abuse his fellow servants. I conceive in
this place, and other places of Scripture, where this evil servant is
mentioned (besides the general notion of any that carries himself
disorderly) I say, it has a particular intention against that evil servant in
particular, that Antichrist, whom the Lord shall destroy with the breath of his
mouth, and abandon with t^^ brightness of his coming, finding him drunk w^^^
the blood of the Saints, This evil servant, I say, will be in a very evil and
sad condition. Our Savior farther expresses this by adding one thing
concerning the measure of this evil, that will befall the unfaithful servant,
and he propounds it as a rule of the misery, the misery will be great; as this is
done more out of knowledge, he which knows his masters will, which sins
hypocritically, against the light, against conscience, those will have a double
share in the misery, and it will be more fearful to them: it will be
something mitigated to them which knowlesse, yet bad enough, as is expressed in
the 47 and 48 Verse. This was the first virtue that our Savior exhorts unto,
watchfulness and carfulness to prepare that they may not be surprised with
his sudden coming.

2. The second virtue our Savior exhorts unto, is spiritual wisdom, although
there be some ambiguity in some interpreters, either meekness or spiritual
wisdom, it is agreed upon.

There be two things wherein this is recommended in general.

1. In bearing unbrotherly oppositions; and our Savior tells them, that this is
that which must be expected, and may be presaged and foreseen. 1. It must be
expected, Verse. 49. for our Savior tells them plainly, that he came to send
fire on the earth; and not to make a carnal peace, but to conveigh the light
of the Gospel, the events whereof would breed combustions, wicked men opposing
the preaching of the Gospel, and of the godly; and this is made ev^^ by those
which are nearest to them, in the same house, Verse 52, 53. Our Savior
prepares them with this beforehand, that they may meekely and wisely bear
unbrotherly oppositions. 2. In which this meekness consists more particularly,
to forbear brotherly contention: Or, as some interpret it, it may rather be
expressed thus, to take care to make peace with God so much the more, agree
with thine adversary, it may commend brotherly conjunction: for those which are
brethren, they shall meet with oppositions in the world, they had not need to
devour one another: Or, as many interpreters say, that adversary is God,
which, while we are in this world, we should make our peace with, since we can
have so little peace in the world; therefore our Savior puts his servants in
mind, that it is a great point of wisdom, at the least, to make their peace
with God, that they may have sweet comfort from him in the midst of all
bitterness in the world. I omitted one thing that I should have spoken, in
opposition to the two things that must be expected, which the condition of the
Gospel will produce, and that may be presaged, in the 54. Verse. And he said
unto all the people, etc. If men were but so wise to observe those
prognostications of grace, and the way of the times of the Gospel, as they are
to prognosticate the face of the heavens, when they see the evening fair and
red, they presage fair weather, and on the appearance of a cloud, foul
weather: if men were so wise in the face of Scripture, they might foresee when
calmes and storms are likely to fall, when they are like to fall into
opposition and affliction, and so wisely might prepare and arm for the same.

Out of all give me leave to mention one thing needful, from the unseasonable
and rude motion of the worldly-minded man, interrupting our Saviors Sermon
with an earthly question, viz.

It is no new thing nor strange, that men should bring carnal hearts to
spiritual duties.

You are not secure by being in the house of God, by hearing Sermons, but you
may be full of carnal thoughts, if you be not careful to purge them out, you
may be thinking of your house, moneys, or trade, talking, or bartering about
worldly things, and so turning the Church into an Exchange, or you may be
gazing after poorer things, this bodies fashion, or that bodies dress, but
every one should be careful of that. To omit all other things, I shall only
fasten upon one observation, and propound that, so as it may be comprehensive
to take the very substance of the truth, of the whole doctrine that our Savior
propounds, and I shall express it thus.

Covetousness is a vice that is hardly discerned, it is a subtle one, it is a
vice largely spread, it is a general one, it is deeply rooted and riveted in
the souls of men, and will hardly be beaten off with many reasons and
arguments much working and chasing, it is a vice that is highly to be abhorred,
of a very foul nature and consequence; and therefore a vice that all that will
be Christ's disciples should be very curious to observe, and cautious to avoid,
toward and fence themselves against.

You see every one of these contained and intimated in the very words of our
Savior, although I might have made so many several observations, yet I chose
rather to contract all into one; And I hold it very expedient so to do, that if
a man can but remember the point, he may carry away all the maine things that
are said concerning it, though he may forget other particulars, yet he may have
the maine in the observation: But before I enter into the explication of the
point, I shall 1. Premise one caution: there be three sorts of men which
happily may be here, that may take some offense at this doctrine, taking things
with a wrong hand, and hearing them with a wrong ear, which are delivered
right.

1. The prodigal man may laugh in his sleeve, and be tickled, thinks he, I am
shot-free, this Sermon concerns not me, I am not guilty of that sin, the world
knows it, and I proclaim it well enough, and this may please him, and so
harden him, while he stands jeering at another man that walks contrary to him.

2. The frugall man, he is clean contrary, he is a sober and a good husband,
and he thinks it his wisdom to be so, as indeed it is, in a vertuall way, and
with moderation, but he is offended, and thinks this may touch him many ways,
taking that to himself which is aimed against covetousness, as though it were
spoken to him.

3. The liberal man, he may take some offense, which is in the right path and
line of virtue, he may receive some prejudice, because he is not only free
from extremes, but is conscious of the contrary virtue, and so he may dance
upon the rope of confidence, and be secure in that one virtue, as though he
need no more; whereas a man may have one virtue, and be liable to many
reproves, not being out of the gunshot, therefore he should not be confident,
of that one, but rather extend himself to every one. And I desire every one of
these whom it may concern, that they may by this caution be advised to take
heed of offense or scandal, which may hinder them in their way.

2. And so I come to the explication of the point, wherein I shall propound,

1. Something concerning the name, covetousness.

2. Concerning the nature, and so shall endeavor to clear the thing,

First, by a description of it, what it is.

Secondly, by a distribution of it, according to the several kinds and ranks
of it.

Thirdly, by a short designation of the properties of it: not such as might
make signs and characters of it, but such only as I expressed particularly in
the point.

1. This only I shall note concerning the name, covetousness, (for I cannot
well go about to define any thing, what it is, except first the name be agreed
upon; for names and words play fast and loose, and so the definition must
vary, according to the latitude of the words.) To omit all Metaphors, and such
which are farther off, there is a threefold latitude of this word.

1. It is taken in a large sense, and so it comprehends all inordinate desire,
more than that which is properly called covetousness, or which our Savior
aims at in this place, covetousness or concupiscence after any thing, it may
reach to all things inordinatly desired: As for example, to mention but three
creatures, that there may be concupiscence after, honor, lust, and riches: Now
we have nothing to do with it after this large sense.

2. It is taken in a strict sense, which I desire not to make use of, though it
is used by some Divines, as indeed every one will have his own apprehension,
and yet there is no great difference: for my part, so long as things are agreed
on, I shall never make contention about words, for that were but to hinder all
knowledge.

Know therefore, some take the word more strictly than is necessary, they would
have covetousness to be an inordinate appetite only in regard of keeping and
saving riches, and not to reach to getting of them.

3. I take it here in a moderate indifferent sense, and so it is all inordinate
desire toward riches in that excessive way, our affections and inclinations
being set on them inordinately: I take covetousness in that middle sense,
which comprehends both desiring inordinately, and getting inordinately, and
saving inordinately: either desiring, getting, or saving inordinately, this is
covetousness.

And this being premised concerning the word, I shall in the second place
endeavor to express the nature of it, first, in a brief description, which I
promise not to be accurate in, because it is not easy to define it accurately,
for an accurate definition should have nothing but the mere essentials, and
all the essentials, which is wonderful hard in all things, especially in
moral things, but rather a rude draught or description, which may be
sufficient for ordinary understandings, and for the general use of men: What I
conceive sufficient for the nature of the thing, I express it thus.

Covetousness is a moral vice, or an inordinate affection toward riches, or
worldly things, whereby the whole heart of man is inclined excessively thereto,
and inordinately carried toward them, arising from a judgment perverted, and
producing perverse fruits or actions.

There be two things to be dilated and enlarged in brief, for it will be
necessary to lay the foundation thoroughly, because the true understanding of
this comprehends all that shall be built upon it: As there is in all
descriptions, the general nature and the particular nature wherein the
formality of the thing consists. So it is in this description, for it contains,

1. The general nature of this, it is a vice, and a moral vice.

1. It is a vice: for there be two kinds of dispositions which the soul of man
is capable of; there is a crooked disposition and a straight; that disposition
of the soul which is right in the right frame, toward any thing, that
disposition is virtuous, and there is a crooked disposition, and that is, when
the soul is not in its right temper, and that is vice, being not in the rank
of virtue, which is a commendable ornament that beautifies the soul, but in
the rank of vice, which is a stain and a spot that defiles and shames the
soul.

2. It is a moral vice. There be two sorts of virtues and vices,
intellectual, and moral; wisdom is an intellectual virtue, and so all the
pregnancy of the intellectual part of the understanding, these excellencies of
the understanding are intellectual virtues, but this is none of those, but a
moral vice, there be moral vices which corrupt men's hearts, the inclinations
of their soul being corrupt, their understanding, and the will and affections
are corrupt, and this is of that nature, it is a moral deformity: Now in a
moral vice there be these two things which are most principally confiderable,
and I shall briefly touch them, because I would have this description, though
rude, yet useful, not only for describing this particular thing, but for any
man to frame a description of virtues or vices by.

Two things are most considerable in a moral vice.

First, the seat of it, and that is the soul of man, and the soul universal;
and so it is,

1. Formally, in the will and affections, which are the proper seat of every
moral vice or virtue. I conceive the will and the affections are in reality
the same, and without all question, according to the general opinion of all
the learned, the proper seat of every moral vice or virtue is in the
affections, in the right or wrong temper of the affections or will; when the
will is right set, it has attained to virtue; when it is wrong set, it has
attained to vice: therefore I chose to describe it principally to be an
inordinate affection; yet withal I added some other things (because there is a
general pollution of the soul by this vice) although the proper seat be in
the will, yet it has an influence into, and defiles the rest of the faculties:
and so it is,

2. Radically, in the understanding, for there is no deformity in the will and
affections, but there is a concurrent distemper in the understanding, it
framing a wrong judgment and opinion, for that is the radix whence the
affections are misled and misinformed; and as all virtues, so all vices are
formally and radically in the understanding, and all the rest of the faculties
of the soul; so they are,

3. Vertually, in the actions; for the propensity of the soul toward virtues
or vices, toward right or wrong, is manifest in ordinate or inordinate acts; I
say, in the actions, though vice be seated formally in the will, and radically
in the understanding, yet it appears vertually in the actions.

Secondly, the second thing considerable in a moral vice or virtue, is the
state, nature and qualities of them, wherein you may observe two things. 1. The
line, or horizon, that divides betwixt virtue and vice. 2. The rule, by which
we find out this line. The line that divides betwixt virtue and vice, I
express thus: when a man keeps the golden path of mediocrity, then a man is
in the right line of virtue, when his ways are equinoxiall, even, when he
swerves from this, his affections, and so his actions, depending on them,
swerve, either to the right hand, or to the left, either to excess, beyond the
line; or defect, short of the line; then is an aberration from the line of
virtue, and so a man is in hazard of vice.

2. The rule of this mediocrity: The Philosophers, as the Naturalists observe,
found no other compass to find out the right line, that when virtue runs
even, as wisdom shall direct; the truth is, it must be the voice of judgment
and discretion that must judge of all moral virtues; to prescribe the path of
the affections, a right and due temper must be kept; and that they may be in a
due temper, all must be described by wisdom: But to speak more Theologically;
it is the will of the wise God that is the rule of mediocrity, which is written
partly in his own breast, in the holiness of his own nature, as the way that
men must walk in; partly written in our hearts, so far as they come into
right reason, to be judged either as reason is originally right, or rectified.
In time of innocence, reason was a competent judge, because it was not
depraved; and full of light and beauty, all darkness being dispelled (by those
heavenly beams) which did serve for the guiding of a man's life, but now nature
is corrupt, and it is as hard to have right reason, as it is to say what
mediocrity is, therefore I add in the third place, written in the word, as the
will of God is written in his own breast, in the holiness of his own nature,
and in our hearts; so all virtue is but an extract of something in the mount,
according to that pattern which is left written in the word, God revealing to
his people his will, and the way of holiness, which is pleasing and acceptable
to him, that must be the judge and rule by which we must discern the line of
mediocrity, wherein virtue consists, swerving from which in the one, or defect
in the other, is vice. And so much concerning the general nature of it, that
it is a vice, and a moral vice.

2. Now to add something concerning the particular, that which makes the
formality of this vice of covetousness, that you may discern it from other
vices, I would propound but two things.

1. Something more general; consider the Object, and the Act toward that
Object.

1. The Object; for every kind of vice or virtue receives its species from the
Object: now the Object is riches, the obliquity of it is by way of excess, as
the obliquity of the soul inmatters of pleasure is lust or wantonness, in
matters of honor is pride or ambition: Covetousness is the obliquity which is
in respect of riches and worldly goods, that is, when we are carried toward
them inordinately, aiming at more than is competent: what is competent, may be
judged by nature, what is necessary and sufficient for nature, may be judged by
reason, what is reasonable, may be judged by faith, now to be desirous, and
covet, and lust after more than such a competency, to go beyond competency,
besides necessity, reason or faith; this is a vicious disposition toward
riches, this is all I shall say in general concerning the object, that it is a
vice, the exercise whereof gives a vicious tincture and perverse inclination to
the soul, when it has to deal with riches; only let me add by way of
caution, most of all, both Philosophers and others, make covetousness to be a
vice in the defect, not in the excess: I am hard to believe, but it is the
excessive carriage of the soul toward riches, but this is easily reconciled;
if men consider vices with relation to virtue, take the excess and the defect
as they stand in the habit to virtue, then covetousness is a defect to
liberality; for liberality is the moderate seeking after riches and using of
them, prodigality is the excess, and covetousness prevaricates from the rule
in the mount, in, or by way of defect, excess, being something opposite: but
if you take it according to the object, as they stand in habit with the object:
for my own pait, with submission to others, I conceive that covetousness is
rather in the excess, than in the defect, in forcing the soul to worldly
things, when a man is like the woman in the Gospel, that had a spirit of
infirmity, bows down toward earthly things: prodigality is a defective
carriage, when a man regards them not with due moderation, but throws all out
at windows: upon the point they come both to the same point and issue, and
what I have said of this, may be said of all virtues and vices.

2. More particularly, the exorbitance of this covetousness may be
apprehended, partly by the opposition in which it stands to other things,
partly in its own proper temper and disposition. 1. For the opposition, there
be two things to which covetousness is opposed in the same rank, respecting
the same object of riches, it is opposed to,

1. Liberality, in all the ranks and degrees; and,

2. To prodigality; I only note this by the way, although we generally mention
but one virtue upon the line in matter of estate, and that is liberality; yet
this liberality may have a threefold latitude, it may comprehend three distinct
branches, the distinction of which may be taken diverse ways.

The lowest rank to which covetousness is opposed to liberality, is frugality;
he which is frugally liberal, which has but a mean estate, and in a mean
business, though he be sparing, yet he keeps the character and temper of
virtue, according to the proportion of the estate, nature, and condition of his
business.

The middle story to which covetousness is opposed to liberality, is that we
call moderate liberality, that is in those which have but ordinary estates, and
in ordinary cases, to be simply liberal, and not to aim at great proportions
in ordinary cases, men of ordinary places, ordinary liberality is the true
character.

The highest story is magnificence, to be more than liberal, to exceed
proportion, either taken from proportion of a man's estate, as a great man is
not liberal, except he be magnificent, proportionable to his estate, or to the
thing, the business he is about to act; a man is not liberal to the public
good, which is barely liberal, if he be not magnificent according to his
estate, and proportionable to the public good, it is not right; for
magnificence is the true temper of liberality, which magnificence may be taken
in respect of two several things.

1. In regard of the person in whom it is: there be persons which are of mean
condition, it is enough for them, according to their estate and condition, to
be frugall; and so they shall carry themselves vertually, though they go no
farther than frugall liberality, with respect to their means and condition.
Others, which are of a middle sort, it is not enough for them to be frugally
liberal, but they must be liberally liberal, or else they come within the
compass of covetousness; though it be not sordid and base covetousness, yet
they are not without the verge. The last rank are those which have fullest
estates; it is not enough for them to be frugally liberal, nor liberally
liberal, they will not avoid covetousness, except they be magnificently
liberal, still to keep the proportion: if he which has a great estate, does
no more than he which has a mean one, or an indifferent one; he does covet
basely, because he does not magnificently, as his estate affords.

2. In regard of the several cases, and so there be three several cases, in
which these several ranks may be considered, and accordingly expressed.

1. Trivial and ordinary cases, and there frugall liberality is sufficient.

2. Great and necessary cases, and there liberal liberality is to be expressed.

3. Urgent and extraordinary cases, and there, according to a man's proportion,
magnificent liberality is required.

I remember an observation that the Rabbis have, it may be it may please some
of this auditory, but in a perverse way; I desire there may be no
misconstruction; they give this rule, to have every man carry himself
according to his estate, the thing they specify is in matter of clothes, or
apparel; they would have every man keep to his estate, and yet they allow of
some excess, and some defect, yet so, as liberality may rule: the thing is
this, cloth thy wife above thy estate, cloth thy children according to thy
estate, and cloth thy self beneath thy estate; they allow excess on the one
side, and defect on the other, and so upon the point they are made even; if
there be excess in one, moderation in another, and defect in another, that
makes the supply; the thing I note it for, is not for the particular, but for
the general, according to the three ranks how we may regulate our selves,
according to the three rules, and those according as the case requires, whether
in a way of frugality, liberality, or magnificence: I give but this rule
proportion to that, for matter of diet and apparel, an ingenuous frugall
liberality is commendable, rather keep within the compass, it is the best rule
of virtue that can be given in this case, because the excess, or inclining to
excess, does but foment vice, as excess in diet, sloathfulnesse, which
hinders and impaires the intellectual parts, excess in apparel is but a flag
of pride, and an inclination to it: therefore in those things the best rule is,
to keep the temper of frugality, go in a liberal way, not sordidly, but in a
way of frugality, rather under, than above a man's estate.

There be some other things, wherein the character of liberality lies, to be
observed, I will mention but two; toward the diligent labourer, and toward
the necessitated beggar, and there go a little beyond the compass of
frugality; be not penurious, pinching the laborers wages, and beating it
down, or the poor trades-mans ware: do as you would be done by; for it may be
better alms, and baser covetousness, to grate upon the poor labourer, beat
down the hire upon the poor man that sells his commodity, so as he cannot
live; herein go in an ingenuous liberal way.

There be other things that characterize magnificence, in all public services,
which are for the public good, for the good of the Church, or the advancement
of the glory of God; for the good of the commonweal, or the service of the
King, and the supporting his State and Honor, the best way is to baulk a
frugall way, transcend a mere liberal way, and Araunah-like, go in a
magnificent way, rather beyond our selves; for it I abate something below the
rule in diet and apparel, I shall have scope to exalt my self above my self
in the public good; this was the first thing to which covetousness is opposed
to liberality; coming short thereof is, when a man forbeares to go according
to the rule of virtue, and keeps aloof off.

2. On the other side, covetousness is opposed to prodigality, it is so far
from coming short of the rule of moderation, that it exceeds, the golden line
is a free, ingenuous, liberal using and spending these things, as discretion
shall prescribe: but when a man is beyond the bounds, careless for matter of
estate, riches, throw all away in a night, upon dice or vain courses, the
extremity is in the excess.

2. But now, besides the opposition, the proper temper and disposition of
covetousness does best characterize it, it does infect the whole soul,
although formally it be,

1. In the affections; an inordinate affecting, and a love toward money, love
of having much, immoderate desire, and immoderate grief and vexation, if he
have them not; immoderate fear, if there be any danger of losing them; it may
be circumscribed by any of these inordinate affections, it is the desire, or
love, either of them will express it fully, immoderate or inordinate love to
riches, affecting of them, that is the defilement of the soul, in regard of
the affections.

2. In the apprehension radically, it is in the understanding, which arises
from some misconceit in the understanding; I will but mention one or two of the
maine. In the understanding an overweening of worldly things; a man thinks
there is a great deal more good and excellency, more desirable, and more
conducible toward his happiness and content, than indeed they do; he has an
erroneous opinion concerning the excellency of them, if he did not esteem them
so highly, he would never affect them so deeply; for a man's affections depend
upon his opinion.

There is another root of bitterness, and that is atheism, or infidelity, or
diffidence, when men are poisoned with a low esteem of Gods providence,
thinking Gods Word is not to be taken heed of; they dare not trust Gods
providence, but themselves, and their own solicitous care, for providing for
themselves, dare not give any allowance to Gods providence; these are the maine
roots of covetousness in the understanding.

3. It manifests it self in perverse actions, the actions are depraved.

1. The thoughts are tainted with caring immoderately, always plodding,
running with thorny cares, vexing and tormenting the soul with desires, that
he is continually upon the rack with carking and caring thoughts.

3. His speeches are perverse, a thousand to one if his breath smell not of
earth, all his talk is of his worldly business, how he may compass such a
possession; if he would show but as much love to God, as he does to his mammon,
it were well.

3. His deeds, they also are polluted.

There be two maine actions which are inordinate, getting, and having.

1. Getting, falling on inordinate courses, riches must be had, however they
come by them, by fair or foul play; covetousness is a snare put on by the
devil and our own corrupt lust, which makes us venture (when we see a bait)
upon any inordinate action.

2. Saving and keeping will be inordinate, he will be pinching and penurious,
scarce enjoying what he has; it is a death to part with any thing, he parts
with so much blood out of his veins, as pence out of his purse; it goes to
his heart and soul: inordinate getting, keeping, and saving; this is the first
thing, I add but a second.

2. As covetousness infecteth the whole soul, so the inordinatenesse of it
appears in the exceeding

in what love requires, and is either
Of God, Our selves, or Neighbor.
The inordinatenesse of it shows it self especially in the affections; and
this I shall express in all these three things.

First, that is apparent covetousness, and wears the livery and cognizance of
covetousness, when it neglects what love requires, and is either against
religion, or justice, or charity, those that stick not to trespass on any duty
of love, I will mention all under that name, are deeply guilty,

1. When men fear not to trespass on the love of God, and of holy duties,
love worldly things so, as they will dispense with the love of God, trample on
Gods back, break all rules of piety, rather than not come to his
covetousness.

2. When a man tramples most unnaturally upon the love of a man's self, that
which he owes to himself; he will spend no time on his soul, to feed that,
for fear he should have too little for the world. Nay, he will starve his
soul, and body also, to save charges, that he may grow rich, and scrape
togeth^r these outward things, he cares not though he pinch himself, and
those that belong unto him.

3. When the love of the world is predominant, above the love of his neighbor,
that he can break the law of justice or charity, break the law of justice, so
that he will wrong, defraud, cozen, or cheat his neighbor any way, or damage
him, accounting all to be fish that comes to his net, so it may but feed his
covetousness: this is an inordinate affection toward riches clearly, the very
disease and leprosy sticking in his forehead. And not only when men break
the law of justice, but when they break the law of charity, that can withold
what they ought, or might do, or are called upon to do in that way, wither his
hand from giving alms, straiten him from his own flesh, it is death with him
to part with any thing; in a word, when he can dispense with the love of God,
himself, and his neighbor, breaking the duty of love, justice and charity;
and all for the love of money; this is a clear character of inordinatenesse
after riches, and worldly things.

LUKE, Chap. 12. Ver. 15. And he said unto them, take heed and beware of
Covetousness.
THus of the description of the nature of covetousness; I shall add a word
concerning the second.

2. The distribution of it: and so it may receive a distribution, or
distinction, three ways. 1. In regard of the subject. 2. In regard of the
state in which it may be. 3. In regard of the degree.

I. In regard of the subject, there is a double kind of covetousness.

1. It may be incident to the godly, as a concomitant, being the relick of
original sin, the seeds of all vices are in him, and so there is a natural
propensity still remaining toward covetousness, even in a godly man; but it
is but a concomitant, it does not bear sway at all in him; for in some measure
it is subdued and mortified; although it may be something, more or less,
toward predominancy. It may be considered in a godly man as diligent^y
opposed, a godly man is upon his watch, if there be any root of bitterness in
him, which inclines him toward covetousness, he will watch over it, and
oppose and set himself against it, he will keep a narrow watch over his soul,
because he is conscious of his inclination thereunto.

2. The other kind of covetousness is incident to a wicked man, and it is in
him predominant, he is a servant, and a slave, he mak^s it his calling, he
gives himself over, and subjects himself to it, it rules him, for he is
wholly bent that way, but this admits of some differency; viz. even in a wicked
man it may be sometimes enraged like a flame, with infinite fury, so that it
bears down all before it, sometimes also it may be restrained, there may be
restraining grace in a wicked man, that keeps him from exorbitancie, though
there is no saving grace, to mortify it, and so it retain the same nature of
covetousness: herein he is like the Fox; the disposition of Fox is to
devour when he is in the chain, yet he devoures not the Lambs, because he is
chained; a wicked covetous man may have the same wild disposition in him, which
is natural, but God may bridle and curb him from acting, and keep him in fair
terms, that he is not so outrageous as many are.

II. Another distinction of covetousness is, in regard of the different state
of covetousness in those persons where it is, godly or wicked men, there is no
estate wherein it is, but it is a crime, be it in the lowest estate; 1.
Sometimes covetousness may be criminal, as it may be subservient, not the
maine vice, but a servant to other vices; covetousness, as a sin, may serve
some other lust, although I cannot denominate covetousness to be the ruling
sin, yet it is in a man, and serves his turn, as a side-wind, to serve some
other lust. As for example: Sometimes a man's principal sin is pride; now
because pride must have something to maintain it, and therefore a man must use
his covetousness as a servant to his pride, to furnish that, to bring him in
trappings for his pride, which otherwise would be hungry; pride would starve it
self without it: this is frequent, men will scrape, and rape, and keep a foul
ado, to oppress, grate, and grind the faces of men; yet it is not done
principally out of covetousness, but rather as an act of pride; covetousness
being a servant to pride: alas his sin may not be covetousness, he glories
not in hoarding up money, but he must live at such a rate, in such a fashion,
he must have gay clothes, and he is necessitated to be covetous, not because
his inclination is thereunto, but because he cannot else support his pride.

Another corruption that covetousness waits upon, is lust: a man which is
given to lust, he cannot feed his lust without* meat and drink, to stuff the
pot, he cannot maintain his harlots, or nourish himself in that sin, nor
furnish himself without covetousness; and that makes him injurious, to steal
from parents, or masters, use any trick of covetousness, but it is not out of
love thereunto; covetousness is not his sin, but a servant to his lust, so
that in both these respects covetousness may be in a man, but yet in the
estate of a servant.

2. Sometimes also covetousness is not only the criminal, but the capital
vice, which does apparently denominate a man to be a covetous man, although he
may have other vices, yet this is the chief, this is his grace, and in this
case covetousness is a friend to him, it is instead of pride, for he prides
himself in his great estate, and herein covetousness is not a servant to
pride, but the very throne of pride, which makes his pride sit higher, he is
proud, but upon conceit of his great heap of money, looking over the shoulder
of his poor neighbor, and thus a man is proud, but it issues from his bags,
his great estate, covetousness is the maine sin; so in many other kinds a
man may instance, wherein covetousness is the master-sinne, when a man makes
it his glory, and his very trade, to gather a great estate together, not for
any use of it, but that he can get such an estate.

III. The last distinction of covetousness is in regard of the degrees, as all
virtues and vices, they are capable of degrees: It may be, in some less, in
some more, in some it may be hardly discerned, in others so palpable, that it
may be felt; there is a sordid base covetousness, that all the world may see a
man is covetous, he bears it in his forehead, in every act that he does, in
all his carriage and course: Others slily dissemble covetousness; are not so
sordidly and so basely covetous; but more slily carry the business; men that
are inwardly covetous, dissembling the business, or, at least, carrying it a
great deal better.

2. Now to come briefly to the predicate, or the thing we affirm concerning
covetousness: there be two things that I have propounded in the point
concerning covetousness.

First, something in regard of it self. Secondly, something in respect as it
stands to us.

1. In regard of it self, there be these four properties of covetousness
that I shall note.

1. It is a subtle and a sly sin, hardly discerned, by every man, neither
in himself, nor others; a man may be in before he is aware; and that arises
partly from a general ground of vice, because all vices are subtle and sly,
they can borrow habits, and dress themselves in the attire of virtues;
covetousness may claim kindred with, and go under the habit of frugality,
partly, upon a particular ground, there is something in covetousness which
makes it more hard to be discerned; because there be more fair pleas for this,
than for any other sin in the world: as, to provide for children and
posterity, for a man's estate and condition, to support his rank; a thousand
things a man may plead for covetousness, there is more to be said for that a
great deal, than for many other sins, as luxury and riot, uncleanenesse and
filthiness, although they be works of darkness, and men are ashamed, if they
once be discovered de facto to be guilty of them, their mouths are stopped,
but this is a more subtle sin, and will admit of a great many colors,
therefore it walks more close, and is hardly to be discerned: In this respect
it is a point of Christian prudence, to take notice of it, and, by the way, to
make use of this: Now there may be these two things deduced, for it may be very
useful for practice.

1. Because it is a sly and subtle sin, I would wish every man, not lightly
or rashly to accuse another man of it, and upbraid him with it; but look to his
warrant and ground for it, if it be ambiguous, and his actions may admit of a
fair construction, I must not judge him, I know not a man's estate, and many
other such like circumstances may fall in, and therefore I may not presently
condemn another of covetousness.

2. Another point of wisdom, rather more necessary, is that we should not
easily excuse ourselves, presently bless not thy self, as if thou could
shun, decline, and avoid all reproof, thinking this sin of covetousness
concerns not me, it does not hit me so home; in many things it is hard to
prove that which is clearly true: a man cannot by the law prove a man is
drunk, unless he be so grossly drunk, that he is not able to keep out of a
carts way, and many other signs of a legal proof, are hard, but yet a
conscientious proof betwixt God and a man's own conscience, may be discerned:
though thy sin be such a sly sin as covetousness, that another man is
loath, happily, to charge it upon thee, remember it is a sly sin, and may
lie at the heart, suspect thy self therefore, and do not easily excuse it.

2. It is an universal and general sin, largely dispersed, our Saviors
words implie so much, therefore s^ith he, take heed, and beware; there is a
double caution, as if he had said, you had need to watch, and to look narrowly
to it, it is a sly sin, a Jugler, that will cast a thousand mists before your
eyes: and withal, it implies that it is a general sin, I speak to all of
you, says our Savior to his Disciples, and others also, as if this were a
general root of bitterness all the world over; and in truth it is so, a man
may see it universally: for,

1. There is no rank or sort of men, which are altogether free.

1. Wicked men, some seem to walk contrary to it, in prodigality; yet either
in predominancie, or subserviencie, scarce a wicked man but he is covetous; he
which is prodigal must scrape unjustly to maintain that.

2. Godly men are not altogether free, there are the relickes of this
corruption in original sin, and it shows it self even in them; godly men
may do it under pretense of religion, they (as he said) are then only godly,
when godliness is sparing, and frugall: many men are against drunkenness in
their families, because it spends their estates, under a vizor of godliness
they keep men sober; so that a man may pretend religion, and yet within have a
root of covetousness.

II. It is in all sorts and ranckes of men.

1. Poor men think they are not capable of it, and yet notwithstanding, their
desires may be as large as hell, there may be as much covetousness in a poor
man, as in a rich man.

2. Rich men it is evident that they are exceeding obnoxious to it, the having
of much, increases the desire of having of more.

3. It is to be found among all callings, the Citizen, the Countryman, the
Tradesman, the Gentleman, the Minister, the Lawyer, all callings, whether
Civil or Ecclesiastical, even Churchmen may be subject to covetousness, it
is a disease that every rank may be infected withal.

4. In regard of every man's condition, there is no sex nor age free, those to
whom it belongs to take the care of families, women also as they are more
impotent, their affections are more inordinate, and so they are more
unreasonably covetous: in all ages it is, although it be more rare in younger
age, covetousness is not so proper thereto, youth is not free, but old age
especially.

III. It is also a tenacious sin, deeply rooted, and therefore not easily
laid down, of our own accord, a thousand to one, if a man lay it down of his
own accord, to have so much goodness of himself as to strip himself of this
vice, not one of a thousand does it, no nor is it easily allayed or beaten
down, not by those means by which vices may be cured.

There are three things which may cure any vice. First, the authority of
religion. Secondly, the weight of reason. Thirdly, the tract of time.

1. The best curing is, when the authority of religion will do it, if when a
man hears the word of God, a man is ready to say, speak Lord for thy servant
hears, that man is in a good temper, when he will be beaten from vice by the
word of God, God has so much authority over his soul, that if he hear this
sin is displeasing to him, he will own none of it, but throw it out of his
hands, as children many times at the very word of their parents, and this is
the best: but covetousness is so tenacious, and rooted in many, as many words
from God will not work, to get it removed: our Savior here is feign to use
many words and arguments, besides his own authority his bare word will not do
it.

2 The weight of reason may step in and second religion, showing the deformity
and baseness of it, and convincing the conscience, and yet this will not do
it: surely that is not a good temper, when men will not be regulated by reason,
when it is neither wit nor reason that will make the cure; our Savior is feign
to heap reason upon reason, I dare say, never any thing more larger discoursed
of, and more fully convinced, then our Savior does here in this Chapter, and
in Matthew, and yet all reason will not do it, not beat it down it was so
tenacious, and stickt so closly.

3 Many things, neither authority of religion, nor weight of reason, yet time
it self will cure them: love is overcome with time, but time does not cure
covetousness, but rather inflame it: the longer a man is acquainted, the less
he grows weary, seeing no inconvenience in this sin of covetousness,
although it pinch him a thousand times, and ride him basely, yet (thinks he) it
is no such base thing, although indeed it makes a man so sordid and base, that
it tramples upon his nature, and his very excellencies, and makes him a base
drudge, and the longer he is in it, the more beastlike he is, the better he
likes it: and whereas age cures many distempers, time when it comes to end,
frees a man, being weary, and having run themselves out of breath, with
their foolish ways; but covetousnes grows upon a man in his age, the nearer a
man grows to the earth, the greedier he is after the earth, his mouth will be
full of earth one day, and yet quo minor via, eo plus viaticum, the less way
he has to go, the more tenacious he is.

4. Which is the principal thing, it is a most dangerous sin, a sin of a
dangerous and a hidious consequence. I thought now to have demonstrated it by
some places of Scripture, wherein I should set down the black stamp, and
fearful name that this sin has, so fearful that it should make every man
shie of it, and abhor it, yea, the very thoughts of it; for there is not a
blacker sin in all the book of God, in some respects, of an ordinary moral
sin, then this sin of covetousness.

Some examples I should give, I shall briefly touch some of them, besides many
negative examples which Divines do observe: there is not any one man in
Scripture which was noted for a godly man, which has ever been tainted with
this sin of covetousness; not any one example, though you may meet with
examples of many sins, yet with none of this: Noah was touched with
drunkenness, David with murder and adultery, Peter denied his master, we
shall not meet with any one instance, that the Scripture approves for a godly
man, that was ever tainted with this sin, it is so little kin to godliness:
not that I will say, that there never was any; yet it shows, it is very far
from piety and Christianity, from the way thereof: and those affirmative
examples that we have of any that were covetous, we shall see they are set
down unto us, to show, that they are most contemptible persons, as the most
vile and odious persons to be abhorred. I had thought also to have showed it by
ground of reason: briefly in general, to touch it but in a word, referring the
main of this, the application, to the next time. There be two things, by which
a man may see the danger and folly of this sin of covetousness.

1. It opposes all the good of nature, and all the good of grace, it checks
all graces, and the ways thereof, and the whole Spirit of grace, it casts a
dampe and chokes a man from hearing the Word, from doing the work of the Lord,
and thriving by the means of grace, it stifles every grace in the soul, the
grows of it, it chokes all the good of nature, so that a man that is tainted
with this sin, has not comm^^ humanity, no bowels of compassion, as though
he were made of flint, it does so far estrange him from the power of the
excellency of grace, that it degrades him of all the sweetness of nature.

2. The second general thing is, that it exposes him to all kinds of
wickedness, there is no evil, whether of sin or punishment, but covetousness
exposes a man to. 1. It leads a man into a thousand snares, he which is once
set on with a greedy desire after the world, will not stick to commit any
sin in the world, to run upon the swords point, he is drawn into the trap by
the bait: suppose a man hold a piece of gold at the end of a sack; the Devil
he does so, a covetous man he will creep into the sack to be catched by the
Devil, and cast into hell, while he goes into the sack after the gold.

It exposes a man to all kind of punishments, both because it takes away all
that watchfulness, that men observe not the season of danger: hence it is,
that our Savior wishes them, to take heed of being overcome with surfeting,
and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, lest that day come on them
unawares: a man which is laden not only with drink, but with luxury, he grows
wanton, and so minds not when evil approaches to avoid the storm; this is
the dry drunkenness, the cares of this life, if a man be overburdened, busy,
plodding after the world, it makes him forgetful of himself. I remember a
Story, of a City in Sicilia being beseiged by the Romans, the maine
experienced and most artificial man in the City was one Archimedes, he used
many devices, and did many wonders, but at last for all his stratagems the City
was surprised, the Soldiers brake in, and great means was made to find out
Archimedes, at last, the Soldiers hearing where he was, brake into his house,
and he was in his Study, he never took any notice that the City was taken,
when the Soldiers opened his Study door, they found him busy, drawing lines
in the dust, like some Mathematician, the Soldiers stood still looking on him,
at last, in scorn and disdain, one of the Soldiers, seeing him so barbarous,
and inhumane, drew his sword and killed him, much against the Generals mind:
Although God beseige us round about, though the Church be taken and surprised,
though a man's own house be in danger, yet if a man be busy, drawing lines in
the dust after worldly things, he will take no notice of any thing, nor use any
means to prevent it, see no danger, and so not be able to avoid danger.

LUKE, Chap. 12. Ver. 15. SERMON. III.
And he said unto them, take heed and beware of Covetousness.
THere was one point of Doctrine that we propounded out of these words, and it
was this; that covetousness was a sin, subtle, universal, tenacious, and
dangerous: cautiously to be avoided by all, and carefully to be watched and
warded against.

Two things we propounded in the handling of it.

First, to show what was meant by covetousnes, which we have already done.

Secondly, to speak something concerning the predicate, what we affirm
concerning it: which we came to the last time: briefly to give you the heads.

In respect of it self, covetousness, four things we affirmed.

First, that it was a subtle sin, not easily discerned.

Second, a universal sin, scarce any, more or SERMON. III.
less, but are covetous, all are tainted with it.

Thirdly, that it was a tenacious sin, that sticks fast, and cleaves close unto
us, etc. Covetousness is so revitted into men, that we can hardly get it out.

Fourthly, it is a sin of dangerous consequence and great importance: I shall
only a little enlarge upon that, it being the maine thing in the point; I will
illustrate that, partly by Scripture, partly by reason. I mentioned then,
(though I shall not name all) that there were many pregnant Texts of Scripture,
which represent unto us, the dangerous nature and condition of this sin:
Colossians 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is idolatry; mark there, how covetousness is yoked, and
what is the consequence of it, although it be a far more subtle sin,
hardly discerned, yet it is rancked with fornication, the sins that all the
world cries shame of, the Spirit of God rancks it among those: nay more then
so, it sets a special brand on that above all the rest, many do penance for
fornication, scarce did ever any for covetousness, the world takes no notice
of such persons, the world has set adultery in a white sheet, but God
himself has stamped a black brand on it, covetousness which is idolatry; it
is true, there is no sin that carries the heart inordinately toward any
creature, but it may be termed idolatry: the harlot is the lustful man's idol,
he makes an idol of her: preferment and honor is the ambitious SERMON. III.
man's idol, it leads him to it, but yet we do not find that the Scripture
does expressly brand any other sin, which is not directly idolatry, with that
name, but only covetousness: I conceive, to omit other things, there is one
thing, as the particular reason of it, which is very considerable (for there is
a general reason for other sins,) which is this; what a man preferres before
God, that he makes as his God, exalts it in the throne of God, and therefore
for that general reason, covetousness is called idolatry: But there is a
special evil in covetousness which makes it idolatry in a deeper dye, a
covetous man besides that in the general respect, his money is his idol in
the particular, he puts trust in it, he has a confidence in it, and that is
the greatest honor that God can have, when we can put trust, and secure our
selves, and bear our selves out upon Gods protection, and in that respect,
there is a great deal of propriety in those words to this sin: for which
things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, verse.
the 6. It is not only true of other sins, which may be taken notice of, but
to provoke God in this secret sin, which the world takes not so much notice
of, for this thing the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.

One remarkable place we have in the first of Timothy 6. 9, 10. But they that
will be rich fall into a temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, etc. For the love of money is the root of all evil, which
while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and peirced
themselves through SERMON. III.
with many sorrows: this is as full a place as I can well conceive: those that
will be rich, that are mad after the world, they are in a most dangerous
condition: such men cast themselves upon a thousand dangers, every expression,
every word is full of weight, I will not take it now on me, to dilate at full
unto you on them, I will leave it to your own thoughts: It is the root of all
evil, I will only speak of this, it is true, any sin which is predominant,
may be the universal root of all evil in that man, so that it may be applied
farther then the matter of covetousness, but yet there is something
emphaticall in covetousness above other things, that precipitates a man into
all evil, for that man which is set upon gain, will not stick upon any evil
course that may advance him that way; it perverts the eyes of the wise, makes
them blind, that they can see no danger: thus we see, that it is the root of
all those evils, which do arise in that man which is bent upon covetousness;
but there be some other men which go not upon the root of covetousness, but
upon some other grounds, and so may break into many evils.

And therefore there is a caution to be observed in these words, all kinds of
evil, which is a large word, for covetousness will not put a man into all
kinds of evil, if you take it in the strict signification, for it will not put
him on prodigality, not in an ordinary course, I say, further then to advance
covetousness, unicuique aliquis est sumptus qui vult facere lucrum, a man must
be at cost to gain oftentimes: but to add another place. SERMON. III.


Another place to prove this, is in the 16 of Luke verse 14. And the Pharisees
also who were covetous heard all these things, and derided him: A covetous
heart is so far out of frame toward any good, from any possibility of
recovering him to a good estate, that the means of grace are but a scorn and
derision to him: our Savior himself, I dare be bold to say, the proudest and
most* captious man in the world could not except against his Sermon: happily in
any man's Sermon there may be some infirmity or weakness, so that a man may
except against it, but our SAVIORS Sermon was not obnoxious to any such thing:
And you see covetousness made our SAVIOR himself derided; when men deride
wisdom it self, this is a high pitch, but covetousness does this: Therefore
the Psalmist makes a prayer to GOD, Psalm 119. verse 36. Incline my heart O
Lord to thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness: implying, there is an
incompossibilitie between regarding GODS Word, and covetousness: if a man be
inclined to covetousness, he is clean out of the way from obedience to GODS
commands, they are put in the balance one against an other, and David
therefore here desires GOD that he would incline his heart to keep his
Testimonies, and therefore that he would keep him uprightly, free from
covetousness.

1 Corinthians Chap. 6. verse. 10. compared with Ephesians Chap. 5 -- verse 5.
you shall find that covetousnes SERMON. III.
bars a man out of Heaven, there is the very same observation which I
propounded in the first place, Know you not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, nor Thieves, nor covetous: observe, that covetous
persons are rancked with unclean persons, and with Thieves, they go
altogether, for they are no better then Thieves on the Highway in GODS
estimate, and shall as much be barred out of Heaven, how smooth a sin soever
it seems to be, such cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Corinthians 5. 10.
11, Not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous,
etc. It is such an odious sin and so abhorred of God, that God would have all
men to abandon it, but especially his own people, and therefore amongst other
persons which are vicious and sinnfull, he warnes the faithful not to eat
with a covetous man: and therefore in the 11. verse, If any man that is called
a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, etc. with such an one no not to eat:
It is strange to see that they are so contagious, and loathsome, the Scripture
says no more of a Leprous person, but only, that he should be separated from
the Congregation, there is as much said of a covetous person, one which is in
the Church, and professes the Christian Religion, as for other men of the
world, this is not meant of them here, but if any man which is a Saint of GOD
be covetous, with such a man not to eat, they are excommunicated out of SERMON.
III.
the society of Gods people, covetousness does not only bar a man out of
Heaven, but it bars a man out of heaven upon earth, from the communion of
Saints, and also from all things honorable in a Commonwealth, or Church:
covetousness makes a man unfit to rule, Exo. 18. 21. Moreover thou shall
provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear God, men of truth,
hating covetousness, and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands: a
man is not in Gods choice capable of the magistracy, if he be covetous: and
there is very great reason for it, for that man that is a slave to his lust, is
not fit for that place, it is not to be expected there will be justice done by
him, if he sag too much upon the purse side: for that will keep down the,
balance of justice that it shall not go right.

A man is not capable of honor in the Church, if he be covetous, 1 Timoth. 3.
3. Not given to Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not
a brawler, nor covetous: A Pastor or teacher of the Church of God, should feed
the flock of Christ, and rule well, and therefore should be free from
covetousness, nay, and hate covetousness; for they that are covetous, are
like to look more, and aim more at their own advancement, how they may
advance themselves, and at their own gain, then at Gods glory, and the good
of souls: and therefore not fit to govern in a Church.

2. Besides these testimonies of Scripture, let me add some examples, some I
mentioned the last day on the negative part, that whereas with other SERMON. III
sins some of the Saints of God were tainted, as Noah was tainted with
drunkenness, David with murder and adultery: it is observable, that not one
that bears the name of a real godly man, is touched with covetousness. I
will only mention those affirmative examples, two or three of them, whereby we
shall see, that they are as bad as bad may be, which are stained with this vice
of covetousness, Laban was a covetous man, one that the Scripture brands for a
base vile person, and sets an ignominious note upon him: Nabal, for that was
the Anagram of his name: Nabal the churl is mentioned with infinite disgrace
to be a covetous man.

There is a command given for Kings that they should not be covetous, and of
all men in the world, they have most use of money, for the support of their
state, and the defense of their Kingdoms, and yet they are commanded not to be
covetous. Ahab his covetous humor after Naboths Vineyard, is mentioned in
Scripture as the root of the ruin of him and his family, and posterity, there
were other sins which followed, but covetousness was the root from which all
sprung; we read of one in the new Testament, Demas a forward man once in
religion, but when once he came to embrace the world, and cleave to that, it
was in him a root of bitterness, he apostatized and fell from Christianity,
leaped through all that he had taken upon him before hand.

2. There be two grounds or reasons of the point, taken from the nature of it.
SERMON. III


I. Because covetousness is a sin which opposes all good.

1. It chokes and checks the growth and very beginning of all that is good in a
man. I might illustrate this by diverse places of Scripture; it stops the
good of grace, and all the growth of any excellency in grace, it is those
Thorns which stop and choke the growing to perfection, as I have sometimes
expressed. The Hedgehog in the Fable comes to the Connie-berrie in stormy
weather and desires harbor, he promises fair to lie quiet and the like, but
when once he is entertained, he never leaves pricking, till he has thrust
his host out of doors: so it is with covetousness, it has many fair pleas
and pretenses to get entertainment in a godly heart, it tells him he will be
but a frugall steward, but if once it be admitted, it will never leave till it
has thrust out all piety, and quenched all godliness, and heavenly
mindednes, all will be eaten up with covetousnes.

2. The very good of nature is exceedingly choked by covetousness, all bowels
of compassion are stopped toward our own flesh and blood, there is no noble nor
generous thoughts in such persons, they are not ingenuous, but so sordid, that
as rust consumes iron, so covetousness consumes the substance of natural
perfection, it eats out all. Naturalists observe, that those places where
there are Mines of silver or gold, they are all barren, affording nothing for
the refreshing of man or beast, bearing no grain nor crop; and besides that
which is worse, they are haunted with Devils, SERMON. III.
I am sure it is true of a black spirit which is addicted to covetousness, it
is not only barren of all good, but it exposes them in whom it is, to the very
possession of the Devil, to be led by a base and sordid spirit in all their
actions.

2 As it opposes all good, so it exposes to all kinds of evil: there be two
sorts of evils; the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment, which attends
sin, and covetousness lays a man open to both.

1 There is no evil of sin, but a covetous man will do; the Devil has
hold of him in that vice, and he is at the Devils service for any kind of sin,
to draw his purse: there is nothing in the world as I remember is more opposite
to covetousness in nature then luxury and wantonness, a covetous man is
temperate of his own humor, yet covetousness prostrates to the basest
uncleanness for hire or gain that is: the whole sphere of the commands of
God does appeal covetousness as the breach of them all: it were no difficult
thing (though I have no intention to enlarge so much) to show that there is no
evil but covetousness disposes unto; it takes a man from all good, and
prostrates him to all evil.

2 And consequently there is no punishment but it lays a man open to: To
mention but a word; the wrath of God is the fountain of all punishment which
comes for other siunes, and covetousness exposes a man to the wrath of God,
as I have showed before: but more expressly see Psalm 10. 3. For the wicked
bosteth of his hearts desire, and blesses the covetous whom the Lord
abhors: it brings Gods wrath, it brings the scorn and derision of men upon
a man, there is scarce any one vice so contemptible to all men in general, as
covetousness is, it is the argument of a play to be jeered at on a Stage:
which is an argument, that although it carries a general applause with some,
yet most men fall foul on covetousness, the world spits in his face, he is
jeered at by all men; it exposes to all kind of judgments, which come either
from the wrath of God, or from the hatred of man: I mentioned one thing the
last time, and I will but only mention it now; to take up where we left, and
make some addition where it is necessary: It makes a man unfit to observe Gods
judgments, and so to avoid them, and take care to shun them. A covetous man in
the most dangerous time, is so choked with the cares of the world, that he
minds not any danger, but plods on till he is taken in the very snare,

And thus much concerning covetousness, the predicate that is affirmed of it,
in regard of it self: the other thing I shall mention in a word, and so come
to the application.

2. In respect of us, it is a sin to be avoided by all men, and by all means.

1. By all men, common men, that have but any spark of ingenuitie, must of
necessity abstain from this, and preserve themselves that they be not foiled
with this sin. But Christian men, which pretend to be the Disciples of
Christ, must shun it, especially it being a thing furthest off from piety
and Christianity, there is nothing so unsuitable to, nor so incompatible with
Religion: and therefore fugiat hoc opprobrium a nobis, it is a shame that a
Christian man should be liable to be upbraided with covetousness, and not to
have a fair answer for it, because it is scandalous to Religion and
dishonorable to God: nay it hinders the progress of Religion, therefore it is
to be avoided by all men.

2. By all means: our Savior uses two words here (...), first (...), look
well to thy self, as if he had said, watch and take notice of thy self, lest
thou do slip, look narrowly to your courses and ways, lest you be overtaken
with this sin, and this is not enough (...), but (...), it is a place of
danger, danger lies therein: as you would in times of danger redouble your
watch in the City, so here should be a strong ward kept, to arm and fortify,
antidote and strengthen your selves with all the strength you can against the
danger of this sin, and this arises naturally from the former; for if
covetousness be so dangerous in it self, then it concerns all men by all
means to watch and ward themselves against it.



Conviction, many men may be arraigned that stand convicted of this vice, if
men would well weigh it, and draw out the description of it, it would fall
point blancke upon a great many men which think themselves free.

2. For reproof of them, as being in a foul fault, it may be fouler then they
are aware of, men are ready to please themselves in it, and plead not guilty:
if they be free from other sins, that they can say, I am not like such a man,
they take no notice of this, this subtle sin moves them not, if they come
not within the verge of other sins, they slight spiritual sins, and as
they take no notice of them, so neither do others, for this sin (as some
other sins) comes not within the lash of the Churches censure, the covetous
man is not found fault withal, no neither is the proud man found faulty,
there is no man censured for his pride, or his covetousness, the world takes
no notice of this sin: yet if it be a thing so dangerous, here is a just
reproof for them. But I pass over these.

3. It serves for exhortation, partly that every one would,

1. Examine himself. I gave sufficient hints, by which a man may try himself,
(in my apprehension) in the description, by which any man may receive comfort,
by applying them to his own heart and ways, and seeing, whether in some, more,
or all of them, he comes not to be obnoxious to this sin: I shall only give
you two or three cautions, in which others may examine themselves.

1. Be jealous and suspicious of thy self, it is a subtle sin, very
general, and universally spread. I know it is reported of Luther, that though
he found the root almost of all sins in him, yet he SERMON. III
never found any inclination to covetousness, he was free from that. But for
our selves, and our better examination, let us not be secure; but be a little
suspicious and jealous that there be no such propension in us toward it; for
there may be, although we are not aware of it. And therefore for your better
consideration, take this along with you, upon your examination be not
confident, be a little jealous and suspicious, that there may be a propension
in thee toward it: upon trials take not up foolish conceits upon frugalitie,
but be jealous to scan thy heart in this kind, whether it be inordinate in its
propension toward the world: I have given sufficient directions for this
already.

2. What you do in this kind, do it conscienciously, not to cosen thy self,
but as in the presence of God, and as you will answer him. I have told you that
rule already, I would have no man lightly to charge another, nor easily to
justify himself, and therefore examine your selves conscienciously, not as you
can stand with the judgment of men by outward appearance, but judge as
conscience judges, and as you think you may stand and bear out at the day of
judgment, at that strict account you must then give.

3. Labor to bring your minds and heart to be ingenuous, not to study shifts
and devices, to bear up thy reputation and credit, and so to free thy self
from it. O it is a rare thing to have an ingenuous spirit, such as that, if a
man be not free from a fault, yet he will not be ready to defend it, but
sweetly and ingenuously to acknowledge it, it is impossible but he that stands
upon his points, may be guilty: I could give you diverse touches thereof.

Many men pretend it is not covetousness, but frugalitie, providing for
posterity, this is no ingenuous spirit, nor plainness of heart? Why then do
thou neglect thy child, and bestows not good breeding on her or him, but spare
a penie and spoil the soul of thy child, and the body also? Why art thou so
base, if all be for thy child, as to marry her, and not to give a portion with
her, when all comes to trial, thou have no ingenuous spirit, be ingenuous
therefore, I say, do not foolishly cosen thy self, but be willing to see
what thou do see, and baffle not thy self with foolish pretenses.

4. Suppose the matter be a thing doubtful, I beseech you stand not upon
points with God, to avoid covetousness, be generous, be far from
covetousness, shun all apparances of covetousnes, be noble and generous
minded, keep a broad difference and a vast latitude from covetousness, if you
would be clear, make it appear, be not obnoxious to suspicion, with hinching
and pinching and such baseness, which makes others, and upon probable reason
and good ground, think that indeed you are so; but if you would not be tainted
with this dangerous sin, do the contrary, be so far from covetousness,
that you will rather be generously magnificent, according to the proportion of
your estate, and the nature of the thing: but this is not that I intend, this
is the first branch of the exhortation, that men would examine themselves,

2. I desire that men would humble themselves, and see their corruption, and
be affected truly with sorrow for it, even such sorrow as becomes
Christians, in that humility of spirit which should be in us, upon every
taking our selves napping in every sin? do thou upon examination find thou
art not free from covetousness? do not thou stand on thy pantables, as they
say, but make amends, humble thy self before God, acknowledge the baseness
and vileness of thy spirit, that thou art guilty of that sin which is
abominable to God, hateful to men, being a scorn and derision to them: and,

3. I desire that men would reform themselves, stay not here, but take out a
new lesson, make progress to reformation, recover thy self, or if thou be
already free, labor to prevent it, in the whole latitude, in all the three
species which I mentioned in the application, in our judgments, understanding,
not thinking too high of riches, in our affections, not cleaving inordinately
to them, in our actions, be not too thoughtfull and careful for worldly
things to be talking and breathing of earth continually, having nothing at all
to speak of but riches. There is a part of the mouth which the naturalists call
the coelum, heaven, it is the upper roof of the mouth, there be many men which
have no heaven at all in their mouths, no upper part, but all lower, talking
still of those base and lower things, avoid it therefore in your talk, in your
actions, and in your deeds, be not covetous in scraping in riches, having, nor
saving, especially let it not carry thee inordinately either to impious
courses, to trample upon God, or unjust or uncharitable toward thy neighbor,
or thy self, thy body to pinch that, or thy soul to starve that, or to those
about thee, to carry thy self injuriously toward them, in one word, set thy
self upon reformation, against all the spices of covetousness.

For the further prosecution of this, to cut off all other things, I shall only
propound those things that may be antidotes against this sin, and remedies to
cure this sin: both to recover those which have been touched with this
dangerous sin, and to prevent it for the future: I take them both, and for
them both there be two sorts of helps.

1. Something habitual, to take care to furnish thy soul with, that may lock
it up, and take up the room, that there be no room for covetousness in the
heart.

2. Something that is actual, to be done by a renewed act, and continually
used, for the prevention and the recovering a man from it. I shall but mention
the former, for those things which are habitual.

1. In general, labor to establish thy heart with grace, for vice and sin
is never cast out kindly nor certainly, but by the introduction of that which
is contrary, and that is grace: therefore if you would empty your hearts of
sin, we must clavum clavo pellere, as they say, drive out sin, with driving
in of grace, as one wedge, if we would get it out of a hard piece of wood, we
must drive in another: so nothing can free us from sin but the introduction
of grace: what can take off darkness from the face of the earth? nothing in
the world but light; so, what can drive out sin? it must be grace brought
into the soul, otherwise a man may do, as when a man reproves a fault to amend
his brother, sometimes he casts out one Devil with another, so the only true
way of driving out sin in general, and so this sin of covetousness in
particular, must be by grace brought into the soul, to have a heart
established full of gracious thoughts, inclinations and affections, I shall
mention some more especially.

There be four pair of graces in particular, which are wonderful conducing,
and effectual for the dispossessing of this Devil of covetousness.

The first pair (for I shall join two together) are Humility and Temperance,
or sobriety: it may be some will think, those two be far off, but I told
you in the explication, that covetousness is sometimes in an estate of
^egencie, it is master: sometimes also it is in the estate of a servant, it
waires upon some other sin: there are two other sins that covetousness
does frequently wait upon (when a man is not overmastered with covetousness,
that is not his direct sin) there may be other sins that will use the
service of covetousness, have it as a servant: to instance, covetousness is a
servant to pride, and lust, and to intemperancie, now if a man be of an humble
spirit, it will kill these lusts, a man would not aim at a high estate: for
the most part men aim at great things rather for pride, because he would
bear a high port in the world, he would be (...), as it is said of him in the
Acts, some great one in the world out of pride, that makes them scrape from
this man and from the other, it makes them set upon any injurious course to
advance his pride: therefore if any one would keep prided own, let him learn
humility and if a man would keep pride under, that would be a good means to
suppress his covetousness.

2. Temperance and sobriety is another excellent means to keep under
covetousness: if I be a temperate sober man, and do not affect either
excess in diet or apparel, but am content with ordinary diet and clothes, and
to go in a sober way, what need I tumble so much in the world? a little will
serve for necessity, all is for the back and the belly, covetousness plunges
a man into a thousand inconveniences, it makes them lay about them infinitely
in the world, because they must live at a luxurious rate, they must go so fine
in clothes, and have such diet: whereas it might be as advantageous every
other way; a man might drive a trade within a lesser compass, so contract it,
it would turn to more advantage, and to his greater glory, if he made his
pride exceed in nothing but in intemperancie or greediness after the best
things, this would clean turn the channel another way.

2. The second pair of graces, which, I would have you to fix, increase and
cherish in your hearts is the due love of God, and the love of thy neighbor,
and this will be an excellent weapon to keep under covetousness, for if a man
do love God, and love his neighbor as he ought, at least it will take him off
from all baseness of covetousness, he will not be base to the service of
God, pinching his soul, forbearing to allow any thing to the advancement of
the kingdom of Christ, nor will he be injurious to oppress and defraud his
neighbor, if he be not altogether for himself, for covetousness arises
extremely from self-love, when a man regards not God, nor his neighbor, he
cares not whom he pinches from, so he may advance himself, now the love of
God and of his neighbor will be a great preservative, and there fore labor to
ingraff those affections in thy heart.

3. The third pair of graces which I would have you to labor for, is heavenly
mindedness and contentedness, if a man be heavenly minded, that his face is
toward Jerusalem, toward heaven, if that be the great design of his life; it
will infinitely keep him off from covetousness, he will not stoop to those
base things as rich men do, because he has more high thoughts, and a more
generou^ aim, his mind is not set on the world, but on heaven. what needs he
trouble himself with the cares of the world, which has placed all his
happiness in heaven. And so for a contented spirit, as the Apostle speaks,
godliness with contentedness is great gain: and for he which can frame
himself to a contented spirit, a little will suffice, if he have but food and
raiment, mere necessities, a contented SERMON. III
spirit can rest quiet, and not restlesly reach after great things in the world.

4. Labor to get and to cherish both faith and spiritual wisdom: it would be
an excellent preservative in this case, if a man get faith, a true and lively
faith, and adherence to Christ, bring Christ into thy heart, the love of
Christ, and the prizing of him, and adherence to Christ, will infinitely make
Dagon fall; as Dagon fell before the Arc, so this breaks the neck of all
sins, all will fall to the ground, and particularly this base sin, faith in
the assurance of Gods promise, that I believe the promises of God in his word,
that he will not leave, forsake, or fail them in their necessaries, which are
careful not to fail in duty toward him: this faith will be an admirable
antidote against covetousness.

Spiritual wisdom also is a great help, for the root of all the poison is
not any defect in the actions or affections, but in the understanding; if men
were wise to know the great good, and to desire what was most desirable and
advantageous for them, they were then in the right way, to put themselves
toward that great thing: but if men be foolish and think all lies in
wealth, nothing else is worth talking of but wealth, nothing will make a man
really good, which has any feeling with it, but so much wealth, if a man be
thus poisoned with these foolish conceits, he will despise and undervalue all
the wisdom, and all the godliness, and the excellency that is in any man,
measuring all excellency according to a man's estate SERMON. III
as indeed the world goes too far this way, all Magistracy is chosen by
estate, all reputation by estate, these things do secretly poison, and as the
wiseman says, that estate will never excel in virtue, in which there is a
high price set on riches: if men would get spiritual wisdom to discern the
excellency of things, and to moderate a man's self according to the worth of
things, it would be a good means to keep back the overweaning after wealth,
which hinders the growth of goodness, and advances covetousness.

There be these habitual graces, that must be gotten into the heart.

2. I shall give you a brief touch of the other branch. There be some other
things actual to be done, which are of great importance: I will mention all in
four steps and degrees, and but merely name them.

1. We must watch. 2. We must pray. 3. We must strive. 4. We must meditate upon
those things which may give us victory.

1. We must watch against, and take heed lest we be surprised and drawn
unawares to it.

2. We must also pray against it, many sins we fall into, because we beg not
Gods assistance, if we would pray ingenuously, and sincerely, as David did,
Lord incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness: if men
make their daily prayers unto God, especially those which find themselves
prone thereto, as every one should do against his master sin, it would be an
excellent means to preserve the soul from this sin.

3. We must strive against it, labor to mortify these our members on earth,
and this amongst the rest, we must strive continually and wrestle against this
corruption, not cherish it, and make a darling of it, and cockering it, because
the gain is sweet, but because the sin is odious, therefore we must strive
against it.

4. Lastly, we must meditate upon these things which are conducible to
establish the soul against covetousness, I will run them over in general
because I cannot go through the particulars.

1. Consider the events of it, which I named formerly, if we did but consider
how much it opposes all good: it choakes all gracious thoughts and all the
means of grace: the very word of God is choked, when a man is brim full of
this error, then Gods word cannot enter: it opposes and choakes all the good
of nature, a man becomes like to a beast, or Tiger, he has no bowels of
compassion, a man has no noble ingenuous thoughts in him that is covetous, he
is all blurred with dirt, and the image of God is blotted out.

2. Consider how it exposes to all kinds of evil both of sin and
punishment: first, of sin against God, and against his neighbor; yea,
against himself, he is injurious to all: and as it exposes to all evil of
sin, so secondly, to all evil of punishment, to the wrath of God, to the
scorn of men, to all punishments, in this life and the life to come, it bars
a man out of heaven, and from any reputation on earth, not capable by Gods law
of any excellency, neither (if all were well) should be by man's law. And for
those arguments, I should have propounded which our Savior mentions in this
discourse immediately after the Text, I know not any in sacred or profane
writings, where it is so admirably pressed as it is here, and in those parallel
places which I mentioned before. Now there be two steps and degrees of those
arguments.

First, he labors to beat it out of him that disturbed him.

Secondly, out of his Disciples.

First, our Savior deals more generally with those of his rank, he which
came to disturb him in his heavenly course: and then he proceeds to other
arguments to take off his Disciples.

In general this he says in this very verse, that men of great estates in the
world, are mistaken, a man's life or happiness consists not in riches, a man may
be a happy man although he be not a rich man, but he cannot be a happy man
by virtue of that he is a rich man, a man's happiness and excellency lies not in
riches, that is the argument in general.

And something in particular is mentioned also in the parable which is
remarkable: as,

First, riches will not free a man from cares, riches brings its cares with it:
here is a rich man, his ground bore a great crop, yet he was to study what he
was to do, he was full of cares and thoughts what to do, how to dispense and
employ his riches: they are so far from emptying his heart of cares as that
they fill a man's heart with new cares, how to secure them, and to dispose of
them, it settles a thousand other thoughts in the heart; so that they free not
from cares.

2. Nay, it brings not so much as delight, soul thou have much goods laid up
for many years, it brings not a man to this, it does not secure a man in a way
of delicacie, that a man may enjoy his pleasure and do his will, which is the
ground of a man's aims, his end which he aims at: if I had an estate I might
eat, and drink, and sleep, and then do what I would, this is not the thing.

3. It does not bring a man to wisdom, nor argue a wise man: for there is a
counterbuffe to that (thou fool) that man that thought himself so jolly a
wise man, because he had so great an estate, our Savior gives him here but
the fool, it does not put a man into the possession of wisdom, nor argues any
wisdom, to get a great estate: these are arguments in brief of our Saviors
discourse to him that interrupted him.

2. There are other arguments that he used to his Disciples, which are proper
only to Christians. I shall give you but a brief touch of the same.

There is a double care, a worldly care, and a heavenly care, our Savior gives
a touch of both, speaks something of either, for both will serve for the
beating down of cove^ous^^sse.

1. And concerning wo^ldly cares, I will tell you what our Savior says
concerning them.

1. Worldly cares they are more then brutish, it is a senseless thing to
trouble a man with the cares of the world our Savior shows that the beasts
are provided for by God, those that neither sow nor reap, and therefore is
more then brutish to be over careful.

2. It is altogether fruitless and bootlesse, there is no boot nor benefit
which comes thereby, not one man by his care can add one cubit to his life, no
man's care can make him rich, it is Gods blessing, and not immoderate caring.

3. It is a needless care, to trouble a man's self with cares: what need a
child of two years old take care what he should eat to dinner or supper, or
what clothes he should have? his parents will look to that: so it is here, God
takes care for his children, what need his servants take immoderate and
inordinate care?

4. Nay, it is a heathenish care, and a faithless care, the Gentiles do those
things, they seek after them, it is enough for Heathens which have no God, nor
any promise made to them, to be so careful after these outward things, unless
a man will show himself worse than a heathen, he must not practice
covetousness.

5. Lastly, it is very hurtful.

1. It fetters the heart, and binds that in chains, for where the treasure is
the heart needs must be, it glews a man's heart to the world, and keeps him off
from God: and,

2. It hinders the passage of preparation or meeting with God, or expecting the
day of Christ's coming, we cannot have a glympse of his coming, or be ready to
look for him, if we be puzling here below, and thus much our Savior speaks
by way of argument against covetousness and inordinate cares of this life.

2. In stead of that worldly care, he expresses the contrary, concerning the
care of heavenly things.

1. It is a more easy care, and more easy gain, in the ^1. verse. first seek
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you: all other things which are necessary, will come easily to us without
caring: God will cast them into the bargain as over weight.

2. A man shall have a richer bargain, what ever other things may bring, it
may a great estate, but it cannot make a man a king, nor bring us to a
kingdom, fear not little slock, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a
kingdom.

3. It brings more continued and durable gain. If a man have great store of
money in his chests and coffers, thieves may break in, and a thousand other
things may happen, but if we have treasure in heaven, that brings gain that we
cannot loose: these are the maine things by which our Savior labors to beat
down covetousness in his Disciples, and those that will follow him: there
were some other things, I thought to have added.

1. From the consideration of riches it self.

1. That they are not so considerable, nor so desirable things.

2. They are not so beneficial, they will not preserve a man from danger.

3. They are altogether uncertain, riches will take their wings, when a man
has labored all his life long to get riches, he may loose them all at a clap:
soldiers, or war, or fire breaks in, and what have thou of all thou had,
all is uncertain.

4. They are exceeding unprofitable, nay, more then unprofitable.

5. They are dangerous, they breed a thousand vices, as self-love, and
selfe-confidence: the rich man puts his trust in his riches, in his wedge of
gold: so is taken off from God, it breeds pride and puffs up the mind of a man
(...): so that his head stands I know not how far above his shoulders, it
breeds a great deal of licenciousnesse, men think they may do what they list
if they be rich: they are far off from God, it puts a man into a thousand
evil courses, as riches are nothing considerable in them which are so greedy.

2. A competencie, or a moderate estate, (if men would be truly persuaded) is
more desirable a thousand times. Agurs condition is the most desirable in the
world, Give me neither poverty, nor riches, but feed me with food convenient
for me, the best condition and the most desirable, is neither to have great
matters; it is a foolish thing to be greedy: nor on the other side to be in
extremity. But a moderate and competent estate, such an estate as I have
sometimes expressed, is like unto glass in the windows, that will be the best,
which although it keeps out wind and weather, yet it keeps not out the light
of the Sun, the prospect of heaven, such an estate that will keep a man from
the injury of the world, that a man shall not be in want, as will keep out
extremity: that I be not anoied with extremity, is desirable, and not so
great an estate, as will keep out the sun of Gods countenance, whereas a
great estate may do it, it may make us covetous, and such a man is incapable
for godliness, untractable for the Ministry: A moderate estate is most
desirable thing in the world.

FINIS.

