1582. Ianuarij decimus.

THE Pathwaie to Martial Discipline. Now newly Imprinted, and divided into
three books. Whereunto is added the order and use of the Spaniards in their
Martial affairs: which Copy was lately found in the Fort in Ireland, where
the Spaniards and Italians had fortified themselves.

THE FIRST BOOK: ENTREATS OF THE OFFICES from the highest to the lowest,
with the laws of the Field, arming, mustering, and training of Soldiers.

THE SECOND BOORE: ENTREATS OF SUNDRY PROportions and training of Caleeuers,
and how to bring Bows to a great perfection of service: also how to march with
a Camp royal: with diverse Tables annexed for the present making of your
battles, as otherwise to know how many paces they require in their march and
battles from 500. to 10000.

THE THIRD BOOK: COMPREHENDS THE VERY RIGHT order of the Spaniards, how to
train, March, and Encampe, with diverse Tables therein contained.

Londini excudebat T.E. Impensis Milonis Ienyngs.

Sr. Richard Nervdigate of Arbury in the County of Warwick Baronet 1709


Of the electing of the General.
IF any Prince do mind to erect his government in the field: he must seek
out a sufficient and able man, each ways as well for the reputation and
nobility of his Predecessors, as for his mind, body, virtue, and experience,
to be his chief and high governor general of the field, who shall by the
Prince or some other of the Privy Counsel before the Prince or else where,
being authorized by the Princes commission, take his oath, in the which he
shall be sworn to serve his Prince truly and faithfully, and to eschew and
foresee all dangers and inconveniences, which may happen to the Prince his
master to the uttermost of his power, and to be ruled by the determinate
counsel in all needful and profitable causes to the greatest furthering of
his Prince any ways, as well in marching, incamping, approach, eskirmish
camisado, or retraite, or what other service with deep care to judge and
foresee whether their devises may redound to the best accomplishing of any
exploite, or otherwise for the remedy of the Princes great charge. Also, not
to levy or take up any soldiers in his own name, but in his Princes. Such a
one should be chosen to be general unto whom the Staff should be delivered,
binding him with a solemn oath that he carry the said staff and deal
vprightlie with each man, all affection set a part, in causes of judgment
doing always according to equity and justice.

Of the Generals office.
THe General principally ought to be a man that lives in the fear of God,
who must provide that there be Preachers and Ministers appointed, for the
daily ministration of Gods sacred and divine word, the which Preachers are to
teach them their duties toward God, and their obedience toward their Prince,
General, and Captains, and to persuade them in all enterprises valiantly,
and manfully to persist, in all such attemptes, as by the General and
principal officers shall be thought meet, yielding them an assured hope
through their daily prayer and serving of GOD, to have most happy success in
all their enterprises, for no doubt although it pleases the almighty to
suffer the faithful many times to receive punishment, yet the faithful
serving of him yields an assured hope of victory.

Of the office of a General.
A General ought to be temperate, continent, and not excessive in eating and
drinking: Patient in travail, of wit prompt, whereby in the night time by
quietness of mind the counsels of Captains examined, may more perfectly
be confirmed. He ought to be content with simple fare: For the preparing of
dishes full of delicateness and the too much thoughts and diligence about
meats, corrupts and drowneth the mind in such sort, that the time that
ought to be spent in the business that is to be done, by the delicateness
of the Captains is most vainly consumed. He ought too be painful, for
that princiapllie it does apperteine too a General that he in the time of
turmoyles of the War, may be the last that is weary. He must be quick
witted, for so much as Homere says, flying to the end: that with his thought
he may most quickly discuss every thing, and with his mind make
judgment, and as it were divine a far of and foresee that which is to come:
least when there happen chances neither foreseen nor looked for, the General
be constrained sodeinly and unprovided for to take counsel, and the safegarde
of things to commit most fearfully to fortune. It behooves him to be
liberal, and not to be covetous and desirous of gain. For surely of this
vice he ought most principally to take heed, forasmuch as he that is not given
to pass much of gifts of Silver and Gold, may most honorably have the charge
of such doings, whereas those be most wicked that will be drawn with the
insatiableness of Gold, the which is such a weapon of so much might, and as
it were with lively force to deliver the weapon out of his own hands and to
give to others. He ought to be a fair speaker, for that considering the
things that are to be entreated of for the War, I judge there will follow
much utility, considering that either having occasion to set men in araie to
the battle, the General comforting the soldiers easily may persuade
every one of them to despise all perils, and to attend to the glorious
enterprise. For the sound of the Trumpet cannot so much inflame the minds of
men to take their weapons; and constrain them more valiantly to fight, then
the convenient and according to the time the sugared task of the General,
which may move them, both unto great acts for the love of virtue, and
encourage them for the desire of glory, or else if need be, to comfort the
minds afflicted for some overthrow had, his words shall be a medicine.
Wherefore for the benefit of the host and to lighten heaviness of accidents
the accommodate speaking of the General by most reason is more to be desired
then the industry of Surgeons, which follow the Camp only to the end to
heal wounds, for that they take no care or charge but to heal the hurtes:
but he with sweet and courteous manner of speaking comfort and most highly
makes glad, the minds of the weak and afflicted. Besides this, he
confirms the minds of them that be whole, and retains them that be
boldened, then how much more difficult it is to heal the infirmities that is
hid, then those which may be both felt and seen, every man knows: and
like as no Prince will erect an army to send them without a General and
determinate Governor: even so the General ought not to be chosen that
knows not, nor has the grace in speaking, and that lacks the facility and
vtteraunce of speech. Likewise the General being confirmed in his degree,
should be pleasant, gentle, and cheerful too them that will come to him,
gladly and willing to recompense the valiant and good, both with the
liberality of the pursse, and dignity of office, and with sharp punishment
to punish the slothful, malefactors, and offenders. Also he ought not in
every place and too every man show himself so benign and gentle, least he
happen to be despised, neither so proud and stout that he move other to bear
him hatred.

And that he do this to the intent that with to much license and benignity
he cause not the army to be dissolute, or with sharpness and severity make
them alienate their minds and beecome enemies. Likewise the liberality of a
Prince or General although it be but little: if with benignity liberally at
time convenient it be used, it may get most great benevolence of the
multitude; and from thence forth the most assured fidelity of the soldiers
gotten, it does add unto it security and constantnesse in any enterprise,
seeing indeed every man hopes to obtain greater things, bearing themselves
valiantly in fight, when they know that in little things the liberality of
the General comes of the proper benignite of his own mind. It is
necessary that the General with his warrelike counsel do deliberate upon
every matter, and they being partakers of the counsels are sworn in time
and place to tell their judgments, the which together with him of every thing
ought to debate, for so much as all those things not any man of himself has
found: he may alone by study with himself examine, but he ought not
straightwaies to approve and confirm it, for that our thoughts and counsels
as a thing, unto the which we have a natural affection, if of others
faithful counsel it be not helped, easily it may beeguile us, and many
times it is found full of errors, contrariwise those things that by judgment
and opinion of others be approved, do assure the mind and keep things
stable and sure. Notwithstanding no man ought so little to trust to himself
that always he be of opinion weak and doubtful, nor of himself so much too
presume that he think other cannot find counsel better then his: for that
it shall be necessary that he which is always subject too the counsel of
others, having altogether distrust of himself, came to change infinite things
whereby in weighty matters both hurt and incommoditie does follow, as likewise
he must needs either always or oftentimes commit error, that not hearing the advice of other, every thing does attribute to himself alone. The General
shall often and unlooked for resort unto the Captains tents and places of
aboade to see in what towardlie readiness they are or may be in of a sudden,
that he cause the Captains often to make like resort unto the under officers
and soldiers to see if they be in the like orderly readiness for any
sodeine service. He must receive into his hands the order of all offices in
writing, whereby he may the better understand and judge of them. Likewise the
names of all the soldiers of the bands, to see whether they have their just
number.

The office of the Master of the Camp.
SInce it stands with the office of him that will govern well to be as
forward in mainteining the good, and rewarding those that deserve well, as in
sincerity of judgment to punish the wicked and offenders: the master of the
camp, bearing the entire and full authority of the office of a General, is
to have a regard, that justice bear as great swaie in his army as in any the
best ordered city that can be. And therefore he must provide Justices
sufficiently practiced and studied, that they may be able to see what
justice will aforde in every case, always provided, notwithstanding that the
laws of arms be not broken, then the case understood, let them decide the
matter, and give sentence briefly. For in the Camp they are bound to observe
nothing but that which the Captain General shall appoint, and that which
natural reason shall chiefly allow of, admitting herein the Canons of the
holy law of Christendom, to which all the good soldiers, as every
faithful Christian is bound to be obedient unto. Next the master of a camp
has to appoint an Agozzino, Arcaldo, or a Prouest, who besides that he must be
well seen in his Art, must have regard that he entertain a convenient
retinue of assistauntes, and amongst the rest a Praetor or master of justice.
He must ordeine also that this Prouest with his servants, and the Master of
justice go apparelled ciuiltie, and not as the custom is in many cities like
abiectes, that thereby they may have credit in their office, and be obeyed as
they ought, and this must be proclaimed through the army general: namely,
that they obeie these officers upon pain of death. He must forbid all
soldiers except Sergeants who in diverse causes ought to have their weapons
about them to restrict all others of what fort so ever, by that means to
prevent those theftes and murders which are commonly committed in such places
of men given to the spoil. He must cause by all means possible all privy
mutinies to be abandoned, and all privy grudges and enmities to be forgotten,
during the time of War, which otherwise will bring great hurt to the Camp,
considering that many do leave house and home to go to War, not so much to
do their Countreie service or win to themselves practice in battle,
thereby to become equal in value to couragius minds, either else to deserve
pay with the recompense of his doutie deeds, but rather some are pulled into
the field to kill villanouslie some foe of their own, or their fathers, or
their friends, men truly most worthy of a thousand deaths, in that they
seek by treason to murder, in that place where they ought to look to nothing
else then to vphoulde justice, and to procure that she may have her due
execution, and in justice the punishment she deserves. He must care moreover
that respect be had that merchauntes and puruaiers and other artificers that
are too furnish the Camp with apparel, victuales, and other nessaries, that
such may have traficke freely, to the end they may do it willingly, and
that they be paid with good and lawful Money for that they sell,
enterteining them courteously, and too make them safe conduct as well too
depart from thence, as too come thither, that they may have a desire too
return: that by these the Army may have store of things as well commodious
for their help, as otherwise necessary for their use. He must rate the
victuals at a reasonable price, that the soldiers be not ouercharged in
buying, and that the merchuunt may have an honest gain. And as this care must
be had, so those things as less necessary may be left to be sold, as the
buier and the seller can agree, as householde stuff, saddles, and all other
furniture for horse, spiceries, weapons, and such merchandies. Also he must
with great counsel and deliberation bestow the lodgings, as next the
trenches to bestow the artilerie, and other munitions, and the ordinary
victuals giving charge that none come near the powder with any fire, neither
gonner nor other soldier. He shall assign the quarters of the camp, to
every company his several charge of the artilerie, which must be kept
unoccupied for what need so ever there shall be, appoynting watch and ward
continually, and that very strong, whereby the soldiers may be the better
conveyed at pleasure, and the frontes the readier to be defended against the
enemy. There must by him be appointed as it were a streate for Merchaunts,
safe for themselfes, and commodious for all the Camp. Then must there in
every quarter be appointed places of ease as for their own use, and likewise
for killing and dressing Cattle for food, that by this means their lodgings
may be kept clean and the infection of the air avoided for the benefit of
health. Then shall he appoint the footmen to be distinctlie divided from the
Horsemen. He must appoint them so that every quarter have his sere place for
victuals: and after they be lodged it ought to be his greatest care to see
them well defenced: also that they may so incampe as they may have the
benefit of wood and water, especially in Winter. These conditions he must
look too with eyes well opened, viewing them diligently and oftentimes: and
well considering them. And also he must foresee that the way be commodious
and ready, by which the army may march and safely be brought to the place of
incamping. Moreover, it behooves necessarily to dispose both horsemen and
footmen toward by day, and watch by night, in places most dangerous, that
the camp may remain without fear of sudden assaults, which otherwise brings
great trouble. And when the army shall by any accident either by day or
night, be forced to come to battle, he must diligently provide, that the
artilerie, the munition and victuals, may be safely guarded. Likewise the
discipline of War does require at his hands in his own person a certain
sharp behavior, that thereby he may win obedience of his soldiers, which
is of as great importance, as any thing else he can have. Thus he shall very
well discharge his duty toward his Prince, as otherwise preserve the safety of
him and his. Also considering that in an army there is a great multitude of
men, diverse in nation, differing in manners, not equal in years, in nature
not altogether agreeing, wherefore they which for pride and insolency, will not
submit themselves to the martial ordinances, may be constrained through
fear of punishment: it apperteyneth to such, to provide such sufficient guard,
as any repairing for relief, cariages, or otherwise either for horsemen or
footmen, or other beasts which are continually in the host to be occupied.
In this office the Lord John Baptist Marquis of Cassano, the Commender of Saint
James greatly deserved comendation being great master of the camp in the two
iourneys too Germany in the time of the renowned Emperor Charles the fifth,
against the Launcegraue, the Duke of Saxony, the county Palatine, and diverse
other Princes then in confederacy with the Almaines.

Of the Treasurers office.
THis offcer is of great reputation, and has to his charge committed, the
payments of Colonelles, Captains, and all other officers, he ought in the
beginning to receive from the General, the true number, both of Horse and
footmen, within the camp or army, and by perfect computation, to make a book
how much is due every month to every Colonel Captain, and other officers,
as well for themselves as other bands.

He ought to make his proportion of pay well known to the General, whereby
the General might accordingly make his provision, that money be not wanting
to pay the soldiers.

He ought to confer with the master of the victuals to see how he is
furnished, and accordingly, to disburse unto him that he be not destitute of
provision.

He ought in like sort to make alowaunce when need shall be, to the master
of the ordinance, for supplying his store of munition, as he shall see cause,
by reason of the consuming of the old, or any importaunt service to be done.

He must confer with the muster master to see how the bands be furnished;
and what soldiers be slain, when and how maine, and when new supply is
made, delivering pay to every Colonel, and Captain accordingly, keeping
their warraunts for his discharge.

He ought also at the pay day to confer with the master of the ordinance,
and master of the victuals too see what is due unto the Prince by the Colonel
and Captains for munition and victuals, and to deduct so much in their wages.

This officer ought to be a man of great wisdom, and well experienced in
martial affairs: because he is used in counsel, where he is to speak his
opinion in all exploites of importance, although they concern not directly
his office.

Of the Master of the ordinance.
THis officer being one of the chief officers, for that charge of all the
artilerie and munition for the wars is committed unto him, would be a man of
learning and experience, whereby he shall the better conceive any exploite,
wherein a very good wit without experience shall be amazed.

He ought to be studied in histories, the better to consider of such
strategems as heretofore by other noble Soldiers has been used, the sundry
sorts of ingennes too assault and defend, also how too pass Bridges and
Waters, with other inventions for conueying of great ordinance over marshes.

He ought to be studied in the mathameticalles, considering he shall be the
better able to shoot at any randons, to conueye mines under the earth, to
any curtayne, Bulwark, or other place that shall be determined to be torn a
pieces.

He ought to forecast what quantity of shot, powder, etc. shall be requisite
for any battery or other exploite, and to set out in due proportion every
particular fortification of Camp, town, or fort, whether ordinance is to be
used without the knowledge of those sciences, cannot sufficiently be
discharged, and that master of ordinance through ignorance shall commit his
trust to the bold presumptious persons, whose want of experience will but
shame themselves, dishonor him and overthrow their enterprise.

He ought at the receite of his charge to make an inventory of all such things
committed to his charge, as well to render an account, as to consider the want
of every sort of munition for the wars.

To this officer apperteyneth to have a Liuetenaunt, and certain clerks in
wages, who are to attend inferior causes, rendering an account of all their
doings too the master of the ordinance.

It apperteyneth too the master of the ordinance too provide all such
necessaries as too the artilerie apperteyneth, as Wheels, Exeltrees, Ladles,
spunges, Bullets, Chayneshot, Crosbarres, Corne-powder, Serpnetine powder,
Mattockes, shouels crows of iron, handaxes, engines for the mounting of
ordinance, graundmaundes or gabions, little handbaskets, ropes, and all other
cart-ware.

Item, to have such governors as are not only skillfull in the ready
managing of their pieces, but also in the making of trunkes, bawles, arrows,
and all other sorts of wild fire, and for the continual supply of them,
they ought to have in a readiness great store of Sulphur, Saltpeter, Rosin,
Calx viue, Lint seed Oil, and comcom Lamp Oil, Pitch, Tar, Campher, Wax,
Tucia, Ars-nicke, quick silver, and Aquauite: hereof to frame bals to burn in
the water, cressets, and torches, that storms and wind cannot extinguish,
murdering bullets to shoot out of mortar pieces, and such like.

Item, every piece of ordinance to have his convenient number of horse or
Oxen too draw, and carters too guide and keep these beasts, and every piece
to have his gunner or two, to attend thereon to charge, discharge, and mount
the piece, also to wade, ram, cleanse, scour, and cool the pieces, when they
are over heated, and for this purpose they shall have in a readiness, spunges,
vinegar, and cold water, etc. For these gunners, there must be one master
gunner over all.

Item, if any band want powder, or shot, the master of the ordinance upon
request of the Captain, is to give order to his clerks, to deliver the same,
and to take a bill of the Captains for their discharge, the which at the pay
day must be delivered to the treasurer, who is to stay so much of the
Captain and his band.

To this officer apperteineth to have in a readiness certain boats made for
the purpose with flat couers of sawed planks which chained together may make
sodeinlie a bridge to pass an army over any water, who must have cables, and
ankers to let fall in a violent stream.

The Master of the ordinance is to have attend upon his charge a sufficient
band for the guard of his charge, and also pioners to make plain the way for
his carriages, and to entrench the place in the camp, appointed by the Provost
for the atilerie.

That there be wheele-writes, carpenters, Copper-smiths, Bowyers, Fletchers,
Masons, and such skillful artizans, with all tools necessary and needful too
preserve, repair, and make all things appertaining to artilerie.

When the day of service is, the Master of the ordinance is too select a
place convenient too plant his ordinance as well to noye the enemy, as also
to be in such sort guarded and fortified, as by no ways it be not surprised by
the enemy.

Also in the camp, town, or fort, he only is to give order for the planting
of the artilerie, and fortifications of the flankers to the best advantage, and
also to forsee that the Master gunner and other gunners do their duties which
appertains to their office, also in besieging to have no less care in placing
his Battery for the cutting of the flankers before the assault be given.

Also the Master of the ordinance is to give order for the accomplishing of
any plat by mines, and the Captain of the mines and Pioners, are to follow
his direction. Finally, this office is of great reputation in the field, and
many exploites depends thereupon: but for that he cannot well perform all
himself, he may refer the small to those that serve under him, and to execute
the great himself.

The office of the Lieuetenaunt or General of horsemen.
Unto this officer apperteineth too have the charge of all the horsemen of the
field, as of Hargulaters, Lighthorsmen, Lances, and men at arms, who
immediately after entering into his charge, must view the election of the
Captains appointed, whether they be meet for such a charge, or appointed by
favor: and to make report unto the General, whereby such may be appointed,
as have been brought up in militare profession. He must keep a book of all
the bands committed too his government, with the names of the Captains, and
to peruse whether the bands be furnished with horse, armor, pieces, lances, and
all such necessaries, for that warlike profession, as unto such apperteineth.
He must give great charge, to all the Captains for the training of their
bands, and to give order in what sort, in what place and time, they shall
exercise their bands: and if default be either of furniture and otherwise, to
make certificate to the General or high Marshall, that defaults may be
amended. He must dispose every sort of weapons in several troops by
themselves, who must appoint them in service, as he shall be directed by the
General, or Lord high marshall. He is to appoint what bands shall watch and
what vancorriers, providing that they which watch the night, may rest the day,
and others to supply their places, that convenient rest may be had, whereby
man and horse may the better continue in service. Also at the sound of the
trumpet in the morning he shall with all the troops of horsemen repair to
the Generals Tent, to know his pleasure, and then immediately to set forth
the Generals standerd, causing all the troops with their guydions to place
themselves in ranks after the General, that he may at every sudden, draw
forth such numbers that shall be required by the Marshall, or General. He
ought to give warning to such horsemen as shall watch the night ensuing, that
they may be the better able to do such service as they shall be enioined
too do.

When the Lord Marshall pretends to incampe, the Lieuetenant is to appoint a
convenient band to attend upon his person, and to appoint a company to take
their rest, which shall feed their horses, till such time as he shall deliver
them to the scowte Master at night, who shall inioine them what to do all the
night after, and shall also deliver them their watch word.

And at such time as they enter into the camp, the Lieuetenant shall cause thr
horsemen to keep the field, till all the footmen be encamped, causing first
one band to enter, and the rest to keep the field, and so orderly to follow,
placing themselves as the last bands may be as well lodged, as the first.

He must give order that the coziers come not out of the field, till the
trumpet sound to the watch, and sentinel come from the camp to take their
places in the field.

He must appoint a sufficient number of horse to attend upon the forage
master, to guard and defend the foringers which must not return out of the
field til the forering master with the rest be returned to the camp, these
must rest all that night, and the next day.

He is to appoint a reasonable convey of horsemen for the safe bringing of
victuals to the camp, to see that no violence be offered unto them, and so to
order the change of his horse in these several services, that some be not
ouerburdened, and others spared to much, but all things so ordered as none have
cause to repine.

He is in the day of battle to appoint the hargubeters the which are the
first to service, the light horsemen Lancis, men at arms in several troops
with such distaunce as one may rescue an other, who with the Lord marshall is
not only to give his advise, but in those actions to be a leader.

He must have regard that he charge not in the front of his footmen, for
being repulsed he may be the overthrow of them, but let them charge upon the
flank, and diligently attend if they can perceive if any breaking or opening
of the side in the enemies battle be, and sodeinly to charge that breach. For
as horsemen are inferiors to well ordered footmen, so upon every little
occasion they carry victory with them.

The offenses committed by these regiments are to be reformed by the Lord
marshall, who should have the Captain of that band by whom offenses are
committed, to sit in justice with him, with such other of the said band as
may be thought meet by the Lord marshall, and the soldier condemned to be
executed with the same weapons of the offenders, used by his own company.

The office of a Coronell.
THe valiant Coronell after his lawful dispatch from the General, and the
obteining of his letters patents from the General, and money for the
conduction of that number of soldiers, appointed to his government, he must
with all diligence choose and appoint so many Captains as he shall have
need of, appointing iii.C. men for a company, which is a convenient number:
For if the number were divided into smaller companies, the more money would be
spent upon the officers. And besides, where many divisions are: there happens
the sooner discord and disorder. Those Captains would be chosen of years and
good experience, whereby they may the better execute their office, as otherwise
too obtain the love of the soldiers, granting unto them sufficient
authority for the executing of al things apperteining to their charge. He must
then deliver unto them equally so much money as he has received for the
companies by pressed, foreseeing that it be sufficient for such an effect, that
the Captains and officers may not be hindered by extraordinary expenses, and
the soldiers to have better liking of the Coronell, as otherwise to win them
to obedience, which is most convenient for men of yt calling. He must have
special regard, that the Lords or principal officers, whose minds are
addicted to avarice by their insatiable desire of gain, the good soldier be
not any ways hindered of his pay, which would do so much hurt to his good
nature, without whom the Coronell can avail little or nothing: and that he
give straight charge that such money as they receive be laid out and spent
with aduisement and discretion. He must choose a Liuetenant of good
experience, qualities, and behavior, that he may the better attend on the
charge of his own company: and besides, too have care of all the bands
apperteining to the Coronell. Then must he choose an ensign bearer, who must
be a worthy soldier, a Gentleman of noble parentage, as otherwise gentle of
behauior, who of all the rest of the officers must be superior. Also he must
choose the Sergeants, the masters of the squares, droms and other officers, who
must be of honest behauior and of great experience in their offices. He must
appoint to his armed pikes his most valiant soldiers, who must be gently
used, showing unto them a cheerful and good countenance, which to them is most
acceptable. Then must he choose a sergeant mayor who must be a tried soldier
and of great experience, and one who has executed and professes the office:
There belongs to his office great advertisement, as to alter or remove the
army, as sometimes the straightnes of time does require, sometimes the
discommoditie of the place does enforce, sometimes the order in which the
enemy is placed does compel, yea and sometime some practice of his own, or
some devise of his Coronell does put into his head, whereupon great aduisement
would be taken, minding not further to speak of it, but to refer it until I
come unto his own office, where I will more amply speak of it. There must by
him be appointed, a furrior or harbinger, who shall without rewards or
corruption lodge the whole company of the Coronell, using his office honestly
and indifferently, without pleasing of any particular man. He must appoint a
general Drum, which shall take care of the rest of the Drums, who must be
authorized to command the rest of the Drums, having a care that they use
obedience: and that every one do his part that belongs to his office, as in
sounding the march, a call, the charge, the batteile, the retrait, etc. He
ought to provide himself the best munition, fit for a coronels charge, as
corselets, pikes, caleuers, murrians, holberds, bills, gon-pouder, lead, match,
and of al manner of victuals, the which shall be delivered by the Sergeant
mayor. He must also examine the election yt the Captains have made, and of al
their officers throughout the companies, and if they be such as ought to be, or
not much worie, he may allow them and not otherwise. And it is to be understood
that these and the like aduertisements do make to appear the very insight of
the conductor, whereas not being narrowly looked unto, the contrary happens:
It seems not out of purpose that every company have 12. hargubusiers too serve
on horseback, who being honest men, may do great service both on foot and horse
back, as often has been seen, as well in careful following. keeping or
recovering of passages, as for the discovering the watch word of the enemies,
and to cast down and level places the easier to make roods to discover in
manner of lighthorsmen: and for to conclude, following these precepts by
exercising thy soldiers often, shall bring them soon to experience the better
to be guided. He must procure that his officers diligently perform his
commissions, and that faithfully they make relation of every particular thing
that he may be informed of all, and in especial that happens in wards, as well
by day as by night: for they going in circuit as apertaines unto them, may
well perceive what chances of any great importance. He ought carefully and
courteously to exhibit to the general Captain great reverence to honor him,
obey him and faithfully counsel him: and for the performance of this, he must
refuse no travail, since that taking pains in causes of such importance is
very meet for men of his calling an office: for gains and delicate pleasures
rather appertein^ to women or those that more esteem riches then virtue, and
more accounpt of the body, then the soul.

Of the office of the great Sergeant or Sergeant mayor.
INasmuch as good order is necessary in all humane actions, the weighty
office of the Sergeant mayor, must needs be exellent and of great importance as
unto whose charge and authority apperteineth, not only to govern, but also to
bring into form, and to execute the greatest part of the chiefest affairs
which require any special service in the army. Wherefore it behooves him to
have 4. expert and worthy soldiers, whose aid at al times he must use, which
he must erect as principal Corporals, who in his absence are to succeed him
both in office and authority. He must after he has received his charge of his
Lord and General use al diligence and wariness, not only to maintain it,
but also to increase it in the minds of ye Captains and other head officers,
as also of ye common soldiers, in whatsoever apperteineth to his charge, to
the intent, that both those which of themselves know their duty, and of
other which are bound to their endeavor to him wards: he may have that ready
obedience showed him that is required, for if that be denied him, no diligence
that he can use, may avail any jot to give any hope of good success in his
great office, as by many examples heeretofo^e has been showed. It is necessary
for him that is in this office, to forecast with himself, to consider and
foresee all chances before they happen, and to foretell every one what he has
to do, for that very often he shall be taken at unawares, and the time that he
has for the dispatch of his business is very short, howbeit the straightness
of time must no whit appall them, or any ways hinder him from executing his
business wisely and readily, as having his wits at commandment even in
this brunt, otherwise if he have not before cast in his own mind, and
instructed others how to behave themselves, he cannot look for any prosperous
end of his business, seeing at the very instant when they are to join with
the enemies, there can be no great heed given unto that which he commands,
for that their ears will be otherwise occupied, and full of rumors,
hurliburlies, To understand the number of weapons as well as of men.
and confusion, which by their noise will rise on the sodeine. Moreover, it
behooves him to know to how many armed pikes and to how many holbards he has
to give charge, and to how many unarmed of both sorts: besides, to have many
hargubuseires on foot, and how many on horseback, and to be short, he must
know the whole number of able soldiers he can make, to the end when occasion
shall be, he may the readier place in the voward or rereward some in one wing,
and some in another to defend the carriage, or to inuiron the enemy, him to
guide his band, and the rest to like offices, and he must command the
Captains, that they repair with their companies when any rumor is made, to
the place where the artilery and the munition is kept, charging them that they
come neither straieng in sunder nor upon heaps (as in like cases men use with
great disorder, but to be careful to keep themselves with their ensigns,
that thereby they may be in a readiness too give a valiant onset in places
where most need shallbe. For it is often seen that the munition of the
artilerie is very hotly assalted by the enemies, the more to discipate and
deceive the force of the army, and to break in upon them with more ease after
they come to the place aforesaid, of the munition. Every band with the ensign
must attend to follow the Sergeant Mayor, or the Corporals, who shall in silent
manner, and with all obedience, follow the appointment of the Sergeant Mayor,
or his Corporals, placing their companies in such order as by them shall be
thought good, having regard that the most valiant and best armed pikes be
always appointed in the fronts, and rereward, so many ranks as may impale the
bills and ensigns in the wings, whereof the battle will come, called the
quadrant of people and ground, Of the battle quadrant of people and grounds.
and not that of people: this battle is of great force to shoulder and beat
down the enemy, for that there are more soldiers placed in ranked then are
in any other form, and yet they occupy a less plat. The shot must be placed
as sleeves or wings to the battle, the which must flank the battle, as a
curteine does a fort. He has to cause them daily to remove and exercise
themselves, to the end when need requires, neither the wings should be
dissolved by (...) and fair speech as much as he may, and that he endeavor
to guide them by a sign, rather then by words: who in this the Lord
Chappinuittello deserved great praise. If upon any alarm a sudden noise or
rumor be raised whereby he shall have chause to gather his army together in
the night time, he must strst command all the Captains, that their Quarries
and their Cressets being light every one by it self, the Captains must bring
their companies in troop, placing their Shot in the Uoward and Rereward, the
Pikes and Bills next the Ensigns into the maket place, and so conveyed to any
place of service whereas need shall require, every one besturring him in such
sort, that in a moment as it were, and out of hand they may be armed and
ready, in that place to be received of the Sergeant General, Of a baltell
for the night the Moon.
when of him they must be ordered in battle, the which for the night is the
Battle called the half Moon, who must within the compass of the two horns
place all the Ensigne-bearers with their Ensigns in their hands, then behind
them the armed Holbards, next unto these the unarmed Pikes, and without the
great Circle between both the Horns of the Moon, must be placed the the
armed Pikes, and the one half of the Sergeants and Liuetenaunts must attend on
this great charge without, but the rest of the Captains with the Sergeant
General must attend on the company of armed Pikes, and most of the Drums
and the Lights must be in the void space between both the horns and before
the Ensigns, where sitting to give hearing of the Imbassage and Messengers
which come and go in such cases, they must deliberate and take counsel what
is best to be done. The enteraunce of this place must be turned to the most
safety that the situation of the place shall offer. Besides, they may for the
surer, place some part of the Artillery of the field, now the Hargubusiers
must be bestowed by the Sergeant Mayor, so far distaunt from the Square in so
many Troops, and so many forms as the condition of the place shall require,
which may soon be perceived by the expert, thereby to fortify the maine
battle, provided with all, that every company of hargubusers thus placed,
have his company of officers appointed over them, with their droms, as if be
needful with their lights that they may be ready and serviceable in every
chance that may befall, and in my judgment, in these skirmishes by night
neither mesure of Geometry, nor the numbers of Arethmetike are so necessary
as the diligence of the valiant and discreet captains is expedient, who have
to stir up the minds of their companies, remembering always their obedience
vdto the great Sergeant, whose will they are only to execute. I have the
rather set down this square, for that it has been oftentimes well ordered of
many valiant captains of Italy, and especial of the L. Alexander Vitellie.
Concerning the other forms of battles which are to be used in the night, I
mind to omit thinking this to be sufficient, and easy to be ordered and
besides not commonly known, except a battle representing full cross, to
which there are so good rules that they may serve any number by day or night to
be ordered, and I the rather do it, because I speak not sufficiently in their
places in the second book, yet as well as I can, not so well as would, ioining
to them certain others, to the end, that if in nothing else I have pleasured the
valiant and expert, yet at the least the proportions of these forms may give
them some small help. Then when as upon any doubt the army shall remove to
march, Of ordering this army in the march.
he shall place ye armed pikes and unarmed with their bills and ensigns, in such
sort, that when need shall be to double the ranks to make the army greater,
and yet the army may keep his former proportions: that is to say, that the
voward and rereward divide between themselves all the armed corslets and
unarmed pikes, so that the flanks in long wise be not unarmed. So shall it come
co pass that the short weapons shall gather together, and in the midst of them
the ensigns. The unarmed pikes are not to be rejected in the plain field
seeing it is very hard, and peradventure not altogether m^^t that any should be
armed pikemen, as it is truly said, they with the armed are the whole strength
of the footmen, so the hargubusers must only serve to flank to ease the
defenses, to lie in ambushment, to skirmish, to approach, and in all other
functions, and at a word, to incumber the enemy, either in defending the
enemy, or to assalt any fort. He must have a care in the making of this
battle quadrant, the which of all other I hold ye best that for Corporals or
Sergeants do perfectly understand, how many ranks are in a company,
aduertising them with all, that every company be agreeable together in the
number of the ranks, which be of many called maniples. Of (...).
Then must he cause the^ to march one hard after another, seeing every company
guided by their officers, and being come to the place to contain them of ease,
command the first company to march from the rest, to make space, willing the
second to join unto the first as a flank, then the third likewise unto the
second and the fourth to the third, and so from hand to hand. He shall frame a
valiant battle to encounter the enemy howbeit it is very hard to keep a
just in order of so many men in rank, and of so many ranks as the rule of the
Theorikes oath does teach, for that very often the companies are unlike, either
in number or weapons then marching thus together on this order, he must
command that all the ensigns under one Coronell march together, not mingling
themselves with the ensigns of other Coronels Now the companies being thus
doubled and the battles ingrosed, as is said before, every ensign may seek
out his own band, and stand with it both for ye greater encouragme^t of them,
and the more safety to himself but if they return to march at length every
ensign shall place himself amongst the rest as his lot falls out, the
hargubusires severed from the battle must march half of the^ by the Uoward,
and the other half by ye Rereward, either a little toward the right hand or
toward the left, either as the commodity of ye place, or doubt of any danger
shall require. Then doubting the ranks of these hargubusires, as much as shall
be needful, they must be engrossed, and then vex is carefully placed for the
flanking of ye main battle, understanding with all, that it behooves very much
as well these two wings of hargubusires, with the voward and rereward of the
chief battle, and the ordinance should be committed to the guide of worthy
Captains, of officers of credit, and of expert soldiers, yt they may be able
to help in all extremities, and to resolve themselves in any doubt, knowing
what is to be done without waiting for the counsel of others, in cause where
such cou^sail is neither present nor at hand. Of a battle called (...) saw or
sheeres.
The body of the square like a wedge must have in the first rank one man, in
the second three men, in the third five men, so till every rank increasing by
two souldieiers, which rule is very perfect, and keeps just in proceeding to
infinite numbers, and of two wedges joined together, a battle may be well
called the sheeres, and three or four joined together a battle called ye
saw, Of a batail for the night called a cross.
with many others, the which were much used amongst the Romans and other
nations, the battle in full form of a cross, having four fronts containing
all sorts of weapons belonging to footmen is very profitable, as may be
understood by the rules of the Theoriks, as otherwise in the proper place of
the battle appears in the second-booke. And although all these battles be
not in use, yet all these forms seem very profitable if they might be ordered
and disposed in place convenient, howbeit all are not very (...) to march: and
as in my judgment it is not very easy to show by words the manner that must
be kept in giving the assault to the enemies, either by day or by night,
considering that a man has always to apply himself to the warlike policies
and devises of his Lord that governs him. For it has been often seen that
the onset has been given by the coriers on horseback, many times by ambushes
well placed in covert having advantage of such as lie in scowt, who wait their
time to assail them at unawares, when they may most endamage them. I might here
speak also (as appertaining to the Sergeants office) of the providing the
principal munition, the armor and victuals and other things necessary for
the army, and the bestowing of them: besides that, he has a part in the
business which belongs to the great master of the camp, as to place the wards
within the camp, and to appoint the watch word by which the same wards are
governed and the whole camp. I might speak of these things if they were to be
done always after one sort, or had one ordinary manner. But for that they be
variable according to the nature and disposition of him that governs, and
very often, as place and time shall require, I will omit them. How the great
Sergeants charge should be given him in writing.
It may suffice to show in part what appertains to the office, that thereby
he may the redilier dispatch what shall be appointed of his Lord. Those
things which shall be given him in charge of any importance, shall be given him
in writing, reserving besides a copy thereof, that if he either miss in his
obedience, or otherwise by his default any mischance shall happen in matters
of weight, he may not say but that he was forewarned, that whatsoever is to be
done by them may be done in their course and order: thereby to avoid all
brawles and iarres which might happen amongst Officers every man knowing what
appertains to his charge. When the face of the Battle, must be turned, he
must give warning that every manne turn his face, and not his Weapons, that
there do no noise arise in such cases. And this may be done best and most
readily, if every soldier keep the point of his weapon in his hand, How
soldiers should behave themselves the battle is turned.
which does give a glorious show, and besides that does make them ready to lay
on their shoulders again, if they have cause to march again at length* and he
shall give order when the army removing, do come to any straight passage or
other discommodious place which may break their order, that every rank do
pass after another, and when they he beyond ye straight, that then they place
them in order again, which being observed in every rank, they may presently
be in some order, as they were before the readier to be brought to the forms
and squares before rehearsed. And when any charge or commandment is to be
given, see it set and ordained in the Rereward, and when there is nothing to
be done, he shall raise the army, He shall likewise command that every
Ensign march with his own company to the end when they come to be encamped,
they may the easiliar be brought to their lodging appointed for them.

Of the electing and office of the four Corporals of the fields.
GReat regard would be had to the choosing of these, as well for their
calling, years and valiantness, as otherwise for their experience, lenity,
and wisdom. Whereby these Warlike affairs may be the readier and sooner
executed, otherwise it may be prejudicial to the whole Army. These be under
the Sergeant general to appoint, set, order, and make battle and battles,
and and to guide every particular person therein, according to their degree
and office, and as the necessity of the same shall require, to instruct and
reform, whose commandments all Captains and Soldiers with their Officers
must obeie. But in march, approach, camizado, skirmish, retraite, watch, ward,
or what other service by them shall be commanded, whose authority likewise is
such, as if any resist, they shall by the Provost matiall be punished as
rebels, of what calling or degree soever they be. Two of these are appointed to
the placing and ordering of shot, and the other two for the embatteling of the
pikes and bile, who according to their worthiness, if death happens, are to
succeed the great Sergeant or Sergeant mayor.

Of the warlike counsel and their oaths.
SUch must by the General of the army be appointed and chosen twelve honest,
wise, and grave men, the which said twelve he shall appoint to be his judges
and determiners in all martial discipline and correction. His choice is to be
made of Captains or otherwise at his pleasure, so he be of stayed judgment
and of honest sobriety The which said judges being is elected and chosen shall
have their wages accordingly appointed them, who except in great extremity
shall be watch free. These shall swear and protest solemnity by the
almighty God unto the said General, that they will serve the Prince by the
month in that p^^^^ which they are chosen and called to, that they will
seriusly, faithful, obedient, and dutiful unto the General in all needful and
lawful affairs, and at al times uprightly and indifferently to judge all
causes coming before them, and to be obedient to the commandments of the
General standing with equity and the laws of the field, that they will to
the uttermost power endeavor them selves to give counsel and advise to see
General to the welfare and commodity of the Prince and his subjects, and
justly to judge the rich as the poor not regarding friendship, kindred, or any
other corrupting cause which may lead affection to the hinderance of Justice:
but to their knowledge to minister equity according to the tenor of the
laws, as they will that God help them at the last and dreadful day of
judgment. Also that in mustering they do diligently foresee to their
uttermost power that the prince their master be not deceived in giving double
pay to such as are not worthy, and that they shall also deliver the names of
the soldiers unto the General as they mustered them with a note of their
aloweance and wages under their hands and seals faithfully without any
deceit.

Of the oaths that every officer ought to take, of what Office so ever he be.
Of the Praetor,
THe Praetor shall take his oath given him by the General, who shall swear by
almighty God that whatsoever he shall judge, ordain, or determine in court,
or out of court, that he shall keep it close and secret to his lives end, and
that he shall be true and just to the Lords, and that he shall execute justice
to his uttermost power, and that he shall not during the wars take any gift
of any man for any matter in controversy to be tried before him, but shall use
indifferent justice to all men, without respect of persons friendship or
malice, as God shall help him at the dreadful day of judgment.

Of the Provost Martial.
HIs oath is likewise given by the General, that these points whereof do
consist herein, that he shall see all faults duly and according to the
laws punished in all offenders, without regard or respectt of persons.

That he shall in the market place set up a pair of gallows both for the
terror of the wicked, as for execution upon them that offend the laws. Also
that he shall set on all victuals brought to the market a reasonable price,
that the seller and the buier may reasonably live by it. And that he exact
nothing beyond his duty of any man, that he neither use extortion or
briberie, that he let no prisoner taken of the enemy or offendour otherwise
to his witting escape, with other Articles contained in his office, at the
discretion of ye General, the which he must be sworn unto.

Of the master of the watch.
HIS oath is to be true and just in his office, and nightly to attend upon the
General to receive the watch word, the which at the setting of the watch, he
shall secretly deliver unto the Captains. He shall diverse times prove the
watch, as well to see if they sleep not, and such as he finds in fault to
accuse them to the higher officers, who ought to appoint their punishment
according to the tenor of the Articles: otherwise appertains unto his office
at the discretion of the General of the army.

Of the chief Purueiour of the victuals.
HIS oath is to be true and just in his office, and not to be slack any
time in procuring in his office good, fit, and wholesome victualles, as well
for those soldiers in extraordinary, as for those which are in ordinary
service pressed, not to werie or drive away from the victualing of ye Camp any
victualer by giving him a more or less sum then they are well worthy, to
procure as many to serve the camp with good victuals as he can, both in giving
of them good and fair language: as also now and then to give them some piece
of money to encourage the said victuallers to take pains with the like. And
that he shall with diligence faithfully shun all things that shall any ways
be unprofitable unto the Prince and the soldiers. And to devise as far as
his wit and judgment will serve him to profit his Lord and Master and his
soldiers, as well for wholesome victuals, beer and wine, for their bodies, as
for good sweet and wholesome meat for their horses, as well for such as serve
in the field, as such as travail and work in the wagon, cart, or otherwise,
which follow for the relief of the camp, and that of all these their doings,
he keep a true and perfect book of accountes, and reckonings for the
General, when and as often as it shall please him to call for it, that the
rest of the counsel may be privy to it, if so it shall be thought good of
the General of the field, for the better trial of all his dealings.

Of the fire Master.
HIs oath is, to be true and just in his office, and that without special
commandment of the General, not to adventure to set any thing on fire,
unless that the enemy be encountered withal, and then without delay all
mattters laid aparte to annoy the enemy by his skill what he may. And that
he do not burn or waste any cornehouses, or other thing that may any
ways profit the camp, and that to his knowledge. He shall not hurt or
hinder any poor creature, or aged person that he may well spare, but extend
mercy and pity on them.

Of the Clarke or Notarie of the Court.
THe Notarie shall be sworn before the xii. Judges of the Court, that he shall
truly and without fraud exercise his office, not adding or diminishing, for
friendship, malice, or bribery, any thing delivered to him in Court, or else
where, to the hinderance of equity and justice. And that he precisely keep
undefaced and vncanceled all the records, and the whole acts and dealings of
all men hanging in the Court, whether they be tried or untried in controversy
and not determined, and that he keep and conceal all things that he hears
in the court, either said or done, as ended and determined, secret and close
to his lives end, and if he do otherwise, he shall have the law provided for
such an offender.

Of the common crier of the Court.
He shall take the like oath before the Judge, to do truly and faithfully in
his office at all times and places as the Judge shall command him, so that
through his diligence there be no fault found in him at the court day, and
that he keep close and secret all such matters as he shall hear handled by
the Judges until his lives end, as God help him.

Certain necessary points concerning the Captains charge.
THe noble custom of English warriors is to choose and appoint to the leading
of men, Of electing and choosing of Captains.
such Captains as be circumspect, skillful, and expert in the noble art of
martial affairs: also hardy, and valiant of courage, painful and ingenious:
liberal in rewarding: just in service to their powers, above all things on
the earth, over mindful to render a just account of that charge, daily
regarding that their numbers be furnished with men, armor, weapons, and
munitions to them apperteining, with all other things to them needful to be
used, distributed in times convenient: often calling forth their numbers to
muster, march, and train the same in all such necessary points of war, as
to such apperteineth. They may not suffer any to continue and spend their time
in idleness, leaving their armor, weapons, and other furniture, unready to
service at need, but give commandment unto their officers in their absence,
circumspectly to look unto the same. They may not suffer their soldiers to
live in too much liberty, neither to be outrageous as some have done in other
countries in times past, as in whoorehunting, drunkenness, common swearing,
quarrelling, fighting, defrauding, or any other thing contrary to the laws of
God and our Prince, and the order of the field: but upon approving any such
offense, shall reform, correct, and amend the same immediately. Good Captains
will have special regard that such provision be made for his soldiers in due
time as unto their numbers shall be needful and necessary, How Captains
ought to have great regard to provide all things for their numbers.
as well for victuals as for armor, and munitions, the same to be discretly
used and in due time, by vitlers appointed, and to be distributed to their
soldiers, to pay their wages truly, also to see the vitlers and other
artificers lending unto soldiers upon their credit at need, until the pay day
to be satisfied and paid: also if any of their soldiers be taken prisoners,
be raunsomed home in due time, that their bands be not long unfurnished of men
to the hinderance of service. Captains have often times committed to their
charge and leading, soldiers of great honesty, substance, and credit, so have
they others of small regard, both ignorant and wilful, whom through their
worthy and prudent government may be so trained and instructed by word and
deed, courteously gratifying the good, and sharply correcting the evil, that
in short time all be brought to one civility of service.

The Captains charge.
Captains have also oftentimes certain exploits and points of service
committed unto them, wherein they must be very secret, using therein great
discretion and knowledge, Of secre^^^^ to be used in service.
as occasion of service shall require, as to use to cownuoie, camisado, ambush,
eskermish, approach, assault, retraite, etc. The which sometimes requires
counsel of the skillful and expert soldiers, whose opinion they will
diligently observe and learn, gratifieng and rewarding according to the value
of their counsel: so shall they sometime prove and circumspectly try by
fained pretenses, saying: they mind exploits, and will travail to some place,
nothing pretending the same, but finding such rash busy bodies and vnsecret to
counsel, presuming without knowledge or experience, afterward revealing the
same, will try the truth and punish the offenders, as to their demerits is
meet. The regard of Captains in chosing their officers.
Captains must be very circumspect in choosing of soldiers to their officers
of their bands, placing ancient, travailed and skilful men, to charge
according to their experiences, as lieuetenants, ensigne-berers, sergeants of
bands, and other whose duties are hereafter mentioned. Many other noble points
unto good captains do apperteine, the which for tediousness in this I omit,
wishing that such be chosen, painful in travail, circumspect in wit, hardy of
courage, liberal of heart in rewarding of service. Thus trusting this brief
remembrance may signify unto the noble and expert, also to the imperfect
available.

Certain points to the Lieuetenants charge.
LIeuetenants of every band ought to be men of great experience and ripeness
of service, whose authority in ye absence of the captain extends to
examine, try, reform, correct and amend any offense within the band
committed, and also day and night to bring the company with the ensign to the
place of assembly, there in order, train and exercise the same, as to the
necessity of service does apperteine, and being commanded by the higher
powers to march toward the enemies, must encounter and fight with the same, as
if the Captain were in presence, who upon impediment must sometimes be
absent, otherwise to the Liuetenants charge apperteineth to watch, ward,
approach, conduct, advance against the enemy, and to encounter, animate,
comfort, and also to encourage the companies by word and deed, and as need
serves to retire, continually mainteyning skirmish until he have recovered
some place of safeguard.

The Ensign bearers charge.
THe Ensign bearer must be a man skillful, hardy, and courageous, of able
courage to advance and bear dp the Ensign, in all extremities secret, silent
and zealous, able often to comfort, animate, and encourage the company to take
in hand and maintain such enterprises as they are appointed unto, never to
retire, but when of noble policy the higher officers command the same, at
such time as the Ensign is committed unto him, he must vow and profess the
same rather to be his winding sheet, and therein to loose his life, then
through his defalt loose the same, of his discretion and authority, espying
the company, travel, or follow enemies to their discommoditie and peril,
loosing the wind, hill, or ground of advantage, disordering the araie, may
stand still and command the drums and fifes to stand and sound the retraite,
that the company may resort and come to the ensign and order the array by
advantage of the ground, rather then abide the coming of the enemy, or follow
as is aforesaid in time of approach, assault, or entering, imbrech he with his
ensign aduaunceth with the foremost, giving occasion that soldiers the rather
follow the same. Other points to his charge apperteineth, which shall be
hereafter more amply declared.

Of the Sergeant of the bands charge.
SVch ought to be men sober, discret, and skillful in the duty of a soldier,
able to bring the company in order of array, as to the ground and number shall
be meet and convenient, if the same be broken, immediately place the same in
order again, always ready day and night to service by the Captain or by his
Lieutenant commanded often times to instruct the company, to march, train, and
travail as well by signs from him framed, as otherwise by words spoken, he
must have very great regard to the company, to see that their armor and
weapons be in a readiness always to service. None may resist his authority,
but observe as the Captain in person: he may not hear any mutenous or
rebellious words among the company, but immediately reveal the same, that
speedy reformation may be had, and faults amended.

The Corporals charge.
SUch must be chosen to every hundred and two honest and skilful soldiers,
either of them leading soldiers, of whose weapons they have skill, and must
often call forth their numbers, view their furniture, that nothing be lacking
to the^ apperteining in time of service. Also if any be sick, hurt, or absent,
by way of imprisonment or death: immediately they ought to make report of the
same, and finding any cause worthy of relation, they must spare for no man to
report the truth to the Sergeant from him the Lieuetenant, so to the Captain,
and further unto the higher powers if need shall require. Thus shall dignity
of offices be maintained, and faults amended to the comfort of the rest.

The Disners charge.
THe Disners charge: four such of the skilfullest soldiers being trusty and
honest men must under the governance of the other officers be appointed to
every hundred, to diverse points of necessaries available, two of them to
have charge of the shot, the other two of the pikes. The band being divided
into 4. parts, they must have to train 24. a piece, the which 24. they are to
train and exercise according to their experience. Also they must be lodged in
the midst of their charge, whereby when any secret service is to be done,
they may call numbers without the drum. They be also a great relief in watch
and ward.

The drums and fiftes charge.
SVch must be chosen of able sort and personage, secret, and ingenious,
skilful in the sounds and using of their instruments, which warns as the
mouth of a man to all intentes of service, diligent in times convenient to
instruct soldiers in the same, that none by ignorance neglect their duties.
Such be oftentimes sent on messages, importing charge, which of necessity
require languages, sometimes to summon or command the enemies to render,
sometimes carry raunsomes or redeem, conduct prisoners. Many other things,
to them do apperteine, as hereafter shall appear.

The Surgeons charge.
Needful it is that every company have one Surgeon, a man honest, sober,
and of good counsel, skillful in that science, able to heal and cure all
kinds of sores, wounds, and griefs, to take a pellet out of the flesh and
bone, and to flake the fire of the same, and that he have all his tools and
instruments, with other necessary stuff, as oils, balmes, salues, stepres,
roulers, boulsters, splenters, and al other things to the science belonging,
which also ought to have courage for his patient and allowed stuff. He shall
readily employ his industry upon the sore and wounded, not intermedling with
others to his own charge noisome, such be placed with the ensign, and lodged
near to the Captain, and wear their baldricks in time of fight, which by
law of the field is their charter.

The office of the Clarke of a Band.
A Clarke of a Band would be a man chosen of a discreet behavior, such a one
as has the use of his pen, and is skillful in Arithmetike, who must have a
book in the which he must write all the names of the soldiers appertaining
to ye band, dividing every weapon by themselves, yt they may be the readier to
be mustred, as otherwise to be placed. In order of march again the Clarke at
watch and ward, must be attentive with his book to call every man's name to
see who is absent, and that certificate thereof be made unto the Captain, who
must without sickness or some special license of the head officers see him or
them punished to the example of all others. Also the Clarke is to take charge
of the Captains munition, who seeing it delivered unto the soldiers, must
take note how much is delivered, unto whom and what day of the month it is
delivered, with the price: likewise he must repair to the Clarke of the
victuals, and by the Captains warrant to receive such bread, beer, and other
victuals as is to be had, and to deliver it to those that shall be thought by
the Captain to be of credit to vittell the band by the Princes price, and to
take ticates of them as well for that it is delivered unto them, as what they
do deliver unto the soldiers. Also he must in the Captains name and by his
warrant repair unto the merchants and other artificers, and take such wares,
as the officers and soldiers have need of, who must at the pay day by the
Captain be answered. Also provided that the vitler allows to the soldiers
but vj. pence a day, the overplus goes to the payment of their furniture and
apparel. The Clarke must also peruse the ticates to see that no more be
delivered then their wages come to, that the Captains thereby receive no
loss. The Clarke ought to enquire when any be departed this world, also when
any be slain or discharged the band, and to make a just note thereof, whereby
certificate be made to the muster master, that ye Prince in no ways may be
hindered, neither the Captain by the vitlers receive any detriment or loss.

The Ministers charge.
IT is convenient that every band, have one honest and sober man appointed to
use daily prayer among the soldiers, and in time convenient to communicate
with them, and to teach the companies their duties toward God and their
Prince, and to give good counsel unto the sick, wounded, and weak in body
or in conscience, and that such be well armed with spiritual armor, that is
with good knowledge, and good living, ready to persuade them manfully to
withstand their enemies, the flesh, the devil, and desperation, putting them
in sure hope through faith in Christ to enter into the camp of everlasting
life, where they shall ride amongst the soldiers on white horses, clothed in
white and pure silk, as witnesses the holy Scripture of the almighty God of
hosts, who of his mercy bring all soldiers unto the Host of them.

THe noble custom of England is to furnish their numbers with manual weapons
to battle appertaining, as with Caliuers, Courriers, Archers, or long Bows,
Pikes, Halberds or Billmen, which be hereafter signified by letters placed in
order of array, as men bearing such weapons may be placed the like to service
convenient, as hereafter by proportions shall more plainly appear.

The signification of the Letters.
C for Captain L for Lieutenant S for Sergeaunt D for Drums F for Fiftei s for
Caliuers. a for Archers. b for Bills. p for Pikes, h for Horsemen.


AS there is a great alteration of weapons, and also division of the same, I
purpose to note unto you the just numbers to every hundred at this present
used: which shall greatly profit to the making of your battles from 1. C. to
15. C.

Two i.C. Me^ 40 pi. 10 bil. 50 shot. ii.C. 80 20 100 iii.C. 120 30 150 iiii.C.
160 40 200 v.C. 200 50 250 vi.C. 240 60 300 vii.C. 280 70 350 viii.C 320 80 400
ix.C. 340 90 450 x.C 400 100 500 shot. xi.C 440 110 550 xii.C. 480 120 600
xiii.C. 520 130 650 xiiii.C 560 140 700 xv.C. 600 150 750 Men. Pik. Bills shot.

Here follows orders which are to be observed for the furnishing of the
weapons.
The Caleuers or Coriers.
SVch must have either of them a good and sufficient piece, flaske, touch box,
powder, shot, fire, iron, mould, ramor, sword, and dagger, a murrion, in
rain, mistes, and winds, their pieces charged and primed. They must carry the
touch hole under their armeholes, match light in their hands covertly and dry,
their pieces fair and clean within and without: so be they seruiseable at
all times, having regard, they keep their match and powder very dry, often
charged and discharged, march and retire of good distaunce a sunder, garding
other, as hereafter shall plainly appear by diverse examples.

Archers or long Bows.
Necessary it is that every man have a good and meet Bow according to his
draught and strength, light and easy: a Jack with a skull, sword and dagger,
nothing upon his arms, whereby in time of service he may easily draw the
arrow to the head, that they may deliver the same with strength an art as
Englishmen be accustomed. They must have also braser and shooting glooue, their
strings whipped and waxed over with glue, their feathers dry: so be they
seruiseable in any weather to serve against the enemy to slaughter and
execution.

Pykes.
THose bearing that warlike weapons especially the frontes which serve in the
place of Gentlemen, must have a fair Corslet, with all the pieces appertaining
to ye same, that is the curats, the collers, the poldrens with the Uambraces:
also the long taces and the burganet, with Sword and Dagger, their Pykes of
the usual length (for the strength of the battle does consist in the same)
bearing the pykes on their shoulders, setting their thombs under the same,
whereby it is ruled. They must oftentimes practice to traile, push, ward,
couch, cross, etc. as for the necessity of the skirmish or battle
appertains.

Bills.
THese be gards unto Captains and Ensigns, which be most times chosen
Gentlemen of experience, who as occasion serves, give order to the numbers in
array, and approaching the enemy to the assault, certain of them be often
appointed to advance and maintain the same: whose discrete leading and
valiant courage does much comfort the rest to follow the same. These be
armed with Corslettes, and be placed in the heart of the battle, usually
called the slaughter of the field, or execution of the same, who commonly do
not fight but in very great extremity.

Thus be the Soldiers, with the great four weapons armed and furnished to
service convenient to be trained and exercised, as hereafter follows.
Of mustering and training.
Captains having their bands furnished with officers, soldiers, armor,
weapons, and munitions, as aforesaid in times convenient, resort wholly
together to some ground necessary to muster, march, and train, exercise, and
instruct such as are not perfect in the feats of war, which be ordered
sometimes by words and deeds, as by signs from the officers framed, that
soldiers may learn and observe the meaning of the same, as hereafter shall
more plainly appear. At such times of assembly, as at watch or ward, the
Clarke ought to read the bill, and to call every soldier by his name, that
every man may answer for himself, and none to be absent upon pain without
sickness or license. The Sergeant as they be called, puts them in araie
that every man follow his lodseman, keeping his rank fellows justly on both
sides, placing the shot in voward and rereward, the ensign and bills in the
midst of the pikes: So be they placed in beauty and strength, as is
accustomed, sometimes to stand and advance their weapons, turn their faces,
and march any way assigned: sometimes to receive a word that shall pass from
man to man from the one end to the other, with such silence that none hear
the same, but those in araie assembled.

Six principal points belonging to the soldiers of all estates, as hereafter
do follow in order.
Silence. IN all places of service such silence must be used, that soldiers may
hear friends, and not be heard, as well in watch, ward, ambush, camisado, or
else where: in which point consists oftentimes the safety or perdition of
the whole Camp. Obedience. 2 Such obedience must be used, that none regard
the persons, but the office to them appointed, diligently observing the same,
any offending to the contrary runs into danger of the Law: for longer
then obedience is used and maintained, there is no hope of good success.
Secretnesse. 3 Soldiers must be secret and have regard that they disclose
nothing, though sometimes they understand the pretense of the higher powers.
The disclosers of such meriteth most cruel punishment. Sobriety. 4 In
sobriety consists great praise to the soldiers, who using the same, are
ever in state of preferment. Such regard their duties, and reprove the rash
busy bodies. Drunkardes, etc. are ever in danger of punishment. Hardiness. 5
The Captains and Soldiers of courage hardy, be to service much available,
specially such as will ponder what may be the end of their enterprise. Some in
times past have hardly given the onset, and after repented the same, but the
praise of the advised cannot be expressed. Truth. 6 The virtue of goodness and
truth is far exceeding my capacity to write, the practisers of the
contrary, are not worthy of life, but to be soon adjudged. Subtle enemies
approve to corrupt soldiers with gifts: but since the reward of truth is
everlasting life, and the untrue loses the fruitio^ of the same in continual
darkness, I trust none of our countriemen will learn the one for the other:
from the which God keep all good soldiers. ()
The laws and constitutions of the field.
Here begin the Articles whereunto all soldiers which serve under Emperor,
or any other King or Prince, ought to be sworn unto, and them to keep and
maintain inuiolated at all times, and in all places, upon such pains as
follow.
FIrst, ye shall be sworn to be true, just, and dutiful to his Lord and
sovereign, and his graund General or chief Captain of the field, to be
tractable and obedient unto every officer placed and appointed to rule over
him, and to be ready both day and night to serve, whether it be by land or by
water, as occasion of service shall fall out and require. And whosoever does
repine or shows disobedience herein, of what degree or condition so ever he
be, he must be duly punished by the judgment of the superiors appointed for
that purpose.

2 Item, if there be any which shall blaspheme the almighty God or his divine
word: let such a blasphemer be punished with the loss of his life openly, and
to the terror of the rest let it be executed. For no doubt the plague of the
highest will not depart from the house or tent of the blasphemer. For how
should we use justice indifferently unto men, when we are content with silence
to suffer such injury to be committed against God? Therefore first straightly
punish the offenses done against the living God, and he will send thee wisdom
better to judge the causes between man and man.

3 Item, whenever any chieftaine or Captain of any band, shall upon urgent
causes appoint in his absence any other whom he shall think good, to supply
and execute his room of Captaineship, every man ought to follow and obey the
said deputy, with no less care and diligence then they would the Captain
himself, upon pain of such punishment as the General or his assigns shall
appoint.

4 Item, that all soldiers must content themselves with their places
appointed, being joined together in bands, or several without resistance,
whether it be in marching, watching, incamping, or besieging, being also
commanded thereunto by the Captain or other officers, upon such pain as
shall be thought good by the Captain.

5 Item, that every soldier shall for his honor sake, gladly favor, and
mercifully forbear unto the uttermost of his power, all women lying in child
bed, or being with child, or lately delivered from child, to defend and
succor them from the rage of the cruel and rude soldiers or others, which
follow the camp for spoil. Also it behooves all Soldiers to defend all
Ministers, Priests of godly calling, and all spiritual persons. But now a
days they be the first to whom abuse is offered, of what opinion or religion
so ever they be: but God no doubt, will justly plague all such before they be
aware, and when they least suspect it. Also they shall defend all aged men and
women: neither shall any molest and hinder them: if otherwise, upon pain of
loss of his or their lives.

6 Item, that every soldier shall serve, and is by the law of arms bound by
long custom to serve thirty days for every month, and after that rate he
shall receive his months wages.

7 Item, if that any soldier have received his months wages before hand, or
any part thereof, and departs without leave or pasport from his Captain, and
has not served for it, he or they apprehended, shall for the said offense be
judged to die.

8 Item, if there be any soldier or soldiers in marching break his or their
raie without just occasion enforcing them, then the Provost marshall,
Lieuetenant of the band or Sergeant shall compel him or them with violence to
keep his or their ranks in order: and if so be that he or they so
disordered, do chance in this case to be slain, there shall no man be blamed
by his or their deaths by the law of the field, for by such disordered people
the whole army may be in danger of ruinating by the enemy.

9 Item if that by the appointment of the chief rulers of the host there be a
battle fought, and that by the mighty power of God, the victory be obtained
on your side, the law of arms is such, that if any soldier has received his
months wages before hand, he shall be discharged of the same, neither shall he
serve any longer for the said wages, after the day of victory, neither shall
owe any thing for it, but he shall be set free from that months service.

10 Item, if it chance that in time of skirmish or in any other conflict with
the enemy, some one do adventure to fly and run away from his fellows, if
in the flying, his Captain or any other soldier by shooting at him, or by
striking at him chance to kill him, they shall incur no danger for so
doing. And if such a flier chance to escape at that time, and afterward be
taken, let him according to the law of arms suffer death for the same: for
one such a recreant may be the overthrowing of a great multitude.

11 Item, it stands with the law of arms that each common soldier shall
be sworn that they will not have amongst themselves any private counsels,
assemblies or conuenticles, upon pain of the loss of their lives.

12 Item, there shall no soldier neither in time of marching, nor during the
time of their incamping hold or keep any whispering or talk, or secretly
convey any letters unto their adversaries, without license from the chief
Captain upon pain of the loss of his life.

13 Item, if there be any one or a more number that shall go about any
treason or any other conspiracy to be committed against the camp or
garrison, such a traitor or conspirator shall be accused unto the Knight
marshall, and he that bewraieth and accuses such an offender shall have for
his reward a month wages or more: as the fact is heinous, so the reward is
to be increased unto the party that reuealeth the same, and the offender to
receive the reward of a false traitor.

14 Item, that no soldier shall be suffered to be of a ruffinlike behavior,
either to provoke or to give any blow or thrust, or otherwise wilfully
strike with his daggar, to injury any his fellow soldiers with any weapon,
whereby mutines many times ensues, upon pain of the loss of his life.

15 Item, if any one bears hatred or malice, or any evil will for any
occasion done unto him, and so strikes him, he loses his hand, if otherwise
he seeks revenge, then by law he loses his life.

16 Item, if any soldier be warned to watch or ward, and he do not come,
he shall be punished at the discretion of the Captain, but if any soldier
be summoned to watch, and he appear, and after the watch word given, and
the watch set, he departs, and leaves the watch, such a one shall without
mercy be punished with the loss of his life, neither shall any man set an
other to watch in his place without the leave of the Captain upon pain of his
life.

17 Item, that no soldier or soldiers draw his or their sword or swoordes, or
use any other kind of weapon with violence to do hurt within or without the
camp, during the time of the wars, upon pain of death. It has lately
been used with more favor of life, as such an offender to loose his hand,
but it is the discretion of the Lord chief General, in whose hands lies
both life and death of offenders, after their arraignment and just condemnation.

18 Item, the like law is against the officer and officers of any band in the
camp, if he strike any soldier without such occasion as is permitted him in
the articles to do.

19 Item, that no person or persons presume to be mustered or to take wages
before he be sworn to be faithful, and truly to serve his Prince in those
wars present, upon pain of death.

20 Item, that the Harold at arms shall proclaim and publish all that the
General shall give him in charge in the place and places where he is
commanded, and not to add or diminish any part or parcel thereof upon pain
of death.

21 Item, there shall no soldiers or other men, procure or stir up any
quarrel with any stranger, that is of any other nation and such as serve
under one head and Lord with them neither in their gaming or otherwise upon
pain of the loss of his life.

22 Item, there shall no soldiers or other person, being in camp or march,
take away any thing from any man being their friend by violence or by
deceit, as their victuals or other necessaries upon pain of the loss of his
life.

23 Item, when that there are any victuals carried or brought unto the camp
no man shall run out to take any part of them before they be brought to ye
appointed place for the purpose: no though they offer for the^ more then they
be worth, upon pain of the loss of his life.

24 Item, if that the Provost martial, have at any time taken an offender,
and according to his office he carries him to be punished, and if that one or
more soldiers seek to rescue the said malefactor, and in this stir the
offender escape, he or they that are the occasion of this escape shall be
punished with the like punishment as the malefactor should have been, whether
it be by life or otherwise according as the weight of the crime requires.

25 Item, if there be any found, that has entered his name under two
Captains, and has taken wages, armor and weapons before hand, such a person
shall be taken for a perjured man, and shall by the law of arms for the same
loose his life.

26 Item, if any that has a place appointed him by the harbinger or officers
for his tent or lodging, he must hold himself content withal, neither shall
he molest any man lodging within his tent, or other lodging at any time for
any occasion upon pain of the chief Captains displeasure, and such
punishment as he shall think most fit for the offense.

27 Item, that no man shall sound and make any allarum, except it be need or
upon commandment, from the higher officers upon pain of the loss of his
life.

28 Item, when of necessity the alarm is made, each man must besturre him to
be ready for battle upon pain of the loss of his life.

29 Item, at the first warning of the drum or secretly, all soldiers must be
in a readiness and resort to the place appointed, which commonly is the market
place, and from thence in order of araie to the enemies, as they be commanded
upon pain of the loss of his life.

30 Item, al soldiers being horsemen or footmen, must diligently in order of
array by sound of drum or trumpet, accompany the Ensign to watch, ward, or
relief of the same, being the silentlie in a readiness to the enemies, and as
occasion shall serve to brute the alarm with the usual word, Arm, Arm, or
Bows, Bows, upon pain of the loss of their lives.

31 Item, all soldiers must keep their armor and weapons fair, clean and
serviceable in a readiness at every sudden, none intermedling but with his
own, every one to help other to arm and diligently to resort to the place
of service at scrie and larum upon pain.

32 Item, all soldiers must honestly entreat, and truly pay vitlers and
artificers allowed for their relief, being friends or enemies, and with
courteous words encourage such to vittell and relieve the companies or camp
upon pain.

33 Item all soldiers, in watch, ward, march, or otherwise shall have special
regard, that if there be man or woman desirous to speak with the superiors,
or being thine enemies for fear do forsake his own power and resort to thee,
let such secretly be conveyed to the Lord chief General, regarding that they
view no secrets, least they be double spies upon pain of the loss of their
lives.

34 Item, Captains and officers must often frequent and resort unto the
soldiers lodgings, to see in what state their armor and munition be in, and
to give great charge that their furniture be always in a readiness, their
corslets with all pieces belonging to the same, and their caleeuers be made
clean and oiled, to have match and powder dry, the stringes whipped for their
bows, their bills and halberds to be kept sharp. Thus often they ought to
view the same upon pain.

35 Item, that no man of what degree soever he be of, shall commit adultery
with married wives, nor enforce widows, maids or virgins: and by violence
defile them, shall without mercy be punished with death.

36 Item, he that shall depart out of the place where he shall be put, by his
head, or any officer, whatsoever, for a spy, watchman, scowte, or warder,
as well by day as by night, as it often happens, to discover some dealings of
the enemy, without attending and staying for him that placed him there, to
take him away, except he should remove in have to advertise his head of the
success of the enemies assaulting or doing any outrage shall be punished with
death.

37 Item, whosoever should rashly offend or hurt either in words or deeds
any man belonging to the deputies or head officers of justice or Captain, they
being in pay for Sergeants, and they being appointed to carry no other
weapons with steals or staves but bills, they may be known for men of
justice, and not for soldiers.

38 Item, whosoever standing within or without the camp or bars to watch or
scowt, and does his duty so evil, that through his negligence, the enemy
sets upon the camp at unawares he shall die.

39 Item, he that under color of doing the duty of a scowte or spy,
perceiving the enemies have assaulted the camp and he with such fayning lies
still, shall die for it.

40 Item, he that shall forsake the defense, in general, or in particular, of
the battery, of the trench, of the passage, of a bridge, or other like, to him
committed, but lightly, not forced, goes away shall be for so offending,
punished with death.

41 Item, whosoever entering into a City taken by force, follows not his
ensign whether soever it shall go, until the general make proclamation, that
every man shall take booties, and if the general cause no such proclamation to
be made, and that soldier make spoil, he shall incur the pain of death,
and if proclamation be made that they shall cease from taking prays and
booties, and after license given if they give not over, they shall fall into
the same punishment.

42 Item, whosoever seeing the Ensign, under the which he warreth in fraies or
fight, by chance to be fallen into the hands of the enemies if he be there
present, and do not his endeavor to recover it, and when it is cowardly lost,
to punish the soldiers which have suffered it to be cowardly lost with death.

43 Item, he that shall fly from the battle being in the face and front of
the enemies, or shall go slowly and slackly to join and affront with them, in
case it be to fight a field battle, or in any skirmish whatsoever, shall be
punished with death.

44 Item, he that shall feign himself sick, to avoid the fighting with the
enemies, or because he would not go to any other enterprise to use his hands,
but I mean therefore to rob, for to such affairs they will be ready
enough, shall be cruelly punished.

45 Item, whosoever seeing his General, or his Captain, or other Colonel,
and officer of the camp, in the hand of the enemies, and succoureth him not
with all his power, and may do it, not respecting any danger, shall suffer
death.

46 Item, he that shall rob or spoil the people of the country, or subjects
or vassals of the Prince he serves, shall die.

47 Item, he that by theft should steal or rob the armor, weapons, or
horses, or other thing from any others, serving against the enemies, shall die.

48 Item, he that should ransom or tax or otherwise misuse the people of the
country, except they should be enemies or Rebels to the Prince, shall be
greatly punished.

49 Item, he that shall play at any game for his armor, weapons or horses,
which are written upon the role, or through his negligence shall loose them, or
lend, give away, or lay them to pawn, let him fall into the same pain of
death.

50 Item, he that goes further then two hundredth steps or paces from his
quarter, without license of his Captain specially when the camp looks or
straieth to be assaulted by the enemies, except he should be sent for by his
heads, shall be punished with death.

51 Item, he that shall go longer then the hour appointed in the night abroad,
in the camp wandering, except he should be sent by his superiors for a matter
of weight, from head Captain to head captain, by a counter token shall be
cruelly punished.

52 Item, he that shall lodge strangers, whether he be of the camp or not,
without license of the General, or of his Captain, either in his lodging or
under a tent, except he be of his chamber, or by the Captain appointed to
service forth of the camp, shall be punished. But every one ought to be in
the night with their chamber-fellowes, and not to be divided from their
lodgings, that occasion serving they may be ready with their weapons in their
hands, neither ought they to lodge watch or scowts, or of the search, for that
the spies having no lodging any excuse being found out, may the better be
apprehended, also if the scowte watch, be taken from their quarter, faining to
be a soldier of the Camp when they are to spy in the night, they for so
offending shall be cruelly punished with death.

53 Item, whosoever shall make any words, deeds, or questions in the ward or in
an ambush, or in other place where respect and silence is needful shall be
punished.

54 Item, he that should be revenged of any injury received, either newly or
before time done, by an indirect way, that is, traitorously, and not by way of
reason, or by way of combat body to body, by the license of his General
shall suffer death.

55 Item, he that should be so bold as to play with false cards and dice, or
should dare to use in play any privy falshoode, theft or deceit in any
wise shall be punished.

56 Item, he that of presumption should pass out of his place into another
either before the battle or in marching, should out of order make have to go
before to be the first that should come to the lodging of the camp, or in
marching should go out of his Rank from one battle to another, or he that
does not observe the order of marching shall die.

57 Item, he that shall task or ransom upon his host or Lodger, or upon any
other that is not his lawful prisoner by good order of war, and that when he
is lawfully taken, the ransom excel not the articles and orders of the
field, and in case there were no articles of agreement, that there be a just
ransom set upon pain of punishment.

58 Item, he that shall enter in or go forth by any other gate, street, or
way, then that which shall be accustomed into the city, pales or list, or fort
where ye camp is lodged, that is going over the walls or under some breach,
and not by the ordinary gate, let him fall into the pain of death.

59 Item, whosoever does not immediately retire when he shall hear the
trumpet or drum sound the retreat, either of a set battle, or of a skirmish
or battery, or of any other fight, or should go in or come forth of the
City when the assault is given to the walls thereof shall die.

60 Item, he that speaks or calls or cries alowd amongst the ordinance,
or in the battle, or in any place where silence needs, except he were a
head, or other Officer or Sergeaunt, commanding some new order, shall die.

61 Item, he that shall commit any thing whatsoever it be, whereby it may be
coniectured that it is against the Prince, and damageable to the General and
the camp shall die.

62 Item, drums and fiftes must often sound and exercise their instruments,
warning as the mouth of man, to all points of service, so must soldiers
diligently learn and observe the meaning of the same, that none plead
ignorance, neglecting their duties to service apperteining. Also sometimes
they shall receive from the higher officers or Captains, secret commandments
by word of mouth, the which must with all diligence be observed and truly
executed upon the loss of their lives.

63 Item, it is against the law of arms that any man should break down any
mill or water works perteining to mils, upon pain of the loss of his life.

64 Item, no man in their marching through what place soever they shall pass
shall set any thing on fire, no not their encamped place at their departing,
without commandment from the chief Captain, upon the pain of the loss of
their lives.

65 Item, if at any time any man shall in the time of his drunkenness
quarrel and fight with his fellow, and in so doing chance to kill him, he
shall in so doing receive as great punishment by death, as if he had been
sober.

66 Item, thou shall note that soldiers shall swear at their first entering
into service that they will faithfully and truly serve their Captain for
six months together, and when the six months are expired, they shall swear
to serve him six months more if he need them. And if the Captain needs
them not so long, but minds to discharge his band, the Captain shall allow
each of them half a months wages at the departing, and so discharge them.

67 Item, there shall no man make any shoute or other stirring noise in any
corner or open place of city, town, castle, fort, or camp, whereby any
danger or inconvenience may grow unto the company any manner of ways, on
pain of the loss of his life.

68 Item, he that shall disclose the watch word to enemies or to friends,
except it be to such a one as he shall be appointed by his governor: or
shall be found asleep in the watch, scowte, or ward, shall be punished with
death.

69 Item, if any Captain for corruption sake, shall give license to his own
soldier or to any other soldier without the license of the General to
depart the Camp, shall receive the same punishment that the soldier should
receive.

70 Item, that no soldier shall go out of the camp in the night time without
the watch word, in danger of his life, for if he be slain so by the watch,
there is no blame to be laid upon them that kill him.

71 Item, there shall no soldier go out of the camp without his armor and
other weapons, upon the pain of the loss of his life.

72 Item, every Captain shall be sworn, that he shall charge every decurion
or Captain of ten men, upon their oaths that he shall denounce every
soldier that is under his charge, and that is not able and meet to serve.

73 Item, in like case if the said decurion shall receive any new or strange
soldier into his band, his part and duty is, that he give unto the higher
Captain knowledge thereof.

74 Item, no man of what condition soever he be, shall be so bold as to
conueie or attempt to conueie any offender upon pain of the loss of his life.

75 Item, that every soldier shall have upon his outermost garment some
special sign or token whereby he may be known, such a one as the higher
Captains shall agree upon. As for example, he shall have on his garment a
red cross, and upon his armor a red lace or such like, whereby he may the
better be known of his fellows, and if there shall be any found without the
said signs and tokens, he shall be used as an adversary or enemy.

76 Item, if any Captain or other officers shall procure skirmish or fight
the battle, without commandment from the higher officers, for so offending
they shall receive death.

77 Item, if that any number of soldiers be commanded and placed by the
head Captains to defend or keep any city, tower, castle or fort, or any
other place, and they being sharply assaulted by the enemy, once, twice, or
oftener, in this case the law of arms is, that the Lord General shall allow
and pay unto such a number of soldiers but ordinary wages, neither is there
by the law of arms any thing more due unto them, and if the said Castles,
Towers, or Fortes shall be sold or be betrayed by the said Captain, officers,
or soldiers, or otherwise yielded without the commandment of the Prince, or
at the appointment of the General: shall be as false traitors used.

78 Item, if there be any City, Castle, or other Fort, yielded up by the
enemy without expugnation, there shall no man be so bold to enter into the
said place to spoil, or otherwise to kill, or do any outrage without leave of
the General upon pain of the loss of his life.

79 Item, there shall no man depart out from the precinct of the camp with any
booty or spoil, without leave of the chief officers or head Captain, upon
the pain of the loss of his life.

80 Item, if any man for fear forsakes the place appointed him to fight in
and for fear throws down his weapon, the officers or soldiers may kill him
without any danger.

81 Item, if any man saying that he has done some worthy thing in fight, and
be proved contrary, should be punished with death.

82 Item, if a legion, cohort, or band, shall by mutines, or otherwise incur
the laws of the field, it is requisite and necessary, for that all shall not
be put to death, that every man's name be taken and put into a bag, and that
the tenth lot should be executed. The which although every man do not feel,
yet nevertheless he shall fear the event.

83 Item, if there shall be any man that shall infringe and not maintain,
confirm, and to his power diligently and dutifully keep and observe these
articles aforesaid, such shall as perjured persons with all severity be
punished: and if any soldier or soldiers shall offend in any manner of thing
that does belong and appertain to the duty of a soldier, whereof there is
no mention made in these articles, such an offender shall be punished at the
discretion of the chief Captain.

THese Articles must be openly read in the presence of the chief Captains by
the notarie or scribe of the court, and after that it is read, the oath shall be
ministered unto every man by the praetor in this wise, or the like words, to the
same end and purpose, speaking unto the whole company, and saying. My brethren
and friends that are here present, ye have here heard the articles of the
Queen our sovereign, containing the chief and principal points of our
rights and laws of the field, and of the oath, and the manner thereof, which
every soldier ought to take. All you therefore that do mean faithfully and
valiantly to observe, maintain, fulfill, confirm, and keep the aforesaid
articles: let him here now either openly refuse to be a soldier, or with me
hold up his finger and say after me.

ALl these Articles which have been openly read unto us, we hold and allow as
sacred and good, and those will we truly and stoutly confirm, fulfill,
maintain, and keep, so help us God and his divine word. Amen.

These Articles with others, which for tediousness I omit, would be published,
some upon pain of death, some greater, and some with lesser punishment, to
every one that does offend, without any remission or forgiveness, or regard of
blood, degree, kindred, or friendship, specially at the beginning to lie in
Camp, whereby the army may the better be set in good order, and to make it
fearful of God, of justice, and of the General, with love and fear.

The execution hereof only apperteineth to the Master of the Camp, for the
hearing, ordering, and determyning of causes of justice under the General, as
the Liuetenant of a City or Town, Deputy for the Prince.

For the Master of the camp is the chief of the orders, who has place in
the Field in many things, as principal next to the General, who has the
chief government in pitching the Camp, and dislodging: briefly, from the
General downward, it is the greatest charge and burden that is in the Army,
and therefore it is requisite, that he have good knowledge and remembrance of
all the orders whereby the wars is to be governed, and that he be of good
practice and experience.

But such cases as are capital and of great importance, should be heard and
determined by the General and his Judges, it suffices that God is the knower
and determiner, and next unto him his ministers on earth, who failing to do
justice, either for zeal, love, or hatred, shall yield account thereof before
the divine Judge, and this law cannot be avoided by us, but we shall be cited
and called by way of appeal.

How Captains according to their worthiness are preferred to great charge.
SOme Ensigns have in times past ben accompanied with one hundred, some with
two, some with three, some with four, some with five hundred men, according to
the worthiness and experience of Captains, of which all were not thoroughly
except at the first, the better to train, exercise, and order such numbers to
service appertayning. Here follow certain particular practices in proportion
by letters, signifying men, from one hundred, unto five hundred, in quadrant or
two-folde battle, to the greatest strength for defense of enemies, showing
every weapon particularly in their place and order, to march any ways to
service convenient, or else to keep the ground of advantage, as wind, Hill,
and Sun will permit, in which consists great profit.

Certain words to be used of the Captain, in time of trayning.
AT such times as the Captain or any other officer determine to exercise their
company to train them, they must cast them into a Ring, or such like
necessary, and to use these words unto the soldiers, saying, as after
follows. My loving friends and fellows, we be gathered together, being also
appointed to serve God and our Prince, and to defend our country to the death,
and for that none through ignorance shall perish or run in danger of the
laws of the field, ye shall from time to time by me or the officers of my
band, be instructed by words or deeds in such points as to our calling and
the necessity of Service shall require, the which you must diligently observe
and follow, though such to you many times seem both dangerous and painful.
Also if any of you my fellows shall find an occasion convenient to declare to
me his mind and opinion in any thing, touching service, I will diligently
hear, and gratify the party the double value thereof, and God willing I will
use equity and justice with the same. Also regard, that all Soldiers know
and obey their Officers in their place, according to their calling.

Here are set forth certain points, to train, exercise, and in order to
place one hundredth men, three in a rank: also how to bring them into a Ring,
an Esse, or a Snaile, very profitable for young Soldiers.
AS before I have set forth what number of weapons apperteineth to every band
from one hundred unto fifteen hundred men: even so to march three in a rank,
three and thirty ranks contain one hundred men, suting your weapons in this
order following, that is, in the front or voward.25. shot, next your shot.20.
pikes, then 10. Bills to guard the Ensign, and next your Bills your other
twenty pikes, and then your other.25. shot, the which being thus placed, may
by your Officers be brought to these proportions and orders as follows,
greatly available to diverse Services.

The Voward,

The rereward.



FIrst, for that a C. is the least number that a Captain has in charge, I
will therefore begin with one hundred, the which after you have taught to
march.3. in a rank, right forth, you shall bring them in this proportion of a
ring, otherwise called a limasson: And although it is not of any force, it is
necessary to train the imperfect, also by bringing them in close compass
together, they may better hear and understand any precepts touching their
charge spoken by the Captain, or any other officers as often as is meet. This
is not of force, because the Ensign lies open to the enemies, without guard of
Pikes.

A Ring.


SOmetimes upon good occasion you shall bring your pikes in order of an esse,
your bills placed in the midst with the Ensign, whereby it may be environed
with Pikes for defense of horse, your shot placed between every rank of
Pikes, so that they may serve to the skirmish either rescuing other within
guard, the which retiring into the void place, the Pikes couched every way for
defense, the overplus of shot with the Captain and Liuetenaunt with other
officers to be placed in the midst of the Esse, with the Ensign.

An Esse.
the Vowarde

the rerewarde



SOmetimes upon the sudden, bring them into this order of a D, otherwise
called a Snaile. Place your bills and Ensign, in the rereward of your Pikes,
and cast your self round, so that you may enuiron your Ensign, place your
rank of Pikes, the Shot betwixt every Captain, Liuetenant, and other
officers, with the overplus of shot to be placed within the weapons. This is a
strength at need, but in this order they can not march or retire.

A D, or, a Snaile.
the rerewarde

the Voward^



How to train your men and bring them to the use of their weapons.
AFter that you have taught your company to march 3. in a rank right forth:
likewise to keep their order in limitation or ring, you shall command your
officers to teach them how to use their weapons. First divide your shot from
your Pikes and Bills: causing a mark to be set upon the water, whereby you
shall the better perceive where the Pellet falls. Then cause your Drum to go
before, and your shot to follow single, teaching them how to hold their pieces,
and to put powder into the Pan, the Match into the Cock, the better to bolden
them, and those that have experience to discharge at the mark, every one for
to follow his lodesman. This done, cast them all about round, and bring them to
the place where they began, then afterward teach them to discharge with pellet.
Then must you divide your pikes and bills in two parts, commanding your
officers, that they turn their broad sides, as if they should encounter the
enemy, causing your drums to sound. Then charge your officers to go in the
front of your pikes, to show them how that they should use their weapons, as
first, to cause your pikes to sarie close together, then to traile their pikes
with the sharp end toward the enemy, two yards from the end of the blade,
and to offer the push one at an other. This being done, cause your Drums to
sound the retrait, that is, to retire with your faces upon the enemy. Then
must you teach them to ward with their pikes, when the push is offered against
them, also to couch and cross, for defense of horse: likewise to advance, as
hereafter shall more plainly appear.

Here begin certain orders and practices to train or place an hundred men.
The first THis shows how the hundred men before mentioned, cast in a ring,
may march three in a Rank, the which may be brought unto these proportions
of strength following.

The second. SOmetimes marching in the Raie aforesaid you shall divide the same
into three parts by 11. ranks in each part, dividing your shot into four
parts, and your Pikes into four parts also, placing your Bills to guard the
Ensign, so be they ready at the sudden in quadrant as appears.

The third. LIkewise you must instruct the same from 3. to march 5. in rank,
to the intent when need serves to join unto other bands. In thus marching,
place half your shot before, the other in the rereward.

The fourth ALso you may practice them to march 7. in rank, placing your Bills
in the rereward, with your Ensign, the which makes a just quadrant, placing
your Shot in the wings and rereward, as appears.

The first. The Voward. The Rereward. The second. The third. The Voward. The
Rereward. To augment from three unto five. The fourth. The Rereward. These
four contain one hundred men a piece.





The fifth. YOu may likewise by placing 7. in rank the which is the greatest
force that a hundred men may be brought into, place 21. Shot in the front and
15. in each wing, the which service very aptly to skirmish, is greatly unto the
anoying of the enemy, also ready to retire to serve round about the battle,
the Pikes as before.

The sixth. IF in marching you understand or perceive that horsemen will assault
you, then place 5. Pikes in rank, and betwixt every Pike a shot, so marching
forward, they fall to be 10. rank quadrant, placing your bills and Ensign in
the midst.

The seventh. LIkewise you may for the defense of Horsemen, place 10. ranks
of Pikes every way, your Shot next unto them, your Bills and Ensign in the
midst, the Pikes ends couched on the ground, the better to defend the enemy.

The eight. THis proportion shows the March or Quadrant order at large of a
C. men, very necessary to be used. In show to the Enemies, when thou
understand their numbers to exceed thine, placing seven Pikes in the
Voward, also 7. Pikes in the Rereward, next unto them 6. Pikes in the second
Ranks, your Bills and Ensign in the midst, with the Dromme and Fiffe as is
before mentioned, the which number when thou perceiuest the Enemy, to take
vewe of thine, thou shall cause the second Ranks of the Voward and Rereward to
step forward to furnish the void spaces, the which shall make of seven
thirteen in Rank. Also if thou perceiuest the enemy pretending to encounter
thee, having no place of refuge, shall cause the Ranks that stepped forward
to retire to their places, and to sarrie close together, remoouing out of the
second Ranks into the wings the Bills, to step forwards in their places, will
be seven every way quadrant, as in the order before is mentioned, your Shot
to be placed in the Voward and Rereward, may skirmish and retire as occasion
serves.

The fifth.


A quadrant mixed with shot.
the sixte

A quadrant defending the shot.
the Seuenthe

The eight Battle.
the Vowarde

the rerewarde

The March at large.



Certain practices for them that have charge of two hundred men to service
convenient.
The first. FIrst marching five in rank. 40. Ranks contain two hundred men
sueting their weapons as before: may be brought to these orders following, to
diverse intents available, although the same for a time seem painful, and
although Archers be not as heretofore they have been, yet it is good to show
you, that having Archers you must place them as afterward to you is mentioned.

The second SOmetimes divide the Pikes and the Bills into three parts, by
fifteen ranks, seven to a rank, placing your Ensign in the midst, so
joining them together, makes a hearse battle, ready at the sodeine against
the enemy, placing forty Caliuers in the voward, and twenty Archers and ten
Caliuers in the rereward with thirty Archers.

The third. LIkewise according to your ground you shall place your outtermost
ranks with your best and fairest Corslets, the which serve not only to the
show, but otherwise for the strength of the battle, commanding your officers
to place ten in a rank, the rest to march ten in a rank, likewise your Bills
and Ensign in the midst, falls to be ten every way quadrant, the which is a
just hundred, your Caliuers placed in the voward and rereward, and your Archers
in the flanks which is a just hundred also.

The first. The Voward. The Rereward. The second. The Voward. The Rereward. The
third. The Voward. The Rereward




Orders of trayning two hundred men.
The fourth SOmetimes by commandment of the General or head Officers, you
shall be commanded to do some exploite by night, the which being lead by
your Guides through straites, wrong grounds, woods, etc. it is needful that
every Pike man and Bill man take hold of his Lodsemans weapon, placing your
shot betwixt your Pikes and your Ensign in the midst, your Pikes to march five
in Rank, sixteen ranks is just eighty pikes beside your Bills, the overplus
of your shot to be placed in the rereward.

The sixth. SOmetimes occasion serves to march through long Brom, Corn, or
Fern, so that Soldiers must traile their pikes from the ground close together
at the half pikes, in the Voward the sharp ends of the pikes forward, and in
the rereward the sharp ends of the pikes to the ground, who may of the sudden
being assailed with horsemen, must presently advance and couch their pikes
every way for defense of Horse, your Caliuers in the front and Rereward, the
archers in the flanks.

The fifth. ALso when you shall be called to the assalts of Town, Fort, or any
such like, you must endure the great shot if it be not dismounted, wherefore
your officers must cause them to march a good distaunce a sunder, and every
man close to his Lodseman, march with expedition, and manfully employ
themselves unto victory, your Caliuers in the Voward, your Archers next to
your Pikes.

The fourth. The Voward. The Rereward.

The fifth. The Voward. The Rereward.



The sixth Battle.
The Voward.



Certain points to exercise and train three hundred men unto service
convenient.
A Captain having charge of 300. men that be expert in service, may often times
victoriously accomplish Exploits and points of service to them committed, which
great numbers imperfect may not attain unto. The better to instruct the same,
here follow certain orders and strengths in araie, which practiced in time
convenient, may bring perfection of service at need.

The first Sometime placing such numbers by 5. in Rank, may be brought to
diverse points of service convenient.60. ra^ks contain.300. men, five in rank.

The second To bring this number into a quadrant proportion, you must divide
your long weapons into three parts, placing four in rank, your Bills and
Ensign in the midst, and joined close together fall out to be 12. quadra^t
every way, your shot placed in the wings ready to skirmish, in the body of your
battle are six score Pikes, thirty bills, and in the wings seven score and
ten shot, in the rerewarde thirty shot, thus is this number at the sodeine
brought to strength against the enemy.

The third Sometime augment your Ranks from 5. to 7. so 44. Ranks contain 100.
men, which are to be joined unto other numbers, and to be brought to force.

The fourth Sometime from 7. to 9. in rank the long weapons of the same
contain 18. ranks, your shot placed in the Voward and Rereward as the ground
may serve, is a hearse or broad square.

By these exercises of augmenting ranks as do appear, Soldiers may be
brought to perfection of order in array, and by the same be brought to
perfection in quadrant or hearse, according as numbers and ground will serve.

Here follows the fifth and sixth order of trayning.300. men.
The fifth. SOmetimes the Captains with your bands aforesaid, be appointed to
some exploits with such silence that Drums sound not, nor clap Weapons, neither
use any noise until they have recovered the place convenient for their
enterprises, yet sometimes the officers in the rereward sends a word passing
from man to man, until it come to the voward only, from one rank unto an
other, which may be said ( Sarre advance) or such like, appointed two or three
ranks of gentlemen skillful Soldiers to lead the voward, knowing the
encounter to join, that way by order of the officers, the shot does issue to
skirmish betwixt the leders aforesaid. The Battle may join close together if
occasion requires, also the rest of the shot may wade through to help the
voward.

The sixth. As before is placed 12. in rank, with your Bills and Ensign in
the midst, so it falls out to be 12. in rank in breadth, and 13. in length,
placing your shot in the front and rereward, the which as occasion serves, may
be brought to skirmish any ways. This same Battle as the ground serves, is
very strong against the enemy.

The fifth. Orders of trayning three hundred men. The Voward.

The S Rereward. S

The sixth.

The Vorward.

The Reward.



The first. I. The Voward C The Rereward The second. L The Voward L The third.
L The Voward C The Rereward. The fourth. L The Voward. C The Rereward.




The viij. Battalle.
The Voward.

The S Rereward.



Sometime marching in straights, and especially having some guard in Rereward
for the safety of the Ensign, you may send certain Ranks or Pikes unto the
Front toward the enemy, which shall wade through to strengthen the battle,
placing the one half of your shot to the skirmish in the front, the other
half in the Rereward.

The eight Battle.


The viij. SOmetime having scope of Ground, standing in doubt of Horsemen,
cause the numbers to march.12. in a Rank at large, a good distaunce asunder,
and so to stand still, every man toward their quarters, placing their Shot on
all the sides betwixt the Pikes which after they have discharged, being charged
with horse, may retire to the Bills, and your outward Fronts serve close
together, until the Shot have charged, and at the repulse of the Horse, to
open your Pikes at large, and the Shot to be commanded to skirmish as they
were in the fronts. This battle is of great force.

To order and imbattaile 4. hundred in quadrant proportion.
The first TWo Ensigns accompanied with 4. C. men may be brought to this
quadrant proportion against the defense of the enemy by placing.15. in the
front, joining 4. ranks of Pikes, in the Voward, and 4. in the Rereward, 4. in
the Flanks, your Bills and Ensign in the midst, placing your Shot in six
wings for the rescuing of each other, the rest of your shot in the Vowarde and
Rereward in Diamond wise. This Battle for so small a number is of great
force. ()

To order and imbattaile 4. hundred in quadrant proportion. The first Battle.
The like number placed in manner of an hearse or twofold Battle. The second.


The second. THe ground may be such as it shall be necessary to place the same
number in manner of a Hearse, or twofold battle, placing 10. in rank to
length, and 20. in breadth, placing your Bills and Ensign in the midst,
encountering the enemy on your broad side, so shall you occupy more hands,
then the quadrant battle does, occupying less ground in marching, then the
other battle. You must cause them to tarry close together, trayling their
Pikes on the ground, being ready to offer the push to the footmen, and to
cross for the defense of the horse, your shot to be placed, as before you
appears. This is of great strength, so that the Enemy cannot enuiron you.

To imbattaile five hundred men in a quadrant proportion.
ACcording to the worthiness of the Captain, the greater charge is committed,
as one Captain to have charge of 5. C. men under one Ensign, the which to
bring into quadrant Battle, you must place 16. pikes in front, making 4.
ranks quadrant, placing your Bills in the midst with your ensign, so have
you lift the body of your battle.250. men, your shot to be placed in the
front and rereward.110. in the flanks of the battle 140. in the 8. wings, the
which being charged, may dischage and retire whereby to be rescued by the lest:
they may in this proporiton march any way unto them needful, be it either to
travail, or else for to win grounds by any advantage.

To imbattaile 500. men in a quadrant proportion.
To place the like number in an hearse or square Battle.


SOme time by reason of the ground it is necessary to bring such a number into
an hearse or twofolde battle, which may be more auailable then the quadrant
battle. To bring them into this present proportion, you must place 13. pikes
in breadth, and 21. in length, your Bills and Ensign in the midst, your shot
in the Fronts and Wings. Thus in order they may turn their faces, and march
any way to them needful, which practice may greatly avail at need, as unto
great numbers apperteineth.

Thus leaving to treat any further of private bands, here following I will
show some points, and necessary practices to great numbers, convenient to
order, join, and imbattaile.

Laudata virtus crescit.
The end of the first book.
In this book is contained certain necessary practices to be exercised with
such hands and regiments, as unto Coronels or Chieftaines, to be committed, to
many exploites of service greatly available.
SVch appointed to the leading and gouenment of numbers aforesaid (with their
bands suited) weapons as accustomed The Captains and Companies be unto them
obedient and observe their commandments to all intents, as if the Lord
Lieutenant General were present. And for that Captains with their bands the
better and more easily may bring their numbers into such order or battelles, as
the Sergeant mayor, by the Coronels or Chieftaines commanded must do,
hereafter ensuing does follow proportions to the assistance of the same. And
for Caliuers, whose practice in the Skirmish be the first in the field, and
begins the fight, the letters following in diverse proportions signify such,
and show to march, skirmish, invade or retire in politic manner, as to such
does apperteine, as well by bands divided in sundry parcels distantly in
sunder, as either may rescue other, as also to retire by ranks rescewing as
aforesaid. And considering how by inventions daily devised, the exercises and
subtelties of the same do daily increase, to the great peril of the inexpert,
as we may daily see, these sundry proportions following unto some unknown,
may in times convenient be exercised to bring to perfection such small numbers,
so to profit in greater numbers, which the imperfect cannot accomplish.

Certain necessary points for to be exercised with numbers of Caleeuers and
Archers to diverse intents of service in the field.


The first. THis number upon the sight of the Enemies must march three in a
rank, casting themselves in proportion of a Ring, so to abide there,
appointing themselves to approach still in araie, there to discharge by Ranks,
so in the Rereward to charge ready to service again, marching round.

The voward.

The rereward.



The second. THis number encountering the ring must discharge by ranks, and
after the first rank has discharged, to retire betwixt the Ranks until they
come to the rereward, there to charge and follow his looseman to service
again. Thus may you continually maintain skirmish how little or great so ever
your number be, it gives great encouragement to the soldiers standing but one
shot and retireth.

Orders of shot very necessary for diverse intents of service in the field.
The Voward. The third.


Theswo bands change tanks, and place on their broad sides.

The fourth.
These bands of Archers be brought to service by the Caleeuers before them.



THese two bands of calleuers set to recounter the enemy on their broad sides,
the fro^ts discharge and turn their faces, retiring betwixt the other, The
third.
which advance in like manner to ye reseue of the same. Those retire and charge
again to service, thus practicing the skirmish may bring the bands of archers
to service, to the great anoying and discomfiting of the enemy.

These bands of archers being brought to service by the calleuers, The fourth.
although that the calleuers be counted to be of greater force the^ they be of,
and the archers be not used in the field so much as they have been, yet having
light shafts made to shoot 12, or 14, score, may keep their place shooting
altogether over the heads of the caleeuers, to the blemishing and very great
anoie of the enemy.

Orders of shot very neccessarie for diverse intents of service in the field.


These two bands discharged by ranks, and return to the rereward, and charge
again.

These two bands placed 5. in ranks like two horns are to be brought to
skirmish in proportion, like as does appear, the fronts or voward discharges,
the one retiring on the left hand, the other on the right hand unto
therereward, and there to charge again, every one to follow his lodesman unto
service again. ()

Orders for shot very necessary for diverse intents of service available,
The seventh.



According to the number of the Enemies you must answer them with like
proportion and numbers, The vij.
having great regard to obtain hill, wind, water, wood, etc the which greatly
avails, sometimes the advantage of grounds is such that small numbers way
repulse greater numbers. The grounds large and plain, make your maineward of
shot larg and strong, the better to answer the enemy, the fro^ts to discharge
and retire to the rereward, there to charge again, and being thus joined in
skirmish with the enemy, the Captain and officers must foresee the best way
to repulse and overthrow the enemy, sending two wings to flank the enemies
and to encounter them the which being wisely foreseen will greatly profit.

Orders of shot very necessary for diverse intents of service auailable.


These three bands marching at large may wade through in skirmish, or retire
betwixt the ranks as occasion serves either band rescewing other, to charge
in the Rereward, and to advance to service again. This may you continually
maintain skirmish.

These practices and such like exercises in times convenient may bring
perfection to service with shot at need, the rather through the good industry
and painful travail of officers and the soldiers by whose gentle patience
it is sooner obtained.

An order to imbattaile 600. men at the sudden against horsemen and footmen.


IT is appointed unto two Captains to bring 600. men to convey, charge or do
exploits, as the commandment of the higher Officers shall appoint them.

The captains advertised of straightes, passages, and scituations of the
countries: also on what part the Enemies be most like to assault. them, must
give order unto your Officers to place 13. in front, as before you is
mentioned, your Ensign in the midst with the Bills, your Shot placed in
the Wings as appears. At such times as the Eenmie shall assault you, join
both your Bands, and become one strengh, as the ground does serve. This order
is very necessary to do many exploits.

The like number brought in manner of a Hearse, to defend horsemen.


SOmetimes marching by 10. in rank, upon the fight of the Enemies divide
into two parts and join their broad sides divided together, and become in one
strength, which being thus placed, is in length 24. and in breapth 10. Against
horsemen they must pitch their pikes on thn ground and cross them, and against
footmen bear above hand. They must sarrie close together, and not disseuer
to follow or fly, least their disorders make place for Enemies to enter, as
by this proportion does appear. Sometimes for the safety of and our shot you
must receive the^ within the guard of your Pikes. This.h. signifies horsemen
galloping the field to break upon you, where they may best enter, and most
easily, as by the void space arpeareth, the overplus of your shot to be placed
in the 4. wings without the battle. This number to disseuer is very perilous.

An order to imbattaile 900. men at the sodeine.
Captains marching with 900, men understanding by scout or spy that the
enemy pretends to skirmish with them or otherwise to join baitaile, you may
divide your bands in three parts, marching 9. in a ra^ke placing Officers
betwixt every band, that being assaulted may join the Voward and the Rereward
to the middle ward, so fall they out to be an hearse battle, placing your
shot in the wings, that they may the better resort to the skirmish,
likewise to retire as occasion serves. This is a singular good order for the
obtaining of any grounds or doing of exploits. ()

An order to imbattaile 900. men at the sudden.
The Voward.

The Rereward.



An order to imbattaile the like number in quadrant proportion at the sudden
as if the Sergeant Mayor were there present.
The Voward.

The Rereward.



WHen battails are to be made, the Sergeant mayor gives commandment unto the
Sergeants of the bands to bring their companies several and to join your
bands the broad sides together, as your numbers serve, The Captains, Droms
and Fiffes, with your Ensign placed in the midst of the execution, as well for
the safety of the same as for the comforting of the soldiers? nevertheless,
such order is taken, that Lieuetenants and Sergeants of bands with other
serviceable Gentlemen, be placed to lead the Voward and Rereward of the
battle, where onsets be uncertain, whose beautiful armours, politic and
courageous onset is to the enemy a terror, to their own companies great
comfort. The shot to be placed in four Troops with two Wings in the Rereward,
for that they may easier maintain skirmish round about the battle, on which
side soever they be assaulted.

THese four quarters joined in one, seem to be 12. hundred men under four
Ensigns every ways, who at the enemies sight must place thirteen in rank,
which fall to be a quadrant every way, which suddenly may join their long
weapons together making one quadrant of four. Your Droms and Fiffes with the
Captain placed next to the Ensign, the Lieftenants in the Wings, and the
Sergeant in the Vowarde and Rereward, whereby they may the better give
intelligence by sign or word what is best to be done. Three hundred men
bearing Caleeuers in the Wings, and three hundred in Demie Diamonde wise, after
the Alm aine manner in the midst, the which being discharged, the Caleeuers will
greatly prevail. This way they may march wholly together, or retire any
ways to service needful, ready with their shot to encounter the enemy any
ways in skirmish, either wing rescuing other as need shall require. And
although the Sergeants Mayor appoints order for the same, yet the Sergeants
of every Band having experience, only rules and gives order to their own
charge, and appoint and place such in the fronts, Rereward and wings, as to
them seem most convenient.

THis proportion is after the Almaine manner of imbattailing, much like unto the
order of the Romans who divided their Legions into diverse cohorts to this
intent, that when the Fronts were wearied the Maineward and Rereward succeeded,
having by late experience in France tried, that the dividing of the Battle
in many Bands, so that they have Pikes sufficient to impsle the Bills, and to
every Band their number of shot and horse, is more available then any
battle being made of a whole body, or as the Greeks term it, a Phalange:
for they are to be out of length or breadth as the ground or occasion serves,
to charge and encounter the enemy placed in one battle, of every quarter to
their great detriment, and overthrowing of any so placed, being of sufficient
strength for defense of horse: and though the first or second, or third, should
be overthrown, yet the rest keeping their order are to succeed. Whereas the
battle being one, after the Fronts be overthrown, the rereward is ready to
run, the which being disordred, can hardly recover to place them in order
again.

And order to imbattell 12. C. men quadrantlie at the sudden.
This ways you may march or retire anle ways that should be thought
needful to the doings of any exploits.



A Coronels charge in twofolde wise, the pikes crossed for defense of horse.



An order to imbattaile a Coronels charge.
COronels or Chieftains who often times according to their experience and
worthiness of service have the charge and leading of fifteen hundred men more
or less, to whom is committed diverse sundry exploits and points of service in
the field, whereof they discrie any multitude of horsemen, pretending for to
charge them and to inuiron your battle, having no Wagon. Borough, or pale of
carriages, water, hedge ditch, or other succors, but only the strength of
their manual weapons and pollice of defense upon sight of the enemies, must
cast the Voward and Rereward to become one strength, and to serve close
together, to touch cross, and defend, as by this order may appear. The three
o^^most ranks fair armed, and skillful gentlemen and others, do pitch their
pikes on the ground couching and crossing the same, the two ranks next giving
the push at the length of the pikes, the shot placed within the pikes for
safeguard, shoot and charge still in their places. This order to encounter with
footmen if it be possible will recover the advantage of wind, hill, and
Sun, in good order, on the one side of the hill to join in fight, where God
gives the victory before these same encounters.

Revive your soldiers with meat, drink, and good counsel, and with
comfortable words to animate and encourage the same.

How to imbattaile.150. men in quadrant proportion.
AS before I have set forth the order or imbatteling of 150 me^ in two fold
wise, yt which in some ground is much available, for yt it occupies more
hands the^ yt just square in fiight at one instant, notwithstanding such must
be assured yt the enemy can approach but one way, which else may be prejudicial
therefore in the plain field the just sqare or quadrant is, the strongest order
yt may be, nevertheless convenient it is at such time as you purpose to ioin
battle with the enemy, having ordinance and other carriage to ye same in the
wings of the rereward, thereby to impale the same yt the enemy enter not but
in the fronts. Also the expert captains must foresee to obtain hill, wind,
Sun, or any other advantage, the which diverse ways greatly profits. If your
battle be assaulted with horse, then couch and cross your pikes, and against
footmen sarrie close, trailing your pikes until the encounter, and then to
offer the push till repulse be given, and God give the victory. In the fronts
you must place your best armed and most valiant men, as well to encourage the
rest, as to be a terror to the enemies, your shot to be placed in the wings
and rereward, for being placed in the fronts, they cannot well retire, but upon
their own pikes, or else upon ye shot in ye wings. To be brought to this
proportion you must place 6. ranks of pikes 19 in rank every ways which comes
to 512. the shot to be placed in 4. troops in the wings, 10, in rank which is
400. and 310 in rank, and 3. in breadth in the Rereward, the which are to
succeed the other troops after they have discharged, the 50. shot and 48.
pikes are to be placed aabout ye artillery, or otherwise at ye discretion of
ye Coronell, ye captains and lieftenants with the sergeants to be placed about
the battle, to give such order as may best prevail. The Chieftaines and
Coronell to be placed within the battle, as appears in the figure.

How to imbattaile 150. men in Quadrant proportion.


A Table to discover numbers by hundreds, placed by. 3.5.7.9, etc. in rank and
raie assembled, from one. C. unto one thousand five hundred, that is to say,
marching by 3, in rranke, 34. ranks contain. 102. men, by which example
following, you may plainly discover the numbers.
Ranks. Men. 3. in rank 34 is 102 67 201 100 300 5. in rank 20 is 100 40 200
60 300 80 400 100 500 7. in rank 15 is 105 29 203 43 301 57 399 72 504 86 600
100 700 9. in rank 11 is 99 22 198 33 296 45 405 56 504 67 603 78 702 89 801
100 900 11. in rank 9 is 99 18 198 17 297 37 406 46 506 56 616 64 715 74 820 81
897 91 1017 100 1100 13. in rank, 8 is 104 Me^ 16 208 23 299 31 404 39 507 46
702 54 806 62 897 69 1014 78 1105 85 1196 92 1230 100 1300 15. in rank 7 is 105
Me^ 14 210 20 300 27 404 34 510 40 600 47 707 54 810 60 900 67 1005 74 1110 80
1200 87 1305 94 1410 100 1500

A two-folde Battle of 2000 men.

THIS TABLE SERVES TO PVT IN ORDER OF BATTLE LONG OR SOVARE, ON HORSEBACK
OR ON FOOT, OR TO NVMBER Enemies so placed: also to tile or pa^e or measure
ground of like portion: also what ground serves to encampe every one of the
long or square Battles.

A quadrant or twofold battle of 2000. men.
THis present form of battle, which represents a quadrant, has been often
used as very profitable of many Italians, well experienced, and of great
credit in the field: it is as it does appear, flanked and environed with two
great bodies or sleeves of Hargubusiers, the which contain in number for each
flank 380. men, and in the Voward 100. and in the Rereward 140. Which shot are
to be carried about the battle very commodiously for service, and as they
shall seem otherwise to be employed by the Sergeant mayor. In the body of
the battle, are 800. Pikes, 200. Bills, and 10. Ensigns, having to every
Ensign 200. men, the which to be brought to this form, you must place 45. in
rank for the breadth, and 22. in rank for the length, the Captains,
Lieutenaunts and Sergeants, as before you is mentioned, and the Chieftaines in
the heart of the battle. And although this manner or form gives scope to
move which way they list, yet I hold it best, not to suffer them to stir
much. And that little moving which is to be granted to them, must not be
over hasty but in pace flow, sober, and well measured, unless he has to set
against the like battle of the enemy, for then the last ranks must be
somewhat quicker in stirring, and to bring 10000. or 20000. to this order
readily, they must in setting forward, march with maniples well severed and
divided, which manner is very ready to be compassed with ease. But to place
them in length, dubling the ranks, brings them likewise to a very formal
order of battle: of which I have sufficiently spoken, in the office of the
Sergeant mayor, in the first book.

A Battle in form of a Cross, very necessary to be used, as well in the
night as by day, because all the weapons are divided by themselves.
THis Battle in form of a full Cross, consists of 10. Ensigns, every
Ensign having under it 200. soldiers, so that the whole number contains
2000. men. It has 4. fronts or faces, whereof every one is accompanied with
Hargubusiers, which may in time of necessity be covered and defended by the
armed Pikes, so that the foremost ranks be moved by the flanks and sides. This
form has been used of Spaniards and Italians. It is a gallant battle, and
of force sufficient to resist the enemy in open field, albeit setting unawares,
and besides superior both against horsemen and footmen, the Hargubusiers are
1000. the which are the half of the number. These Hargubusiers being divided
into four parts, must be in every flank 200. placing 14. in rank every way,
the Bills and Ensigns placed in the midst of the Cross, are 200. and the
whole number of Pikes, are 800. the which are to be placed on every quarter of
the Bills 200. placing 14. every ways, the which make a just quadrant of
people, so that there remain to be placed by the Sergeant mayor 16. Pikes and
4. Bills, and of shot 200. This rule may serve in proportion for any number
being very excellent for the night, because each weapon being divided by
themselves, may be ready at the sudden for any service, either to give
battle, or for defense of the Camp, the horsemen and the field pieces to be
placed as shall seem best by the Chieftaines or the Sergeant mayor.

The Battle called a Cross, very excellent both for day and night.


THE BATTLE IN FORM OF A MOON, BEING OF GREAT FORCE FOR THE NIGHT.


An excellent order of incamping, if thou stand in doubt of the enemy.
THis square battle in form of a Moon is very convenient and fit to be
executed in the night time, for yt there being appointed any Chieftaine
whatsoever, which may place the first companies that come to him, at the
Ensign in order before assigned, and the great Sergeant the^ receiving them,
and from hand to hand parting them into several companies, in manner as this
form shall require, it is ordered very easily, and it is no great matter to
divide the weapons without confusion: either to march, or otherwise to use
themselves severally from the rest, more or less as it shall be needful, for
that every weapon does stand at his own defense by it self, as first the
Artillery, next the Ensigns, then the Bills, or Holbards, and in the
outtermost circle, the armed Pikes, which may upon the sudden hy the Sergeant
or the Corporalles of the field, be brought to any other form of battle:
also the great Sergeant may place the Hargubusiers in so many companies and so
many forms, and so much distance one from another, as the situation of the
place does either bind him to, or may seem to require, to the end that the
principal square may be best defended and flanked. And for that the purpose of
this form is easy enough of it self to be understood: and also for that I
have more largely spoken of it in the first book in the office of the great
Sergeant, I will no further entreat thereof, aduertising withal, that every
battle in square form, this or other, that must be ordered in the night,
above al must provide that it have placed every sort of weapons by themselves,
that thereby confusion may be avoided, and besides they may call forth to
service any company presently upon any necessity that may befall,
aduertising that good watch and scoute be kept on horseback and on foot, as
near the enemy as is possible, and to give advertisement whereby you may
know what is best of you to be done.

A way to march and to conduct forth the Army.
IF any General or Master of a Camp, Coronell, or Sergeant General that
has charge to conduct an Host to march from one place to another, it is
requisite, that if he have not experience of ye country himself, that he
carry such as have experience, that he with them may consider well of the
situation and place, whether he is to go with his Host, as through Plains,
or near a Hill, or by Hills, or on Valleys that have Hills on both the
sides, or by Woods, or near to a Wood, or else where a River is near. It is
also requisite that some of the light horse, as well for discovering the
enemy, as otherwise to take the breadth of the straights and passages go
before, and to make certificate that according to the breadth the Host may
march. And put case, that one part of the way be fifteen foot broad, the
Host shall be made to march by five in a rank, because every footman will have
three foot in breadth from shoulder to shoulder, and six foot in length
betwixt rank and rank, and one foot for every person, so that 21. foot in
breadth, and two miles in length, will contain an Army of ten thousand men.
After the same reason whether there be twenty or thirty thousand footmen,
according to the measuring of ground by the foot they may be set in order
very easily, neither can the leader be deceived when he knows how many armed
men every place can contain. And after the same order as the place does
enlarge, he must enlarge the ranks, causing part of thy Shot to go before the
array, and part behind, and other to go in succor of thy Horsemen that go in
viewing the passages, and the Ambushments, with the whole doings of the enemy:
and let an other part be for a vauntgard and retrogard to the ray, to be able
to serve them at need, and an other part to go always at the flanks of the
ray, the which if there be Ditches, shall serve as a Counter-mure against the
Horsemen of the enemy, and if they be men at arms, they must march on both
the sides of the Battle, and also of the Hargubusiers that do march by the
flanks of the Battle, and the Lighthorsmen to serve for Scowtes both before
and behind the ray. Also there be abundaunce of Laborers to make places
plain, and to cast down Ditches and Bridges, and to make defenses and other
necessary things that are required in marching, the which must be guarded by
your Lighthorse and Shot, and when you depart to feign to go to some other
place then that you go to, and if there be no men at arms to appoint to every
Regiment certain Hargubusiers to serve on Horseback, the which may serve in
stead of men at arms, and when occasion serves to serve on foot again. It is
requisite that all Soldiers follow their Constables and leaders, and have
great care and diligence in marching, to the end, that by sudden assaults they
be not at every step to rise in a rumor, and confusedly to run here and
there, and the one to go contrary to the other, and finally coming about
them, not to be able to do any thing of any profit. For which cause thou
ought to march with thine Army through every place in battle ray, whereby
the Soldiers may be made more apt and speedy to make a voyage, and quick
and ready to resist if need shall be. They having learned to follow the
Ensigns and attend to the commandments, and to behave themselves valiantly,
according to their place and order, if thou march in a plain Country, it is
requisite that thy Pikes march in battle ray, retyring thine Army into a
little space, so that by the straightness and facility of enlarging, thou be
not constrained to extend thy self into too much length, which fashion of
marchings seems to give power to the enemy to assault commoudiously their
adversaries, and according to the occasion to hurt them, he knowing to be
taken from them the commodity to defend themselves, forasmuch either with more
largeness coming against thee, the which is wont to happen both the horns
being compassed, it is like that he shall easily disorder and put thee to
flight, or else giving charge on the flank in the midst of thy battle, having
already broken thine order, sodeinly stop thy men from being able to go
forward, being closed in the araies of their enemies: wherefore mynding to
retire in a main battle, and to turn to resist, they shall be able to do
little good, as those that have used such a maine battle, which for want of
thickness is nothing strong, but altogether weak. Also if the enemy should
charge thee on the Rereward, thou shall be brought to the very same necessity,
because thou shall be so compassed as thy fronts shall not be able to succor
the last, or the last to succor the first. For the which thing it is always
better and more sure and easier, to govern the bands that march, close and
square, then thin and long, especially, forasmuch as to an army that
marches long, often times happens that of some thing seen doubtful and
uncertain, there grows sodeinly fear and terror, because sometimes it has
chanced that men descending from high and hilly places, into the plain, to
places expedite and open, and the foremost seeing the last of the same band by a
great distaunce to come after, supposing themselves to be assaulted of some
Ambush of enemies, it has been seen, they have sodeinly turned to fight, and
afterward no otherwise then enemies, with their own companyons, gone together
by the ears. The victualles, the cariages, and all the rest of provision, I
judge should be placed in the midst of the army, that without great danger
such things may be carried and conducted after the army: but if it shall be
otherwise the hindmost part would be guarded and defended of the most valiant
Soldiers, as in the fronts, because that at unawares may happen many things,
thy Lighthorsmen going before inuestigating and spying where they may pass,
having occasion to pass by Mountains, Woods, places closed with Hills and
most great Deserts, because the enemy many times by opportunity will lay an
Ambush privily by the passage to assault his adversary, which little thereof
taking heed, has easily broken and brought them to utter decay, the which
Ambushments if the conductor by way of explorators shall foresee with a little
pain, having prevented the counsel of the enemy, may get him a most great
name of prudence, and likewise save his Army. And as for the Plains thou with
thine own eyes may see a far off, forasmuch as in the day dust moved and
lifted up into the air, does show the moving and stirring of the enemy, and
in the night the fires and flames signifies their Camp to be nere. When thy
men are to be conducted and not to fight, thou ought to remove by day, if
peradventure some thing do not constrain thee, for the which thou think it
good to go in have to come before thine enemy, where in deed for such
occasion thou may remove by night; so that thou know it may safely be done
to fight with the enemy. Lead thy men not in haste but softly, and enforce
them not to make too long a journey, forasmuch as labor taken before men do
come to fight, is seen most oftentimes vaynly to consume and wast the strength
of their bodies. And marching in the Country of thy friends, it is needful to
command thy soldiers that in no manner of wise they touch or mar any thing,
but rather altogether to refrain, considering that Soldiers having weapons
and liberty to do what shall please them, will favor nothing, especially,
for that the sight of things that please men, out of doubt is woone most
daungerously to lead ignorant and unwary men to desire them, and with the
sweetness of robbing to entice them to all manner of mischief, whereunto if
thou provide not, thy friends and thy confederates for very small occasion
will become enemies. Notwithstanding, the Country of thine enemies, thou shall
suffer thy soldiers openly to destroy, burn, and consume, because by the
dearth of victualles and lack of money, Wars are wont to diminish, and be
extinguished: and contrariwise through abundance and riches they are nourished
and mainteyned, but first before thou suffer thine enemies Country to be
destroyed, thou should give advice to thine enemies, threatening them what
thou will do, if they will not yield unto thee: for that the peril of the
misery prepared, and the fear of ruin looked for, ofttymes constraines men
to grant many things, the which at the first by no manner of means had been
possible to have brought them to pass, but after they have once received the
hurt, they will make little account of thee, and despise al other things as
though thou could do them no more harm. Albeit if thou know surely that
in the Country of thine enemies thou must tarry long with thine Army, suffer
to be taken and spoiled those things only which thou see not to be greatly
profitable unto thee: but the same which is to be thought may be preserved
for thy commodity, command openly to thy Soldiers that they forbear. Having
made ready and set in order thy men, tarry not long in thine own Country,
nor yet in thy confederats, least that consuming all thy provision, it seem
not that thou art of greater hurt to thy friends then to thine enemies, but
rather conduct quickly thine Army into thine adversaries country, whereby it
be fertile and abundant, there may be taken at thy need most plenteously
those things that thou list: but if it be otherwise, thou shall cause to be
known, yt thou seek to provide most lovingly both for the wealth and
profit of thy friends. Besides this, thou ought to care with all diligence
that marching or incamping by sea or land, victuals may safely be brought,
forasmuch as by such means the merchants with all diligence will bring all
things, which for the use of an army shall be necessary. Moreover, when thou
must pass by straights, or march through rough and hilly ways, then is it
convenient principally for the preservation of thy things, to send before shot
on horsbacke and on foot, for the keeping of those places, rocks, or enclosed
ways, least the enemy taking it before thee, may both let thy passage to thy
great hinderance and loss: the contrary thou ought to enforce thy self to
do, when thou understand the enemy to pass, the like thou have not only
to take heed for receiving harm, but to enforce thy self to turn against
the enemy, those deceits whereby he thought to deceive thee. And when thou
purposest to go against him, it is requisite to provide before him, and at
unawares oppress him. So diligently thou ought to provide to let him
every way if thou understand that he intendes to pursue thee. ()

Of the order of the march in figure, and of the placing of the weapons.
FOr so much as there are diverse forms of marching, so I think it good to
note this only one set down in figure, as very necessary and of great
force for an army with his whole carriages to march with all: wherein I
partilie imitate the antiquity, as otherwise the order now used, as for
example, let there be an army of. 40000. footmen, and 14000. horsemen,
according to the proportion set down, there is allowed to every hundred
footmen, forty pikes, fifty shot, ten bills, the which falls out to be
20000. shot.16000. pikes and.4000. holberdes, the which with the horsemen are
to be divided into three battles: the Voward, the Maineward, and the Rereward
battle: In the Voward shall be placed.10000. footmen, whereof.4000.
pikes.1000. bills.5000. shat. In the front of the Voward battle are to be
placed. 2000 pistolaters on horseback.1000. Lances, then there are to be
placed thy piners who are to be guarded with.500. shot of each wing, the
Sergeaunt mayor must give in charge that these Piners beat down and make
plain the ground before them in their march, in such breadth as occasion shall
serve to make your battles, or necessity procure, or the straightness of
the place permit, also the Sergeant has to appoint these Piners that if they
be charged by the enemies, having their weapons to defend themselves amongst
the shot: or otherwise to retire themselves by the wings of the battle,
and to be placed at the discreation of the Sergeant mayor in the battle, next
after the Piners shall follow.2000. shot, next unto the shot the carriages
of The order of march in figure.
the first battle with all the impedimentes, then follows. 2000. pikes: and
1000. Bills with the Chieftaine in the midst, then follows the other.
2000. Pikes, after the Pikes the carriages of the merchaunts, and puruaiers,
who must by the appointment of the General march armed for the defense of
their charge, then follows the other 2000. shot, and if you pass through
any dangerous places, it is requisite so to march as you may sodeinly bring
them to a quadrant battle, sending always before. 100. Hargulaters on
Horseback, and an hundred light Horsemen for vancurriers: to discover and
view the straightes and passages: as otherwise to take the breadth and to give
certificate to the officers whereby they may make their march thereafter, and
to view that all places be free from ambushes and trains of the enemy,
whereby the army may the more safelier and quietlier pass, sending from the
frontes as necessity require aid to assist the curriars, then must follow
your maine battle of footmen, the which is 20000. Foote-men, whereof.10000.
Shot, eight thousand Pikes. 2000. Holhardes, the which are to be divided in
this manner, next unto the shot of the Voward battle must be placed the
carriages of the maine battle, with bag and baggage, who must be placed by
quarter, then four thousand Pikes, next the Pikes. 2000. Holberdes with the
General in the midst, then the other four thousand Pikes, after the Pikes
the carriages of the merchauntes, the weaponnes of the Rereward battle to be
divided as in the Voward, who must send forth corriers from the Rerewarde, to
epsy whether the enemy does prosecute thee to take advantage to thy
hinderaunce or no, and you must place next your shot in the Rereward one
thousand Lances, and two thousand pistolaters, your. 15000. shot of the
maine battle are to be placed as wings to al your battles, who must be plast
a sixteen paces from the sides of the battles. Next unto the shot must go the
artilerie of the field with their carriages, with like distance on both the
sides of the battles, then must be placed. 1000. men at arms of each side
of the battles. Likewise. 1000. Lances of each side, and.2000. hargulaters, as
appears in the figure. The General must give in charge that in all dangers
till the footmen may be brought to form of battle, that the ordinance and
artilerie may be redilie and equally divided in the two horns of the
battle, to terrify the enemy to the uttermost, and if so be that the enemy
will attempt the battle on the wings, let the hargulaters with the rest of
the horse and shot in the wings make the like defense, thus every part shall be
of like sort defended until thou have made thy battles as pleases thee: if
this order cannot please thee, to march withal, through a suspected place, you
may practice that which the wise Captain may best like of: or according to
him that shall have the authority of the field, not thinking it amiss in
noting this order in figure, with the division of the weapons, for that being
well considered, and with advise well ordered, you, may make presently as
many battles as you will, and in what order you please, even by hand, without
any great trouble, or business of brain.

The ordering of the lodginges.
NOow when the wise Captain shall be come into his enemies land, and that by
his politic government he shall have escaped all the trains of deceit which
were laid to entrap him, insomuch that he is come to the Walls of any City,
there to lay siege: his first care must be, that he be settled there, where he
may have either at their backs some great fenne, some large river, or some
deep dale, having high pendles over it, either cast there by Art, or fortified
by nature, or else he must provide that he place them where they may be
defended by some other means, as in the top of some hill or under some
mountain. But for the greater safety of the army, he shall send before
faithful spies, which shall discover the coast, and make true report of all
they see, in such sort as he does, which is set in some promontorie, to watch
and give warning, of whatsoever enemies he shall see to appear by sea. But if
so be that these places of strength be wanting in any place where he shall
come, he must in any case provide that he encampe there, where he may both
hinder all passage, and especially of victuals to his enemies besieged: and
yet have free conueiaunce of provision for his own army. He must use
especially in the choice of the Plat, the wise advise of his company, as
namely of the Master of the camp, the Sergeant Mayor, The choice of the plat
ought to be by the consent of the chief Officers.
and other experienced heads of his army. And particularly for the Plat it
self he may follow the counsel of the Master of the Camp, the Sergeant
Mayor: whether it be commodious for the victualling of the Camp, he must
learn of the chieefe Purueier: and whether it be fit to fight in, he may take
the counsel of other beaten soldiers: so that all having the election of the
place both by the benefit of the The^riks, and the help of practice they
shall be lodged in places well defenced, wholesome in air, plenty in Water and
Wood and Meddowe, free of passage for victuals so that the army be
disquieted by no want. If in that place in which they are determined to give
the siege, as convenient to compass the City with the army, there be any
Pallaice or place of commodity it must be allotted for the Liuetenaunt
general. If there be none, let there be made a square vale of cunning men,
well trenched and cast into this form following, which I have resembled
partly too that of former time, or any other form, as the Platte will best
bear, or the counsel of those which are of greater experience herein then I,
can better devise. But of what sort soever it be, it must be such, that the men
at arms may lodge about the General, and the Lances about the men at arms,
the pikemen about the Light horse, and the hargubusiers about the pikes,
according to the manner and form mentioned in the end, that when by any
sudden chance either by day or night, the camp shall be set on by the
mighty multitude and force of the enemy, especially by night, the
hargubusiers and the pikes may for a while make resistaunce in the head, till
the Light horsemen and the Lances with the men at arms have leisure to arm
themselves, and come with the Lances in the front one foot, in manner of
pikemen to the Pauilion of the great General, and so armed as they they are
to try the uttermost of their strength and courage be, to save their General
and their army, to their own honor: which they may do very well, if so be
that they will not stick to rush upon their enemies, and with their Lances
serving for armed men, may encounter with the pikemen, whereby they may both
defend their own valiantly, and beat back their footmen, mauger their force,
considering that they shall be in complet armor and fresht, and their enemies
but armed in part, and alredie tired with the hot onset they have had in the
fronts, and beesides the footmen being newly supplied and somewhat refreshed
may break in by the flank and backs of the enemy, so that they may repent
themselves that they ever attempted an onset to their so great loss, and
greater shame, as enforced to fly and forsake their enterprise, only by the
might and worthiness of the armed men, whereupon the armed men, as well bard
as light, shall at all times for their great honor, and for the aforenamed
necessity, lodge about their General. I have seen the armed men, and the
light horsemen lodged, some at the entrance of the trench within the bank,
and other without, not far from the ditch of the said trench: howbeit I have
always thought some oversight to be therein. But I submit my self still to
better judgment, for that if by night as I have said they shall be assailed,
they must needs be taken unprovided and unarmed, then will they not be able
to make any long resistance, so that the enemy breaking in upon them, shall
find the footmen with the General, destitute of the defense of the bard and
light horse: whereupon without all doubt, they shall be killed without
respect, or taken prisoners, or otherwise fly from their tents, with their
great dishonor. The form of the Camp I have set down at the end of this
discourse in figure, partly showing how the ditch should be cast about the
Plat. The space of the plat must be agreeable to the quantity of the army,
which is to be determined up the Master of the Camp, the Sergeant Mayor, and
the whole counsel. Whereupon the greater army must have the greater plat, and
the less army the less plat. Always providing, that the streets for the
inner lodgings be made wide enough, as well for ye ease of the soldier, as for
the use of the merchant and purueier, as also for whatsoever sudden chance may
happen: seeing that if not in order of battle, yet in this double ordered
form, one man may take another place, and by that means help one another,
The ditches shall be 80, paces broad and as deep as may be, if the st^
ninesse of the ground, or some hard rocks do not hinder as it does about the
Trapanian on Sicile. For about two miles from the city, there, rows a huge
rock. This largeness of the ditch is necessary during the time of any
siege; but especially if the army be incounted in a Plat not well defenced of
it self, thereby to be safe from al ^ines and sleights of the enemy, both by
day and night. But marching by the way, there is no such depth nor largnesse
required, especially if the adversaries army be not in wait too set upon
you. Howbeit it is good always to lodge safely, being in your enemies land
or otherwise in place of danger and I persuade my self, that this is a vary
profitable form of lodging, for that if the enemy set upon them in their
lodgings, he shall find them arrived and ordered in a quadrant battle, and
flanked on every side with hargu^usiers and artillery. And beesides the
horsemen being in the midst, the enemy will suppose that all the strength
lies in the head, whereas the horsemen may come forth armed and set upon
them by the flanks and beehinde, through the benefit and scope of the large
streats which are from the North too the South, and from the East too the West,
and breaking upon the enemy thus at unawares by the flanks and behind them,
may endamage them to their shame and confusion. It is to be noted, that the
Coronels, the Captains and other head Officers must lodge about their charge
of footmen, to the end that the soldier in sight of his Captain dare not do
the thing which honesty will not brook. And moreover there must be care had
that the watch and ward and scouts be not raised before morning, not that the
gates of the Camp, be opened to any, before the Sun be a good height and the
spialls be sent to view if there be no privy ambushments appointed by the
enemy too endamage thee and do thee outrage. There must be therefore gre^^
foresight in the THE PLAT FOR INCAMPING.
General to cut off all such places, as be fit to harbor any scouts or
ambushments of the enemy. This form of encamping is partly borrowed of
antiquity, and partly imitated of the Turkish manner of encamping, in the
assiege of any city, tieng my self always to the memory of the ancients
of former time. If there be any who misliketh this, I leave him to the
liberty of his own judgment to devise some other of his own, and I promise
him that I will be content there with to do him pleasure, and not in this alone,
but in all other things above showed in this work. But if this form like he
shall place the footmen, the horsemen, the Merchaunts, the Purueiors, the
craftesmen, soldier to soldier, back to back, and ridge to ridge, making
the lodgings double. Upon the bank of the ditch, and in the Curtains he
may place artillery round about and before it for safety, or else with the
carriage of the munition, and the carriage of the whole army enuiron it for
his defense. In which he shall imitate the Turk, who with the carriage, with
the Cammells, and the Artillery, both inchaine and fortify the Camp. Near
unto the artillery, he shall appoint the Gunners to lodge, who have the charge
thereof, and after the Hargubusters, and so forth from hand to hand as I have
said. And further he shall cause the Captains, and Officers to lodge at the
back of the Hargubusters, having his Captain before him, and the Pikes at the
flanks, that every kind of soldiers may be conioined, and not dismembered as
it were in their service, and from their Captains: which otherwise will be a
cause of greater disorder, and many discommodities. ()

An Oration to be made by the General, before the Battle be fought.
VAliant Knights and Companions in War, most thankfully I accept your
service, for that you do offer your lives as true subjects, to accompany me
the Kings high General in the wars: wherein you greatly show your duties.
For of right you ought too loose your goods, and to venture your lives at the
commandment of the King, and for the defense and surety of your Countreye,
giving unto you, not only thanks for your company, but much more for your
good counsel, which daily you give me. For in great conflicts, seldom is
found together both good counsel and stout hearts, minding not too enterprise
this battle in hope of man's power, for then had you reason we should not give
battle, seeing the great multitude in respect of us. For as you say, the
weighty affairs, of a public weal, should not be unadvisedly committed
too the uncertain of Fortune: the which has caused the King my Master to
apoint me in this dangerous and perilous wars. First, trusting that on our
part there remains Justice, and since God is the same only Justice, I trust
assuredly he will give me the victory in this perilous conflicts, for
Justice avails princes more that they have, then the men of War do which
they lead. Wherefore since our cause is just, and that we have God the only
Judge thereof on our sides, me thinks no worldly fear should make us cease
to give the battle: for I should show my self to be of small faith, and also
blaspheme God, saying, he were of small Justice, for God shows his power
there, where the frailenesse of man has least hope. Then since by the King our
Master and Governor, we are appointed and procured to come to this war, I
have determined my most loving Companions and fellow Soldiers to enter in
battle, and valiantly to adventure my life with you: and if I perish therein,
I shall be sure it shall be for the salvation of my soul, and the memory of
my person, for to die through Justice is not to die, but to change death for
life: and thus doing, if I loose my life, yet I loose not my honor, and all
this considered, I do that which to my Prince and the Commonwealth I am
bound. For to a Prince it were great infamy and dishonor, the quarrel being
his own, should by the blood of others seek revenge, minding this day to
try in battle, whether the pleasure or will of the living God be to give us
victory, the which may be a warning to others of the great wrong offered us:
if otherwise he suffer us to perish, the end of the sword of the enemy, is
but the scourge of our offenses. The best I see therefore in this matter to be
done, is that we confess our selves unto the celestial God, preparing our
selves to receive our redeemer, every man to pardon and forgive his brother, if
he have done wrong or injury unto him, for oftentimes though the demand of
the wars be just, yet many mishaps befall therein, through the offenses of
those which pursue and follow the same.

Now each thing accomplished as behooves according too my saying, then let God
dispose things as he shall seem good. Wherefore my loving, valiant and stout
Soldiers, doubt not at all, for this day I must either vanquish mine enemies,
or else suffer death: and if I die I do that which I needs must. Wherefore I
will now cease to exhort you any more, desiring you most lovingly to consider
that, whereunto your duty leads you, remembering that you are come as
Knights, and in the defense of your Country to wage battle, being now come
to that pinch, that deeds must more avail us then words: for peace ought too
be maintained by the tongue, but wars ought to be atchiued by the sword.

Of the ordering of the battles before they fight.
THe oration being made by the General, and prayers finished to the immortal
God, it is requisite that thou have care too bring forth thy army to the
field with bright and shining armor, which easily may be done, by giving
charge in time to the Captaiues, and so to the officers, that their burgonets,
corslets, enleeuers, holberds and every other piece of armor: forasmuch as
the cleannes and brightness of the weapons, makes the army seem terrible, and
puts fear and travel in the minds of the enemies. Then call forth thy
bands, the which being set in araie, the General being expert, having seen
the preparation of the enemies, gives in charge too the Sergeant mayor and the
principal corporalls too accommodate and ordain his soldiers in battle
according to the army, the men, and the manners of them. And if the enemy be
more puissant of horsemen: thou having the commodity, choose thee straight and
difficult places, or at the foot of mountains, and where the horse cannot
easily serve. If in footmen he exceeds, then it is requisite to get the
hills and places of advantage, as the Sun and wind, etc. and that with
diligence to choose such fit places, which either be near Rocks or Rivers:
and above all things, where thou may put in araie thy battles, and by the
quality of thy place be able to let thy enimes, that they neither compass
thee about nor enclose thee, the which requires not only the counsel and
prudence of a wise Captain, but the counsel of the most expert in the camp,
because oftentimes an Army happens upon such places. And notwithstanding the
Captain ignorant how to choose such situation of ground as is best for him,
but of those that are present it is good to choose the best, and to foresee
which may be most profitable, is surely a sign of a wise Captain: Caius
Sulpitius, Of the policy of Caius Sulpitius, whereby he overcame the
Frenchmen. The po^^^^^ of the Spaniards overcame Amilcar.
to fear his enemies got a great many of mules and other beasts unprofitable
for the wars, causing a great number of sackes to be gotten, which were so
ordered upon the backs of the beasts as they seemed men at arms, giving in
charge whiles he was a fighting they should appear upon a hill, whereby grew
his victory against the Frenchmen. The Spaniards to overcome Amilcar, set in
the fronts of their battles, carts full of towe, drawn with Oxen, that being
ready for the encounter, they set it on fire, causing the Oxen behementlie to
thrust forwards into the army of the enemy dividing the same. Thy number
small, and the fields large and open, How the cutting of trenches may be the
overthrow of the enemy.
it is good to make ditches, the which being filled with bowghes and slightlie
covered with earth, leaving void spaces for thy horse and shot to procure
skirmish, the which being of the enemy encountered may feign a running away,
and being prosecuted by the enemy, shall be ouerthrown in the ditches, where
they are easily slain, many such notable diuises by wise Captains has
been practiced, the which upon the sodeine put in use, will greatly profit.
Thy battles being made and set in order, it is requisite that thou leave the
ward within the trenches of the Camp for the defense of thy lodginges,
munition, and carriages, least the enemy understanding the place to be left
void, send his soldiers to take the camp, and so to spoil all: upon
occasion some Captains will destroy their own lodgings, or else pass rivers,
or leave beehinde them hills and deep places, to the end that the soldiers
standing constantly may overcome the adversary and obtain the victory, or
otherwise altogether to perish, for that if they should think to save
themselves by running away, they shall see by all manner of means taken from
the possibility to escape. How the flourishing of the Weapons before the
battle against the Sun, causes a fear in the enemy.
Now being come to join battle, with thy enemy, cause thy soldiers
somewhat before, to flourish often their naked swords and holberds against the
Sun, for that yt glistering of the weapons, and their shining points, through
the brightness now of the one and now of the other, against the resplendant
beams of the Sun, does show a certain horrible terror of war, the which
will strike a dread and fear into the minds of the enemies. Likewise it is
sometimes requisite that thy battles go forwards with rumors and
showtings, sometimes running with violence, forasmuch as the semblaunce of such
things with the noise of trumpettes, drums, and great ordinance,
wonderfully troubles and fears the hearts of the adversaries, also it is
great wisdom in a Captain, not with desire to be drawn to be the first to
give the onset, but to stay thee near thy trench till thou have viewed thy
self and the remedies of the enemies: that is, how many battles, how they
are placed, of what condition, and where they are disposed too fight, for after
this manner thou may more commodiouslie see to thine affairs: considering
which of thine thou have too set against those of thy enemies, and in what
manner thy men are to be ordained and placed, doing in like sort too a good
Physician, the which considering first the infirmity, and knowing the cause,
comes afterward too give remedy, therefore ordeine thy men so as may
turn most utility too thy business. The manner of ordering of battles
lately used. I cannot greatly commend, for the army being.20.30. or.40. M.
they are divided but into 3. battles, whereby ensues many perilles and
discommodities, because the Pike being but 5. yards three quarters long,
every man occupying a yard and half a quarter of Pike, can occupy but four
or five ranks at the most, so that the rest are superfluous, and lost,
besides, they are easily too be compassed, and too be charged on every
side: wherefore I have set down an order of one of the battles in figure,
according to my opinion, the which if it may turn profit to my countreie, I
would be most glad. How the good ordering of the Roman Legions made them
victors.
The occasion of the prosperous success of the Romans, was only through
their good orders, by dividing their Legions into cohortes, the which were
bands of.400. and.50. the.50. were shot. the.400. were armed, their weapons,
Pikes, Swoordes and Targets, the which were placed in quadrant manner.20.
every ways being.10. battles in front, leaving a certain space between
every battle for their retraite upon occasion unto the next order, which
were but six battles, and the rereward four battles, all in like number,
keeping one breadth, the voward were called Hastatie, their battles thick
and close, the Maineward were called Principie, who had such space beetweene
the ranks as they might receive the Hastatie, the Rereward were called
Triarij, whose spaces between their ranks, were such, as they might receive
the Principie and Hastatie: on the wings were placed seven ranks of Pikes, of
strangers, which did distend in length from the voward to the Rereward,
through these good orders they became conquerours of many countries. Of the
making of the battles to be fought.
Now because of the diversity of the weapons having, 20000. footmen, I would
divide them into ten battles, too every one of the battles shall be
according to my proportion set dawne.1000. shot.800. Pikes, and.200.
Bills, the which placed in two-folde wise according to my proportion set down
in figure will be in breadth.45. and in length.22. and.10. overplus, the
which are to be placed at the discreation of the Sergiant Mayor, the shot
placed in the wings and rereward in maniples for their readier service, who
must be place a good distance from thy battle, thy men at arms upon the
wings of the shot, thy Lances as two horns in the front of thy battle the
light horse in the fronts of thy Lances, the hargulater, in the frontes of thy
light horse, who with the pistolaters are the first that begins the battle:
thy great Ordinances to be placed in the fronts of the battles, or in such
convenient place as may most terrify the enemy: there would be appointed
certain troops of Lances, whose guidons would be contrary to the rest, the
which the German calls, their Eorlorne hoope, the French Infans perdus, who
must at such time and instant as shall be thought good by the General, give the
charge upon the enemies battails, whatsoever shall happen, who are for the same
too receive double pay. The second battle not too be placed in the front
with the first battle, as the Romans did, but in the rereward of the first
so far wide and with such distaunce, as the horsemen and shot a foot
giving the first charge, may retire themselves without disturbaunce to the
battles, having thy shot placed as in the voward with the lances and shot on
horsbacke, the third battle to be placed in the rereward of the second, with
like distance with shot and horse, and so to the fourth, fifth, and the tenth,
in the rereward of the which, if occasion shall require, thou may as in the
Rereward of the battle, place for thy defense certain of thy carriages, thy
battles being thus ordered, thou shall be sure no ways to be compassed by
the enemies, whereas thou may easily compass in him, not ordered in the
like manner, and thy battles being but little, yet as strong as the greater,
being strongly fortified every ways with Pikes, and when a sign is given,
your hargulaters, pistolaters and lances, may at the sodeine be with the
foremost, or ready for any other place of service. Also your second battle
may join with the first, and the third with the second, and so to strengthen
your battles at pleasure, as otherwise two or three of thy battles to give
the charge to one of his battles, and if it should so hapen that thy first
and second battles should be over thrown, ^hy battle The Battle in
Figure, showing how every Weapon should be placed to fight.
plast in this order thou may retire thy self and leave of the field, mawger
the head of thy enemy, who in prosecuting thee, disorder themselves, as many
times happens, may be easily conquered, using thy battles in this order, I
hold to be of greatest and most auailable.

Of the office of a General, when the battle is a fighting
THy battle set in order, the horse and shot being encountered, it is
requisite that the General uses some speech unto the whole army, without the
which many times a whole army ruinateth, for that his speaking takes away
fear, incourageth the minds, increases the obstinants to fight, discovers
the deceipts, promises rewards, shows the perils, and how to avoid them:
reprehending, praieng, threatening, filling with hope, praise, shame doing
those things by the which the human passions are extinct: How the fighting of
the General cannot benefit so much a common weal, as his wise counsel.
unto the General it apperteineth rather with wisdom circumspectly to forsee
them boldly to fight, because that his fighting cannot so much benefit the
common weal, although he should show force invincible, as the loosing of his
life should endamage the same, neither that in distress to refrain from
fight, by the which the soldiers may do some exploite, but the best is, with
prudence to foresee things, and deliberating in times convenient to counsel
the common weal: principally to the General, and to no other is requisite,
for as the master of a ship forsaking his charge doing that apperteineth to
a mariner, gives great occasion to the loss of the Ship. Even so the
General, who setting a part his office of counselling and providing of every
thing to descend so low, as to take upon him the charge of a soldier, should
commit the like error: for through the negligence of superiors becomes
vain all aid to whom such affairs is committed, the General being slain
puts the commonweal in hazard of decaie, the which being alive, having
through his counsel and discreation achieved felicity by mean of foresight
with reason, he may lawfully glory: and contrariwise he that is so
ignorant, arrogant, and covetous, that believes not to do any thing
honorably, except he fights himself is not to be thought, but rather
presumptuous and foolish hardy, and he that will hazard his life to get him
a name of the multitude, whereby to put those weighty affairs in peril, is
very unmeet for such a charge. But if necessity constraines thee to fight, it
behooves thee to fight warily, and not to fear death: choosing rather to be
deprived of life, having any overthrow, then to live with shame, but the
army being in safety, he ought to have regard to his life, for surely
where the death of the Captain chances, there the happy success is
diminished: for as much as they who have had the worse understanding their
enemies to be deprived of their Captain, takes boldness, charging their
enemies afflicted with melancholy, for the loss of their Captain, have given
them the overthrow. Unto the General apperteineth whilst his men fight, to
go riding about the battle, and to show himself to the fighters, praising
those that do valiauntlye, to threaten the fearful, to comfort those that
be doubtful and flow, to succor them that are repulsed, to supply the
lackes: and if it shall be needful to lead men from one place to an other,
to observe times, to take occasions, to make conjecture of things to come, and
when necessity procures to give the sign to retire. The clemency of the
General increases the love of the Soldier. Armor, good order, or late
victory causes Soldiers to have a good opinion and sure confidence in the
General, and as the love of the Countreye is increased through a certain
instinct of Nature, even so the love of the General through virtue more then
through any other benefit. The necessities be many, but that is strongest
which constrains thee either to overcome, or else to die.

Of making spoil after the victory obtained.
THe spoil ought to be made with great discreation, and that special
commandment be given, and proclaimed upon pain of death, that no prisoner
be taken except he be of great authority until thou have vanquished and
beecome victor, for oftentimes through the greediness and desire of gain, the
order of battle being broken and dispearsed, the Conquered has brought
themselves in order again and become Conquerours, for undoubtedly many times
when the enemy flieng seeing his adursaries, coming upon him without any
order, brings his men again in araie, and turning backward with standing
them with violence, cruelly overcomes them, wherefore men must think that
nothing is better, nothing more safer, nothing more surer, then observing
order, to prosecute in order, and retire in order, and the contrary nothing
more dangerous, as appears by Brennus and Belinus, who being enriched by
the plentiful spoils of Italy, returned in disorder and security, whereby
Camillus and a few of his people before conquered, beereft them of the fruits
of their conquest.

Likewise Cyrus inuading Scithia, faining himself to be afraid of his
enterprise, left his tents standing, and stored with good cheer and delicate
Wines, the Scithians being greedy thereof, he returned and slew every
mothers son: the like policy used by Thomeris a Queen of that country, who
withdrew her self into her land, faining fear until she had got them into
straightes, where being disordered, she privily had planted ambushes, which
sodeinlie invaded Cyrus and his host, slew them all which were. 20000.
thousand. The like examples in France and other places I could recite, but I
will not wast time in declaring the mischiefs and destructions chanced through
rash and over hasty reconning of unripe victory, and unsure safety, trusting
this may suffice to warn thee from rashness and uncircumspect foresight, to
tomble upon the enemies sword. Having obtained the victory, humanity
requires, and christianity commands, to show mercy, following the Cannons
of the field, having special regard that no Princes, Of the cleme^cie of
Alexander the great.
Princes wives or Virginnes, be by filthy lust polluted, for God will see it
punished, but imitate the courtesy of noble Alexander the great, used toward
his captives Darius wife and his daughters, which greatly enlarged and spread
abroad his honor, to the furthering of his Conquestes. How Scipios chaste hands
was cause of his victories.
Likewise what fortunate success had Scipio, by his chaste hands, in delivering
of Luceius his wife, and honorable usage of Masinissaes nephew with his great
liberality, which afterward bred him continual service of those Princes,
before his captives, with infinite examples which for tediousness I leave off.
Grant not license to thy Soldiers to put al to sack: having regard to the
time, and to the state of things, whether thou have need to retain all the
pray, or part of the same, or else none at al. And it is not convenient if need
require for the common profit, that making war, the common Treasury be left
without money, for that more amply and largely things may be sold, and with
benignity distributed to them that have best deserved, having regard to the
hurt and sick: but those that have been slack and slothful, let him punish
most shamefully: and unto valiant men grant those honors the which of right
they ought to have. The gifts which the Captains ought to give, be Offices,
Ancients Armours and Spoils, and to those that be in authority, there would
be greater honors given, the which with benignity and gentleness liberally
given according to the deseruings of every man, it shall cause encouragement
and virtue, for the good to show valor, and for the evil through fear, to
embrace virtue.

Of that is to be done after the deeds of arms, and of burying the dead.
Having withdrawn thy Soldiers from the field, it is most requisite with all
humility to render thanks to the immortal God in most solemn manner, the
which being done with penitencie and devotion from the heart: he will
undoubtedly the better prosper thee in all thy affairs, as he did Moses,
David, Manasses, with infinite others that put their trust in him: then provide
and with great diligence procure, that the Obsequies be made most worshipfully
to them which have been slain in the deed of Arms, for thou should not
make excuse, neither of time, nor of hour, nor of place, nor of perrill,
whether thou overcome or be ouercomed. For like as it is a godly thing to
perform the Obsequies, and according to the rights to see the dead buried,
even so it is very profitable for them that remain alive, and rather
altogether necessary to show to the living this thy pity toward the dead:
for surely when every man sees the dead bodies as it were for fearfulness
left in the fields, or else for despite left unburied, they judge and
presuppose the very same of themselves, taking displeasure of such things,
causing hatred and a unwillingness in the minds of the Soldiers to adventure
their lives, knowing that if they happen to fight for their Country and to be
slain, they are not like to be buried. Wherefore the General and principal
Officers must with eyes open, see to prevent those mischifes that may ensue, as
otherwise to render unto the dead, that of right they ought to have.

Of the taking of prisoners, and of the usage of them.
ALthough ye antiquity has dealt hardly with their prisoners, putting many to
death, yet Christianity requires, to show mercy, and considering that
fortune is uncertain and doubtful: and chance variable and mutable, the
which oftentimes bears envy to the happy success, to minister shame to
glory attained: so during the wars above all things, although great occasion
given by the enemies, extend thy mercy, especially to those that be of
authority, and bearing office: the which will procure the enemy to minister
the like pity unto thee: except thou having taken many and stand doubtful
of the field, or such as have dye shot, Onyons, Bakon, Gre^^^ or such like,
carried to the destruction of than, contrary to the Cannons and laws of the
field, those thou may lawfully kill. It behooves thee likewise, if the enemy
sends not unto thee, to send unto him, to know if thy prisoners taken may be
raunsomed according to the ancient order of the field, the which is, every
Officer and Soldier under the degree of a Captain, to be rusomed for his
months wages, and those of fame and authority render them for some town or
Hold, or else for some such of thy friends being taken, as thou greatly desire
to have again.

Good Captains ought not to let their bands go long unfurnished of Soldiers
being taken, to their weakening and detriment of the Army, whom by ransom and
way of exchange or other means they may redeem. Captains also ought to
enquire whether any being taken, and sent home upon their faith and honor,
that at the day expyred, they either pay the money, or else send them again
unto their takers, until better remedy be found, the which otherwise will
breed great dishonor to the Captain, giving occasion to the enemy to kill
and spoil so many of his band, as by them afterward may be taken. The wars
being ended, then with wisdom and deliberation leasurely at thy commodity,
al peril taken away, determine what thou will do with the enemy thou have
conquered.

Of Feasts and Tryumphes, after the Victory.
THE Romans order and manner, was after Victory obtained, and all dangers
past and overcome: that preparation should be made to feast yt whole Army, and
that Tryumphes and Plays should be made to lighten and rejoice the hearts of
the Soldiers, giving them the better occasion to abide the pains and turmoyle
of the wars, and with greater courage to withstand the enemies force: then
of such spoils as the Treasury have no need of, there should be imparted,
not only to those of Office, but particularly to every Soldier throughout the
Camp, the which with benignity would be delivered as fruits of their labors,
gotten with the hazard of their lives, giving unto them great thanks for their
pains, true hearts, and valiant courage, promising greater recompense. The
wars being once finished, to those in Office and authority, there would be
greater rewards and honors given.

Having received an overthrow how to seek revenge.
IN fighting if thou happen to receive ye worse, it behooves us with great of
ligence and policy to find occasion of revenge to take away yt shame
received, as otherwise to put fear out of thy soldiers minds, it is good
policy to retain spies giving unto the^ great rewards yt which by politic
usage may be learned ye state, the strength, the order, manners, and
determination of ye enemies: by which means with secret usage, thou may many
ways have due revenge: for that to those that have newly obtained the victory,
have the lesser care of the enemy, becoming slothful and rechlesse straggling
here and there, keeping their things without forecast, leaving their wards
naked, and their watches slender, may with secret approach in the day time, or
by camisado in the night time, with valiant courageous hearts be quite over
thrown, otherwise by a few trained out to the skirmish retiring thy self
faining to run through fear till thou come to such place of advantage as
before thou have plast ambushes of horsemen, the which shall suddenly approach
the enemy disordered and scattered, to their great detriment, as otherwise
with thy hands of footmen placed in order of battle, may approach thy
enemy, yt which seeing thy policy, not having time to order themselves in the
like, will come forth on heaps, the which being then valiantly charged, may
put their state in hazard, through the which negligence the happy success
before obtained by this policy will turn thy enemy to great ruin.

Of truce and intermission of wars.
POlicy wills thee not to seek truce or delaie, but by constraint of
necessity, or for some advantage to be taken: as some aid looked for, or in
the mean time to grow into the secreetes of the Enemy, to fifte his purpose,
by conference had with him to undermine his dooinges, and if he be not very
well advised, to search the state of his force and government, being most
secret and vigilant in these affairs. Now if fear, enforseth the enemy to
take truce, learn by all possible means whether it may turn to thy profit
or discommoditie, if otherwise it may little avail them, then it may much
encourage thy own soldiers The truce being once made, do not at any time
assault thy enemy, nor yet stand unprovided: although thou sta^dest in such
quiet, as if thou had peace, but have as great regard as may be, to the
hidden hatred of thy enemy, and wily sleights, that being unprovided, he
assalts thee not unawares: for as much as the minds of them with whom thou have
made war withal, be secret and uncertain. Wherefore make the watches and
wards, as strong as if thou lookedst every hour to be assalted, and give
special commandment to al thy soldiers that during the truce no injury to
be offered by them to ye enemy upon pain of death, by reason of the oath y^
thou have made in thy covenants to the enemy, the which by no means thou
should break or inuiolate, considering that the fruits of falsehood
(besides the punishment of almighty God) is everlasting shame. When thou
sendest to thy enemy, send the most valiant, and noble men of thy army, the
which be in the flower of their age, tall, lusty and of goodly personage, the
which in all points should be very well armed, because many times it
happens that the enemy seeing such men as comes with the Captain, has
judged the Army to be the like, believing sooner that they see, then by
report.

Precepts and rules of war necessary to be observed as well for General,
Captain, as Soldier.
A General ought not to be cruel upon victory, nor insolent upon good
success, nor timorous of an overthrow, but with most moderate magnanimity upon
the respect of occasion to show mercy to the humble, and to subdue the proud.

2 Cicero prescribes four things to be in a governor or General, which is
experience, valiance, authority and felicity, to ye which add these 4,
justice, fortitude, policy and temperaunce, first Justice to revenge,
fortitude, to execute reuengment, policy to prepare ye mean whereby to
revenge, and temperance to limit and measure out how far they ought to
revenge.

3 That Captain that with such righteousness can so rule his souldyers, ye he
will suffer them neither to do wrong nor receive injury, but with wisdom will
maintain them in that which is right, that Captain must needs be loved and
feared of his soldiers, of the which proceeds true and unfeigned obedeience.

4 Alexander Seuerus says, the strength of wars lies in the Soldiers: whose
great virtue consists in obedience toward their Captain.

5 Obedience in soudiours is nourished by fear and love, fear is kept by true
justice and equity, and love is gotten by wisdom joined with liberality.

6 Xenephon declares, that the soldier which first serves God and then
obaieth his Captain, may boldly with all courage hope to overthrow his enemy.

7 Three necessary points appertaining to soldiers, the one to hearden the
body to make it apt to pain, the other to teach them to handle their weapons
the third to learn them to keep their orders in marching, as well in ye army
as in fighting or in camping.

8 As it is necessary to retain citizens for horsemen, the country for
footmen, so it is perilous to receive strangers to serve in a city, because
thou shall dread two enemies.

9 Nature has bread few strong men, but industry and exercise has made many.

10 And army with labor and exercise does profit and prevail, whereas
idleness does hinder and decay.

11 The choice of ground does more prevail then manhood, and manhood does
more prevail then multitude.

12 He is hardly overcome the which can truly judge of his own and his
enemies.

13 No Counselles better then those which the enymies know not before thou
accomplish them.

14 Bring not forth thy soldiers to fight the field before thou triest what
they can do.

15 It is better to subdue the enemy through scarcity and want of necessary
things, then through many assaults to decay thy army.

16 If thou will know if any spy be in thy camp or no, send all thy
soldiers to their lodginges.

17 God Captains will never fight the field but when necessity constraines
them.

18 The advised valiant soldiers avails more then the multitude.

19 Aduertyse thy soldiers to despise delicate living.

20 He that disordereth his army, to follow the enemy, becomes of a
conqueror, conquered.

21 Sudden things do make enemies afraid, where things common are nothing
set by.

22 Offer not to fight the field, except thou perceive thy soldiers hope of
victory.

23 Always with thy footmen covet to get the hills or high places, so shall
thou accomplish thy exploites the better.

24 If thou understanding thy counsels are bewraied to thy enemies, then
change thy intent and purpose.

25 Let not thy enemies know after what manner you intend to fight, least they
go about to prevent the same by one means or other.

26 That governor that prepares not necessary victuals is already conquered.

27 Men, money, Iron, and Bread, is the strength of the wars.

28 Practice to know a new enemy by skirmise before thou fight the field with
him.

29 When any mercinary soldiers will leave the enemy to serve thee, retain
them so they become faithful, for their departure shall both weaken the enemy,
and make them fearful.

30 In pitching the field, it is better to make many battles then few, for that
in making many the enemy cannot imco^passe thee, likewise thou may make of
one 2, of 2, three as occasion shall serve, and otherwise thou may charge a
battle of ye enemies with two or three of thine, the which will be to thy great
advantage.

31 New and sudden things makes armies afraid, slow and accustomed things
are a little regarded of them.

32 The same that helps the enemy hurts thee, and that that helps thee,
hurts the enemy.

33 Consult with many of those things which thou ought to do, and when
thou determinest any exploit confer with few.

34 With punishments there would be rewards, whereby at one instant to make the
soldiers to fear and to hope, as according to the worthiness of the act, so
the reward should be.

35 As he that fighting saved his Captain or other soldiers, rescewing them
would be well recompensed.

36 Also he that first leapt upon the walls of the enemy, or first entered the
camp of the enemy would be well recompensed.

37 He that kills the first enemy, or strikes the first enemy from his
horse, consideration would be used.

38 Every act to the counsel known perfectly, would be openly punished,
and openly rewarded.

39 Thus shall good government be amongst all soldiers and officers,
whereby any exploite to be executed, by this fear and hope shall be the
better done, and of all men to be comemnded.

A Table to konwe from 500. men unto 10000. how many paces they do contain
both in length and breadth in their march, from 5. to 11, in rank very
necessary both for Chieftaine and Captains,
500. 5 in breadth 3, paces 500. 7 in breadth 4 paces a fo, contains
contains. 3 overplus 200. in lengt. 140 pa. 71, in length, 99 pa 2 foot 1000
5 in breadth 3, pa, 1000 7 in breadth 4, pa, a foot contains contains, 6
overplus 200 in length 280, paces, 142 in length 198 paces 4 fo 2000 5 in
breadth 3, paces, 2000 7 in breadth 4 pac a foot contains contains 5 overplus
400 in lengt, 260 paces, 285 in length 399 paces a fo 3000 5 in breadth 3,
paces, 3000 7 in breadth 4 paces a foot contains contains 4 overplus 600 in
lengt 840 pace. 428 in length 599 pa a foot 4000 5 in breadth 3 paces 4000 7 in
breadth 4 paces a foot contains contains 3 overplus 800 in length 1120,
paces, 571 in length 799, pac a, foo 5000 5 in breadth 3 paces 5000 7 in
breadth 4 pa a foot contains contains 2 overplus 1000 in lengt 1400, paces
719 in length 999 pac 3, foo 6000 5 in breadth 3 paces 6000 7 in breadth, 4
paces a foot contains contains 1, overplus 1200 in lengt, 1680 paces 857 in
length 1199 pa 4 foot 7000 5 in breadth 3, paces, 7000 7, in breadth, 4 paces a
foot contains contains 1400, in leng 1960 paces 1000 in leng 1400, paces
8000 5 in breadth 3 paces 8000 7 in breadth 4 paces a fo, contains contains 6
overplus 1600 in lengt 2240 paces 1142 in lengt 1598 pa 4 fo, 9000 5 in breadth
3 paces 9000 7 in breadth 4 pa a foot contains contains 5 overplus 1800 in
leng 2520, paces 1285 in lengt 1799 paces 10000 5 in breadth. 3 paces, 10000 7
in breadth 4 pa a foot, contains contains 4 overplus 2000 in lengt 2800,
paces. 1428 in leng 2999 pa a foot 500. 9 in breadth 5, pa, 2. foot, 500. 11
in breadth 6 paces 3 foot contains 9 overplus contains. 5 overplus 55. in
length. 77 paces, 45, in length, 63 paces 1000 9 in breadth 5, pa 2, foot,
1000 11 in breadth 6, pace 3 foot 1 contains 1, overplus contains, 0 overplus
111 in length 155, pa, 2, fo, 90 in length 136 paces 2000 9 in breadth 5, pa,
2, foot, 2000 11 in breadth 6 paces 3 foot contains 2, overplus contains 9
overplus 222 in lengt, 310 pa, 4. fo, 181 in length 253 paces 1 fo, 3000 9 in
breadth 5, pa, 2, foot, 3000 11 in breadth 6 paces 3 foot contains 3 overplus
contains 8 overplus 333 in lengt, 466 pa 1 fo, 272 in length 380 pa 4 foot
4000 9 in breadth 5 pa 2, foot, 4000 11 in breadth 6 paces 3 foot contains 4
overplus contains 7 overplus 444 in length 622, pa, 3 foot 363 in length 508,
pac 1, foot 5000 9 in breadth 5 pa 2. foot, 5000 11 in breadth 6 paces 3 foot
contains 5 overplus, contains 6 overplus 555 in length 777, paces 454 in
length 635 pac 3, foot 6000 9 in breadth 5 pa 2, foot, 6000 11 in breadth 6
paces 3 foot contains 6 overplus contains 4 overplus 666 in lengt. 932. pa 2,
fo. 545 in lenth 763 paces 7000 6 in breadth 5, pa, 2, foot, 7000 11, in
breadth 6 paces 3 foot contains 7 overplus contains 4 overplus 772, in leng
626 in lengt. 890, pa 2 foot 8000 9 in breadth 5 pa 2, foot, 8000 11 in
breadt, contains 6 paces 3 foot contains 8 overplus contains 3 overplus 888
in length 1087 pa, 4, fo, 727 in length 1015 pa 4 fo, 9000 6 in breadth 5 pa 2
foot, 9000 11 in breadth 6 paces 3 foot contains 1 overplus contains 3
overplus 1000 in leng 1400, paces 818 in length 10000 9 in breadth 5 pa, 2,
foot. 10000 11 in breadth 6, paces 3 foot contains contains 1, overplus 1111
in length 1555, pa, 2, fo 909. in lengt. 1145 pa 1 fo. A TABLE TO KNOW HOW
MVCH GROUND WILL contain a quadrant battle of people, of people and ground,
and twofold, and how many paces they require in their battles from 500, to
10000, very necessary for the Sergeant Mayor or the Captains,
Quadrant Battles, Battles of people and ground, 500. 22. in length. 30, pa 4,.
foot, 500. 14. in length, 19 paces 3 fo, contains 16 men over contains. 10
overplus 22 in breadth 13 pa 2 fo. 35 in breadth 21 paces 1000 31 in length 43,
pa 2, foot, 1000 22 in length 30, pa, 4 foot contains 8, men over contains,
32 in breadth 19, pa, 1, fo, 50 in breadth 30 paces 2000 44 in length, 61, pa,
3, foot, 2000 29 in length 40 pac 3 foot contains 20, men over contains 28
overplus 45 in breadth. 27 paces, 68 in breadth 40 paces 4 fo, 3000 54 in
length, 71, pa, 3, foot, 3000 36 in length 50 paces 2 foo contains 30 men over
contains 12 overplus 55 in breadth 33 pace. 83 in breadth 49 pa 4 foot 4000 63
in length 88 pa 1 foot 4000 41 in length 57 pace 2 foot contains 31 men over
contains 23 overplus 63 in breadth 37, pa, 4 foot 97 in breadt. 58, pac 1,
foot 5000 70 in length 98 paces 5000 46 in length 64 pa 2 foot contains 30
men over contains 32 overplus 71 in breadth 42, pa 3 foot 108 in bread, 64 pac
4, foot 6000 77 in length. 170 pa 1, foot 6000 50 in length 70 paces contains
71 men over contains 77 in breadth 46. pa 1, fo. 120 in breadt 72 paces 7000
83, in length 110, pa, 1, fo, 7000 55 in length. 77 paces contains 28 men over
contains 15 overplus 89 in breadth 50 pa 1 foot, 127, in bread, 76, pa 1
foot, 8000 89 in length 124 pa 3. foo 8000 58 in length 81 paces 1 fo,
contains 79 overplus contains 57 overplus 89 in breadth 53 pa, 2, fo, 137 in
bread, 89 pa 1 foot, 9000 94 in length 131 pa 3 foot 9000 62 in length 86 pa 4
foot contains 70 men over contains 10 overplus 95 in breadth 55, paces 145
in bread 87 paces 10000 100 in length 140 pa, 10000 65. in length. 91, paces
contains contains 55, overplus 100 in bread 60, paces. 153 in breadt 91 pa 4
fo.

Twofolde battles.
500 16 in length 22 pa, 2, foot. 6000 55 in length 77 paces contains 4
overplus contains 5 overplus 31 in breadth 18 pa, 3 foot 190 in bread. 65 pa
2 foot 1000 22 in length 30 paces 4 fo 7000 59 in length 82 pa 3 foot
contains 10 overplus. contains 38 overplus 45 in breath 27 paces, 118 in
breadth 70 pac 4 foot 2000 31 in length 43 pa 2, foot, 8000 63 in length 88 pac
1 foot contains 16 overplus contains 62 overplus 64 in breadt, 38 pa 2 foot
126 in bread. 75 pa 3 foot 3000 38 in length 53 pa, 1 foot 9000 67 in length
93 pa 4 foot contains 36 overplus contains 22 overplus 78 in breadth 46 pa 4
foot. 134 in bradth 80 pa 2 foot 4000 44 in length 61 pa 3 foot 100000 69 in
length 96 pa 3 foot contains 36 overplus contains 64 overplus 90 in breadt,
44 paces 144 in bread, 68 pa 2 foot 5000 50 in length 70 paces contains 100
in bread 60 paces



A discourse of the Author, with a conclusion and end of the profession of
Arms.
AS for besieging of a City or Town, fortifications, and placing of battery,
I have not entreated of, because ye daily practice and execution of the same,
besides the publication thereof by many excellent writers, by whom thou may
receive profitte sufficient, neither have I written of the offices or training
of horsemen, because there is little alteration from the service used in
antiquity, saving the hargulaters on horseback, the which at the discrecion of
the General are to skirmish or disorder a battle: only their places of
service in ye field with the battles I have noted and not otherwise the
variety of weaponnes and alteration of service is only in footme^: of the
which for the great desire I have to the profiting of my country, I have boldly
entreated of, trusting that those errors that may happen through default of my
writing may be without harm to any man corrected, the which are the only
strength and bulwark of the field, the defense both of horse and shot, The
Swizers the first inuenters of squadrons,
as appears by the poor Swizers, who not being able to furnishe themselves
with Horse, were the first deuisers of the pike and the Squadronnes, who sea
red not after they found the strength and advantage thereof to encounter with
20000. footmen, any number of horsemen, whose victories has caused diverse
nations to imitate them. The Romans what multitudes of horsemen so ever they
were to fight against, never used more then their accustomed number, the which
was to 1000, footmen, a 100. horsemen, putting their whole confidence in their
footmen, as appeared, when they fought against Tigrane King of Armenia, who
inuading their Country, Tigrane ouerthrone by the Romans having 150000.
horsemen with 25000 footmen and 6000 horsemen.
with 150000 horsemen, were encountered of the Romans with 250000, footmen,
and 6000. horsemen: being of them utterly subverted, with many other notable
victories, the which the Romans did, as in Titus Liuius thou may plainly
see. Wherefore horsemen art to be accounted as second, and not as superior or
principal of the field, because horsemen cannot go as footmen in every
place, being slower then the footmen to obey, when it is requisite to alter
the order: forasmuch, as if it be needful either going forward, to turn
backward, or turning backwarde, to go forward, or to move themselves,
standing still, or going to stand still, without doubt, the Horse can not do
it so readelie as the footmen.

The horsemen can not being with violence disordered, return in their orders,
but with great, difficulty, the which the footmen do most easelie and
quickly.

Besides this it happens many times that a valiant man shall be upon a vile
horse, and a coward upon a good, whereby it follows that these evil
matching of stomakes, makes disorder.

Neither is it to be meruailed at, that a band of footmen susteineth al
violence of horses, for that a horse is a beast, and knows the perils, and
with an ill will, will enter upon the Pike: and if you consider what force
makes them go forward, and what holds them backwarde, you shall perceive
the same to be greater which keeps them back, then that which makes them go
forwards: for that the spur makes them go forward, and the Pike and Sword
keeps them back, so that it must needs be, that footmen are most
invincible, and superior to horses.

And if you should argue with me, that the heat which they come withal,
makes them more furious, regarding the spur more then the Pike: I say, the
Horse perceiving himself to run upon the point of the Pike, either of
himself, he will refrain the course, turning on the right hand or left: or
else feeling himself pricked or gawled, will stand still. As for example,
prove a Horse, and run him against a wall, and you shall find few with
what fury soever they come withal, will strike against it.

Caesar with his horse feared to encounter the squadrons of the poor Swizers.

The policy of Henry the 5. at Egincourt,


Caesar having in Faunce to fight with the Swizers, caused all his horsemen to
alight a foot, to avoid from the Squadrons, as a thing more meeter to fly
then to fight.

Footmen being politic has many other helps as by making of Trenches, and
as King Henry at Egin-court used sharp stakes, whereby he got the
Chivalry of France. Or to cause of Iron to be made Galtropes a handful long,
and to be made sharp like a Triangle, every man to have one of these to
throw upon the ground at the encounter of the horse.

Besides, the wise Captain will choose grounds of great advantage. And as for
the Pistolate is not so much in use as they have been: using cheeflie the
Caleeuer on horseback, the which is nothing comparable to the footeman with
the Caleeuer, who will from every little Moll-hill gall him at his pleasure,
besides more readier for any service.

Horses necessar^e in the field,
Horses notwithstanding are very necessary in the field for discovering the
Enemies Country, and to destroy their forage, and to burn and wast, all
that is not within the fortified Towns, and to keep troubled and disquieted
the Army of the Enemies, whereby not only to let them of their rest, but
to keep them troubled and wearied in the ir Armor. Also to let them of their
victualles. Likewise, necessary for Vancurriers, or for Scowte: and when the
Battle is fought, and Victory obtained they are to overtake, run down, and
ruerthrowe the Enemy expulsed. Wishing thee not to to be drawn with desire to
imitat every new service, but to observe the order of the Romans, using thy
footmen as thy force, and to every Regiment or Battle, a certain number of
horse, where by thou may the better be able to serve against any Nation,
how, or in what sort soever their service be.

Now having finished the Wars, Of the retraite out of thy enemies country,
and a full determination of peace concluded: being in thy late enemies
Country, it behooves thee to have great care, and with great diligence to
retire thy soldiers, from the Enemies country, keeping so good order as if
the Enemy would falsify his vow made, to take any advantage of thee: yet
that he may find thee so prepared and in so good order: as his wyles shall
little endamage thee, giving great charge unto thy Captains, and so to the
Officers, that thy Soldiers straggle not from thy Camp to do any outrage,
or by violence seek to take any thing away, but as they pass the Country,
honestly and truly to pay for that they take, whereby thou may be the
better thought off of the Enemy, as otherwise to avoid all inconveniences,
that may follow. This would be published upon pain of death.

And if thou art to pass the Country of thy friend, have the like regard of
thy Soldiers, that through their dysorder, they make not of a Freende an
Enemy.

Being come to the water side, see yt with all expedition such preparation be
made, for the conuaying over of the Soldiers as the Prince so shortly as
may, be unburdened of her great charge. And against their arrival see that
money be prepared for the present payment of the poor soldiers that they to
their detryment, and hinderaunce do not long remain unpaid, whereby their
hearts may be hardened and through this default mutinies arise, and many
inconveniences grow, considering that at the commandment of the Prince as
true subjects they have adventured their lives, and in the defense of their
Country: but it is great pity, yt favor does so much prevail, and
experience so little esteemed, that so many be suffered to bear the Office
and authority of Captains, whose going to the wars, is rather to bribe and
hinder the poor Soldiers, to the dishonor of their Country and their own
shame, then to merit any thing in the Wars to the profitting of the same.
Trusting that great and wise Officers in time by trying the cause, will see it
reformed.

An exhortation necessary for all Captains at the discharge of their
soldiers,
The Soldiers being paid, it were very requisite that every Captain
should call their company together, or a little before their wages paid:
yeeldinge thanks unto them for their diligence and pains in the Princess
affairs, certefying them that the almighty God no doubt, will prosper them
the better in all their affairs.

And where as every subject by GODS law in conscience, and by the law of
Nature, are to be at the commandment of their Prince and Governor, their
travails and pains in the turmoile of wars has de clared the same, letting
them to understand the wars being ended: the Prince is not further to use
them, exhorting every man, quietly to depart into his Country from whence he
was pressed, or to the place of his longest abode, not looking to make an Art or
exercises of arms for that it is not to be used, but when the Prince through
constraint shall be enforced to the same. And when they are come into their
Country, require every man to frame him self to such Science, Occupations,
Trades or Traffickes, as they have chiefly been brought up with all, accompting
themselves most happy that GOD has delivered them from the bloody wars to
live in peace and quiet: the which brings so many commodities, so many
virtues, and so much good as I am not able to express. For to make wars to
have peace is Christianity, and to trouble the peace by making wars
unjustly, is Tyranny. Now the fruits of the idle, the which scorns their
occupations, through necessity are nothing else but robberies, thefts and
murders, and then Justice enforced to extinguish them.

Most lovingly desiring them not to forget the great dangers that almighty
God has delivered them from, through the which they were men prepared to dye,
having the same printed always in their minds, by which means they shall be the
better able to see Justice mainteyned, peace preserved, Magistrates and
Officers obayed, and they the better as true Christians, to live in the fear
of God: thus doing, they shall not only show themselves as true and duetiful
Soldiers to their Prince, but like the Soldiers and servants of Jesus Christ,
who of his infinite mercy, bring all Soldiers to the host of Heaven. Amen.

The General, principal Officers and Captains are in conscience bound, How
the General and Chieftaines are in conscience bound to be Mediators unto the
Prince, for the relief of the hurt and lame Soldiers.
to be most earnest suitors and Mediators unto the King and Prince, for the
relief, help, and maintenance of the hurt, lame and sick Soldiers: being a
part of Christianity to see them comforted, who in the Princes affairs and
under their conduct, have received their hurts: and that those that have served
in the wars until they be aged, and the maimed, might have yearly stipends
for their maintenance, during their lives, and the hurt and sick to be
helped, at the charges of the Country from whence they were pressed.

An example of Alexander Seuerus.
Alexander Seuerus thought that Soldier worthy of his keeping in the time of
peace, that had truly served his Country in the time of war.

Jesus the son of Siracke pitied in his heart the scarsenesse or poverty of
an expert man of war.

An excellent act made by Octauian Augustus for the maintenance of Soldiers.
Octauian Augustus erected a Law for Soldiers, that if he had served ten
years in the wars, and being forty years of age, that he should have wages
appointed out of the common Treasury for the maintenance of him and his
family, and that the lawful wife of a Soldier, should be preferred before
other women: and being Heroes, it was lawful for him to bear Arms, and that
they should not be chastised, but by Caesar.

How Policrates appointed livings for the wives and children of Soldiers
slain in the wars.

Solon decreed the same.


Policrates of Samos appointed living for the wives and children of the
soldiers slain in the wars, straightly commanding that no man should offer
them any wrong.

Solon made this Law, that those children, whose fathers were slain in the
defense of their Country, should be brought up at the charges of the Common
Treasury.

What Nation but England but cherishes Soldiers, and provides for men of
service, trusting that some noble minds at the next Parliament may have in
remembrance some of these good Laws decreed by Emperous, Kings and Princes,
whereby some Act may pass for the relief and maintenance of Soldiers, the
which would cause such a willingness and pristinate valor in English minds,
that no Nation should be comparable unto us.

And as there is al diligence used for to make men faithful, peaceable, and to
live in the fear of God, by the Governors of war was doubled: for in what
man ought the Country to seek greater faith, then in him who must promise to
dye for the same? In whom ought there to be more love of peace, then in him
which only by the war may be hurt? In whom ought there to he more fear of
God, then in him which every day commits himself to infinite perilles.

Therefore to such as has truly and valiauntly served in the Field with
authority, How dignity of office should be appointed to such as have served
truly and adventured their lives in the defense of their Country.
would great rewards and dignity of Offices be appointed, as men most meet
for counselling, and the ministration of Justice. For as the Poets have feigned
Minerua to be armed: signifying, that Captains should be as wise in
counselling, as courageous in conquering: as politic in keeping, as valiant
in getting.

And Tullie in his first book of Offices speaks of a double commodity these
men do yield to their Country: who making wars go armed, and roabed do
govern the Commonwealth.

And as in Genesis it is mentioned, before ever King was, that those were
appointed to govern, in whom valiantness and virtue did most abound.

Charles the Great gave this honor to his Captains, How Charles the great
called his Captains companyons of kings and appointed them Judges of offenses.

How the chief of every Shiere should be in their warlike attire at the
trayning day.


saying, you shall be called Heroes, the Companyons of Kings and Judges of
offenses. Wherefore hereafter counsel Kings in the public authority, and if
any do you injury: let him know he has offended the Emperors Majesty: and
if offenses be by you committed, we ordain punishment to be given by us and
our successors Emperors of Rome, as often as you shall transgress.

And as the use of wars ought to be applied for the defense of right to
shield us from injuries whereby to plant a commodious state of life, so the
studies thereof are to be used in time of peace, for exercise, and in the time
of war, for necessity and for glory, and to suffer only the Commonweal to
use it for an Art: so likewise as peace is the nourse of store and increase of
things, if respect in time be not had for the provision of Munition, money,
weapons and men prepared both in mynds and by exercise trained for the wars,
it will cause in necessities but faint wars, beseeching the living GOD, that
this careless living in security, be not so pernicious unto the Commonweal,
as the detracting of time shall enforce us to take counsel when it is to late.

The Queens Majesty with her wise Counsel has made so good provision of
Munition for the Land, likewise of Shippus for the Sea, as no Realm for the
quantity better provided: but if men be not trained and exercised for the use
thereof, it will serve to no other purpose, then men taken from the Land, to
be Pylates of Ships well appointed in the dangerous Seas. Besides, her
Majesty's provision upon every occasion is not to be broken, neither upon a
sudden invasion easily to be transported to the hands of her subjects, for
defense of her Majesty's Country, the which yt Counsel has wisely foreseen,
but their Commissions are so simply executed, as I greatly doubt, when
necessity shall enforce to the use of the same, they shall altogether be
deceived.

The reason is, the Commissions are directed unto the chief of every Shiere,
and by them are appointed, such Muster masters as has good skill in the Law,
the flying of a Hawke, or experience in choosing of a fat Bullock or Sheep:
supposing because we have lived a time in peace, that we shall always live in
this security: How those that has experience in Martial affairs should be
appointed for Muster masters.
despising to crave the assistance of the Soldier, who has adventured his
life for his Country, being never so expert or of so good behavior, because
he is poor, and for that a Soldier will not see his Country deceived by
their Muster books, as to put in so many able Caliuers, so many able Corstets,
so many able Bills, and so many able Bows, the which will prove when occasion
shall serve to use them, to be half lame. I mean, because such as are
appointed to have a Caleeuer furnished, shall pass the book with an old
rustie Piece without a Flaske, Touchboxe, Martion, Match, Powder, Sword, or
Rapier and Dagger: and such as are appointed to have Corssets furnished, that
is, to have good Curates for their bodies, Taces for their thighs, Poldrones
and Vambrases for their shoulders and arms, Burgonites for their heads, good
Pikes, and Swords, and Daggers, these shall pass the Musters with a little
old broken iron of their backs, or if he have an old Almon Riuet on his back,
although he lack his Taces, and many other pieces, so he have a Pike he shall
be very well armed, and yet men of that ability as they are, are able some to
furnish 1.2. or 3. men, and keep them continually in pay: And the Bill men who
are appointed for execution and slaughter of the field, the which of necessity
must be armed at all points, these shall pass as men had in no estimation, with
a Skull on his head, and a Pikestaffe on his shoulders. Likewise the Bowmen
without Iackes, Skulles, or sufficient Bows, according to their strengths,
with two or three Shaftes by their sides in their doublets and hose, shall pass
for able Bowmen: through the sufferance whereof, not only the Queens Majesty
but the Country shall be deceived, if it be not presently looked unto,
trusting the wise Counsel will see it reformed, by assisting the chief of the
Shiere, with such Soldiers whom experience has made to know what is meetest
for men to apparel themselves withal for the wars: and for that none are
appointed but such as are of great ability for the provision of the same, so
after sufficient warning given by the Muster masters, as is appointed for
their Furniture, not well oyled and kept for the present use, if default be
found either in lack of such Furniture, they to have a fine set upon their
heads, the which they should truly pay, and that money to be bestowed upon
Match and Powder, the which should be spent upon the trayning day, and that
such might be appointed for the trayning of Soldiers as are known to have
experience to instruct and teach them that, that they may profit themselves
and their Country, and not by favor to choose such Captains as are to be
taught by the poor Soldiers, and that consideration by the Country for their
pains might be used: and at the days appointed for trayning, the chief of
the Shiere to be present in their warre-like attire, and to exercise themselves
and their horses, with running at the Ring, and such points of service as is
meetest for Horsemen, as otherwise to see the trayning of Pikes and Shot,
whereby if election be made of Captains not able to instruct like a Captain,
that others might be appointed that has experience. And if Noblemen and
Gentlemen would see these exercises honorably frequented, we should not fear
the wicked practices of foreign Princes, to be in hostile oppression, for that
those Nations seeing the discipline and martial prowess of a state so well
governed, provided, and defended, may fear to offer us injuries, being glad to
desire favor and league, when things in this good stay and safety are
confirmed and established through this course of life, we shall be most happy,
and do our Lord God best service, so that our felicity may hereafter endure
for ever.

FINIS.

