THE SVBVERSION OF ROBERT PARSONS His confused and worthless work, ENTITVLED,
A treatise of three Conuersions of England from Paganism to Christian Religion.

1. Tim. 1.

Conuersi sunt in vaniloquium.

They are turned unto vain iangling.



LONDON, Printed for JOHN NORTON. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable the Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England.
THE show of antiquity in matters of religion being so plausible to the
multitude, and so sorcible to persuade the simple; I marvel not, my good Lord,
if our adversaries the Papists, who show themselves also adverse to truth, do
both commonly and willingly entitle their erroneous doctrines concerning the
worship of Saints and Images, the Popes indulgences, Purgatory, and all their
traditions and trash, though never so new, the Old Religion. Your Lordship also
well knows, what pains Parsons the Iebusite has taken in his books of
Three Conuersions, to prove, that the ancient inhabitants of this land were
converted to that religion, which is now professed and taught at Rome, not
doubting, but if he can prove it so ancient, that the same will soon be
admitted as true, as being derived from the Apostles, and most ancient and
sincere Bishops of Rome.

Having therefore commiseration of the ignorance of seduced Papists, and
willing to consirme good Christians in the truth, and to arm the weak against
the assaults of such seducers, I have undertaken to examine his whole discourse
concerning the three supposed conuersions of England, wherein Parsons
indeuoureth to prove the antiquity of Popish religion within this Island,
seeking from the true religion professed here to bring us back to the haeresies
and captivity of Rome, more odious far then that of Babylon. And this I
undertake not because he deserves to receive any long or curious answer, but
rather to show. his consorts, that he brings nothing, which cannot easily be
answered.

Some do esteem the book very much in regard of the strangeness and
novelty, promising not only a narration of the planting of religion in England
by Austin the Monk, but also a confirmation of the history of King Lucius, and
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, and new tidings of a new conversion of Britain
wrought by S. Peter himself: matters of which many will be glad to hear. But
he that diligently peruseth what he has written, shall soon lose all his
longing. For whether we consider the subject of this discourse, or the manner
of handling the same, there is nothing that can any way satisfy the reader.
The proofs stand upon conjectures. The authors style is harsh and uneven. His
rehearsals thick and tedious. His purpose fond and foolish. Three things he
strives to prove. First, that this land was thrice converted to religion by
preachers sent from Rome, viz. by S. Peter, Eleutherius, and Austin. Secondly
that the same was converted to no other religion then that, which is now
preached and maintained at Rome. And thirdly that therefore we are now to
learn religion, and to receive direction and government from thence. But the
first is very evil performed. For of the first conversion by S. Peter he is
scarce able to bring any conjecture. The second seems fabulous. The third
concerns not the whole land, but only a few Saxons. In the second he has
altogether failed, not being able to prove either his Tridentine, or
Decretaline doctrine concerning the Pope, the Mass, the seven Sacraments, the
worship of saints and idols, and such like matters in question out of the
histories of those ti^^s. In the third point he trauaileth in vain. For why
should England be more subject to Rome for receiving the Christian faith from
thence, then Rome to Jerusalem, from whence the sound of the Gospel went into
all lands? In the second part of his three Conuersions he seems to make great
inquiry for our Church and religion in former times. But when he cannot deny,
but we hold all the Christian faith either taught expressly by the Apostles
and holy Fathers of the Church, or explaned in the six general Councels; and
do only condemn the corruptions of later time brought in by the Decretals and
Schoolemens frapling disputes; he shows himself a blind searcher, that can
neither see, nor sinde our faith and Church before these late days. Physicians
say, that melancholic men are much subject to dreams. Melancholici says one
of them (...). It seems therefore, that Parsons writing this book of three
Conuersions, wherein so many dreams and fancies are contained, did ouerflow
with melancholy. But writing the second part of his treatise it seems, that
he was in a dead sleep, and had his senses so bound, that he could neither
feel, nor see any thing. In time past, they say, he was able to write well:
but now his books are like the coins, of which one in Plautus talks. The
last are the worst.

And this I doubt not to make to appear in this my answer, the which I make
bold to present to your Lordship, as a testimonial of my thankfulness, and a
pledge of my affection and love. And the rather, for that, as your Lordship
has been a principal helper to free me of my troubles, so you may first taste
of the fruit of my travails. It is more then a year since I first framed
this treatise, but could not publish it by reason of my other occasions and
disturbances. But now that your bountiful favors have given me some time of
breathing, I thought I could not better employ my life and breath, then in the
common defense of the truth. Vouchsafe therefore, my good Lord, to accept of
this small present, and to take both the gift and giver into your protection.
And so I shall be more free to do God service, and more willing to employ my
self for his Church, and always rest

Your Lordships most ready to be commanded Matthew Sutcliffe.

The Praeface to the Christian Reader.
IT is an old trick of heretics, Christian Reader, to grace their lewd
opinions with fair titles. Sub falso praetextu and specie pietatis, says
Constantine Eusebius. de vit. Constant. lib. 3. ca. 62.
speaking to heretics, semper delinquentes, omnia contagione vestra
contaminatis. So Parsons, albeit he talks of popish religion, which is
nothing else but a mixture of Iudaisme, Paganism, and Heresy; yet does he
give out, that he contendeth for Christian religion. Again albeit the Mass,
wherein the whole service of God (according to the opinion of Papists)
consists, be but a late patchery, and their popish opinions mere novelties,
and strange fancies; yet would he make men believe, that the Mass was
instituted by Christ, and that these new doctrines were taught by Peter and the
rest of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. In his Epistle
Dedicatory he calls the English Papists the offspring, and children of the
first professors of Christianity in this Island. And yet no children could
further degenerate from their ancestors, then the modern Papists from the
ancient Christians, as by many particulars may be demonstrated. Their faith
concerning the foundations of Christian religion, concerning Christ's office,
and humane nature, concerning the Church and Sacraments, concerning the
ministry and policy of the Church, nay concerning the Law and the Gospel, is
altogether different from that faith which the first Christians of this Island
professed. And were not the difference so great as we find it, yet what needed
this babbling fellow to search antiquity for proof of his three imagined
conuersions of the ancient inhabitants of our country to Christian religion?
Let him show, that the doctrine of popery which we refuse, is Christian
religion, and that it was first taught by Saint Peter in Britany, or
otherwhere, and that will suffice without more ado.

But herein the poor fellow fails most grossly. Nay where he needed not,
blindly he plungeth himself into diverse difficulties, offering to prove, that
the ancient inhabitants of this land were converted unto Christian religion by
S. Peter, Eleutherius, and the Monk Austin: matters far beyond the reach of
his ability, and impertinent. For neither does he prove, that the Britains
were thrice by them converted, nor would it advantage his cause being proved,
seeing the decretaline and wicked doctrine of Popes, which all true Christians
refuse, is of a late and different note from that faith, which those three
taught and professed, and which was of ancient time planted in this Island.

The which, that it may evidently appear, I have for thy better satisfaction
thought good to examine this whole treatise of three Conuersions, in volume
big, in value small, in discourse idle, in proofs weak and simple, and
altogether unworthy any long answer, were it not that some men suppose, that
he has said somewhat, where God wot his whole treatise is nothing but vain
talking, and tedious discoursing to no purpose. Eadem atque eadem saepe dicit
says Augustine epist. 86. of such an idle writer, aliud non inueniendo quod
dicat, nisi quod inaniter, and ad rem non pertinens dicit. But with better
reason may this be said of this prattling Iebusite, which repeating the same
things often, yet finds nothing to serve his purpose, but that which
overthrows the purpose of the author.

In his Epistle Dedicatory he gives the title of Catholics to English
Mass Priests and their consorts. But that is the point in question. He calls
them also the worthy children of the first professors of the Christian faith in
this land. But the testimony of a bastard shall never make bastard professors
true Christians. Further it is not like, but his provision will fail him
before the end of his journey, that begins so impudently to beg at his first
setting forth, and so presumptuously to take for granted matters in
controversy. Finally, under the name of the Christian catholic faith, he
goes about to commend the corruptions and trash of the Romish church, as the
Macedonian heretics did their heretical poison. Venenum melle illitum, nempe
catholico nomine superinducto propinabatur says Athanasius ad Serap.

He shows reasons of his dedication, but all false. For neither shall he ever
prove, that Papists profess the Christian catholic faith first planted in
England, nor derive their pedigree from the first Christian Britains, or
Saxons. His best reason is either forgotten or ouerslipped, viz. that such
patcheries are most properly due to such patrons.

Against true Christians he inueigheth with open mouth, as if they were
heretics, and intruders on the right of the catholic church. But that is a
common practice of men of his sort, to fall to railing and lying, when by truth
they cannot stand. Hierome in his 2. apology against Russine, speaking of
Heretics, conuicti de perfidia says he ad maledicta se conferunt. And
Constantine Eusebius. de vit. Constant. lib. 3. ca 63.
directing his words to heretics, charge them with vain lies. Cognoscite
says he, quibus mendacijs vestrae doctrinae inanit as implicata teneatur.

In favor of the Papists he braggeth, that he has produced the sentences and
arrests of all Christian Parliaments of the world, to wit, the determination of
all the highest ecctesiasticall tribunals. But if by Parliaments he mean
general Councels, he abuses his clients, and all the world. For it were great
simplicity, if upon his word they should suppose, either that Popery is
authorized by ancient general Councels, or that the late conuenticles of
Laterane, Constance, Florence and Trent ordered by the Popes direction were
lawful Councils. He does also err grossly, if he affirm it. Finally he
contradicts his own holy fathers pleasure, if he affirm the Council to be
above the Pope, and the highest tribunal on earth.

The words of the Apostle, Philip. 1. he applies to such Papists as have been
of late time called in question for treason and felony, as if they did not only
believe in Christ, but also suffer for him. Whereof the second is evidently
false, as public records testify; the first is doubtful, seeing heretics
cannot be counted true believers.

Likewise he abuses other scriptures 1. Cor. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 1. and Isa. 1. like
the Valentinians, endeavoring to wrest the sacred word of God to his own
fancies, and fabulous discourses. Aptare volunt says Irenaeus lib. 1. aduers.
haeres. ca. 1. fabulis suis eloquia Dei. Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. and 1 Thessalonians.
1. speaks of true Christians, that followed Christ Jesus, and his Apostles:
this Iebusite talks of such, as follow Antichrist, and hearken to the Ieud
persuasions of the false Apostles of Satan. That which the Prophet Isay, chap.
1. speaks of purging the Church of God, the same he applies to the rusty
followers of Antichrist, whom he seeks to continue in their disorders, and
errors.

Neither could he conceal the stirs that have been in England between the
secular priests, and the Iebusites, although good it were for him, that they
were never remembered, he being convinced by the testimony of his own
followers in diverse discourses written of this argument, to be a Machiauelian,
2 traitor, and a devil. Here also he applies the words meant of our Savior,
Matthew. 8. to Antichrist the destroyer, as if he rising up could command winds
and seas, and cause calmes; who indeed rather causes storms, then calmes;
wars, then peace; and is the firebrand of troubles throughout all
Christendom. Further he entitleth him Christ's substitute. But his outrageous
persecutions of Gods saints, show him to be Christ's adversary, rather then
substitute. Commission or act of substitution he shows none. But of the other
we find diverse arguments Dan. 8. and 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Apocalyp. 13. and 17.
which in my books de pontif. Romans are at large declared.

In an addition to his epistle he triumphs over Queen Elizabeth of pious
memory, and raileth at her, as a persecutor, whose clemency her greatest
enemies cannot choose but acknowledge: and he among the rest, if he were not
ungrateful. But herein the heathen Philosophers do accuse him. (...), says
Homer odyss. (...). And another, de mortuis nil nisi bonum. Herein therefore
the proverb is verified, that Hares insult over dead Lions. If he had not been
a renegate Christian, and fugitive traitor, he would never have compared her to
Julian the apostate, or to Dioclesian that persecuting tyrant. Neither if he
had been wise, would he have mentioned these two examples, himself in
apostacy being like the one, and the Pope in cruelty and pride far
surpassing the other.

From railing he falls into a vein of flattering the King, whom he co^pareth
unto Constantine. And yet not many years since, in his most traiterous book
of titles he sought to deprive this Constantine of the crown of England, and
to convey the same to the Infanta of Spain, who now condemns the glosing
companions flattery. And very lately the gunpowder Papists by his direction
attempted to destroy him, and his whole house. Thus with the time this Iebusite
can change his note, singing that only which makes for his profit. Modo
palliatus, modo togatus. Now he plays Dolman, now N. D. But as Ambrose says
writing against Auxentius, vnum portentum est, duo nomina, that is, one
monster, two titles. Yet such is the folly of this parasite, that thinking to
praise the King, he does greatly dishonor him, comparing his royal Majesty to
diverse not yet converted to Christianity, and implying, that the King is no
Christian.

He talks of the Kings preservation; yet may we probably suppose, that he had
a finger both in Percies treason discovered in November last, and in Clerks and
Watsons practice executed at Winchester not long since, for intending the
destruction of the kings Majesty, and the subversion of the realm, as
appears by a public edict against them.

In commending the Kings book, he condemns his religion: as if any could be
more dishonored, then by imputation of want of religion. Again he
contradicts himself, commending the king for fervent and extraordinary
affection of piety toward God, and godliness: and yet presently after taxes
him as being addicted to vanity, and inanity of sects and heresies, where no
ground, no head, no certain principle, no sure rule or method to try the
truth can be found. Which his vain and idle sconce shall never either justly
impute to that religion, which his Majesty professes, or cleanly avoid in that
sect, which he follows, being a pack of impieties, blasphemies, heresies,
novelties, vncerteinties, contradictions, absurdities and fooleries. The first
we verify by diverse treatises written in defense of our religion, wherein we
declare, that the same is not only built upon the immovable rock Christ
Jesus, the writings of the Prophets and Apostles bearing witness unto it, and
full of sincere wisdom; but also approved by Councels, Fathers, consent of
nations, miracles, yea and by the bishops of Rome for many ages. The second is
evident by the school doctrine of the Mass, of the Sacraments, of the Pope,
of Purgatory, Indulgences, works of supererogation, and such like. For what
more impious, then to say, that Christ's body may be really eaten of dogs or
hogs eating the Eucharist? What more blasphemous, then to give Gods honor to
stocks, stones, and to Antichrist? What more heretical then to destroy
Christ's humane nature, and office, and to worship Angels, Saints and Images?
What more new then the doctrine of Constance, Florence, Trent, concerning the
massing sacrifice, the communion under one kind, the subsisting of accidents
without substance, indulgences and such like? What more uncertain, then popish
religion, that depends upon the Popes determination, a man oftentimes blind,
unlearned, and variable? What more contradictory then that Christ's body should
be both visible and invisible, above and below, dead and alive at one time?
What more absurd then to limite the catholic church within the diocese of
Rome, or to say with the Donatists, that it is perished out of the whole world,
save in one corner of the Romish church? Finally what more foolish, then the
apish toys of Mass Priests at the altar, of massing Bishops in consecrating
Churches, and such like superstitious ceremonies?

In his Preface he endeuoreth to prove, that man is mutable, by his own
example, that has so often altered his intention in his treatise of three
Conuersions. But that is little for his credit, or the credit of his cause. For
what if he turn like a weathercocke, and renounce religion? would he have all
his countrymen to prove apostates like himself? Truth also is constant, and
always like it self. But falsehood varieth, and false teachers differ in the
defense of falsehood. Noua ipsa rursum innouata emendatione scindis, emendata
autem iterum emendando condemnas, says Hilary to Constantius. The like we may
say to this motley and changeable Iebusite, who being uncertain in his
resolution, and leaving matters formerly purposed, brought forth matters never
designed, for a calfe presenting his readers with a hedgehog. Afterward he
exhorts men by the example of S. Augustine to the search of Catholic
Religion, and condemns the sluggishnes of them, that are careless in this
behalf. But his words are contrary to the Romish practice, that forbids the
reading of Scriptures in vulgar tongues without license, and makes it mortal
sin for a lay man to dispute of religion. Much, certes, it were to be wished,
that men would do as he says, for then should Christians easily espy the
iugling of Papists, and see, that popery is not Catholic, as it differs from
the faith professed in the church of England. Dagon cannot stand before God's Ark, nor darkness continue, when light appears.

To prevent perilous courses, and to give light, where certeinty of religion
lies, he says he has framed his treatise of Three Conuersions. But alas, the
poor idiot is so far from proving the certeinty of his religion, as the East
is from the West. For what assurance can he have of religion, who does believe
neither Prophetical, nor Apostolical writings, nor other article of faith
without the Popes resolution, and for his proofs alleges Simeon
Metaphrastes, Surius, Baronius, and other fabulous writers, and vain and
uncertain traditions, of which he has no certeinty? Again his pamphlet of
Three Conuersions does principally handle matter of history, and not matter of
faith or doctrine. Lastly, he does rather seek to draw men into danger both of
soul and body, by seeking to bring Gods people back to the thraldom of
Babylon, then to keep them from any danger. Neither does he handle in his
treatise any point here by him promised. In this preface, I confess, he
compares the Church to a mansion house, and several points of doctrine to
parcels of land belonging to the same, promising that he will make proof, that
the right of the Church belongs to the Romanists, as true owners of the
mansion house built in the clouds by Parsons, and that we are but vagrant and
contemptible persons. But first there is great difference between the Church,
and a mansion house: the Church being a mystical body, and being scattered
here and there, and not being appropriated to any family, city, or nation: and
a mansion house being a civil and artificial building situate in one place,
and belonging to one family or sort of people. Secondly several points of
doctrine are rudely compared to several parcels ofland, which are corporeal,
and may be translated from one to another, whereas points of Christian doctrine
are matters spiritual, and cannot be held and truly professed, but by the
members of the true Church. In like sort the Arians by their gross similitudes
depraved such matters, as were well spoken, as says Athanasius orat. 4. contr.
Arian. Incorporalia says he, corporaliter excipientes, quae probe dicta erant,
deprauarunt. Thirdly neither shall he ever prove, that the right of the Church
belongs to the Pope and his adherents, nor shall he exclude us from the
precincts of the true Church, howsoever in his Luciferian pride he do here
despise and scorn us. His marks of Antiquity and Succession are neither the
proper notes of the Church, nor were they so to be taken, can he, if by
succession he mean descent of true doctrine, either take them from us, or give
them to the Popes adherents, who rather belong to the synagogue of Satan, then
to the Church of God.

In the latter end of his Praeface he takes upon him the person of a Doctor,
and lays down four points of consideration about matters of faith. The
first is, that our articles of faith are above man's reason. The second, that
they have sufficient arguments of credibility. The third is, that it behooves
us to have a pious affection. The fourth is, that some articles of our faith
may be demonstrated and known by force of humane reason. But first, he shows
himself a vain and arrogant companion, that in matters where he is party,
takes on him to be a Doctor, not distinguishing betwixt a bar, and a Doctors
chair. Secondly, all these schoole-points are matters far distant from the
argument of Three Conuersions, which he undertakes to handle. For I hope he
will not affirm, that his Three Conuersions be matters of faith. Thirdly, his
first and last point contradict one another. For if all the articles of our
faith are above man's reason, as he says, handling the first point, then are
not some articles of faith demonstrable by force of reason: which is also the
doctrine of the Apostle, who shows us, that the natural man understands
not the things of the spirit of God. Fourthly, by pious affection he absurdly
understands a good opinion of the Pope and his slaves the Iebusites, and
Mass Priests. But how can Christians have a good opinion of them, whom holy
Scriptures declare to be false teachers, and vpholders of the kingdom of
Antichrist, and experience declares to be professed enemies of piety and
godliness? Fifthly he concludes very absurdly, because some matters of faith
are demonstrable by reason, that he has so discussed matters in his treatise
of Three Conuersions, as that all matters thereby may be cleared. For neither
does his treatise properly concern matter of faith, nor has he done such
glorious acts, as he braggeth of. Finally these points do little relieve
Parsons. For if we are to talk of matters of religion with great reverence and
submission, then are the writings of the Schoolmen sca^dalous, that dispute
pro and contra in all matters of religion. Parsons also deals very lewdly,
who attributes more to Philosophical demo^strations, then to arguments
inducing us to believe matters of religion. Next if there be matters sufficient
in religion to induce us to believe, then are not the articles of Popery to be
believed, we having more inducements to reject them, then to believe them.
Thirdly if matters are to be scanned before they be received, as Parsons
infers; then most blind are the Papists, that believing the Pope and his
adherents to be the Church, drink up all the abominations, which the whore of
Babylon does present unto them, without all examination, whether they be
consonant to holy Scriptures and the faith of the ancient Fathers, or not.
Fourthly if matters are to be examined with serenitie of mind, why are Papists
forbidden to read our books, to hear our reasons, nay without license to
read the Scriptures? Why do they condemn them, whose cause they refuse to
hear or know? Lastly this his treatise of Three Conuersions is not such a
brave piece of work, as he imagines, nor shall he gain any one jot ofhis
cause thereby. For first; it is either false that the ancient Britains were
converted by S. Peter, and Eleutherius, or else very doubtful. Likewise it is
a matter questionable, whether Austin the Monk, or some other did first
convert the Saxons to the Christian faith.

Secondly, admit the ancient Britans had bin converted by S. Peter, and by
Eleutherius, and the Saxons by Austin the Monk; yet this makes nothing for
Pope Clement the 8. or Paul the fifth, that is, no more like to Peter nor
Eleutherius, then a Cheshire cheese to the bright Sun. Peter was a holy
Apostle, and fed Christ's sheep, Eleutherius was a godly Bishop, and preached
the Gospel, which Clement and Paul the fifth does not. Again Clement and
Paul the fifth challenge two swords, and have a temporal Kingdom, which those
two never had, nor challenged. This Clement and Pope Paul maintain many
heretical doctrines established in the Popes Decretals, and late Popish
conuenticles, which neither S. Peter, nor Eleutherius, nor Austin ever heard
of. Finally neither are the Romans subject to the Bishops of Jerusalem,
although the Gospel first came to them from thence, nor owe we ought to Rome,
albeit those that first converted the Britains and Saxons had come from thence.
To those that first taught us we are obliged to render thanks. But Parsons like
a foolish logician would thereof infer, that we are now to yield obedience to
the Pope, because Peter preached first in Britain. He might as well infer,
that the Romans are to be subject to the Turk that sits at Jerusalem, for
that the Gospel came first to them from thence.

Thirdly those exceptions which he takes to us and our Religion are most vain
and frivolous, as the discourse ensuing shall declare. Wherefore, as we have
already ripped up his rude and ragged epistle, advertisement, and preface; so
now, Godwilling, I purpose to discover the insufficiency and foolery of the
rest of his frapling discourse. I do not think thou shall find a book of
that bulk so void of all proof, or good matter, unless it be some that
proceeds from the same author.

Read therefore I beseech thee both our writings with indifferency, and judge
according to equity, and so shall thou hereafter be made more wary in esteeming
such huge volumes fraught with nothing but idle tales, gross lies, loose
collections, and to say all in one word, Iebusiticall and Popish vanity and
foolery, and learn to discern shadows from substance, and errors from truth.

The Subversion of Rob. Parsons his Babylonicall Tower, entitled A Treatise of
three Conuersions.
CHAP. I. Whether S. Peter the Apostle preached the Gospel in Britain, or no.
IN this controversy betwixt our adversaries and us, about the first
conversion of the ancient Britains and Saxons to Christian religion, three
points are principally to be considered, and resolved. First, whether the
Britains were first converted to the faith by S. Peter, and by Eleutherius, and
the Saxons by Austin the Monk. Secondly whether these three, or any one of
them taught that faith, which now the Pope and his adherents profess, and we
refuse. And thirdly what the modern Church of Rome can challenge of us, by any
favor done to our ancestors by them.

Robert Parsons boldly affirms, that the ancient Britains were converted to
the faith first of all by S. Peter, and next by Eleutherius a Bishop of Rome.
And thirdly that Austin, sent by Gregory the first, did first preach the faith
to the Saxons. But the first conversion supposed to be wrought by Peter we
deny. Of the second we have cause to doubt. Of the third our adversaries have
no cause to boast.

He impudently avouches, that these three taught the same doctrine, which the
church of Rome now holds, and which we refuse. We wonder at his impudency,
and laugh at his folly, that attempteth to prove any such matter.

Thirdly upon these supposed conuersions he concludes, that England and
Englishmen have particular obligation to Part. 1. ca. 1.
the church of Rome above other nations. He would have said, if he durst for
shame, that therefore we are to be subject to the Romish church, and to receive
her doctrine and trash, I would say, traditions. We say, that we owe nothing
but hatred to the Popes, and later church of Rome, having received nothing from
thence, but wrongs, and disgraces, and loss. If any thing we owe, it is to
those, which took pains to preach the true faith among us, and not to the
Romanists and their agents, that now go about to turn us from the faith, and
to destroy his Majesty, and our country by treason.

That S. Peter never preached the Gospel in Britain these reasons are
sufficient to persuade us. First, it is apparent Galat. 2. that the preaching
of the Gospel to the uncircumcised was committed unto Paul, and the preaching
of the same to the circumcised, to Peter. The direction also of the first
epistle of S. Peter sent to the Jews dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia,
Asia and Bithynia does prove it true. How then is it likely, that S. Peter
leaving the circumcision committed to his charge, should preach to the
uncircumcision committed to others charge? Or how could he, that preached to
them in Asia spare so much time, as to make a journey to preach to them in
Britain? Again can any man think, if he had preached to the Britains at the
time of the writing of the first and second epistle, that he would not as well
have mentioned them, as the Eastern nations? That the second epistle was
written to the same persons to whom he had directed ye first, it appears by
these words 2. Pet. 2. This second epistle I write to you. Baronius also
confesses, that he wrote this epistle a little before his death. It cannot
therefore be surmised, that he preached to the Britains after the writing of
this epistle, nor that he would neglect them more then others, if at any time
he had preached to them.

Secondly if Peter preached the Gospel in Britain, either he preached in
Claudius the Emperor his days, or under the reign of Nero. And so some of
our adversaries say he preached under the reign of Claudius, as Baronius, some
under the reign of Nero, as Eisengrenius in his Ce^turics. But Eusebius in
Chronico says, that after his coming to Rome he preached the Gospel there,
and continued Bishop 25. years. vbi Euangelium praedicans says he, 25. annis
eiusdem vrbis Episcopus perseuerat. Baronius anno Christi 58. relates, how
Peter, being expulsed out of Rome by Claudius, preached to the Western
nations. But Onuphrius in annotat. ad vit am Petri says, that being expulsed
by Claudius out of Rome, he went not westward, but eastward, and returned first
to Jerusalem, where he was present at the Council at Jerusalem, and
afterward sat 7. years Bishop of Antioch. Ibidem, says he, 7. annis vsque ad
Claudij obitum, and Neronis imperium permansit. The report also of his 25.
years continuance in Rome is imprebable. For if he were martyred, as some say
the 13. as others the 14. year of Nero, then could he not be Bishop there 25.
years, Paul being converted to Christ some year or more after Christ's
passion, and afterward abiding in Arabia three years, and 14. years after
finding Peter at Jerusalem, as may be gathered out of the words of the Apostle
Galat. 2. It is not likely also, that he could suddenly go from Jerusalem to
Rome, being sent to preach to all nations. The best witness of Peter's being
Bishop of Rome 25. years is Eusebius his Chronicle: but he testifies also,
that he sat 25. years at Antioch, which is a plain contradiction to all
stories of that matter.

Thirdly, Peter preached in no place, but he there ordained Bishops and
teachers, and founded Churches. But in Britain we do not read, that either he
ordained Bishops, or founded Churches, or left any memorial of his being there.

Fourthly, the tradition of the church, which is a part of the word of God, as
the Papists believe, ascribes the first conversion of Britain to Joseph of
Arimathaea and his fellows. Capgraue in his legend of Joseph affirms, that
they preached the word of God in Britain with great confidence, and this, he
says, they did the 63. year from Christ's incarnation. Anno, says he, ab
incarnatione domini 63. fidem Christi fiducialiter praedicaba^t. Which
disprooueth Caesar Baronius his tradition of Peter's first preaching in Britain
anno Domini 58.

Fifthly no one English Chronicle does so much as once mention the coming of
Peter into Britain. Is it then probable, that Simeon Metaphrastes the writer
of the Greek legend, living in Greece, or Caesar Baronius the calculator of
Romish traditions and legends, singing Masses at Rome, should better know what
was done in Britain, then the ancient Chroniclers of the Britain nation?

Sixthly of ancient writers of Ecclesiastical histories no one says, that
Peter the Apostle first preached to the Britains. Neither does any ancient
father of the church mention any such matter, but rather ascribe that labor
either to Paul, as does Theodoret in commentar. in epist. ad Timoth. and lib.
9. de curandis Graec. affect. and Sophronius in sermon. de natiu. Dom. and
Venantius Fortunatus: or to Simon Zelotes, as Nicephorus lib. 2. cap. 40. and
Dorotheus in Synopsi: or to Aristobolus, as does the same Dorotheus, and some
late writers. But if Peter had first founded the Church of Britain, it is not
likely, that all authors would either have concealed so glorious an action, or
else have attributed the same to others.

Finally the adversaries themselves for the most part confess, that Joseph of
Arimathaea did first convert the Britains to the faith of Christ. So says
Capgraue in his legend of Joseph. So says Sanders in his preface to his
sclanderous book of schism. Britannos says he, ad fidem Christi primus
conuertisse, primamque Ecclesiam in illa natione crexisse perhibetur Josephus
ab Arimathaea. Lastly Parsons himself in his late Ward-word knew no more, but
of the two conuersions, as he calls them of England, the first under
Eleutherius, the second under Gregory the first. Wherefore either now, or then
he vttred untruth.

The arguments and testimonies produced by Parsons to prove S. Peter's
preaching in Britain, are weak and frivolous. First, says he, Part. 1. ca.
1. pa. 19.
of S. Peter himself, to have been in England or Britany, and preached,
founded Churches, and ordained Priests and Deacons therein, is recorded out of
Greek antiquities by Simeon Metaphrastes a Grecian. But first it may be a
question, how he knows, that Simeon Metaphrastes a Grecian says so, and
that out of Greek antiquities, seeing he poor idiot understands no Greek,
nor has read any Greek antiquities. he quoteth therefore Metaphrastes apud
Surium 23. Iuny. but Caesar Baronius in his Annals quoteth Metaphr. 29. Iuny.
Secondly he wro^geth both Metaphrastes and Surius, adding to their words.
Thirdly albeit he had reported their words truly, yet neither are we to give
credit to Metaphrastes, a lying pedant, living in Constantinople some 700.
years agone, and writing more lies then leaves, nor to Surius a superstitious
Monk, and a professed enemy of the truth. Finally neither does Metaphrastes
nor Surius name one Church founded, or one Bishop ordained by Peter, nor is
Parsons able to name them.

His second reason is derived from the testimony of Innocentius in his epistle
to Decentius in the chapt. Quis nesciat. did. 11. But first there is no
mention in that epistle made of Britain. neither can the same be well
understood by the Islands lying betwixt Italy, France, Spain, Africa, and
Sicilia, but rather some Islands of the Mediterranean sea. Secondly this epistle
is evidently counterfeit, and contains a most notorious untruth. For he says,
that none did institute Churches, or teach in Italy, France, Spain, Afrike,
Sicily, and the Islands between them, but S. Peter and his successors: which is
clearly refuted by the preaching of Paul in Italy, of James in Spain, of
Philip and Dionysius in France, and is convinced not only by the testimony of
histories and fathers, but also by the infallible authority of scriptures,
which testify of Paul's preaching in Rome and other places of Italy, that
received no authority from Peter. The Gloss therefore to salve this sore, and
to help this lie, by alius in that Chapter, understands contrarius. As if
Innocent had said, that none did preach contrary to Peter in all those places.
And Parsons to add some weight to his light argument adds these words unto
Innocentius, or his scholars, falsifying the deposition of his own witness.
Finally, these words of Innocentius do not imply, that Peter preached in
Britain, but some of his successors. The third testimony brought for proof
of this first conversion, is taken out of one William Eisengrene his first
Centurie. But it is of no more weight, then the testimony of Isegrime the
wolf in the book of Reinard the fox, the fellow being a weak author, and a
party in this cause. Furthermore he plainly contradicts Caesar Baronius. For
where he says, that Peter preached in Britain in the reign of Claudius, Sir
Isegrime writes, that he founded Christian Churches in England under Nero, if
Parsons say truly. So liars confound themselves like Cadmus his brood one
contending against another, and each cutting his fellows throat.

Parsons his fourth testimony is out of Gildas de excid. Britanniae, where he
says the priests of Britain did usurp S. Peter the Apostles seat with
impure fecte. But this shows, that al bishops teaching S. Peter's doctrine do
sit, after a sort, in S. Peter's chair, rather then that S. Peter placed a
special chair, and sat as Bishop in Britain; of which neither Gildas, nor
other authentical author gives the least signification. Saint Augustine de
Agone Christiano c. 30. teaches us, that these words spoken to Peter, Love
thou me? feed my sheep, belong to all Bishops. Cum ei dicitur, (says he) ad
omnes dicitur, Amas me? pasce oues meas. Cyprian, Hierome, Optatus, and other
Fathers call all Bishops the Apostles successors, albeit the Apostles did not
there sit, or teach, where the Bishops have their sea, which are termed their
successors.

Fifthly he alleges the testimony of Alred Rienual a Cistercian Monk,
recorded by Surius 5. lanuarij, who about 500: years agone, as he says,
wrote, that S. Peter appearing to a holy man, showed him, how he preached
himself in England. But neither can Parsons name this holy man, upon whose
credit this report depends, nor is any credit to be given to Surius, or to
his legends, or to such fained dreams and revelations, as he reports. In the
mean while the Papists, if they be not wilfully blind, may see how Parsons
gulleth them with lies and fables out of Simeon Metaphrastes, and Surius, and
discern what a brave piece of work his treatise of three Conuersions is, that
is founded upon dreams, revelations and fables, testified only by authors of
legends, fat crammed Monks, and professed enemies of the truth.

Finally, in the same Chapter he discourses of the preaching of Paul, Simon
Zelotes, Aristobolus, and Joseph of Arimathaea in Britain. He collecteth also
some suspicions, out of Gildas, Nicephorus and others, as if the Britains were
converted by some Romans, which being Christians went with Claudius the
Emperor against the Britains. But what makes all this to prove, that the
Britains were first converted by Peter? We are hereof to conclude the contrary
rather. For if mention be made of Simon Zelotes, and Aristobolus, and others of
more obscure note for preaching in Britain; it is not like, that the preaching
of Peter here in this Island should have been suppressed in silence, if there
had been any such thing. Parsons surmiseth, that those that went with Claudius
into Britain were sent thither by Peter. But that is his own foolish conceit
and vain imagination. No ancient Writer does testify any such thing. Thus
then we may see, that all Parsons his discourse concerning the conversion of
Britain by S. Peter is subverted, and brought to nothing. Let us therefore
consider, what is to be thought of the other two supposed conuersions.

CHAP. II. Of the pretended conversion of Lucius king of Britain, and of the
British nation, to Christian religion by Eleutherius bishop of Rome, and his
agents.
The report of the conversion of the Britains, and their king Lucius unto the
faith of Christ, although believed by Parsons and the Romanists, as an article
of their conuertible faith; yet for many just respects may well be called into
question. First the name of Lucius seems rather to savor of the Latin, then
of the British language. Neither can it be said, that he received this name in
baptism. For he is so called before he was baptized as well as after, neither
does any Author mention this change of name.

Secondly, about this time, when Lucius is said to have reigned king of
Britain, and long before, the Romans, as histories report, had brought the
whole country under subjection, and into the form of a province, which
admits no king. Beda de gestis Anglor. lib. 1. cap. 3. speaking of Claudius
the Emperor says, that in few days he brought most of the Island under his
subjection. Intra paucissimos dies (says he) plurimam insulae partem in
deditionem recepit. Afterward in the same book and 11. chapter he shows, how
the Romans dwelt and possessed all unto the bank cast up upon the frontiers of
Scotland by Seuerus. Neither is it material, that after this the Britains
endeavored to recover their ancient liberty. For under the reign of Commodus,
as Capitolinus testifies, all the stirs in Britanny and other countries were
pacified. In Britannia, Germania, and Dacia (says he) imperium eius
recusantibus Prouincialibus omnia per duces sedata sunt. In the times also of
Domitian, and Adrian, which lived not long before Lucius his supposed reign,
we read in Spartianus, that the Britains lived in subjection to the Romans.
How then could Lucius in this time rule all the Island of Britain, as is
supposed by the authors of this fabulous conversion under king Lucius? Baronius
annal. tom. 2. anno 183. answers, that Lucius reigned beyond the wall. But
that shows plainly, that this report, as it is recorded by Bid and Geffrey
of Momoutb is utterly false. For the one reports, that the Britains under
Lucius were converted; the other, that all Britanny was converted from
Paganism, and not a few Britains only beyond the wall of Seuerus, as Baromus
is driven to confess.

Thirdly, no authentical authors make mention of this story. The first
spreaders of this report seem to be Damasus in his pontifical, and Bid in
his story de gestis Anglorum, and Ado. Whereof the first deserves little
credit among the papists. The second reports too many things by hearsay.
The third is a fabulous Writer. From them, it seems Galfridus Monumetensis,
Martinus Polonus, Platina and others have borrowed this fable. The matter as ye
first authors report it, is no way probable. Malmesburiensis in fastis speaking
of Lucius says, he received the faith with the whole nation of the Britains.
But that is altogether improbable: for at that time the Romans professing
paganism ruled almost all Britain. Galfridus Monumetensis hist. Brit. lib. 4.
ca. 19. says, that the preachers sent by Eleutherius did abolish paganism
almost throughout all the Island. Cum per totam fere insulam (says he)
paganismum deleuissent. A matter repugnant to all authentical histories, which
testify that the Romans, that then ruled in Britain, and a great part of the
world besides, professed and maintained paganism, until the reign of
Constantine. The same man says further, that in the whole Island there were 28.
Flamines, or principal priests, and three Archiflamines, and that king Lucius
in the place of Flamines appointed Bishops, and for Atchistamines substituted
Archbishops. But these are also matters never before heard of. For neither had
Lucius power over the whole I Will, as before is declared, nor had the Britains
any such Flamines, or Archiflamines, nor among the Romans, that had Flamines,
were any Archiflamines appointed over Flamines. This history therefore of king
Lucius may well be paragoned with the tales of king Arthur, Sir Tristram, and
Lancelot du lac, or of Gregory the Pope de gestis Romanorum ca. 81. or of
Rowland and Oliver in the legend of Romish Saints.

Fourthly, there is great variance betwirt the reporters of this narration,
especially concerning the time, when it should be done. Baronius says, Lucius
was converted during the reign of Commodus the Emperor of Rome anno Dom. 183.
Beda says it was under Marcus Antonius Verus, anno 156. Galfridus Monumetensis
hist. Brit. lib. 5. cap. 1. says, Lucius died the year of our Lord 156. So
that he must needs be converted some time before. Martinus Polonus writes,
that he was baptized anno Christi 188. Marianus Scotus accompteth it done anno
Christi 177. Lilly refers this act to the year of Christ 181. And Lanquet
to the year 180. an old Chronicle written in the Saxon language and found in
the archiues of Peterborough says, that Lucius wrote to Eleutherius anno
Christi 167. To conclude, Nennius says, that Lucius wrote to Euaristus anno
164. and makes no mention of Eleutherius. Likewise some report, how the king
was converted, without mentioning the conversion of his people, as Beda.

Others testify, that the whole Island was then almost cleared from paganism,
as Galfridus Monumetensis lib. 4. hist. Brit. cap. 19.

Sanders in his preface to his railing libel de schismate Anglicano says, a
great part of the people was then converted.

In Eleutherio.
Platina tells us, how in stead of 25. Flamines there were so many Bishops
created in Britain, and in the place of three Archiflamines, three Archbishops
were substituted.

But Galfridus sets down 28. bishops, and 3. Archbishops made for so many
Flamines and Archiflamines.

Some report, that Eleutherius sent Fugatius and Damianus to Lucius, as Platina
in Eleutherio.

Others name none, as Damasus in Pontificali, and Beda lib. 1. hist. Anglor.
cap. 4.

Others name Fugatius and Donatianus, and say, that Elnanus and Meduinus were
sent in embassage to Eleutherius, as Baronius tom. 2. anno Dom. 183. Galfridus
hist. Brit. lib. 4. cap. 19. says, Eleutherius sent Faganus and Duuanus, and
with him consents Ponticus Virunnus. Malmesburiensis lib. de antiq. Glaston.
Eccles. calls these messengers Phaganus and Deruianus. The history of
Landaffe calls the Doctors sent by Eleutherius, Eluanus and Meduinus, and
with him consents Caius lib. 1. de antiq. Acad. Cantabrig. If then truth
cannot dissent nor vary from it self, how can we believe the narration
concerning Lucius to be true, that is so diversely reported? Again, if the king
only, or some few with him were converted to Christianity in the time of
Eleutherius, then was religion rather continued, and enlarged by his agents,
then restored being lost. Which appears also in this, that the king heard of
the persecution of Christians, and of Christian religion before he sent to
Eleutherius.

But suppose, that Lucius was indeed converted to Christian religion about the
time reported in the story: yet it seems, that those that converted the king
were rather Britains, then Romans. That is apparent first by the testimony
of the Annals of Burton cited by Caius lib. 1. de antiq. Acad. Cantabrig.
which affirm, that diverse Doctors of Cambridge were baptized anno 141. But
what should they need to send for Romans, when they had Christian Doctors
among themselves? Secondly, the same is proved by the history of Landaffe
alleged likewise by Caius, which testifies, that Eluanus and Meduinus, that
were sent to baptize Lucius were Britains. Thirdly, the sound of the names of
those which were sent to Lucius, does rather declare them to be Britains then
Romans. For whether we call them Eluanus and Meduinus, or Phaganus and
Deruianus, or Faganus and Duuanus; they will hardly be drawn to sound like
Latin. Finally Capgraue in Iosepho, Malmesburiensis in hist. Glaston. and
Caius in his book of the antiquity of Cambridge do declare, that
Christianity once planted by Joseph was always continued in the land by
those, which succeeded him. What then needed the Britains to run to Rome to
fetch a commission to baptize the king, unless it were to win a little glory
by the reputation, which the Romans then had in the world?

Again, albeit we should grant, that they were Romans that baptized king
Lucius; yet what glory can hereof redound either to Eleutherius, or to the
Romans? For Eleutherius neither preached to the Britains, nor once moved a
foot from Rome. Neither could those Romans that are said to be sent into
Britain, speak the language of Britains, or teach them Christianity. Nor is
it so great a matter to baptize king Lucius, who, if ever there were any such,
was like to the Caciques of the Indians, or the petty kings of Ireland.

To conclude this point, this fable seems to be devised by some favorers of
the Church of Rome, that endeavor to draw all nations to like that sea, as the
fountain of many favors: and yet it is neither probably related, nor makes
any thing to the purpose, for which it was first forged, and afterward by
diverse related and enlarged.

Let us then see what Rob. Parsons is able to make of this matter. First he
says, that these two conuersions under two famous Popes of Rome, (viz.
Eleutherius and Gregory) are acknowledged 1 Part. 1. cap. 4.
and registered by the whole Christian world. But what is this to the purpose,
if it were true, seeing neither of them did much cooperate in the conversion of
the Britains and Saxons? And being false, who does not see, that the notorious
impudency of this Iebusite deserves to be censured of all the Christian
world? Caius for his principal proof of the baptism of king Lucius alleges
letters patent of king Arthur. Beda says only, that Lucius was christened per
mandatum Eleutherij, that is, by the commandment of Eleutherius. The rest that
go further are writers of legends, and contemptible fellows speaking all
untruth to win the Popes favor. Of Gregory and Austin the Monk we shall
speak, when their turn comes. Furthermore, albeit Gregory and Eleutherius
were Bishops, and famous men in the Church for their painful labors, and
constancy in teaching the truth: what is that to the Popes of our time, that
are rather Wolves, then shepherds, loyterers than laborers: infamous
persecutors of Christians, then conuerters of Pagans to the Christian faith,
maintainers of errors then teachers of truth? Parsons calls them successors
to Eleutherius and Gregory: but never shall he show, that these two called
themselves Universal bishops, or Heads of the church, or took upon them to
depose kings, or to give away kingdoms, or to ride upon men's shoulders, or to
give their feet to be kissed. Is he not then ashamed to compare such monsters
to such holy men, and to ascribe the praise of good Bishops to those, that are
no Bishops, nor good men?

2. Further he shows, how matters passed in this conversion, which he
supposes, and how Lucius hearing of the horrible persecutions of Christians in
Rome, and how two worthy Senators called Pertinax and Tretellius, had been
lately converted from paganism to Christ, and that Marcus Aurelius then
living, began to be a friend to Christians, as the Emperors Legate in England
told him, etc. sent men to Rome to demand preachers of Eleutherius the Pope,
who directed to him two Romans named Fugatius and Damianus. And the cause
hereof he assigns to be, for that he understood the chief fountain of
religion to be at Rome, and was not contented with instructions by Christians
at home. But in this and the rest of his narration of Lucius he tells many
gross lies learned by him of his father Lucifer, the father of pride, and
lies. For first, it is not like, that this was the occasion of Lucius his
ambassade to Rome, considering that in the latter end of Marcus Aurelius and
beginning of Commodus his Empire, we do not read of any such horrible
persecutions against Christians, as he reports. Secondly, this sending to
Rome, which Parsons imagines to have fallen out in the reign of Marcus
Aurelius, Baronius refers to the second year of Commodus. Thirdly, the
conversion of two Senators Pertinax and Trebellius, by Parsons called
Tretellius, is not reported by any authentical Writer. Fourthly, if Lucius
were enemy to the Romans, as Parsons says, it is not likely, that an
Ambassador did reside with him, or that he had any commerce with the Romans.
Fifthly, he sent to Rome, not to demand Preachers, but baptism, as Galfridus,
Beda and Damasus testify. Sixthly, never can it be showed, that Lucius believed
Rome to be the fountain of religion. For it seems rather to be worldly
respect, then respect of religion, that moved him to send to Rome. Finally, I
have before showed, that those which were sent to Lucius were Britains, and not
Romans: neither does any authentical Writer affirm the contrary.

3. For proof of his gross leasings he says, that this conversion under king
Lucius is testified in ancient books of the lives of Roman bishops,
attributed by some to Damasus, by ecclesiastical tables and martyrologies, by
Bid, by Ado Archbishop of Treuers, by Marianus Scotus, and all Authors since.
But all this testification amounts to nothing, but only to make proof of
Parsons his notorious ignorance and impudency. For first the adversaries
themselves give no credit to those notes, that pass under the name of
Damasus. Secondly, nothing is more ridiculous, then to allege lying legends,
and moth-eaten martyrologies for authentical proofs. Thirdly, neither does
Bid nor Damasus, nor Ado speak one word of the conversion of Britain, nor
say, that Lucius was christened by any Roman. Fourthly, Ado was not bishop of
Treuers, as Parsons ignorantly affirms, but of Vienna. Fifthly, Marianus
Scotus does differ in time from others, and yet says little for Parsons his
purpose. Finally, neither all, nor many writers after him do report this story.

4. To answer our objections concerning the great differences concerning the
time, wherein this conversion is supposed to be made, and the observation of
Easter after a fashion diverse from the Church of Rome, he says first, That
there is no small variety found among principal Writers about principal
points and mysteries of our faith, as about the coming of the Magi, the
martyrdom of the Infants, the time of Christ his baptism, yea also of his
passion, what year and day each of these things happened. But first he shows
himself to be a lewd and blasphemous companion, that compares the history of
Christ's passion, and of other high points of our religion, to the fable of the
conversion of Britain by Eleutherius. Woe were we, if we had no better
assurance of Christ's passion, and other matters of Christian religion, then
Parsons has of his supposed conversion of Britain under Lucius. Furthermore,
it is one thing to vary about the times of things authentically testified in
holy Scripture, to have passed, though the certain day and time be not
expressed, and to vary about the times of things, of which there is no
authentical assurance. Thirdly, there is no material controversy about the
time of Christ's passion, but it may well be decided out of holy Scriptures. The
like we may say of the Infants put to death by Herod, and of the coming of the
Magi. But about the time of the supposed conversion of Britain by Eleutherius
his agents, there are manifest contradictions, insomuch, as not only the time,
but the report it self is made very doubtful.

He answers further, and Part. 1. p. 80
says, that if it were granted, that the Britains observed Easter after the
fashion of the East church, and that Simon Zelotes preached the Gospel in
England; yet it proves not, that the faith of Britanny came not from Rome. As
if it were likely, that scholars in such a ceremony would dissent from their
first masters, or else that Simon Zelotes were either sent from Rome, or did
not aid the Britains in their first conversion.

Finally, he spends many idle words in cauilling with the Magdeburgians, and
M. Fox of reverent memory. But for as much as he neither proves, nor
refelleth any thing material, we should wrong ourselves and the reader, if we
should follow the gosling wandering up and down, that has lost himself in the
Labyrinth of his own fancies and fooleries.

CHAP. III. Of Austin the Monk his coming into England, and of his preaching
and proceeding here.
FOr the sending and preaching of Austin the Monk to the Saxons, our
adversaries have some better color of reason, then for the sending of any
Romans by Eleutherius to the Britains. For neither is it denied, that
Gregory did send, or that Austin came to Ethelbert king of Kent. But what is
all this to the purpose? For neither can the modern Romans vant of the acts
and prowess of Gregory or Austin, nor does any advantage redound to the
modern synagogue of Rome by their merits, as we shall declare anon.
Furthermore neither is Gregory to be termed the Apostle of the inhabitants of
this Island, nor are the Papists to make any great crackes for any thing done
either by Gregory the first, or by his Legate Austin.

That Gregory the first was our Apostle, as in Bid to flatter the Romanists
he is called, it cannot be proved. For first he cannot say, as the Apostle did,
Galat. 1. Not of man, nor by man. For he was not called immediately by Christ,
as were the Apostles, but was ordained by bishops, and chosen by the Clergy
and people of Rome, as the agents of Rome themselves confess.

Secondly, it was not said to him, as to Christ's Apostles Matthew. 28. Go teach
all nations. Nor did he presume to take upon him that charge. Nay, expressly he
condemned the title of Oecumenicall or Universal bishop. But he was only
called and ordained to govern the Church of Rome: and happy is he, if he did
approve himself faithful in his calling.

Thirdly, he had no grace of working miracles, or prophecy, as Christ's
Apostles had, nor could he speak with tongs, as the Apostles did. Nay, it is
apparent, that he was very unskillful both in the Greek and Hebrew tongues,
which notwithstanding Saint Augustine for the understanding of Scriptures
accompteth necessary.

Fourthly, he neither preached himself, nor sent Austin to preach to the
Britains, or to the French, or other nations beside Saxons only; of all which
notwithstanding the inhabitants of this country are descended.

Finally, he preached not himself to the Saxons, nor seemed to be sent unto
them, but abiding quietly at Rome, sent Austine, and other Italian Monks to
preach unto them. How then is he termed the Apostle of the English, to whom he
was neither sent, nor came, nor preached?

That neither he, nor Austin deserve great praise for the conversion of the
Saxons or English, it is proved first, for that Gregory himself did nothing,
but send and command others, who notwithstanding were not the first conuerters
of the Saxons. For it were absurd to think, that the Saxons having so many
Christian Britains living both among them, and near unto them, had no notice
of Christian religion until the coming of Austin. That the Britains lived
among the Saxons the practice of conquerors does show, who do not kill such as
submit themselves, but rule them and command them. So did the Romans in time
past conquering Spain, and Gallia, and other countries. So did the Normans
entering into England. And so did the Saxons also deal with the Britains.
Malmesburie lib. 1. de gest. Angl. ca. 2. speaking of the Saxon king Cerdic,
testifies, that the men of the country being once overcome did willingly
yield to obey him. In eius iura volentes concessere, says he, Likewise lib. 1.
cap. 3. speaking of Hengists Captains: Cum Prouincialibus (says he)
congressi, profligatisque qui resistendum putauerunt, reliquos in sidem
acceptos placidae quietis gratia mulcebant. Now let any reasonable man esteem,
how it is possible, that the pagan Saxons conuersing daily with Christian
Britains, and seeing the practice of their Rites and Religion, should neither be
converted to Christian Religion, nor have any notice of it.

Further we read, that Berta Ethelberts wife was a Christian woman, and had
with her a Christian Bishop named Luidardus, by whom the king and his people
could not choose but receive some notice and tincture of Christian Religion.
This is plainly related by Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 26. Antea ad eum
(says Beda speaking of Ethelbert) fama Christianae religionis peruenerat,
vipote qui and vxorem habebat Christianam de gente Francorum nomine Bertam,
quam ea condition a parentibus acceperat, vt ritum fidei ac religionis suae,
cum Episcopo, quem ei fidei adiutorem dederant, nomine Luidardo inuiolatam
seruare, licentiam haberet. Capgraue in the legend of Lethardus containing
diverse traditions of the Romish Church speaking of this matter, calls him
Austins precursor, and says, that he prepared him a way, and an entrance into
the country. Praecursor (says he) and ianitor venturi Augustini. And again:
Parauit ei viam, ingressum and locum. Wherefore, as the Britains living among
the Saxons showed them a light of Christian religion, so Luidardus and Berta
were the first, that prepared the heart of Ethelbert king of Kent, to receive
Christian religion, and not Augustine, whose language he little understood, and
whose person he accepted, no question, for his Queens sake, and at the
persuasion of Luidardus.

Thirdly, although some Saxons were converted by Austins means, yet most of
them were converted by others. Laurentius baptized the son of Ethelbert, that
was a pagan. The king of Northumbers marying Edelburg the daughter of
Ethelbert, by her persuasion was christened by Paulinus. Erpwald the king of
the Castangles received the faith by the persuasion of king Edwine. Osric and
Eanfrid kings of the Deirans and Bernicians were baptized in Scotland. Many
Northern Saxons were also converted to religion by the means of king Oswald
and Finan a Scot. Birinus ordained by Asterius bishop of Genua converted the
West Saxons. Sigbert was baptized in France, and reigning in Essex caused many
to embrace Christian religion. Peda king of Middleangles was baptized also by
Finan a Scot. Vlfride consecrated bishop by Ailbert bishop of Paris converted
to Christ the Southsaxons. And all this is testified by Henry of Huntington.
With him also agree for the most part Beda, William of Malmesburie and diverse
other Chroniclers. It is therefore evident, that Austin performed either little
or nothing, those conuersions of Saxon nations being wrought by others after
his death.

Fourthly, it is most apparent, that neither the French nor Britains, of which
the inhabitants of this land consist as much as of Saxons, were converted by
Austin. Not the French, for that Austin was not sent unto them, and for that
they had received Christianity long before. Not the Britains, for that Austin
was sent to Saxons, and not to Britains. Secondly, the Britains were Christians
long before Austins coming into England, neither did Christianity after their
first conversion ever fail amongst them, as is evident by the testimony of
Bid, Capgraue and others. Not long before the arrival of Augustine many
Britains about the time of Caster being newly baptized, went out with the rest,
under the conduct of Germanus, to fight against the Picts and Saxons, and
obtained a great victory, as we may read in Bid lib. 1. hist. Angl. cap 20.
Likewise in the Council assembled by Austin, and mentioned by Beda lib. 2.
hist. Angl. cap. 2. there appeared diverse Bishops of the British nation.
Thirdly, the Britains, as Beda writes, refused to subject themselves to
Austins jurisdiction, and to accept his orders. Finally, it appears, that
Austin did rather work the subversion, then the conversion of the Britains,
animating the Saxons to destroy them.

Fifthly, Austin showed extreme cowardire in coming toward England, and hardly
was persuaded to set forward, as we may read in Bid, lib. 1. hist. Angl. cap.
23. Coming also into Kent he was not able to speak one word of English, nor to
preach, unless it were by his interpreter. Lastly, he was ordained Archbishop
of England by Eltherius bishop of Arles, at the commandment of Gregory. But
first such fear or cowardice beseems no Apostolic man. Secondly, faith
comes by hearing, and understanding, and not by commission or outward signs.
It seems therefore, that Austins Interpreters did rather convert the Saxons,
then Austin himself. Finally, what power had either the bishop of Arles, or
Gregory to appoint Archbishops in England? And how comes it to pass, that
now more Archbishops are here then one, if his order had any force? That these
exceptions are true, Beda will witness. Percussi timore inerti (says he) lib.
1. hist. Angl. cap. 23. redire domum potius, quam barbaram, feram,
incredulamque gentem, cuius ne linguam quidem nossent, adire cogitabant. Et hoc
esse tutius communi consilio decernebant. And again, cap. 26. Acceperunt
praecipiente Papa Gregorio de Francorum gente interpretes. And afterward cap.
28. Augustinus venit Arelas and ab Archiepiscopo eiusdem ciuitatis, iuxta quod
iussa sancti Patris Gregorij acceperant, Archiepiscopus genti Anglorum
ordinatus est.

Whatsoever then was done by Austin, the same concerned none, but a few Saxons
of Kent, and such as were baptized by him. Neither did he deserve more, then is
due to every minister of Gods word and Sacraments, that by preaching and
baptizing gains souls unto Christ Jesus. The Normans, and Northern, and
West. Saxons are nothing beholding to him. The Britains have cause to detest
his memory, and to think hardly of him for his pride, and barbarous cruelty.

If therefore Rob. Parsons mean to gain any thing by the labors of Gregory
or Austin, he must prove first, that these two did preach to the ancient
Saxons, Britains, French and other inhabitants of England. Next, that the
present Pope is like unto Gregory: the malignant race of Massepriests and
Iebusites to Austin. Thirdly, that all Churches erected by Preachers sent from
other nations, are to subject themselves to the Churches and Bishops that sent
them. And finally, if he will have us to keep unity with the modern Church
of Rome, he must prove, that the same is neither departed from Christ, nor from
the doctrine of Austin and Gregory. If not, he does but cast feathers against
the wind, and both tire himself with writing, and vex his reader with
examining his fooleries, and idle imaginations.

CHAP. IIII. That the modern doctrine of the Church of Rome, which the Church
of England rejects, was either oppugned by Peter, Eleutherius, Gregory and
Austin, or at the least unknown unto them.
BUt what would it advantage Rob. Parsons, if he could prove, that either the
ancient Britains were converted to the faith by S. Peter, and Eleutherius, or
the ancient Saxons by Gregory and Austin, seeing the modern doctrine of the
Church of Rome, which is now rejected, was either oppugned by them, or at the
least never known unto them?

Now the Romanists prohibit holy Scriptures to be read publicly in vulgar
tongues, as dark and unprofitable, and condemn those that read them
translated into vulgar tongues without license. But the Apostle S. Peter, 1.
Epist. 2. exhorts all Christians though newly regenerate, to desire the
sincere milk of the word. And 2. Epist. 1. shows, That they do well, that
take heed to the words of the Prophets, as to a light shining in a dark
place. Neither need we doubt, but that all Peter's true successors maintain the
same doctrine. Gregory in Ezechiel. homil. 10. does commend Scriptures, as
meat and drink and lib. 2. Moral. as a glass. It is not likely therefore,
that he would prohibit Christians to eat and drink, and to behold themselves
in a glass, that thereby they may learn to inform themselves in matters of
faith, and to reform their manners.

2. Now they teach, that the holy Scriptures to us are not authentical, nor
canonical, unless the Pope deliver them, and consigne them. And this is the
meaning of Bellarmine li. de notis Eccles. cap. 2. where he says, that the
Scriptures do depend upon the Church; and of Stapleton in his book written in
defense of the authority of the Church. But S. Peter 2. Epist. 1. says, that
the word of the Prophets is most sure unto us. We have (says he) a most sure
word of the Prophets. And Gregory in his preface unto his Commentaries upon
Job, says, that in vain we search for the writers of Scriptures, when we
faithfully believe, that the holy Ghost was the author of the book. Quis haec
scripserit (says he) valde superuacue quaeritur, cum tamen author libri
Spiritus Sanctus fideliter credatur. Which is as much, as if he should say:
that the authority of Scriptures, in regard of us, proceeds not from the
writer, much less from the teacher or propounder, but from the holy Ghost.

3. Now the Romanists teach, that the books of the Machabees and such like are
canonical Scriptures, and equal to other books of the old Testament. But S.
Peter 2. Ep. 1. where by the word of ye Prophets he understands ye
Scriptures, excludes from the rank of Scriptures of ye old Testament, al
books not written by Prophets, of which sort are the books of the Machabees,
being written long after the times of Malachy the last of the Prophets. Gregor.
lib. 19. moral. c. 17. does say plainly, that ye books of the Machabees are not
canonical.

4. Now they affirm, that the Pope is the foundation and head of the Church.
But the Apostle Paul shows us, that Christ is the head of the Church, and
that the same is built upon the Apostles and Prophets, Christ being the chiete
corner stone: and we may not think, that the Apostle Peter taught any other
doctrine. Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 82. naming Peter and other Apostles says, they
were not heads, but members of the Church. Sub vno capite (says he) omnes
membra sunt Ecclesiae. Neither is it credible, that Eleutherius, or Austin
taught any other doctrine.

5. When Cornelius, as we read Act. 10. did fall at Peter's feet, and adored
him, Peter would not suffer it. And Gregory and Eleutherius were far from
admitting men to kiss their slippers. But now the Romanists give the bastonata
to those that will not worship the Pope, and ordinarily the Pope requires
adoration, and suffers great Princes to kiss his feet. Of late some are
said to have disputed, that Latria is due to the Pope.

6. Now also the bishops of Rome have given over preaching and feeding the
flock. But the Apostle Peter exhorts all Bishops, and Elders to feed the
flock, that depends on them. And Greg. in pastor. p. 2. says, That all
bishops take on them the office of a Preacher or Crier. Praeconis officium
suscipit (says he) quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit.

7. Now the Popes carry themselves, as Lords over their flock, and entitle
themselves Oecumenicall, or Universal bishops. But Peter 1. Epi. 5. forbids
Elders to bear themselves, as Lords over Gods heritage And Greg. lib. 4.
Epist. 78. and 80. condemns this title of Uniuersall and Oecumenicall bishop,
as proud and Antichristian.

8. Now they that take upon them to curse kings, and to raise rebellion against
them, and to thrust them out of their royal seats, as appears by the wicked
Bulls of Paul the 3. against Henry the 8. of England, of Pius the 5. and Sixtus
the 5. against Q Elizabeth, and the wicked Decretais of Greg. the 7. against
Henry the 4. and of Gregory the 9. and Innocent the 4. against Friderick the
2. But the Apostle Peter never cursed Nero, albeit he was a most cursed fellow,
nor went about to depose him. Nay contrariwise, he exhorts all Christians to
submit themselves to kings and governors. Likewise Eleutherius and Gregory
were obedient to temporal Princes. Greg. li. 4. ep. 78. calls the Emperor
his most pious Lord, and submits himself even in an Ecclesiastical cause to
his order. Pijssimi Domini scripta suscepi, (says he) vt cum fratre and
consacerdote meo debeam esse pacificus.

9. Now they teach, that the reprobate and wicked men professing the Romish
faith are true members of the Catholic Church, as appears by Bellarmines
discourse de Ecclesia militante. They include the same also within the
precincts of the Romish Church. But S. Peter 1. Epist. 1. shows, that it
consists of the elect, according to Gods foreknowledge, dispersed in Pontus,
Galatia, and other countries. Gregory in Cantic. 4. says, that the holy
Church is called hortus conclusus, that is, a garden walled round about,
because it is of every side so environed with a wall of charity, that no
reprobate person may come within the number of the elect. Likewise in the 28.
book of his Morals, he concludes all the elect within the measure of the
Church. Neither does it appear, that either Eleutherius or Austin did teach
otherwise.

10. They now teach us to doubt of our election and salvation. But S. Peter
exhorts us, 2. Epist. 1. to make our calling and election sure. Which were a
most vain exhortation and request, if no man could assure himself of his
salvation. Neither did Eleutherius, or Gregory, or Austin in this dissent from
him.

11. They now teach priests to offer for quick and dead, and Christians to
receive the Sacrament under one kind. But Peter kept Christ's institution
inuiolably, which shows, that the Sacrament is to be received under both the
kinds of bread and wine, and not to be offered for quick and dead. Gregory also
homil. 22. in Euang. shows, that the people received both kinds. Quid sit
sanguis Agni (says he, speaking to the people) iam non audiendo sed bibendo
didicistis?

12. They make their followers believe that Christ's natural body is really
under the forms of bread and wine, although it cannot be felt, nor seen
there. But Peter knew that Christ had no other body, but such a one, as might
be felt and seen. And Gregory lib. 14. moral. c. 31. and 32. imputes this as
an heresy to Eutychius, that men's bodies after the resurrection should be
impalpable, and invisible.

13. They give out, that we may redeem our sins with silver and gold, buying
and procuring Indulgences, and with our own satisfactions both in this life
and in Purgatory. But S. Peter 1. Epist. 1. says expressly, We are not
redeemed with silver and gold, but by the precious blood of Christ. Gregory
likewise in Psalm. 5. Peenit. says, that our Redeemer is called excelsus, or
high, because none, beside God, could redeem us out of the hands of our
enemies. And lib. Moral. 9-cap. 30. Non valent virtute propria (says he) ab
humano genere supplicia sequuturae mortis expleri: that is, No man by his own
power can satisfy for the pains in the world to come.

14. Now in celebration of the holy Eucharist they have added a number of
prayers for quick and dead, and prayers and confessions to Saints and Angels.
But the Apostles, as Gregory testifies lib. 7. Epist. 63. did consecrate,
saying only the Lords prayer. And in his time and long after the forms now
used were not received.

15. Neither Saint Peter, nor Eleutherius, nor Gregory, nor Austin did make
the traditions of the Church equal to the word of God written. Nay Gregory
upon the Canticles, cap. 2. says, that in Christ alone we find wholesome
meat. But if in Christ alone; then not in the Popes traditions.

16. None of them did ever speak irreverently of Scriptures, or call them a
killing letter, or a matter of strife, or a nose of wax, or a shipmans hose,
or such like, as do our adversaries.

17. None of them did make the Latin translation of the Bible more
authentical, then the original Tert. Nay Peter albeit he had the gift of
tongues, yet did he not write in Latin, but in Greek.

18. Neither did Eleutherius, or Gregory call himself the spouse, or rock of
the Church, or Christ's Vicar or substitute. Nor did either S. Peter or Austin
allow such proud titles.

19. Neither did Gregory the first, nor any before him call himself King of
Kings, or Supreme Monarch of the Church. Nay Gregory rather delighted in the
name and title of servant of servants, and the rest of the bishops of Rome in
ancient time were humble men, and detested these proud titles.

20. In the times of Gregory and Austin, neither the number of. Sacraments, nor
those forms and rites, which now the Synagogue of Rome uses, were
established. If Parsons will maintain the contrary, let him make proof, that
the words used in the popish sacraments of Confirmation, and Extreme Unction,
were known and practiced in those times. Let him also show, that Priests were
then appointed to sacrifice for quick and dead. Now if he cannot find these
forms in the time of Gregory; he will be much more puzzeled to find them in
the days of Eleutherius or Peter.

21. The Master of the Sentences lib. 4. did. 11. confesses frankly, that he
knows not, whether the conversion in the Eucharist be substantial, or not.
Qualis sit illa conuersio says he, an formalis, vel substantialis, vel
alterius generis, definire non sufficio. Much more difficulty then shall
Parsons find, to prove his Transubstantiation out of the doctrine of Austin,
Gregory, Eleutherius, and Peter.

22. S. Peter knew no other Priesthood, but that which was common to all
Christians, neither did he acknowledge any sacrifices of Christians but
spiritual. Neither Eleutherius, nor Gregory, nor Austin, ever heard, that a
Mass Priest did either offer up Christ's body and blood really, or, as we read
in the Canon of the Mass, take upon him to be a mediator for Christ's body and
blood.

23. It is impious to think, that either Peter, or Gregory, or any in those
times believed, that hogs and dogs eating consecrated hoasts, did with
their mouths eat and swallow down into their belly the body of Christ, as
the Schoolmen, and most Papists now teach.

24. S. Peter never put the Sacrament in pixes, nor adored it, as his Lord and
God. Neither do we find, that either Elcutherius, or Gregory, practiced any
such matter. For it was first ordered by Honorius the third, that ye Sacrament
should be kept in pixes, and worshipped after the modern fashion.

25. In the Romish ordinall we find no prayers for the dead, nor any private
masses, nor masses for war, peace, plagues, or for hogs and horses and such
like uses. If then the same be thought to have proceeded for the most part from
Gregory, and from others that succeeded him, it is certain, that these abuses
came in after his time.

26. The form of hosts and singing cakes not much bigger then a counter, and
the image of the crucifixe upon them, and the idolatrous worship of Latria
given to them was utterly unknown in Gregory's time, and long after.

27. The old ordinall of Rome does show, that the confession of penitents was
not made to Saints or Angels in Gregory's time, or before him.

28. Neither in Gregory's time, nor before him, do we find, that any godly
Bishop commanded, that the public Liturgy of the Church should be said in
Latin, or Greek, or other language not understood by the common people, or
that he suffered the Sacraments to be administered in tongues not known of the
vulgar sort. Nay the Apostle Paul 1. Cor. 14. shows plainly, that prayers
in a tongue not understood are fruitless, which doctrine, no question,
antiquity much respected.

29. Now the Romanists will have all Churches to follow Rome, as their
Mistress in all rites and ceremonies. But Gregory, as Bede testifies lib. 1.
hist. Angl. c. 28. gave Austin liberty to choose out of all Churches what rites
he thought most convenient. Ex singulis quibusque Ecclesijs, says he, quae
pia, quae religiosa, quae recta sunt, elige.

30. Neither did Austin nor Gregory consecrate a Paschal lamb at Easter, after
the Jewish manner, or hallow water to drive away devils, and for remission of
venial sins, as is now practiced by the Papists.

31. The law of auricular confession, and the necessity, and form thereof was
first established by Innocent the third c. Omnis vtriusque sexus. de poenit.
and remis. It is not therefore likely, that yt same should be practiced in
Gregory's time, or before.

32. Gregory would not have Saints images broken, or defaced in Churches: yet
did neither he, nor any Bishop of Rome before him allow the worship of them.
Quod ea adorari vetuisses, omnino laudauimus, says he, lib. 9. epist. 9. ad
Serenum, speaking of images of Saints. And again, Si quis imagines facere
voluerit, minime prohibe, adorare vero imagines omnibus modis deuita. that is,
if any will make images, foibid them not; but by all means, avoid the worship
of images. But Peter and Eleutherius neither worshipped images, nor suffered
them to be made in Churches. None of them, certes, nor Austin himself did
think or teach, that the cross, or crucifixe is to be worshipped with Latria.
Austin coming to Canterbury, had a cross of silver, and the image of our
Savior painted in a table, as Bede lib. 1. hist. Angl. ca. 26. reports, but
he says not, that either the cross or image was worshipped with Latria, or
otherwise, either by him, or by others.

33. Both Gregory and Austin used Letanies. But neither did they pray to the
virgin Mary, nor to Peter, nor Paul, nor to other Saints. Austins Letany, as
we may read in Bid, hist. Angl. lib. 1. ca. 16. was nothing, but a prayer
directed to God.

34. Gregory and Austin esteemed much the relics of Saints: yet did neither
of them dig their bodies out of the graves, and put them in shrines to be
worshipped, as is the fashion of papists of our time.

35. Neither did Gregory take upon him to canonize, or vncanonize Saints, or to
appoint Masses to be said, or holidayes to be kept in their honor. And if this
will not be proved of Gregory, much less will it be showed, that either
Eleucherius or Peter ever taught or allowed any such canonization of Saints, or
Romish worship given them.

36. Gregory allowed Purgatory (as it seems) for small faults, yet did he not
believe, that men did satisfy in Purgatory for the temporal pains of mortal
sins, nor that the bishop of Rome by his indulgences could deliver men out of
Purgatory. As for Peter and Eleutherius, they never thought, nor taught, that
our sins are purged by other means, then by the blood of Christ, which, as
the Apostle says, 1. John. 1. cleanses us from all sin.

37. That the souls of the godly are tormented by devils in Purgatory, or that
the bishops of Rome by their plenary indulgences, and Bulls of Iubiley could
deliver souls from thence, was far from the thought of Austin and Gregory,
and much more of Eleutherius and Saint Peter. These are devises of late Dopes,
and frapling Schoolmen, as appears by the Decretals of Boniface the eight,
and Clement the sixth extr. de poenit. and remiss. and Bellarmine and Henriquez,
and others in their treatises of Indulgences and Purgatory.

38. Neither did Gregory, nor Austin, nor any before them teach, that the grace
of God was nothing but charity, or that charity is the form of faith, as do
the modern uncharitable powdermen papists, and their associates.

39. Far also it was from their thought, that men are predestinate to
salvation, or reprobated and destined to damnation for works foreseen in them.
For the Apostle Romans 9. does prove the contrary by the example of Esau and
Jacob, and adds this reason, that the purpose of God might remain according
to Election, not by works, but by him that calls.

40. None of them ever taught, that men are justified by marriage, or orders, or
confirmation, or extreme unction, or by eating fish or such external
obseruances, as our adversaries now teach.

41. Nay they believed not, that christian men were justified by the works of
the law, or that they could perfectly fulfill the whole law, and love God with
all their heart, soul, and affection. For as the Apostle says Romans 4. the Law
causes wrath. Again, if man could perfectly fulfill the law, then might he
live without all sin, which is the heresy of the Pelagians, as Augustine de
haeres. and Hierome aduers. Pelag. lib. 1. testify.

42. Never did any of these four, or other ancient Father teach, that
christian men were able, not only to fulfill the whole law, but also to do
works of supererogation, and more then the law requires: or else, that the
state of perfection did consist in beggary or poverty, forswearing of marriage,
and obedience to monkish rules.

43. Finally, because it were infinite to prosecute all the singular
differences betwirt Austin, Gregory, Eleutherius and Peter of one part, and the
modern Popes and the Iebusites on the other, I will bring all into one brief
sum. I do therefore pray Robert Parsons, because he contendeth, that now no
other doctrine is taught in Rome, beside that which in times past was delivered
by Gregory, Austin, Eleutherius, and the holy Apostle S. Peter; that he will be
pleased of his Iebusiticall favor plainly to demonstrate: First, that the
particulars above mentioned were by the^ known, believed and taught; And next,
that the rest of the Romish doctrine established partly in the Popes Decretals,
and partly in the conuenticles of Laterane, of Constance, of Florence and
Trent, and partly professed and proposed by Pius the fourth, which the Church
of England rejects and detesteth, differs nothing from that form of
doctrine and wholesome words, which they delivered to their hearers in their
time. If he perform this, he shall show himself a great master; if not, his
cause falls, his hope of mastership perishes, and his dreams of a Cardinals
hat, are at their last period.

CHAP. V. A brief answer to Parsons his fond and frivolous discourse, wherein
desperately he undertakes to prove, that the faith now professed in Rome under
Clement the 8. is the same, and no other, then was taught by Eleutherius and
Gregory in time past.
Unto our arguments Rob. Parsons in his treatise of three Conuersions makes no
answer. And yet he could not be ignorant, that these and many more arguments
are brought against his cause. Nay it appears, that it will be as easy a
matter for him to turn himself into a woodcock, as to maintain his book of
Three Turnings. Only, least he should seem silent, he sets on a brazen
face, and Page 8. desperately promises to prove, that the faith of Rome is, and
was all one under Eleutherius, Gregory, and Clement the 8. lately reigning. He
should have added S. Peter also, if he would have maintained his argument of
three Conuersions. But he knew, that there is too maine a difference betwixt S.
Peter's catholic epistles, and Clements vncatholike Decretals. In the process
also of his discourse concerning the faith of Eleutherius and Gregory, compared
to the confession of Clement the 8. he runs on confusedly and absurdly,
turning and winding up and down, like a man that has lost his way, and is
carried without direction, he knows not whither. In his discourse there are
three maine faults. First, he does not justify all those points of popery,
which are now holden by Clement the 8. at the least, if the Pops believe the
modern Romish faith, nor prove them to have been believed and taught by
Eleutherius and Gregory. Next, he neither proposes his matters resolutely, nor
in proouing them proceeds orderly. Lastly, he barely touches some points in
controversy, but neither dare handle the principal matters taught by the
Romanists, nor can prove that which he promises. And this God willing we
shall demonstrate out of the man's own words, following as well as we can the
file and order of his disordred discourse.

Page 7. He threapeth kindness upon us, and would bear us in hand, that we
dare not deny, but that both Mass and Images were in use in Gregory's time in
the Roman Church and faith, and so brought into England by Augustine. But
first he speaks strangely, where he says, Mass and Images were in use in
the Roman faith. For Mass is song or said at the Altar, and Images are
painted, or made in bosse upon walls, or other places. But faith is properly
in the heart, though declared with the mouth, and consists neither in
Imagery, nor Massing foolery, but in receiving the saving word of God.
Secondly, if by the use of the Mass and Images he understand the modern
doctrine and practice of the Romish Church concerning these two points, he
wrongeth us, and abuses his reader, saying we dare not deny, that the Mass
and Images were in use in the Roman church in Greries time, and so brought
into England by Augustine. For by the old Romish ordinall it appears, that
Gregory's Mass was most unlike the modern Mass of the Romanists. That form
overthrows private Masses, half Communions, prayers for the dead, the
carnal real presence, transubstantiation, the real propitiatory sacrifice
for quick and dead, and the whole form and frame of the modern Romish Canon
and Mass. Gregory also, as we have declared, absolutely condemned the worship
of Images, and never acknowledged, that the Cross or Crucifixe was to be
worshipped with Latria. Finally, albeit Augustine named Masses, and had a
cross and an image; yet it appears not, that his Mass was like the modern
Mass, or that he worshipped the cross or the image, or planted them in the
Church. Bid mentions no such matter, where he mentions them. If by Mass
he mean a dimission of the people, and by the use of images understands an
historical use of them, he releeueth his cause nothing. For neither do we
contend about words, nor deny all historical use of images. To help the matter
a little he says, that Austin and his fellows entered into Canterbury in
procession with a cross, and image of our Savior in a banner. But Beda
conuinceth him oflying, who says Lib. 1. hist. Angl. cap. 26.
he brought Christ's image in a table. Veniebant says he, crucem pro vexillo
ferentes argenteam, and imaginem Domini Saluatoris in tabula depictam.

For proof, that Eleutherius held the faith now professed by Clement the 8. he
remitteth us Pa. 8. and 9. to the Magdeburgians, Cent. 2. and cap. 4. de doctr.
But his proof is weak, and witless. For first in that place there is no
mention made either of Eleutherius, or Clement. Secondly albeit we should
grant, that Eleutherius consented with all those that lived in that age in
their erroneous or incommodious speeches (which notwithstanding we have no
reason to believe) yet can it not thereby be proved, that he consented with
Clement the 8. or Clement with him. For albeit we read in Ignatius this phrase
Offerre, and Sacrificium immolare, and like phrases in Irenaeus, Cyprian,
Tercullian, and Martialis, who mentions also Altars; yet it follows not,
that the Romish sacrifice of Christ's body and blood for quick and dead, or the
modern Canon of ye Mass, or Transubstantiation, and the rest of the Romish
Masses ceremonies were known to these ancient Fathers. For all those terms,
which the Fathers used being taken and meant spiritually, and being understood
of spiritual sacrifices, make nothing either against us, or for our
adversaries Masses, or massing forms. Thirdly, although the Magdeburgians in
these times complain of some declining in Christian doctrine of some men,
which Parsons grossly interprets and calls the falling away of Christian
doctrine: yet they tax but few men, and say not, that any agreed in all or
most points with the Papists. Fourthly what the Magdeburgians do yield, let
them yield for themselves: we do not in all points take ourselves bound to
allow their sayings, nor find any such inconvenience in these terms, as the
Fathers understood them, as the Magdeburgians pretend. Finally, Rob. Parsons
must speak of more then one point of consent, or else he will show himself
unwise to parallele Clement the 8. with his triple Crown to the humble martyr
of Christ Eleutherius. This testimony therefore out of the Magdeburgians makes
little for his purpose. But therein he does properly bewray his own folly. For
he cites Tertullian lib. de coen. Dom. where he never wrote any such book;
and did not understand the Magdeburgians, who use these words, Tertullianus de
coena loquens in lib. de culiu foeminar. Lastly the words, inclinatio
Doctrinae, he translateth the falling away of Christian doctrine: as if every
thing, that did decline, did fall away; or else, as if doctrine might be said
properly to fall away, and not rather men to decline from the sincerity of
doctrine.

Afterward, Page 25. and 26. he tells us, how Cyprian epist. 45. glories, in
that his Church of Carthage in Africa, and all other the Churches under her in
Mauritania and Numidia, had received their first institution of christian faith
from Rome, as from their mother, and that he calls the Roman Church matricem
ceterarum omnium. And that Tertullian says, that the authority of his church
came from Rome. And lastly, that Augustine in Psalm. contr. parte^ Donati, had
no better way to defend his church of Hippo and others to be truly Catholic,
then to say, that they were daughters and children of the church of Rome. But
first, this makes nothing for his purpose, which should prove, that ye
doctrine of the modern church of Rome varieth not from the ancient church of
Rome. Secondly most grossly does he either mistake, or belie these Fathers,
for neither does Cyprian epist. 45. say, that his church of Carthage and all
churches under her in Mauritania and Numidia, had received their first
institution fio Rome. Nor does he once mention Rome, but some ignorant fellow
has added Rome in the margent, where it is plain he speaks of the general
Catholic Church. Further he does not say, that Mauritania and Numidia were
under Carthage: for they are provinces entire of themselves, and divided from
Carthage, as Caesar Baronius might have informed him. All which also is made
clear by ye words of Cyprian lib. 4. epist. 8. Vt Ecclesiae Catholicae
matricem and radicem agnoscerent, and tenerent. says he, Sed quoniam latius
fusa est nostra prouincia, habet etiam Numidiam and Mauritaniam cohaerentes.
Tertullians words are these, Vnde nobis quoque authoritas praesto est statuta.
That is, from whence we have testimony at hand: and not as this beetlehead
interprets, from whence the authority of our Church came. S. Augustine in
Psalmo contr. part. Donati neither says, that Hippo and other Churches were
the daughters of Rome, nor mentions Hippo. It appears therefore, that Rob.
Parsons had ouerwatched himself when he wrote these fooleries.

Page 101. he goes about to refell our argument, concluding, that there was
not in Rome the same faith in the days of Eleutherius that is now, because
then there was no mention or knowledge either of the universal authority of
the bishop of Rome, or of the name or use of Masses, or of sacrifice
propitiatory for quick or dead, or of Transubstantiation, or worship of Images.
But first he marreth our argument by adding and detracting. To the bishop of
Rome he adioyneth the Church, leaves out our exception against the doctrine of
the Mass, and worship of Images, and puts down only the name and use of
masses, and use of images in churches. But to forbear to censure him for his
iugling, let us see, what exception he makes to our argument. If, says he,
this consequence should be admitted, then would it follow, that the name and
doctrine of the blessed Trinity, the two distinct natures and one person in
Christ, his two distinct wills, the virginity of our blessed Lady both before
and after her childbirth, the proceeding of the Holy Ghost as well from the
Son, as from the Father, should not be admitted. But the fellow shows
himself not only impudent, but also most blasphemous, to compare such false,
wicked, and impious doctrines, as Papists now maintain, to the principal and
highest mysteries of our faith concerning the Trinity, and Christ's two natures,
and the proceeding of the holy Ghost. For who kneweth not, that these articles
are plainly proved out of Scriptures, and declared in Councels, and received by
most ancient Fathers? but the doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass for quick
and dead, of the Monarchy and universal authority of the Pope, of
Transubstantiation, and popish worship of Images, is not only not to be
proved, but also to be disproued by holy scriptures. The same is also contrary
both to decrees of Councels, and authority of Fathers, as has been declared in
diverse treatises of those several arguments. We only will allege some few.
First then the sacrifice of the mass for quick and dead is repugnant to
Christ's institution, that ordained the Eucharist to be distributed and
received, and not to be offered up for quick and dead. Next to holy Scriptures,
and Fathers, that say that carnal sacrifices are ceased, that ye body of
Christ was once only to be offered, that Christ is a priest after the order of
Melchisedech, and that the sacrifices of Christians are spiritual and not
carnal. Finally if Christ's body be not really present, nor the bread and wine
transubstantiated into his body and blood, then the papists themselves must
needs confess, that the Mass is no sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead.
But that is proved by the words of the institution, bread and wine being named,
after consecration, by ye testimony of Fathers that expound these words, hoc
est corpus meum, figuratively, by the analogy betwixt the signs and things
signified, which by transubstantiation is quite overthrown, and by diverse
other arguments.

For the Popes monarchy and universal authority, there is no one word in
scripture, nay scriptures show, that all the Apostles were called, and
authorized alike; and that is also expressly affirmed by Cyprian de simpl.
praelat. Furthermore, the Popes agents cannot show either commission or
practice for this authority, for more then a thousand years after Christ.
Gregory, as I have showed, condemned the title of universal bishop as
Antichristian; neither can it be showed, that ye Pope either made laws, or
ordained bishops, or judged all causes throughout the whole church, until
Antichrist of the temple of God had made a den of thieves.

Transubstantiation overthrows the humane nature of Christ's body, and
supposes it neither to be visible, nor palpable, repugneth to the words of
institution, and common consent of Fathers, that declare bread and wine to
remain after consecration, takes away the analogy between the signs and
things signified, and brings in the heresy of Euty ches.

The worship of images is contrary to the law of God, Exodus 20. to ye decrees
of Councels, to ye doctrine of Fathers, and abolisheth all true religion. God
forbids us expressly to make either graue^ image or likeness, to the intent to
worship it, or to bow down to it. The Council of Eliberis c. 36. forbids
any thing that is worshipped to be painted on walls. The 2. Council of Nice,
though it allow some worship done to images, yet expressly shows that Latria
or divine honor is not to be given to any image. The Council of Francfort
abrogated the acts of the idolatrous conuenticle of Nice allowing the worship
of images. Epiphanius tore down a veil, that had an image of Christ, or some
Saint painted on it. Gregory, as before I have showed, utterly condemned the
worship of Images. Finally Lacta^tius lib. 2. Instit. divine. c. 19. says
plainly, There is no religion, where there is an image. Most odious therefore
and blasphemous it is to make a comparison betwixt the articles of our
Christian faith, and these damnable doctrines contrariant to Religion and truth.

Notwithstanding to demonstrate these points of the modern Romish faith,
Parsons promises to take two ways of proof, the one as he calls it,
negative, and the other affirmative; and by them he vanteth, that he will make
our folly to appear to every indifferent man. But whatsoever he is able to
perform against us, against himself he brings an evident proof of his own
folly. For what can be supposed more absurd, then to offer to prove an
affirmative, by a negative, or contraxiwise? and yet such is Parsons his
wisdom, that he offers us this abuse. Further he seems not very well to
understand himself, where he talks of negative proofs. For albeit he
stands upon his denial, and resolves to put us to prove, yet he deserves a
garland for his eminent folly, that esteems his own bare and blockish
denial an argument, and is not ashamed to call it negative proof. His meaning
is, that we are not able to show, that either the points above mentioned are
contrary to the doctrine and practice of the Christian church in Eleutherius
his time and after, or that they came into the church afterward. And therefore
he indenoureth to conclude upon ye words of S. Augustine lib. 4. de bapt. ca.
24. that seeing ye whole church for some time has received the doctrine of ye
popes Monarchy, the Romish mass, Transubstantiation, and the worship of
Images, the same is delivered by authority of the Aposties. But first we have
showed this doctrine to be contrary to the practice and faith of Christ's
Church. Secondly we are able to show how every of these doctrines entered by
little and little into the Church, and that long after Eleutherius his time.
The Churches of Romes primacy over other Churches began to enter by a grant of
Phocas. The popes tyranny by usurpation of Gregory the 7. The pieces of the
Mass when they were added, we may see in Walafridus Strabo, Platina, Nauclerus
and Polydore Virgill. Transubstantiation was first established by Innocent the
3. The worship of Images by the second Council of Nice got credit. Yet were
these doctrines never perfited, until the late conuenticle of Trent, nor could
they ever be received of the whole Church. For to this day the Greek Church
neither acknowledges ye Popes authority, nor believes transubstantiation, or
receives the Popes mass, or popish purgatory, or his doctrine of Images. Nay
the French at this day refuse the decrees of the conuenticle of Trent, and the
Emperor protested against ye Synod.

Little therefore does Augustine help, but to confound Parsons his cause,
albeit his words are not to be understood of all false doctrines, whose
certain original and author is not always known, but of ceremonies in the
administration of sacraments and government of the Church.

But says Parsons, Page 111. although the word Transubstantiation was added by
the Council of Lateran, as these words Consubstantiall, Trinity, and the like
in the first Council of Nice, yet the substance of the article (viz.
concerning transubstantiation) was held from the beginning. And this he
endeuoreth to prove by the authority of S. Ambrose, lib. 4. 5. and 9. de
Sacramentis, and out of these words, Non valebit sermo Christi, vt species
mutet elementorum? And again, Sermo Christi, qui potuit de nihilo facere, quod
non erat, non potest ea quae sunt in id mutare, quod non erat? But first he
shows himself a shameless creature, to compare the mystery of the holy
Trinity, and of the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, both being
proved clearly by Scriptures, with the article of transubstantiation, that is
so repugnant to Scriptures, faith, authority, and common sense. Secondly he
wrongeth the famous Council of Nice to equal it to the conuenticle of Lateran
under Innocentius the 3 nay under the kingdom of Antichrist, and in the times
of darkness. Thirdly he seems little to understand what passed in the
Council of Nice, that supposes that Council first to have established the
article of the Trinity. Fourthly he avouches an untruth impudently, where he
says, the article of transubstantiation was held from the beginning. For I
have showed before, that the Master of Sentences knew it not. And in my books
de Missa I have overthrown transubstantiation by the testimony of Ambrose.
These two sentences which he alleges outof Ambrose, make nothing for Parsons.
For he will not deny, but that species, or forms remain, where as Ambrose
says they are changed. Again, Ambrose will not have any other change in the
elements, then is wrought in our regeneration, or in the iron of the hatchet of
one of the sons of the Prophets, 4. Reg. 6. or in the union of the two
natures in Christ, as is evidently seen lib. de ijs qui initiantur. ca. 9. and
de Sacrament. lib. 4. ca. 4. This mutation he will have to be such, that the
things still remain. Vt sint quae erant, and in aliud commute^tur. The same
Father lib. 6. de Sacram. ca. 1. says we receive bread. Tu, says he, quia
accipis panem, diuinae eius substantiae in illo participaris elemento. Fifthly
he bewrays singular ignorance or negligence, that cites the ninth book of
Ambrose de Sacramentis, where he wrote but six, if those six books at all
were his, and alleges these two places, as out of Ambroses book de
Sacramentis, that are not there to be found, but are derived out of his book
de ijs qui initiantur ca. 9. Finally he grossly belyeth Ambrose, where he
says, he auerreth the change of natures of elements and of one substance into
another, for he does neither talk of the change of natures, of elements, nor
substances.

To prove the article of the Popes supremacy, of the worship of images, and of
the sacrifice of Mass to have been always believed in the Church, he
alleges neither authority, nor reason, but only says, Page 113.
that although we appoint certain times when these things began, yet we dare
not stand to any certain time, nor can allege the certain authors of them.
But as in his own proofs, so in reporting our assertions he uses notorious
falsehood and impudency. For we do not say, as he reports, that the Pope
challenged this supremacy, which now in some countries he possesses, under
Pope Gregory, and Phocas the Emperor, but that they began to encroch by little
and little, and that Boniface the 3. obtained of Phocas, that the seat of Peter
should be esteemed chief of all Churches, as Platina says in Bonifacio 3. The
rest, we say the Popes obtained partly by fraud, and force of arms in the time
of Gregory the 7. and diverse of his successors. The authors of the Mass, and
of the worship of Images both entering by degrees, we allege most certainly
out of their own histories, and stand to our allegation so firmly, that Rob.
Parsons notwithstanding his great cracks thought best to pass over the matter
in sad and deep silence. That heresies could not creep into the church
without being espied, we grant, and therefore show how popish heresies grew to
be contradicted by the most ancient and sound Fathers: and that Rob. Parsons
had little reason to stand upon this exception, or his negative proof, as he
ridiculously calls it.

His affirmative proof also is not much better. First, he Page 123.
cites the names of Irenaeus, Iustine Martyr, Athenagoras, Clemens
Alexandrinus for proof of the Popes supremacy, freewill, merit of works, the
sacrifice and ceremonies of the mass. But very wisely he makes only a muster
of names without making them to speak, lest in the places quoted either they
should hap to say nothing, or else to speak against the producents cause. Only
he could not, as he says Page 129. omit one place out of Ireney lib. 3.
aduers. haeres. ca. 3. beginning, Maximae and antiquissimae ecclesiae etc. but
first he choppeth off the beginning of the sentence, which shows, that ye
tradition of other churches is no less to be regarded, then that of the church
of Rome, and that Irenaeus cites the Romish churches tradition only, not as
head, but for avoiding tediousnes. Quoniam valde longum est, says he, in hoc
tali volumine omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones, maximae and
antiquissimae etc. Secondly absurdly he translateth these words, ad hanc
ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse est omnem conuenire
ecclesiam, in this sort, for that unto this church, in respect of her more
mighty principality, it is necessary, that all churches must agree, and have
access. Whereas Irenaeus his meaning only is, that every church should have
respect unto the church of Rome in respect of her greatness and dignity, and not
subject it self or agree unto it. Thirdly he collecteth very absurdly, yt
because Christians did respect ye church of Rome much, while it kept the faith
sincere, now also all churches are to respect it, being departed from the
faith, and tyra^nizing over all others. For why should we rather respect that
church, then the church of Ephesus and Smyrna, whose succession and tradition
Irenaeus then no less respected, then that of Rome? Mainely therefore does
Parsons conclude upon Irenaeus his words, saying, lo here the principality of
that church confirmed. For by the Popes supremacy far greater matters are now
understood, then Irenaeus ever gave to Rome, or understood by principality.

Next he urges the confession of ye Magdeburgia^s against us. But neither do
we allow whatsoever they say, nor do they bring any thing to help Parsons to
prove, that the modern faith of Rome was professed by Eleutherius bishop of
Rome. True it is, that in the 2. Century c. 4. under ye title of Incommodious
opinions, and stubble of some Doctors, they allege Ignatius epist. ad Romans and
Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 3. and centur. 3. c. 4. do mislike Tertullian for giving
the keys only to Peter, and saying, that the Church is built upon him.
Likewise they ta^^ Cyprian for some speeches. But it is plain ideotisme heerof
to conclude, that either Cyprian, or Tertullian, or Irenaeus, or Ignatius does
hold and maintain the bishop of Romes authority, which now he challenges.
Parsons seems not to have read Cyprian. No way, certes, he can be thought to
understand him, that names Salonius for Sidonius, and supposes Maximus,
Vrbanus, and Sidonius named in that epistle to be holy Fathers, and to have
affirmed, that there ought to be one chief Bishop in the catholic church,
whereas these three returning from the side of schismatikes, that in every
church had erected a bishop of their own faction, began now to hold, yt in
every several church, there ought to be but one bishop. Furthermore neither he
nor the Magdeburgians do well understand Cyprian lib. 4. cpist. 8. For indeed
he speaks not of the Roman church, but of the universal church. The like
may be said of Cyprians book de simplic. Praelat. Finally if Parsons upon the
words of Cyprian, or Origin, can conclude the primacy challenged by the Pope,
he shall well deserve a Cardinals hat. But in the mean while, he must content
himself with a garland of Fore tails for his insignious fopperie, that by
such weak surmises thinks to prove the faith of Eleutherius and Clement the
8. to be all one.

He should also have alleged the testimony of the Magdeburgians, as yielding
the Fathers to make for the popish sacrifice of the Mass, for
transubstantiation, and the worship of images: but therein he fails. Only he
talks idly of certain frauds practiced by them in citing the Fathers, and
touches them for dissenting from the Fathers in matters of Free Will,
Justification, Repentance, Good works, Fasts, Uirginitie, keeping of Holy
days, Martyrdom, invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Traditions, Monastical
life, Relics, and such like points. But all this is nothing to the purpose.
For neither are we bound to perform and make good every private man's singular
opinions: nor do the Magdeburgians note any great matters of difference betwixt
themselves and the Fathers: nor do they always gather their sentences out of
the authentical writings of the Fathers: neither do they mean and comprehend
all, as often as they speak against one or two: nor finally does it follow
because some one or two Fathers do dissent in some one or two points from us,
that either all the Fathers make against us, or that all, most, or any do join
with the Papists. Robert Parsons therefore would be admonished by some of his
friends, to leave this vain and roauing discoursing, and scholerlike to
conclude somewhat against that religion, which he has forsaken, and we do
profess, and believe to be most Catholic, and ancient, and Apostolical.

For proof that the religion now professed in Rome is the same, which was
brought into England by Austin the Monk, he refers us p. 152. to Stapletons
Fortress of faith, as he called it. But he should remember, that the same
fortress was taken, and overthrown by M. Doctor Fulke of worthy memory, and
that in such sort, that the builder and author of that foolish fortress, durst
never undertake to repair the ruins thereof. Furthermore, he is to
understand, that Stapletons discourse contains a brief recapitulation of
certain ceremonies and abuses in doctrine, which were in practice about the
coming in of Augustine into England. But neither were they matters of any
importance, nor were they generally received, nor were they agreeable to the
forms now received, and used in the Church of Rome.

Part. 1. chapter 8. he spends much time in speaking for Gregory and Austin, and
railing against M. Fox, M. Bale, and M. Holinshead. And Chap. 9. and 10.
endeavors to prove, that Austin brought into England no other religion, then
that, which the Church professed during the times of Eleutherius. But first we
have no special quarrel either against Gregory or Austin. If Parsons will
needs urge us to speak against the Monk Austin, he shall hear, what he was
anon. Secondly, these good men M. Fox, M. Bale, and M. Holinshead, it is no
marvel though they be rayled on by such wicked fellows. Upright and good men,
(as the Wiseman shows us, Prou. 29.) are an abomination to the wicked.
Thirdly, we do not so much contend about the corruptions brought in by Austin
the Monk, as those which now the Church of Rome would thrust upon us. Parsons
therefore ought to show, that now the same religion is professed' in Rome, which
was brought in both by Eleutherius and Austin into Britain and England, and
not so much to prate of the times between Eleutherius and Austin. Howbeit it
appears, that even in these times superstition and false doctrine began to
creep into some corners of the Church contrary to that form, which was
received from the Apostles, and used in Eleutherius his times. Some began to
talk doubtfully of Purgatory, others to pray privately to Saints. In the
administration of the Lords Supper some rites began here and there to be
practiced diverse from Apostolical orders. Of Freewill and of Works some began
to talk philosophically, others to advance man's merits. Churches were built in
honor of Saints, and their Relics worshipped. Austin he brought in an image
of Christ in a table, and a silver cross, and began to chaunt Letanies; which
Rob. Parsons, albeit all the Iebusites in Rome should help him with their
suffrages, will never prove to have been known or practiced in Eleutherius his
time. Pa. 181. he proves altars in Britain out of Chrysostom, and afterward
altars of stone, and sacrifices, and vows, and oaths made to Saints out of
Gildas. He alleges also Optatus, and Augustine, for proof of altars, and ye
Mass. But neither does the name of Mass, or altars, or sacrifices, or vows
prove the Romish Mass, altars, sacrifice, vows, or the Romish doctrine of
these points, as at large has been declared in my books De Missa, and De
Monachis against Bellarmine, nor do we stand upon names or terms, nor are
these the principal points of Romish religion, which we impugn: nor is the
testimony of Gildas authentical.

Part. 1. chap. 10. he tells us of a Church built in the honor of Saint
Martin, where Austin song, prayed, and said Masses; of a Tribunes daughter
restored to sight by Germanus his prayer, and application of relics, of a
prayer made to Saint Alban, of honoring Martyrs sepulchers, of Alleluia, and
the observance of Lent, out of Bid. But therein he spends his labor in
vain. For neither were the Masses then said, nor the honor then done to Saints
relics, nor their obseruances like to those, which the Church of Rome now
practices. Beside that, Bid speaks of things past after the manners of his
time, and reports many things by hearsay. Parsons also to help the matter
translateth these words of Bid lib. 1. hist. cap. 18. Beatum Albanum Martyrem
auctori Deo per ipsum gratias petierunt: thus, They went to the sepulcher of S.
Alban, prayed to the Saint largely. But there is no such meaning to be forced
out of the words. Finally, these points are not great in regard of the rest of
the Romish religion, which we refuse.

Out of Galfridus Monumetensis he gathers that Dubritius was the Legate of
the Apostolic sea, and that there were Procession, Organs, and singing in the
Church. Out of M. Bale, M. Fox, Trithemius and others, that before Austins
time there were diverse learned men and preachers among the Britains, whereof
some were instructed at Rome, some were sent from Rome, some built Monasteries,
some were Monks. But neither does that make any thing for proof, that they
either held that religion, which Eleutherius taught, or taught that Romish
religion which Parsons now professes.

Finally, he affirms, that the religion taught by Austin, was catholic and
confirmed by miracles, and shows how it was planted and continued without
interruption to these times. But that which is the point in controversy, viz.
that the religion established by the conuenticles of Lateran, Constance,
Florence, Trent, and by the Popes Decretals since Innocent the thirds time, is
the same, that was preached by Austin the Monk, the wise disputer does scarce
mention, and no way proves. Of this his loose dispute then I infer first,
that seeing he would have us to embrace the religion preached in England by
Eleutherius his agents, and by Austin, we are to renounce all those heresies,
false doctrines, and abuses, which since the time of Austin have been brought
into the Church. Secondly, that Robert Parsons is not able to prove the carnal
real presence, nor transubstantiation, nor the sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood offered really in the Mass for quick and dead, nor half Communions,
nor the Popes tyrannical supremacy, nor his Indulgences, nor the worship of
Images, nor Purgatory for satisfaction for the temporal pains of mortal
sins, nor the rest of the Romish doctrine by us refused, to have been
preached by those, that first planted Christian religion in this country.

CHAP. VI. Of the vanity and foolerie of Parsons his whole Treatise of three
Conuersions of England.
HItherto we have discoursed of Parsons his falsehood, who will needs bear the
Reader in hand, that this land has not only been thrice converted to the
faith by Preachers that came from Rome, but also to that faith, which now the
Pope and his adherents do profess. Now therefore it rests, that we speak
somewhat of the vanity and foolerie of his whole purpose, that by this
discourse hops to reclaim us back to the subjection of the Pope. Two things
it seems, he aymeth at in this work. The first is, to bring the King, the
Clergy, the Nobles, and people of England, under the Popes obedience, and
into the captivity of Babylon. The second is, to persuade us to like of the
Romish Religion, and all the abominations of Antichrist figured in the whore
of Babylon. But to effect this purpose, this labor is wholly insufficient.

For first, no Bishop or teacher ought to desire any such dominion, or rule
over Gods people, as the Pope pretends to be due unto him. Our Savior Christ
expressly forbids such rule unto his Disciples. The Princes of nations (says
he) Mallb. 20. Marc. 10. Luc. 22.
bear rule over them, and afterward, but it shall not be so with you. Likewise
Saint Peter dehorteth the Elders of the Church to affect domination, or popish
tyranny over the Lords heritage. Neque dominantes in Cleris, says he.
Hereupon Bernard writing to Eugenius, applies this to him, and shows, that
the Apostles were forbidden to affect this domination, and Lordlinesse. Planum
est (says he) lib. 2. de Consid. ad Eugen. Apostolis interdicitur dominatus.
I, ergo tu, and tibi vsurpare aude, aut dominans Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus
dominatum. The Apostle Paul also 2. Cor. 1. shows, that the Apostles
themselves had no dominion over Christian men's faith, so that he might impose
yokes upon their consciences. Not (says he) that we have dominion over your
faith, but we are helpers of your joy. Finally, our Savior Christ forbids
his disciples to affect to be called Rabbi, or Master, and shows, that this
is Pharisaicall. Gregory also disliketh the title of Universal Bishop, and
reason shows, that it is a note of great pride to desire to be called the
general Master, or teacher of the whole Church.

Secondly, the people of God may not subject themselves to any such tyranny.
Stand fast (says the Apostle Gal. 5.) in the liberty, wherewith Christ has
made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. And again,
Col. 2. Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you, by humbleness of mind,
and worshipping of Angels, advancing himself in those things, which he never
saw, rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind. Which words do directly belong to
the Pope, who pretending humility, and calling himself Servant of servants:
yet teaching worship of Saints and Angels, and telling news out of Purgatory,
and strange things, which he never saw, affects Lordship and rule over the
Church of God. There cannot be assigned a more proper mark to know the
adherents of Antichrist, then the slavish bondage and subjection of the papists
to the Pope, who rules in their consciences, and marketh them for his slaves,
as we read Apocalypse. 13. with the brand of Antichristianitie. He made all
both small and great, (says John) rich and poor, free and bond to receive a
mark in their right hand, and in their foreheads. But let such beware, how
they continue in this bondage: and let others that are free, take heed how
they suffer themselves to be entangled with the yoke of Antichristian tyranny.
For as we read Apocal. 14. Such as worship the beast, and his image, and
receive Antichrists mark in their foreheads, or in their hands, shall drink
of the wine of the wrath of God.

Thirdly, experience teaches us, that the Gospel began to be preached first
at Jerusalem, and from thence went forth into all lands. And our Savior
Christ speaking to his Apostles, Act. 1. says, They shall be witnesses to him,
both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and to the uttermost part of the earth.
Yet never did either the Bishops, or Church of Jerusalem claim dominion, or
superiority over the whole Christian Church for that cause. Why should then
the Church of Rome pretend a greater privilege, where they say Peter preached,
and sent out teachers to convert diverse cities and nations, then the Church of
Jerusalem, where our Savior Christ himself preached, and from whence as we
read, Mat. 28. and Act. 1. he sent his Disciples to preach in all the world,
and to teach all nations?

Fourthly, we read in histories, that the Churches of India were planted by
preachers sent from Alexandria, and that Philip out of France or Gallia sent
preachers into Britain. For so Capgraue writes, citing Freculphus for his
author. It is said also, that Dionysius coming from Athens preached the Gospel
in France, and that James coming from Jerusalem, preached first in Spain. S.
Augustine Epist. 162. and 170. testifies, that the Gospel came into Afrike by
the means of preachers, that came out of the East country. Finally, our
histories do teach us, that the Northern Saxons were converted by Finan a
Scot, and that the Irish were converted to the faith by Patricke a Britain,
and that the Frizelanders, and diverse German nations were taught religion by
preachers out of England. Yet neither are the Indian Churches subject to the
Bishops of Alexandria, nor the English to the French, or the French to the
bishops of Athens, or the Spaniards to the Bishop of Jerusalem, or the
Africans to the Eastern Church, or the Frizelanders or Germains to the
English. Is it not then a mad conceit of Parsons, to suppose, because for many
ages past it is reported, that the ancient Britains and Saxons were converted
by preachers sent from Rome, that the Church of England should be subject to
the Pope or Church of Rome?

Fifthly, the Church of Rome, as Irenaeus says, lib. 3. adners. haeres. cap. 3.
was founded by Peter and Paul. Neither need we make any question, but that
they came from Jerusalem. Diverse stories also say, that Peter for some time
sat Bishop of Antioch. In Chronico.
Eusebius says, He was 25. years Bishop at Antioch. If then the Church of
Rome do yield no subjection either for matters of faith, or government to the
Church of Jerusalem, or Antioch, from whence, the Papists cannot deny, but
that the first founders of the Church of Rome did come: Parsons is but a simple
fellow, to urge this matter of Conversion so much, seeing the Romanists
themselves, and their holy Fathers the Popes of Rome regard it not one strain.

Finally, if our own Bishops, to whom we owe subjection in the Lord, should
teach any other Gospel, then that which was preached by the Apostles of our
Savior Christ, we are not to follow them. Nay we are to pronounce them
Anathema. Though we (says the Apostle, Gal. 1.) or an Angel from heaven
should preach unto you otherwise, then that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. But the Pope and his adherents preach unto us otherwise,
and publish doctrines in their Decretals, and acts of the conuenticles of
Lateran, Constance, Florence, and Trent, not only diverse from the Apostles
preaching, but also contrary unto it, as partly we have showed, and also shall
be ready to auerre to Parsons his face, though never so much steeled with
impudency. Had they then any right to teach or govern us, as they have not:
yet by the Apostles rule we are to pronounce them Anathema. And as for Parsons,
we are to suppose him a weak fellow, that has spent the quintessence of his
silly learning and understanding to prove that, which profits him nothing.

If we owe any thing to the Romans, it is to those, if any such were, that
took pains to teach us the faith of Christ. As for the modern Romanists,
that seek to turn us from true religion, nay that seek to blow us up, we owe
them nothing. Furthermore, as well may it be concluded, that the Pope and his
adherents the Iebusites are to be subject to the great Turk, that now rules
at Jerusalem, or to his Mufti or chief Bishop there, because from thence came
the preachers that first founded the Church of Rome, as that we are to be
subject to the Church of Rome, or the Pope, because the ancient Britains and
Saxons were first converted by preachers, that came from Rome. For the Turks
Mufti is as good a Bishop, as the Pope, and the Popes religion is not much
less corrupted in many points, then that of the Turk. Howsoever it is, the
Turks call themselves Musulmans, or True believers, as the Papists call
themselves Catholics. Finally, I cannot better compare Parsons, that
concludes subjection and obedience of this pretended Conversion to any, then
to him that would infer, that the Pope is Lord of the whole world, because
sometime Rome was mistress of the world, or that the Romans have obligation to
the Turks of Asia, because they possess the city and country of Troy, from
whence it is said, the ancient Romans are descended.

But says Parsons, pa. 28. Irenaeus, Tertullian de Praescript. Cyprian lib. 4.
cap. 8. Augustine and others are wont to urge greatly against Heretics, that
if our Church be the daughter and disciple of the Church of Rome, then ought it
to run to her in all doubts and difficulties of faith. But first, no one of
these Fathers speaks one word in the places quoted of our Church. Secondly,
they do not affirm this of any other Church. Why then does he not bring forth
his testimonies that has been so often taken halting in false alleging the
Fathers? Irenaeus lib. 3. aduers. haeres. says, that every Church ought to
have respect to the Church of Rome then, for her eminent principality. And
others regarded her, when she flourished in piety. But what is this to the
modern Church of Rome, that is departed from the faith, piety, and virtue of
the ancient Church of Rome? Again, if other Churches in old time had no great
respect to Rome professing the faith; no Church is now bound to hearken to her,
being departed from the faith. Finally, albeit in ancient time other Churches
did consult in matters of difficulty with the Church of Rome: yet this
proves not, that in matters of faith, or ceremontes they were to adhere to
her, or that they ought to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for their Monarch.
Does it not then appear, that Parsons his work is as frail as a Spiderwebbe,
and as full of foolerie, as frailty, undertaking to prove matters, which he
could not perform, and which being proved do rather make against him, then for
him?

CHAP. VII. That the late Popes of Rome have deserved nothing of England, or
the English nation, but hatred and detestation.
GLadly would Parsons have concluded, if he durst, that the English, being
first converted to the faith by the Romans, are now to be subject to the Pope
both in matters of doctrine, and Ecclesiastical government. But well he
understood, that the consequent was lewd and foolish. He does now therefore
Part. 1. ca. 1.
say only, That England and English men have particular obligation to the sea
of Rome, leaving it to every man's private supposall, what that obligation is.
But we do no more yield to this, then to the former conclusion.

For whereas the inhabitants of England are descended either of the ancient
Britains, or Saxons, or Danes, or Normans and Frenchmen: first, the ancient
Britains and their offspring do owe nothing either to Austin or Gregory. For
when as the Bishops of the Britains came to confer with Austin, most proudly
he sat in his chair, and would not receive them with any sign of humanity
or reverence. Factum est (says Bid lib. 2. histor. Anglor. cap. 2.) vt
venientibus illis sederet Augustinus in sella. He confesses also, that the
Britain Bishops noted his pride. And it appears manifestly in this, that
ambitiously he sought to be the Archbishop of England, and to rule over the
Britains. Again, when the Bishops of Britain refused him as their Archbishop,
and would not submit themselves to his commandments, he animated the Saxons,
and stirred them to war against the Britains. Austin being refused of the
Bishops (says Thomas Gray in his Chronicle,) and others the learned of the
Britains, made such complaint thereof to Ethelbert king of Kent, that
forthwith he leauied his power, and marched against them, and flue them in
most cruel wife, having no more mercy on them, then a Wolf upon a sheep.
Another old English Chronicle testifies, That Augustine went with the army to
the war, and that such of the Britains, as were sent to entreat for peace,
were killed without pity. That Augustine was the cause of this war and
murder, we may probably also gather out of Bedes history. For he does not
only show, that the greatest slaughter was made of the Monks of Bangor, that
resisted Austin, and gave counsel against him, but also that Austin did
threaten them and foretell them, that they should have war. Augustinus (says
he, lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.) fertur minitans praedixisse, quodsipacem cum
fratribus accipere nollent, bellum ab hostibus forent accepturi. Neither is any
cause alleged of this war against the Britains, but that Augustine was by
them rejected. Is not then Austin to be taken as a brave Apostle and conuerter
of nations to the faith, that came with Pagans against Christians with fire and
sword, because they would not undergo his yoke? To excuse this matter they
allege the words of Bid, as they pretend, who speaking of this murder,
says, That Austin was dead long before. But a man of mean judgment may see,
that these words are thrust into Bid by some falsarie. For how could Austin be
dead long before, that after this war, as Bede reports, ordained Iustus and
Melitus Bishops? Do dead men revive again to ordain Bishops? Furthermore,
these words of Austins death before the murder of the Britains are not found
in the Saxon translation of Beda made by King Alured. Finally, both the
Chronicles of Peterborough, and Flores historiarum do witness, that Austin
died three years after the execution done upon the Britains. The Britains
therefore are not bound to Rome, that sent this proud and cruel man amongst
them. Neither is the same much obliged to Eleutherius, if he did, as is said,
send Preachers into Britain. The reasons I have before alleged.

As for the Danes, Normans, and French, and their discendants they are clear
also from this obligation. For the Romanists, albeit they seek out all colors
to beautify the Popes chair, yet say not that preachers from Rome did convert
them to the faith.

It rests then, that all the weight of this obligation to Rome, which Parsons
aduanceth so magnifically, must rest upon a few Saxons or English. But this
cannot be great, as I have showed, seeing the Saxons were not then the greatest
part of the inhabitants of this land, nor generally converted by the Romans,
as has been declared.

But were the ancient English, beholding in times past to Gregory, or Austin;
yet the inhabitants of England for this six hundred years and upward, have
been little beholding to the Popes of Rome, and their adherents. For first they
have used all force and fraud to plant their false, heretical, and idolatrous
Religion in England, as their sending of Legates, Agents, Archpriests,
Iebusites, and Massepriests, when they durst openly, and now of late privily,
and the rebellions, and wars stirred up by them against the Kings and Princes
of England do declare. If then we are neither to hearken to false Prophets, nor
dreamers of dreams, nor to spare them, or favor them, that would draw us from
the service of God to Idolatry; then are we to detest the Pope and his
idolatrous Agents, whose massing Religion and worship of Saints and Images, is
nothing else but refined paganism, and gross Idolatry. Again, If we are to
mark them, and avoid them, that cause division and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine, which we have received from the Apostles, as Saint Paul exhorts
us, Roman. 16. then are we to have no communion nor fellowship with the Pope,
which indeuoureth to divide us from the Catholic Church, and to draw us from
Apostolical doctrine to his leude Decretaline Heresies and Traditions.
Secondly, they have by their cunning engines drawn infinite treasure out of
England, impouerishing both the Kings and people of this Island by their
manifold exactions. Matthew Paris does in sundry places complain of the
oppressions made by the Pope and his Agents, and in Henrico tertio says, That
England by the Pope was made like a vine left to the open spoil of every one,
that passed by.

Thirdly, for the most part they have concurred with our enemies, and by all
means oppugned our nation. Matthew Paris writing Harolds life shows, that
Alexander the Pope sent a Standard to William the conqueror, when he came with
fire and sword against the English nation. Papa (says he) vexillum Willelmo in
omen regni transmisit. And call you this a favor to join with him, that came
to conquer our country, and to cut the Englishmens throats?

In the days of Henry the 2. the Pope favored both the Kings disloyal
subjects, and open enemies, as appears by the discourse of matters passed
betwixt him and Thomas Becket.

Innocentius the 3 excommunicated King John, and sought to deprive him of his
kingdom. By his malicious courses the King lost Normandy, and was forced to
surrender his Crown into his Legates hands. Matthew Paris testifies, that he
gave the English for slaves to the French. Sententialiter definiuit (says he)
vt Rex Anglorum Ioannes a solio regni deponeretur. He committed the execution
of this sentence to the French King, and for his labor determined, that he and
his successors should perpetually enjoy the kingdom of England. Vt ipse and
successores sui regnum Angliae iure perpetuo possiderent. And may we think,
that any is so brutish, as to dispute, that we are beholding to the Pope, that
gives us as a prey unto our enemies? Certes, unless we had read it in Parsons
the Popes parasite, we could hardly have believed it. In the end albeit he
could not bring us into servitude: yet he wanted not much, to make our King and
country tributary.

That noble and victorious Prince King Edward the third found none, that more
ouerthwarted him and disturned the course of his victories in France, then the
Pope, as his letters, menaces, and practices reported in Histories declare.

To forbear to speak of ancient wrongs done to our Princes and nation by
other Popes, see (I beseech you) the indignities offered to king Henry the 8.
and his subjects by that impious Pope Paul the third, and to his daughter Q.
Elizabeth of famous memory and her people, by that lousie friar Pius the fifth,
Gregory the 13. and Sixtus the fifts seditious, railing, and outrageous Bulls.
Paul the third rayleth on the King, interditeth the kingdom, depriueth his
subjects of trade, and gives them as slaves to those that could take them.
Prohibet commercium cum Anglis, (says Sanders in his Gloss upon the Popes
Bull) foedera cum Henrico dissoluit, Henrici sequaces tradit in seruitutem.
Look what rage or malice can devise, that he vomiteth out both against the
King, and our nation. And will Parsons have our nation to submit themselves to
such monsters? or can any find in their hearts to yield to such tyrants?

Against Queen Elizabeth, Pius Quintus, as appears by the discourse written
of his life, first stirred up her subjects, and when that served not, he
animated both Spaniard and French against her, and her people.

Gregory the 13. by his Legate Sanders stirred the Irish to take arms against
our nation. The same man, when force served not, animated the assassinor and
murderer Parry to lay violent hands upon her person, not omitting withal any
course to hurt or trouble her subjects.

In the end, by the procurement of Sixtus quintus, the Spanish Armada, supposed
and ridiculously called invincible, came upon us, with a full intention to
depose the Queen, to destroy her true subjects, and to mark the rest for
slaves. And can any man think well of the Pope, so long as any memory of this
action remains? It is no marvel then, if the Pope set on that traitorous
companion Allane to speak all the dishonor he could both against the Prince
and her nation, seeing he intended the total destruction of the kingdom, and
her subjects. But if we search all histories, we shall never find a more bloody
and savage enterprise, then that which the Papists of late attempted, resolving
to extinguish the Kings line, to destroy the King, his Nobles and the commons
in Parliament assembled, and utterly to subvert the state. Our nation then has
great obligation to the Popes of Rome and their adherents: but it is to hate
them, and detest them, and resist them, as most bloody and malicious enemies
of our nation for many years.

But says Parsons in his Ward-word, Our nation has been twice converted by
the labor and industry of that sea. And since he says, The same has been
thrice converted from Paganism to Christian Religion. So absurdly does he
confound himself in his own devise. But neither can he prove his Conuersions:
nor should we grant them, could he win any thing at our hands, but hatred and
indignation against the late Popes of Rome, which are so degenerated, that they
seek to destroy both the bodies and souls of those, whose ancestors ancient
Bishops of Rome are said to have gained to Christ.

And this may serve to answer Parsons his patcherie talking of the obligation,
which England and English men owe to Rome. Now because the same man every where
tells us of the succession of Romish Bishops, and gladly would smoother the
fame of Pope Ioane: albeit the same be somewhat impertinent to the matter of
Three Conuersions; yet shall we examine the title of the Popes succession,
turning a little out of the way, to observe our adversaries exorbitant
proceeding.

CHAP. VIII. That the Popes of Rome of this time are not the successors of
Peter, or Eleutherius, but rather of Pope Ioane.
MUch does Robert Parsons boast of the succession of Popes, especially Part. 2.
cap. 1. and gives out, that it is of great importance, for trial of true
Religion. Bellarmine De not is Eccles. and diverse others his consorts esteem
it a principal mark of the Church. But when the matter shall be thoroughly
discussed, he shall well perceive, that he has no cause so much to boast of
these conceits, seeing neither the Popes are successors to Peter, or the
ancient Bishops of Rome, nor the succession of Popes is any mark of the
Church, or proper trial of true religion.

The first is proved by these arguments. First, no man can claim right of
succession, but either by right of testament, or proximitie of blood, or some
law or laudable custom. For that is the opinion of all Lawyers, where they
talk of successions. But Clement the 8. and his predecessors for diverse ages,
can neither produce any Will made by S. Peter declaring the modern Popes to be
his successors, nor any law or custom grounded on the old or new testament.
Neither can they show, that they are of his kindred or affinity, whereby they
may seem to have right of succession. The like also we may say of Eleutherius.
Secondly, all successors either do succeed, as heirs, in the whole right, or
as Legataries in some special bequest of land, goods, or right, or else as
executers of any office, or charge. But if Clement the 8. should claim to be
Saint Peter's heir, or a Legatarie; then must he show some testament, or will,
or law made in his favor. If he claim to succeed him in office, then must he
show both records, how he holds his office, and also acts, which may declare
him, to have truly executed Saint Peter's office. Likewise if he claim to be
Eleutherius his successor, he must both show a lawful title, and declare, that
he has executed Eleutherius his function. But neither can he exhibit any
proof for his title of Apostolical or Episcopal function, neither does it
appear, either that he works miracles, or teaches all nations, as did Saint
Peter, or that he preaches or baptizeth, as did Eleutherius. Wherein then have
Clement, and his predecessors employed themselves? Forsooth, in stopping the
preaching and proceeding of the Gospel, and in murdering the Saints of God,
and maintaining the kingdom of Antichrist. None of them (certes) can show any
title, either from Peter or Eleutherius, or other godly Bishop.

Thirdly, the Popes claim to be Universal Bishops, and heads and spouses of
the Universal Church. But that never came into the head of Peter, or
Eleutherius. Nay Gregory lib. 4. epist. 82. speaking of Peter, and other
Apostles says, they are not heads, but members of the Church under one head.
Sub vno capite, says he, omnes membra sunt Ecclesiae. Likewise in the title of
Decumenicall or Universal Bishop he shows, that the Pope does rather follo^w
Lucifer, then Peter, or any godly Bishop. Quis says he, speaking of the title
of universal Bishop, in hoc tam peruerso vocabulo, nisi ille, ad imitandum
proponitur, qui despectis Angelorum legionibus secum socialiter constitutis, ad
culmen conatus est singularitatis erumpere? He says also, that none of the
Prelates of that sea would ever be called by so profane a title. The Apostle
Paul shows, that there is but one head and spouse of the Uniuersall Church,
that is Christ Jesus.

Fourthly, our Savior Christ forbad S. Peter and his Apostles so to bear rule
over Christians, as temporal Kings did over nations. Neither do we find that
S. Peter, or Eleutherius did transgress Christ's commandment. If then the
Pope does rule, not as Princes over nations, but as King of Kings, and
challenges power to depose Kings, then is he not S. Peter's or Eleutherius his
successor. S. Bernard says, the Pope cannot both bear this rule, and succeed
Peter in his Apostleship. Plane ab alterutro prohiberis; si vtrumque similiter
habere voles, perdes vtrumque. And again, forma Apostolica haec est, dominatio
interdicitur, indicitur ministratio.

Fifthly, Peter exhorted Christians. 1. epist. 2. to obedience to Kings and
governors, and Eleutherius, no question, did follow his exhortation. Where
either of these persuaded Christians to take arms against their superiors, or
took upon them to depose Emperors and Kings, and to tread upon their necks,
we read not. Clement therefore and his predecessors, that have taken upon them
to depose Kings, and have trodden upon their necks, and raised their subjects
against them, are rather successors of Julius Caesar, and Nero, and the
Emperors of Romans, then of Peter and Eleutherius.

Sixthly we do not read, that Peter ever came abroad crowned with a triple
crown, and clad with golden and silken ornaments and apparel, or that he had
a guard of Suitzers, and a number of Cardinals, Mass Priests, and Friars to
attend upon him. The like also we may say of Eleutherius. The Popes therefore
that come abroad with this pomp and pride, rather therein succeed
Constantine, then S. Peter, or Eleutherius. And this concerning S. Peter we
gather out of Bernard lib. 4. de Consid. ad Eugenium. Petrus hie est says he,
quinescitur processisse aliquando, vel gemmis ornatus, vel sericis, non tectus
auro, non vectus equo albo, nec stipatus milite, nec circumstrepentibus saepius
ministris. Absque his tamen credidit satis impleri posse salutare mandatum, Si
amas me, pasce oues meas. In his successisti non Petro, sed Constantino.

7. S. Peter never challenged any right in the city of Rome, or territory
adjoining, or that, which is called the patrimony of Peter. Neither did either
he, or Eleutherius challenge to be King of Kings, or Lord of Lords, or Supreme
Monarke of the Church. The Popes therefore usurping these rights, and
challenging these titles, do not therein succeed Peter, or the ancient Bishops
of Rome.

8. S. Peter and Eleutherius never took upon them to dispense with oaths, or
Simony, or sacrilege, or incest, or such abominable crimes. Neither did
ambitious, simoniacall, sacrilegious, incestuous and such monstrous persons
resort to Peter, either to procure preferment, or to retain honors which they
had already procured. Bernard lib. 1. de Consid. speaking of the Apostle,
Nunquid ad eum, says he, de toto orb confluebant ambitiosi, auari, simoniaci,
sacrilegi, concubinarij, incestuosi, and quaeque istiusmodi monstra hominum, vt
ipsius Apostolica authoritate vel obtinerent honores Ecclesiasticos, vel
retinerent? In this case therefore the Popes show not themselves the Apostles
successors, neither will they prove the successors of the ancient Bishops of
Rome, unless they can show, that they did these things.

9. No man can be said to succeed the Apostles, but those which preach the word
of God, and administer the Sacraments; nor unto Bishops, but which do the
office and work of Bishops. Therefore does Cyprian call Bishops the Apostles
successors lib. 4. epist. 9. and the Apostle 1. Tim. 3. does call a bishopric
a good work, and 2. Tim. 2. Timothy is termed a workman. Hierome in an
epistle to Oceanus shows, that the office of a Bishop imports a good work,
and not dignity. St quis says he, Episcopatum desiderat, bonu^ opus
desiderat: opus, non dignitatem: laborem non delicias. Bernard lib. 2. de
Consid. ad Eugen. says, that ye name of a Bishop does emply officium, non
dominium: an office, and not a pre-eminence. And that may appear by the
practice of Eleutherius, a diligent preaching Bishop. But the Popes now do not
either ye office of Apostles in going about to teach all nations, or the office
of a Bishop in teaching the flock of Christ, and governing the same according
to the Apostles Canons. What do they then? Forsooth, they encourage Assassins
to murder Princes, and, as Paul the fifth of late did, grant Indulgences to
miners and powdermen to blow up the King, his Nobles, and Commons assembled in
Parliament, and to shead innocent blood.

10. Peter diligently fed the flock of Christ according to the charge given him
by Christ. Neither need we to doubt, but that Eleutherius did the same. Can we
then call the Popes the successors of Peter, and Eleutherius, that neither
feed the flock of Christ, nor care for the same, but rather like wolves seek
to devour and destroy Christ's sheep? Bernard lib. 4. ad Eugen. denied
Eugenius either to be a paffor, or Peter's successor, if he did not feed.
Pastorem te populo huic says he, certe aut nega, aut exhibe. Non negabis: ne
cuius sedem tenes, te neges baeredem. And afterward, Non est quod pastoris
horreas operam, curamue pastoralem, pastoris haeres.

11. All those that succeed Peter or any godly Bishop in his sea, are to teach
the doctrine of Peter, and to abide in their predecessors faith. Presbyteris
illis, says Irenaeus lib. 4. aduers. haeres. c. 43. qui sunt in Ecclesia,
obaudire oportet, qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, qui cum Episcopatus
successione charisma veitatis certum secundum placitum patris acceperunt. We
are to hear those Bishops, which have their succession from the Apostles,
which with the succession of their bishopric have received the gift of truth
according to the pleasure of the Father. Tertullian de Praescript. contr.
haeret. shows them only to be successors of the Apostles, which do so hold,
as in their Testament they prescribed. Ambrose lib. 1. de Poenit. c. 6. denies
expressly, that they succeed in Peter's inheritance, which keep not the faith of
Peter. But the Popes of lats time are departed from the faith of Peter and
Eleutherius, as before we have showed.

Finally, it is an absurd thing to suppose idolaters, heretics, coniurers,
sacrilegious Church-robbers, whoremongers, gluttons, and carnal worldlings,
that raise wars, trouble Christendom, vex the professors of S. Peter's
doctrine, and sow rather gunpowder, then Gods word, to be the Apostle Peter's,
or Eleutherius his successors. Hierome, as the adversaries report did. 40. c.
non est facile, holds them not for Saints which possess the place of Saints,
but those which do their works. The same man upon the second of Michaeas:
Apostolicus says he, sermonem and conuersationem Apostoloru^ imitetur. Jonas
Aurelianensis lib. 3. de Cult. imag. holds none for Apostolic, but which do
the work of Apostles. John of Salesbury Polycrat. lib. 8. c. 23. says, that
such as ambitiously, and not without effusion of blood mount into the Popes
chair, do rather succeed Romulus in parricide, then Peter in governing of the
flock committed to them.

The Popes therefore of late time neither succeed Peter, nor Eleutherius, nor
the ancient Bishops of Rome. But if they succeed any, they succeed Pope Ioane.
Their spiritual fornications and idolatries, their golden cup, wherein they
propound their abominable doctrine to the world, their whorish deceits and
frauds, their whorish forhead and impudency, their bloody massacres and
cruelty declare them properly to succeed her, and to be of near affinity to
the whore of Babylon Apocalyp. 17. This history Rob. Parsons, Part. 2. Chap. 5.
goes about by all the force he has to discredit. But he strives in vain
against a story recorded by men not set on by us, but favoring the sea of
Rome, and such, as no man can note of partiality in this behalf.

That John the 8. or as some number the Popes, the 7. was a woman, first
Radulphus Flauiacensis in his Chronicle does testify. This man was a Monk of
Benets order, and lived about the year of our Lord 930. as Trithemius
reports.

Secondly Marianus Scotus does report the same. Anno Domini 854. says he, anno
Lotharij 14. successit Leoni Ioannes mislier. He shows also, that she sat
two years, five months, and four days.

Our third witness is Sigebertus, who speaking of this Pope, says, that the
fame went, that this John was a woman, and being begot with child by her
servant, was delivered being Pope. These two testimonies of Marianus Scotus,
and Sigebertus Gemblacensis our adversaries now of late have razed out of all
those copies, which now are printed. But this does nothing relieve their
credit, but rather blot them both with the infamy of this whoredom, and also
with corruption and falsity. Their own consciences must needs herein witness
against them, seeing they know, that these words are found as well in printed
books, as in ancient manuscript copies.

Martinus Polonus our fourth witness tells plainly, that this woman
desguised in man's apparel went with her lover to Athens, proved learned,
returned to Rome, was chosen Pope, begotten with child, and delivered near S.
Clements Church, and that for this cause all Popes afterward shunned this way.

Our fifth witness is Martin a Minorite, in his book entitled Flores temporum,
printed at Vlme in Dutch anno Domini 1486. This Minorite tells, how Pope
Ioane coniuring a Devil to tell, when he would depart out of the body of one
possessed, received answer, that he would declare this, when the Pope would
tell, when a Pope should be delivered of child.

Papa pater patrum, says he, papissae pandito partum,
Et tibi tunc edam, de corpore quando recedam.
Our sixth witness is Francis Petrarch, who in an Italian book printed at
Florence anno Dom. 1478. says, that a woman was made Pope, and delivered of
child.

The seventh witness is Antonine Archbishop of Florence, who in the second
part of his history tit. 16. ca. 1.. 7. does report this history of a
woman-pope, as others do, and adds, that an image, representing the Popes
delivery of child, was erected in the place where she travailed of child and
dyed: and thereupon exclaimeth, o the depth of the wisdom, and knowledge of
God!

The eight witness is John Boccace in his book De Foeminis illustribus, who
in the whole report agrees with Antonine, and his other contestes.

The ninth is Iacobus Gulielmus of Egmond a Monk in the rimes following.

Papacadit, panditur improbis
Ridendi norma, puer nascitur
In vico Clementis.
Wernerus Rolewinke makes the tenth, who in his book called Fasciculus
temporum, speaking of this Pope, says, That being gotten with child, and
afterward going in Procession, she died in travail, and therefore was not put
into the catalogue of Popes.

The same history is recorded by him that wrote the Annals of Auspurg anno
Domini 855. he therefore fills the eleventh place.

The full jury is made up by Raphael Volateran, who in his Cosmograph.
consents with the rest.

Unto these for a supply we may add Platina in Ioanne 8. Sabellicus Aenead. 9.
Bergomensis and Palmerius in their Chronicles, Trithemius in Catalog. Pontif.
Albert Crantz, Baptista of Mantua, John Lucidus, John Stella, Nauclerus in
Generat. 29. John Henaldus, and Peter Messiah in Silua var. lect. Finally,
least any man might forget a matter so memorable, the same report was
represented in imagery both in the street of S. Clement at Rome, and in the
Cathedral Church of Siena: and that might have been yet seen of every man, but
that Pius the 5. ashamed of the lechery and whoredom of his predecessor,
caused the statue of marble representing this Tragical accident to be thrown
into Tiber. Finally no man ever denied, or contradicted this report, until the
time of Onuphrius a hungry parasite of the Pope, and a lying Friar, who to win
some favor of the Pope, began first to call this history into question, and
desperately to face out the matter.

If then Rob. Parsons and his consorts had not faces of proof, they would have
been ashamed, being but late vpstarts, and contemptible fellows, to have
opposed their bare credits against the authority of so many authentical and
impartial witnesses in matters done so long before they came out of the
bottomless pit. They answer and devise, what they think most fitting to
discredit the report, or to help their cause. But all is but like dust cast
into the air, that falls on the heads of them that cast it, and blinds
their own eyes.

Parsons page 389. answers and says, that albeit some such thing had happened,
yet it had not preiudicated the Church of Christ. But had any such thing
happened, then had he no reason so stiffly to deny it. Again, albeit the
Catholic Church be not prejudiced by the intrusion of men or women incapable
of Ecclesiastical function, yet the same would wholly overthrow the descent and
succession of Romish Bishops, upon which the Romanists do so much depend. For
if heretics, and men or women, incapable of Ecclesiastical function, do
thrust into the line of Bishops, then is the line of true Bishops interrupted.
But of heretics S. Augustine gives us knowledge epist. 165. that they may
enter among ye Romish Bishops, where he says, What if a traitor in those times
should have crept in? Of persons incapable, the story of Dame Ioane the Pope
gives testimony.

He corrects therefore his first answer, and upon better advice says, that
this whole story of Pope Ioane is a mere fable, devised first by Martinus
Polonus a simple man, that tells many things by hearsay, and continued by
those that favored the German Emperors contending against the Pope. And to
prove this, he alleges first, that Anastasius, Audomarus, Luitprandus,
Regino, Hermannus Contractus, Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, Otho Frisingensis,
and Vrspergensis, after Leo the 4. place Benedict the third, and next that
William of Malmesbury, Henry Huntington, Roger Houeden, Florentius
Vigorniensis, and Matthew of Westminster, make no mention of this woman-pope.
And thirdly, that Alphred living in Rome when Pope Leo died, or thereabout,
must needs have known, that one of his own country had been Pope, if any
such matter had then fallen out. Fourthly, that in ancient manuscript copies of
Marianus Scotus, and Sigebertus this story is not set down. Fifthly, that Leo
the 9. in the contention betwirt the Churches of Rome and Constantinople
objected to Michael Bishop of Constantinople, that diverse Eunuchs, had been
Bishops there, and as is said, a woman also, which it is not likely he would
have done, if the same might truly have been said of the sea of Rome. And
lastly, that the story contains diverse improbabilities, and contradictions.
But that the story should be fabulous, or a matter feined, it is not like,
being recorded in so many histories, and authentical writers. That Martinus
Polonus did first report this matter no man has reason to believe, seeing the
same so plainly set down in Radulphus Flauiacensis, Marianus Scorus, and
Sigebertus Gemblacensis. Baronius says, that Marianus Scotus was the first
brother of it. Neither was Martinus Polonus so simple a fellow, as is
pretended, being the Popes penitentiary, and a writer in that kind equal to
the best of his rank. That ye favorers of the Emperor should brute this
matter abroad to defame the Pope, is a mere fiction. For it cannot be showed,
that any Emperor in the contention betwixt the Emperors and the Popes did
ever cast out any such matter against the Pope. Rob. Parsons his arguments
brought forth to prove this history to be a fable, are like his own head, that
is, brutish and blockish. For first it is no good argument to conclude from the
authority of two or three of the Popes parasites negatiuely, viz. that they
omit a matter tending to the Popes defame, ergo no such matter was done.
Secondly he alleges a counterfeit author called Audomarus. He may do well to
show, who he was, being neither mentioned by Baronius nor Bellarmine, where
they talk of this matter. Thirdly it is ridiculous to inquire of our country
writers of matters done at Rome, or to think that they would speak any thing
tending to the disgrace of the Pope, whose sworn slaves they were. Beside that
the author of Fasciculus temporum shows, that this woman-pope was not
forgotten, but of purpose omitted by the writers of histories, because of the
slander that might thereof redound to the sea of Rome. Fourthly no man can
tell, whether Alphred knew any such matter, or not. Nay it is not very
certain, that either he, or his father were in Rome about the time of Pope
Ioans delivery. But had they been at Rome about this time; yet might they well
know Pope John to be English, although not a woman. Fifthly if in ancient
manuscript copies of Marianus Scotus, and Sigebertus Gemblacensis this history
be not found; it is plain, that the agents of the Romish Church, men infamous
for falsitie, have razed the same out. And that may appear first by the
testimony of Fasciculus temporum, who shows the cause of the blotting out of
Pope Ioans name; next, by ancient manuscript copies; and last, by the
testimony of Baronius, who makes Marianus Scotus the first deviser of this
matter. So hard is it for liars and forgers to consent together. Sixthly it may
be a question, whether the letters of Leo the 9. to Michael be counterfeit, or
not. But were they written by him, as is reported; yet raylers oftentimes
object the same crimes one to another. Finally, there is no such discordance in
the circumstances of the history, but that there are far greater in matters,
which the Romanists believe to be most true. Letters, and names, and places,
and times may be easily mistaken, and yet the matter reported may prove most
true. Likewise it is no strange thing for one person to be called of two places
both Anglicus and Maguntinus. That Athens then was a place famous for study,
it may be gathered out of Greek histories, no one writer certes holds the
contrary.

The Popes therefore of this time, if they please, may be successors of Pope
Ioane, whom we have manifestly demonstrated to have been Pope, but the
successors of Peter and Eleutherius, and other godly ancient Bishops of Rome,
they cannot justly term themselves.

CHAP. IX. That the succession of Romish Popes is neither mark of the Church,
nor means of trial of the truth.
BEllarmine lib. de not. Eccles. ca. 8. would gladly have the succession of the
Romish Bishops to be a mark of the Church. And Rob. Parsons does esteem the
same a matter of great importance for trial of true religion, and proves it
in the best sort he can Part. 2. Chapter 1. How much they are abused, these reasons
may declare. First the succession of Popes is of no greater force or virtue
then the succession of the priests of the law. For from them they borrow diverse
titles and prerogatives. But the high priests of the Jews did oftentimes
withstand the Prophets of God, and Vria the high priest in the time of Achaz as
we read 4. Kings 16. erected a strange altar in the Temple. Finally, they
condemned Christ, and his Apostles, and all their doctrine.

Secondly the Apostles in their time could not try their religion by the
succession of Bishops, nor was succession then a mark of the Church. For
neither did the Apostles succeed the high priests, or sacrificers of the Jews,
nor as yet had the Apostle Peter any successor. But the marks and properties of
the Church are always the same. Neither can we look for better trial and
proof of religion, then that which the Apostles had.

Thirdly the Church of Rome, when Paul wrote his famous epistle unto it, had
no succession of Bishops. Yet was it then the true Church. Neither need we to
make question, but that the same had all convenient means for the trial of
truth.

4. The succession of Bishops in the Church of Antioch, Jerusalem and
Alexandria neither was a certain mark of the Church, nor a means to try the
truth. And this, I think, our adversaries will not deny. But if they should,
it may easily be proved, for that Ecclesiastical histories teach us, that the
Bishops of those seas have fallen into diverse gross heresies, and are now
condemned for heretics by the sea of Rome.

5. The Churches of Antioch, Alexandria, and Constantinople to this day show
the Catalogues of their Bishops. Likewise Vincentius Lirinensis in Commonit.
Cap. 34. shows the successors of Simon Magus for diverse ages. Likewise does
Epiphanius haeres. 34. show, who for diverse years succeeded Valentinus. Yet
Parsons will not grant, that either Valentinus, or Simon Magus, or their
followers were true Catholics; neither will the Papists confess, that the
Greeks of the Churches of Constantinople, or the people of Antioch or
Alexandria are the true Church, or that by the succession of their Bishops
truth may be tried.

6. If by succession of Bishops either the Church, or the truth might certainly
be discerned and tried, then could not Bishops err, or teach peruersely. But
histories teach us, that diverse great Bishops have grossly erred, as Liberius,
and Honorius the first in Rome, Macedonius and Nestorius in Constantinople. And
this the Apostle speaking to the Bishops assembled at Miletus, Act. 20. does
clearly show. Of your own selves says he, shall men arise, speaking perverse
things to draw disciples after them.

Finally the adversaries themselves sometimes confess, that succession is no
certain mark of the Church. Lyra in his postill upon the 16. of Matthew. says,
that the chief Bishops have been found to have departed from the faith. But
what trial is to be had by succession, if Bishops may depart from the faith?
Bellarmine de not is Eccles. ca. 8. says, that we cannot conclude necessarily,
that the Church is there, where is succession of Bishops. Non colligitur
necessario, says he, ibi esse Ecclesiam, vbi est successio. But were they
resolved to stand upon this succession, yet would the same draw with it the
ruin of the Popes cause. For never shall they be able to show a number of
Bishops professing or holding the doctrine of the Popes Decretals, and of the
late conuenticles of Lateran, Constance, Florence and Trent, until of late
years.

But, says Parsons Part. 2. Chapter 1. Augustine was held in the Church by the
succession of Bishops. And Tertullian de Praescript. aduers. haeretic. does
challenge heretics to this combat of succession. And Irenaeus proves by the
succession of Roman Bishops the true succession, and continuation of one and
the self same Catholic faith. Likewise he alleges Hierome, who in his
Dialogue against the Luciferians says, We are to abide in that Church, which
being founded by the Apostles, does endure to this day: And Augustine lib de
Vtil. credend. ca. 17. that shows how we are not to doubt to rest in the lap
of that Church, which notwithstanding the barkings of heretics about it, by
successions of Bishops from the Apostles seat, has obtained the height of
authority. Finally he tells us Page 283. how 70. Archbishops of Canterbury
were all of one religion. But first we must understand, that the ancient
Fathers talking of succession, never speak of the external place, and bare
succession of Bishops without respect to the truth of doctrine. Irenaeus lib.
4. Chapter 43. would have those Bishops harkned unto, which succeed the Apostles,
which with the succession of their Bishopric have received the certain gift
of truth, according to the will of the Father. Tertullian lib. de Praescript.
aduers. haeret. shows, that the persons are to be approved by their faith,
and not faith by the persons. Non habent haereditatem Petri, says Ambrose lib.
1. de Poenit. cap. 6. quifidem Petrinon habent. That is, they have not right to
succeed Peter, or Peter's inheritance, that hold not the faith of Peter.
Nazianzen de laudib. Athanasij, says, that they are partakers of the same
chair, or succession, that hold the same doctrine, as they that hold contrary
doctrine, are to be counted adversaries in succession. Qui eandem fidei
doctrina^ profitetur, says he, eiusde^ quoque throni particeps est. Qui autem
contrariam doctrinam amplectitur aduersarius quoque in throno censeri debet.
Whatsoever then ye Fathers speak of succession, it concerns as well
succession in doctrine, as in place, and external title of office. Unless
then this Iebusite can show that ye modern Popes are true Bishops, and hold ye
same faith, which Peter and the first Bishops of Rome did, the testimonies of
the Fathers which he alleges, will make against him. Secondly, ye Fathers do
allege ye succession of other churches, as well as Rome. Irenaeus li. 3.
aduers. haeres. c. 3. appealeth as well to the Churches of Asia, and namely to
that of Ephesus, and Smyrna, as to Rome; albeit for avoiding prolixity he
cites only ye names of the Roman Bishops. Testimonium his perhibent, says he,
quae sunt in Asia Ecclesiae omnes, and qui vsque adhuc successerunt Polycarpo.
Likewise in the end of the Chapter he cites the testimony of the Church of
Ephesus. Tertullian de Praescript. aduers. haeret. makes all Churches founded
by the Apostles equal, and cites as well the testimony of the Churches of
Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica and Ephesus, as Rome. But the succession of
these Churches is no certain mark of the Church, or trial of the truth. S.
Augustine contr. epist. fundament. c. 4. reckneth diverse things jointly with
the succession of Bishops, which retained him in the Church, and among the rest
sincerissimam sapientiam, the sincere wisdom of Christian doctrine. But
Parsons must prove, that the succession of Bishops only is a sufficient
argument of truth. Likewise Augustine in his book de Vtilit. credendi. ca. 17.
talks not of the Romish Church, but of the Catholic Church, whose authority
notwithstanding he places after the primary foundations of Scriptures.
Likewise Hierome speaks of the Catholic Church, and not of the particular
Church of Rome. Finally, never shall it be proved, nor is it likely, the later
Bishops of Canterbury before the reverend Father and most glorious Martyr
Bishop Cranmer receiving ye new Decretals of the Pope, and the decrees of ye
conuenticles of Lateran, Constance and Florence, but that their faith differd
much from the first Bishops of Canterbury, which lived before the times of
these conuenticles, that authorized these new corruptions. If then Rob. Parsons
have no better argument in his book, then this of the external succession of
the Popes of Rome, it is likely he means fraud, and for the true Church
commends unto us the synagogue of Antichrist, and the whore of Babylon,
rather shunning, then seeking any lawful and certain trial of truth.

CHAP. X. That the Church of England is the true Church of God, and holds the
Apostolic and Catholic faith.
AS Esau hated Jacob because of his fathers blessings, as we read Genesis 27. so
Rob. Parsons, the more it has pleased God our heavenly Father to bless ye
Church of England, the more hatred does he show against his countrymen and
brethren. In the first part of his treatise of Three Conuersions he endeavors
to make the^ slaves to the Pope. In the second he raileth at them, as vagrant
persons, and strangers from Gods Church, and people without succession of
teachers from the Apostles, and deuoid, as he says, of all demonstrations and
evidences, to prove themselves to be Christ's Church. But if those be Gods true
Church, which hear his word with attention, and believe it, and receive the
Sacraments according to Christ's institution, and seek to worship God with true
devotion, and to live after their Christian profession; then is the Church of
England Gods true Church. For although Bellarmine and others do spend much time
in taking exceptions against our doctrine, practice in Gods worship and
manners; yet can none of them either prove any error in the doctrine which we
teach, or the administration of Sacraments which we practice, or in the rules
concerning Gods worship or common manners, which we follow.

Secondly those Christians which profess and believe all the Apostolic faith,
and condemn all those errors and false doctrines, which the Apostles
condemned, and endeavor unfeignedly to live according to their profession, are
the true Church. For that is a property of Christ's sheep to hear his voice,
and not to follow strangers, as we read John. 10. The Apostle also shows
Ephesians. 2. that the faithful are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. But the Church of England
believes and professes all the Apostles faith, and condemns whatsoever is
contrary to the same. Neither can the adversary justly charge us, that we allow
any false worship of God, or breach of his holy ordonances.

Thirdly, the Church of England for matters of Faith, Sacraments, Gods worship
and service, believes and follows whatsoever is either expressly commanded
in holy Scriptures, or out of them deduced in ancient general and lawful
Councels, condemning also whatsoever is by ancient Councels or Fathers declared
to be contrary to the same.

Fourthly, Christ's true Church is a diligent and wary keeper of doctrines
committed to her, and changes nothing at any time, deminisheth nothing, adds
nothing, cutteth not off things necessary, nor adds things superfluous,
loses not her own, nor usurps things belonging to others, as says
Lirmensis Commonit. ca. 32. Likewise ca. 34. he says, it is the property of
Catholics, to keep the doctrine of the Fathers committed to them in trust,
and to condemn profane novelties. Who can then deny the name of Catholics
unto us, but such as are false Catholics?

Fifthly, all Churches, that belong to Christ's body, which is gathered and
governed by his word, nourished and preserved by his holy Sacraments, and
inspired and led by his holy spirit and grace, belong to Christ's Catholic
Church. But nothing can be alleged by the adversaries, but that these
properties belong to the Church of England, and the members thereof, and those
which communicate with it.

Sixthly, the Church of England does in all things communicate with the
Catholic and Apostolic Church that is spread over all nations, and has
continued from the beginning, and shall continue to the end, and which has a
most certain succession of true Bishops, which adhereth to Christ only, and to
his word, and whose faith is confirmed with miracles, and most invincible
testimonies. If Parsons will deny this, let him cease his railing against us,
and his vain babbling about impertinent matters, and forbear to impute unto us
the names of factions, which we renounce, and the faults of particulars, which
we defend not, and prove somewhat substa^tially.

Seventhly the Church of England is justified by the confession of our
adversaries: for with them we profess one faith in all articles contained in
ancient Creedes, with them we receive the same Scriptures, with them we allow
the sacrament of the Eucharist, and Baptism, with them we admit the most
ancient general Councels: and finally, whatsoever was delivered by the
Apostles to be observed, that we observe. What is then the difference?
Forsooth, they have added to the Apostles faith, to Christ's Sacraments,
Scriptures, Apostolic doctrine and laws: and that we refuse, for that it is
above, and beside, yea sometime contrary to the Canon of Scriptures, which is
the perfect rule of faith. Unless therefore our adversaries will stubbornly
reject the Apostolic faith, the canon of Scriptures, the Sacraments, and the
ancient forms of Ecclesiastical government, and condemn the same, they cannot
deny yt Church of England to be ye true Church. Finally, all those exceptions,
which either Bellarmine or Bristow, or Stapleton, or Hill, or any of their
consorts have taken to our doctrine or manners, are cleared, and so answered,
that still the adversary, though never so full of words, rests silenced.
Parsons in ye second part of his treatise of Three Conuersions of England by
him pretended, goes about to show, that the Church of England is no part of
the Church universally dispersed, and that has continued throughout all ages.
But his arguments are so vain, that I make this an argument to justify the
cause of our Church. For if he and his consorts can take no just exception
either to the faith, or manners of the Church of England, then does it follow,
that the same is the true Church of Christ, Et inimici nostri iudices, and our
enemies therein judge against themselves.

CHAP. XI. Parsons his idle discourse Part. 2. of his Treatise, wherein he
pretends to seek for the original and descent of the Church of England from
the Apostles times downward, is examined and refuted.
IT is a simple part, according to the common proverb, in the midst of a river
to ask, where is water; or in a forest of trees, to enquire for wood. Yet
Parsons seems not much wiser, who in the Scriptures and writings of ancient
Fathers every where finding the Apostolic and Catholic Church, with the which
ye Church of England holds communion, does notwithstanding still enquire,
where our Church was in ye Apostles time, and the ages after. But it seems,
he was unwilling to see, yt which he was loath to find. His search certes, and
manner of proceeding, and whole dispute about this matter as it is tedious, and
full of words, so it is fond, foolish, and void of substance and concludent
argument.

In the 2. Part of his turning Treatise chap. 1. he alleges diverse
testimonies out of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Hierome, and Augustine, concerning the
succession of Bishops, and the force thereof. But what (I pray you) does that
make against us, who do well allow of that faith, which was taught and
maintained by those Bishops succeeding one another in diverse Churches, which
they mention? Nay, if Parsons talked of no other faith or doctrine, then that
which those holy Fathers speak of, and did not hide in this catalogue of good
Bishops, a multitude of false teachers, and Heretics much unlike to the
former; the controversy betwixt us would soon be ended. Furthermore, where he
will not allow them to be the true Church; which in all points of faith consent
with the Apostles and ancient Fathers, and disagree in nothing, but will needs
exact a descent of our faith by a catalogue of Bishops; we want not therein an
answer sufficient. For the Bishops of Britain and England, that have continued
since the first plantation of Religion, by Joseph of Arimathaea, and other
Apostolic men have still retained the Apostolic faith, and the Sacraments
instituted by Christ.

True it is, they retained them, but yet with many corruptions, although
nothing so many, as are now established in the Church of Rome, since the wicked
conuenticle of Trent. Although then the Church of England have purged away
certain abuses: yet the substance of doctrine, and Sacraments we have not
changed, therein varying in nothing from the Apostles, or ancient Bishops of
Christ's Church for many hundred years after Christ. But the Popes of Rome and
their adherents within these five hundred years have brought in a new
Scholasticall and Decretaline doctrine, especially since the conuenticle of
Trent, which neither the Apostles nor ancient Bishops ever knew, nay which is
opposite to their doctrine and faith. It appears therefore, that this
argument of succession does rather make for us, then for our adversaries.

Secondly, he bears us in hand, that Luther and Calvin being pressed with
this argument of Succession, did make the Church invisible. And that
Melancthon, and the Magdeburgians dissenting from them, and overcome with
proofs concerning the visibilitie of the Church, did grant it to be visible,
yet so, as it did consist not in the external conspicuous succession of
Bishops, and Councels, but rather in those, which following the Apostolic
Church and faith kept themselves from common corruptions of others. But not
they did dissent, but Parsons does either mistake or misreport. For all of us
do affirm, that the universal Catholic Church is invisible, because it
contains all the members of Christ's Church of all times and all ages.
Likewise all of us believe, that particular Churches are always visible,
albeit not so, that every one is able to discern, which is the true Church,
which not. For that is a matter of reason and discourse, and not of sense, and
that being true, all heretics and infidels would discern, which is the true
Church, and cease to persecute it. Likewise we say, that the true Church is not
always in peace and prosperity. Nay, oftentimes the same is persecuted, and
driven to hide it self as it did in the Apostles time, and during the times of
the first persecutions until the reign of Constantine, and as the Scriptures
do foretell it, should do in the persecution under the reign of Antichrist.
Ridiculously therefore does he allege Scriptures and Fathers speaking of the
visible Church. For they neither speak of the Catholic Church, as it
comprehends all Christians, nor of the glory of the Church in all times. He
does also proclaim either his owneignorance, not setting down, what we hold,
nor knowing how we distinguish, or else impudently misreporteth our doctrine,
that he might thereby take some occasion the rather to stander it, and to
cavil with his adversaries. Finally, he does leudly and contumeliously speak
of Christ's Church, hiding it self in time of persecution, tearming it A
company of few, obscure, and contemptible people lurking from time to time in
shadows and darkness, and known to few or none.

Page 294. he cauilleth at M. Foxes words, where he says, that commonly none
see it, but such only as be members and partakers thereof. For his meaning is,
that none can see it to be the true Church, but such as are members thereof.
Although all those, that persecute it, do see the men, that belong to the
Church. His similitude also of the truth, and true Church agrees well. For
albeit men be visible; yet this point, Which is the true Church, is not a
matter of sense, but of the understanding, and the Church, as it is Christ's
body, is mystical, albeit it consist of visible men.

Part. 2. cap. 2. he tells us, How the Montanists and Marcionists bragged of
martyrdom, and how Cyprian inueigheth against the Martyrs of the Nouatians,
and Epiphanius against those of the Euphemites, and how S. Augustine detested
the Martyrs of the Donatists. But to what purpose, God knows, unless he
would either put us in mind of the false traitorous Massepriests and Iebusites,
that being put to death in England for felony and treason, as in the end, the
secular Priests themselves confess, are calendred in the Romish Churches
tables for Martyrs, or else to disgrace those godly Martyrs by this ungodly
comparison, that suffered death for the testimony of truth in Q. Mary's
bloody reign. Which if he do, then he is as far guilty of their blood, as
the wolves that shed it, and is rather to expect the vengeance of God, then any
answer from man.

In the same Chapter he endeavors to show some differences bewixt the Martyrs
of the primitive Church, and us, as for example, that Saint Andrew sacrificed
daily an immaculate lamb upon the altar. That Sixtus the Bishop of Rome is
said to offer sacrifice, and Laurence his Deacon to dispense the Lords blood,
and that, as Prudentius says, The holy blood did fume in silver cups. That
Cyprian said, Sacerdotem vice Christi fungi, and sacrificium Deo Patri offerre.
But first the difference, if any be, is in terms, and not in matters of faith.
Secondly, we do not disallow these terms simply, if they be rightly
understood, as the ancient Fathers meant them. Thirdly, the words of S. Andrew
are drawn out of the Legend. Bernard in Sermon. de S. Andrea is quoted for them,
yet in neither of his Sermons has he them. Fourthly, the words of Prudentius
must needs be understood figuratively, unless they will have their sacrifice
to be bloody. Lastly, these words do make more for us, then for the Papists.
For that sacrifice, which Andrew and Cyprian do speak of (for here I will take
no exception to the words of Andrews Legend) does signify only the
representation of Christ's sacrifice in bread and wine. Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist.
3. by the sacrifice understands bread and wine, and not Christ's body and
blood really present. Panem and calicem mixtum vino, says he, obtulit. And
again: Sed and per Salomonem Spiritus sanctus typum Dominici sacrificy
praemonstrat immolatae hostiae panis and vini, sed and altaris and Apostolorum
facit mentionem. Furthermore, the same show, that the Deacons did then
distribute the Sacrament of the Lords cup to the people: which Papists now
admit not. Lastly, Sixtus suffering for the confession of Christ is liker to
Bishop Ridley, then to the triple-crowned Pope Clement, who suffers not, but
rather persecuteth such Bishops, as profess Christ. The real sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood offered for quick and dead, out of these words cannot
be proved.

Afterward he tells us p. 310. how Constantine built four Churches in Rome,
dedicating them to our Savior, to Saint John Baptist, S. Peter, S. Paul, and
S. Laurence, adorning them with Images, etc. And having told his tale, he
runs out into a discourse of the glory of that Church, and in great pride
asks us, where our poor, obscure, and trodden down Church, as he calls it,
was at this time, and for 300. years before. But upon such small victories, he
shows himself a vain fellow, to make such triumphs. This tale of four
Churches dedicated to Saints, and adorned with Images, is borrowed out of the
Legend, and is repugnant to the Fathers doctrine. Lactantius says, There is no
religion, where there is an Image or simulachrum. Saint Augustine says, that
temples are not erected to Saints, but that their memories are there honored.
The same Father lib. de vera Relig. cap. 55. speaks both against Images, and
religious worship of Saints. Non sit nobis religio humanorum operum cultus. And
again, Non sit nobis Religio cultus hominum mortuorum. As for the spreading
and splendour of Christ's Church in Constantines time, the same argues, that the
Church is governed and beautified by godly Princes, such as Constantine was,
rather then by godless Popes, such as Clement was. To his question I answer,
that the Church in Constantines time was that Church, with the which in faith
and Sacraments we communicate, and from which the Romanists are departed,
subiecting themselves, not to such godly Princes, as Constantine was, but to
the Pope, and to his ungodly Decretaline and profane school doctrine, which
is diverse from the faith of those times, as (God willing) we shall show anon.
They do also come nearer to the old Heretics Simon Magus, the Gnostickes,
Marcionists, Valentinians, Montanists and the rest mentioned by Parsons page
312. then we. To the Bishops of Rome, that suffered martyrdom, the Popes are
as like, as Nero to Saint Peter.

Page 314. and in the pages following he charge us with holding some heresies
condemned in the primitive Church, As of the false Apostles, that believed
only faith to be sufficient to salvation without works, of the Heretics
mentioned by Ignatius apud Theodoretum Dial. 3. Who did not confess, that the
Eucharist was the flesh of our Savior Christ; of the Nouatians, that did not
anoint those, which were baptized by them, nor receive the Sacrament of
Confirmation, nor grant Priests power to absolve from sin; and of the
Manichees, that denied man's Free Will. But these objections are nothing, but
either calumniations, or mere cauils. For first we do not hold, that a bare
and solitary faith deuoid of works does justify, as those false Apostles
did, against whom S. James, S. Peter, and others do inueigh, and as the Papists
in effect do, which make every wicked man professing their faith, and receiving
their Sacraments a true member of Christ's body, and absoluing hand over head
all, that come to confession. Secondly we do not deny the Eucharist to be
Christ's flesh sacramentally. Thirdly, we do not refuse absolution to the
penitent, as did the Nouatians, nor was Nouatus condemned for denying
Confirmation to be a Sacrament, (for neither the name, nor thing was then in
use in the Church) but rather for neglecting a ceremony then used. Finally, we
do not deny, that man sins voluntarily, as did the Manichees, but only
that he has not freedom of will, whereby he may discern, and do works
tending to the attainement of the kingdom of heaven, as the Pelagians
directly, and Papists after a sort do teach.

Page 318. and 319. he says, that Origin and other Fathers do invoke Angels,
and Saints, and are therefore condemned of the Magdeburgians Centur. 3. But
first the words of Origin homil. 1. in Ezechielem, and of other Fathers may be
so expounded, as that they rather sound an affection, and contestation, and a
Rhetorical Apostrophe or turning of their speech to the Saints and Angels,
then a set form of prayer. Secondly, diverse books cited for proof of this
point seem either to be bastards, or else corrupted by falsaries. Thirdly, it
is an absurd conceit, to attribute that, which is haroly to be proved of one
or two Fathers, to all the rest, that speak so much against the same. Finally,
there is great difference betwixt the words of the Fathers, and of the modern
Breuiaries, Missals, and Offices directly framed in honor of Angels and Saints,
as we shall show (God willing) when we come to speak of that controversy.

Unless therefore Rob. Parsons can find better arguments, he shall not prove,
that the Church for 300. years after Christ, did dissent from the Church of
England, in matters of faith and Sacraments. The like we may affirm of the
next 300. years, viz. from Constantine to Gregory the first. And that shall
appear by the simple arguments, that he brings to prove a difference betwixt
us and the Church of those times. The Donatists (says he) p. 329. said, that
they were the only Church, and called the succession of Bishops in the Church
of Rome, the chair of pestilence. He tells us also how Saint Augustine,
Optatus, and others, object against them, that they cast the blessed Sacrament
of the altar to dogs, overthrew altars, broke Chalices and sold them, cast a
bottle of Chrisme out of the Church window, shaued Priests heads to take away
their unction, turned Nuns out of their monasteries to the world, polluted
all Church stuff. But what is all this to us, that neither take upon us to be
the only Church, as the Papists and Donatists do: nor call the ancient Bishops
of Rome, or their chair, the chair of pestilence? The Popes chair we
confess is ye chair of pestilence, but Popes are no Bishops, but the heads of
Antichrists kingdom. Furthermore, God forbid, that any of us should throw the
Eucharist to dogs, or break Communion tables, or else abuse Gods Ministers, or
any thing dedicated to holy uses. But our accusers do commonly shave priests
heads, and not seldom do priests and Friars dishonest Nuns, and make little
account of their own Church stuff. Parsons therefore to make some show, as if
we did agree with the Donatists, and himself and his conforts not, does
grossly belie Augustine, who has little or nothing of that, which he is made
to say; and leudly salsifie Optatus. For he does not once name the Sacrament of
the altar, but the Eucharist: nor speak of Monasteries, but only of women
professing chastity, which he calls Castimoniales. But such at that time
lived without Monasteries, and were unlike to Nuns. Likewise the altars of
Christians then were of wood: and this Chrisme was reserved for extraordinary
uses.

Page 330. and 331. he charge us to hold with the Eunomians, and Nouatians,
Aerians, Iouinian, Heluidius, and Vigilantius. But first we do not say with
Eunomius, that the committing of sins does not hurt a man, so he have faith.
Nor do we say, that he that is a true and faithful Christian, will commit
grievous sins. Nor did Eunomius talk of the true Christian faith, but of his
own faith. Secondly, we do not deny power to Priests to reconcile penitent
sinners, as did the Nouatians, or after a sort to forgive sins, that is, by
Gods word to loose sinners, and to declare their sins forgiven. Thirdly,
Aerius was condemned for Arianisme, which we detest. He had also private
opinions concerning set fasts, which our Church likes not. Lastly, he
condemned the order of the ancient Church, that used to make a commemoration
of the dead, and to give thanks for them in the celebration of the Eucharist:
whose doings, as we will not condemn, so their practice for manifold abuses
brought in by Mass priests and Friars we are not bound to follow, every Church
having liberty herein to edification. Fourthly, we admit not Iouinians heresy
of equality of sins, neither was Iouinian condemned either for saying, that
every transgression of the law was mortal sin in his own nature, or for
teaching the abuses of Monkish life and profession, as we do. Fifthly, we do not
with Heluidius oppugn the perpetual virginitic of the blessed Uirgin, nor in
all respects equal marriage with virginity, nor was he to be condemned, if in
regard of merit of eternal life, he equalled marriage with birginitie. Finally,
neither was Vigilantius to be condemned in speaking against the superstitious
worship of dead men's bones, nay sometime of the bones of other creatures, or
the abuse of burning tapers and candles at noone day, nor did Hierome, yt wrote
against him allow invocation of Saints, or the filthy and swinish life of
Monks, that we condemn.

To make some show, that the Church of England does differ from the Church of
Christ, from Constantine to Maurice the Emperor, and Gregory the first, Page
333. and pages following
he alleges first, that M. Fox speaks nothing of these three ages, nor of
the Doctors, that then flourished in the East or West Church, and in Britain
it self, or of their doctrine. And all this he supposes to have been omitted,
because it made much against him, and nothing for him. Otherwise he thinks,
he would have set down somewhat, undertaking to set forth at large the whole
race and course of the Church from Christ to our times. Next he says, that the
Magdeburgians in their fourth, fifth, and sixth Centuries speaking much of the
Doctors of the three ages from Constantine downward, find nothing for
themselves, but rather against themselves: as for example in the matter of
Free Will, where they say in the 4. Centur. c. 4. that almost all the Doctors
of that age speak confusedly, and against the manifest testimonies of
Scripture, and in the Paragraffe of repentance, where they say, it is handled
by the Doctors of this 4. age thinly and coldly. And likewise in the matter of
the real presence, where they cite the Fathers abundantly, save in the matter
of the sacrifice, where they reprehend them: and finally, in the controversy
of Goodworkes, satisfaction, invocation of Saints, and concerning ceremonies,
where they reprehend the Fathers. But all this brabblement about M. Fox, and
the Magdeburgians is to no purpose. For first, what if either they should have
omitted, or spoken any thing, which they should not? It is a vain thing to
imagine, that all this should be imputed to us. Secondly, the reason why M.
Fox speaks so little of the 4. 5. and 6. ages, and of the Fathers then
flourishing was, for that we acknowledge that faith, which was then professed,
and adioyne ourselves to that Church. What then needed any long discourse to
deduce our Church throughout those ages, when the same is every where apparent
in the Fathers of that age, whose faith, if we might have restored without the
leaven of the Church of Rome lately brought in, the controversy betwixt us and
our adversaries would soon be ended. Furthermore, it was not his purpose to
handle controversies: and therefore no marvel, if in every question he did not
set down ye sentences of the Fathers. Thirdly, the Magdeburgians do in some
points concerning free will, repentance, the sacrifice, good-works, invocation
of Saints, and such like, mislike some of the Fathers. But he is a very simple
idiot, that therefore would conclude, that they join with the Papists in their
modern heresies. Likewise they allege the Fathers for proof of a certain
real presence. But it is not that corporal and carnal presence of the body
and blood of Christ, of which the Papists dream. Finally, albeit in some small
things the Magdeburgians tax some one or two of the Fathers, or rather those
authors, which have published counterfeit books under the name of the Fathers:
yet in the matters of greatest moment they show the true Fathers to make, for
us. And that shall be made good against Rob. Parsons, if leaving his bangling
about these small advantages, he list to deal with us in any substantial point
of controversy.

In the 4. chapter of his second part, and diverse chapters following, he
handles the descent of times from Gregory the first, unto the preaching of
John Wicleffe, and therein spends much vain talk to small purpose. For
although in those times the tyranny of the Pope increased, and Monkish life
began to be in request, and the worship of Images, and Saints departed,
together with diverse frivolous ceremonies, by little and little entered, and
Priests were separated by the Popes practices from their lawful wives: yet the
substance of Christian Religion remained still in the Church of England all
this while, and the corruptions, that then began to enter, were nothing in
comparison of that which followed afterward, nor generally received. In those
times neither was the Pope accounted the head or spouse of the Uniuersall
Church, nor did he undertake to depose Kings before Gregory the 7. or to
ouerrule all Churches. The Bishops of England took not themselves to be
subject unto the Pope under pain of damnation, nor did he much encroch upon
them before the times of Henry the second King of England. The doctrine of the
carnal real presence, of transubstantiation, of the sacrifice of Christ's
body and blood in the Mass, of worshipping the Sacrament with Latria, and of
Images with the same worship, that is due to the Original, of the seven
Sacraments, and of the degrees of merits of works, and works of
supererogation, of the force of freewill in justification, of the Popes two
swords, and superiority over general Councels, and his power in Purgatory,
and in granting Indulgences and such like, was not then known in England, but
was devised afterward by schoolmen and Canonists, and established by the Popes
Decretals, and wicked conuenticles assembled by their commandment. Nay albeit
the Popes by all means sought to subdue Christian Kings, and to bring all
Ecclesiastical preferments to their own disposition, and (...) the Priests of
their wives: yet could they not do this, but in long time, and after great
contradiction of many. Of this discourse then two things may be gathered direct
against Rob. Parsons his cause. The first is, that the Church of England from
the time of Gregory the first to Alexander the thirds time, was not subject to
the Pope, nor had received the wicked and abominable doctrine contained in the
Popes late Decretals, and devised in the Conuenticles of Lateran, Constance,
Florence, Trent, and published in the profane disputes of schoolmen. The
second is, that the tyranny of the Pope beginning first in Alexander the
thirds time to be felt in England, increased by little and little until King
Henry the eight his reign, and that the greatest corruptions of popish
doctrine entered into England after his time. Of which two points we may
conclude, that the Church of England from the time of Austin until the time of
Alexander the third, in fundamental matters of faith did communicate with us,
and not with the modern Papists, whose principal corruptions have entered
since.

In the 9. 10. 11. and 12. Chapters he quarrelleth with Master Fox, for
building the Church upon M. Wicleffe, Sir John Old-castle, Husse, M. Luther, M.
Calvin, Zuinglius, and others, holding, as he says, many dangerous points of
doctrine, and differing from themselves and from us, and many of the^ noted of
diverse great crimes. But while he quarelleth with others, he bewrays his own
gross ignorance. For it is not Master Foxes meaning to frame a new Church of
Christ from Master Wicleffes time downward, or to affirm, that there was no
Church in the world for certain ages before Wicleffe: but rather to show, that
the Church in diverse places, and by little and little being corrupted since the
time of the Fathers, by the pride and false doctrine of the Popes began much to
degenerate in the adherents of the Church of Rome. Which Wicleffe and his
followers in England, and the Valdenses and Albigenses in France, and some in
Germany began at length to discover. But in our times the same by Luther,
Calvin, Zuinglius, and other godly men was both more openly discovered, and
Christianly reformed. Secondly, it is no marvel, if Wicleffe, and Husse, and
others, that first began to discover the abuses of Popery, did not see all.
For God had appointed a certain time, when the man of sin should be
revealed; and no man is so clear sighted, that he can see into all the abuses
of Heretics, without help and direction of many. Neither is this to be
ascribed more unto Wicleffe, and such, as have labored in the reformation of
the Church, then to others, which have their singular opinions, and by their
errors declare themselves to be men. Furthermore, by this we collect, that we
are to build our faith upon none, but the Apostles and Prophets, which by
special direction of the holy Ghost have declared unto us the will of God.
Thirdly, many heresies are falsely imputed both unto Wicleffe, and unto John
Husse, and unto every one, that has opposed himself against the Romish
faction. As for example, they say that Wicleffe taught, That God must obey the
Devil, and that John Husse added a fourth Person to the Trinity, matters
contrary to the whole form of their doctrine. Diverse errors also they have
ascribed to the Valdenses, Albigenses, and Bohemians. Neither may we marvel,
if they have slandered the dead, seeing they spare not the living, making their
credulous followers believe, That we make God the author of sin, and speak
irreverently of Christ. They have also laid most false imputations upon Luther,
Calvin, Zuinglius, and other our teachers. Further, we are not to marvel, if
they have charged Sir John Oldcastle, and diverse others the followers of
Wicleffes doctrine with treasons, and rebellions, and other enormous crimes.
For so did the heathen deal with the first Christians, as appears by the
Apologies of Tertullian, Arnobius, and others. And now they cease not to
exclaim against our doctrine, as if the same were enemy to the Magistrates
authority: the which is not more trodden under foot by any, then by the Popes
of Rome, and their agents. Fourthly, the Papists themselves have many singular
opinions in diverse points of doctrine. Why then should they impute unto us the
dissentions of private men? And why may not all be good Christians, holding the
substantial points of Christian faith, and varying in nothing from the grounds
of true doctrine concerning the holy Trinity, Christ's incarnation, the
Sacraments, Gods worship, and manners? Finally, as errors did not altogether
enter into the Church, so neither can they be all at one time, and by one man,
or one age reformed. In all the principal points concerning the abuses of
Popery, both the Churches of England, Scotland, France, Germany, and other
nations not subject to the yoke of Antichrist do very well agree. And we doubt
not, by the grace of God, to see Antichrist confounded with the spirit of Gods
mouth shortly, by a general union in the rest.

Finally, in his last chapter he compares M. Fox to a crafty Broker, that
uses fraud in selling of his wares, whereas the Romanists sell like royal
Merchants. He delivers also to his reader three differences betwixt the
Papists and us, saying, first, That we contemn the Church, and next, yt we
define it falsely, and thirdly, yt we assign common and obscure marks thereof,
whereas the Papists do all contrary. But of this comparison, because it is
his own, he may boldly take both parts to himself, and not without just
cause. For as the Pope sells Religion, and all divine matters in gross, and
like a royal Merchant: so Parsons and such like pedlars and palterers fell, as
they may, by retayle, now bargaining for one part of the Church, then for
another: now selling one sin and then another. In assigning his differences,
he differs not from himself, but as always, so now also he belyeth his
adversaries. For neither do we make so little estimation of the Church, as he
reports, nor do we give such a definition of the Church as he imagines, nor
are our marks given out of the Church, either common, or improper. On the
other side they value not the Church one rush, making the same a slave to
Antichrist: nor do they define the Church aright, not touching the life and
soul of it, but only certain outward qualities: nor do they bring other
marks then those, that may fit the Pagans and Turks better then the Papists,
as the name Catholic, universality, continuance, succession, unity,
prosperity, and such like do show. If Parsons will maintain the contrary,
let him answer a book of mine De Ecclesia, written against Bellarmine, wherein
this is declared at large. If not that; yet let him leave his idle wandering
discourse, and come to a point: and then we doubt not but to make his pedlarie
ware known. And thus an end of this wooden constables search. Of which we may
conclude, that it will be a hard matter to find out a more idle searcher, or
foolish search.

CHAP. XII. That the Church of modern Papists was not visible in the world for
more then a thousand years after Christ, and never was fully settled, nor
plainly visible in England.
THe Church of Christ says Hierome in Psalm. 133. consists not in walls,
but in the truth of doctrine. There is the Church where is true faith. So
likewise every Church is to be esteemed according to the doctrine, which it
teaches: and of the Church of Rome we are to make account, not according to
the walls of the Churches there, but according to the doctrine, which now that
Church professes. If then there cannot be showed a Church in the world for a
thousand years professing that faith and doctrine, which now the Church of
Rome holds and professes; we may boldly say, that the Church of Papists, as
now it stands, was not visible for a thousand years after Christ. Nay it is
plain, that such a Church, as the Papists now have, was never yet planted in
England. So far is Parsons from his account, when he supposes, that the
faith and Church of Rome, that now is, has always continued since the first
preaching of the Gospel, and been visible in England.

That we say true, it appears first, for that no Church did ever esteem
traditions and holy Scriptures with like affection before the decree of the
conuenticle of Trent ratified by Pius the fourth Anno Domini 1564. The Church
of England before that time never had any such conceit of traditions, as to
believe them to be the word of God, and equal to Scriptures.

Secondly, no Church in the world did make the old Latin vulgar translation of
the Bible authentical before yt time.

Thirdly, the modern Papists forbid men to read the Scriptures translated
into vulgar tongues without license, and command the service to be said in
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew: which languages the common people understand not.
But such a Church and so malignant and envious of the knowledge and profit of
Christians was not seen in the world before the assembly of Trent.

4. For a thousand years after Christ, and longer, it was lawful for laymen
and all Christians to dispute, argue, and reason of matters of Christian
Religion. And so long this Popish Church was not seen in the world, that
prohibiteth laymen so to do.

5. The modern Papists teach, that Christ's natural body is both in heaven
and earth, and upon every altar where any consecrated host is hanged, where he
is neither felt, seen, nor perceived, and all at one time. But the Church
until the times of the Trent conuenticle ever believed, that Christ had a
solid, visible, and palpable body. And certes, very strange it were if the
Catholic and mystical body of Christ should be visible, and not his natural
body.

6. They teach, that Christ was a perfect man at the first instant of his
conception, and that he knew all things, and was omniscient as man, both then
and always. But this neither the Church of England, nor other Christian Church
as yet could ever believe or comprehend.

7. They teach, that Christians are not to believe the Scriptures to be
Canonical, unless the Pope tell them so. They say also that the authority of
Scriptures in regard of us does depend upon the Church, that is, as they say,
upon the Pope, Cardinals, Mass Priests, Monks, and Friars. But the true
Church has always taken this to be derogatorie to the Majesty of God, and of
holy Scriptures.

8. They teach, that the Pope has two swords, and a triple crown as King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. But the Church of England for a thousand years after
Christ never saw, nor believed any such thing. Nay the English know well yt
Greg. the 7. was ye first yt took up arms against ye Emperor.

9. They teach, that the Pope has power to depose Kings and to assoile
subjects from their oaths of obedience. But this Sigebertus Gemblacensis anno
1088. shows to have vin reputed a nouelty, if not an heresy. The Church of
England never saw any Pope attempt such a thing before King John's time, and
then the same did not believe it, or allow it.

10. The modern synagogue of Rome teaches that the Pope is the head,
foundation, and spouse of Christ's Church. But no visible Church ever taught
this, until of late time: the Church of England never held it, nor believed it.

11. Now they think it lawful to suborne the subjects against their Prince,
and to hire privy murderers and assassinors to cut ye throat of Kings
excommunicate, as appears by the exco^munications of Paul the 3. against
Henry the 8. King of England, of Pius the 5. and Sixtus the 5. against our late
dread soueragine Queen Elizabeth, and by the doctrine of Emanuel Sa in his
wicked Aphorisms. Nay of late they have attempted by gunpowder to blow up the
King and his Son albeit not excommunicated, and to massacre and murder the
most eminent men in this kingdom, and wholly to overthrow the state. But ye
Church of England ever taught obedience to Princes, and disliked this damnable
doctrine.

12. They teach, that the Pope is above all general Councels. But no Church
ever believed this for a thousand four hundred years. The Doctors assembled
at Constance and Basil decreed the contrary doctrine to be more Christian.

13. They teach, that the Pope is supreme judge of all matters of controversy
in religion. But the Church of England ever thought it a matter absurd, to make
a blind man judge of colors, or an unlearned and irreligious fellow to be
judge of matters of learning and religion. Now who knows not, that most Popes
are such? Of Benedict that lived in the Emperor Henry the 2. his days.
Sigebertus in ann. Do. 1045. writes, that he was so rude and ignorant, that he
could not read his breuiary, but was enforced to choose another to do it.
Benedictus, says he, qui Simoniace Papatum Romans inuaserat, cum esset rudis
literarum alterum ad vices Ecclesiastici officij exequendas, secum Papam
Syluestrum 151. consecrari fecit.

14. They now fall down before the Pope and kiss his feet; and when he list
to go abroad, they carry him like an idol upon men's shoulders. But no Church
for above a thousand years after Christ did ever kiss the feet of Antichrist,
or adore him. Nay the Church of England did always know full well, that S.
Peter a far holier and honester man then Clement the 8. or Paul the 5. would
not suffer Cornelius to lie at his feet, or to worship him.

15. They now call the Pope God, and acknowledge him to be their good Lord and
God, as appears by the Chapter Satis. did. 96. and the gloss upon John the
22. his Extrauagant, cum inter nonnullos. de verb. signif. Commonly the
Canonists honor him as a God on the earth. But no Church did ever abase it
self so low, as to use these high terms to so base a fellow. The Church of
England, though patient in bearing the Popes injuries, did never use any such
slavish forms of flattery.

16. They believe, that the Pope can change kingdoms, and take a kingdom from
one, and give it to another. Potest mutare regna, says Bellarmine lib. 5. de
Pontif. Romans ca. 6. atque vni auferre atque alteri confer. But this no Church
of God ever believed. The Church of England, certes, when King John would have
made his Kingdom tributary to the Pope, disallowed and detested the fact: and
when the Pope would have deposed King Henry the eight, manfully resisted him.
So did the French likewise oppose themselves against Julius the 2. that went
about to wrest the Scepter out of the hands of Jews the twelfth.

17. They believe, that Abbots and Friars may by privilege of the Pope give
voices in Councels, and that an Abbot may ordeine Clerks, as appears by the
practice of their late conuenticles, and by the privileges granted to the
Benedictines. But all ancient Councels declare, that Councels are assemblies
not of Monks and Friars, but of Bishops: and all Churches according to the
Canons of ye Apostles as they are called, acknowledge that ordination of
Ministers belongs to true Bishops, and not to blockish statues, called Popes.

18. They believe that Cardinals only now have voice in the election of the
Bishop of Rome. But this no Church believed for a thousand years after Christ.
The Church of England ever held rather the ancient Canons, that gave the
election of Bishops to the clergy with the people, then these late humorous
Canons, and Decretals of Popes.

19. They believe, that Monks are Clergy men, and necessary members of the
Church. But no Church for a thousand years after Christ ever believed it.

20. The Friars of the orders of Francis and Dominicke and other begging
societies, were not seen in the world before the times of Innocent the third.
But these orders are counted principal ornaments of the Romish church.

21. No Church ever believed for a thousand years, that the state of
perfection consisted in Monkish vows, or that Friars were to be called
religious men, or members of the Church.

22. For above a thousand years no Church ever allowed, that Monks and Friars
should make vows to the blessed virgin, to Saints, and the founders of Monkish
orders, as now they do in the Romish Church.

23. Ancient Christian Churches believed, that marriage was not dissolved or
separated by entering into Monasteries, neither that such as had contracted or
married themselves might depart into Monasteries, and live asunder. Nay they
believed Christ that teaches, that man is not to separate that, which God has
joined together, rather then the Pope.

24. The Papists believe, that the vows of Chastity, Poverty, and Monkish
obedience be works of supererogation, and deserve a higher degree of glory in
heaven, then works commanded by Gods law. But no Church of Christ ever believed
this.

25. The form of the popish Church is composed of a triple crowned Pope, with
two swords, and a guard of Switzers, of Cardinals in broad hats and purple
gowns, of shaven Mass Priests, Monks and Friars, and of a multitude of
ignorant people, that subject themselves to the Pope, and cry Miserere nobis.
But such a deformed company was never seen in ye world for a thousand two
hundred years. Let Parsons therefore take heed, least while he contendeth that
Christ's Church was always visible in the world, he prove not the Romish
Church not to be Christ's Church.

26. God prohibiteth the shauing of heads and beards as a thing indecent in his
Priests, Non radent caput, neque barbam, says Moses Leuit. 19. neque in
carnibus suis facient incisuras. We read also, that this shauing, and
whipping, or lancing of men's selves came from the priests of Baal, and from the
Gentiles. We are not therefore to think, that the Church of Christ would admit
such abuses, rontrary to Gods word. In the Church of England such shauing, and
lashing, and cutting of men's selves for a thousand years and more, was not
commonly received, nor practiced.

27. In England we do not read for a thousand years, that the Pope did bestow
Bistopricks by his provisions or commendaes, or that he disposed of
Ecclesiastical livings. Robert Parsons would be desired to show this out of
his reading, and what visible Church it was that allowed it.

28. In Rome the Pope ruled not in temporalties until Boniface the 9. his
time; nor had he the patrimony of Peter, as it is called, till after Gregory
the 7. his Papacy. Does it not then appear, that the visible Church of Rome
ruling the temporalties, and Peter's patrimony was invisible until their times?

29. The Church does take his form partly of doctrine, and partly of laws.
But the school doctrine of Aquinas and his folowers was not much known before
the year 1^00. and the Decretals of Popes had no force of law until Gregory
the 9. his time. Does it not then follow necessarily, that the Church of Rome
that now is, has risen up out of the earth, and that but of late time?

30. For more then a thousand years we do not read that any Church believed
to be saved by the merits of S. Francis, S. Dominike, or other Saints. They are
therefore of a late stamp, that believe this.

31. The Church of Rome never received the doctrine of the Popes Indulgences,
or believed his Bulls of Iubiley, unless it were within this two or three
hundred years. The true Church ever abhorred them.

32. The ancient true Church never did believe, that the Pope was able to fetch
souls out of Purgatory with his Indulgences.

33. The distinction of the merit of Congruity and Condignity was not received
of any known Church, until such time as the Schoolmen taught this strange
doctrine.

34. The Missals, breuiaries and offices, that now are received by the Popish
Church, were not known before the conuenticle of Trent. The Church of England
used other forms in former times.

35. The Church of England likewise for more then a M. years did not call upon
Saints in public Letanies. Neither did this, or any other church in old time
say Masses and offices in honor of Angels, Saints, and the blessed virgin Mary.

36. That Church that uses to consecrate paschall lambs, and to make holy
water to drive away devils, was not visible for one thousand two hundred years
and more. In England, Parsons cannot show any Church allowing these forms
before that time.

37. Nicholas the 2. in yt chap. Ego Bere^garius. did. 2. de Consec. was the
first that taught his Romish adherents, that Christ's flesh was handled with
hands, and torn with teeth.

38. The first that taught, that a dog or a hog eating a consecrated host
did swallow down Christ's true body into his belly, was Alexander Hales, Part.
4. sum. q. 53. memb. 2. and qu. 45. memb. 1. In this blasphemous opinion Thomas
Aquinas Part. 3. sum. q. 80. art. 3. does second him. And now the blasphemous
rabble of Mass Priests and their folowers do hold the same opinion, contrary
to the doctrine of the visible Church of ancient times.

39. The Church of England never believed, that Christians were eaters of man's
flesh, and Canibals. But the modern Romish Church holds, that Christians
take Christ's flesh with their teeth, and swallow down his flesh and blood
into their bellies.

40. Innocent the 3. was the first that made his adherents believe, that the
bread was transubstantiat into Christ's flesh, and the wine into his blood in
the Sacrament. Parsons if he can tell any news of transubstantiation before
his time, shall do his friends good pleasure not to conceal them. Otherwise ye
beginning of this transubstantiating Church will be derived no higher then from
Innocentius his reign.

41. The same man did first ordeine, that both men and women should yearly
confess their sins to a Priest. Which shows the original of the popish
Church, confessing her sins in the priests ear.

42. The Mass Priests sacrificing the very body and blood of Christ for quick
and dead, received no authority for their massing sacrifice, before the time of
the conuenticle of Trent. Who then would not marvel, that these massing
companions should brag of the antiquity of their massing Church, whose massing
sacrifice had no certain establishment before that time?

43. The Church never used to hang the sacrifice of Christ's body over the Altar
before the times of Honorius the third. It is not therefore much more then
three hundred years since these hangers and abusers of the sacrament of
Christ's body in the Church appeared.

44. That the accidents of bread and wine subsist in the Eucharist without
their substances, the Romish church began to believe only from the times of the
conuenticle of Constance. From thence therefore the Church believing this point
took her beginning.

45. That the Priest does work three miracles, as often as he does consecrate,
and that all Mass Priests are workers of miracles, no true Church can believe,
or ever did believe. Only the miraculous idiots, that subject themselves to
Antichrist, and receive the Romish Catechism prescribed them by the
conuenticle of Trent, are bound to believe it.

46. For a thousand years Christ's Church never knew any private Mass without
Communion. The Church therefore that uses private Masses without Communion, is
but a new vpstart Church.

47. The Communion under one kind was not established by law before the
conuenticle of Constance. This therefore does show also, that the Romish church
communicating under one kind is but of late continuance.

48. That Masses should be good to cure sick Horses, and mesel Swine, is but a
late doctrine. Of a late beginning therefore is that Church that believes
these things, and says Masses for fair weather, and rain, against the
Plague, and for all purposes, yea for sick Horses and mesel Swine.

49. The first that set down any certeinty for 7. Sacraments was he that
borrowed the name of the conuenticle of Florence in the instruction given to the
Armenians. The 7. Sacramentary church therefore is but new.

50. Then also were the Romanists taught, what were the words of Popish
Confirmation, and extreme Unction. But the Church of God hitherto never
believed, that these are Sacraments, or were ordained by Christ to be used by
the Church in the form prescribed by the conuenticle of Florence. Would
Parsons show, when and where Christ instituted these two Romish Sacraments, he
might resolve his folowers of a great doubt, and do himself great honor.

51. Bellarmine teaches, that all Sacraments do justify the receivers ex
opere operato: and like it is, that the Romanists, as becomes good scholars,
do follow their masters doctrine. But sure no Church of Christ hitherto did
ever believe, that Christians were justified by Marriage, Orders, Confirmation,
or extreme Unction.

52. The true Church of Christ did ever believe, that Christ did perfectly
satisfy for the sins of the whole world. It must needs therefore be a new
congregation, and opposite to Christ's Church, that teaches or believes, that
every Christian is to satisfy himself for the temporal pains of sins
committed after Baptism.

53. In the conuenticle of Florence we read, that it was first decreed, that
such as departed this life without satisfaction for sins committed, are
purged with Purgatory fire, and that such may be elieued by Masses, oraisons
and alms. Bellarmine lib. 2. de Purgat. ca. 13. tells us, How by many
revelations it has been declared, that souls are tormented there by Devils.
It cannot therefore be an ancient Church, whose faith is patched up by such
fellows, and consists of such strange novelties.

54. Whether Indulgences do profit souls in Purgatory ex condigno, or only ex
congruo, the matter seems not yet resolved, as may appear by Bellarmines
dispute lib. 1. de Purgator. c. 14. In ancient time the Church of England was
ignorant of the popish doctrine of Indulgences. It cannot therefore be an
ancient society, that teaches such new doctrines, and is not yet resolved upon
them.

55. Boniface the 8. did first institute Iubileys. Clement the 6. from a
hundred years brought the solemnity to 50. and Sixtus the 4. to 25. Where it
stands. We may therefore conclude, that this iubilating Church of Rome
differed much from the Church of Christ before Constantines time, and that it
was not heard of before the days of Boniface the eight.

56. The Romanists worship the Cross, and Crucifixe, and Images of the Trinity
with Latria. But such an Image-worshipping Church is not to be found until
such time as Thomas Aquinas taught this idolatrous doctrine.

57. They kiss Images, bow to them, offer incense to them, and set up lights,
and say Masses before them. But these tricks were not frequented in the Church
of England, for a thousand years, nor ever in any true Christian Church were
publicly received.

58. They call upon the blessed Virgin, as their gate of salvation, and pray to
Saints, and Angels, as mediators of intercession. They do also make vows to
them, and say Masses in their honor, all which prove the erection of their
congregations to be new, and of a late device.

59. They believe, that S. Rock and S. Sebastian cure the plague, that
Apollonia cures toothach, that S. Jews has horses in his protection, and S.
Antony pigges, of which all true Christians may be much ashamed.

60. With the Collyridians the Romanists offer a rake in the honor of the
blessed Virgin, and with many other heretics bring in diverse heresies, and not
only novelties. Finally, for their own impure traditions they leave the
observance of Gods holy laws. Let them therefore henceforth leave to vaunt of
the antiquity of their Church, or to tell us of novelties, seeing their Church
holding these novelties must needs be new and of a late erection.

CHAP. XIII. That Parsons makes no conscience to wrest and corrupt holy
Scriptures.
THus we see the substance of Parsons his two first books of Three Conuersions
quashed, and brought to nothing. But because he has committed diverse other
faults, which in the sequel of our discourse we could not particularly insist
upon, we have thought it good to refer their further examination to this
place. For whatsoever bragges his followers do make of this brave work, yet by
examination it will appear, that the Author has foully abused and mistaken
Scriptures, corrupted, falsified, and falsely alleged Fathers, and other
Authors, bragged of himself and his conforts most vainly, taken things in
question as granted most simply, erred in historyes and other authors most
childishly, applied Scriptures and spoken of God and matters concerning God
most blasphemously, behaved himself toward his Prince most disloyally, lied
and calumniated honest men most impudently, alleged matters making against
himself most sottishly: and to reduce all into a brief sum; that this whole
treatise is nothing else, but a fardle of false allegations, corruptions, lies
and fooleries.

That he makes no conscience to wrest and pervert the words of holy
Scriptures, it appears by these particulars. In the front of his book, which
he like a man of a front and face without shame entituleth, A treatise of Three
Conuersions of England, he tumbleth two sentences of Scripture together, and
makes one of two. He does also wrest them both contrary to the meaning of the
holy Ghost. For whereas Deuter. 4. whence his first place is taken, we are
willed to enquire of ancient times, and thereof to learn Gods great works in
delivering his people, he applies the words of that text to the times of late
Popes, and to their trash and traditions. And out of the words, Deuteronomy. 32.
whence his second place is taken, where we are commanded to remember the old
days of our forefathers, etc. he instnuateth, that we are to look back to the
Popes Decretals, and corruptions of former times. But the holy Scripture
sends us to the Prophets and Patriarks, and the people of God, which were eye
witnesses of Gods special favor toward his people. Both the places do
utterly overthrow Parsons his cause, that has neither help of antiquity, nor
testimony of the Fathers of the Church.

In his Epistle he applies these words Philip. 1. To you it is given, not only
to believe in him, but also to suffer for him: to his accomplices the Papists.
But he leaves out these words (...), that is, for Christ. Percase his
conscience told him, that in England none of his consorts suffer for Christ,
but rather for Antichrist. Further, most of them are so ignorant, that they
neither know what Christ is, nor what it is to believe in Christ, holding it
sufficient to believe as the Pope does, who for the most part believes no more
then the great Turk.

Where the Apostle Philip. 1. says, Ut vincula mea manifesta fierent in
Christo in omni praetorio: he changes his words, and makes him to say,
Vincula vestra manifesta siunt in Christo in omni praetorio, making the Apostle
to speak an untruth, and applying his words to the Papists, who never suffered
for Christ, nor were ever called before any bar for his sake, but rather for
treason and rebellion, and mainteining the faction of Antichrist, to whose
service they have consecrated themselves. He does also mistake the Apostles
meaning utterly, where he says, The Apostle gloried of himself and his
fellows. For he does not once mention his fellows, nor glory of himself or
his bonds, as this glorious fellow surmiseth.

The Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 1. commends them, for that they became followers of
Christ, and of the Apostles, and received the word of God with joy in the holy
Ghost, in great tribulation. But Parsons applies these words to the Papists.
Let indifferent men therefore judge how madly he applies, and biole^tly
wresteth holy Scriptures to serve his lewd purpose. For Papists follow not
Christ, nor his Apostles, but Antichrist and his false apostles the
Mass Priests and Iebusites. The word of God in vulgar tongues they receive not
to be read publicly: nor do they joy so much in the holy Ghost, as in their
own devilish practices, treacheries, and murders. They suffer no tribulation,
nor affliction of mind or body, but live in all delights and pleasures of the
world, rather following the sect of the Epicures, then the piety of Christians.
Neither can it be showed wherein ye Papists of England may be resembled in any
thing to the Christians of Macedonia, unless it be, in that they be enemies of
the cross of Christ, and make a god of their belly, as the Apostle says,
speaking of some Macedonians Philip. 3. Finally the place is not so evil
applied, but it is worse translated: for to the text he adds these words
published every where throughout the world, and leaves out these, that we need
not to speak any thing.

These words of God by his Prophet Isay, chap. 1. I will turn my hand upon
thee, and purge away thy dross, till thou be made pure, and will take away thy
tin: are so absurdly applied to his consorts, that profess a religion full
of dross and superstition, a religion most impure and full of heretical
corruption, a religion full of base metal, and that teaches her clients to
worship Images of tin and lead, ye while he endeuoreth to praise the Papists,
he does utter words that do utterly confound both them and their drossy
Religion.

Intus pugnae, foris timores, says the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. But Parsons to show
that he mainteineth a perverse Religion, turns his words contremont, making
him to say Foris pugnae, intus timores. It may be, he was much ashamed to
acknowledge, that there is such a faction and division betwixt ye Secular
Priests and the Iebusites throughout England. Further, if unity be a mark of
the Church, as his consorts pretend, then did he well perceive, that such
divided companies as the Secular Priests and Iebusites cannot belong to the
Church, and therefore thought it best to corrupt the Apostles words.

Matthew. 8. we read, how Christ arose and rebuked the winds and sea, and how
there followed a great calm. But Parsons wickedly applies these words to the
Pope, for Christ honoring Antichrist, and giving the power of God to a wretched
man, who is so far from calming winds and seas, that he cannot appease the
troubles of his own house, nor stop the ouerflowing of Tiber. Nay albeit he
endeavor to stop the breaths of true preachers, yet shall the sword of the word
of God issuing out of their mouths lay his kingdom wast, and destroy the
fortresses of his Antichristian state.

1. Reg. 3. Heli the priest submits himself to the will of God, foretelling
the certain destruction of his house, saying, It is the Lord, let him do
whatsoever seems good in his eyes. But Parsons does impiously apply them to
the Kings Majesty, disloyally as it seems, wishing and prophesying of some
such like destruction to the Kings house, and lignage, as happened to Heli and
his issue: and this the gunpouder and undermining Papists have of late
attempted.

In these words Hebrews 5. Didicit ex ijs, quae passus est, obedientiam:
Parsons leaves out the word, obedientiam, and where the Apostle approprieth
them to Christ, he detorteth them to the King.

In his Preface alleging the words of Christ Matthew. 24. he makes himself to
say, That such times of heresy and contradiction should come, when one sect
would say, here is Christ, and another, there is Christ. Where we may see
manifestly, that he neither speaks of diverse sects, nor of yt contradiction
or heresies of diverse sects, but says indefinitely, If any say here is Christ,
or there is Christ, believe him not. And this directly makes against every
several sect of Papists, who pretend that Christ's body is contained in pixes,
and lies lurking under the accidents of consecrated hosts, and is offered by
polshorne priests in every corner of their Churches.

Citing the words of Peter, Act. 10. who says, That Christ was not manifested
to all the people, but to certain witnesses before appointed by God, he
bears his reader in hand, that this was done to the end that their faith
might be of more merit: whereas we find not any mention made of merit in that
place, nor any suspicion of any such matter.

Out of the words of Mark. c. 16. he concludes, That we are to captiuate our
understanding not only to the obedience of Christ, but also to those that
preach unto us. But there is great difference betwixt the incredulity of those
yt would not believe the Apostles teaching Christ's resurrection, of which
Mark speaks, and the piety of such, as believe not the Friars, Monks and
Mass Priests, which are the false Apostles sent out by Antichrist, teaching ye
Popes Decretals, and Romish forged traditions.

Page 21. he endeuoreth to prove by S. Peter's words Act. 15. that he was the
Apostle of the Gentiles. But S. Paul Galat. 2. shows, that the Gospel over
the circumcision was committed to Peter, and the Gospel over the
uncircumcision to himself. Act. 15. he says nothing, but that God appointed
that the Gentiles should by his mouth hear the word of the Gospel. But that
may be true in case any number of the Gentiles should hear him preach the
Gospel. The words of Peter certes do not exclude others.

Page 441. rehersing ye words of Daniel. c. 2. he applies them to ye Church of
Rome, as if ye church were that kingdom, that shall never be dissipated, and
shall consume and wear out all other kingdoms: but by ye sequel of ye text it
appears, that they are to be understood of the universal Church and kingdom
of Christ, and not of any one particular congregation, much less of the
synagogue of Rome, that is now begun to be dissipated by the true preachers of
Gods word on one side, and is greatly straited by the Turk on the other side.
He does also fraudulently leave out these words in his quotation, Et regnum
eius alteri populo non dabit, least he should thereby declare, that every
particular city and people is excluded from the claim of the right of the
universal kingdom of Christ. And with this faith he cites other Scriptures.

CHAP. XIIII. A Catalogue of diverse falsifications, false allegations, and
corruptions of the Fathers of the Church, and other Authors committed by Rob.
Parsons.
IN civil causes to deal untruly, it is but falsity. But in matters of faith,
to use false dealing, does beside falsity imply impiety. He therefore that was
not afraid to force Scriptures, will not spare to forge and falsify the
Fathers, and other Authors, as may appear by the practice of Rob. Parsons. To
prove that S. Augustine said, That Christians ought to travail by sea and
land, countries and kingdoms to seek out the truth and certeinty of Catholic
Religion, he cites in his Preface first Possidonius in vita Augustini, and
next Augustine himself lib. 4. and 5. Confess. But in the first place there is
not one word for his purpose. In the second, there is not that which he
surmiseth. Nay it is not like, that S. Augustine would write as he affirms,
seeing to find true Catholic religion, and the certeinty thereof, we need
neither to pass the Sea, nor to travail to Jerusalem or Rome, but are rather
to search the books of holy Scripture, which teach the same sufficiently.

He says, that S. Augustine lib. de morib. Eccles. c. 17. and Chrysostom in a
certain Homily reprehend greatly the sluggishnes of diverse men in their days,
that seeing sects and heresies to arise, and diversities of religion in almost
every country, did not bestirre themselves to try out the truth. But he abuses
both these holy Fathers, whereof the first has no such words or reprehension.
The second talks not of the diversities of religions, but only exhorts
Christians to embrace the Christian faith earnestly. The which does concern
Popery nothing, which has been sown in Gods field long after the first
planting of the Christian faith.

Augustine tractat. 73. in Joan. has these words, Haec est laus fidei, si quod
creditur, non videtur. To these words Parsons adds the word merit, and
translateth the^ thus, The praise or merit of faith stands in this, that the
thing be not seen which is believed. He should have said thus, Herein
consists the praise of faith, if that be believed, that is not seen. And
this overthrows the doctrine of the Papists, that teach, that the Catholic
Church which we believe in our Creed, is visible. He makes Ambrose to say
thus lib. 1. de Abraham. ca. 3. If a grave honorable person in this life,
especially if he be of high authority and our superior, will take it in
disdain to be asked a proof, for that he affirms, how much more ought God
to be credited, when he proposes unto us a matter above our reach or
capacity? But therein he shows himself neither grave nor honorable, to
impute his own sayings to so grave a Father. S. Ambrose says only, How
unworthy a matter were it, to believe the testimonies of men concerning others,
and not to believe Gods oracles concerning himself? Quam indignum, vt humanis
testimonijs de alio credamus, dei oraculis de se non credamus? This also
touches the Papists very near, who will not believe holy Scriptures, which
are Gods oracles, without the testimony of the Pope.

Page 3. he says, That Eleutherius converted King Lucius and his subjects by
the preaching of Damianus and his fellows; and for proof alleges Bid lib.
1. hist. Angl. ca. 17. and 18. But Bid in these two Chapters does not so much
as once mention any such matter. And ca. 4. where he speaks of Eleutherius
and Lucius, he does not once name Damianus or his fellows, or speak of the
conversion of Lucius his subjects. Furthermore it is absurd to say, that
Eleutherius did convert the Britains by Damianus. For if Damianus preathed unto
them, then did he convert them, and not Eleutherius.

Page 7. alleging Bid lib. 1. hist. Angl. c. 34. he makes him say, that
Austin and his fellows entered into Canterbury in Procession, with a cross,
and the image of our Savior in a banner. But first he misseth the chapter
alleging the 34. for the 26. Next he speaks more then his author does
warrant him. for he neither speaks of procession, which was a later device,
nor of the image of our Savior in a banner. Crucem pro vexillo ferentes
arge^team says he, and imaginem Domini saluatoris in tabula depictam, that is,
carrying a silver cross for an ensign, and an image of our Lord and Savior
painted on a table. So it appears they neither louged a crucifixe with them,
nor prayed to the cross, nor worshipped Christ's image.

Page 9. citing Cyprians testimony lib. 2. epist. 3. for proof of his massing
sacrifice, he cutteth out these words out of the midst of the sentence qui id
quod Christus fecit imitatur. Which argues, that the popish Balamite priests
offer no right sacrifice, digressing from Christ's institution.

Page 11. out of Eusebius he says, That Peter sat Bishop of Rome for 25.
years together. And out of Bid lib. 1. hist. Anglor. c. 3. that there began
to be such war in Britany, that Claudius resolved to go thither with the
admiration of the whole world. But neither does Eusebius in his story, nor any
other good author say, yt Peter sat Bishop of Rome 25. years together, neither
does Bid in ye place mentioned speak of wars in Britany, or of the admiration
of the world in regard of his journey.

Page 12. rehersing the words of Malmesburiensis in fastis an. Christi 86. he
adds these words, and brought into a perfect form of province, which is both
a notorious forgery and falsity.

Page 19. he alleges a cou^terfet Decretal under the name of Innocentius,
where he affirms most falsely, that all the Churches of Afrike and diverse
other countries there named were converted by S. Peter, or his successors. To
this counterfeit epistle Parsons also adds these words, or his scholars,
therein declaring himself to be a master in forgery.

Page 25. he alleges out of Cyprian Epist. 45. That he glories in that his
Church of Carthage in Africa, and all the other Churches under her in
Mauritania and Numidia had received their first institution of Christian faith
from Rome, as from their mother. But the words of Cyprian are gloriously
corrupted by him. And that may in part appear by Pamelius his edition of
Cyprian, but more clearly by older copies. Neither can Parsons himself make
these words good out of any other place of Cyprian.

Page 26. where Tertullian li. de Praeser. aduers. Haeret. uses the testimony
of diverse Churches, as well, as of that of Rome, he only mentions Rome, and
concealeth the authority of other Churches.

There also he says, that S. Augustine in Psalm. contr. part. Donati, had no
better way to defend his Church of Hippo, and other of those countries to be
truly Catholic then to say, they were daughters and children of the Church of
Rome. But it seems he dreamed, when he wrote these things: if not, then he
lied of mere malice. For in that place neither these words, nor any such matter
is to be found.

Page 28. he says, That Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, and
others are wont to urge this consequent against Heretics, to wit, that if our
Church be the daughter and disciple of the Church of Rome; then ought it to
run to her in all doubts and difficulties of matters of faith. Thus does he
write, and this he affirms, with one breath belying diverse Fathers. And that
shall himself perceive, if he list to allege their words. We may easily
imagine the same to be true, for that ye consequent is so absurd. For if all
Churches were to have recourse to their mother Church for decision of
controversies concerning the faith: then were the Church of Rome and all others
to derive their decisions concerning matters of faith from Jerusalem. But this,
Parsons himself will not grant.

Page 30. he tells a tale of one Beatus a Briton, who being converted to the
faith, as he says, was sent by Joseph to Rome to S. Peter the head of the
Apostles, to be better instructed and confirmed. And this he delivers to his
reader, as testified by B. Rhenanus lib. 3. rerum Germa. sub Hello, and
Pantaleon de viris German. part. 3. But he does grossly abuse his reader in
telling gross untruths upon the credit of these witnesses, who only mention
this Beatus, but report no such matter of him. Further Rhenanus does no
otherwise account of this report, then as of a Monkish fable, and thereupon
says, That he finds small help from the Chronicles of Monks, to furnish
his story.

Page 33. he tells us, that few of the Britains observed Easter after the
manner of the Eastern Church, and fathereth this fable upon Bid in diverse
places. But Bid himself lib. 2. hist. Anglor. cap. 2. refuteth his foolish
tale, showing, that Austin objected this observance to all the Bishops of
Britain, and how they refused to leave the same.

Page 42. he urges an Epistle set out under Innocents name, and says, That
the British Churches are put among the rest. But neither are they there once
mentioned, nor is this Decretall Epistle to be esteemed, being plainly
counterfeit.

Page 43. he cites Orosius hist. lib. 2. and says, that he calls
Innocentius an holy Father. But there is neither holiness, nor honesty in
fathering lies upon holy Fathers.

Page 45. and in diverse places he cites Eusebius his Chronicles, yet he is
simple, that perceives not, that those Chronicles were never written by
Eusebius: and shall be much intricated, if he confess all therein written to
be true and perfect. There it is said, That S. Peter sat 25. years at
Antioch, which Parsons will not confess. In the margent against the year 146.
it is said, Hic omissa est linea de Pio. Parsons for the 146. year after
Christ alleges the 144. year.

Page 46. for proof, that the keeping of Easter contrary to the Roman use
was condemned as an heresy, and so held in all ages after, he quoteth Bid
hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 19. and Eusebius lib. 3. de vita Constant. cap. 17.
and 18. But in the place alleged out of Bid there is not so much, as any
color of this matter. By Eusebius in the place quoted, and Bid lib. 3. cap.
25. we may gather, that an order was appointed for uniform observation of
Easter. But neither of them affirms them to be heretics, that did not
observe that order. Nor is it to be reputed heresy, not to observe all Canons,
that concern such ceremonies. Nay it cannot be proved, that Vlfride says,
That this error might be tolerable in them, that lived so distant from the sea
Apostolic, in a corner of the world, albeit this glozing parasite of the sea
Apostatike of Rome, do affirm it, page 48.

Page 49. he belyeth Marianus Scotus, Prosper, Bid lib. 2. hist. Anglor. cap.
19. and other authors making them to say, That Celestine sent Patritius and
Palladius to convert the Irish and Scots. For neither do the authors mentioned
speak of more, then one of these two, nor can he make his assertion good by
the testimony of other authors.

Page 50. he says, that Pelagius crept into many learned, and godly men's love,
and friendship, and above others with Paulinus and S. Augustine. And for proof
he quoteth S. Augustines Epistle 105. and lib. 2. de Bon. Perseueran. cap. 20.
But in neither place is there any such matter to be found. In the second place,
it is said, that Pelagius talked with a fellow Bishop of S. Augustines, but it
is also said, that he disliked his talk. Far non potuit.

Page 52. he falsifieth Eusebius lib. 3. de vit. Constant. ca. 18. making
Constantine there to say, That the greater part of the East held the Roman
use, viz. for the time of Easter. His words are only these: Nonnullae, quae in
locis ad Orientem spectantibus habitant.

Page 53. out of Nicephorus hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 36. he affirms, That
the calculation of the Roman use was hard. But he forgeth a deposition, which
his witness will never agnize.

Page 112. he makes Ambrose to say, That the substance of one body is changed
into another. But that holy Father has no such words, as this falsarie has
reported out of his writings.

Page 117. boldly he affirms, that in the writings of Athanasius, Hilarie,
Optatus, Basil, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Cyrill
and other more ancient Fathers there is every where mention made of the
doctrine, which Papists maintain concerning the Pope, the Mass,
Transubstantiation and Images. But it is a bald course to say every where, when
neither himself, nor Bellarmine a far better disputer then he, is able any
where to find the Pope to be supreme judge of controversies, and Christ's Uicar
general, and that he cannot err, or that Christ's body and blood is offered in
the Mass by the Priest for quick and dead, and in honor of Saints, or that
the substance of bread and wine is turned into Christ's body and blood in the
Eucharist, or that any Images are to be worshipped with Latria, and such like
popish doctrines. Blushed he not then, to belly so many Fathers, in so many
matters, and all with one breath?

Page 128. rehearsing certain words of the Magdeburgians concerning factions
and opinions, he adds these words: Among them, that profess the Gospel,
which they have not. He takes also the word Communicationem, from their
sentence concerning the presence of Christ's body.

Page 129. in the allegation out of Irenaeus lib. 3. aduers. haeres. cap. 3. he
choppeth off the beginning of his sentence, which declares, that the tradition
of other Churches was as well to be respected, as that of Rome. He makes him
also to say, That all Churches must agree to the Church of Rome: which he never
thought. Lastly, by tradition he gives his reader to understand, that Irenaeus
speaks of traditions not contained in Scriptures, where expresiy he
mentions the Articles of the faith most plainly contained in holy Scriptures.

Page 177. to show, that there was conformity of Religion throughout
Christendom, except only in some places of the world, where were certain
relics of Pelagians, and Eutychians and other Heretics, for the first he
alleges Gregory lib. 5. Epist. 14. and for the second Greg. lib. 10 in lob
cap. 29. Whereas in the first place he only mentions and Pelagian book, and
in the second does not so much as speak one word of the Eutychians, and in
neither has any word concerning the uniformity of Religion throughout
Christendom.

Page 188. to prove the word Mass he alleges Augustines Sermon. 237. and 251.
de Tempore. Council. Mileuit. cap. 12. Epiphanius haeres. 5. Eusebius. lib. 5.
hist. cap. 23. and vit. Constant. lib. 3. cap. 17. and Council. Carthag. 4. cap.
84. But first Eusebius and Epiphanius are grossly belyed. For how could they
writing in Greek speak of the Latin Mass? Secondly, the two Sermons
ascribed to S. Augustine, as the rest also De Tempore are counterfeit. And yet
nothing is therein concerning the Popish Mass. Thirdly, the Council of Mileuis
speaking of Missae or dimissions of the people by certain blesings, and the
fourth Council of Carthage by the word Missa, understanding the dimission of
the Catechumeni, makes nothing for the Popish Mass. These authors therefore
are fondly and falsely alleged.

Page 201. he tells, how Patritius was sent to the Scots after Palladius, and
for evidence brings forth Prosper contr. Collator. and Bid lib. 1. hist.
Angl. c. 13. but neither of them has one word of Patritius.

Page 228. he says, that Irenaeus accompteth the enumeration of the Bishops of
Rome a full proof against Heretics. But he abuses this holy Father, and
belyeth him. For of this full proof he has not one word. Further, he speaks
of Churches, and not only of the Church of Rome, and with the succession of
Bishops joins the tradition of the faith kept in Churches. Lastly, by the
tradition which he mentions, he means the faith contained in holy
Scriptures.

Page 278. he alleges a place out of S. Augustine, lib. cont. Epist. fundam.
cap. 4. touching succession, as if he made that a principal motive to embrace
the Christian faith, and a proper mark of the Church, whereas that holy Father
reckons that among, and after others, and no way accompteth it a mark of the
Church.

Page 282. S. Augustine lib. de Vtilit. cred. c. 7. is alleged for proof of
the succession of the Church of Rome; but falsely. For he speaks of the
successions of diverse Bishops in the whole Christian Church, which overthrows
the pretended prerogative of the Romish Church.

Page 291. S. Augustine in Psalm. 44. and 47. and lib. 2. contr. liter. Petil.
and other Fathers are alleged, to prove the Church to be so visible, that
every one may see it, and know it. But it seems our adversary cited them at
all adventure. For in some of these places little mention is made of the Church,
and in none of them is his intention proved.

Page 305. To prove these words found in the Legend to have been uttered by S.
Andrew, Ego omnipotenti Deo, qui vnus and verus est, immolo quotidie, etc. He
quoteth Bernard Sermon. de S. Andrea, and Lanfranc lib. contr. Berengar. But
that Sermon is counterfeit, and in neither of the authors are these words to be
found.

Page 383. Bedes testimony lib. 3. hist. cap. 27. is alleged to prove the
sending of Willibrord with eleven companions toward the conversion of Germany.
But the Chapter being read does confute our adversaries falsehood.

Page 401. To prove that Athens had no schools of learning in it, when that
woman, that was afterward Pope, and called John the eight is reported to have
studied there, Zonaras and Cedrenus in vita Michael. and Theod. Anno Christi
856. are produced for witnesses: but falsely and absurdly. For no such matter is
to be gathered out of them.

Page 472. He makes S. Augustine lib. 1. quaest. Euang. q. 38. and Tractat. 2.
in Epist. Joan. to say, that it is as easy to see in all ages, where the true
visible Church goes, as to see the Sun at noone time, when it shines
clearest. But this is a trick of his false dealing. For in the first place he
says only, That the Church is rightly called Lightning, because it breaks
out of the clouds: which shows, that the Church is sometime darkened with
clouds, and not seen. And in the second he has nothing but these words of
the Psalm, in Sole posuit tabernaculum suum. Which do plainly demonstrate,
the Church being like to the Sun, that the same may be hidden or darkened, as
the Sun is hidden in the night, and in the day time obscured with clouds. And
such is the man's honest dealing with other Fathers.

CHAP. XV. Certain examples of Robert Parsons his Thrasonicall bragges, and
beggarly craving of matters in question.
COmmonly we find by experience, that the greatest braggers perform least. If
no man else, yet Rob. Parsons does verify it by his example. For albeit he
boasts much, yet when it comes to performance, he beggeth matters in
question, rather then proves them. In his Epistle dedicatoris he braggeth of
undoubted Charters, Enrolments, Evidences, writings, and witnesses, which he
says he will bring forth for proof of the Romish religion, and gives out
great words of his future doughtie deeds. Yet when we come to the examination
of his best proofs, we find that his witnesses depose either nothing for him,
or much against him, that his evidences are evident demonstrations of his own
weakness and vanity, and that in his own writings he has enrolled himself a
bragging fool in great letters.

There also he tells us further, how he produces the judgments, censures,
sentences, and arrests of all Christian Parliaments of the world, to wit, the
determination of the highest Ecclesiastical Tribunals in favor of his
consorts the Papists of England. But this shameless brag is refuted by the
whole course of his worthless work. For neither does he handle any one
principal point of faith in controversy, nor does he produce the Canons of
lawful general Councels, which have sovereign authority in external
government, to prove the doctrine of the Papists, but only prateth idly of
counterfeit Decretals, and mentions forged instruments, suborned witnesses,
and most weak surmises not worth one chip. Furthermore, where he calls
Councels the highest Tribunals of the Church, he does as it were with his
putatiue Fathers sledge batter the Popes chair in pieces.

Thirdly, he vanteth of the honorable course of true obedience to God in
matters of the soul, and loyal behavior toward temporal Princes in all
worldly affairs held by Papists. And this he says is glorious both before God
and man. But the man's notorious vanity deserves to be hated both of God and
man. For how can they be thought to hold a right course of obedience toward
God, that prohibit the reading of Gods word in the Church in tongues
understood? And how may they seem careful in matters of the soul, that bring
in new and strange worships of God, and for Christ serve Antichrist?

The disloyalty of Papists is too too apparent not only in the rebellions of
England and Ireland, and their treacherous plots against his Majesty and his
predecessors, but also in their doctrine, teaching and professing, that Kings
are the Popes vassals, and that he has power to take away their Crowns, and
to assoile subjects from their obedience. But if any doubted of their loyalty
before, now he may be resolved not only by their treacherous plot to blow up
the Parliament house, but also by their open rebellion in Warwikeshire.

Speaking of the fact of Pope Clement commanding his vassals in England to
keep silence, he boasts of it, as of a miracle. But it is no marvel, to see
the slaves of Antichrist obedient to his command. It were rather miraculous, if
they should follow the laws of God, and submit themselves to their lawful
Princes, and renounce the abominations of Antichrist.

In the latter end of his Epistle he braggeth, That supposing Christ to be
Christ and his promises true, he will (forsooth) by his doughtie discourse of
Three Conuersions decide all the controversies betwixt us and the Papists, and
that, as he professes, with certain sequel of argument, and necessary
demonstration. But his blustering bragges are passed without effect, and his
clients rest more doubtful then before. Nay his arguments are so ridiculous,
that indifferent men do scorn them, and his demonstrations so lousie, that it
appears plainly, that he is better affected to Antichrist, then to Christ,
and groundeth his faith rather on the Popes Decretals, then holy Scriptures.

Page 114. he bears his reader in hand, that really and substantially he is
able to prove our doctrine to be heresy, and to show the beginnings and
authors thereof. But his shows are declared to be shadows, and the substance
of his discourse is disproued, as a pack of real and gross fooleries. Sooner
shall he transubstantiate himself into a mess of Mustard, then either
maintain the mass of Popish heresies, or disprove the substance of our
doctrine.

Neither does he more insolently boast of his own doughtie deeds, then
childishly beg, and take matters in question as granted. In the Epistle
Dedicatory, and diverse other places, Papists are still called Catholics, and
Popish superstition covered and dignified by the name of Catholic Religion.
Matters by all true Christians utterly denied, and by infinite particulars
disproued, and apparently false. For how can they be truly esteemed Catholics,
that embrace the particular faith of the Church of Rome, neither taught by the
Prophets, nor Apostles of Christ, nor known to ye ancient Fathers of the
Church? Or how can a particular, heretical, superstitious and idolatrous
Religion be reputed Catholic?

There also he supposes the ancient monuments of the Church to be charters,
and evidences for the modern Romish Religion. A matter always contradicted by
us, and never proved by our adversaries, and yet boldly affirmed by this
babbling discourser. Let him therefore cease to beg this at our hands, and
orderly deduce the doctrine of the Romish Mass, and Popes tyrannical rule, and
the rest of their unwritten traditions out of the ancient monuments of ye
Church.

Page 7. He tells us, That the Mass and Images were in use in Gregory the 1.
his time. And no question, but he understands the Mass now used, and the
worship of Images by the Church of Rome defended. But these are matters in
question, and not impudently to be affirmed, but seriously to be proved.

Page 311. he names the Popes of Rome head Bishops of the Catholic Church.
But this would rather be soundly proved, (and so he should do the Pope a great
favor) then dissolutely passed over, and boldly begged. For wise men do but
admire his folly, and scorn such loose dealing.

It were an easy matter to specify his impudency in this kind by infinite
particulars. But what need more proofs in matters so evident?

CHAP. XVI. Arguments of Rob. Parsons his gross ignorance and childish
fooleries.
AMong his followers Robert Parsons, they say, is holden a profound Doctor. But
his pitiful fails and errors in mistaking both his authors, and their words
and meaning declare the contrary. In the addition following his Epistle he
tells us, how Constantine the great entered into the Empire next after
Dioclesian. But Ecclesiastical histories show, that Constantius and Galerius
succeeded Diocletian, and that Constantine succeeded his father Constantius.
And if he will not believe us; yet let him see, what Baronius says in his
second and third Tome of Annals, who puts three years between Dioclesian
and Constantine, and others between them two.

There also he says, that Constantine being of a different religion, when he
entered, became a Christian by his pious mother Helena. But the Legend of
Siluester says, that Helena was a Jew in Religion, and endeavored to draw her
son that way. And Eusebius lib. 8. Eccles. hist. cap. 26. shows, that from
the beginning of his reign he was a follower of his father in pious affection
toward our Religion. Se paternae pietatis erga nostrae Religionis disciplinam
ae^eulum and imitatorem ostendit, says he.

Further, he mistaketh the history of Maxentius, affirming That he fained
himself a Christian, when he heard of Constantines coming toward Rome, whereas
Eusebius lib. 8. Eccles. hist. cap. 26. says, he fained Christianity in the
first entrance of his reign. His words are, In ipso imperij ingressu.

Speaking of S. Martin, S. Nectarius, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, he says,
It was presumed and foretold, that they would be such, before they were
Christians indeed. But in the Legend of S. Martin it is said, he was a
Christian at the age of twelve years, and nothing does Parsons allege, whereby
we may understand, that any prophecy was made by any of the future
Christianity of Nectarius, Ambrose, and Augustine.

In his preface speaking of the Church, most ridiculously he compares it to a
mansion house, and the marks thereof to charters, ridiculously I say. For
first there is great difference between a mystical body, and a natural
body, the Church being changed, albeit men continue, and a mansion house not
being moved, although the right be translated to others. Next Charters do
rather show, which are the bounds and marks of lands, then may be called the
marks of them, and are rather compared to Scriptures, then to the marks
assigned by Papists.

Lastly, this similitude of a mansion house does overthrow the cause of the
synagogue of Rome. For the mansion house of the Church is in no one particular
place, and the Charters of the Church are rather holy Scriptures, then Popish
Decretals.

In the same place he alleges Alexander Halensis 3. part. q. 79. to prove,
That a man has two lights, whereby he may understand matters of faith. But in
that part he has only 69. questions, and nothing of the two lights. Durandus
also is there cited in nu. 39. but neither book nor section noted. Does it not
seem therefore, that Parsons, as he has long since lost the light of faith,
so is now become destitute of the light of humane reason?

Page 9. he alleges Tertullian de Coena Domini, who never wrote any book De
Coena Domini. It may be, he mistook Tertullian for Cyprian.

Page 14. He says Peter and Paul were put to death the 14. and last year of
Nero. But Baronius and diverse learned men say, they died in the 13. year of
his reign. Others deny, that they dyed both in one year.

Page 43. He cites an Epistle of Basil Ad Innocentium. But in Basils works no
such Epistle is to be found. And, certes, strange it were, if Basil should
write to Innocentius Bishop of Rome, seeing he died twenty years at the least,
before Innocentius came to be Bishop there, as Canisius in his Chronology, and
Baronius in his Annals, to go nofurther, might have taught him.

Page 54. He alleges Eusebius lib. 7. hist. c. 29. where there are but 26.
chapters of that book in Christophersons version. And page 55. he mentions
two books of S. Augustine ad quaest. Ianuarij, which are more then he ever
saw, or we can find in the works of S. Augustine. Percase he meant S.
Augustines 118. Epistle ad Ianuar. But there is no mention made of such
mysteries concerning immovable or moveable feasts, as our dreaming adversary
fancieth.

Page 67. He alleges Theodoret lib. 6. c. 9. whereas his history contains
only five books.

Page 77. He names one Photinus a Bishop of France, and Ado Bishop of Treues,
whereas he cannot find any Photinus Bishop in the time of Irenaeus, and might
well know, that Ado the Chronicler was of Vienna, and not of Treues.

Page 104. He braggeth, That he will prove the Pope, the Mass,
Transubstantiation, and the use of Images Via negatiua. Which passes the reach
of common foolerie. For who ever heard of affirmative propositions proved by
negatiues? Or who is so sottish to take impudent denials for proofs?

Page 106. Where S. Augustine lib. 4. de Baptis. contr. Donatist. c. 6.
speaks of the custom of not rebaptizing Christians once baptized by
Heretics, our ignorant adversary supposes, he talks of the custom of
baptizing of infants.

Page 111. He alleges the ninth book of S. Ambrose De Sacramentis, and
supposes these words: Non valebit Sermo Christi, etc. to be found in the
fourth, fifth, and ninth book De Sacramentis, and these words, Sermo Christi
qui potuit de nihilo facere, quod non erat, etc. to be in the same books.
Whereas these words are taken out of the book De ijs qui initiantur, etc. and
the former are only found in one book of Ambrose, and neither make for his
purpose.

Page 119. There can be no doubt thereof, says he, speaking of the Popish
doctrine of Sacraments. And why trow you? Forsooth, because the conuenticle of
Trent, the Master of sentences, and Thomas of Aquine have taught it. I would
therefore pray all moderate men attentively to consider this fellows either
madness, or ignorance. We do by arguments out of Scriptures and Fathers refute
the impious doctrine of the conuenticle of Trent, Lombard, and Aquinas. And yet
he thinks it sufficient by the testimony of his own fellows, most
partially deposing in their own cause, to refute our arguments grounded upon
Scriptures, Fathers, and other authentical witnesses.

Page 120. He says, Popish auricular confession is in it self repugnant to
man's sensual nature. As if it were not as natural to confess a truth, as to
deny it. This we find, that nothing is more beneficial to Massepriests, or more
pleasing to man, then to have absolution after confession. And by this engine
the Pope does work many wonders, to maintain his state.

Page 123. He signifies, that Irenaeus lib. 5. aduers. haeres. speaks for
the supremacy of the Pope: whereas the Pope is not once mentioned in that
place, unless it be, where he foretells, that Antichrist tyrannically shall
take upon him as God. Ipse se tyrannico more, says he, conabitur ostendere
Deum.

Page 133. And otherwhere, he supposes, that we are bound to defend all the
singular opinions of the Magdeburgians. But if we allege to Papists the
opinions of Bellarmine, Baronius, Suarez, Stapleton, or other Popish proctors,
they think themselves not tied to their particular doctrines. Again, he
imagines, because the Magdeburgians mislike some of the Fathers in some
things, yt therefore we mislike the^. But neither do we in all things hold with
the Magd. nor do they condemn ye Fathers, yt in some singular points
dissentfro^ the^.

Page 146. A Treatise De bono pudicitiae, and a Sermon De natiuitate Christi is
alleged under the name of Cyprian. And yet it is mere simplicity, to suppose
them to be Cyprians.

Page 165. For the title De Regularibus. In sexto, he alleges De Reg. iuris
lib. 6. mistaking chalk for cheese. And for the 25. Session of the conuenticle
of Trent he cites 28. whereas there are not so many in all.

Page 181. He alleges an Oration of Chrysostom Contra gentes with this
title, Quod vnus est Deus; whereas the true argument is, Quod Christus sit Deus.

Page 239. He talks of the burning of William Tracie. And yet by the acts
that concern him, it appears he died quietly in his bed, and that his
religion was not discovered, but by his testament after his death.

Page 268. he mentions the Bishop of Cardiffe: whereas every man knows,
that there is no such Bishop in England. The records of the story might also
direct his judgment in this matter, but that he uses to look upon no records.

Page 269. He names a certain sect of Heretics, Massilians, as if they of
Massilia were Heretics. But he should say, if he were not grossly ignorant,
Messalians.

Page 282. Hierome is cited Dial. vlt. contr. Lucifer. Whereas it is apparent,
that he wrote only one Dialogue against the Luciferians. He is also alleged
for proof of succession of Bishops, albeit he speak only of the foundation
and succession of the Church.

Page 387. He taxes M. Foxes words against Pope Ioane, as blasphemous. Yet it
is very absurd, to account all to be blasphemy, that is uttered against the
Pope.

Page 444. and 445. in a matter of controversy concerning Innocent the third,
he produces Blondus and Genebrard, two poor parasites of the Pope, to speak
in his cause. Likewise he alleges Platina and Sabellicus, as witnesses for
Hildebrand. For him also he quoteth Sigebert and Auentine that speak against
him, and an Epistle of Anselme, that is not extant. But what is more absurd and
foolish, then to use the testimony either of hired parasites, or of such, as
speaks against the purpose of him that uses them, or of records no where
extant?

But what should we need to seek for more arguments of Parsons ignorance and
foolerie, when his whole discourse is nothing but a pack of errors and
fooleries?

CHAP. XVII. A note of certain speeches of Parsons in respect of God
blasphemous, in respect of his duty to his Prince, disloyal.
IF a man would respect terms; he might percase sometimes esteem Rob. Parsons
to be a man not altogether exorbitant from Religion and loyalty. But if we
look into the whole course of his writing, we shall hardly find in so final a
volume more aguments of impiety and disloyalty. In his Epistle Dedicatorie he
applies these words of the Evangelist, Exurgens, imperauit ventis and mari,
which belong properly to Christ, to the Pope, as if he were able to command the
winds and sea.

In his Preface speaking of arguments of credibilitie for Christian Religion,
and naming the sayings of Prophets, miracles, and testimony of eye witnesses,
he says, that neither they, nor such like are so evident, as philosophical
demonstrations. As if philosophical arguments were more clear and evident,
then the lightsome word of God, or Gods miracles, or else, as if every one were
better able to understand philosophical arguments, known only by the light of
natural reason, then the truth of Scriptures and Religion proved by the light
of Gods holy Spirit, most certain miracles, eye witnesses, and diverse other
arguments.

There also he affirms, that there are like arguments of credibilitie for the
points of Popish Religion now in controversy, as are for the Articles of
Christian Religion. But this is sufficient to overthrow all piety and
Religion. For what man can believe the articles of the faith, if we had no
better ground for them, then for the Popish doctrine of Purgatory,
Indulgences, the Popes Monarchy and infallible judgment, the popish worship
of Angels and Saints and Images, the eating of Christ's body by brute beasts
eating the Sacrament and other unwritten Popish traditions?

Page 102. he compares the doctrine of the Trinity, of Christ's two natures
and one Person, of the proceeding of the holy Ghost, and such like substantial
and necessary points of the Christian faith, to the wicked and corrupt
doctrine of the Popes universal authority of the popish Mass, of
Transubstantiation, worship of Images and such like taught by the Church of
Rome, as if the one were as easily and directly to be proved, as the other. But
what can be devised more impious, then to match the heretical doctrine of
schoolmen, either devised by Popes, or conceived by philosophical deductions,
with the faith of Christ not only proved by divine Scriptures, but also
testified by Fathers, and Catholic Christians of all times?

Page 111. he compares the word Transubstantiation to the word Trinity, and
Consubstantiall. Which is as much, as if he should deny the holy Trinity, and
the Deity of the Son of God, if he cannot prove his Transubstantiation: a
matter that passes his capacity to prove.

Page 104. he allows the donation of Ethelwolph, that gave lands to God, the
blessed Virgin, and all the Saints. But what is more impious, then to match
creatures with the Creator, and to honor Saints, and the Mirgin Mary as Gods?

Likewise does he show himself disloy all to his Prince. In his Epistle
Dedicatorie speaking of obedience due to Princes, he takes from them all
authority to command in Ecclesiastical causes esteeming that he does them
favor in giving them obedience in all worldly affairs. But if he were further
examined, what obedience is due to Princes excommunicated by the Pope, it is
not to be questioned, but he would deny them obedience in temporal affairs
also, and defend the rebellions of subjects against their Princes.

In an addition following his Epistle he insulteth over the late Queen hearing
of her death, and rayleth at her, calling her an old persecutor. The which
argues not only a disloyal affection toward his Prince, but also an inhumane
malice against the dead. And this reward Princes reap, that show favor to
these Scorpions.

There also he prayseth the King for his learning, judgment, and zeal. But if
he were either good Christian, or true subject, he should have commended his
piety, and not have sought to make him subject to the Pope. Again if he had
loved the King, he would not have plotted his destruction.

Page 136. he imputes the burning of Foster, Freese and Tewkesbury, three
godly Martyrs in King Henry the 8. his days to the King, and yet were the
Romish persecutors the causers of their death. Likewise he says, that others
were burned by the Kings authority. So all the fault is laid upon the King,
although the principal agents in these murders were Romish prelates.

Page 252. he proves, that Kings are subject to the Pope by the best reasons
he could devise. Can he be thought then loyal to his Prince, that extolleth
strangers, and debaseth Kings?

Page 257. he laugheth at King Edward the sixth as a child King, as if the
children of Kings were not to succeed their Fathers in their Kingdoms: and
Page 260. he scorneth Proclamations set forth in his name. Percase it would
greatly please him, if all matters were ordered by the Decretals of the Pope.
But what need we other arguments, to convince this fellow of disloyalty, when
his book of titles is extant, wherein he does not only oppugn the Kings title
to the Crown of England, but also gives both the Pope and people authority
over Kings? And if that will not serve, yet when we remember the horrible
treason of Percy and his consorts animated, no doubt, by Parsons, we may
plainly see that he is a Cardinal traitor.

CHAP. XVIII. A particular of Parsons his lies, calumniations, and false
allegations.
NOw we enter into a large field. But it shall be sufficient for us, if of many
impudent lies, calumniations, and false allegations of authors, we rehearse some
part, and give you a taste of his false dealing in the whole. For thereby you
may conjecture, how this child of the father of lies has dealt in the rest. In
a certain addition following his Epistle he tells, how it was foretold, that
S. Martin, Nectarius, Ambrose and Augustine should be converted to Christian
Religion long before it came to pass. But if he vouch not his authors, we may
boldly avouch, that he has forged this lie on his own head without truth or
authority.

In the same place he affirms, that he knows most certainly how the
Papists desired his Majesty's advancement before all others. But he that
reads his book of titles set out under the name of Dolman, and considers
not only the practices of Brook, Watson, and Clerk against the King and the
State, but also the matters objected by the Secular priests against the
Iebusites and their faction concerning this point, and especially the attempt
of the gunpowder papists and underminers of the Parliament house, will say,
that neither Parsons, nor the popish faction showed themselves very zealous of
the Kings advancement. And as for the King of Spaines pentioners, it were great
simplicity to think that taking his money they promised, or intended his
Majesty's advancement and honor.

There also he tells tales of the readiness and forwardness of Papists in
advancing his Majesty's present admission to the Crown. The untruth whereof is
not only testified by their own consciences, but also by secret conuenticles
after the late Queens death, and by open practices to the contrary. True it
is, that when they saw their own weakness, then they came on forward, but
with great sorrow and heaviness of heart appearing in their countenances, and
rather to save themselves then to help the King.

He adds somewhat of his Majesty's Mother, and the loyalty of Papists
toward her. But his glauering leasing may be refuted, first by the history of
Sammier a Iebusite, that was the principal motive to bring her into trouble.
Next by the practices of the Pope, Frenchmen and Spaniards, that used her name
as a pretense for their own ambition. And lastly, by the practices of the
Spanish pentioners, and namely of Parsons for other titles.

In his Preface he says, that Master Fox (in his book of Acts and Monuments)
treats of the principal pillars of his religion, whereof he makes some
Martyrs, and some Confessors, and distributeth them in a certain
Ecclesiastical Calendar, according to the days of every month, wherein their
festiuals are to be kept. But in these few lines he tells many untruths. For
first Master Fox never accounted these Martyrs the principal pillars of his
religion, founding himself and his religion principally upon the Prophets, and
Apostles. Secondly, not Master Fox, but their death and sufferings for
Christ's faith made these holy men and women Martyrs and Confessors. Thirdly
not M. Fox, but the Corrector of the print distributed them in the Calendar
according to his pleasure. Fourthly this Calendar was not made for the Church
of England, which abhors the abuses of popish Calendars, but for a direction
to those that shall desire to know the order and times of their martyrdom and
sufferings, that are named in the story. Lastly, M. Fox never presumed to
appoint festival days for the memorials of these holy men; nor had he
presumed so far, could he have done it. But in this point both he and we
condemn the arrogance and presumption of the Pope, that challenges this power
to himself.

In his argument before his first book he gives out, that the church of Rome
from the times of S. Peter until our days has always maintained and taught
one faith, without change, or alteration of any one substantial article, or
point of belief. And this is the maine post whereon turns his windmil-like
discourse. Who then does not see, yt his whole discourse is founded upon
untruth? That this is a notorious untruth, it appears by the great
alterations of Religion made partly by the Schoolmen, and partly by the Popes
Decretals, and not least by the decrees of the conuenticles of Rome, Lateran,
Constance, Florence and Trent, wherein I hope Parsons will not deny, but that
substantial points of Religion have been discussed.

Page 9. he makes the Centuriasts, Centur. 2. 3. and 4. to say, that Christian
doctrine fell away in the time of the Doctors. But his report is false and
slanderous. For they speak only of a decay or declination in some points of
doctrine, and in some Doctors, and not of any falling away, or corruption in
all the Doctors, or in all points of their doctrine.

Page 23. he says, that some hold, that Joseph of Arimathaea was sent into
Britain by S. Peter. A matter of no moment, yet falsely affirmed by him, yt
cares not what untruth he speak.

Page 40. speaking of Ieffrey of Mommouth he affirms, that lib. 11. ca. 12.
there is not one word of not acknowledging the Popes supremacy. And his reason
is, for that Austin was not sent to the Britains, but to the Saxons, and for
that they had their Archbishops jurisdiction reserved. But his assertion
contains a manifest untruth. For Austin Gregory's Legate required subjection
of them, which they could not deny without impugning Gregory's authority. He
caused them also most cruelly to be murdered, which he would not have done,
unless he had thought his authority to be unjustly resisted. His reason is
most ridiculous, and not only false. For neither is there any mention made of
any reservation of jurisdiction in Austins story, nor do ye Popes Legates spare
to vsurp all jurisdiction where they can do it. Furthermore it is a vain thing
to talk of Gregory's reservation of Archiepiscopall jurisdiction in Britain,
when before his time no Bishop of Rome was ever heard to appoint either Bishop,
or Archbishop in Britain.

Page 57. he says the Lutherans reject Hester, S. James his epistle, and the
Apocalypse from the canon of Scriptures. But their books and acts declare the
contrary. They only make a difference betwixt some Chapters of Hester, S. James
his Epistle, and ye Apocalypse, and other canonical Scriptures, which never
have been doubted of, or called in question.

Page 58. he says, that Luther lib. de Council. did persuade the German Princes
to observe Easter day, as an immovable feast. But either he wilfully
forgets, or slothfully dreameth. For in his book of Councels he says only,
that it had bin better to have left the law of Moses concerning Pase dead and
buried. Quanto fecissent consultius, says he, page 26. si legem Moysis de
Paschali festo reliquissent ibi iacere mortuam and sepultam? so far was he
from making it an immovable feast.

Page 64. he tells, how Vlfrides festival is kept by the universal Church
upon the 12. day of October. But this leasing is plainly confuted by the
Calendars of the Eastern, and African Churches, that never knew any such
Saint, and Molanus signifies, that this Saints feast was only kept in England.
In Anglia, says he, natalis Vlfridi. But now the reformed Church has blown
away these superstitious festiuals, and condemns the Popes claim in
canonizing his disciples.

Rehersing the report of Lucius his conversion out of Baronius, page 77. he
adds, lies and forgeth, like a forging falsary. That which he tells of
Lucius hating the Romans for their old religion, and how he knew, that the
fountain of religion was at Rome, is both added and false. That which he
talks of Pertinax and Tretellius his conversion, and Marcus Aurelius his
favor, and of Fugatius and Damianus, who as he says, were Romans, is false,
and not to be justified by any good author.

That Wicleffe and Husse taught, that Kings are no Kings, longer then they rule
well, as Parsons surmiseth Page 98. is a mere calumniation. Their books
contain contrary doctrine.

Page 103. he says, The article of the Trinity, and Christ's two natures were
as little, or perhaps less specified in the first two hundred years after
Christ, then the popish doctrine of the Popes authority, of the Mass, and of
Images. Matters not only false, but blasphemous. The doctrine of the Trinity
and Christ's two natures being directly deduced out of holy Scriptures, and the
popish doctrine concerning the Pope, the Mass, and Images, being contrary to
Scriptures.

Page 147. speaking of the Magdeburgians, he says, They accuse openly, and by
name S. Athanasius, Basil, Gregory, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Prudentius, Epiphanius
and Ephrem, for the error of praying to Saints. But he that shall read the 4.
Century cap. 4. shall find the contrary. The same is also to be proved by
reason. For what needed they to accuse the Fathers, when neither the writings
mentioned are certainly theirs, nor any matter is in those writings contained,
that cannot probably be defended, and be wrested out of the hands of our
adversaries, that by them would prove prayers to Saints?

Page 152. he bears his reader in hand, that we cannot say, that the faith of
Rome in the time of Gregory the first, was any other, then that which is now in
Rome. And for further proof he refers us to Srapleton his translation of
Bid, and his Fortress of faith. But first the translation is wicked and
corrupt, and his fortress of perfidye and heresy is overthrown by D. Fulke
of worthy memory. Secondly that which he affirms, that we cannot say; that we
both say, and prove, and thereof have given diverse particulars in our former
answer. Finally the points which Stapleton touches in his weak fortress,
are neither the most material points in controversy betwixt us, nor any way
proved by him substantially.

Page 153. he tells, how, by all means we can devise, we discredit Gregory
and Austin. But he does very much discredit his cause by telling these great
untruths: for we do neither discredit them, nor wrong them, but only report, as
we find. Nay we doubt not, but in diverse great points of controversy to
overthrow our adversaries by the testimony of there two.

Page 192. he says, that S. German prayed largely to S. Albane. But Bid, upon
whose credit this report is made, says not so, as we may reads hist. Anglor.
lib. 1. c. 18.

Page 205. he affirms, that Dinothus was punished by the sword of Ethelfred
after the death of S. Austin. Yet Bid lib. 2. hist. Anglor. c. 3. shows
after this execution done upon the innocent Britans, how Austin ordained two
Bishops, which he could not well do being dead.

Page 227. he tells, how Archbishop Cranmer agreed to break King Henry the
8. his last will, and that he conspired to put down and destroy all the Kings
children, and was put to death for heresy and treason. Matters certes most
grossly devised, and impudently affirmed by this wicked heretic and traitor.
For first King Henry's will, if any such were, was not cancelled by him, but by
the popish prelates in Queen Maryes time, and of that the lay Papists brag in
their petition to the King an. 1064. Secondly, not Archbishop Cranmer, but the
bloody Papists had determined not only to break his will, that they might
convey the Crown to strangers, but also to burn his body, if they had not
been prevented by Queen Maryes death. Thirdly that grave Father and holy
Martyr refused to subscribe against Queen Mary, albeit many Papists did it,
and she to requite his kind dealing, cruelly persecuted him to the death.
Lastly he dyed for defense of true Religion, and not for heresy. And albeit
matters of treason were objected to him, yet never came he to his arraignement
for them, as no question Rob. Parsons should, if he might be caught.

Page 239. he says, Latimer stirred a notorious tumult in Bristow, but this is
not only false, but also improbable: for the good old man was most meek and
peaceable.

Page 241. he writes, that the Abbots of Glastenbury, Whalley, and Reading,
and D. Forest, and Powell gave their blood for defense of Catholic unity. But
the acts of their trial show, that diverse of them were executed for plain
rebellion, and all for treason. And if any Abbots or Iebusites should make the
like stirs abroad against the Pope, or the King of Spain, it would avail
them but little to pretend Catholic unity. Forest and his fellows under
pretense of this Catholic unity, sought to revoke and call back into England
the Popes tyranny.

Page 243. he shameth not to say, that the King gave Bishop Gardener special
commission to procure a reconciliation with the Pope. But his impudent lying
may be refuted both by his commission and instructions yet extant, wherein no
such matter is signified, but rather the contrary. Parsons therefore may do
well to show, by what commission he lies thus shamefully.

Page 283. he says, that all the Archbishops of Canterbury were of one
religion until Cranmers time. But hardly shall he prove, that all of them had
in them any religion at all. And by no means can he deny, but as the church of
Rome changed her faith, so her lovers likewise changed. The faith of the
conuenticle of Trent none of them ever knew.

Page 287. he alleges these words, as out of Calvin lib. 4. Instit. c. 1.. 3.
We are forced to believe the Church to be invisible, and to be seen only by
the eyes of God. But he that has any eyes at all may see this fellows
impudent lying. In that place he has no such words, but rather teaches
contrary. Likewise does he belie Luther, affirming, that he teaches the Church
to be invisible.

Page 296. and 297. he says, that we doubt, that the Church is failed, and
that Master Fox contradicts former writers, and that we hold, that all is
not true, which the Church held. But we make no doubt, but that Parsons does
grossly lie and feign. For neither do we say that the universal Church
fails, or so erreth, that none holds the truth, nor does Master Fox either
so teach, or contradict former authentical writers.

Page 308. he tells us, how the Centuriasts Centur. 3. ca. 4. reprehend
Cyprian sharply for speaking of offering sacrifice. But he abuses his reader,
and mistaketh the whole matter. For they do not mislike him for speaking of
offering sacrifice, but for attributing too much to the priest. In the same
place, thinking that he has found out a lease of priests, Lo here, says
Parsons, three massing priests, and yet is there not one word in that place of
the Mass. True it is, that Cyprian speaks of a sacrifice, but his sacrifice
was not the massing popish sacrifice, but a sacrifice of thanksgiving.

Page 310. he says, that Constantine built 4. goodly Churches within the city
of Rome, carried earth to their first foundation, and adorned them with Images:
Three lies no where found, but in the fabulous legends calculated by Friars and
Mass Priests under the shadow of a glass of wine. Nay the legends themselves
are not so false, as Parsons his discourse of Three Conuersions. For they place
S. Paul's Church without Rome, whereas he by his cunning masonry has placed it
in Rome.

Page 316. he charge us with Symbolizing with the Manicheyes. But if to agree
with heretics is to symbolize with them, then does Parsons symbolize with
heretics. We do anathematize both the Manicheyes, and all other heretics.

Page 318. and 319. he tells diverse lies of the Centuriasts, making them to
condemn diverse Fathers for invocation of Angels: whereas it does not appear,
that either those Fathers which are there mentioned prayed to Angels, or that
the Centuriasts do simply condemn them for writing as they did.

Page 354. he says Charles the great was made Emperor of the West by Leo the
third, which is a ridiculous and vainglorious lie. For next to God, his own
sword, and the consent of the people of Rome and Italy made him Emperor of
that country, the rest of his Empire he had by his own right. As for Leo the
third he had nothing to give, but only by certain ceremonies was appointed to
declare the Emperors titles, and the peoples voluntary submission.

Page 373. he gives out, that the sixth general Council was called by Pope
Agatho. But unless he bring proof, it will appear, that he is nothing
scrupulous in giving out lies.

Page 378. he says, the Council of Laterane under Innocent the third was
holden an. 1115. But he miscounteth a hundred years, as his own Chroniclers
may inform him. He says also, that all Councels were holden by order of the
Bishop of Rome, and confirmed by him, and none held for lawful without his
confirmation. But these are matters merely forged. For first, not the Bishops
of Rome, but the Emperors called the first general Councels. Secondly, albeit
the Bishop of Rome should have withstood them, yet should their acts have
passed, neither needed these Councels any confirmation from the Bishop of Rome.
Thirdly, diverse things passed in the sixth Council of Aphrike, in the Council
of Chalcedon, and the sixth Synod maugre the Bishop of Rome, albeit yet a
Bishop, and not the head of Antichrists kingdom, as the Pope proved
afterward. To conclude, lies are as rife with Parsons, as lice were in Egypt,
when they came upon man and beast, as we read Exodus 8.

CHAP. XIX. Parsons his texts and allegations for the most part make against
himself and his cause.
HE is a simple Fencer, that hurts himself with his own weapons, and in the
common opinion of men they are accounted unwise, that bring forth furniture
into the field, that does better serve the enemy, then themselves. Yet this is
the wisdom of Parsons throughout his discourse. The point of his allegations
does commonly serve to pierce himself, and no better allegations need we then
those, which he brings to overthrow that cause, which he defends. In his
Epistle Dedicatory he alleges these words out of the Psalm 118. Pax multa
diligentibus legem tuam, and non est illis scandalum. But what could be
leuelled more directly against the cause of Papists? For first they regard not
holy Scriptures, nor the law of God. Next their whole confidence is in the
Pope, and in his dispensations and indulgences. Thirdly they seek not for
peace, but with wars and seditions trouble the Christian world. No marvel
therefore, if the whole world be scandalized by the Popes, Cardinals, Monks,
Friars, and their superstitions, idolatries, barbarous cruelties, perfidious
dealing and wickedness.

In his Preface he cites S. Augustine de morib. Eccles. Cath. c. 17. and
Chrysostom homil. 14. inc. 24. Matthew. but both make against him. Crassas
omnino mentes, and corporeorum simulachrorum pestifero pastu morbidas ad diuina
iudicanda defertis, says that holy Father, and so we may likewise say to the
Papists. You bring with you gross minds, and distempred with the pestilent
norriture of material images to judge of divine matters. And this is the
reason, why they worship Saints, and other creatures, and make gross
similitudes of the Trinity and divine persons. Chrysostom speaks of
Christian Religion, and not of the Popes monarchy, or of the idolatrous popish
Mass, or of Purgatory, or Indulgences, or such popish trash.

Out of the (...) of Saint Matthew he cites Christ's words, foretelling, that
false Prophets should arise and say, lo here is Christ, or there is Christ. But
this text does directly prove the Mass Priests to be false Prophets and
seducers. For one says, lo here is Christ pointing to this Altar, or that
Crucifixe; another pointing to another Pixe or Crucifixe says, lo there is
Christ. Chrysostom is alleged homil. 43. operis imperfect. in Matthew. as
speaking against men negligent in trying out the truth of doctrine. Yet will
not popish prelates permit Christians to hear Scriptures publicly read in
vulgar tongues, nor do they give liberty to Christians to judge of the false
doctrine of Mass Priests and Friars. Finally they do not like, that Christians
should be too busy in trying out the truth, and in disputing of matters of
Religion.

He tells us further, that many of our country this day persuade themselves,
that either matters of religion perteine not greatly unto them, or that they go
well as they are. But if this be a fault, then are the Papists herein most
faulty. For in Italy and Spain they are forbidden to talk of matters of
Religion, as things perteining to Priests and Friars, and doubt not, but that
the Pope and his Cardinals together with inferior Prelates have ordered all this
business excellently well. And this is the error of all the Popes puppy
followers.

Ambrose is there alleged to show, that God will be believed on his word. What
indignity were it, says he, lib. 1. de Abraham ca. 3. if believing the
testimonies of men concerning others, we shall not believe the oracles of God
concerning himself? Do not then Papists offer a great indignity to God, that
will not believe Scriptures to be Canonical, unless the Pope and Romish
Church do tell them so?

These words John 5. verse 44. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes of God alone? And that which is
said by Parsons concerning pious affection, required as a key to open the gate
to true faith, most fitly may be applied against Parsons and his consorts, for
they seek for glory one of another, and all for preferment from the Pope and
Cardinals. They seek also the honor of Angels and Saints. But neither do they
seek for Gods glory alone, nor do they desire so much the praise of God, as of
men. Further how can they pretend pious affection, and the keys to open the
gate to true faith, when by fraud, treachery, violence and bloody massacres of
Christians they seek to maintain not the faith, but heresy; not the truth of
Christ, but the false and erroneous doctrine of Antichrist? Lastly, Parsons,
where he makes pious affection a key to open the gate to true faith, shows
himself either impious in placing piety before true faith, or heretical, that
with Pelagius supposes a man may be pious, before faith, by force of freewill.

Page 9. for proof of the sacrifice of the Mass he brings a testimony out
of Irenaeus, lib. 4. aduers. haeres. ca. 32. which quite overthrows the
popish sacrifice of the Mass. For there he speaks of the sacrifice of
Christians, and calls it primitias creaturarum, the first fruits of Gods
creatures. But the Papists in their Mass suppose, that the Priest offers not
the first fruits of Gods creatures, but the very body and blood of Christ.

Page 14. he stands much upon the testimonies of Gildas, Nicephorus,
Theodoret, and Sophronius, which name diverse that preached the Gospel in
Britain. But all this tends to the overthrow of Parsons his discourse, who
in that place undertakes to prove, that S. Peter and not other preachers did
first convert the Britans to the Christian faith.

Page 59. he shows how Wilfride converted the Southsaxons, which is as far
from his purpose, as the North from the South. For in all this dispute he
undertakes to prove, that the Britans were first converted to the Christian
faith by Romans, and not by Frenchmen or Britans.

Page 67. out of Tertullian he goes about to prove, that Blastus was
condemned as an heretic, for that privily with his observance of Easter he
sought to bring in ludaisine. And Page 73. he affirms, that Constantine did
authorize and publish the decrees of ye Nicen Council. Both which points
directly make against our adversaries. For while they rigorously stand upon the
observance of Easter, and offer paschal lambs, they do after a sort renew and
call back into use the ceremonies of the Jews; and while they ascribe to the
Pope all authority to confirm and publish the acts of Councels, they do
abrogate the authority of Christian Princes in favor of Antichrist.

Page 97. he alleges diverse texts and testimonies to prove that temporal
Princes are Gods vicars and substitutes within their realms. But if that be
so, then the Pope is the devils substitute, and vicar of hell, that oftentimes
goes about to remove Gods substitutes from their government, and to kill them.

Page 106. S. Augustine lib. 4. de Baptism. c. 24. is produced as a witness,
to prove, that what the universal Church does hold, and ever has held, and
was not instituted by Councels, has come from the Apostles. But this witness
ouerthrowed the whole cause of popery, if he may be credited. For neither the
doctrine of the Popes universal monarchy in the visible Church and in
Purgatory, nor of the popish sacrifice in honor of Saints and Angels, and for
the benefit of quick and dead, nor of the worship of images, nor the rest of
the unwritten traditions of the Romish Church have been always held by the
universal Church, nor are at this day held by the same. Further it is
manifest, that the worship of images was first established in the second
Council of Nice; and the doctrine of transubstantiation and auricular
confession in the Council of Lateran under Innocent the third; the carnal
real presence in a Council at Rome under Nicholas the 2. and other popish
heresies in the Councels of Constance, Florence, and Trent. Are they not then
ashamed to call their traditions Apostolical?

Page 145. he alleges an Epistle of Ignatius ad Heronem, where he says,
Virgins custodi tanquam sacramenta Christi. But this overthrows the practice
of the Romish Church, which is nothing curious in keeping of these Sacraments,
nor so watchful in looking to them, but that they are often gotten with child
by the Mass Priests, Monks and Friars. Furthermore this shows, that there
are more Sacraments then 7. which no Papist dare affirm, unless he will
encurre the thundering curse of the connenticle of Trent.

Page 159. he reherseth an Epistle of Gregory condemning them that worship
stocks or stones. Do we then think that either Gregory or Austin did convert
the English to the worship of these things? He does also wickedly translate
Gregory's Epistle, leaving out these words, a Germaniarum Episcopis, which
contain a contradiction to the words of Bid, who says, that Austin was
ordered by a French Bishop, and not a German Bishop.

Page 229. he alleges these words of Augustine epist. 165. in illum ordinem
Episcoporum etc. that is, If any traitor should have crept into that order of
Roman Bishops, it should not have prejudiced the Church of God, or innocent
Christians. But he cutteth off the midst of the sentence, and some words in
the latter end, least that holy Fathers opinion might appear too clearly. And
yet it appears thereby sufficiently, that Roman Bishops may be false
traitors, and that the succession of the Popes is no mark of the Church,
seeing Augustine does say, the Church may stand, notwithstanding their falsehood
and treachery.

Page 280. he cites the words of Irenaeus lib. 4. aduers. haeres. c. 4.
commending Succession with the gift of truth. What is then the bare succession
of Popes, or Turks without truth?

Page 295. he confesses, That the truth of this question, whether this or that
be the true Church, is a matter of understanding. Out of this grant therefore
we conclude, that we cannot discern with our eyes, which is the true Church,
nor know it by the succession of Popes, or such like sensible marks.

Page 307. He produces the example of S. Laurence dispensing the cup of
Christ's blood from the altar. Do not the Mass Priests therefore shame to
drink all alone, and to refuse to dispense the cup from the Lords table?

Page 360. He alleges diverse orders concerning doctrine, life, and the
ceremonies of the Church. But all are repugnant to the ceremonies of the Romish
Synagogue.

Page 372. He tells us, how the Gospel was laid in the midst of Bishops
sitting in Council. But this shows, that matters there ought to be decided
by the word of God, and not by the Popes Decretals.

Finally, he shows page 475. out of S. Augustines 48. Epistle ad Vincentium,
that the Church is sometime shadowed and obscured: which plainly overthrows
the Popish doctrine concerning the illustrious and perpetual visibilitie of
the Church of Christ.

If then any simple Papist heretofore have been seduced by this fabulous
discourse of Rob. Parsons, to believe, that the inhabitants of this land have
been thrice converted to that faith, which now is professed at Rome, or to give
credit to the heretical doctrine of the Romanists; let him reform his
opinion, and beware how he admit such trifling books, wherein Scriptures are
so wickedly abused, and Fathers so corruptly alleged, and lies so commonly
interlaced. And if he love Rob. Parsons; let him admonish him hereafter, to
have more care what he writes, and to desist from wresting and abusing
Scriptures, from falsisying and corrupting the testimony of Fathers, from
Thrasonicall bragging, and yet beggarly craving matters in controversy, from
his impious speeches against God, and disloyal terms against his Prince, and
finally from lying, slandering and impertinent babbling. Otherwise as his faults
and errors appear many and grievous: so it will manifestly appear, that it is
Gods judgment, that so wicked a cause should be defended so weakly, leudly,
and wickedly. God give him grace to repent him of his inueterate malice against
true Christians, and confirm all Christians in the truth, that they give no
ear to the fabulous tales, and leasings of such lewd, wicked, and malicious
companions.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Discourse precedent.
THe Praeface contains a brief examination of Robert Parsons his Epistle
Dedicatorie, of the addition to it, and of his Praeface.

The 1. Chapter disputes this question: Whether S. Peter the Apostle preached
the Gospel in Britain, or no.

The 2. Chapter shows, what we are to think of the pretended Conversion of
Lucius King of Britain, and of the Britains to Christian Religion by
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome and his Agents.

The 3. Chapter resolves us of Austin the Monks coming into England, and of
his preaching and proceeding here.

In the 4. Chapter is proved, that the modern doctrine of the Church of Rome,
which the Church of England rejects, was either oppugned by S. Peter,
Eleutherius, Gregory, and Austin, or at the least unknown unto them.

The 5. Chapter contains a brief answer to Parsons his fond and frivolous
discourse, wherein desperately he undertakes to prove, that the faith now
professed in Rome, is the same and no other, then was taught by Eleutherius,
and Gregory, in time past.

The 6. Chapter discovers the vanity and foolerie os Parsons his whole
Treatise of three Conuersions of England.

The 7. Chapter brings evident demonstrations, that the late Popes of Rome
have deserved nothing of England, or the English nation, but hatred and
detestation.

The 8. Chapter contains proofs concluding, that the Popes of Rome of this
time are not the successors of Peter or Eleutherius, but rather of Pope Ioane.

The 9. Chapter shows, that the succession of Romish Popes is neither mark
of the Church, nor mean of trial of the truth.

The 10. Chapter proves the Church of England to be the true Church of God,
and to hold the Apostolic and true Catholic faith.

The 11. Chapter refuteth Parsons his idle discourse Part. 2. of his Treatise,
wherein he pretends to seek for the original and descent of the Church of
England from the Apostles times downward.

The 12. Chapter shows, that the modern Church of Papists was not visible in
the world for more then a thousand years after Christ, and never was fully
settled, nor plainly visible in England.

Chap. 13. therein is declared how little conscience Parsons makes, to wrest
and corrupt holy Scriptures.

The 14. Chapter contains a catalogue of diverse falsifications, false
allegations, and corruptions of the Fathers of the Church, and other authors,
committed by Parsons.

The 15. Chapter exhibiteth certain examples of Parsons his Thrasonicall
bragges, and beggarly craving of matters in question.

The 16. Chapter alleges arguments of Parsons his gross ignorance, and
childish fooleries.

The 17. Chapter contains a Table of certain speeches of Parsons, in respect
of God, blasphemous, in respect of his duty to his Prince, disloyal.

The 18. Chapter contains a Table of Parsons his lies, calumniations, and
false allegations.

The 19. Chapter shows, how Parsons his texts and allegations, for the most
part, make against himself, and his cause.

FINIS.

