THE UNMASKING of a Masse-monger.

WHO IN THE COVNTERFEIT Habit of S. AUGUSTINE has cunningly crept into the
Closets of many English-Ladies.

OR, THE VINDICATION of Saint AUGUSTINES Confessions, from the false and
malicious Calumniations of a late noted Apostate.

By M. S. D. of EXETER.

1. TIM. 1.19. and 20. Having Faith and a good Conscience, which some having
put away, and as concerning Faith have made shipwreck.

Of whom is HYMENIVS, and ALEXANDER, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that
they may learn not to blaspheme.

PSALM. 22.16. Dogs are come about me, and the counsel of the Wicked has
assaulted me.

LONDON. Printed by B.A. and T. FAUCET, for NICH: BOVRNE, and are to be sold
at his Shop near to the Royal- Exchange. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND HIS VERY WORTHY Friends, Sir BAPTIST HICKES
Knight, and the good Lady his Wife.
AS the holy Apostles, Right Worshipful, so all faithful Christians derive
their faith from CHRIST. Acceptam a CHRISTO disciplinam fideliter nationibus
assignarunt, says De praescript.
TERTVLLIAN, speaking of the Apostles. He is the Foundation that cannot fail,
and the Truth, that cannot err; and therefore, are the Faithful said to be
built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; Ephesians. 2.
because they first Preached CHRIST, the only Cornerstone, and main
Foundation of the Church. Upon the Foundation of CHRIST and his Apostles both
St. AUGUSTINE and all the ancient Fathers built their Faith.

Do we then think, that the Translator of St. AVSTINES Confessions a
notorious Rinegate from the Faith of the Church of England, has reason out of
that Father to draw his Romish Doctrine? Sure no, the poison of his Heresy
cannot be found in that holy Fathers Works. All his Confessions are directed
to GOD, and neither to Saints, nor Angels, nor to the Virgin MARY, as is the
use and practice of the Synagogue of Rome. The Popes two Swords, and his triple
Crown, his supreme Power to judge, his Cardinals, Hierarchicall Orders, and
Universal Monarchy over the whole Church he knew not. The real presence of
CHRIST'S Body under the accidents of Bread and Wine, and the eating thereof by
the mouth of the Faithful; yea, by the mouths of the Reprobate and brute
Beasts he never taught. Neither did he teach the monstrous Doctrine of
Transubstantiation and the reft of the abominable Heresies, established against
us in Trent.

Hungry Dogs may dream of Bread. (...), says THEOCRITVS in Piscatorib. And
as ATMANASIVS says, in Apolog. Defug. Heretics forge opinions according to
their own pleasure. Pro libidine sua id opinatur quod volunt. But Truth will
always stand firm.

Wherefore, seeing this Apostate, so unkind to his Parents, so false to his
Country, so malicious to Religion, has some years since published St.
AUGUSTINES Confessions, translated into English, in a long Preface, and diverse
false marginall Notes, Observations, and Calumniations, endeavoring to induce
the simple to dislike the Truth professed in this Church, and to affect and
approve the corruptions of Popery, as if S. AUGUSTINE did favor his Sect, and
dislike our Confession; I have thought it a Work worth my labor, to Vindicate
that holy Father out of this impure fellows false fingers. Not that you need
to be resolved of the truth of Religion, wherein I know you are firmly
established; but to the end, that what I write for the establishing of the
weak, coming forth under the Patronage of your name, might remain as a
perpetual testimony of that love and respect, which I have borne and always
shall bear you.

These fellows impudently arrogate to themselves the Name of Catholics. But,
as ATHANASIVS says in his 2. Orat. against the Arrians; How can they be
reputed among the members of the Catholic Church, whose Faith is not
Apostolic? This young Nouice may please himself with his childish Annotations
and Prefations; but, I shall show they are no better, then those Childish
fables and fooleries, which S. AVSTINE, Lib. 2. contr. Academic. would have
cast out of men's hands. Nay, diverse points of Popery are no better then those
monstrous Fancies, which ORIGIN condemns writing against CELSVS. And this I
shall (God willing) hereafter plainly demonstrate, and not only take from him
all that hold, that he thinks to have, either in Saint AUGUSTINES
Confessions, or in any other Book of his.

This Treatise I consecrate to GOD under the Patronage of your favor,
beseeching him that it may profit many, so, that the Thanks may remain to
you, and that thereby you may understand how much I honor you, and that I
shall always remain:

Yours, much obliged and devoted: M. SVTCLIFFE.

THE PREFACE TO the Christian Reader.
FRom the excellency of S. AUGUSTINES Piety, Virtue, and Learning, we purpose
not (Christian Reader) to derogate any thing: nay, we doubt not to prefer him
before many others, both ancient and late Prelates. Let the whole List of late
Popes, and their purple Cardinals, and Mitred Prelates, be produced, and
compared with that holy Father, I suppose he will surpass them all; neither
do we doubt, but he is more worthy then many others, (...): yet does he not
exempt his Writing from other men's judgment. Id genus literarum, says he,
writing against Faustus, lib. 11. c. 5. Quae non praecipiendi authoritate, sed
proficiendi exercitatione scribuntur a nobis, non cum credendi necessitate, sed
cum iudicandi liberate legendum est: so he permits others to judge of his
Writings. Neither does he disdain in the same place, to prefer the
Canonical Books of Scripture before them: nor do we think it any
disparagement unto him, or other Fathers, to have the Apostles preferred before
them, as he writes unto Hierome, Epist. 19. There also he gives that
privilege to Scriptures only, Not to err in any thing.

The Apostate does in diverse places call him an incomparable Doctor: yet never
did S. Augustine so think of himself, nor do other learned men so esteem
him, but that Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Basil, Hierome,
Ambrose, and others, might be compared with him.

But the more excellent he is, the more is our gain; the less the Apostates
advantage. For this I affirm, and I doubt not but to make it good against all
the pack of Jesuits, and not only against this silly Translator, whose soul
is lately turned and translated Popish; First, that S. AUGUSTINE never believed
the Popes infallible judgment in matters of Faith, nor his sublime and
universal Monarchy over the whole Church, nor the Doctrine of the Popes
Schools and Decretals; and secondly, that he holds nothing as a matter of
Faith and necessary to be believed, that is contrary to the Articles of
Religion publicly professed in the Church of England.

In proof whereof, that we may proceed more particularly and punctually, we
shall (God willing) declare in the first Chapter, that S. AVSTINE never knew
either the Decrees of Trent enacted against us, or that part of Romish Religion
which this Church of England admits not, and which this Apostate and his
Consorts hold to be Catholic. In the second Chapter shall be demonstrated,
that many of these Points of Romish Religion which we reject are also
contradicted by S. AUGUSTINE. Thirdly, because the Apostate and his Consorts,
do ever and anon challenge to themselves the name of Catholics, we propose
in the third Chapter by Arguments invincible to convince them, that they are
neither Catholics nor hold the true Catholic and Apostolic Faith. The fourth
Chapter, shall contain the examination of the Apostates Title page, and his
Epistle dedicatory. In the fifth Chapter, the Apostates absurd tedious and
malicious Preface is scanned and refuted. The sixth Chapter, sets down
Notes and Animaduersions upon the Translators idle Advertisement. Jn the
seventh and last Chapter, the false wicked and absurd Notes of the Translator
upon S. AUGUSTINES Text, are refuted and expugned.

Now how contrary S. AUGUSTINES writings are to Popery, here I will give a
touch in general. Non sit nobis religio, says he, c. 55. de Ver. Relig. in
phantasmatibus nostris; Let us not frame Religion according to our fancies. But
Popish Religion is wholly grounded upon the Popes fantasies and fantastical
Decretals.

In the same Book and Chapter he shows, that true Religion does tie us to
one God, that is Almighty. But Popish Religion does oblige men to serve Saints
and Angels, and to worship many Gods on every Altar, that have no power. And
again, Non sit nobis Religio humanorum operum cultus. And afterward, Non sit
nobis Religio cultus hominum mortuorum. And speaking of Angels, he says,
Honoramus eos charitate non seruitute nec eis Templa construimus. So he
declares, that Religion consists not in the worship of Images, or the works
of men's hands, or in the worship of dead men, or Saints, or in the service of
Angels; showing, that then Temples were not built in the honor of Angels, or
any Service given to them: all direct contrary to the practice of the Romish
Church.

In ijs quae aperte in Scripturis posita sunt inueniuntur illa omnia quae
continent fidem moresque viuendi, says he, lib. 3. de Doctr. Christ. c. 9. So
he holds Scriptures to be both sufficient and perspicuous in all matters
concerning salvation. And Lib. de Bon. Viduit. c. 1. Sancta Scriptura nostrae
Doctrinae regulam figit, ne audeamus supera plus quam oportet. All contrary to
the Doctrine of false Romish Catholics, which hold the Scriptures to be
obscure and dark, imperfect, and no sufficient Rule, without Traditions.

Disp. 2. contr. Fortunat. After that man sinned by Free Will, we were cast
headlong into a necessity of sinning. And Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 30. Man,
ill using Free Will, lost both himself and it. But false Catholics deny that
it is so lost, but that we may freely do well.

Lib. 4. contr. Julian. he denies, that Infidels can do works pleasing to
God: which Papists admit not.

In his Book de Unit. Eccles. c. 1. he acknowledges no Head of the Church but
CHRIST JESUS, the only begotten Son of the living God, who is also the
Savior of his Body. False Catholics make the Pope to be the Head of the Church.

Omnes homines sub Lege constitutos reos facit Lex, says S. Austine. But false
Papists seek for justification by the Law.

Iustitia nostra quamvis vera sit, tamen tanta est in hac vita, vt potius
peccatorum remissione constet, quam perfectione virtutum, says S. Augustine,
lib. 19. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 27. He says, Our justice stands in remission or
sins, and not in the perfection of virtue: The Papists teach contrary.

Lib. 2. contr. Epist. Parmen. c. 8. he denies, that S. Paul, or other
Apostles, are our Mediators. And again, Pro quo nullus interpellat sed ipso
pro omnibus hic vnus verusque Mediator est. But this Apostate, and his
Consorts, use the mediation of the Virgin Mary, of Angels, and Saints.

Cum Petro dicitur ad omnes dicitur, pasce Oues meus, says S. Austine, de
Agon. Christ. c. 30. Papists contrary believe, that these words do properly
belong to Peter, and the Pope.

When it was said to Peter, I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, the Church Universal was signified, says S. Austine, Tract. 124. in
loan. The Apostate contrary restrains this to the Pope.

S. Austine in Epist. ad lanuar. 118. and Lib. 3. de Doctr. Christ. c. 9.
mentions only two Sacraments, which our Church allows: False Catholics
add other five, and hold, they justify ex opere operato; which was a Doctrine
never known by S. Augustine.

Lib. de Fid. ad Petrum, c. 19. he says, The Church cease not to offer the
Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, wherein there is action of Graces, and a
commemoration of Christ's Flesh, which he gave for us, and of his Blood, which
he shed for us. Contrariwise, the Apostate and his fellows deny, that Bread
and Wine are effered, and suppose, that his Flesh and Blood is really offered
for us in the Eucharist.

Tract. 30. in Joan. S. Austine says, that Christ's Body, in which he rose
again, must be in one place. And Sermon. 53. de Verb. Dom. Christus caput
nostrum sursum in coelis est. The Aduersaeries of Truth say he is here below on
every Altar, and believe, that the Pope is the Head of the Church.

Tractat. 26. in Joan. and in Psalm. 77. he says, that the Sacraments of the
Old and New Testament are equal in the thing that is signified, though diverse
in signs: Which overthrows the carnal reaell presence of Christ's Body and
Blood, under the accidents of Bread and Wine, in the Sacrament.

De morib. Eccles. Cath. lib. 1. c. 3. S. Austine condemns such as worship
Sepulchers and Pictures. Et de Fid. and Symb. c. 7. Tale simulachrum Deo nefas
est Christiano in Templo collorari, says he, condemning the making of the
Image of God, and placing it in Churches. In his Book de Haeres. he shows,
that the Simonians and Carpocratians were reputed Heretics: yet the worship of
Images and Saints Relics is reputed no small part of the Romish Faith.

In his 6. Book of Confessions, c. 5. he shows, that God persuades us to
believe Scriptures, condemning such as ask, how we know that the Scriptures
were delivered to men by the ministration of the holy Ghost. But false and
counterfeit Christians, and this Apostate, do make this question commonly, and
believe not Scriptures, without Tradition.

Quid mihi est cum hominibus vt ipsi confessiones meas audiant, says S.
Austine, lib. 10. Confess. c. 2. But the Apostate and his Apostaticall Consorts
think it a matter necessary to confess, and reckon up all sins, and the
circumstances thereof, making Confession a necessary ingredient of the
Sacrament of Penance.

Finally, it were an easy matter to show, that S. AUGUSTINE does discord with
the Papists in all those Points wherein they differ from us; but this may serve
for a tasse in the interim, until we discourse hereof more particularly in the
second Chapter of the Treatise following. Now this is sufficient, to show the
falsitie and poverty of the Translator, and his Notes and Obsernations upon S.
AVSTINES Confessions, wherein most simply and weakly he endeavors to make
that worthy Father of his party. Quid est egere, says S. AVSTINE, de Vit.
Beat. And he answers, Sapientiam non habere. And again he says. Nihil est
aliud habere egestatem quam habere stultitiam. So that by Saint AVSTINES
judgment, this man being void of Wisdom, and full of Foolerie, is but a poor
Translator, wracking himself upon S. AVSTINE, upon whom he meant to lay the
ground of his foolish and vain Religion. Therein also we may percciue how
vainly our Adversaries boast of Fathers, and especially of S. AUGUSTINE, who
in all important matters of Faith are directly opposite unto them. But leaving
all further preambular speeches, we will now begin to handle such matters, as
the rinegned Translator does principaelly insist upon.

THE UNMASKING of a Masse-monger. WHO In the counterfeit habit of S. AUGUSTINE
has cunningly crept into the Closets of many English Ladies: OR, The
Vindication of S. AUGUSTINES Confessions, from the false and malicious
Calumniations of a late noted Apostate.
CHAP. I. That S. AVSTINE never knew either the Decrees of the conuenticle of
Trent enacted against us, or that part of the Romish Religion, which the Church
of England admits not, and which the Apostate and his consorts hold to be
Catholic.
MVch do our Adversaries insist upon the name of Catholics and title of the
Catholic Church. So do also all other Heretics, as says Lactantius, lib. 4.
Divine. instit. c 30. Singuli quique haeriticorum caetus, se potissimum
Christianos and suam esse ecclesiam eatholicam putant. But if that be Catholic
which at all times, of all Christians and in all places has been holden as
Vincentius Lirinensis aduers. haeres. teaches us, then certes the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome is not Catholic.

In the judgment of S Augustine it cannot be accounted either Catholic or
soundly Christian.

For first S. Austine refers himself in all matters of faith to holy
Scriptures, and speaks most reverently of them, Canonica scriptura veteris
and noui Testamenti, says he, Lib. 11. contr. Faust. c. 5. Est in sede quadum
sublimiter constituta, cujus authoritati seruiat omnis fidelis and pius
intellectus. He places their Authority above all Councels, Fathers, and
Popes, and would have all pious Christians to submit their understanding unto
them; but such as rayled upon them, and called them a dead and killing letter,
and said they were imperfect, obscure, ambiguous, and flexible, he never did
acknowledge to be Catholics or Christians.

He never believed nor knew the traditions of the Church of Rome concerning the
consecrating of Crosses and Images,

He believed not that traditions not written were to be received with like
affection,

That traditions should be added to the rule of Faith was more then he could
ever imagine. Sancta scriptura, says he, Debon. viduit. c. 1. Nostrae
doctrinae regulam figit. Holy Scripture gives us a fixed and certain rule. And
l. 2. con. Donatist. He accounts the Scriptures to be a divine ballancer,
wherein Doctrines may be justly weighed. But other ballancers he accounts
deceitful. Non afferamus stateras dolosas, says he, Vb^ appendamus quod
volumus, and quomodo volumus pro arbitrie nostro; dicentes hoc grave, hoc leave,
sed afferamus diuinam stateram de Scripturis sanstis, tanquam de the sauris
Dominicis, and in illa quid sit grauius appendamus: imo non appendamus, sid a
Domino appensam recognoscamus.

The Church of Rome believes, Austine gave no such credit to that, or any
other tranflation. Nay contrary, lib. 15. de ciuit. D.c. 13. he prefers
Originals before all Translations. Ei linguae potius credatur, says he, vnde
est in aliam per interpretes facta translatio. And lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. c.
11. He would have men to have recourse to the Hebrew and Greek text, for the
variety of Translations. Lib. 2. de doctr. Christ c. 15. he says, Translations
ought to give place to the Greek text of the New Testament.

To come to the Pope who is the founder of the grand Idol of the Mass,
Austine never knew the man. Nay, if any man in his time had said, that the
Bishop of Rome had two Swords and power to depose Kings and dispose of their
Kingdoms, and that he was the Universal Bishop of the Church, the head,
foundation and Spouse ministerial of the same, and finally that he was the
supreme judge of Faith, and had Authority to make new Articles of the Faith;
does any man think, that so holy and wise a man could have contained himself
within the limits of patience, hearing such monstrous Paradoxes?

The School doctrine concerning Merits of congruitie and condignitie, not
known to S. Austine, nor heard of in his time.

All the authentical Doctrine of the Romish Synagogue is contained in the
Popes decretals and decrees, Nicene Synod, in the assemblies of Laterane,
Constance, Florence, and Trent. How then could that holy Father know a Faith,
that was so long after his time established? Could he Prophecy that the men of
Trent would decree that Christians should be justified by the Popes law? That
the Images of the Trinity should be worshipped with Latria? That Saints and
Angels should be inuocated? That men should believe Transubstantiation,
auricular Confession, seven Sacraments, and such like late doctrines?

S. Austine, lib 11. contr. Faust. c. 5. Would have all pious understanding
made subject to the high authority of Scriptures. Neither did he believe, that
the same might be confirmed by any man's writing. Is it then likely, that he
should teach or think, that Scriptures in respect of us received their
authority from the Churches of Romes decrees or from the Pope?

That the Pope should be an infallible Interpretor of Scripture, Austine never
heard. Nay, disaduowing all the Popes decretals and other men's writings, he
signifies, that he owes his consent without all exception, only to
canonical Scriptures. In quorumlibet hominum scriptis, says he, lib. de
nature. and great. Liber sum quia solis canonicis scripturis debeo sine vlla
recusatione consensum.

S. Austine never prayed to the Virgin Mary, nor call upon her and other Saints
and Angels, or teach that they were to be worshipped with Dulia. If he had
dedicated his Confessions to the Virgin Mary, as does the Apostate his absurd
translation, I should believe, that he had learned somewhat from that holy
Father.

He never believed that the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin, of Mankind
together with her Son, or that her body is already assumed into heaven, as
this Apostate her devout slave and others hold.

Nor did he ever teach,

He might make a commemoration of the names of the faithful hence departed,
and commend his Mother to God.

He was no Mass Priest,

That Christ's body and blood should be contained under the accidents of Bread
and Wine, and that severally, Christ's flesh and drink his blood.

The Sacrament he neither adored, nor carried it about,

He never confessed his sins to the Virgin Mary,

Much less did he pray for Christ's body, Sacrifice of Abell and Melchisedech,
and carried into heaven, as do the Apostates consorts.

This Apostate cannot demonstrate, Austine ever thought, that Salt and Water
consecrated would cause Thunder to cease, and drive away Devils. Let him bring
forth the testimony of any man or Devil to prove this, and then his devoted
followers may perchance believe him.

That Christians should be burned, Austine, either taught or allowed.

The Precepts of the Romish Church, Augustine, nor could be, being brought in
by diverse Popes that lived since his time.

Neither did he teach or believe,

Of the cases reserved to the Pope, Austine never heard news.

Neither was he acquainted with the Popes Penitentiarie Tax,

Finally, Austine, or utterly unknown unto him.

CHAP. II. That those principal points of Romish Religion which we reject, are
also rejected and contradicted by S. AVSTINE.
Neither does S. Austine only pass over in silence the new-forged Religion of
Papists, maintained by this Apostate, but also directly oppugn the same.
imperfect, difficult, ambiguous, calling them a Nose of Wax, a Delphian Sword,
a dead Letter, Matter of Contention. S. Austine contrariwise extolleth them, as
placed in a sublime place of authority, and from them he would have none to
depart. Extat authoritas sacrae Scripturae, vnde men's nostra deuiare non debet,
says he Lib. 3. de Trinit. cap. 11.

They admit Traditions and the Popes Definitions for a Rule of Faith: but this
holy Father admits no Rule, Canon Ecclesiasticus, says he, constitutus est.
ad quem certi Apostolorum and Prophetarum libri pertinent. The words are
extant, Lib. 2. contr. cresc. gram. c. 31.

In the same place he would not have any to judge of Scripture,

The Apostate and his Consorts esteem the Scriptures to be hard and
ambiguous.S. Austine, lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 9. says, That whatsoever is
necessary to saeluation, is contained in plain places of Scripture.

The Jesuits muster against us, Traditions, Decretals, Fathers, Austine
rejecting all the rest, would have all proofs derived out of Scriptures. Lib.
de unit. Eccles. c. 3. Auferantur, says he, ille de medio quae aduersus nos
inuicem, non ex Diuims Canonicis Libris, sed aliunde recitamus.

They go about to mark out a Church by Unity, Universality, Austine de
unit. Eccles. c. 1. would have the question of the Church to be decided by
Scriptures. Inter nos and Donatistas quaestio est, vbi sit Ecclesia, quid ergo
facturi sumus, says he, in verbis nostris eam quaesituri, an in verbis capitis
sui Domini nostri Jesus Christi?

These presumptuous fellows prefer themselves before Scripture, determining
according to the Popes Decretals, Austine, lib. 2. contr. Cresc. c. 21.
shows, that neither any particular man, nor the Church it self, is to
prefer it self before Christ. Now who knows not, that Christ speaks to
us in Scriptures? Ecclesia, says he, non debet se Christo praeponere. And
Confess. 13. c. 23. he would not have any to judge of the sublime authority of
the Book of God.

They receive not holy Scriptures, Austine, lib. 6. Confess. c. 5. blames such
as are not by Scriptures persuaded to accept them.

They hold the old Latin vulgar Translation to be authentical; Augustines
judgment.

Bellarmine, Leo Castrius, Lindaue, and diverse other Papists, tax holy
Scriptures in the Originals, of Impuritie, and Corruption: but contrary to S.
Augustines judgment, Ep. 108. and Lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. c. 13.

The Books of Toby, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees, the
Papists receive as Canonical: but S. Augustine, Lib. 2. contr. Cresc. c. 31.
places no Books in the Canon of the Old Testament, but such as were written
by the Prophets; of which number, these will hardly be proved to be.

They make Christ to be our Mediator, Augustines Doctrine, who in his Homily de
Ouibus, c. 12. does attribute this work of Mediation to his Person in both
Natures. Diuina humanitas, says he, and humana Diuinitas Mediatrix est.

The worship and invocation of holy men departed, Austine de ver. Relig. c.
vlt. forbids us to place Religion in Relics, and the invocation of dead
men. Non sit nobis Religio, says he, culius hominum mortuorum. And Lib. 22. de
Ciuit. Dei, c. 10. he says: Christians departed, are named at the Altar, but
not called upon.

S. Augustine de Morib. Eccl. Cath. c. 34. some that worshipped dead men's
Tombs, and Pictures; but such are condemned by him. In his Book de Haeresib.
he condemns it as an Heresy of the Simonians and Carpocratians, that they
worshipped Images, and burnt incense unto them: Yet does not the Apostate, nor
his Apostaticall mates, forbear to worship Relics of Saints and Images, and
to burn incense unto them.

He acknowledged but two Sacraments, properly so called; Epistle, viz.
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; Manauit sanguis and aqua Ecclesiae gemina
Sacramenta, says he, Lib. 2. de Symb. c. 6. But the Apostate not regarding S.
Austines authority, acknowledges five Sacraments beside these two.

He says: Visible Sacraments, without the sanctification of invisible grace,
profit nothing; as we read in Quaest. super Leuit. Lib. 3. q. 84. But the
Apostate and his Consorts believe, that visible Sacraments confer grace ex
opere operato.

S. Augustine in Psalm. 3. a figure of Christ's Body; and Lib. contr. Adimantum,
c. 12. Christ, as he writes, doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he
gave a sign of his Body: But Papists cannot brook, that this Sacrament
should be called a sign, or a figure of Christ's Body.

Take away the spaces of places from Bodies (says S. Austine, Epist. 57. ad
Dardanum) and they will be no where; and because they are no where, they will
not be at all: Spatia locorum toll corporibus, nusquam erunt, and quia nusquam
erunt, non erunt. And in his 20. Book contr. Faustum, he faith; Christ,
according to his corporal presence, could not be at one time in the Sun and
Moon, and on the Cross. And in his 30. Treatise on Joan. he says; The Body
of Christ must be in one place. But this rinegate, Apostating as well from S.
Austiue, as from the Christian Faith, holds that Christ's true Body is in
every Altar, and diverse Countries, at one instant, and yet fills no place.

It is against Piety, Austine, as he is alleged, c. vtrum, Did. 2. de
Consecrat. to think, that Christ's Body is devoured with teeth; Christum
vorari dentibus fas non est. He faith also, that his flesh is no meat for men's
teeth, but for their souls, Tract. 25. in Joan. But this impiety, of
devouring and eating Christ with teeth, and with the mouth, is part of the
Apostates impious Religion.

He says also, The wicked which accord not with Christ, do not eat Christ's
Body, or drink his Blood, as is alleged, c. qui discordat, Did. 2. de
Consecr. Yet this fellow rineguing from S. Austines Doctrine, holds, that not
only the wicked, but also brute beasts eating the Sacrament, both eat his
Body, and drink his Blood.

Simul sumimus, simul bibimus, quia simul viuimus; We do take the Sacrament,
and drink together, because we live together, says S. Augustine in Sermon. ad
Neoplast. which is alleged, c. quia passus, Did. 2. de Consecrat. And can the
rinegate in his rinegued Conscience believe, that S. Austine allowed private
Masses and half Communions?

Free Will being captiuated (says S. Augustine contr. 2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 3.
c. 8.) is of no strength, but to sin: Liberum arbitrium captiuatum non nisi
ad peccandum valet. And will this captiuated slave of Antichrist contradict
such a holy Father, and say, that Free Will is not captiuated, but has power
to do well?

The same Father, de Nupt. and Concupisc. lib. 1. c. 3. and contr. Julian. lib.
4. c. 3. and de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. c. 19. and in Psalm. 31. in Praefat.
teaches, that Infidels sin in all their works: but the rinegate and his
Mates will not submit themselves to S. Austines judgment; nor deny, but that
Infidels may do good works.

The Church (as S. Austine says, Lib. 5. contr. Donatist. c. 27.) consists
of just and holy men: and in his Exposition on the 56. Psalm. he says it
consists of all the faithful, that are the members of Christ. And will the
Apostate hold, that wicked Popes, Cardinals, Mass Priests, Monks and Friars,
whereof some are Infidels, are the true members of Christ's Body. His Master
Bellarmine, de Eccles. c. 2. says, a man may be a true member of the Church,
if he communicate outwardly in Faith and Sacraments with the Church, and be
subject to the Pope, albeit he have neither inward Faith, nor Virtue. But who
will not rather believe S. Austine, then these two Pseudo-Catholikes?

Sine bonorum operum meritis per fidem iustificaetur impius, Austine in Psalm.
67. Yet this rinegat doubts not, but as he has the sins of his youth, and
scabs inherent, so he is justified by charity inherent, and good works, if he
have any.

S. Austine in his Commentaries, in Psalm. 36. esteeming all our sufferings
vile, and not worthy of that which we receive. And in Psalm. 83. Quicquid
promisit, indignis promisit: Whatsoever God promised, says he, he promised to
men unworthy, that the reward might be not of Works, but of Grace. Afterward
he says, Our justice is not of Merits of men, but of Gods gift. And yet this
unworthy fellow, and his thrice-vnworthie Mates, boast continually of their
worth, and teach men's Merits.

The same holy Father also, Confess. lib. 10. c. 42. de Haeresib. condemns
such for Heretics, as pray to Angels. How then can such rinegates reconcile
themselves to S. Austine, praying to Angels, and trusting to be reconciled by
Angels, and helped by their intercession?

Lib. de Haeres. c. 88. Pelagius for an Heretic, holding that man may by
free will dispose himself to grace; and that just men can live without sin,
and be saved by their own strength. The which Fancies being embraced by this
Heretic; who sees not, that he concurreth rather with Pelagius, then holds
with S. Austine.

The Heracleonites used to give Extreme Unction to their followers, mumbling
certain prayers over them, Tongue not understood: But for this, S Austine
shows they were condemned as Heretics, de Haeres. c. 16. Does the Apostate
then think S. Austine is of his party who allows Extreme Unction, and the
barbarous ministering of it in a Tongue not understood?

Like wise commending barefooted Friars and Nuns, Austine, de Haeres. 68.
then reputed a Disciple of that holy Father?

Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam, says
S. Austine, Lib. Confess. 9. c. 13. Yet this Apostate and his glorious
Companions standing on their Merits, think they need not Gods mercy, in
meriting Heaven.

They talk also of the Blessed Virgins Conception without original sin:
Austine held, that original sin passed over all, and would not free her from
this original corruption.

Finally, Austines Confessions, and the form and frame of it, does plainly
convince this Apostate and his fellows to be of a diverse Religion from S.
Augustine. He dedicated no Book to the Virgin Mary, as does this Apostate.
He confessed his sins to God only; they, to Angels, Saints, and the Virgin
Mary. He called upon God only, and not upon Saints and Angels, and the Virgin
Mary: These pray more to the Virgin Mary, to Angels and Saints, then to God.
He esteemed, that Christ was our only Mediator; these fly to the mediation
of Angels and Saints. He called upon God, his Father; they, upon the Virgin
Mary, that is not so much as their Mother. He held the Unity of the Catholic
Church; these are only called Catholics, being departed from the Catholic
and Apostolic Faith.

CHAP. III. That the Apostate and his consorts holding what the Church of
England rejects are neither Catholics nor hold the Cathosike Faith.
IN this Book in his Preface and notes, and all his idle talk, the Heretical
rinegate presumes to arrogate to himself and his fellows the name and title
of Catholics. And that is the scope of his Preface, and the end of his
Translation, to justify himself, and the Faith of the Romish Church to be
all Catholic, a matter so impudently presumed, and so falsely affirmed, as
nothing more.

For first, None are Catholics, but such as hold that Faith, that is truly
Catholic and Apostolic. But the Faith of this Apostate and his fellows is
neither. They believe the Popes Decretals, and the doctrine of Trent published
against the true Faith, which neither the Apostles taught, nor ancient
Catholics ever believed; nay, it is not received by all Papists.

No Heretics can be reputed Catholics. S. Austine, de ver. Relig. c. 8.
says, They are without the Church. And in the end of his Tract. de heresib.
he says, Haereses qui tenuerit Christianus catholicus non est: but Papists
holding the Popes particular sect, and submitting themselves to his command are
directly Heretics. For first, they hold diverse Doctrines contrary to
canonical Scriptures, which are generally beloved of all Catholics: which
Robert Grosthead in Heur. 3. apud Matthew. Paris, Durand, and diverse others hold
to be heresy. 2. They commonly interpret Scriptures contrary to the meaning
of the Holy Ghost: which Hierome in his Commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistle to
the Galatians holds to be heresy. Now that they interpret Scriptures
contrary to the meaning of the Holy Ghost, it appears by the Cap. solitae. de
major. and obed. and Vnam Sanctam, extr. com. de major. and obed. and infinite
other decretale Epistles, by the decrees of Trent, and School disputes. 3.
With the Simoniaens, and Carpocratians, and Valentinians, they worship Images,
and burn incense to them. 4. With the Angelickes and Caians, they worship
Angels, and call upon them. 5. With the Collyridians, they adore the Virgin
Mary, and offer consecrated Hoasts, or Cakes, in her honor. 6. With the
Marcionites, and Manichees, they destroy Christ's humane nature, giving him a
fantastical Body in the Sacrament. 7. With the Pelagians, they make man's
free will the cause of man's predestination, and salvation; and hold, that man
is able to prepare himself to grace, and with grace to live without sin. 8.
With the Catharists, they believe their works are clear without sin, and
perfectly just. 9. With the Audeans, and Donatists, they teach, that their
Priests forgive sins. 10. With the Staurolatrians, they worship the Cross.
11. With Capernaites they believe, that Christ's flesh is eaten with the mouth.
Finally, with the Pharisees, they believe the justice of Works.

Christ giving his Apostles commission to go forth into the World, Trent, the
determination of Schools, and the Popes Decretals, concerning the bodily Real
presence of Christ, under the accidents of Bread and Wine, in the Sacrament;
Transubstantiation, and Auricular Confession, the invocation of Saints and
Angels, the worship of the Cross, of the Images of the Trinity, and the
Sacrament, the adoration of Relics, the consecration of holy Water, of Agnus
Dei, and Paschall Lambs, and such like Romish Traditions.

All true Catholics profess one Catholic and Apostolic Faith: Trent, and
Schoole-sophisters concerning Purgatory, Indulgences, private Masses, half
Communions, Transubstantion, and such like, that is neither Catholic,
Apostolic, nor Christian?

As we know an Artificers work by the rule,

True Catholics which are also the true members of Christ's body adhere only
to Christ, as their head, spouse,

Basil in Epist. 80. ad Eustat. and S. Augustine de nupt. and concupisc. c. 33.
Would have the canonical Scriptures and Christ speaking in them to judge of a
point of Christian Doctrine. Those therefore which contrary to these Catholic
Fathers judgment decline the judgment of Scriptures and would have the Pope
to be supreme judge in matters of Faith cannot be Catholics.

Athanasius in his Creed setting forth that Faith, Trent concerning Traditions,
Justice of works, Freewill dispositions, 7. Sacraments, worshipping of Saints
and Images, and other heresies rejected by us. How then can Papists pretend,
that their Religion is Catholic, which that Catholic Father admitted not as
catholic?

The Catholic Church ever prayed and administered Sacraments in a tongue
understood of the hearers. The Friars,

To hold, Christ has a body, that can neither be felt nor seen, nor can it
self either feel or see, is a Doctrine not of Catholics, but of heretical
Papists, contrary to our Saviors words, Luke 24. inuiting his Disciples to
feel and see.

They are also Heretics, Christ's humane nature, and that give him a body like
a Spirit. But so does Bellarmine and his Disciples the Papists.

Without me, you caen do nothing, and this all true Catholics believe. But
the Apostate and his consorts hold, that by force of Freewill they can turn to
God and prepare themselves to grace, and do good.

Catholics think and speak reverently of Christ.

Catholic Christians never admitted 7. Austine said the Sacraments issued out
of Christ's side, which cannot be verisied of the five Romish new Sacraments.

True Catholics confess their sins to God, Mary. They think themselves
also bound to confess in the Priests care: contrary to the practice of true
Catholics.

Catholics do believe, Audean Heretics mentioned by Theoderet, haeret. Fab.
lib. 4?

This Apostate and his mates believe, Mary in body is assumed up, and crowned
Queen of Heaven; therefore they call upon her as their Mediatrix. But this
will not be proved to be a Catholic doctrine or practice.

death, because they would not serve and worship Creatures, and fall down
before dumb Images. Are they then Catholics, that worship Creatures, and
adore Images?

Not Catholics, but the Priests of Baal and Cybele,

Heathen men in time past fell down and prayed before their Images; and can
they pretend to be Christian Catholics, Pater Noster and Aue Maria before
Stocks and Stones, practicing this Heathenish custom?

Papists do also fall down before their Lord, and God,

True Christians received devoutly the holy Sacrament, Corpus Christi day, and
worship it as a God.

The Apostle, 1. Tim. 4. accounts it a Doctrine of Devils,

Catholic Christians never believed they should be saved by eating Salt-Fish
and Red Herrings, Rome. How then are Papists Catholics, that believe such
fooleries?

Jesus, Maria, Mary, as well as Jesus. In this conjunction therefore, Papists
make a separation of themselves from true Catholics.

True Catholics used always in time past to bury the Bones and Relics of
Martyrs.

Neither did ancient Catholics believe, Agnus Dei was good against Lightening,
and did as well purge sins as Christ's blood: Which is another evidence, that
Papists so believing, are not Catholics.

S. John, Epist. 1. teaches us, that Christ's blood does purge our sins, and
that is a point believed of all Catholics. Papists therefore, that believe
that the blood of Saints, and their own blood, and Satisfactions, yea, that
holy Water does purge sin, are but sorry Catholics.

Sorry Catholics also,

Far also were Catholics from believing,

Ancient Christian Catholics did not say Masses for sick Horses, de praeputio
Christi: nor had they several Masses for Sailors, Hunters, Trauailers, Barren
Women, Maids, and Women with Child. Are not Papists then degenerated quite
from ancient Catholic Religion?

True Catholics never blessed Crosses, the Foundation of Faith, or a Defense
in Adversity, or Victory against the Enemies, as Papists profess in their
Pontificals, plainly declaring themselves therein to be idolatrous Heretics.

They do also believe, our Ladies Image can help such as pray before it, and
that it is a remedy against Thundering and Lightening, inundation of Waters,
and tumults of Wars; and that the Evangelist S. John's Image can expel
Devils, and bring to us the assistance of Angels: matters never heard of, or
believed by Catholic Christians.

In a Book called Antidot arium animae, to the Image of Christ's Face, called
Veronica, to be purged from all blemishes of sin, to obtain grace, and the
fellowship of Saints. And this Prayer, as they say, was made by John, the two
and twentieth Pope of that name. But neither can the Apostate, nor all his
Masters, the Jesuits, prove, that such a Prayer was used by any ancient or
true Christian Catholic.

Papists also are taught to consecrate Bells, Tempests to cease, and to drive
away Devils. They do also salute consecrated Oil, saying, Aue sanctum
Chrisma. But if the Apostate were all greased with Oil, and signed with
Crosses, yet shall he never be able to show, that this was a practice of true
Catholics.

The Apostle, Ephesians. 4. says, Christ gave the Church Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers; and true Catholics believe, that these
only are sufficient for the work of the Ministry, and building of the
Church. But the Papists, beside these, have in their Synagogue universal
Popes, Cardinals, Inquisitors, dumb Woluish Prelates, that neither feed nor
work any good, sacrificing Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nuns, which have no
institution from Christ. How then are they Catholics?

Among Catholics, c. nulla ratio, Did. 62. and c. in nomine, Did. 23. And
this was an Ordinance allowed also by Leo the first. But Popish Bishops are
intruded into their Seats by the Pope, without any allowance of the Clergy, or
the People, or any conprouinciall Bishops; and the Pope himself is neither
elected by the Clergy, or People of Rome, but only by a few Cardinals, the
most part strangers. And do you call them Catholics, that have no Pastors
lawfully instituted by Christ, or called by the Church?

The Apostles and their successors were sent by Christ to preach the Gospel,
Christ's institution; and those are only true Catholics, whole Prelates and
Priests do perform that Office which Christ enjoined them. But among Papists,
Priests are ordained, not to preach, but to sacrifice for quick and dead: and
Prelates are not ordered by the Church, but by Antichrist, the Adversary of
Christ and the Church; and preach not the Gospel, but humane Traditions, and
the Popes Decrees. Further, they observe not Christ's institution, in
administering the Sacraments according to Christ's institution. How then are they
true Catholics, among whom neither the Word is truly preached, nor Sacraments
are duly administered, and where in Doctrine and Chair there is no Apostolical
succession?

Among ancient Catholics, Christ, but by Antichrist; and Women sometime are
permitted to baptize, as if Women could succeed the Apostles.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, says the Apostle,
Romans 10. and this Faith only is the Catholic Christian Faith. But among
Papists, no Faith is allowed as good, but that which comes from the
proposition of the Church, as Canisius teaches, in Catech. c. de Fide. Now
this Church is nothing but the Pope, and their Faith is grounded upon
Traditions not written, and the Decrees of the Pope. Can this Faith then be
Catholic, and Divine?

Tiue Catholic Faith is also joined with firm Hope and assurance of
faluation, God and our neighbor. But the Faith of the Apostate and his
consorts, is only a bare assent to the word of God. Knowledge of God they have
little, contenting themselves with an implicit Faith, and denying all
assurance of salvation, and warring against all, that submit not themselves to
the Pope, and his sect. But such a Faith is a dead faith, a devilish faith, an
erroneous and wicked persuasion, and not a true Catholic and Apostolic faith.

Finally, England rejects as coming from Antichrist; he might plainly see,
that the Papists are neither Catholics nor hold the Catholic Faith in any
thing, which the Church of England disliketh. Wherefore least any hereafter
should boast, that his Popish religion is Catholic; I will hereafter specify
diverse points thereof which themselves will be forced to confess to be
vncatholike.

An Appendix unto the third Chapter, containing some principal points of the
vncatholike, modern Romish Doctrine.
WHen we speak against the Church of Rome and her Doctrine, we understand
not either the ancient Church of Rome, or any Article of her Faith, but the new
Church of Rome as she is subject to the Pope and embraces his new Faith
contained in his Decretals, and established in the late conuenticle of Trent,
and is maintained by the Schoolmen and other his factors. And of this
Doctrine these are some of the chief heads.

First, Christ to be the author and finisher of our Faith; so Papists derive
their Faith from the Pope, as the Author and principal Founder thereof. For
whatsoever God speaks to us in Scriptures, yet they allow nothing, but what
the Pope propounds.

We believe no head of the Church but Christ Jesus,

We are taught 1. Cor. 3. That Christ Jesus is the only foundation of the
Church. Stapleton and his followers believe That the Pope and his
determinations are the Churches foundation also. And this is also the Doctrine
of Bellarmine.

The Church being a chaste virgin admits no Spouse but Christ Iosus. Rome
receives the Pope as her Spouse, as appears, C. Vbi periculum. de elect. in
6.

When any question arises about matters of Faith, Rome will have the Pope to
be supreme Judge, a matter unreasonable, that an Heretic and an enemy should
sit judge in matters of Faith and in his own cause.

When Christ ascended into Heaven,

They believe also, Peter's only Successor, and the universal Bishop, and
chief Monarch of the universal Church. But neither does he teach or love
Christ. as did Peter, nor does he demonstrate how this universal Monarchy
came unto him.

They say he has power to dispense against the Law,

Suarez lib. Defens. Cath. and Apost. fid. c. 4. and 6. Teaches that the Pope
has power not only to depose Kings, but to command them to be killed.

Christ fled away when the people sought to make him King.

The Popes Decretals concerning matters of Faith, Turks also think of their
Alchoran.

Of holy Scriptures they speak evil, dead Letter, a dumb Judge, matter of
strife, a killing Letter, a Nose of Wax, a Lesbian Rule.

They receive the unwritten Traditions of the Church of Rome with equal
affection as they receive holy Scriptures;

The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, they say,

They forbid holy Scriptures to be read in vulgar Tongues to the people,

Contrary to the Doctrine of the Fathers, Tobia, Judith, Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, the Machabees, and those pieces of Books that are in the old
vulgar Latin Translation, and not in the Originals, to be Canonical
Scriptures, equal to the Law and Prophets.

The old Latin vulgar Translation they make authentical,

They forbid all interpretations of Scriptures, Roman Church; and might as well
forbid all Scriptures.

They teach, that the worship of Dulia is due to Saints, Hyperdulia to the
Virgin Mary.

They worship Images of Gold and Silver,

Before a Stock they say Pater noster, Matter nostra; praying help of them,
that neither hear nor see, nor walk nor speak.

They desire the Picture of Christ's Face given, as is said, Veromca, to blot
out their sins, and to bring them to the society of Saints.

They call upon Angels and Saints in all places,

Praying to the Cross, Aue spes vnica, and desire it to increase instice in
them, and to pardon their sins.

They give divine honor to the Cross, Christ, and the Trinity; which is
inexcusable Idolatry.

Consecrating a Cross, Foundation of Faith, and a Defense in Adversity.

They believe, Mary can help the faithful, and that the Image of S. John the
Evangelist has power to drive away Devils; as appears by their prayers in
the Pontifical, when they consecrate them.

They pray without understanding in a strange Tongue,

They make the Images of the Trinity;

The Apostle says,

Yea, George, S. Katherine, S. Christopher, and XI. M. Virgins, yet are not
assured, that there are any such Saints in Heaven, or ever were in the World.

In the Mass, Christ Jesus, beseeching the Father to look upon his Son with
a serene countenance, and to send Angels to carry up his Body into Heaven.

Mass Priests believe, Melchisedech; but the Apostle, Hebr. 5. and 7. shows,
how that Office belongs only to Christ.

They believe, Christ is by them continually offered to God: but the Apostle
says he was but once offered, and that by that one Oblation, he persited all
that are sanctified.

They offer Masses for the redemption of their Souls, Christ.

They say Masses also for Hogs, and sick Horses: Christ dyed for brute Beasts.

They hold the Mass to be a Sacrifice propitiatory; Hebr. 9.

S. John, 1. Epist. 1. says, Christ's blood does cleanse us from all sins:
quite contrary to the Doctrine of the Romanists, holding that sins are
cleansed by Purgatory fire, and by our own and the Saints sufferings.

They whip themselves, Baals Priests; not considering, that we are healed by
Christ's wounds.

The Apostle, Ephesians. 2. says, we are saved by grace:

He says, God called us, not according to our works, according to his
purpose, and grace: They hold, that. God does predestinate and call such as by
free will admit that calling, and justify men that first prepare themselves to
justification.

Romans 9. he shows, That it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs: They teach, that every one that will may be saved, if he run well.

They do also teach,

The Apostle, Romans 3. says, We are justified freely by grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus: They believe, they are justified by their
works and merits.

Christ breaking Bread, said, This is my Body:

Christ distributed the Cup to all that had received the Bread:

They say, Christ did eat himself and offer himself at his last Supper: but
for a man to eat himself, it is absurd; and for Christ to offer two
Sacrifices, was superfluous.

In private Masses, Christ's Institution.

Christ bad his Disciples preach the Gospel:

Among Papists, Katherine of Siena, and Joane of the Cross did.

They think it is sufficient to believe implicitly. Christ said, eternal
life consisted in knowing God, and Christ Jesus.

They believe in a God that neither made Heaven nor Earth,

Priests take upon them to be creators of their Creator;

They believe, Christ's Body is in many places at once; as if every body were
not circumscribed by place, and continued to it self: now what is this, but to
destroy Christ's humane Nature?

Christ's true Body in the Sacrament,

The Mass, Christ offered in the Mass, which is not externally seen?

Christ in the Capernaites condemned the real eating of his flesh:

Christ says,

Decretals is merely an humane Faith: and therefore not true Christian Faith.

The Cardinals having elected a new Pope place him on the Altar, and adore him.
Great Princes also kiss his feet,

They forbid certain Meats and prohibit their Votaries to Marry: Tim. 4.
calls no better, then Doctrines of Devils.

They teach rebellion against Princes excommunicated, Romans 13. that teaches
Obedience.

With their equivocations and mental referuations,

Neither do they think it unlawful to murder Excommunicate persons, c.
Excommunicatorum. 23. q. 5.

The Conuenticle of Constance gives them liberty to break their Oaths made
with Heretics.

For Heresy they account it meritorious for Parents to bring word to burn
their Children condemned for heresy,

Neither do they make any scruple either to defraud their creditors, Mariana
and Philopater teach.

They forbid their Mass Priests,

Before Marriage consummated, either of the parties, that are publicly married
to betake themselves to a Monastical life.

The law of God teaches Children to honor their Parents. Alchoran permits
Children either to marry without their Parents consent, or to forsake their
parents, and to enter into a Monastery.

For Prisoners to break prison, England.

They think it a small sin to steal things of small value,

They teach,

As if Christ had not made satisfaction for men's sins,

Nay,

They teach there are 4. Stages or receptacles in Hell, to wit. The 1. of the
Damned; the 2. of Purgatory; the 3. of Children dying before Baptism; the 4.
for the souls of the Patriarchs before Christ's ascension. But let them beware
they make not their Disciples to doubt of Hell; as their proofs for the other
3. places are weak and doubtful, and make men deny them.

The wiseman Sap. 3. says, The souls of the just are in the hands of God,
and that no torment touches them. Are they then wise, that cast just men into
the fire and torments of Purgatory.

By Masses, are drawn out of Purgatory: as if S. Peter, and ancient Bishops
of Rome, had sung Masses and granted Indulgences to Souls in Purgatory, or
Souls might be freed out of Hell, which comprehends Purgatory.

Christ, say they, instituted Indulgences, Trent says also, they are wholesome
and profitable; but the Germans in Grauam. 3. deny it.

In the Tax of the Popes Chamber there is a Rate set down, what is to be paid
for Incest, Perjury, Parricides,

From the Jews, they borrow Altars, Priestly Orders,

Sacrifices for the Dead, Purgatory, consecrated Water, Gentiles, rather then
from the later Jews.

Because Peter had the Keys of the Church committed unto him, the Pope
infers,

Monks and Friars, albeit they live wickedly,

Generally they establish their justice of Works and inherent Charity: the
justice of God, in remitting sins, Christ's justice, they regard not.

And least any man should except against them for this wicked Doctrine, they
give out, ex Cathedra, cannot err, and that the Church of Rome is the ground
and pillar of Truth: matters most absurd and false.

Finally, unless the Apostate can prove, that these Doctrines which are above
specified, are Catholic, himself must needs confess, that neither the
Papists are Catholics, nor their Faith Catholic, or true.

CHAP. IIII. The Examination of the Apostates Title page and his Epistle
dedicatorie.
THus having declared that S. Austine either knew not the Apostates Popish
religion, or else oppugned it, and that Papists cannot by any means be
esteemed Catholics, believing and teaching as they do, it follows now that
we enter into the listes with this Confessionist, and examine his whole
proceedings.

In the forefront and title Page of his book he promises a Translation of S.
Augustines Confessions. But how foolish he was and evil advised to undertake
this work, both that holy Father himself, and this Discourse ensuing will
declare. I have also partly touched this point heretofore. Here it will be
sufficient to remember, that he makes his Confessions to God only, and not
to Angels or Saints, or to the Virgin Mary, as this idle fellow and his mates
use to do. He makes his sins known to God: these fellows think they are
bound to confess all their sins in the Priests ears. All his devotion was
to God, who could forgive sins: this Apostates devotion is toward the Virgin
Mary, and to Saints, to whom, if he be in his right wits, he will not give
power to absolve him from his sins. He consecrated his confessions to God:
this Apostate does consecrate himself and his translation to the Virgin Mary.

A translation I say, so idle, false, malicious and full of errors, that he
durst not set his name unto it. Which I take to be done with some cunning, the
man (percase) meaning to deny it.

He vaunteth that his large Preface will make the Book more profitable and
pleasant. But it had been far better, if it had been shorter; for of harsh
and foppish Prefaces the shortest are best. His Discourse is full of
observations false, unpleasant, full of poison and hurtful, if any of his
readers be so foolish as to give ear and credit unto them.

For his Motto or word, he sets down this sentence; Cibus sum grandium, I
am meat for the strong, grow and thou shall eat me. As if his translation and
notes were meat for great men, and sit to be devoured of them: which are
nothing but husks for swine and hoggish and ignorant Papists. S. Austine
applies these words to God, this Apostate applies them to himself and his
idle fantasies.

Intimating that his Book was printed Permissu superiorum, by the permission
of his Superiors, he makes a plain declaration, that like a false-hearted
fellow he renounceth his allegiance to his Prince, and submits himself to
traitorous Mass Priests and Jesuits, and other the Popes foreign factors,
enemies to the Prince and State.

Now come we to the Epistle dedicatory directed to the Virgin Mary, a work
full of presumption and vanity. For how could so holy a Virgin accept of such
an impure companion; or so faithful a Christian, allow of this disciple of
Antichrist, endeavoring to draw Christians from Christ to serve Belial? Further
how can so spotless a Virgin approve so corrupt a Translation, and so wicked a
Preface, and notes sauouring of nothing, but the spirit of Satan, seeking by
lies and impostures to abuse the simple.

This blessed Virgin he slileth the most glorious Queen of Heaven. A style
neither given to her by the Apostles, nor allowed by any Catholic; further, it
is a vain imagination to turn the Kingdom of Heaven into an earthly Princes
Court, and to suppose that God is married to a woman.

He adds, that she is the joy of celestial Spirits, and under Christ the
highest hope of humane creatures. As if Angels turned themselves from God, to
joy in the Virgin Mary, or men were chiefly to hope in her. Where did this man
learn this tradition, and how does he prove, that Angels and men are to joy
in a Creature, and to trust in her, and not to place their glory and hope in
God only. Is this a Catholic point of Doctrine? and will his holy Father
define it to be true?

Behold, says he, a prodigal Child of thine. As if such a wanton young man,
that has so often run from his Father, were the Son of a Virgin, and a
glorious Queen, as he calls her, who never had any son but him, that was
also the Son of God. A prodigal Child, he may well call himself, as one
that has dissipated his substance, viuendo luxuriose, and which has devoured
his substance, cum meretricibus, as did the Prodigal mentioned Luke 15. But
let him forbear to call himself (a man so debauched) the holy Virgins son.

In stead of a glass of Flowers, as he says, he lays upon the altar of the
Virgins goodness a book of Pictures, which have the fame to be well limned.
But first, it is boys play, to make sport with Glasses, Flowers and Puppets.
Next, in earnest he declares himself to be an Idolater, that erecteth an
Altar to the Virgin Mary, and offers sacrifice upon it. Thirdly, were he not
an Ideote, he would not make S. Austine a limner; and if he were not
vayne-glorious, he would not suppose, that this vain Translation were a
picture well limned, or compare such brutish conceits to Flowers odoriferous,
and Pictures beautiful and glorious.

Going on in his absurd allegorising vain, he tells us, That the colors of
the Pictures were mingled by no worse hand then of the holy Ghost, and laid by
one of his fore-fingers. As if this absurd and misshapen translation were
painted out with fresh colors, or such a discolute and discomposed Painter
were a forefinger of the Holy Ghost, or the Holy Ghost had hands and
fore-fingers to paint withal. Further, to speak of S. Austine himself, he
was not so bold as to say, his Confessions were indicted by the Holy Ghost,
which belongs only to the sublime authority of holy canonical Scriptures.
Neither was he so gross conceited, as to make the Holy Ghost in the form of a
man, or to attribute to him the Art of Limning. This is the work of this
painting Apostate, who having rinegued Chris, makes no scruple to blaspheme
the holy Ghost.

Further, he says, his wandering youth in faith and life, does not discourage
him from venturing his translation before the-Virgins eyes. He would have said
venting, if he could have hit upon the word, for Merchant venturer he was
never: neither had he reason to venture the sight of so baudie a Work, before
such a Queen as he imagines her to be; and so contemptible a translation,
before her curious judgment. Further, how does he prove, that the Virgin Mary
would or could read his Book below, she reigning in Heaven above? And what
testimony can he produce, that he does not now more wander and go astray both
in faith and life, then he did in his most youthful time? Italy and Spain
certes are no places to teach reformation, either in Doctrine or manners.

Thou flowest from that Sea of Mercy, says he, speaking of the Virgin Mary,
as a most noble and nauigable River, bearing Bottomes of all Burdens: So he
blasphemeth that holy Virgin, supposing her to be a nauigable River, bearing
Popish, Turkish, and Pagan Bottomes, and dishonouring her Virginity, whom he
would seem to magnify. Further, like a ridiculous Sot, he makes nauigable
Rivers to flow out of the Sea; which his senses, if he have any, might have
showed him to flow into the Sea, He does also make the Virgin Mary to flow from
the Divinity, as if she were a fourth Person in the Trinity, or as if she
were her Sons Image.

Christ, says he, paid the price of our redemption out of the stock of his
flesh and blood which he took from his Mother: As if our Savior acted nothing
with his Divinity, and holy Soul, in the Act of our Redemption, and all his
stock had come from her, and she, and not Christ, had broken the Serpents
head. These are not Elegancies, but Blasphemies, of which he has no small
stock, the stock of his substance being formerly spent in foraine Countries.

His mercy, says he, so looks, as if his justice did receive thereby some
wrong: as if Christ's justice could not stand with his mercy. Further, he
diminishes much of Christ's mercy, making not Christ, but the Virgin Mary, a
nauigable River of Mercy, capable of all Bottomes. It may be he thinks, that
as Christ saved all Christians, so the Virgin Mary saved Turks, Infidels, and
Apostates.

This Saint repaired the ruins of his former life, and as a broken Bough being
bound about, exceeded in strength, as he telfeth the Virgin Mary. But S.
Austine never told the Virgin Mary so much, nor did he confess to her, as this
Apostate does confess for him, but without commission. Further, it was not in
S. Austines power to repair himself; nor are broken Boughs, being ingrafted,
stronger then they were before: were he and his companions ingrafted in Tiburne
Stocks, they would neither grow strong nor long.

S. Augustine retracted some of his words: But what has the Virgin Mary to do
with his retractations? this should rather be an example for the Translator to
retract his Heresies, and repent himself of his Apostacy. He adds, that he
reuersed all the impure works of his heart: as if it lay in man, to make his
heart clean, and to repent. This is impure Pelagianisme.

He adds, that S. Austine gave himself, as it were, into the hands of the
four Winds, to spread him abroad as a most wicked piece of flesh. As if no
Winds did blow but four, and these Winds had Hands, and S. Austine had more
wicked flesh then the Translator and his Consorts. He may therefore think
himself happy, that the blessed Virgin takes no note of his words: for if
she should reward him according to his deeds, she should for his madness
commit him to Bedlem, there to be whipped by four Beadles, until his wicked
and luxurious flesh were well chastised for his windy conceits.

Such humility (as thou, O sacred Virgin, do best know) cannot choose but
now be answered with a strange measure of glory. But first, how does the
Translator know, that the blessed Virgin was best acquainted with S. Austines
humility and his thoughts? Did she better know it, then God Almighty, the
searcher of men's hearts? Further, who can say, that by his humility he can
deserve a strange measure of glory? S. Austine certes was never of this man's
humor, who trusted rather to Gods mercy, then to his own merits.

He did penetrate the consideration of thy matchless purity with a most
perfect eye, which in dignity is next to God, says he, speaking to the Virgin
Mary. As if this blind Buzzard, which has neither perfect eye, nor other good
sense, could penetrate S. Austines conceit concerning the Virgins purity, or
discern who is next to God in dignity. That the Virgin Mary was conceived
without sin, S. Austine never said; nor does he prefer her in dignity,
before Angels. Nay, that exception which is now found put into his 36. Chapt.
de Natura and Gratia, seems to be foysted in by some Friar.-Further, S.
Austine does neither accuse her, nor excuse her. Nay, c. 41. out of Romans 5. he
proves, that sin by one man passed over all. No where was he so simple, as
to talk of the perfect eye of the Virgins Soul; of which the Apostate, whose
Soul is dyed in villainy, speaks: nor does he say, that her Soul was
wholly free from the least shadow of spot: or, that he that should charge the
blessed Virgin with any sin, should strip our Savior of his honor; as this
shameless companion, stripping all shame from his face, most falsely
affirms: for he has nothing of the shadows of spots. Nor was it any
dishonor for Christ to be borne of a sinful Woman, she being over shadowed by
the holy Ghost, when she conceived Christ: but that her Mother was
ouer-shadowed by the holy Ghost, when she conceived her, we read not, nor can
it be proved.

He believes, as he says, that the holy Virgin was as entirely immaculate in
the first instant of her Conception, as she is truly glorious by her
Assumption. Which argues, that he is a poor Infidel, having no Faith, but
that which is built upon the Dreams of Friars, and Fables, concerning her
Assumption. Dreams, I say, and Fables, contradicted by many of the most
learned of his own side, and not received by any true Christians, that build
their Faith upon the Word of God.

The times wherein we live, he says, are deadly sick of two Infirmities.
Which we confess to be true, in himself and his Consorts: who offend so
outragiously in Luxury and Heresy, that scarce Pagans come near them in the
first, or the ancient Heretics in the second; maintaining public Brothels,
and giving themselves over to all uncleanness. They do also oppugn the true
Faith, and uphold most damnable Heresies. And this is not only found true by
experience, but also testified by Petrarch, Boccace, Platina, and their own
Writers, and that in Popes, Cardinals, Mass Priests, and the most eminent men
of that side. Let S. Austine read what Lecture he will upon the Anatomy of
the Soul, yet if his Soul and Body were anatomized, there would be nothing
found therein, but Botches, Ulcers, Scabs, and a whole mass of filthiness and
villainy. If then he had any drops of blood left uncorrupted he would blush and
be ashamed to talk of anatomizing Souls, and of deadly sicknesses, himself
and his Mates being most of all therewith infected, and ruined. But were he
never so discased, and needed he never so much to be carried to the Hospital,
yet has he no reason, as he does, to call her an Hospital, which commonly is
a Receptacle of sick, scabbed, and vlcered companions.

There was never, says he, within the Line and Latitude of mere Creatures, so
bright a Beam of Truth shot out from the Sphere of immortal Light, nor so
clear a Stream of Purity from theeuerlasting Spring of Paradise, ^as that
which did sill and euerflow thy most holy Soul; the high example and sweet
influxe whereof, does so help to reform and rectify the dark and dissolute
heart of man. And I, to requite his flux of vanity in part, say, you shall
hardly find such a piece of bombasted Barbarism, such a Line of doltish
Dizardrie, and such a frame of allegorizing Pedantrie, as this extrauagant
Translator has here afforded us: Draw out your Lines, and use your uttermost
Art, yet shall you not frame a Model of a Dizard comparable to him. Who ever
could shoot out such Bolts of Foolerie, and flow with such excess of Inke-pot
phrases, but he, that is steeped in the Popes Close-Stoole, and shaped by the
Rules of irregular Ignatians? The blessed Virgin he disgraceth with his
exorbitant phrases, and makes an Idol of her whom he desires to magnify;
signifying, that Grace did flow from her, as a Goddess.

He prays to the Virgin Mary, that neither the Mist or Fogge of Sensuality
may detain him, nor the side Wind of Vanity divert him, nor the contrary
Wind of Impatience toss him: as for the Pyrate of Heresy, he presumes he
needs no more to fear, least he be drowned by him. But had we no other
argument to disprove the intercession of the Virgin Mary, this one were
sufficient to overthrow it: for notwithstanding all his importunity, we see
he is overwhelmed with Mists and Fogges of Lust and Concupiscence; his Vanity
and Pride has diuerted him from all Goodness, contrary Winds and Discontent
has bereaved him of his Senses, and never was any of his Consorts more deeply
plunged into Heresies. But so it fares with those, which leaving Christ Jesus,
the Fountain of living Water, dig to themselves Cestern^s that hold no
Water, and fly to the intercession of the Virgin Mary, of Angels and Saints.

CHAP. V. Herein the Apostates absurd tedious and malicious Preface is scanned
and refuted.
THE principal mark unto which the Prefator and Translator directs all his
bolts; is first, to prove himself and his Popish consorts to be Catholics,
and next to convince his Parents, good friends and Countrymen to be
misbeleeuers and Heretics.

But how far wide he shoots in the first, I have already by sound arguments
declared. The same will also more evidently appear by the answer made to his
Objections, and by the whole Discourse ensuing. The second shall manifestly be
demonstrated as well by our public Confessions, which contain nothing but
sound Catholic doctrine, as by his vain frivolous and calumnious opposition
in his Preface and idle Annotations. See then I pray you the pride and
presumption of this rinegate, who at his first setting forth, takes that as
granted, which in all his tedious Discourse he shall never be able to prove.
For how can he call himself and his fellows Catholics, whose Doctrines
rejected by us are a composition of old and new Heresies? And how can he deny
us that title, whose Faith is wholly Catholic and Apostolic?

He presents us, as he professes, with a translation of S. AVSTINES
Confessions. A poor present, God wot, and nothing worth our acceptance, being
first as it seems rather turned out of Spanish, then Latin, and next
differing from the Original in diverse places; and thirdly, being corrupted
with false Notes and glosses. He presumes it will be profitable and not
unpleasing; so Geefe believe their own Goslings to be goodly birds. He adds,
that the subject will be now and then hard. As if every Schoole-boy could not
translate S. Austines Confessions, as well as he, or any Discourse could be
more easy.

As the beauty of a person, says he, consists in Complexion, proportion, and
motion. So he would prove S. Austine to be excellent in the complexion of his
Soul, the proportion of the parts of his Book, and the actions of his Life. A
similitude borrowed from his skill in discerning the beauty and complexion of
his outlandish Mistresses, but evil befitting this Subject. For first, what
likeness is there between Men and Books? Secondly, when did he ever see the
complexion of S. Austines Soul? Thirdly, what beauty is there in the
distinction of the Chapters made by some ignorant transcriber of S. Austines
Confessions? Lastly, what makes this tale of fair Complexion, decent
proportion and motion, to his evil favored translation, and jeiune Preface
and Notes?

He pitieth some Critickes offended, as he says, with some tautologies of
this Book; But such Critickes pity rather the translators Morologies and
Pseudologies, handling an argument unfit for such a person, and with diverse
lies commending his own friends, and taxing his adversaries.

Vanting of his labors he says, It was not in his will to commit the least
fault: but what if ignorance and partiality have carried him into faults and
errors: shall we accept his will for excuse? In the Preface and Translation
you shall find faults, lies, and corruptions, such as will easily convince this
vain brag.

He taxes some for falsifying and corrupting S. Austines books, De ciuit.
Dei, and his Meditations. But his reproof is easily answered. For first, he
does not, nor cannot show any proof of the corruption of S. Austines books,
de ciuit. Dei. Secondly, the book of Meditations attributed to him, is not
his. I have seen it under the name of Anselme. Others attribute it to some
later Schoole-man; and Master Rogers does not so much translate the book of
Meditations, as frame a new Discourse upon that ground.

But, that the belief and practice of S. AUGUSTINE, and the Church of his
time, is fully agreeable to the Roman Church at this day, and different from
the Church of England, as he affirms, cannot be proved out of any of S.
Augustines works. This I have clearly demonstrated before. Now I say only
he cannot prove, either the mysteries of the Mass, or the Popes universal
Monarchy, or the 7. Sacraments and Indulgences, or the Decrees of Trent which
we refuse. Only it is easily proved, that he is an adversary of this Church
of England, and so he professes himself to be. He is also an enemy of his
Country and the State, and a slave of Antichrist, albeit he does not profess
it.

He complains of the great difficulty of Translating this Book; and yet a
Child of 15. years old might well have translated a harder Book then this.
And if his betters thought so, as well as himself, both he and his betters
were poor, weak and ignorant Translators.

The sentences of S. Austines Confessions are no such deep matters, but they
may easily be understood. But to find Sentences, that grew on the tree of S.
AVSTINES soul, and to gather them with Flewers and dowe upon them, is an
absurd conceit, and altogether impossi^le. Never were any such Trees, Flower,
or Dew heard of, but in the Apostates harsh style. Let him rather beware of
sentences growing out of Tiburne tree, and of treacherous Doctrines taught him
by Mass Priests, Monks and Ignatians.

Having finished the Translation, he found, as he confesses, That he had much
mistaken the sense of diverse places. And every man that is not obdurat, will
yield, that he says it truly. But that he reformed his mistakings, it
apeareth not. Nay, we justly doubt he made the matter worse.

By his most significant and sententious soul, says he, his pen is thrust
into so little room. A strange and monstrous kind of guibrish, for who ever
heard before of a significant and sententious soul, and a pen thrust into a
little room? but if S. Austine spoke significantly, how could he speak so
obscurely, as is pretended? If the Apostates tongue were wedged in a wimble
hole, would he speak dark sentences think you?

The Heresy of the Manichees, says he, is laid under the ashes of oblivion.
And yet in his Popish doctrine concerning prohibition of Marriage to elected
Priests, in the extending of Christ's body into diverse places, in the
destruction of Christ's humane nature, and the Communion under one kind, it is
again revived.

The arguments of the Chapters, he says, are not S. Augustines. A very
profound Speculation. He might also have added, that the meaning expressed in
his Translation is not S. Augustines, but that shall appear hereafter.

Going about to commend his Book of Confessions, he says, He will borrow the
words of Ribadineira. And I doubt he borrowed some light from his Spanish
translation. But if he had chosen out a hundred, he could not have encountered
a more wicked enemy of Religion and the State, nor a more false and treacherous
companion then that Jesuwide, who translated and amplified that scandalous
Libell of Sanders, De schismate, devised of purpose to the disgrace of the
Kings of England and this State.

The Jesuit compares his Learning to a Spring, that rises and runs
perpetually. And yet Mass Priests and Friars drink rather of the puddle
Decretals of the Pope, then of S. Austines clear Spring.

Having vowed Chastity to God, says the Translator, he retired, in the
company of two friends, into a solitary house, where he spent three years in
meditation of Scripture, Prayer, Fasting, and other Penance. But first, it is
most untrue, that he vowed Chastity, or other Monkish Vows: secondly, he was
no longer there, then he pleased himself: thirdly, he read Scriptures, which
Monks use not much to do now: fourthly, he was not subject to the Pope, nor
lived under any certain Rule: fifthly, he whipped not himself, as the Friars
now do: sixthly, he retired not into a solitary house, but into his own
house, as Possidonius reports. Was he not then ashamed to tell so many
untruths with one breath?

He adds, that a principal Caualier offered to depend on his advice, in the
way of spirit; and that there were many Monasteries already erected in S.
Austines time. A gross Leasing, devised not without the instigation of some
wicked Spirit. For first, the Monasteries of Egypt and Syria were of another
fashion: secondly, Benct brought the Orders of Monks first into Italy:
thirdly, Possidonius calls the man, Agentem in Rebus, A Factor for the
Emperor: fourthly, of the dependence upon S. Austine by way of spirit, there
is no mention in Possidonius.

Another gross Leasing, related by the Translator, is that which is related
concerning a Monastery built by S. Augustine in a Garden; Possidonius says,
it was in the Church: and there lived not Canons regular, as this irregular and
prodigal fellow reports, but some servants of God, that followed the
Apostles rule, and not the fashions of Monks, or the Decrees of Popes.

The Order of Priesthood he took, but not the Orders of Mass Priests,
sacrificing for quick and dead: Nay, he preached the Gospel, which
Mass Priests do not; and was made Bishop without any Bulls of the Pope, being
chosen by the Clergy and People. That Evangelical perfection consists in
Monastical Obedience, he never thought: nor did he found a Monastery, for
Canons Regular. These be Fictions, and Lies, devised by the Apostate for the
maintenance of his Popish Religion; the North-starre of his Discourse, by which
he directs his broken Bark.

He confesses, that he was frequent in Preaching, Catechizing and teaching of
youth. A plain conviction of the sloth and negligence of the Romish woluish
Prelates, which neither Preach nor Teach, nor Catechize. He adds, that he
compounded Differences, and exercised himself in works of Charity. But Popish
Prelates inflame Wars, vex poor Christians, Murder Innocents and are void
of Charity, and full of vices and villainy. That his Bishoppricke should be
worth 40. M. Crowns by the year, is a pleasant conceit of a foolish Factor of
the Pope, measuring times past, wherein the Church was poor and needy, with
the time present, wherein Popish Prelates exceed in Luxury and Pride.

To error in belief and sensuality of Life, he confesses, he was admirably
opposite. To which the Apostate and his consorts are admirably addicted, being
Heretics by profession, and sensual Epicures in life and conversation. Yet
did S. Austine never vant of his noble Cooperation with Gods grace, or say he
made a superabundant satisfaction for his former offenses. These be glorious
vaunts of Popish Heretics, which take to themselves power of satisfactions and
merits due to Christ. He makes S. Austine also unspeakably pure, from a
Papist turning to be a Puritan, and gives that to S. Augustine, that he never
took to himself. He adds, that S. Austine did expiate 16. years of his
Youth uncleanly spent. As if a man were able to purge his sins, and to make
an atonement for them. Making S. Austine a Redeemer, and a teacher of perfect
Justice; the first being Blasphemy, and the second Pelagian Heresy.

Of the tenderness of S. Austines Conscience, and the rigor used by him in
examination of his small imperfections, he talks idly; himself and his
Consorts having Consciences seared with hot yrons, and not examining their most
flagitious Offenses, following sensual Lusts, falsifying their Words and
Oaths, murdering Gods Saints, maintaining Stews, teaching Rebellion and open
wickedness.

He accumulated, says the Apostate, a huge stock of Merits. But S. Austine
always disauowed his own Merits and fled to Gods mercy. Cor. 2. in Psalm. 36.
he says, All things are to be esteemed vile to us, when we consider what
we are to receive. Vt justi ficrent merita non fuerunt, says he, Epist. 150.
And in his Preface in Psalm. 31. Nihil boni fecisti and datur tibi remissio
peccatorum. And de Verb. Apost. Sermon. 2. he says, God does crown us in pity
and mercy: of a stock of Merits, he never spoke one word. Nay, so absurd is
the Doctrine of Merits of condignitie, that the sounder Schoolmen do
disauow it.

He adds, That he came not short in paying his Debts contracted with God and
his Church, by reason of his erroneous Belief. But if he came not short of
payment, what needed he to beg forgiveness of Debts? If he confuted
Pelagius, and other Heretics, then he was no great friend of Papists, that
teaching purity of Life, and perfection of Justice, and the power of Free Will
in our Regeneration, and doing good Works, join with Pelagius, and other
Heretics, condemned by S. Austine.

The Donatists, as he says, pretended, that the universal Church has erred,
and was perished: But he lies grossly; for they only said, that it erred,
and perished in all places save in Afrike: not as Papists say, that it is
perished, and erreth in all places, save in the Popes Jurisdiction.

He establishes, says he, the supreme Authority under God, of the true,
visible, and universal Church of Christ, in matters of Faith. But if the true
Church were visible in S. Austines time, then is not the Romish Church,
consisting of Popes, Cardinals, Inquisitors, dumb Prelates, sacrificing
Mass Priests, Monks, Friars, Nuns, fiery Ignatians, and such Vermin, the
true Church; for such a Church was not visible in S. Austines time, nor long
after. If the Churches Authority be Supreme, then is not the Pope Supreme;
nay, God speaking in Scriptures, is not Supreme. Finally, if the Church be
Universal, then is it not confined within the Limits of the Popes Authority.
Saint Austine certes never believed the Popes supreme Judgment, nor thought
the Church of Afrike to be of less Authority then that of Rome.

Concerning the Canon of Scripture it self, or the Translation or
interpretation thereof, or the trial of Apostolical Tradition, or whatsoever
other Point in difference; by the judgment of great Saint Augustine, the
Catholic visible Church is that which must be resorted unto, as the Supreme
and final Judge on Earth, as he says. He tells us also, That he gave
certain general Rules, whereby all Controversies of Faith may be composed.
But first, the Pope does much scorn to follow Saint Austines Rules, or
Judgment. Secondly, Saint Austine never knew any Rule of Controversies, but
holy Scriptures: The Rule of Faith, says he, Lib. 5. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 33. is
sufficiently known to the Faithful, by the Books of Canonical Scriptures; A
Regula Fidei, quae per alias eiusdem Authoritatis Sacras Literas, satis
fidelibus nota est non vberrauimus. Thirdly, Saint Austine, Lib. 2. de Doctr.
Christ. c. 11. and 15. and Lib. 15. de Ciuit. c. 13. will have Translations
examined by the Originals, and inferior to them. Fourthly, the blind Papists
do not follow the Judgment of the Catholic visible Church, but of one blind
Pope, that is the Enemy of the Church. Fifthly, how can the Universal Church
conuene, to judge all Controversies? And what reason has any to follow the
Church before Christ; or to hear the Church, judging in her own Cause?
Sixthly, the Traditions of the Romish Church, concerning the Popes power, the
Mass, and sieve new Sacraments, and their forms and matter, were never known,
either to the ancient Church, or to Saint Austine. Seventhly, he never knew
the Modern Church of Rome, or believed, that the Catholic Church was visible,
or supreme and final Judge.

He declares, what a pestilent thing Heresy and Schism is, as the Apostate
confesses. But what is that to us, that are true Catholics, and maintain the
Unity of the Apostolic Church? It touches rather the pestilencie of this
Apostate and his Companions, who having abandoned Christ, adhere to Antichrist.
and being divided from the Apostolic Church, embrace the Heresies of Trent,
and Schools in part condemned, or else not known to the ancient Catholic
Church, or to S. Austine.

S. Augustine held that which in his time was taught by the Fathers, and was
believed by the universal Church. But this Rinegate and his adherents embrace
the novelties of Schools, and errors of the Pope, and the Conuenticle of
Trent, albeit they were never believed by the Church, nor taught by the
Fathers. And of these erroneous Doctrines I have touched many particulars
heretofore.

That holy Father, Lib. de unit. Eccles. declares how the Church was known by
Scriptures, and not by those false Marks which the Pope and his Supporters
thrust upon it. By Scripture also we plainly discern, that the Apostate and
his fellows are a pack of wicked Heretics and Schismatikes, and no Communion
of Saints, or Catholic Christians.

The Donatists denied the universality of the Church, and said it was perished
in all places save in Afrike, and in the Communion of the Donatists. S. Austine
therefore disputing against them, confounds this Rinegate and his
Apostaticall fellows, who confine the Church within the Limits of the Popes
Diocese, and Territories of the Roman Obedience, holding it to be fallen and
vanished away in all other places. As for us, we neither deny the Church to be
universal, nor hold, that Christ's Catholic Church can perish or fail,
although this shameless Companion does impose this Error upon us; whom he
maliciously calls Caluinists and Lutherans, foming out his rage against his
Parents, Friends, and Countrymen.

That the true visible Church is Judge of Controversies, and cannot possibly
err, is not any Doctrine of S. Augustines. but an absurd Error of this
Rinegate. For first, either the Church judges her own Controversies, and so
sits Judge in her own Cause; or the Causes of Strangers and Infidels, who
will not hear her Sentence. Secondly, S. Austine never appealed to the Pope,
but to Christ and his Apostles. Thirdly, never does the Church meet, to judge
any man's Cause; nor ought Bishops to judge otherwise, then according to holy
Scriptures, iuxta Legem^eius, as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 17. Fourthly, the Church of
Afrike, of which S. Austine speaks, contr. Epist. Fundam. c. 5. is not now
visible, nor extant in the World. Fifthly, it follows not, because the Church
moved him to believe the Gospel, that therefore the same is supreme Judge: for
any man or woman may induce a man to believe the Gospel, yet every one is not a
supreme and infallible Judge. Sixthly, the Church of Ephesus, Corinth, and
Galatia, was sometime a true visible Church, and yet it is now failed, and
subject to gross Errors, and never was the supreme Judge of matters of Faith.
Neither is it material, that the Truth remains in the Belly of the Church,
as S. Austine says in Psalm. 57. for the Truth remained in the Church of the
Colossians, Thessalonians, and Philippians, yet neither were these Churches
supreme Judges, nor did they always abide in Truth: and whatsoever we think
of them, yet the Truth abides not always in the Head, Belly, Legs, or
Chair of the Pope.

If any fear to be deceived, says S. Austine, Lib. 1. con. Cresc. c. 33. let
him consult the Church, which without doubtfulnesse the holy Scripture does
demonstrate. And therein we willingly follow his advice, consulting the Church
of England. But the Adversaries do contrary, consult the Synagogue of Rome,
composed of Popes, Cardinals, Inquisitors, Woluish Prelates, Mass Priests,
Monks, Friars, Nuns, and ignorant people, knowing nothing of the Faith,
which neither Scriptures nor Fathers demonstrate, unless it be in Babylon,
Apocalypse 17.

He says further, that no man can be saved, but in the Catholic Church: and
so say we. But we deny the Synagogue of Rome, despising holy Scriptures, and
adulterating the Doctrine of Sacraments, given us by Christ, to be that Church.
They may pretend to be Catholics, as other Heretics do, and sing Alleluia,
De Profundis, Aue Sancta Crux, and Salve: Regina; but out of the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, as they hold, the new Creed of Trent, and Doctrine of
Schools, they cannot be saved. Greased and salued they may be, but saved they
cannot be.

And hereof he brings another reason, De unit. Eccles. c. 16. because they
have not Christ for their head, and this is proved because they have the Pope
for their head; nay, they have Antichrist for their head. They also hold the
heresies of the Simonians, and Carpocratians, Angelikes, Collyridians;
Nudipedales. Manichees, and Pelagians.

The books of Tobia, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees, S.
Austine never made equal to the Law and Prophets. Nay, he denies them to have
been reputed Canonical by the Church before Christ, albeit in regard they
contained Precepts of manners they were read in the Church, and in a general
signification might be called Canonical.

Of S. Peter's primacie, this prime Disciple of Antichrist has little reason to
prate. For first, S. Augustine gives him no command or superiority over the
Apostles, but only a prime Place in order in respect of his feruor, Age and
Virtue. Secondly, he had no power to depose Princes, or to make Laws; This
belonged to the Council, that, neither to any Apostle, nor any Council.
Thirdly, the Pope neither feeds Christ's sheep, nor loves Christ; nay, he is
more like to Nero, then to Peter. Fourthly, the Bishops of Rome had no
Apostolical Prerogative, nor had they power over Scriptures, men's Consciences,
Princes or all other Bishops. Lastly, the Bishops of Afrike, and among others
S. Austine, thought themselves in no degree inferior to the Bishops of Rome.

S. Austine, contr. part. Donat. where he speaks of the Rock, against which
the proud gates of Hell cannot prevail, understands S. Peter's Confession and
Doctrine, and not the succession of Popes, as this Popelin would have it. For,
against Marcellinus the gates of Hell prevailed, and no strength is there in
the Succession of the rest. Secondly; neither does he call S. Peter's feat an
Episcopal feat of Peter, as this false Translator has turned it, but only an
order of Bishops, In ordine illo Patrum, quis cui successit videte, are his
words. Thirdly, he does signify, that other Bishops were as well Successors
of Peter as the Bishops of Rome.

To end this point concerning his Judgment of the Church and the visible head
thereof, says this visible and palpable Sot, as if S. Augustine had ever
taught, that the Pope was the visible head of the Church, or that his Decrees
and Determinations were the determination of the Church. What a brainlesse head
and brazen face has the Apostate to affirm this?

The succession of Priests, says S. Austine, kept him in the Church. But not
the personal Succession of them, nor the Succession of Popes, as this Rinegate
impudently affirms. Further until S. Austines time the Bishops of Rome and
other the Successors of Peter continued in the Catholic Faith. But now the
Popes are Apostated from the Faith, and have abandoned the office of Bishops;
professing new Doctrine, and assuming to them a new Office.

S. Austine De anim. and ejus Orig. lib. 3. c. 4. believed not, That Iufants
dying without Baptism could obtain remission of original sin. But neither
he, nor the Schoolmen say, that all not Baptized are necessarily damned,
holding, that beside the baptism of Water, there is a baptism of Blood, and
of the Holy Ghost. S. Ambrose doubted not of the salvation of Valentinian,
albeit he dyed unbaptized. And the same is the opinion of the unbaptized and
believing Thief, and such Martyrs as shed their blood for CHRIST.

For the Popish real and external Sacrifice of the Mass, S. Austine speaks
no one word, howsoever it pleases this slave of Antichrist to vouch him for
it. He does not so much as once name the Mass, or say that Christ's Body was
really offered under the accidents of Bread and Wine. The sacrifice he speaks
of, was only a memorial of the sacrifice of Christ's death; and Monica was
only remembered at the Altar, as other Christians, Patriarchs, and Martyrs
were, albeit her soul was not in Purgatory.

Papists also build Churches to Martyrs and Saints, and call upon them,
contrary to the Doctrine of S. Austine, Lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 10. who
albeit they were named in the Mysteries, yet denies that either they were
called upon, or had Temples built unto them.

Lib. 17. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 20. he admits none to be Priests after the
Order of Melchisedech, or Mediators of the New Testament, but CHRIST JESUS:
Sacerdos ipse Noui Testamenti, and secundum Ordinem Melchisedech. But this
Apostate supposes, that his Mass Priests are after the Order of Melchisedech,
and that Saints canonized by the Pope, are Mediators of the New Testament,
albeit neither New nor Old Testament was established in their blood.

We adore Christ's flesh, says S. Austine, allegorically expounding the words
of the 98. Psalm: but not in the Mysteries, as this Patron of the Mystery of
Iniquity affirms; nor does he speak of the Sacrifice of the Mass, as this
Dreamer imagines: for he speaks of the spiritual eating of Christ's flesh,
that is adored when it is believed, and spiritually received by Faith. That
Christ's flesh was under the accidents of Bread and Wine, and really contained
in the Priests hands, neither did S. Austine, or other Fathers believe; for
that were nothing else then to betray Christ; as did Judas, into the hands of
Thieves. That Christ's Body is to be eaten with the mouth, he utterly denies:
Non hoc corpus quod videtis mandueaturi estis, says he.

Again, in Conc. 1. in Psalm. 33. expounding these words, Ferebatur in manibus
suis, he understands them of the Sacrament in Christ's hands; for speaking
properly, he says, No man is carried in his own hands: which words the
Prefacioner either marked not, or wilfully diffembled.

Prayers for the dead, infer not the Doctrine of Purgatory; as the place of
the 2. Machab. 12. albeit corrupted, and his Book de cura pro Mortuis, does
declare: for neither does he there mention any Purgatory, nor did he ever
think, that his Mothers soul was in Purgatory. In Enchirid. ad Lament. he
speaks of purging small faults, but very doubtingly: but that Christians were
to satisfy in Purgatory for sins, whose guilt was remitted, he never
taught nor imagined. Aerius was condemned as an Heretic, as Augustine relates
Haeres. 53. de Haeres. ad Quoduultd. but it was because he was an Arrian. He
was reproved also for denying, not Sacrifices and Prayers for the Dead, as this
Apostate, lying most deadly and impudently, affirms, but a Commemoration for
the Dead, then used, wherein Martyrs and holy Saints were mentioned. As for the
Sacrifice, 2. Machab. 12. it will profit the Apostate but little, being offered
for the Damned.

In his second Sermon upon the 88. Psalm. S. Austine would have Saints Feasts
celebrated with sobriety. But what makes that for innocation of Saints, or
celebrating Masses in their honor? Further, these words seem to be patched to
the end of the Psalm by some idle Monk, that was zealous for his Belly, and
more willing to feast then fast: for neither have they any connection with the
words going before, nor was it the use to celebrate Feasts in S. Austines days
for other Saints then Martyrs, as appears Lib. 20. contra Faust. c. 22.

That S. Austine proved Prayers to Saints and Angels out of Scriptures, is a
most gross Untruth, uttered by a lying Apostate. In the 21. Book de Ciuit.
Dei, c. 27. alleged by him, is no such matter sound: Nay, in the 22. Book de
Ciuit. c. 10. he condemns the invocation of Martyrs. And Lib. 10. Confess. c.
42. and 43. shows, that the Office of Reconciliation and Mediation between
God and man, belongs to Christ only, and not to Angels or Saints.

In the 22. Book de Ciuit. Dei, c. 8. diverse Miracles are reported, as wrought
some by holy Earth, some by Relics, and some by other means. But the whole
Discourse sauoureth rather of the Vein of some Monk, or writer of Legends,
then of so learned and grave a Father. Howbeit, whosoever is the Author of that
Addition, he neither mentions the Mass, nor invocation or prayers to Saints,
for which by the Apostate it is vainly alleged; nor says, that Miracles were
wrought by such superstitious Tricks.

In his Book de Great. and Lib. Arb. c. 16. he says, It is certain we keep
Gods Commandments, if we will. But he says not, it is in the power of the
will to keep Gods Commandments, or as the Apostate infers, that man has
possibility to keep Gods Commandments: For presently the holy Father adds,
That our will must be prepared of the Lord, and that we can do nothing,
unless it be given us of God. Further, to hold that man by his will can
fulfill the Law of God, is Pelagianisme. Lib. de Not. and Great. c. 43. We
must, as he counsels us, demand grace of God, that we may do that which we
cannot otherwise. But what need Grace, if the Will had power sufficient to do
well?

In his first Book of Retract. c. 21. S. Austine does utterly overthrow the
Popish Doctrine, concerning the power of Free Will, in doing good: For if man
cannot change his will, unless it be given him, nor do good but by grace, as
he teaches, then does it not lie in the power of Free Will to do well, more
then it lies in the power of the Apostate to be made a Cardinal: which is a
grace bestowed by the Pope on his favorites, and not obtained by every loose
companions free will.

S. Austine does also confound the Heresy of the Apostate, holding
justification by Faith and Works; for if Works follow him that is justified,
and go not before, then do not Works justify us. Yet hold we not, that
Faith deuoid of Works does justify, but that Faith lively by good Works does
only apprehend Christ's Mercy and lustice, and not our Works effect Justice.

That S. Austine, with other Fathers of the Church teach, that our Works are
meritorious of Eternal life, as this Apostate auoweth, is an impudent
assertion disauowed by them, and meritorious of a sharp censure. S. Austine
neither in his 105. Epist. nor in his 46. Epist. ad Valent. does in one word
signify that Works are meritorious of Eternal life. Nay contrary, albeit he
does mention Merits: yet, he says, men are justified by Grace without merits.
Which overthrows the Doctrine of Merits de congruo, and the Decrees of Trent
concerning men's preparations to Justice. Jn Epist. 46. ad Valent. he says, Man
is converted by mercy and grace. In Conc. 2. in Psalm. 36. he denies our Works
to be meritorious of that we shall receive. And in Psalm. 83. That what soever
he has promised, he promised to such as are unworthy. And Ser. 16. de verb.
Apost. He is made our debtor, says he, not receiving anything from us, but
promising what pleased him.

And thus it appears, that S. Austine is little propitious to Papists even in
those points, in which they think him to be most favorable. But their maine
grounds he either knew not or contradicted them, as has been formerly
demonstrated Most idle therefore is his whole Discourse ensuing.

First, he wondreth, that any should be so silly or impudent, as to avouch S.
Austine as a Patron of the Faith which we profess, whom he like a Calfe of
the Popes Bulls calls Caluinists. But I have alleged against him so many
particulars, that I hope he will cease his wonderment. I have also derived our.
Faith from Christ and his Apostles, and not from Calvin or any late teacher. S.
Austine argued against the Manichies, that held Fate, and the Pelagians, that
magnified Free Will, and made an Idol of it. But what does that concern us,
who detest all the Heresies both of the one and the other. It rather touches
the Apostate and his consorts, who according to the Doctrine of Thomas, 1. P.
q. 116. Art. 1. and 2. allow Fate, and with the Manichies condemn Marriage in
Priests, and give to CHRIST a fantastical body, that is in many places at one
time, and refuse Flesh and other meats. They also magnify Free Will as being
the Cause of man's conversion, and having power to prepare us to Justification;
and hold, that the Virgin Mary and some others, were borne without Original
sin, and that Just men may live without sin for some time, and the unjust
do any good by their Freewill: all which, are Heresies of the Pelagians.

He adds, that S. Austine, believed the invocation of Saints and Angels to
be a Catholic Doctrine, and that he, did not only approve Prayers made to
Saints, but also recounteth many Miracles wrought by them: Lies idly repeated,
and formerly refured. See S. Austines Confess. lib. 10. c. 42. and 43. and lib.
22 de ciuit. Dei, c. 10. and you shall find he teaches contrary. The
miracles reported, Lib. 22. de ciuit. c. 8. are thrust in there by some
falsary; and yet is it not there said, they were wrought by Saints.

He supposes, that we infer that Scriptures contain all things necessary
to salvation; because, as S. Austine says, lib. Confess. and. c. 5. they are
excellent means whereby God may he both believed and served, But his
supposall is ridiculous and false; for neither has S. Austine in that place
any such words, nor do we ground our selves upon any thing therein contained,
but upon diverse other place, Lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. c. ^. Tract. 49. in
Joan. Lib. 1. de cousens. Euangel. c. 35. lib. 3. centr. lib. Petil. c. 6. and
lib. 3. cantr. d^^s epist. Pelag. c. 4.

Far he was, says the Apostate, from holding Scripture to he the supriame
Judge of Controversies; Yes, lib 3. de Nu^^. and Co^o^p^^. c. 33. he appealeth
to Christ and his Apostle. He does also try all questione in all place by
Scriptures, and no where by the Pope or his (...). That the Gospel with h^n
had been no Gospel, if the authority of the Church had not obliged him? is a
wicked speech of this blasphemous Apustate, and no saying of S. Austine. He
said only the Authority of the Church moved him, which he might have affirmed
of any godly Preacher, yea, of his Mother.

If S. Austines, or other Fathers words seem to favor us, the Rinegate
pretends, That so many other places are plain and express for his Romish
Religion; insomuch, that some confess they contradict themselves. Both gross
and impudent leasings; For the first, we have refuted by many unanswerable
arguments: the second, he cannot choose but confess, unless he can produce
such as charge the Fathers with contradictions.

But says he, The Roman Church has preserved S. Austines Works untouched:
secondly, she preserved two Orders of Religious men instituted by him:
thirdly, she permitted his Images and Relics to be kept and honored, his
Festival to be solemnized, and Churches and Altars to be erected to God in
his name. I answer, that the first is most untrue; for the Popes factors have
not only added to his Works many suppositious Books, but also have falsified
his true works; and if any sincerity have been used in the edition of his
writings, it is much against the Popes mind. But suppose the Romanists should
have used diligence in preserving his Writings, yet is not the same comparable
to the diligence of the Jews, in preserving the Old Testament, by which
notwithstanding they are plainly convinced. 2. It is false, that either
Hermites or Chanons regular were instituted by S. Austine, they having received
their Original and Laws from the Pope. 3. The Jews honored the Prophets,
albeit, they regarded not their admonitions and counsels. 4. It is guibrish
to say, that Churches and Altars were built to God in S. Austines name; for S.
Austines Church is built to Saint Austine, as Baals Church to Baal. 5. Not Gods
Church, but the Sinagogue of Satan maintains the Idotrous worship of Saints,
of their Relics and Images.

He says, we disclaim S. Austine, and call him superstitious, and
scornefully trample upon the head and heart of this glorious Saint. But would
he disclayme his lying and calumniating, this accusation would soon cease. To
prefer holy Scripture before any one Father, is no scorn nor wrong. Calvin
in some things leaves him; but Papists leave him where he follows the
Apostle, and sets forth the grace of Christ: they believe, that Monicaes
soul was in Purgatory; but so did not S. Austine.

Toward the end of his Preface, having almost tired himself with lying, and
busy search of that he cannot find, he cries out, O Heresy, how deep are
thy Roots laid in Hell! Some pang belike of Hellish Treason and Heresy wrung
his rotten carcass, and pinched him at the heart: for to deny Masses and
Dirges for the dead, is no Heresy; but to destroy Christ's humanity, to
renounce his grace, and to maintain Pelagianisme, as Papists do, is most
gross and notorious Heresy.

We esteem S. Austine, and other Fathers, as much as they desire to be
esteemed, and prefer them far before the Pope and his whole Consistory of
Cardinals. But the Papists do prefer every blind and ignorant Popes Sentence
before all the ancient Fathers: of whom, albeit they speak gloriously in their
Breuiaries and Missals, yet they neither regard them, nor the Apostles of our
Savior, if they speak against their holy Father, and his profit, and Monks
slow bellyes.

S. Austine believed, repented, and lived a boly life: but yet he neither
whipped himself, nor did Penance, as Friars do; neither did he make boast of
his eminency in all perfection of life, which the Apostate attributes unto
him. The Fable of the writing of the seven Penitential Psalms before S.
Austine, as he lay on dying, is not probable; the same being a practice of
Friars, and not mentioned by Possidonius.

We endeavor by Faith and good Works, and the testimony of a good Conscience,
to make our election sure to us; and so no doubt, did S. Austine: but we
persuade no man to assure himself of his salvation, his life being flagitious
and sensual, and himself being ignorant, and living without repentance, and
having Faith only, without good Works, as this lying and flagitious Apostate
does falsely charge us; that is rather the flagitious error of the Apostate and
his Consorts, who promise salvation to all absolved by Mass Priests, and dying
in the Popes Faith: which was also the Heresy of Eunomius.

The example of S. Austine, he says, is profitable to all men, whether they be
in state of purity, or are fallen into sensuality, having dark and frozen
souls. As if S. Austine were a Catharist, or Puritan; or sensual Papists,
whose hearts are darkened with ignorance, and frozen with coldness of
devotion, could reap any profit by S. Austines example.

Only he would not have his Reader so to remember S. Austine, as to forget
their devotion to his Mother Monica; who, as he says, had a manly soul,
endued with massy and solid virtues. A note of remembrance, full of
stoliditie rather then soliditie: for devotion and religion, in the opinion of
all solid Christians, tries us to God, and not to men or women departed this
life, and unknown to us. Further, if her soul were manly, why may not the
Apostate have a female soul, being so much addicted to the feminine gender? If
her virtues were massy, why may not his vanities be spongeous and light, like
Tyffanie? Lastly, if S. Austine and his Mother were Saints, being not canonized
by the Pope; then is the Popes power, lately usurped in canonizing Saints,
nothing. And thus an end of the Apostates idle and long Preface: proface to his
indignity, that has thus unworthily disgraced himself, and his graceless
Cause.

CHAP. VI. Notes and Aduertisements upon the Translators Advertisement,
concerning S. AVSTINES Retractations.
ALthough his idle Advertisement to the Reader, is neither worth any
Animaduersion, nor the Readers pains; yet because it comes in suit next
after his Preface, it follows in order, that upon his Advertisement, we put
our Animaduersions.

And first, I could not ouerpasse his impudence and arrogance, albeit noted
before, in calling himself and his companions Catholics, whose Faith is
neither Catholic, nor Apostolic, nor Christian. Let him, if he have any
shame, demonstrate, that Christ's Body is made of Bread, nay, of Wine, and that
it is contained under the accidents of Bread and Wine, and was eaten not only
by the Apostles, but also by Christ himself, yea, by men and beasts, eating
the Sacrament; that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and has two Swords, and power
to depose and kill Kings; that Friars and Monks were instituted by Christ, and
live in perfect purity; and all the new Creed of Trent.

When we are urged by Papists with the authority of Saint Austine, making
evidently against us, it is our use, says the Aduertiser, to allege, that he
made Books of Retractation. But first, he is not able to show any authority
of S. Austine making evidently against us: contrariwise, we have alleged
places making evidently against the Popish Faction and their Heresies.
Secondly, it is no fault to say, he made Books of Retractations. Thirdly, we
allege places never retracted. Lastly, it is an easy matter to avoid
whatsoever is objected against us out of S. Austine, without any such frivolous
and idle shift, as is by this poor shifter suggested and devised for us.

Where S. Austine, Lib. 9. Confess. c. 13. speaks of the price of our
Redemption, he says, nothing is signified, but the Sacrifice of the Mass. A
conceit fond and ridiculous: for first, what is more absurd, then to confess,
that the soul of the Translator and his companions is of so little value, that
they may be redeemed with every three-halfe-peny Mass? Secondly, that Father
does not so much as in one word mention the Sacrifice of the Mass. Thirdly,
he understands the Sacrifice made upon the Cross, for our Redemption; a
memorial whereof is made in the holy Mysteries, profaned by wicked
Mass Priests.

That which S. Austine says of Prayers for the Dead, makes nothing either for
the sale of Masses, or Dirges, or the blazing fire of Purgatory: neither is
the Apostate able to auow his irreligion by any words of S. Austine, of Vows,
of Miracles, or of the darkness of any Texts of Scriptures.

He tells us, that S. Austine mentions Monasteries of Religious persons,
and great numbers of Hermites: yet cannot he show any such institation of
Hermites, nor demonstrate, that S. Austine ever knew any Popish Monk or Friar.

That one and the same Scripture has very many and different senses, is not
the Doctrine of S. Austine, but the foolish conceit of this idle Translator,
that has in his head very many crotchets, but very little sense or
understanding: for how can we be assured of the truth and certain
understanding of Scriptures; if the same have many senses? Apollo Loxias gave
forth ambiguous Oracles; but far is that from the Text of holy Scriptures,
and the wisdom of the holy Ghost.

He notes also, that albeit S. Austine wrote the story of his youth, yet he
was no young man when he wrote his Book. A high point of the Translators
learning; as if old men could not write the story of their younger years: the
Translator himself, if he please, may write what he did in the Brothels of
France, Italy, and Spain, when he was younger then now.

Further he charge us, as if we should say, that S. Austine was but a young
man when he wrote his Confessions, and that afterward he grew wiser. As if any
of us did tax S. Augustine of indiscretion, for writing this Book: if he know
any such, why does he-not name them? if he name none, himself seems to be a
false accuser; who albeit grown in years, is neither more honest, nor wise,
then when he was young.

He in his Retractations, says he, confessed his sins and good deeds. An
example which the Aduertiser means not to follow: for his enormious sins he
will not confess, and good deeds I know none he has to relate.

He adds, that his Confessions much pleased many of his Brethren. Yet we
hear of no Confession, that this prodigal, and Popish Apostate has made, nor
does he greatly care to please his Parents, Brethren and Friends; neither does
his Translation please any man, but himself.

S. Austine in his fourth Book of Confessions, says, He made rather a light
Declamation, then a serious Confession. But the aduertiser although he make
both idle Declamations and frivolous and false Annotations, yet neither in jest
nor earnest does he confess his faults, but rather proudly and
vaine-gloriously boast of his doings.

In the end the Aduertiser beseeches his discreet Reader to admire the
humility and exactness of the Saint. A request that concerns himself
nothing, that is neither Saint, nor humble, nor exact, nor discreet; nay,
foolishly he admireth himself and his doings, albeit, his Prefaces, Notes and
Aduertisements, contain nothing but foolery, vanity and lies.

S. Austine, says the Aduertiser, believed what he taught. But neither did
he teach any thing in favor of his Popish Heresies, nor prejudicial to the
Faith of the Church of England. Vainly he boasts that the modern Faith of
Rome is Catholic; But we have convinced it to be neither Catholic, nor
Apostolic, nor true. Let him answer to our arguments, and he shall be forced
to confess so much himself.

This advertisement therefore, howsoever it pleased the Translator therein to
mention S. Austines Retractations, makes nothing for his own glory and
commendation. He should have showed more wisdom, if he had retracted both
his Preface and Advertisement.

After his Aduitisement he confesses, that his Copy was evil written, and
that many errors escaped in Printing. But this should easily have been
pardoned, if that his whole labor had been well performed, and gross Errors
had not been committed in his Preface, Annotations and Translations. Now then
we come to speak of his Annotations and Translations reserved for the last
Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Of the false, wicked, and absurd Annotations of the Apostate upon
S. AUGUSTINES Confessions, and how euill-fauouredly they and he answer the
Text.
SAint Augustine, in the first Book of his Confessions, Cap. 2. Does invoke
his Lord and God, which made Heaven and Earth: and which notwithstanding was
not contained in them. But this Apostate and his fellows does invoke and
call upon Angels and Saints; yea, upon their God of the Altar, that neither
made Heaven nor Earth, nor any thing else, but as themselves say, was made by a
Priest, and is contained under the accidents of Bread and Wine, and shut up in
a Pixe, and hanged over the Altar. This the Apostate did well perceive, made
not for his profit; and therefore he was content to pass by this Chapter in
sad silence.

Chap. 4. S. Augustine says, Supererogatur tibi vti debeas, which the Apostate
translateth thus: By our Supererogation thou becommest our debtor; and notes,
that God makes us able to do works of Supererogation. But neither does that
holy Father say, or think, that God was made our debtor for our Works, but
only for his Promise, nor account Monkish vows to be works of
Supererogation, nor teach, that man was able to perform the whole Law and more.

Chap. 5. lib. 1. the Translator notes, That S. Austine did oblige God to be
good unto him. A patch stitched to the Text and not in one word signified by
that holy Father, and most false. For by what obligation can God, that is above
all, be obliged to a sinful man, that is so far underneath him? Nay, in this
very Chapter he declares his sins against himself, and confessing the
impiety of his heart, and disclaiming his Merits and Works, says, He will
not stand in judgment with God.

In the Margent, Chap. 10. the Translator notes, that there are Sectaries who
blasphemously affirm, that God appoints men to sin. But he durst not name
any party, least touching M. Calvin, he should be deprehended in a manifest
Lie, and convinced of his ordinary Crime of Calumniation. Howbeit, if men
should appoint men to worship the Pope, and to embrace his Heresies; to worship
Saints and Images, after the practice of Rome; to rebel against Princes
excommunicated by the Pope, which the Apostaticall Faction of Rome says he
does; then by their Doctrine he should appoint men indeed to sin. We say,
only God forbids all sins, and directs all men's actions.

Chap. 11. he observes the use of signing with the Cross: but S. Austine
there speaks of signing and salting Infants newly come out of their Mothers
Womb, and sometime before Baptism; Ceremonies not now used in the Romish
Church. He talks therefore of no matters of Faith, nor helps the
Translator, who so often and superstitiously abuses that sign.

S. Austine, Chap. 13. touches the buyers and sellers of Grammar: but the
Translator adds Rules, as if Rules of Grammar were sold, so that a man might
have license to speak false Latin. In Rome the Pope sells Rules, Laws, and
Dispensations; but the Translator cares for none of that, nor does the Pope
care for Grammar Rules, or good Latin.

Lib. 1. Chap. 16. S. Austine speaks of a Flood: but the Translator turns
it into a Torrent, and notes in the Margent, A noble Discourse; as if it were
a noble thing to talk of Torrents of Custom, and drying up of Floods.
Afterward he talks of learning these words, the Golden Shower, the Lap, the
Ornament, and the Temple of Heaven; and the Translator notes an extreme abuse
still on foot, but shows not what it is, nor wherein it consists. These
words, Qui templa Coeli summo sonitu conculit, he translateth thus, which
shakes the whole Vault of Heaven with his sovereign Voice: as if the Heaven
were like a Vault of a Cellar, and every great noise were a sovereign Voice. O
the sovereign dizardrie of a transcendent Translator, whose words soar above
all understanding and reason!

God is the Center of all true sweetness, says the Apostate in a Marginall
Note upon the first Chapter of the second Book of Confessions. But in the Text
there is no mention of Center, or Circumference: neither is God in the lowest
place, as a Center, but fills all things with his presence. And where S.
Austine says, Exarsi aliquando satiari in inferis in adolescentia, he turns
it thus; I did sometimes burn with a kind of hellish desire, to be satisfied:
as if Hell were nothing but hellish desires.

And commenting upon the second Book, and second Chapter, he says in his
Marginall Note, That Virginity is a better disposition to receive Divine
consolation, then the state of Marriage. But S. Austine talks nothing of this
disposition; nor do Popish Votaries, that forswear Marriage, either attain to
perfect chastity, or receive the Divine consolations he speaks of: nay,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and other married men, received more consolations
from God, then all the pack of unmarried Popes, Monks, and Friars.

These words, Lib. 2. c. 3. Et volutabur in caeno eius, tanquam in Cinamomis
and Vnguentis praetiosis, he translated thus; And I weltred in the mire
thereof, as if I had been regaled in a Bed of Spices and precious Odours: as
if there were no Spices but Cinnamon, and Ointment did signify Odours. Would he
not be anointed with Hogs-dung for corrupting the Text, and bastonaded with a
Ruler, which makes an English word of a Spanish, and thrusts it into the
Translation without warrant of the Text?

Lib. 2. c. 4. S. Austine thought himself in the bottom of the Deep,
remembering he had stolen his neighbors Pears. But the Apostate and his
Teachers account such slight matters venial sins, and say they are done
away with knocking the breast, and holy water. He translateth also these
words, in imo Abyssi, in the bottom of Hell: as if God redeemed souls out of
Hell, and Purgatory.

Seruus fugiens Dominum, and consequut us vmbram, Lib. 2. c. 7. he translateth,
a slave flying his Lord, and finding nothing to lay hold upon but a shadow.
Where many words are redundant, and the meaning not attained: for S. Austines
meaning is, that a slave flying, and obtaining a shadie place, had but a small
rest.

Quis audet viribus suis tribuere castitatem and innocentiam suam! says S.
Austine, Lib. 2. c. 7. But this Apostate translateth it pedantically thus, Who
dares presume to entitle himself to the virtue of his chastity and
innocence? quite beside the Text: and this of purpose, least S. Austine should
seem to condemn his cooperations, and that power of Free Will which
Pelagianizing Papists maintain.

Veni Carthaginem and circumstrepebat me vndique sartago flagitiosorum amorum,
says S. Austine, Lib. 3. Confess. c. 1. But the Apostate durst not note any
thing upon the place, because coming to Rome, he was boiled in a Drying Pan of
impure and flagitious Lusts, and reboyled again in Cornelius Tub, and yet
confesses nothing, as did that holy Father.

S. Austine, Lib. 3. c. 3. speaks of certain Companions called Euer-sores,
or ouer-turners of Civility; a cruel and devilish name: yet not so cruel,
as the name of a Traitor, and Apostate, and a hired slave of Antichrist. He
compares them to roaring Boys, and Wits: but English turned Italian and
Spanish, are far more cruel and devilish.

In the Margent of the fifth Chapter he notes, that there is great difficulty
in understanding holy Scriptures; but quite contrary to that holy Fathers
meaning: for he says, they profit such as are little ones, and humble; albeit
they be not understood of the proud and ignorant, such as the Pope is, that
presumes he cannot err; and such as his Disciple here is, that with unwashed
hands and feet falls upon handling holy Scriptures.

The Manichees, as the Translator says in his Notes upon the 3. Book of
Confess. c. 6. professed to believe the three Persons of the holy Trinity. But
in the Text of S. Austine there is no such matter: nay contrary, he says,
their heart was void of all truth. But did they believe some truth, yet
destroying the humanity of Christ, and forbidding Marriage to their elect
Priests, and not receiving the Cup in the Sacrament, and holding diverse other
lewd fancies, they were gross Heretics. Likewise are the Papists; who albeit
they hold the Apostles Creed, yet hold these Manichean Heresies, and those of
the Simonians, Carpocratians, Angelikes, Collyridians, Staurolatrians, and
others. They teach also the fictions of Bodies, which have no being at all, as
S. Austine reports of them, Lib. 3. c. 7.

S. Austine confesses, he was persuaded to yield to foolish Deceivers; which
he lamenteth, Lib. 3. cap. 7. Yet this Apostate sorroweth not, that he has
abandoned the Apostolic Faith, and yielded to seducing Mass Priests and
Iesuwides, teaching the Heresies above mentioned, and diverse others: only he
notes them to be Atheists, which (as it seems) dislike, that the Pope should
allow that in one Age, which is unlawful in another.

Flagitious sins against nature, S. Augustine, Lib. 3. Conf. c. 8. detesteth.
He says also, it is a general agreement of humane socictie to obey Kings. Yet
Popes disturb this general agreement, forbidding men to obey Kings
excommunicate, and his marked slaves claim exemption from this obedience: And
many forswearing Marriage, fall into these enormious and flagitious sins.

Gladly would the Apostate, cap. 8. excuse his companions, who in their
Catechismes leave out the second Commandment, against I dols or graven Images.
But first, S. Austine leaves out nothing: secondly, more Father divide the
Commandments into 4. in the first Table, and 6. in the last, then into 3. and
7. Thirdly, these words 3. and 7. seem to have crept into the Text, having no
connection with other words.

In the 3. Book and 9. Chap. the Apostate notes, that in the Catholic Church
there is no danger of indiscretion, in doing Penance. But first, most absurdly
he doteth, where he reputeth the Pope, Cardinals, Mass Priests, Monks, and
Friars, to be the Catholic Church. S. Austine certes does not talk of Popish
Penance, in whipping themselves, and lying on the ground, or on Ropes.

Noli esse vana anima mea and obsurdescere in aure cordis, says S. Austine,
Lib. 4. Confess. c. 11. And hereupon the Translator notes, That sin makes
us deaf to the voice of God. We may therefore well esteem, by his own
confession, what the cause is why he hears not the voice of God, but rather
hears and follows the call of Satan, drawing him away from the truth: his
heart is deaf in hearing the Word, his soul foolish in obeying the voice of
Antichrist, and delighting in foreign and strange fashions.

He talks also here of the Center of Rest, corrupting his Author, and
himself being not only out of the Center, but also all the Circumference of
Rest. In the Margent he notes as an absurdity, that any should prefer the
part before the whole. and yet he and his fellows do prefer the Pope before
the Cardinals and Priests, and before the whole Romish Church.

Lib. 4. cap. 16. When we rely on our selves, says the Translator, our
strength is nothing but mere weakness: A place ill translated. S. Austines
words are, Firmit as nostra quando tu es, tunc est firmit as; cum autem nostra
est, infirmit as est. How then can man of himself will or do that is good, or
prepare himself to justice, or before grace believe and repent, and love God?

Where in the Text S. Austine, Lib. 5. Confess. c. 1. has, Heal thou all my
Bones; the Translator in the Margent notes, the powers of his Soul: as if his
Apostaticall Soul were full of Bones. S. Austine also says, God does open the
heart when he will: Which shows, that man cannot resist his grace, nor
receive it, before it be given him.

The picture of an Heretic, says he in a note upon the 5. Book and 6. Chap.
is set out in Faustus, who was very shallow, albeit, he made a fair show.
What then need we go further to seek out an Heretic, then to this
shallow-pated Apostate, who notwithstanding his shows and brags, is a
Translator of small substance, such also are his pedanticall Masters the
Jesuits, that talking bravely of the Church and Tradition, run their barks
upon the sands of the Popes Decrees, impudently bragging and yet performing
nothing. Like to Faustus, who was Magnus laquens Diaboli, as S. Austine says,
Lib. 5. Confess. c. 3. as they are.

Erat memoria B. Cypriani, says S. Austine, Lib. 5. c. 8. This the Apostate
translateth, there was the Shrine of S. Cyprian. As if that godly Martyr were
Shrined like Thomas of Canterbury, and worshipped with Lights, Masses, Music,
solemn access of Pilgrims, and such like Ceremonies. There also he says, S.
Cyprians Relics were kept; but he shows not what Relics, nor is able to
prove, that they were there worshipped. S. Augustine has no such thing: It was
only a memory of Cyprians martyrdom. Monica there prayed to God, and not to
Cyprian, as may be collected out of S. Austines words.

The Manichees, as the Translator notes, Lib. 5. c. 9. believed that our
Savior CHRIST had not a natural Body. And can he and his consorts believe
otherwise, that in the Sacrament give him a Body that is neither felt nor
seen, nor suffers any thing? There also he adds, that Monica went every
day to Mass, corrupting S. Austines words, who speaks of an Oblation no day
pretermitted by her. But I trow the Apostate will not say she said Mass,
neither was there any Mass framed by Scholasticus, or patched together by
Popes in her time. She went every day to Church, as S. Austine says: a plain
conviction of Recusants, that go no day to Church.

He adds, that God by his promises makes himself a debtor; therefore for
men's Merits he is no debtor, remitting daily their debts.

The Manichees, as S. Austine reports, Lib. 5. c. 10. believed that God had
the bulk of a Body. And do not the Papists paint and figure God the Father
and the Holy Ghost, and give them bulkes of bodies?

As the Manichees salsified the Scriptures, as witnesses S. Austine, Lib. 5.
Confess. c. 11. So do the Heretical Papists both by Translations and wicked
Interpretations. 2. They do also suppress Gods eternal Testament, prohibitng
the reading of it in vulgar Translations without license. 3. They falsify the
Fathers, as their Indexes, Expurgatory, and later Editions compared with
Manuscripts, and former Prints declare. In vain therefore does this poor
Translator think to wipe away so foul a fault, with a megre Marginall note.

S. Ambrose did Preach to the people, as S. Austine relates, Lib. 5. Confess.
c. 13. he did also substantially teach Salvation, whereas Faustus the Heretic
did wander up and down by certain fallacies. But the Pope and his proud
Prelates Preach not. The Mass Priests also and Iesuwides, wandering in diverse
fallacies and Schoole-trickes teach the Popes fancies, and lead their
Disciples out of the way of salvation, as did the Heretical Manichees.

Upon the 5. Book 14. Chap. in a Marginall note, he says, God deceives men
of their souls: most impiously making God a deceiuer, who deceives none, but
draws men by a right course into the way of Truth.

Monica, as S. Austine testifies, Lib. 6. Confess. c. 2. brought Bread and Wine
to the memories of Martyrs (which this jugler translateth shrines) but was
forbidden by the door keeper: because it was a Heathenish custom. Yet this
Heathenish custom the heathenish Priests of Baal leave not, Feasting and
Banqueting riotously on the festival days of their Saints, which they
worship Idolatrously.

The Translator in a certain Note does insinuate, that Ostiarius was then an
Office in the Church, as it is now. But S. Austine does neither make an Order
of Doore-keepers, nor a Sacrament; nor can the Translator with any Art draw
that out of him. The Communion of the Body of our Lord, says the holy Father,
was celebrated at the Tombs of Martyrs. But neither does he mention Mass,
nor do Mass Priests always make this Sacrament a Communion, eating and
drinking all alone; albeit, this Iugler would willingly draw his Mass out of
these Boxes.

God has no Children, says the Apostate in Lib. 6. Confess. c. 3. but such as
are members of the Catholic Church. How then can the Apostate and his fellows
claim to be Gods children, being the members of Antichrist, and having
forsaken the Catholic Church and Faith? S. Augustine says, God spiritual
Children are by him Regenerated by Grace. But the Apostate does attribute
Regeneration to the Priest and Sacrament, and that ex opere operato. Are they
not then rather the Popes Bastards, then Gods spiritual Children?

Persuasisti mihi, says S. Austine, Lib. Confess. 6. c. 5. non qui crederent
libris, quos tanta fere in omnibus gentibus authoritate fundasti, sed qui non
crederent esse culpandos, nec audiendes esse si qui forte mihi dicerent, vnde
scis illos libros vnius very and veracissimi Dei Spiritu humano generi esse
ministratos? So he says, first, that God persuaded us to believe holy
Scriptures to be of God. 2. That Scriptures have their authority from God, and
not from the Pope or Church. 3. That it is impious to make a question how we
know, that Scriptures came from God. But this false Translator contrary to S.
Austines words and meaning, makes the Scriptures to receive Authority from
the Church in regard of us. 2. He would have us to believe the Scriptures, not
because God persuades us, but because the Church teaches us; as if the Church
received her persuasion from herself, and not from God. Lastly, continually
they question us how we know, that the Scriptures are of God; which this good
Father condemns as impious. To resolve that the Scriptures are Divine,
because the Pope says so, is most ridiculous. The like fraud this Iugler uses
in a Note upon the 11. Cap. of this Book, deriuing that Authority, which S.
Austine gives to holy Scriptures; to his Church, that is, to every ignorant
and faithless Pope.

Alipius is commended by S. Austine, Lib. 6. conf. c. 8. for that he shut his
eyes, least he should behold the Gladiators; intimating, that we are to avoid
all occasions of sin. Why then did not this Translator shut his eyes in Italy
and Spain, where are so many baits for sin? Did he drop into the Brothel
blindfold?

In the Margent, Lib. 6. c. 12. he tells us, that the Devil is ever putting
Tricks upon him. And do we marvel, that he and his fellows are so lewd and
vainglorious, seeing the Devil does put so many Tricks upon them, and has
entangled their feet with his snares?

Lib. 6. c. 13. he seems to insist much upon Visions and Revelations. But S.
Austine says, Monicaes Visions were vain and fantastical, and that there was
great difference between God revealing, and the soul dreaming: And such
Dreams, commonly, are the Visions and Revelations of Monks and Friars. God
therefore directs us, Isay 8. to the Law and Testimony, and not to Visions
nor the Revelations of Spirits.

S. Austines Concubine, as is related Lib. 6. Conf. c. 11. vowed to God, she
would no more know man: so it may be, many beastly women vow, they will forsake
their lewd life. But this is but a simple argument to prove Vows of Chastity,
albeit the best the idle Translator could draw out of Saint Austine; who yet
has nothing to say of Nuns, or their Rules.

Lib. 6. c. 16. the Translator notes Merits in the Margent. But he is a poor
disputer, that out of such Merits as Epicunus had, thinks to prove, that
men's Works do merit eternal life. A fit man rather to follow Epicures, then
to translate good Books.

Lib. 7. c. 1. he places this profound Note in the margent, That the Catholic
Church is our Mother. A point which no man doubts. But if he believe, that
the Pope and modern Church of Rome, is the true Catholic Church or the Mother
of faithful Christians, he is foully mistaken, not discerning the chaste
Spouse of Christ. from the abominable Whore of Babylon. Further, when Rome was
the Church, yet was she but a particular Church.

The cause of sin, is our own will, as S. Austine teaches us, Lib. 7. Conf.
c. 3. And this that worthy man, M. Calvin, knew very well, who never said nor
thought as the damned Apostate charge him, that God makes men to sin, that
he may afterward damn them: neither does he say, that any do sin by
necessary constraint. These are the railing Rinegates vain and blasphemous
Conceits, and no Doctrines of M. Calvin; as by the Texts by him falsely cited,
may appear.

The Authority of the Church commends holy Scriptures to particular persons,
as S. Austine says, Lib. 7. c. 7. But he says not, that holy Scriptures
receive their Authority from the Catholic Church, as the Adversaries of the
Church and Scriptures conceive; and much less, from the Pope, and Church of
Rome: For if that were so, how could the Church believe Scriptures? May the
Church authorize and deliver Scriptures to it self?

Lib. 7. c. 18. S. Austine makes Christ his only Mediator, showing that he
was God and man. How then can the Schoolmen and their followers accord with
him, making the Virgin Mary, together with Saints and Angels, to be Mediators,
and holding that Christ is our Mediator according to his Humanity only? That
the Virgin Mary being a Virgin still, did conceive and bear Christ Jesus, is
not doubted by any Christian: it is also confessed, that Christ was known to
betrue man by Tradition, as S. Austine teaches, Lib. 7. c. 19. But that this
was known by Tradition unwritten, and only, or that holy Scripture is known
by Tradition, as the Translator notes, S. Austine says not, neither is it
true: for the natures of Christ are known by Scripture, and one Book of
Scripture testifies of another. Neither does he say, that the holy Virgin was
conceived and lived without sin: these be only Friars fancies and dreams, and
not this holy Fathers doctrine.

We are to find the joys of Heaven not without Penance in this life, says
the Translator, worthy to be translated, and made the Popes Penitentiarie, to
impose Penance, and to give pardon to all that are troubled with the Colic in
their Brains. And this he notes in Lib. 8. Confess. c. 3. Yet S. Austine
never thought, that the way to Heaven was by whipping, knocking the breast,
wearing hayre-cloth, and going barefoot.

Upon the 8. Book of Confess. c. 6. the Translator notes, that Anthony the
Egyptian was a Monk, and that he wrought Miracles, and that there were many
Monasteries before S. Austines time, and one near Milan. But out of all these
Monasteries he cannot find one that held the Modern Romish Religion, or that
lived in obedience to the Bishops of Rome, or received their Rules from them.
Further, they now work no Miracles, nor are like to them either in their lives
or studies: nay, it appears they rather dwelt in Cells and poor Cottages,
then in any sumptuous Buildings.

S. Anthony and S. Austine were converted by reading holy Scriptures, as is
testified Lib. 8. Confess. c. 12. Why then are Christians denied liberty to
read holy Scriptures, in Tongues understood by them? Why are Scriptures
reputed to be dumb Teachers? Finally, why are Scriptures denied to have power
to work Faith, unless the Church propose them? Out of Scriptures certes,
Monkish Vows and their pretended Evangelical perfection will never be proved,
albeit the Postiller should resolve himself into sweat, endcuoring to do it.
These words, Go and sell all thou have, Matthew. 19. and put on the Lord Jesus,
belong not to Monks only; nor did the Romans, or the young man in the Gospel
put on Monks Cowles, upon hearing these words. Finally, he that will find out
the original of Monks and Friars, he must search not holy Scriptures, but the
Popes Decretals.

That man had free will to do evil, S. Augustine confesses, Confess. Lib. 9.
c. 1. but that he had a power by free will to do well, that is a surmise of
the Pelagianizing Translator: for albeit grace move us to submit our selves to
Christ's yoke, yet is it not our free will that works what is good, but Gods
grace.

Lib. 9. Conf. c. 2. the corrupter of S. Austines Confessions endeuoreth to
prove Graduall Verses and Procession out of them; but his labor is in vain: he
may as well out of them draw from thence the Tricks of the Missall and
Breuiarie. But had the Jews any such Ascension, or Procession, yet are not the
Traditions of the later Jewish Rabbis any warrant for him and his Consorts, to
warrant their superstitious Devices.

Scripsi haec in Caera, says S. Austine, Lib. 9. Confess. c. 4. And this the
Buzzard translateth, This I wrote in Wax. As if men did then write in Wax,
and not in Tables laid over with Wax, mixed with other stuff: so he thinks
they wrote in Dust, where the Writing was on Tables plastred over with Wax and
Dust.

That men went barefoot in Devotion, S. Austine does not affirm, albeit this
threadbare Translator does hold that to be a custom used, Confess. Lib. 9. c.
6. Nay, he does account such barefooted Walkers to be rather Heretics, then
devout Christians, Lib. de Haeres. c. 68.

The Bodies of two Martyrs, as S. Austine relates, Lib. 9. Conf. c. 7. were
found at Milan: but neither were those Bodies worshipped, nor did those Martyrs
hold any Article of the Doctrine of Trent, denied by us. Miracles might be
wrought at these Martyrs Sepulcher; but neither does Saint Austine say, that
Martyrs wrought those Miracles, nor does the Apostate believe all the Miracles
that are written in Saints Legends, if he be in his right senses.

Placito sancto simul habitabamus, says S. Austine, Lib. 9. c. 8. speaking of
Euodius and himself. Out of which, the Translator notes, that they entered
into a Religious life; by which, he understands Monastical profession: as if
S. Austine turned Monk, and knew no other Religious life, but that of Monks
and Friars; which was not then used, and is now most irreligious.

Chap. 10. he says, S. Austine and his Mother were in an ecstasy; extatically
and fanatically belying his Author, who speaks not one word to that purpose.
These words also, Attigimus came modice toto ictu cordis, and suspirauimus, and
reliquimus ibi religatas primitias Spiritus, he translateth thus, We grew able
to take a little taste thereof with the whole strife of our souls, and we
sighed profoundly, and left there confined the very top and flower of our
souls and spirits. But in the Author, there is no word signifying our ability
to taste Gods wisdom, nor is our strife ictus cordis, nor can the Translator
tell what is the top and flower of men's souls: The first fruits of the Spirit,
words used by S. Austine, signify another thing.

When Monica died, she desired to be remembered at the Lords Altar, as S.
Austine says, Lib. 9. Conf. c. 11. But that her son should pray for her, she
desired not, albeit this Rinegate does impudently affirm it in his false
gloss. Further, neither did S. Austine believe, that her soul was in
Purgatory, nor did any Mass Priest sing Mass for her; her name was only
rehearsed out of the Church Tables, that all might know and remember she dyed a
faithful Christian.

Conuenerunt fratres and religiosae foeminae, says S. Austine, Lib. 9. c. 12.
But not a Friar, or Nun, as this hungry Hind imagines, gaping for some
Relics of Popery, which he cannot draw out of S. Austines words: for that
Vermin came not into the World, until the time of Pope Innocent the third;
and these, that came together, were Christian men and women, that were to
conduct and prepare the Corpse to the Funeral.

The Translator says, The Sacrifice of the Mass was offered for S. Monica,
being dead. But S. Austine mentions no Mass; nor by the Sacrifice of our
Service offered for her, understands any thing but the commemoration of her
name, made in the holy Mysteries, called a Sacrifice, because it was a
memorial of Christ's Sacrifice.

S. Austine prayed for his Mother out of his affection, and in regard of her
more speedy resurrection and glorification, but not to draw her soul out of
Purgatory, as Papists do: for he doubted not, but God had performed what he
desired before, as he says, Lib. 9. c. 13. Credo iam feceris quod te rogo,
says he, sed voluntaria oris mei approba Domine. He does also desire others to
remember his Father and Mother at the Lords Altar, but not to pray for their
souls in Purgatory, as this Prodigal, that is not well purged nor perfumed
for his scabs, and other uncleanness, would have it.

Lib. 10. Confess. c. 3. he condemns Auricular confession made to Priests in
the Roman Synagogue; What have I to do with men, says he, that they should
hear my Confessions, as if they could cure my Languors: manifestly he denies
both the necessity of Confession, and the power of Mass Priests Absolution.
But this is passed by in silence, without any note or observation.

Lib. 10. c. 4. the Postiller denies not, that S. Austine was certain of his
salvation: Why ought not then others also to endeavor to make their election
sure? He says, he wrought it in fear and trembling: as if men could not fear
Gods judgments, and yet assure themselves of his gracious promises.

Thou have stricken my heart with thy Word, and I have loved thee, says S.
Austine, Lib. 10. Confess. c. 6. But this Translator regards not Gods Word,
neither is so in love with God; but he loves the Whore of Babylon, and the
Curtizans of Italy and Spain much more.

Lib. 10. Confess. c. 31. S. Austine takes away all distinction of Meats,
teaching, that to the clean all things are clean, and that all Gods creatures
are good, if they be taken with thanksgiving. But the false Postiller adds an
Exception, that they are sometimes to be devoutly forborne, when the Church
commands us to fast. An Exception not only beside but contrary to S.
Austines words and meaning, who never knew any such Church, as prohibited flesh
and white meats, nor any such prohibition.

No man can be certain of his salvation, according to the Doctrine of S.
Austine, says the Postiller, Lib. 10. c. 32. but most falsely. He says only,
Nemo securus esse debet, that is, None ought to be careless: so do we also
believe, and teach. But Gods promise, he says, is firm and faithful; and
acknowledges, that his only hope and confidence is in Gods faithful promise
and mercy: Vna spes, vna fiducia, vna firma promissio misericordia tua.

Cap. 34. lib. 10. he says Esau blessed his sons, mistaking Esau for Isaac,
as it is both in Genesis, and S. Austine: neither had he so much grace as to
correct this foul fault, albeit he amended many slight escapes.

Cap. 35. he gives the title of Spiritual persons to Mass Priests, Monks,
and Friars, most absurdly; for they are often more carnal then spiritual, and
Laymen are led by the spirit more then they.

Cap. 39. in a certain Marginall Note, he says, Christ died for all, albeit
S. Austine say no such thing: nay contrary, holy Scriptures teach us, that few
are chosen; and that he is the Savior of his Body, and came not to save the
reprobate, but his own people, for whom also he prayed.

Tantum consuetudinis sarcina degrauat, says S. Augustine, Lib. Confess. 10.
c. 40. This burden of evil Custom, the Translator supposes to be evil
Habits: which is far wide from S. Austines meaning, and from the
signification of the word; Habits being qualities inherent, and Custom a
practice incident. The Translator has a custom to lie, and to talk idly, and
to translate falsely, yet are they no habits in him.

Friars and Monks do usually pretend Ecstasies; but this was no practice of S.
Austine. His Marginall Note therefore upon the 40. chapter of the 10. Book of
Confessions, might well have been spared; where he says, he was plunged into
high and deep Ecstasies, albeit there be no words of any such matter in the
Text. Nay, S. Austine shows he was possessed with inward feeling, and
delight; which have no place, when a man is deprived of his senses.

All sinful pleasure, says the Apostate, apostilling the 41. chapter, is a
Lie; yet his Author affirms no such thing: neither is it a Lie, that the
Apostate takes sinful pleasure in lying and railing.

No Angel, says S. Austine, Lib. 10. Conf. c. 42. could reconcile us to God.
To salve this sore, the Translator in the Margent forgeth this evasion, that he
speaks not of intercession, but of redemption. But S. Austine in plain words
rejects intercession of Angels, as well as Redemption. Was I, says he, to
resort to Angels? By what Prayers? By what Sacraments?

Cap. 43. he says, he thought to fly into the Desert: but God for bad him.
Yet this ignorant Gull and his brutish Consorts do give out, that he was the
Patron and Founder of Heremiticall and Hypocritical Friars, and a Preacher to
Monks in the Wilderness; and have forged a number of Sermons in his name, ad
fratres in Eremo. This Postiller says, The Hermites life is a holy state; but
his brain, when he so wrote, was not in right state: S. Austine, his Leader,
said no such thing.

Lib. 11. Confess. c. 2. the holy Doctor shows how he was drawn by Gods
exhortations, terrors, consolations, and guidance, to preach his Word, and
dispense his Sacraments to the people. And are they then lawfully called, that
being ordained Bishops by Antichrist, preach not? And being made Priests, offer
for quick and dead, and preach Fables in stead of Gods Word? That dispense not
the Sacraments to the people, but eat and drink all alone?

There also he desires, that the holy Scriptures may be made his chaste
delight. But the Translator and his Teachers care little for Chastity, and
less for holy Scriptures, being more occupied about unwritten Traditions,
School subtleties, and the Popes Decretals.

The words of Scriptures, says S. Austine, have dear retyring into them,
walking, feeding, and lying in them: by dear, understanding all sorts of
Christians, and not greasy Priests and graduated Doctors, as the Apostate
would have it; for dear translating Stagges, and understanding the stalion
Priests, as if they only were to read and study Scriptures.

In the Margent the Translator notes that Priests and Doctors, by a most
choice and noble Metaphor, are called Stagges, and thereby would exclude Lay
men and women from reading Scriptures. But were his Priests and Monks Stagges
and Stalions to, yet S. Austine does not appropriate the reading of Scriptures
to them, nor debar others from reading them. The Apostles wrote as well to
people, as to Priests: And Hiero'me in Psalm. 86. calling them Scripturas
populorum, shows, they belong to the people, as well as Priests. But, says
the Apostate, It is an easy thing, by reading of Scripture, to bedeceiued, and
to deceive others. But quite beside that holy Fathers meaning, that misliked
not the reading, but the misunderstanding of them; and therefore prayed, that
he might not be deceived in them, by mistaking them, as the Popes Factors do.
In the end teaching, that Christ intercedes for us, he oueithroweth the Popish
intercession of Saints.

Lib. 11. c. 3. He confesses, if Moses spoke in Hebrew, he should not
understand him. But the Apostate contradicting his Author says, he had some
skill in Hebrew. Declaring himself to be a Contradictor, and no Translator.

S. Austine, Lib. 11. c. 8. does call Christ speaking to us in his holy
Gospel, his good and only Master. But the Apostate and his Confreres, hold the
Pope to be their only and chief and good Master, neither regarding Christ, nor
his Gospel, unless the Pope be pleased to propose it.

Lib. 11. c. 31. the Translator talks idely of Habits and Customs, where S.
Austine names only the Consequences of sins, which follow evil Customs and
actions.

Lib. 12. c. 1. The holy Father does not speak one word of the dissiculty of
holy Scripture. See then the audacious boldness of the Translator, that makes
that the title of the Chapter. S. Austine contrary, proves the facility out of
Christ's promise, saying; seek and you shall find: knock, and it shall be
opened unto you.

In the same Book Cap. 5. and 6. the foolish Translator talks much of
Materia prima, which is not so much as once named there by S. Austine. And Cap.
8. he speaks of an Imperial Heaven, opposed to a Corporiall Heaven. It may
be he means to give the Dominion of the Heaven to the Emperor, and afterward
to subject both the Emperor and Heaven to the Pope. Where note I pray you the
Idiots ignorance, who writes Imperial for Empyreal, or fiery, and supposes
Fire and the Heaven to be no bodies.

In a marginall Note upon the 12. Bocke, 11. Chap. the Translator mentions
Quires of Angels? where S. Austine neither mentions Quires, nor Orders of
Angels. So saucy he is, as to change S. Austines words and meaning, to
establish his own foolish Popish conceits. Et per inania cordis sui cum suis
phantasmatibus vagatur and voluitur, and by the vanities of his heart, with his
fantasies he wandreth and tumbleth, as S. Austine says in that place.

Cap. 13. The Translator by Heaven and Earth. will needs understand the Angels,
and Materia prima. But S. Austine, whom he should follow has no such words.
And absurdly Earth is called Materia prima, and Angels confounded with Heaven.
Hereof we may better infer that the Translators Materia prima is foolery and
confusion, and his Heaven, his own vain imagination and the Popes consistory.

Upon every Woman that reads Scripture, he rayleth, calling her Saucy and
simple, Lib. 12. c. 14. not sparing his own Mother. As if English women
reading Scriptures without the Popes license, were more saucy then Jtalian,
French and Spanish women, reading Legends and living in Brothels, by whom, they
say, he has been euil-fauouredly dressed and sauced.

S. Austine, Lib. 12. c. 15. does plainly declare, that men are not justified
by their Works or qualities inherent. Nos dicti sumus, says he, justitia tua,
ait enim quidam seruus tuus, vt nos simus justitia Dei in ipso. We are called
thy justice. for a Servant of thine says, that we may be made the
righteousness of God in him. Was not the Postiller then blind and shameless,
that out of the Fathers words inferred, that there is inherent Justice in men.
For how can Gods justice, that is in him, be inherent in us, or our inherent
Justice be the perfect Justice of God? Angels may have true light in themselves
because they fell not; but Man being fallen, can neither have perfect Light,
nor Justice in him; but must be justified by Faith in CHRIST.

In culmine sequendae aut horitatis nobiscum constituentis illam per Sanctam
Moysem editam sanctam Scripturam tuam, says S. Austine, Lib. 12. Confess. c.
16. that is, placing holy Scriptures written by holy Moses on the top of
Authority to be followed. Was not then this Rinegate impudent, that took the
Authority, which S. Austine bestowed on Scriptures, and by a trick of
Legierdemaine conveyed it to the Church of Rome, and to every blind Pope?

That one place of Scripture has diverse senses, as the Apostate blindly
auoweth in his Notes on the 12. Book of S. Austines Confessions, Chap. 18. he
shall never be able to prove by the testimony of that Father, who confirms
that to be the sense of Scripture, which the Enditor meant, who is Truth, and
speaks but one thing. Thus we see, for a Translator, we have here a
corrupter and falsifier of S. Austine.

Afterward, lib. 12. c. 20. he says, diverse Expositors may diversely interpret
one place; but he says not, that one place has diverse senses, as the
Apostate, without all sense, infers. For how can that which differs, be
true? And how can God in one sentence understand diverse things, he being
always one, and unchangeable?

The Postiller upon the Margent of this 12. Book, c. 25. says, Truth is a
Catholic Benediction; and S. Austine there confesses, that Truth belongs
not to any one man, but is common to all the lovers of Truth. But he is an
absurd fellow, to suppose the Pope and his followers, embracing the refuse
Doctrine of Trent, and the Schools, to be Catholics; or Truth to be a
Benediction bestowed on Papists, that we have found and declared to be
forgers, liars, slanderers, and a pack of Heretics. Further, if Truth
belongs not to any one man, why does every false Pope, that is but a private
man, pretend, that he is the only supreme Judge of Truth, and infallible
interpreter of holy Scriptures?

In the Title of the 30. chapter of the 12. Book of S. Austines Confessions,
the Translator says, Charity is to be maintained among men of contrary
opinions. So he pronounces sentence against the Pope, and his Inquisitors,
and all their Faction, which persecute Christians, and cut their throats, for
not holding every one of their trifling Heresies.

S. Augustine would have Truth to make friends: But the Apostaticall Sect will
not hear him, being offended for nothing more, then that we teach Truth
against the Brood of Antichrist, and their wicked Errors.

Lib. 13. Confess. c. 1. the Postiller notes, that without Gods inspiration, a
man cannot think a good thought: which is also S. Austines Doctrine; and both,
contrary to the Popish Doctrine of Papists, that give free will to a natural
man both to say well, and to do well.

Cap. 7. the Translator intimates, that man rises from sin, and is
justified by the help of Charity inherent in us. And this he endeuoreth to
pick out of S. Austine; but sooner shall he pick Gudgeons out of Flint
stones: for that holy Father does not speak there of Charity inherent in us,
but of Charity given us, and working in us by Gods holy Spirit.

Lib. 13. c. 9. ridiculously he endeuoreth to prove his Popish Procession, by
the example of the Jews; who, as he says, did sing Psalms as they went up
the stayres of the Temple. As if every Mass Priest, singing Letanies as they
go up Newgate stayres, or as they go to Tiburne, do walk in Procession. By
the Psalms of the Jews, this Apostate will never prove his Letanies, or
Procession, for they sung Psalms to God; Mass Priests, in their Letanies,
pray to dead men.

Where S. Austine, lib. 13. c. 13. speaks of the expectation of adoption, and
the redemption of his body, the false Postiller notes, that S. Paul saved
Christians, by praying for them after his glorification; of which, that Father
gives not the least signification: nay contrary, he expected the fruits of
his own adoption, and the redemption of his own body; of which, other
Christians were no members.

Cap. 14. he says, the Caluinists affirm their Church to consist only of the
elect. But the lying Apostate shows not who these Caluinists are, and where
they write so much as he charge them with. Calvin himself says only, that
the Catholic Church is a Communion of Saints, and properly consists of the
Elect to whom remission of sins and eternal life belong, albeit many wicked
men may seem to be of the Catholic Church, and in regard of their profession
are reputed members of particular Churches.

Quis nisi tu Deus noster fecisti nobis firmamentum authoritatis super nos in
scriptura tua diuina, says S. Austine, Lib. 13. Confess. c. 1.5. that is, who
but thou our God has given us a foundation of authority above us in thy divine
Scripture? which clearly refuteth the blasphemous Postill of this Apostate,
who says the Church (that is the Pope) has power to make Scriptures
Canonical to us. For if they receive authority from God only, how comes the
Pope or the Church to give them authority? and how does the Church know them to
be Canonical, but by divine Authority?

Cap. 19. the Translator corrupts S. Austines text, by adding to it about the
middle of the Chap. these words, a word of Counsel: following as it seems
his Spanish notes and translation. He intimates also, that Friars and Monks
the scum and refuse of the world, are an elected generation, which S. Austine
neither meant, nor could speak of. Finally, he says, Religious men and
Priests are a middle kind of Creatures, as you would say, Centaures, Satyrs,
and Monsters, being neither Saints (and therefore not belonging to the Church
that is a Communion of Saints) nor ordinary Christians, and therefore not
belonging to Christ, or to the King, because they claim themselves to be
exempt.

By creeping things, Confess. lib. 13. c. 20. the Postiller understands
Mass Priests, Monks, and Friars: who indeed creep and crawle like Snakes,
leap like Toades, and swarm like Lice. But yet he is much deceived, if he
think there were any such vermin in the world in S. Austines time.

Lib. 13. c. 21. the Translator seeks for Mass Priests, Monks and Friars in
S. Austine, and in the 1. of Genesis, declaring that they are men as it were
severed from the world. But the poor Idiot is as far wide, as Genesis is
from the Apocalipse, where he may find Locusts newly come out of the
bottomless pit, and Mass Priests are no where found, but in the Popes
Decretals and Pontifical. Both most noxious Serpents, and given to carnality
and worldly pleasures.

Spirituales ergo sieve qui praesunt, sieve qui obtemperant spiritualiter
iudicant, says S. Austine, Lib. 13. Confess. c. 23. that is, spiritual men
judge, whether they rule or obey: but of the sublime authority of Gods Book
he will admit none to judge, but would have all men to submit their
understanding unto it. How then does the Pope take upon him to be that
spiritual man that judges all things? Can Boniface the eight, c. vnam
sanctam, extr. com. de Mayor. and Obed. judge better then S. Austine? What
audacious boldness is it for every Pope, to challenge a power to himself over
Scriptures, to make them authentical to us? Every Preacher may expound
Scriptures, but the Pope challenges a power to authorize Scriptures; which
this Apostate also would auow, if he durst: but S. Austine does beat down both
the Apostates and the Popes blasphemous pride. Fish, he says, is sometimes a
figure of Christ in the Sacrament: a proper device. For so the Priests, by
their Transubstantiation, make of Bread Flesh, and this Apostiller by a new
figure will make it Fish, that they may have in the same Feast both Fish and
Flesh: Matters never though of by S. Austine. Neither does he in this place by
blessing and calling upon God, understand crossing or sprinkling of holy Water,
such as Mass Priests use, but blessing and praising the Name of God.

In his Notes upon the 13. Book of Confessions, c. 25. he would be glad to
know, as he says, what Benedictions have come unto us from our Ministers, and
whether their sound be gone over all the Earth. And I, to give him
satisfaction, answer, That these Blessings we receive from them: We learn to
know God, and whom he has sent, Christ Jesus, and to discern Antichrist, and
to fly from him: We learn the true Faith, and Gods true worship: We
understand, that we are to avoid the Heresies of the Romish Church, and her
abominable Idolatry and Superstition: We learn how to reform our lives, and
walk worthy our profession. But of him and his Mass Priests, Monks, and
Friars, ignorant people receive nothing but an implicit Faith, Crosses,
Beads, holy Water, Masses, Agnus Dei, Indulgences, and such Toys: neither do
they learn any thing, except that which we teach, but Heresy, Superstition,
Idolatry, Rebellion, ignorance of Scripture, and corruption of manners, nor
receive any thing but shame. Bishops made by the Pope, preach not,
Mass Priests teach little, Monks and Friars teach without authority, having
no power but from Antichrist; and if they teach any Truth, it is mixed with
many Errors and Corruptions. That which we teach, is the Apostles Doctrine, the
sound of whose Doctrine is gone over the whole Earth; the Papists Heresies, and
false Doctrine, is only received in the Popes Jurisdiction.

Our Savior Christ promises to him that receives a Prophet in his name, the
reward of a Prophet, as S. Austine says, Confess. lib. 13. c. 26. But absurdly
is this applied to Mass Priests, and such false Prophets: for such destroy
Souls, undermine the State, corrupt the Manners of their Disciples, and seek
only to underprop the ruinous Kingdom of Antichrist.

Lib. 13. c. 34. S. Austine says, God has solidely built the authority of
his Book (of Scriptures) between superiors which should learn of God, and
inferiors which should be subject unto them: Solidasti authoritatem libri tui
inter superiors qui tibi docibiles essent, and inferiores qui eis subderentur.
So he gives authority to Scriptures, and would have all men subject unto
them: which is contrary to this Apostates mind. And therefore by his false
Notes he goes about to corrupt the place, not willing to deny the Popes
authority, in making Scriptures Canonical to us by that authority; contrary
to S. austines judgment, which would have Superiors to learn of God. He
adds also, that the Scripture is subject to the exposition of Doctors; which
is contrary to that holy Fathers meaning.

Finally, S. Austine, lib. 13. Conf. c. 38. hops to rest in Gods holy place,
which he calls his great sanctificaton; not for his merits, but by Gods
grace and mercy. And this do all good Catholics hope, and believe: not
doubting of their salvation, grounded on his holy Word, that is most certain;
and his sweet Promises, that are most comfortable. But this Apostate and his
perverse companions neither believing that Gods Word concerns them, nor
trusting to his Promises, made to all that believe and live according to their
holy profession, nor having good conscience nor feeling of the holy Ghost, but
measure all by their own works and merits, are neither Catholics, nor
Christ's Disciples.

And this, I trust, will suffice to vindicate the holy Father Saint Austine
from the violence and wrong offered to him by this impure Apostate. As for the
wrong that he has offered to Religion, and the Church of England, I trust our
Superiors will in time vindicate: and albeit they neglect it, or cannot
redress it, I doubt not but God will revenge his own Cause his own self.

Deo vni trino laus honor gloria in sempiterna secula. Amen.

FINIS.

