AGLAURA.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Sign of the Flying Horse between York-house and Britains Burse.
1638.

Aprilis 18. 1638.

Imprimatur, MATTHEW. CLAY.

PROLOGVE.
I Have thought upon it; and cannot tell which way
Ought I can say now, should advance the Play.
For Plays are either good, or bad; the good,
(If they do beg) beg to be understood.
And in good faith, that has as bold a sound,
As if a beggar should ask twenty pound.
-- Men have it not about them:
Then (Gentlemen) if rightly understood,
The bad do need less Prologue than the good:
For if it chance the Plot be lame, or blind,
Ill clothed, deformed throughout, it needs must find
Compassion, -- It is a beggar without Art: --
But it falls out in penny worths of Wit,
As in all bargains else. Men ever get
All they can in; will have London measure,
A bandfull over in their very pleasure.
And now ye have't; he could not well deny'ee,
And I dare swear he is scarce a saver by ye.
Prologue to the Court.
THose common passions, hopes, and fears, that still,
The Poets first and then the Prologues fill
In this our age, he that writ this, by me,
Protests against as modest foolerie.
He thinks it an odd thing to be in pain,
For nothing else, but to be well again.
Who writes to fear is so; had he not writ;
You ^ere had been the Judges of his wit;
And when he had, did he but then intend
To please himself, he sure might have his end
Without the expense of hope, and that he had
That made this Play, although the Play be bad.
Then Gentlemen be thriftie, save your doomes
For the next man, or the next Play that comes;
For smiles are nothing, where men do not care,
And frowns as little, where they need not fear.
To the King.
THis (Sir) to them, but unto Majesty.
All he has said before, he does deny.
Yet not to Majesty: that were to bring
His fears to be, but for the Queen and King,
Not for your selves; and that he dares not say:
You Are his Sovereigns another way:
Your souls are Princes, and you have as good
A title that way, as ye have by blood
To govern, and here your powers more great
And absolute, than in the royal Seat.
There men dispute, and but by Law obey,
Here is no Law at all, but what ye say.
Scena Persia.
KING, In love with Aglaura. THERSAMES, Prince, in love with Aglaura. ORBELLA,
Queen, at first Mistress to Ziriff: in love with Ariaspes. ARIASPES, Brother
to the King. ZIRIFF, Otherwise Sorannez disguised, Captain of the Guard, in
love with Orbella, brother to Aglaura. JOLAS, A Lord of the Council, seeming
friend to the Prince, but a Traitor, in love with Semanthe. AGLAURA, In love
with the Prince, but named Mistress to the King. ORSAMES, A young Lord
antiplatonique; friend to the Prince. PHILAN, The same. SEMANTHE, In love with
Ziriff; platonique. ORITHIE, In love with Thersames. PASITHAS, A faithful
servant. JOLINAS, Aglaura's waiting woman. COURTIERS. HUNTSMEN. PRIEST. GUARD.
AGLAURA.
ACTUS I.
SCENA I.
Enter JOLAS, JOLINA. JOLAS, MArried? and in Diana's Grove!

JOLIN. So was th'appointment, or my Sense deceived me.

JOLAS, Married!
Now by those Powers that tie those pretty knots,
it is very fine, good faith it is wondrous fine:

JOLIN. What is, Brother?

JOLAS, Why? to marry Sister --
t'injoy 'twixt lawful and unlawful thus
a happiness, steal as 'twere ones own;
Diana's Grove, say thou? -- Scratcheth his head.

JOLIN. That Is the place; the hunt once up, and all
engaged in the sport, they mean to leave
the company, and steal unto those thickets,
where, there is a Priest attends them;

JOLAS, And will they lie together, think thou?

JOLIN. Is there distinction of sex think you?
or flesh and blood?

JOLAS, True; but the King, Sister!

JOLIN. But love, Brother!

JOLAS, Thou say well;
it is fine, it is wondrous fine:
Diana's grove --

JOLIN. Yes, Diana's grove,
but brother if you should speak of this now, --

JOLAS, Why thou know a drowning man holds not a thing so fast:
Sema^he! she shuns me too:

Enter Semanthe, she sees Jolas, and goes in again. JOLIN. The wound festred
sure!
the hurt the boy gave her, when first
she looked abroad into the world, is not yet cured.

JOLAS, What hurt?

JOLIN. Why, know you not
she was in love long since with young Zorannes,
( Aglaura's brother,) and the now Queens betrothed?

JOLAS, Some such slight Tale I Have heard.

JOLIN. Slight? she yet does weep, when she but hears him named,
and tells the prettiest and the saddest stories
of all those civil wars, and those Amors,
That, trust me, both my Lady and my self
turn weping Statues still.

JOLAS, Pish, it is not that.
It Is Ziriff, and his fresh glories here
have robbed me of her.
Since he thus appeared in Court,
my love has languish'd worse than Plants in drought.
But time's a good Physician: come, lets in:
the King and Queen by this time are come forth.

Exeunt. Enter Serving-men to Ziriff. 1 SERVE. Yonder Is a crowd without, as if
some strange sight
were to be seen to day here.

2 SERVE. Two or three with Carbonadoes before in stead of faces
mistook the door for a breach, and at the opening of it,
are striving still which should enter first.

3 SERVE. Is my Lord busy?

(Knocks.) Enter Ziriff as in his Study. 1 SERVE. My Lord, there are some
Soldiers without --

ZIR. Well, I will dispatch them presently.

2 SERVE. Th'Embassadours from the Cadusians too --

ZIR. Show them the Gallerie.

3 SERVE. One from the King --

ZIR. Again? I come, I come.
Exeunt Serving-men. Ziriff solus. Gre^nesse, thou vainer shadow of the Princes
beams,
begot by mere reflection, nourished in extremes;
first taught to creep, and live upon the glance,
poorly to fare, till thine own proper strength
bring thee to surfeit of thy self at last.
How dull a Pageant, would this States-play seem
to me now; were not my love and my revenge
mixed with it? --
Three tedious Winters have I waited here,
like patient Chemists blowing still the coals,
and still expecting, when the blessed hour
would come, should make me master of
the Court Elixar, Power, for that turns all:
it is in projection now; down, sorrow, down,
and swell my heart no more, and thou wronged ghost
of my dead father, to thy bed again,
and sleep securely;
it cannot now be long, for sure Fate must,
as't has been cruel, so, a while be just.

Exit. Enter King and Lords, the Lords entreating for Prisoners. KING. I say
they shall not live; our mercy
would turn sin, should we but use it er'e:
Pity, and Love, the bosses only be
of government, merely for show and ornament.
Fear is the bit that man's proud will restraines,
and makes its vice its virtue -- See it done.
Enter to them Queen, Aglaura, Ladies, the King addresses himself to Aglaura.
So early, and so curious in your dress, (fair Mistress?)
these pretty ambushes and traps for hearts
set with such care to day, look like design:
speak, Lady, is it a massacre resolved?
is conquering one by one grown tedious sport?
or is the number of the taken such,
that for your safety you must kill outright?

AGL. Did none do greater mischief (Sir) than I,
heaven would not much be troubled with sad story,
nor would the quarrel man has to the Stars
be kept alive so strongly.

KING. When he does leave't
woman must take it up, and justly too;
for robbing of the sex and giving all to you.

AGL. Their weaknesses you mean, and I confess, Sir.

KING. The greatest subjects of their power or glory.
Such gentle rape thou act'st upon my soul,
and with such pleasing violence do force it still;
that when it should resist, it tamely yields,
making a kind of haste to be undone,
as if the way to victory were loss,
and conquest came by overthrow.

Enter an Express delivering a Packet upon his knee. The King reads. QU.
Pretty!
The Queen looking upon a flower in one of the Ladies heads. Is it the child
of nature, or of some fair hand?

LA. It Is as the beauty Madam of some faces,
Arts issue only.

KING. Thersames,
This concerns you most, brought you her picture?

EXP. Something made u^ for her in haste I have.

Presents the Picture. KING. If she does owe no part of this fair dower
unto the Painter, she is rich enough.

AGL. A kind of merry sadness in this face
becomes it much.

KING. There is indeed, Aglaura,
a pretty sullenness dressed up in smiles,
that says this beauty can both kill, and save.
How like you her Thersames?

THERE. As well as any man can do a house
by seeing of the portall, here is but a face,
and faces (Sir) are things I have not studied;
I have my duty, and may boldly swear,
what you like best will ever please me most.

KING. Spoke like Thersames, and my son,
come! the day holds fair,
let all the Hunts-men meet us in the vale,
we will uncouple there.

Exeunt. Ariaspes: solus stays behind. ARIASP. How odd a thing a crowd is
unto me!
sure nature intended I should be alone,
had not that old doting man-mid-wife Time
slept, when he should have brought me forth, I had
been so too --
Studies and scratches his head. To be borne near, and only near a crown --

Enter Jolas. JOL. How now my Lord?
what? walking o'th'tops of Pyramids?
whispering your self away
like a denied lover? come! to horse, to horse,
and I will show you straight a sight shall please you
more than kind looks from her you dote upon
after a falling out.

ARIASP. Prithee what is it?

JOL. I Will tell you as I go. --

Exeunt. Enter Hunts-men hollowing and whooping. HUNT. Which way? which way?

Enter Thersames, Aglaura muffled. THERE. This is the grove, it is somewhere here
within. --

Exeunt. Enter dogging of them, Ariaspes, Jolas. (...). Gently! Gently!

Enter Orsames, Philan, a Huntsman, two Courtiers. HUNTS. No hurt, my Lord, I
hope.

ORS. None, none,
Thou would have warranted it to another,
if I had broke my neck:
what? do think my horse and I show tricks?
that which way soever he throws me
like a Tumblers boy I must fall safe?
was there a bed of roses there? would I were Eunuch if I had not as lief h'a
fallen in the state, as where I did, the ground was as hard, as if it had been
paved with Platonicke Ladies hearts, and this unconscionable fellow asks
whether I have no hurt; where is my horse?


1 COURT. Making love to the next mare I think.

2 COURT. Not the next I assure you,
(...) gallop't away, as if all the spurs in the field
were in his sides.

ORS. Why there is it: the jade's in the fashion too.
Now h'as done me an injury, he will not come near me.
Well when I hunt next, may it be upon a starved cow,
without a saddle too.
And may I fall into a saw-pit, and not be taken up, but with suspicion of
having been private, with mine own beast there. Now I better consider on it
too, Gentlemen, it is but the same thing we do at Court; here is every man
striving who shall be foremost, and hotly pursuing of what he seldom overtakes,
or if he does, it is no great matter.


PHI. He that is best horsed (that is best friended) gets in soonest, and then
all he has to do is to laugh at those that are behind. Shall we help you my
Lord? --


ORS. Prithee do -- stay!
To be in view, is to be in favor,
is it not?

PHI. Right,
and he that has a strong faction against him, hunts upon a cold sent, and may
in time come to a loss.


ORS. Here Is one rides two miles about, while another leapes a ditch and is in
before him.


PHI. Where note the indirect way's the nearest.

ORS. Good again --

PHI. And here is another puts on, and falls into a quagmire, (that is) follows
the Court till he has spent all (for your Court quagmire is want of money)
there a man is sure to stick, and then not one helps him out, if they do not
laugh at him.


1 COURT. What think you of him, that hunts after my rate and never sees the
Dear?


2 COURT. Why he is like some young fellow, that follows the Court, and never
sees the King.


ORS. To spur a horse till he is tired, is

PHI. To importune a friend till he be weary of you.

ORS. For then upon the first occasion you are thrown off, as I was now.

PHI. This is nothing to the catching of your horse Orsames.

ORS. Thou say true, I think he is no transmigrated Philosopher, and
therefore not likely to be taken with moralls.

Gentlemen -- your help, the next I hope will be yours, and then 'twill be my
^urne. --


Exeunt. Enter again married, There sames, Aglaura, Priest. THERE IS. Fear not my
Dear, if when Loves diet
was bare looks and those stolen too,
he yet did thrive! what then
will he do now? when every night will be
a feast, and every day fresh revelrie.

AGL. Will he not surfeit, when he once shall come
to grosser fare (my Lord) and so grow sick,
and Love once sick, how quickly will it dye?

THERE. Ours cannot; it is as immortal as the things
that elemented it, which were our souls:
nor can they ere impair in health, for what
these holy rites do warrant us to do,
more than our bodies would for quenching thirst.
Come let us to horse, we shall be mist,
for we are envies mark, and Court eyes carry far.
Your prayers and silence Sir: --

to the Priest. Exeunt. Enter Ariaspes, Jolas. ARI. If it succeed? I wear thee
here my Iolas --

JOL. If it succeed? will night succeed the day?
or hours one to another? is not his lust
the Idol of his soul? and was not she
the Idol of his lust? as safely he might
have stolen the Diadem from off his head,
and he would less have mist it.
You now, my Lord, must raise his jealousy,
teach it to look through the false opticke fear,
and make it see all double: Tell him the Prince
would not have thus presumed, but that he does
intend worse yet; and that his crown and life
will be the next attempt.

ARI. Right, and I will urge
how dangerous it is unto the present state,
To have the creatures, and the followers
of the next Prince (whom all now strive to please)
too near about him:

JoL. What if the malcontents that use
to come unto him were discovered?

ARI. By no means; for 'twere in vain to give
him discontent (which too must needs be done)
if they within him gave't not nourishment.

JOL. Well, I Will away first for the print's too big
if we be seen together. --

Exit. ARI. I have so fraught this Bark with hope, that it
dares venture now in any storm, or weather;
and if he sink or splits, all is one to me.
"Ambition seems all things, and yet is none,
"but in disguise stalks to opinion
"and fools it into faith, for every thing:
It Is not with th'ascending to a Throne,
As it is with stairs, and steps, that are the same;
For to a Crown, each humor's a degree;
and as men change, and differ, so must we.
The name of virtue does the people please,
not for their love to virtue, but their case,
and Parrat Rumor I that tale have taught.
By making love I hold the woman's grace,
it is the Court double key, and entrance gets
to all the little plots; the fiery spirits
my love to Arms has drawn into my faction;
(...), but the minion of the Time, is mine,
and he shall be, or shall not be at all.
He that beholds a wing in pieces torn,
and knows not that to heaven it once did bear
the high-flowne and selfe-less'ning bird, will think
and call them idle Subjects of the wind:
when he that has the skill to imp and bind
these in right places, will thus truth discover;
That borrowed Instruments do often convey
the Soul to her proposed Intents, and where
our Stars deny, Art may supply --

Exit. Enter Semanthe, Orithie, Orsames, Philan. SEM. Think you it is not then
the little jealousies (my Lord) and fears,
joy mixed with doubt, and doubt revived with hope
that crowns all love with pleasure? these are lost
when once we come to full fruition;
like waking in the morning when all night
on sancie has been fed with some new strange delight.

ORS. I grant you, Madam, that the fears, and joys,
hopes, and desires, mixed with despaires, and doubts,
d^e make the sport in love; that they are
the ve^ie dogs by which we hunt the hare;
but as the dogs would stop, and straight give over
were it not for the little thing before;
^o would our passions; both alike must be
flesh't in the chase.

ORI. Will you then place the happiness, but there,
where the dull plow man and the plow-mans horse
can find it out? Shall souls refined, not know
how to preserve alive a noble flame,
but let it die, burn out to appetite?

SEM. Love's a Chamelion, and would live on air,
ph^sick for agues, starving is his food.

ORS. Why? there is it now! a greater Epicure
lives not on earth; my Lord and I have been
in^ priv^e kitchen, seen his bills of Fare.

SEM. And how, and how my Lord?

ORS. A mighty Prince,
and full of curiosity -- Hearts newly slain
served up entire, and stuck with little Arrows
in stead of Cloves --

PHI. Sometimes a cheek plumpt up
with broth, with cream and clarret mingled
for sauce, and round about the dish
Pomegranate kernells, strewn on leaves of Lillies.

ORS. Then will he have black eyes, for those of late
^e feeds on much, and for variety
the gray --

PHI. You forget his covered dishes
of ^ene-stra^es, and Marmalade of lips,
p^rfum'd by breath sweet as the beans first blossoms.

SEM. Rare!
And what is the drink to all this meat, my Lord?

ORS. Nothing but pearl dissolved, tears still fresh, fetched
from Lovers eyes, which if they come to be
warm in the carriage, are straight cooled with sighs.

SEM. And all this rich proportion, perchance
we would allow him:

ORS. True! but therefore this is but his common di^r;
only serves
when his chief Cooks, Liking and Opportuni^e,
are out of the way; for when he feasts indeed,
it is there, where the wise people of the world
did place the virtues, in the middle -- Madam.

ORI. My Lord, there is so little hope we should convert you;
and if we should, so little got by it,
that we will not lose so much upon it as sleep.
Your Lordships servants --

ORS. Nay Ladies we will wait upon you to your chambers.

PH. Prithee lets spare the complement, we shall do no good.

ORS. By this hand I Will try,
they keep me fasting, and I must be praying.

Exeunt. Aglaura undressing of her selse, Jolina. AGL. Undresse me: --
Is it not late, Iolina?
it was the longest day, this --

Enter Thersames. THERE. Softly, as Death it self comes on,
when it does steal away the sick man's breath,
and standers by perceive it not,
have I trod the way unto these lodgings.
How wisely do those Powers
that give us happiness, order it?
sending us still fears to bound our joys,
which else would overflow and lose themselves:
see where she sits,
like Day retired into another world.
Dear mine! where all the beauty man admires
in scattered pieces, does united lie.
Where sense does feast, and yet where sweet desire
lives in its longing, like a misers eye,
that never knew, nor saw sacietie:
tell me, by what approaches must I come
to take in what remains of my felicity?

AGL. Needs there any new ones, where the breach
is made already? you are entered here --
long since (Sir) here, and I have given up all.

THERE. All but the Fort, and in such wars, as these,
till that be yielded up, there is no peace,
nor triumph to be made; come! undo, undo,
and from these envious clouds slide quick
into Loves proper Sphere, thy bed:
The weary traveller, whom the busy Sun
has vex't all day, and scortch'd almost to tinder,
nere longed for night, as I have longed for this.
What rude hand is that?
One knocks hastily. Go Iolina, see, but let none enter --

Iolina goes to the door. JOL. It Is Z^iff, Sir.

THERE. -- Oh --
Something of weight has fallen out it seems,
which in his zeal he could not keep till morning.
But one short minute, Dear, into that chamber. --
Enter Ziriff. How now?
thou start'st, as if thy sins had met thee,
or thy Fathers ghost; what news man?

ZIR. Such as will send the blood of hasty messages
unto the heart, and make it call
all that is man about you into council;
where is the Princess, Sir?

THERE. Why? what of her?

ZIR. The King must have her --

THERE. How?

ZIR. The King must have her (Sir)

THERE. Though fear of worse makes ill, still relish better,
and this look handsome in our friendship, Ziriff,
yet so severe a preparation --,
there needed not: come, come! what is it?
Ziriff leads him to the door, and shows him a Guard. A Guard! Thersames,
thou art lost; betrayed
by faithless and ungrateful man,
out of a happiness: --
He steps between the door and him, and draws. the very thought of that,
will lend my anger so much noble justice,
that were thou master of as much fresh life,
as thou have been of villainy, it should not serve,
nor stock thee out, to glory, or repent
the least of it.

ZIR. Put up: put up! such unbecomming anger
I have not seen you wear before.
What? draw upon your friend,
Discovers himself. do you believe me right now? --

THERE. I scarce believe mine eyes: -- Zorannes.

ZIR. The same, but how preserved, or why
thus long disguised to you, a freer hour must speak:
That you are ^etraid is certain, but by whom,
unless the Priest himself, I cannot guess
more than the marriage, though he knows not of:
if you now send her on these early summons
^fore the sparks are grown into a flame,
you do redeem the offense, or make it less;
and (on my life) yet his intents are fair,
and he will but besiege, not force affection.
So you gain time; if you refuse, there is ^ut
one way; you know his power and passion.

THERE. Into how strange a labyrinth am I
now fallen! what shall I do Zorannes?

ZIR. Do (Sir) as Seamen, that have lost their light
and way: strike sail, and lie quiet a while.
Your forces in the Province are not yet
in readiness, nor is our friend Zephines
arrived at Delphos; nothing is ripe, besides --

THERE. Good heavens, did I but dream that she was mine?
upon imagination did I climb up to
this height? let me then wake and dye,
some courteous hand snatch me from what is to come,
and ere my wrongs have being, give them end:

ZIR. How poor, and how unlike the Prince is this?
this trifle woman does unman us all;
robs us so much, it makes us things of pity.
Is this a time to loose our anger in?
and vainly breathe it out? when all we have
will hardly fill the sail of Resolution,
and make us bear up high enough for action.

THERE. I have done (Sir) pray chide no more;
the slave whom tedious custom has enured
and taught to think of misery as of food,
counting it but a necessary of life,
and so digesting it, shall not so much as once
be named to patience, when I am spoken of:
mark me; for I will now undo my self
as willingly, as virgins give up all first nights
to them they love: --

Offers to go out. ZIR. Stay, Sir, 'twere fit Aglaura yet were kept
in ignorance: I will dismiss the Guard,
and be my self again.

Exit. THERE. In how much worse estate am I in now,
Than if I nere had known her; privation,
is a misery as much above bare wretchedness,
as that is short of happiness:
So when the Sun does not appear,
It Is darker 'cause it once was here.

Enter Ziriff speaks to Orsames and others half entered. ZIR. Nay, Gentlemen:
there needs no force, where there is no resistance:
I Will satisfy the King my self.

THERE. -- Oh it is well you are come,
there was within me fresh Rebellion,
and reason was almost unking'd again.
But you shall have her Sir --

Goes out to fetch Aglaura. ZIR. What doubtful combats in this noble youth
passion and reason have! --

Enter Thersames leading Aglaura. THERE. Here Sir --

Gives her, goes out. AGL. What means the Prince, my Lord?

ZIR. Madam, his wiser fear has taught him to disguise
his love, and make it look a little rude at parting.
Affairs that do concern, all that you hope from
happiness, this night force him away:
and lest you should have tempted him to stay,
(Which he did doubt you would and would prevail)
he left you thus: he does desire by me
you would this night lodge in the little tower,
which is in my command; the reasons why
himself will shortly tell you.

AGL. It Is strange, but I am all Obedience --

Exeunt. ACTUS II.
SCENA I.
Enter Thersames, Jolas a Lord of the Counsel. JOL. I told him so, Sir, urged
'twas no common knot,
that to the tying of it two powerful Princes,
Virtue and Love were joined, and that
a greater than these two was now
engaged in it; Religion; but 'twould not do,
the cork of passion boy'd up all reason so
that what was said, swam but o'th'top of the ear
nere reached the heart:

THERE. Is there no way for Kings to show their power,
but in their Subjects wrongs? no subject neither
but his own son?

JOL. Right Sir:
no quarrie for his lust to gorge on, but on what
you fairly had flowne at, and taken:
well -- were not the King, or were indeed
not you, that have such hopes, and such a crown
to venture, and yet --
it is but a woman.

THERE. How? that but again, and thou arr more injurious than he, and woul't
provoke me sooner.


JOL. Why Sir?
there are no altars yet addressed unto her,
nor sacrifice; if I have made her less
than what she is, it was my love to you:
For in my thoughts, and here within, I hold her
the noblest piece Nature ere lent our eyes,
and of the which, all women else, are but
weak counterfeits, made up by her journey-men:
but was this fit to tell you?
I know you value but too high all that,
and in a loss we should not make things more,
it is miseries happiness, that we can make it less
by art, throw a forgetfulness upon our ills,
Yet who can do it here?
when every voice, must needs, and every face,
by showing what she was not, show what she was.

THERE. I Will instantly unto him --

draws. JOL. Stay Sir
Though It be the utmost of my Fortunes hope
to have an equal share of ill with you:
yet I could wish we sold this trifle life,
at a far dearer rate, than we are like to do,
since' it is a King's the Merchant.

THERE. Ha!
King, (...) it is indeed,
and there is no Art can cancel that high bond:

JOL. -- He cooles again. --
(to himself.) True Sir, and yet me thinks to know a reason --
for passive nature nere had glorious end,
and he that States preventions ever learned,
knows, it is one motion to strike and to defend.

Enter Serving-man. SERVE. Some of the Lords without, and from the King.
they say, wait you.

THERE. What subtle State trick now?
but one turn here, and I am back my Lord. --

Exit. JOL. This will not do; his resolution's like
a skillful horseman, and reason is the stirrup,
which though a sudden shock may make
it loose, yet does it meet it handsomely again.
Stay, 'tmust be some sudden fear of wrong
to her, that may draw on a sudden act
from him, and ruin from the King; for such
a spirit will not like common ones, be
raised by every spell, it is in loves circle
only 'twill appear.

Enter Thersames. THERE. I cannot bear the burden of my wrongs
one minute longer.

JOL. Why! what is the matter Sir?

THERE. They do pretend the safety of the State
now, nothing but my marriage with Cadusia
can secure th'adjoyning country to it;
confinement during life for me if I refuse
Diana's Nunnerie for her -- And at that Nunn'rie, Iol^s,
allegiance in me like the string of a watch
wound up too high, and forced above the nicke,
ran back, and in a moment was unravelled all.

JOL. Now by the love I bear to Justice,
That Nunn'rie was too severe; when virtuous love's a crime
what man can hope to escape a punishment,
or who is indeed so wretched to desire it?

THERE. Right!

JOL. What answer made you, Sir?

THERE. None, they gave me till to morrow,
and ere that be, or they or I
must know our destiny:
come friend let us in, there is no sleeping now;
for time is short, and we have much to do. --

Exeunt. Enter Orsames, Philan, Courtiers. ORS. Judge you, Gentlemen, if I be
not as unfortunate as a gamester thinks himself upon the loss

of the last stake; this is the first she
I ever swore to heartily, and (by those eyes)
I think I had continued unperjur'd a whole month,
(and that is fair you will say.)

1 COURT. Very fair --

ORS. Had she not run mad betwixt. --

2 COURT. How? mad?
who? Semanthe?

ORS. Yea, yea, mad, ask Philan else.
people that want clear intervalls talkenot
so wildly: I Will tell you Gallants; it is now, since first I found my self a
little bot, and quivering 'bout the heart, some ten days since, (a tedious
Ague) Sirs; (but what of that?)

the gracious glance, and little whisper past,
approaches made from the hand unto the lip,
I came to visit her, and (as you know we use)
breathing a sigh or two by way of prologue,
told her, that in Loves Physic 'twas a rule,
where the disease had birth to seek a cure;
I had no sooner named love to her, but she
began to talk of Flames, and Flames,
neither devouring, nor devoured, of Air,
and of Camelions --

1 COURT. Oh the Platoniques.

2 COURT. Those of the new religion in love! your Lordship's merry, ^oth, how
do you like the humor on it?


ORS. As thou would like red hair, or leanness
in thy Mistress; scurvily, 'tdoes worse with handsomnesse,
^han strong desire would do with impotence;
a me^re trick to inhance the price of kisses --

PHI. Sure these silly women, when they feed
our expectation so high, do but like
ignorant Conjurers, that raise a Spirit
which handsomely they cannot lay again:

ORS. True, it is like some that nourish up
^oung Lions till they grow so great, they are afraid of themselves, they dare
not grant at last,

for fear they should not satisfy.

PHI. Who Is for the Town? I must take up again,

ORS. This villainous Love's as chargeable as the Philosophers Stone, and thy
Mistress as hard to compass too!


PHI. The Platonique is ever so; they are as tedious
before they come to the point, as an old man
fallen into the Stories of his youth;

2. COUR. Or a widow into the praises of her first husband.

ORS. Well, if she hold out but one month longer,
if I d^e not quite forget, I ere beleaguered there,
and remove the siege to another place, may all
the curses beguiled virgins lose upon their perjured Lovers
fall upon me.

PHI. And thou woult deserve'em all.

ORS. For what?

PHI. For being in the company of those
that took away the Prince's Mistress from him.

ORS. Peace, that will be redeemed --
I put but on this wildness to disguise my self;
there are brave things in hand, hark i'thy ear: --

(Whisper) 1. COURT. Some severe plot upon a maidenhead.
These two young Lords make love,
as Embroyderers work against a Mask, night and day;
They think importunity a nearer way than merit,
and take women as Schoole-boyes catch Squirrells.
hunt 'em up and down till they are weary,
and fall down before'em.

ORS. Who loves the Prince fails not --

PHI. And I am one: my injuries are great as thine,
and do persuade as strongly.

ORS. I had command to bring thee,
fail not and in thine own disguise

PHI. Why in disguise?

ORS. It is the Princes policy and love;
for if we should miscarrie,
some one taken might betray the rest
unknown to one another,
each man is safe, in his own valor;

2. COURT. And what Mercers wife are you to cheapen now in stead of his silks?


ORS. Troth; it is not so well; it is but a Cozen of thine -- come Philan let us
along: --


Exeunt. Enter Queen alone. ORB. What is it thus within whispering remorse,
and calls Love Tyrant? all powers, but his,
their rigor, and our fear, have made divine!
But every Creature holds of him by sense,
the sweetest Tenure; yea! but my husbands brother:
and what of that? do harmless birds or beasts
ask leave of curious Heraldrie at all?
Does not the womb of one fair spring,
bring unto the earth many sweet rivers,
that wantonly do one another chase,
and in one bed, kiss, mingle, and embrace?
Man (Natures heir) is not by her will ti'de,
to shun all creatures are allied unto him,
for then he should shun all; since death and life
doubly allies all them that live by breath:
The Air that does impart to all life's brood,
refreshing, is so near to it self, and to us all,
that all in all is individual:
But, how am I sure one and the same desire
warmes Ariaspes: for Art can keep alive
a beddred love.

Enter Ariaspes. ARI. Alone, (Madam) and overcast with thought,
uncloud -- uncloud -- for if we may believe
the smiles of Fortune, love shall no longer pine
in prison thus, nor undelivered travel
with throes of fear, and of desire about it.
The Prince, (like to a valiant beast in nets)
striving to force a freedom suddenly,
has made himself at length, the surer prey:
the King stands only now betwixt, and is,
just like a single tree, that hinders all the prospect:
it is but the cutting down of him, and we --

ORB. Why would't thou thus imbarque into strange seas,
and trouble Fate, for what we have already?
Thou art to me what thou now seek'st, a Kingdom;
and were thy love as great, as thy ambition;
I should be so to thee.

ARI. Think you, you are not Madam?
as well and justly may you doubt the truths,
tortured, or dying men do leave behind them:
but then my fortune turns my misery,
when my addition shall but make you less;
shall I endure that head that wore a crown,
for my sake should wear none? First let me lose
the exchequer of my wealth, your love; nay, may
all that rich Treasury you have about you,
be rifled by the man I hated, and I look on;
though youth be full of sin, and heaven be juft,
so sad a doom I hope they keep not from me;
Remember what a quick Apostacy he made,
when all his vows were up to heaven and you.
How, ere the Bridal torches were burnt out,
his flames grew weak, and sicklier; think on that,
think how unsafe you are, if she should now,
not sell her honor at a lower rate,
than your place in his bed.

ORB. And would not you prove false too then?

ARI. By this -- and this -- loves breakfast:
(Kisses her.) by his feasts too yet to come, by all the
beauty in this face, divinity too great
to be profaned --

ORB. O do not swear by that;
Cankers may eat that flower upon the stalk,
(for sickness and mischance, are great devourers)
and when there is not in these cheeks and lips,
l^ft red enough to blush at perjurie,
when you shall make it, what shall I do then?

ARI. Our souls by that time (Madam)
will by long custom so acquainted be,
they will not need that duller truch-man Flesh,
but freely, and without those poorer helps,
converse and mingle; mean time we will teach
our loves to speak, not thus to live by signs,
and action is his native language, Madam,
Enter Ziriff unseene. this box but opened to the Sense will do it.

ORB. I undertake I know not what,

ARI. Thine own safety (Dearest)
let it be this night, if thou do;
Whisper and kiss. love thy self or me.

ORB. That Is very sudden.

ARI. Not if we be so, and we must now be wise,
For when their Sun sets, ours begins to rise. --

Exeunt. Ziriff solus. ZIR. Then all my ^eares are true, and she is false;
false as a falling Star, or Glow-wormes fire:
This Devil Beauty is compounded strangely,
It is a subtle point, and hard to know,
whether't has in it more active tempting,
or more passive tempted; so soon it forces,
and so soon it yields --
Good Gods! she seized my heart, as if from you
sh'ad had Commission to have used me so;
and all mankind besides -- and see, if the just Ocean
makes more haste to pay
to needy rivers, what it borrowed first,
then she to give, where she nere took;
me thinks I feel anger, Revenges harbenger
chalking up all within, and thrusting out
of doors, the tame and softer passions; --
It must be so:
To love is noble ^railtie, but poor sin
When we fall once to Love, unlov'd again.

Exit. Enter King, Ariaspes, Jolas. ARI. 'Twere fit your Justice did consider,
(Sir)
what way it took; if you should apprehend
the Prince for Treason (which he never did)
and which, unacted, is unborne; (at least will be believed so)
lookers on, and the loud talking crowd,
will think it all but water colors
laid on for a time,
and which wiped off, each common eye would see,
Strange ends, through stranger ways:

KING. Think thou I will compound with Treason then?
and make one fear another Advocate?

JOL. Virtue forbid Sir, but if you would permit,
them to approach the room (yet who would advise
Treason should come so near?) there would be then
No place left for excuse.

KING. How strong are they?

JOL. Weak, considering
the enterprise; they are but few in number,
and those few too, having nothing but
their resolutions considerable about them.
A Troop indeed designed to suffer what
they come to execute.

KING. Who are they are thus weary of their lives?

JOL. Their names I cannot give you.
For those he sent for, he did still receive
at a back door, and so dismissed them too.
But I do think Ziriff is one. --

KING. Take heed! I shall suspect thy hate to others,
not thy love to me, begot this service;
This Treason thou thy self do say
has but an hours age, and I can give account
of him, beyond that time. -- Brother, in the little Tower
where now Aglaura's prisoner,
you shall find him; bring him along,
he yet does stand untainted in my thoughts,
and to preserve him so,
he shall not stir out of my eyes command
till this great cloud be over.

JOL. Sir, 'twas the Prince who first --

KING. I know all that! urge it no more!
I love the man;
and it is with pain, we do suspect,
where we do not dislike:
thou art sure he will have some,
and that they will come to night?

JOL. As sure as night will come it self.

KING. Get all our Guards in readiness, we will our self
disperse them afterward; and both be sure
to wear your thoughts within: I Will act the rest:

Exeunt. Enter Philan, Orsames, Courtiers. 2. COURT. Well. -- If there be not
some great storm toward,
nere trust me; Whisper (Court Thunder) is in
every corner, and there has been to day
about the Town a murmuring
and buzzing, such as men use to make,
when they do fear to vent their fears;

1. COURT. True, and all the Statesmen hang down their heads, like full eared
corn; two of them

where I sup't, ask't what time of night it was,
and when 'twas told them, started, as if
they had been to run a race.

2. COURT. The King too (if you mark him,) does faigne mirth and jollitie, but
through them both,

flashes of discontent, and anger make escapes:

ORS. Gentlemen! it is pity heaven
designed you not to make the Almanacks.
You guess so shrewdly by the ill aspects,
or near conjunctions of the great ones,
at what is to come still; that without all doubt
the Country had been governed wholly by you,
and plowed and reaped accordingly; for me,
I understand this mystery as little
as the new Love, and as I take it too,
it is much about the Time that every thing
but Owls, and Lovers take their rest;
Goodnight, Philan -- away --

Exit. 1. COURT. It Is early yet; let us go on the Queens side
and fool a little; I love to warm my self
before I go to bed, it does beget
handsome and sprightly thoughts, and makes
our dreams half solid pleasures.

2. COURT. Agreed: agreed:

Exeunt. ACTUS III.
SCENA I.
Enter Prince: Conspiratours: THERE. Could thou not find out Ziriff?

1. COURT. Not speak with him my Lord;
^et I sent in by several men.

ORS. I wonder Iolas meets us not here too.

THERE. It Is strange, but let us on now how ere,
when Fortunes, honor, life, and all is in doubt
bravely to dare, is bravely to get out.

Excursions: The Guard upon them. THERE. Betrayed! betrayed!

ORS. Shift for your self Sir, and let us alone,
we will secure your way, and make our own.

Ex^nt. Enter the King, and Lords. KING. Follow Lords, and see quick execution
done,
leave not a man alive.
Who treads on fire, and does not put it out,
Disperses fear in many sparks of doubt.

Exeunt. Enter Conspirators, and the Guard upon them. ORS. Stand friends, an
equal party --

(Fight.) Three of the Conspirators fall, and three of the Kings side: Orsames
and Philan kill the rest. PHI. Brave Orsames, it is pleasure to dye near thee.

ORS. Talk not of dying Philan, we will live,
and serve the noble Prince again; we are alone,
off then with thy disguise, and throw it in the bushes;
They throw off their disguises. quick, quick; before the torrent comes upon us:
we shall be straight good Subjects, and I despair not
of reward for this nights service: so. --
we two now killed our friends! it is hard,
but 'tmust be so.

Enter Ariaspes, Jolas, two Courtiers, part of the Guard. ARI. Follow! Follow!

ORS. Yes; so you may now, you are not likely to overtake.

JOL. Orsames, and Philan, how came you hither?

ORS. The nearest way it seems, you followed (thank you)
as if 'thad been through quicksets:

JOL. 's Death have they all escaped?

ORS. Not all, two of them we made sure;
but they cost dear, look here else.

ARI. Is the Prince there?

PHI. They are both Princes I think,
they fought like Princes I am sure.

Jolas pulls off the vizors. JOL. Stephines, and Odiris -- we trifle.
Which way took the rest?

ORS. Two of them are certainly here abouts.

ARI. Upon my life they swam the river;
some straight to horse, and follow ore the bridge;
you, and I my Lord, will search this place a little better.

ORS. Your Highness will I hope remember, who were
the men were in --

ARI. Oh! fear not, your Mistress shall know you are valiant.

ORS. Philan! if thou love me, let us kill them upon the place.

PHI. Fie: thou now art wild indeed;
thou taught'st me to be wise first,
and I will now keep thee so. -- Follow, follow.

Exeunt. Enter Aglaura with a Lute. The Prince comes and knocks within. THERE.
Madam!

AGL. What wretch is this that thus usurps
upon the privilege of Ghosts, and walks
at midnight?

THERE. Aglaura.

AGL. Betray me not
my willing sense too soon, yet if that voice
be false. --

THERE. Open fair Saint, and let me in.

AGL. It is the Prince --
as willingly as those
that cannot sleep do light; welcome (Sir,)
(Opens.) welcome above. --
Spies his sword drawn. Bless me, what means this unsheathed minister of
death?
if, Sir, on me quick Justice be to pass,
why this? absence alas, or such strange looks
as you now bring with you would kill as soon:

THERE. Softly! for I, like a hard hunted Dear,
have only hearded here; and though the cry
reach not our ears, yet am I followed close:
o my heart! since I saw thee,
Time has been strangely Active, and begot
a Monstrous issue of unheard of Story:
Sit; thou shall have it all! nay, sigh not.
such blasts will hinder all the passage;
Do ^t thou remember, how we parted last?

AGL. Can I forget it Sir?

THERE. That word of parting was ill placed, I swear,
it may be ominous; but do thou know
into whose hands I gave thee?

AGL. Yes into Z^riffi Sir.

THERE. That Ziriff was thy brother, brave Zorannes
preserved by miracle in that sad day
thy father fell, and since thus in disguise,
waiting his just revenge.

AGL. You do amaze me, Sir.

THERE. And must do more, when I tell all the Story.
The King, the jealous King, knew of the marriage,
and when thou thought thy self by my direction,
thou were his Prisoner;
unless I would renounce all right,
and cease to love thee, (o strange, and fond request (...))
immured thou must have been in some sad place,
and locked for ever, from Thersames sight.
For ever -- and that unable to endure
this night, I did attempt his life.

AGL. Was it well done Sir?

THERE. O no! extremely Ill!
for ^o attempt and not to act was poor:
here the dead-doing Law, (like ill-paid Soldiers)
leaves the side 'twas on, to join with power.
Royal villainy now will look so like to Justice,
that the times to come and curious posterity,
will find no difference: weep'st thou Aglaura?
come, to bed my Love!
and we will there mock Tyranny, and Fate,
those softer hours of pleasure, and delight,
that like so many single pearls, should have
^orn'd our thread of life, we will at once,
by Loves mysterious power, and this nights help
contract to one, and make but one rich draught
of all.

AG^. What mean you Sir?

THERE. To make my self incapable of misery,
by taking strong preservative of happiness:
I would this ^ght enjoy thee:

AG^. Do: Sir, do what you will with me,
for I am too much yours, to deny the right
however claimed -- but --

THERE. But what Aglaura?

AGL. Gather not roses in a wet and frowing hour,
they will lose their sweets then, trust me they will Sir.
What pleasure can Love take to play his game out,
when death must keep the Stakes --
A noise without. hark Sir -- grave bringers, and last minutes are at hand,
hide, hide your self, for Loves sake hide your self.

THERE. As soon the Sun may hide himself, as I.
The Prince of Persia hide himself? --

AGL. O talk not Sir; the Sun does hide himself
when night and blackness comes --

THERE. Never sweet Ignorance, he shines in the other world then;
and so shall I, if I set here in glory:
Enter
Opens the door, enter Ziriff. ye hasty seekers of life.
Soranne^. --

AGL. My brother!
If all the joy within me come not out,
to give a welcome to so dear an o^ject,
excuse it Sir; sorrow locks up all doors.

ZIR. If there be such a Toy about you, Sister,
keep't for your self, or lend it to the Prince;
there is a dearth of that Commodity,
and you have made it Sir. Now?
what is the next mad thing you mea^e to do?
will you stay here? when all the Court's beset
like to a wood at a great hunt, and busy mischief hastes
to be in view, and have you in her power --

THERE. To me all this --
for great griefe's deaf as well as it is dumb,
and drives no trade at all with Counsel: (Sir)
why do you not Tutor one that has the Plague,
and see if he will fear an after ague fit;
such is all mischief now to me; there is none left
is worth a thought, death is the worst, I know,
and that compared to shame, does look more lovely now
than a chaste Mistress, set by common woman --
and I must court it Sir?

ZIR. No wonder if that heaven for sake us, when we leave our selves:
what is there done should feed such high despair?
were you but safe --

AGL. Dear (Sir) be ruled,
if love, be love, and magic too,
(as sure it is where it is true;)
we then shall meet in absence, and in spite
of all divorce, freely enjoy together,
what niggard Fate thus peevishly denies.

THERE. Yea: but if pleasures be themselves but dreams,
what then are the dreams of these to men?
that monster, Expectation, will devour
all that is within our hope or power,
and ere we once can come to show, how rich
we are, we shall be poor,
shall we not Sorannez?

ZIR. I understand not this,
in times of envious penury (such as these are)
to keep but love alive is fair, we should not think
of feasting him: come (Sir)
here in these lodgings is a little door,
that leads unto another; that again,
unto a vault, that has his passage under
the little river, opening into the wood;
from thence it is but some few minutes easy business
unto a Servants house of mine (who for his faith
and honesty, hereafter must
look big in Story) there you are safe however;
and when this Storm has met a little calm,
what wild desire dares whisper to it self,
you may enjoy, and at the worst may steal:

THERE. What shall become of thee Aglaura then?
shall I leave thee their rages sacrifice?
and like dull Seamen threatened with a storm,
throw all away, I have, to save my self.

AGL. Can I be safe when you are not? my Lord!
knows love in us divided happiness?
am I the safer for your being here?
can you give that you have not for your self?
my innocence is my best guard, and that your stay
betraying it unto suspicion, takes away.
If you did love me? --

THERE. Grows that in question? then it is time to part: --
Kisses her. when we shall meet again Heaven only knows,
and when we shall I know we shall be old:
Love does not calculate the common way,
Minutes are hours there, and the hours are days,
each day's a year, and every year an age;
what will this come to think you?

ZIR. Would this were all the ill,
for these are pretty little harmless nothings;
Times horse runs full as fast, hard borne and curbed,
as in his full carreere, loose-rain'd and spurred:
come, come, let us away.

THERE. Happiness, such as men lost in misery
would wrong in naming, it is so much above them.
All that I want of it, all you deserve,
Heaven send you in my absence.

AGL. And misery, such as witty malice would
Iay out in curses, on the thing it hates,
Heaven send me in the stead, if when you are gone
I welcome it, but for your sake alone. --

Exeunt. Leads him out, and enters up out of the vault. ZIR. Stir not from
hence, Sir, till you hear from me so goodnight dear Prince.


THERE. Goodnight dear friend.

ZIR. When we meet next all this will but advance --
Joy never feasts so high,
as when the first course is of misery.

Exeunt. ACTUS IV.
SCENA I.
Enter three or four Courtiers. 1. COURT BY this light -- a brave Prince,
he made no more of the Guard, than they would of a Tailor on a Mask night,
that has refused trusting before.


2. COURT. He Is as Active as he is valiant too;
did mark him how he stood like all the points
of the Compass, and as good Pictures,
had his eyes, toward every man.

3. COURT. And his sword too,
all the other side walk up and down the Court now,
as if they had lost their way, and stare,
like Greyhounds, when the Hare has taken the furze,

1. COURT. Right,
and have more troubles about'em
than a Serving-man that has forgot his message
when he is come upon the place. --

2. COURT. Yonder Is the King within, chafing, and swearing
like an old Falconer upon the first flight
of a young Hawke, when some Clown
has taken away the quarrie from her;
and all the Lords stand round about him,
as if he were to be baited, with much more fear,
and at much more distance,
than a Country Gentlewoman sees the Lions the first time:
look: he is broke loose. --

^nter King and Lords. KING. Find him; or by Osiris self, you all are
T^aitours;
and equally shall pay to Justice; a single man,
and guilty too, break through you all!

Enter Ziriff. ZIR Confidence!
(thou paint of women, and the States-mans wisdom,
valor for Cowards, and of the guilties Innocence,)
assist me now.
Sir, send these Starers off:
I have some business will deserve your privacie.

KING. Leave us.

JOL. How the villain swells upon us? --

Exeunt. ZIR. Not to punish thought,
or keep it long upon the wrack of doubt,
know Sir,
That by corruption of the waiting woman,
the common key of Secrets, I have found
the truth at last, and have discovered all:
the Prince your Son was by Ag^aura means,
conveyed last night unto the Cypress Grove,
through a close vault that opens in the lodgings:
he does intend to join with Carimania,
but ere he goes, resolves to finish all
the rites of Love, and this night means
to steal what is behind.

KING. How good is Heaven unto me!
that when it gave me Traitors for my Subjects,
would lend me such a Servant!

ZIR. How just (Sir) rather,
that would bestow this Fortune on the poor.
and where your bounty had made debt so infinite
that it grew desperate, their hope to pay it --

KING. Enough of that, thou do but gently chide
me for a fault, that I will mend; for I
have been too poor, and low in my rewards
unto thy virtue: but to our business;
the question is, whether we shall rely
upon our Guards again?

ZIR. By no means Sir:
hope on his future fortunes, or their Love
unto his person, has so sicklied ore
their resolutions, that we must not
trust them.
Besides, it were but needless here;
he (...) through the vault alone, and I
my self (...) dertake that business,
if that were all, (...) ^t there is something else,
this accident does prompt my zeal to serve you in.
I know you love Aglaura (Sir) with passion,
and would enjoy her; I know besides
^hee loves him so, that whosoere shall bring
the ti^mgs of his death, must carry back
the news of hers, so that your Justice (Sir)
must rob your hope: but there is yet a way --

KING. Here! take my heart; for I have hitherto
to ^amly spent the treasure of my love,
^e have it coined ^eight into friendship all,
and make a present to thee.

ZIR. If any part of this rich happiness,
(^ortune prepares now for you) shall owe it self
unto my weak endeavors, I have enough.
(...) without doubt this night expects
the (...), and why
you should not then supply his place by stealth,
and ^n disguise --

KING. I apprehend thee Ziriff,
but there is difficulty --

ZIR. Who trades in Love must be an adventurer, (Sir)
but here is scarce enough to make the pleasure dearer:
I know the Cave; your Brother and my self
with (...), (for those we are sure do hate him,)
with (...) few chosen more betimes will wait
the Princes passing through the vault; if he
comes first, he is dead; and if it be your self,
we^ will conduct you to the chamber door,
and (...) 'twixt you and danger afterward.

KING. I have conceived of Joy, and am grown great:
Till I have safe deliverance, time's a cripple
and (...) crutches. -- as for thee my Ziriff,
I do here entertain a friendship with thee,
shall drown the memory of all patterns past;
we will oblige by turns; and that so thick,
and fast, that curious studiers of it,
shall not once dare to cast it up, or say
b^ way of guess, whether thou or I
remain the debtors, when we come to die.

Exeunt. Enter Semanthe, Orithie, Philan, Orsames, Lords and Ladies. ORI. Is
the Queen ready to come out?

PHI. Not ^et sure, the Kings brother is but newly entered;

SEM. Come my Lord, the Song then.

ORI. The Song.

ORS. A vengeance take this love, it spoils a voice
worse than the losing of a maidenhead.
I have got such a cold with rising
and walking in my shirt a nights, that
a Bittorne whooping in a reed is better music.

ORI. This modesty becomes you as ill, my Lord,
as wooing would us women: pray, put's not to it.

ORS. Nay Ladies, you shall find me,
as free, as the Musicians of the woods
themselves; what I have, you shall not need to call for,
nor shall it cost you any thing.
SONG.
WHy so pale and wan fond Lover?
Prithee why so pale?
Will, when looking well cannot move her,
Looking ill prevail?
Prithee why so pale?
Why so dull and mute young Sinner?
Prithee why so mute?
Will, when speaking well cannot win her,
Saying nothing do it?
Prithee why so mute?
Quit, quit, for shame, this will not move
This cannot take her;
If of her self she will not Love,
Nothing can make her,
The Devil take her.

ORI. I should have ghest, it had been the issue of
your brain, if I had not been told so;

ORS. A little foolish counsel (Madam) I gave a friend
of mine four or five years ago, when he was
falling into a Consumption. --

Enter Queen. ORB. Which of all you have seen the fair prisoner
since she was confinde?

SEM. I have Madam.

ORB. And how behaves she now her self?

SEM. As one that had entrenched so deep in Innocence,
she feared no enemies, bears all quietly,
and smiles at Fortune, whilst she frowns on her.

ORB. So gallant! I wonder where the beauty lies
that thus inflames the royal blood?

ORI. Faces, Madam, are like books, those that do study them
know best, and to say truth, it is still
much as it pleases the Courteous Reader.

ORB. These Lovers sure are like Astronomers,
that when the vulgar eye discovers, but
a Sky above, studded with some few Stars,
find out besides strange fishes, birds, and beasts.

SEM. As men in sickness scortch'd into a raving
do see the Devil, in all shapes and forms,
when standers by wondering, ask where, and when;
So they in Love, for all is but fever there,
and madness too.

ORB. That Is too severe Semanthe;
but we will have your reasons in the park;
are the doors open through the Gardens?

LO. The King has newly led the way.

Exeunt. Enter Ariaspes: Ziriff, with a warrant sealed. ARI. Thou art a Tyrant,
Ziriff: I shall die with joy.

ZIR. I must confess my Lord; had but the Princes ills
proved ^eight, and not thus dangerous,
he should have owed to me, at least I would
have laid a claim unto his safety; and
like Physicians, that do challenge right
in Natures cures, looked for reward and thanks;
but since 'twas otherwise, I thought it best
^o save my self, and then to save the State.

ARI. 'Twas wisely done.

ZIR. Safely I Am sure, my Lord! you know it is not
^ur custom, where the Kings dislike, once swells to hate,
there to engage our selves; Court friendship
is a Cable, that in storms is ever cut,
and I made bold with it; here is the warrant sealed
and for the execution of it, if you think
we are not strong enough, we may have
(...), for him the King did name.

ARI. And him I would have named.

ZIR. But is he not too much the Prince's (Sir?)

ARI. He is as lights in Scenes at Masks,
what glorious show so ere he makes without,
I that set him there, know why, and how;
Enter Jolas. but here he is. --
Come Iol^s. and since the Heavens decreed,
the man whom thou should envy, should be such,
That all men else must do it; be not ashamed
thou once we^ guilty of it;
but bless them, that they give thee now a means,
to make a friendship with him, and vouchsafe
to find thee out a way to love, where well
thou could not hate.

JO^. What means my Lord?

ARI. Here, here he stands that has preserved us all!
that sacrifi^'d unto a ^u lique good,
(the dearest private good we mortals have)
Frien^hip: gave into ourarmes the Prince,
when nothing but the sword (perchance a ruin)
was left to do it.

JOL. How could I chide my love, and my ambition now,
that thrust me upon such a quarrel? here I do vow --

ZIR. Hold, do not vow my Lord, let it deserve it first;
and yet (if Heaven bless honest men's intents)
it is not impossible.
My Lord, you will be pleased to inform him in particulars,
I must be gone. --
the King I fear already has been left
too long alone.

ARI. Stay -- the hour and place.

ZIR. Eleven, under the Tarras walk;
I will not fail you there.
Goes out, returns back again. I had forgot: --
^may be, the small remainder of those lost men
that were of the Conspiracy, will come along with him:
'twere best to have some chosen of the Guard
within our call --

Exit Ziriff. ARI. Honest, and careful Ziriff:
Jolas stands musing. how now Planet struck? --

JOL. This Ziriff will grow great with all the world.

ARI. Shallow man! short sightedder than Travelers in mists,
or women that outlive themselves; do thou not see,
that whilst he does prepare a Tomb with one hand
for his friend, he digs a Grave with the other for himself?

JOL. How so?

ARI. Do think he shall not feel the weight of this,
as well as poor Thersames?

JOL. Shall we then kill him too at the same instant?

ARI. And say, the Prince made an unluckie thrust.

JOL. Right.

ARI. Dull, dull, he must not dye so uselesly.
As when we wipe of filth from any place,
we throw away the thing that made it clea^e,
so this once done, he is gone.
Thou know the People love the Prince, to their rage
something the State must offer up; who fitter
than thy rival and my enemy?

JOL. Rare! our witness will be taken.

ARI. Pish! let me alone.
The Giants that made mountains ladders,
and thought to take great Iov^ by force, were fools:
not hill on hill, but plot on plot, does make
us sit above, and laugh at all below us. --

Exeunt. Enter Aglaura, and a Singing Boy. BOY. Madam, 'twill make you
melancholy,
I Will sing the Prince's Song, that is sad enough.

AG^. What you will Sir.

SONG.
NO, no, fair Heretic, it needs must be
But an ill Love in me,
And worse for thee.
For were it in my Power,
To love thee now this hour,
More than I did the last;
I would then so fall,
I might not Love at all;
Love that can flow, and can admit increase,
Admits as well an Ebb, and may grow less.
2
True Love is still the same; the torrid Zones,
And those more frigid ones,
It must not know:
For Love grown cold or hot,
Is Lust, or Friendship, not
The thing we have;
For that is a flame would die,
Held down, or up to high:
Then think I love more than I ca^ express,
And would love more, could I but love thee less.

AGL. Leave me! for to a Soul, so out of Tune
as mine is now; nothing is harmony:
when once the maine-spring, Hope, is fallen into
disorder; no wonder, if the lesser wheels,
Desire, and Joy, stand still; my thoughts like Bees
when they have lost their King, wander
confusedly up and down, and settle no where.
Enter Orithie. Orithie, fly! fly the room,
as thou would shun the habitations
which Spirits haunt, or where thy nearer friends
walk after death; here is not only Love,
^ut Loves plague too -- misfortune; and so high,
that it is sure infectious!

ORI. Madam, so much more miserable am I this way than you, that should I pity
you, I should forget my self:

my sufferings are such, that with less patience
you may endure your own, than give mine Audience.
There is that difference, that you may make
yours none at all, but by considering mine!

AGL. O speak them quickly then! the marriage day
to passionate Lovers never was more welcome,
than any kind of ease would be to me now.

ORI. Could they be spoke, they were not then so great.
I love, and dare not say I love; dare not hope,
what I desire; yet still too must desire --
and like a starving man brought to a feast,
and made say grace, to what he nere shall taste,
be thankful after all, and kiss the hand,
that made the wound thus deep.

AGL. It Is hard indeed, but with what unjust scales,
thou took'st the weight of our misfortunes,
be thine own Judge now.
thou mourn'st for loss of that thou never had,
or if thou had a loss, it never was
of a Thersames.
would thou not think a Merchant mad, Orithie?
if thou should see him weep, and tear his hair,
because he brought not both the Indies home?
and would not think his sorrows very just,
if having fraught his ship with some rich Treasure,
he sunk in the very Port? This is our case.

ORI. And do you think there is such odds in it?
would Heaven we women could as easily change
our fortunes as ('it is said) we can our minds.
I cannot (Madam) think them miserable,
that have the Princes Love.

AGL. He is the man then --
blush not Orithie, it is a sin to blush
for loving him, though none at all to love him.
I can admit of rivalship without
a jealousy -- nay shall be glad of it:
we two will sit, and think, and think, and sigh,
and sigh, and talk of love -- and of Thersames.
Thou shall be praising of his wit, while I
admire he governes it so well:
like this thing, said thus, the other thing thus done,
and in good language him for these adore,
while I want words to do it, yet do it more.
Thus will we do, till death it self shall us
divide, and then whose fate 'tshall be to die
first of the two, by legacy shall all
her love bequeath, and give her stock to her
that shall survive; for no one stock can serve,
to love Thersames so as he will deserve.

Enter King, Ziriff. KING. What have we here impossibility?
a constant night, and yet within the room
that, that can make the day before the Sun?
silent Aglaura too?

AGL. I know not what to say:
^s't to your pity, or your scorn, I owe
the favor of this visit (Sir?) for such
my fortune is, it does deserve them both:

KING. And such thy beauty is, that it makes good
all Fortunes, sorrow looks lovely here;
and there is no man, that would not entertain
his griefs as friends, were he but sure they would show
no worse upon him -- but I forget my self,
I came to chide.

AGL. If I have sinned so high, that yet my punishment equals not my crime,

do Sir; I should be loath to die in debt
to Justice, how ill soere I paid
the scores of Love. --

KING. And those indeed thou have but paid indifferently to me, I did deserve
at least fair death,

not to be murdered thus in private:
that was too cruel, Mistress.
And I do know thou do repent, and wilt
yet make me satisfaction:

AGL. What satisfaction Sir?
I am no monster, never had two hearts;
One is by holy vows another now,
and could I give it you, you would not take it,
for'tis alike impossible for me,
to love again, as you love Perjurie.
O Sir! consider, what a flame love is.
If by rude means you think to force a light,
that of it self it would not freely give,
you blow it out, and leave your self in the dark.
The Prince once gone, you may as well persuade
the light to stay behind, when the Sun posts
to the other world, as me; alas! we two,
have mingled souls more than two meeting brooks;
and whosoever is designed to be
the murderer of my Lord, (as sure there is,
has angered heaven so far, that 'tas decreed
him to increase his punishment that way)
would he but search the heart, when he has done,
he there would find Aglaura murdered too.

KING. Thou have ^come me, moved so handsomely
for pity, that I will dis-inherit
the elder brother, and from this hour be
thy Convert, not thy Lover. --
Ziriff, dispatch away --
and he that brings news of the Prince's welfare,
look that he have the same reward, we had decreed
to him, brought tidings of his death.
'Tmust be a busy and bold hand, that would
unlinke a chain the Gods themselves have made:
peace to thy Thoughts: Aglaura --

Exit. Ziriff steps back and speaks. ZIR. What ere he says believe him not
Aglaura:
for lust and rage ride high within him now:
he knows Thersames made th'escape from hence,
and does conceal it only for his ends:
for by the favor of mistake and night,
he hopes to enjoy thee in the Prince's room;
I shall be mist -- else I would tell thee more;
But thou may guess, for our condition
admits no middle ways, either we must
send them to Graves, or lie our selves in dust: --

Exit. Aglaura stands still and studies. AGL. Ha! it is a strange Act thought
puts me now upon;
yet sure my brother meant the self same thing,
and my Thersames would have done't for me:
to take his life, that seeks to take away
the life of Life, (honor from me;) and from
the world, the life of honor, Thersames;
must needs be something sure, of kin to Justice.
If I do fail, the attempt howere was brave,
and I shall have at worst a handsome grave --

Exit. Enter Jolas, Semanthe. Semanthe steps back, Jolas stays her. JOL. What?
are we grown, Semanthe, night, and day?
Must one still vanish when the other comes?
Of all that ever Love did yet bring forth
(and 't has been fruitful too,) this is
the strangest Issue. --

SEM. What my Lord?

JOL. Hate, Semanthe.

SEM. You do mistake, if I do shun you, it is,
as bashful Debtors shun their Creditors,
I cannot pay you in the self same coin,
and am ashamed to offer any other.

JOL. It is ill done, Semanthe, to plead bankrupt,
when with such ease you may be out of debt;
In loves dominions, native commodity
is current payment, change is all the Trade,
and heart for heart, the richest merchandise.

SEM. 'Twould here be mean my Lord, since mine would prove
In your hands but a Counterfeit, and yours in mine
worth nothing; Sympathy, not greatness,
makes those Jewels rise in value.

JOL. Sympathy! o teach but yours to love then,
and two so rich no mortal ever knew.

SEM. That heart would Love but ill that must be taught,
such fires as these still kindle of themselves.

JOL. In such a cold, and frozen place, as is
thy breast? how should they kindle of themselves
Semanthe?

SEM. Ask? how the Flint can carry fire within?
it is the least miracle that Love can do:

JOL. Thou art thy self the greatest miracle,
for thou art fair to all perfection,
and yet do want the greatest part of beauty,
Kindness; thy cruelty (next to thy self,)
above all things on earth takes up my wonder.

SEM. Call not that cruelty, which is our fate,
believe me Iolas, the honest Swain
that from the brow of some steep cliffe far off,
beholds a ship laboring in vain against
the boisterous and unruly Elements, never had
less power, or more desire to help than I;
at every sigh, I die, and every look,
does move; and any passion you will have
but Love, I have in store: I will be angry,
quarrel with destiny, and with my self
that it is no better; be melancholy;
And (though mine own disasters well might plead
to be in chief,) yours only shall have place,
I Will pity, and (if that is too low) I Will grieve,
as for my sins, I cannot give you ease;
all this I do, and this I hope will prove
it is greater Torment not to love, than Love. --

Exit. JOL. So perishing Sailours pray to storms,
and so they hear again. So men
with death about them, look on Physicians that
have given them over, and so they turn away:
Two fixed Stars that keep a constant distance,
and by laws made with themselves must know
no motion excentrick, may meet as soon as we:
The anger that the foolish Sea does show,
when it does brave it out, and rore against
a stubborn rock that still denies it passage,
is not so vain and fruitless, as my prayers.
Ye mighty Powers of Love and Fate, where is
your Justice here? It is thy part (fond Boy)
when thou do find one wounded heart, to make
the other so, but if thy Tyranny
be such, that thou will leave one breast to hate,
If we must live, and this survive,
how much more cruell's Fate? --

Exit. ACTUS V.
SCENA I.
Enter Ziriff, Ariaspes, Jolas. JOL. A Glorious night!

ARI. Pray Heaven it prove so.
Are we not there yet?

ZIR. It Is about this hollow.

Enter the Cave. ARI. How now! what region are we got into?
Th'enheritance of night;
Are we not mistaken a turning Ziriff,
and stepped into some melancholy Devils Territory?
Sure it is a part of the first Chaos,
that would endure no change.

ZIR. No matter Sir, it is as proper for our purpose,
as the Lobbie for the waiting woman's.
Stay you here, I Will move a little backward,
and so we shall be sure to put him past
retreat: you know the word if it be the Prince.
Goes to the mouth of the Cave. Enter King. Here Sir, follow me, all is quiet
yet. --

KING. He is not come then?

ZIR. No.

KING. Where Is Ariaspes?

ZIR. Waiting within.

He leads him on, steps behind him, gives the false word, they kill the King.
JOL. I do not like this waiting,
nor this fellows leaving us.

ARI. This place does put odd thoughts into thee,
then thou art in thine own nature too, as jealous
as either Love, or Honor: Come, wear thy sword in readiness,
and think how near we are a crown.

ZIR. Revenge!
So let us drag him to the light, and search
his pockets, there may be papers there that will
discover the rest of the Conspiratours.
Iol^s, your hand --

Draw him out. JOL. Whom have we here? the King!

ZIR. Yes, and Zorrannes too, Illo! hoe! --
Enter Pasithas and others. Unarme them.
Do You stare?
This for my Fathers injuries and mine:
Points to the Kings dead body. half Love, half Duties Sacrifice,
this -- for the noble Prince, an offering to friendship:

Runs at Jolas. JOL. Basely! and tamely --

Dies. ARI. What have thou done?

ZIR. Nothing -- killed a Traitor,
So -- away with them, and leaves us,
Pasithas be only you in call.

ARI. What do thou pawse?
have thou remorse already murderer?

ZIR. No fool: it is but a difference I put
betwixt the crimes: Orbella is our quarrel;
and I do hold it fit, that love should have
a nobler way of Justice, than Revenge
or Treason; follow me out of the wood,
and thou shall be Master of this again:
and then, best arm and title take it.
They go out and enter again. There --

Gives him his sword. ARI. Extremely good! Nature took pains I swear,
the villain and the brave are mingled handsomely.

ZIR. 'Twas Fate that took it, when it decreed
we two should meet, nor shall they mingle now
we are brought together strait to part. --

Fight, ARI. Some Devil sure has borrowed this shape.
Pawse. my sword never stayed thus long to find an entrance.

ZIR. To guilty men, all that appears is Devil,
come Trifler, come. --

Fight again, Ariaspes falls. ARI. Whither, whither, thou fleeting Coward life?
Bubble of Time, Natures shame, stay; a little, stay!
till I have looked my self into revenge,
and star'd this Traitor to a carcass first.
-- It will not be: --
Falls. the Crown, the Crown, too
now is lost, for ever lost -- oh! --
Ambition's, but an Ignis fatuus, I see
misleading fond mortality,
That hurries us about, and sets us down
Just -- where -- we -- first -- begun --

Dies. ZIR. What a great spreading mighty thing this was,
and what a nothing now? how soon poor man
vanishes into his noone-tide shadow?
but hopes over fed have seldom better done: --
(Hollowes.) Enter Pasithas. Take up this lump of vanity, and honor,
and carry it the back way to my lodging,
there may be use of Statesmen, when they are dead:
So. -- for the Cittadell now, for in such times
as these, when the unruly multitude
is up in swarms, and no man knows which way
they will take, it is good to have retreat.

Exeunt. Enter Thersames. THERE. The Dog-star's got up high, it should be late:
and sure by this time every waking ear,
and watchful eye is charmed; and yet me thought
a noise of weapons struck my ear just now.
'Twas but my Fancy sure, and were it more,
I would not tread one step, that did not lead
to my Aglaura, stood all his Guard betwixt,
with lightning in their hands;
Danger! thou Dwarf dressed up in Giants clothes,
that show far off, still greater than thou art:
go, terrify the simple, and the guilty, such
as with false Optics, still do look upon thee.
But fright not Lovers, we dare look on thee
in thy worst shape, and meet thee in them too.
Stay -- These trees I made my mark, it is hereabouts,
-- Love guide me but right this night,
and Lovers shall restore thee back again
those eyes the Poets took so boldly from thee.

Exit. Aglaura with a torch in one hand, and a dagger in the other. AGL. How
ill this does become this hand, how much worse
this suits with this, one of the two should go.
The she within me says, it must be this --
honor says this -- and honor is Thersames friend.
What is that she then? it is not a thing
that sets a Price, not upon me, but on
life in my name, leading me into doubt,
which when 'tas done, it cannot light me out.
For fear does drive to Fate, or Fate if we
do fly, oretakes, and holds us, till or death,
or infamy, or both does cease us. --
Puts out the light. Ha! -- would 'twere in again.
Antiques and strange mishapes,
such as the Porter to my Soul, mine Eye,
was never acquainted with, Fancy lets in,
like a distracted multitude, by some strange accident
piec'd together, fear now afresh comes on,
and charges Love to home.
-- He comes -- he comes --
woman, if thou would be the Subject of man's wonder, not his scorn
hereafter,

now show thy self.
Enter Prince rising from the vault, she stabs him two or three times, he
falls, she is goes back to her chamber. Sudden and fortunate.
My better Angel sure did both infuse
a strength, and did direct it.

Enter Ziriff. ZIR. Aglaura!

AGL. Brother --

ZIR. The same.
So slow to let in such a longed for Guest?
must Joy stand knocking Sister, come, prepare,
prepare. --
The King of Persia's coming to you strait!
the King! -- mark that.

AGL. I thought how poor the Joys you brought with you,
were in respect of those that were with me:
Joys, are our hopes stripped of their fears,
and such are mine; for know, dear Brother,
the King is come already, and is gone -- mark that.

ZIR. Is this instinct, or riddle? what King? how gone?

AGL. The Cave will tell you more --

ZIR. Some sad mistake -- thou have undone us all.
Goes out, enters ^stily again. The Prince! the Prince! cold as the bed of
earth
he lies upon, as senseless too; death hangs
upon his lips,
like an untimely frost, upon an early Cherrie;
the noble Guest, his Soul, took it so ill
that you should use his old Acquaintance so,
that neither prayers, nor tears, can e're persuade
him back again. --
Aglaura swounes: rubs her. hold, hold! we cannot sure part thus!
Sister! Aglaura! Thersames is not dead,
It is the Prince that calls --

AGL. The Prince, where? --
Tell me, or I will strait goeback again,
into those groves of Gessemine, thou took'st me from,
and find him out, or lose my self for ever.

ZIR. For ever. -- I: there is it!
for in those groves thou talk of,
there are so many by-ways, and odd turnings,
leading unto such wild and dismal places,
that should weegoe without a guide, or stir
before Heaven calls, it is strongly to be feared
we there should wander up and down for ever,
and be benighted to eternity! --

AGL. Benighted to eternity? -- What Is that?

ZIR. Why it is to be benighted to eternity;
to sit in the dark, and do I know not what;
unriddle at our own sad cost and charge,
the doubts the learned here do only move --

AGL. What place have murderers brother there? for sure
the murderer of the Prince must have
a punishment that Heaven is yet to make. --

ZIR. How is religion fooled betwixt our loves,
and fears? poor Girl, for ought that thou have done,
thy Chaplets may be fair and flourishing,
as his in the Elysium:

AGL. Do you think so?

ZIR. Yes, I do think so.
The juster Judges of our Actions,
would they have been severe upon
our weaknesses,
would (sure) have made us stronger. --
Fie! those tears
a Bride upon the marriage day as properly
might shed as thou, here widows do it
and marry next day after:
To such a funeral as this, there should be
nothing common --
We Will mourn him so, that those that are alive
shall think themselves more buried sar than he;
and wish to have his grave, to find his Obsequies:
but stay -- the Body.
Brings up the body, she swounes and dies. Again! Sister -- Aglaura --
o speak once more, once more look out fair Soul. --
She Is gone. --
Irrevocably gone. -- And winging now the Air,
like a glad bird broken from some cage:
poor Bankrupt heart, when 'thad not wherewithal
to pay to sad disaster all that was its due,
it broke -- would mine would do so too.
My soul is now within me
like a well metled Hawk, on a blind Faulk'ners fist,
me thinks I feel it baiting to be gone:
and yet I have a little foolish business here
on earth; I will dispatch: --

Exit. Enter Pasithas, with the body of Ariaspes. PAS. Let me be like my
burden here, if I had not as lieve kill two of the Bloud-royall for him, as
carry one of them; These Gentlemen of high actions are three times as heavy
after death, as your private retired ones; look if he be not reduced to the
state of a Courtier of the second form now? and cannot stand upon his own
legs, nor do any thing without help, Hum. -- And what is become of the great
Prince, in prison as they call it now, the toy within us, that makes us talk,
and laugh, and fight, I! why there is it, well, let him be what he will, and
where he will, I Will make bold with the old Tenement here. Come Sir -- come
along: --


Exit. Enter Ziriff. ZIR. All Is fast too, here --
They sleep to night
i'their winding sheets I think, there is such
a general quiet.
Oh! here is light I warrant:
for lust does take as little rest, as care, or age. --
Courting her glass, I swear, fie! that is a flatterer Madam,
in me you shall see trulier what you are.

Knocks. Enter the Queen. ORB. What make you up at this strange hour my Lord?

ZIR. My business is my boldness warrant,
(Madam)
and I could well afford to have been without it now,
had Heaven so pleased.

ORB. It Is a sad Prologue,
what follows in the name of virtue?

ZIR. The King.

ORB. I: what of him? is well is he not?

ZIR. Yes. --
If to be free from the great load
we sweat and labor under, here on earth
be to be well, he is.

ORB. Why he is not dead, is he?

ZIR. Yes Madam, slain -- and the Prince too.

ORB. How? where?

ZIR. I know not, but dead they are.

ORB. Dead!

ZIR. Yes Madam.

ORB. Did see them dead?

ZIR. As I see you alive.

ORB. Dead!

ZIR. Yes, dead.

ORB. Well, we must all die;
the Sisters spin no cables for us mortals;
they are thread; and Time, and chance --
trust me I could weep now,
but watrie distillations do but ill on graves,
they make the lodging colder.

She knocks. ZIR. What would you Madam?

ORB. Why my friends, my Lord!
I would consult and know, what is to be done.

ZIR. Madam it is not so safe to raise the Court;
things thus unsettled, if you please to have --

ORB. Where Is Ariaspes?

ZIR. In's dead sleep by this time I Am sure.

ORB. I know he is not! find him instantly.

ZIR. I Am gone. --
Turns back again. But Madam, why make you choice of him, from whom
if the succession meet disturbance,
all must come of danger?

ORB. My Lord, I am not yet so wise, as to be jealous;
pray dispute no further.

ZIR. Pardon me Madam, if before I go
I must unlock a secret unto you; such a one
as while the King did breathe durst know no air,
Zorannes lives.

ORB. Ha!

ZIR. And in the hope of such a day as this
has lingered out a life, snatching, to feed
his almost famished eyes,
sights now and then of you, in a disguise.

ORB. Strange! this night is big with miracle!

ZIR. If you did love him, as they say you did,
and do so still; it is now within your power!

ORB. I would it were my Lord, but I am now
no private woman, if I did love him once
(and it is so long ago, I have forgot)
my youth and ignorance may well excuse't.

ZIR. Excuse it?

ORB. Yes, excuse it Sir.

ZIR. Though I confess I loved his father much,
and pity him, yet having offered it
unto your thoughts: I have discharged a trust;
and zeal shall stray no further.
Your pardon Madam:

Exit. Queen studies. ORB. May be it is a plot to keep off Ariaspes
greatness, which he must fear, because he knows
he hates him: for these great Statesmen,
that when time has made bold with the King and Subject,
throwing down all fence that stood betwixt their power
and others right, are on a change,
like wanton Salmons coming in with floods,
that leap over wyres and nets, and make their way
to be at the return to every one a prey.

Enter Ziriff, and Pasithas throwing downethe dead body of Ariaspes. ORB. Ha!
murdered too!
treason -- treason --

ZIR. But such another word, and half so loud,
and thou art. --

ORB. Why? thou will not murder me too?
will thou villain?

ZIR. I do not know my temper --
Discovers himself. Look here vain thing, and see thy sins full blown:
There Is scarce a part in all this face, thou have
not been forsworn by, and Heaven forgive thee for it!
for thee I lost a Father, Country, friends,
my self almost, for I lay buried long;
and when there was no use thy love could pay
too great, thou made the principle away:
had I but staid, and not began revenge
till thou had made an end of changing,
I had had the Kingdom to have killed:
As wantons entering a Garden, take
the first fair flower, they meet, and
treasure't in their laps.
Then seeing more, do make fresh choice again,
throwing in one and one, till at the length
the first poor flower o're-charg'd, with too much weight
withers, and dies:
so have thou dealt with me,
and having killed me first, I will kill --

ORB. Hold -- hold --
Not for my sake, but Orbella's (Sir) a bare
and single death is such a wrong to Justice,
I must needs except against it.
Find out a way to make me long a dying;
for death's no punishment, it is the sense,
the pains and fears before that makes a death:
To think what I had had, had I had you,
what I have lost in losing of my self;
are deaths far worse than any you can give:
yet kill me quickly, for if I have time,
I shall so wash this soul of mine with tears,
make it so fine, that you would be afresh
in love with it, and so perchance I should
again come to deceive you.

She rises up weeping, and hanging downeher head. ZIR. So rises day, blushing
at nights deformity:
and so the pretty flowers blubbered with dew,
and ever washed with rain, hang down their heads,
I must not look upon her:

(Goes toward him.) ORB. Were but the Lillies in this face as fresh
as are the roses; had I but innocence
joined to their blushes, I should then be bold,
for when they went on begging they were never den^de,
It Is but a parting kiss Sir --

ZIR. I dare not grant it. --

ORB. Your hand Sir then, for that is a part I shall
love after death (if after death we love)
cause it did right the wronged Zorannes, here --
Steps to him, and open the box of poison, Zorannes falls. Sleep, sleep for
ever, and forgotten too,
all but thy ills, which may succeeding time
remember, as the Seaman does his marks,
to know what to avoid, may at thy name
all good men start, and bad too, may it prove
infection to the Air, that people dying of it
may help to curse thee for me.
Turns to the body of Ariaspes. Could I but call thee back as easily now;
but that is a Subject for our tears, not hopes!
there is no piecing Tulips to their stalks,
when they are once divorced by a rude hand;
all we can do is to preserve in water
a little life, and give by courteous Art
what scanted Nature wants Commission for,
that thou shall have: for to thy memory
such Tribute of moist sorrow I will pay,
and that so purified by love, that on thy grave
nothing shall grow but Violets and Primroses,
of which too, some shall be
of the mysterious number, so that Lovers shall
come thither not as to a Tomb, but to an Oracle.

She knocks, and raises the Court. Enter Ladies and Courtiers, as out of their
beds. ORB. Come! come! help me to weep my self away,
and melt into a grave, for life is but
repentance nurse, and will conspire with memory,
to make my hours my tortures.

ORI. What Scene of sorrow's this? both dead!

ORB. Dead? I! and it is but half death's triumphs this,
the King and Prince lie somewhere, just
such emptietruncks as these.

ORI. The Prince?
then in griefs burden I must bear a part.

SEM. The noble Ariaspes -- valiant Ziriff too. -- Weeps.

ORB. Weep'st thou for him, fond Prodigal? do know
on whom thou spend'st thy tears? this is the man
to whom we owe our ills; the false Zorannes
disguised, not lost; but kept alive, by some
Enter Pasithas, surveyes the bodies, finds his Master. incensed Power, to
punish Persia thus:
He would have killed me too, but Heaven was just,
and furnished me with means, to make him pay
this score of villainy, ere he could do more.

PAS. Were you his murderer then? --

Pasithas runs at her, kills her, and flies, Rub her till she come to her
self. ORI. Ah me! the Queen. --

SEM. How do you Madam?

ORB. Well, -- but I was better, and shall --

Dies. SEM. Oh! she is gone for ever.

Enter Lords in their night gowns, Orsames, Philan. ORS. What have we here?
a Churchyard? nothing but silence, and grave?

ORI. Oh! here has been (my Lords)
the blackest night the Persian world e're knew,
the King and Prince are not themselves exempt
from this arrest; but pale and cold, as these,
have measured out their lengths.

Lo. Impossible! which way?

SEM. Of that we are as ignorant as you:
for while the Queen was telling of the Story,
an unknown villain here has hurt her so,
that like a sickly Taper, she but made
one flash, and so expired:

Enter tearing in Pasithas. PHI. Here he is, but no confession.

OR. Torture must force him then:
though 'twill indeed, but weakly satisfy
to know now they are dead, how they did die.

PHI. Come take the bodies up, and let us all
go drown our selves in tears, this massacre
has left so torn a state, that 'twill be policy
as well as debt, to weep till we are blind,
For who would see the miseries behind?

Epilogue.
Our Play is done, and yours does now begin:
What different Fancies, people now are in?
How strange, and odd a ^ingle it would make,
If ere they rise; ^ere possible to take
All votes. --
But as when an authentic Watch is shown,
Each man winds up, and rectifies his own,
So in our very Judgments; first there sits
A grave Grand Jury on it of Towne-wits;
And they give up their verdict; then agin
The other Jury of the Court comes in
(And that is of life and death) for each man sees
That often condemns, what the other Jury frees:
Some three days hence, the Ladies of the Town
Will come to have a Judgment of their own:
And after them, their servants; then the City,
For that is modest, and is still last witty.
'Twill be a week at least yet e're they have
Resolved to let i^ live, or give't a grave:
Such difficulty, there is to unit^
Opinion; or bring it to be right.
Epilogue for the Court.
SIR:
THat th'abusing of your ea^'s a crime,
Above th'excuse any six lines in Rhyme
Can make, the Poet knows: I am but sent
T'intreat he may not be a President,
For he does think that in this place there he
Many have done't as much and more than he;
But here is, he says, the difference of the Fates,
He begs a Pardon after't, they Estates.
FINIS.
AGLAURA

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Sign of the Flying Horse between York-house and Britains Burse.
1638.

Prologue.
FOre Jove, a mighty Sessions: and I fear,
Though kind last Sizes, 'twill be now severe;
For it is thought, and by judicious men,
Aglaura 'scap't only by dying then:
But 'twould be vain for me now to indeare,
Or speak unto my Lords, the Judges here,
They hold their places by condemning still,
And cannot show at once mercy and skill;
For wit's so cruel unto wit, that they
Are thought to want, that find not want in the play.
But Ladies you, who never liked a plot,
But where the Servant had his Mistress got,
And whom to see a Lover dye it grieves,
Although it is in worse language that he lives,
Will like't we are confident, since here will be,
That your Sex ever liked, variety.
Prologue to the Court.
It Is strange perchance (you will think) that she that di'de
At Christmas, should at Easter be a Bride:
But it is a privilege the Poets have,
To take the long-since dead out of the grave:
Nor is this all, old Heroes asleep
'Twixt marble coverlets, and six foot deep
In earth, they boldly wake, and make them do
All they did living here -- sometimes more too,
They give fresh life, reverse and alter Fate,
And yet more bold, Almightie-like crea^:
And out of nothing onelyto deifie
Reason, and Reasons friend, Philosophy,
Fame, honor, valor, all that is great, or good,
Or is at least'mongst us, so understood,
They give, heavens theirs, no handsome woman dies,
But if they please, is strait some star in the skies --
But oh --
How those poor men of Meetre do
Flatter themselves with that, that is not true,
And' cause they can trim up a little prose,
And spoil it handsomely, vainly suppose
They Are Omnipotent, can do all those things
That can be done only by Gods and Kings.
Of this wild guilt, he feign would be thought free,
That writ this Play, and therefore (Sir) by me,
He humbly begs, you would be pleased to know,
Aglaura's but reprieved this night, and though
She now appears upon a Poets call,
She Is not to live, unless you say she shall.
ACTUS V.
SCENA I.
Enter Ziriff, Pasithas, and Guard: he place^m: an^ Exit. A State set out.
Enter Ziriff, Jolas, Ariaspes. JOL. A Glorious night!

ARI. Pray Heaven it prove so.
Are we not there yet?

ZIR. It Is about this hollow.

They enter t^ Cave. ARI. How now! what region are we got into?
the inheritance of night;
have we not mistaken a turning Zirisf,
and stepped into the confines of some melancholy
Devils Territory?

JOL. Sure it is a part of the first Chaos,
that would not suffer any change,

ZIR. No matter Sir, it is as proper for ou^
purpose, as the Lobbie for the waiting woman's:
stay you here, I'se move a little backward,
and so we shall be sure to put him past
retreat, you know the word if it be the Prince.

Ziriff goes to the Door. Enter King. ZIR. Here Sir, follow me, all is quiet
yet.

KING. Is he not come then?

ZIR. No.

KING. Where Is Ariaspes?

ZIR. Waiting within.

JOL. I do not like this waiting,
nor this fellows leaving of us.

ARI. This place does put odd thoughts into thee,
then thou art in thine own nature too
as jealous, as Love, or Honor; wear thy sword
in readiness, and think how near we are a Crown.

ZIR. Revenge! --

Guard seiseth on'^. KING. Ha! what is this?

ZIR. Bring them forth. --

Brings them forth. ARI. The King.

ZIR. Yes, and the Princes friend --
Discovers himself. Do You know this face?

KING. Zorannes.

ZOR. The very same,
the wronged Zorannes, -- King --
Do You stare, --
away with them where I appointed.

KING. Traitors, let me go;
villain, thou dare not do this --

ZOR. Poor Counterfeit,
how feign thou now would act a King, and art not:
stay you, --
to Ariaspes. Unhand him, --
Whispers. Leave us now. --

Exeunt. M^net Ariasp. Zoran. ARI. What does this mean?
sure he does intend the Crown to me.

ZOR. We are alone,
follow me out of the wood, and thou shall be
Master of this again,
and then best arm and title take it.

ARI. Thy offer is so noble, in gratitude I cannot
but propound gentler conditions,
we will divide the Empire.

ZOR. Now by my fathers soul,
I do almost repent my first intents,
and now could kill thee scurvily, for thinking
if I had a mind to rule,
I would not rule alone,
let not thy easy faith (lost man)
fool thee into so dull an heresy;
Orbella is our quarrel, and I have thought it fit,
that love should have a nobler way of Justice,
than Revenge, or Treason.
If thou dare dye handsomely, follow me.

Exeunt. And enter both again. ZOR. There, --

Gives him his sword. ARI. Extremely good; Nature took pains (...) swear,
the villain and the brave are mingled handsomely: --

ZIR. 'Twas Fate that took it, when it decreed
we two should meet, nor shall they mingle now,
we are but brought together strait to part. --

Fight. ARI. Some Devil sure has borrowed this shape,
my sword never staid thus long to find an entrance.

ZIR. To guilty men, all that appear is Devil;
come trifler, come, --

Fight. ARI. Dog, thou have it.

ZIR. Why then it seems my star's as great as his,
I smile at thee,
Ariaspes pants, and runs at him to catch his sword. thou now would have me
kill thee,
and it is a courtesy I cannot afford thee,
I have bethought my self, there will be use
of thee, -- Pasithas -- to the rest with him.

Exit. Enter Pasithas, and two of the Guard. -- Exeunt. Enter Thersames. THERE.
The Dog-star's got up high, it should be late:
and sure by this time every waking ear,
and watchful eye is charmed; and yet me thought
a noise of weapons struck my ear just now.
'Twas but my Fancy sure, and were it more,
I would not tread one step, that did not lead
to my Aglaura, stood all his Guard betwixt,
with lightning in their hands.
Danger, thou Dwarf dressed up in Giants clothes,
that show far off still greater than thou art,
go, terrify the simple, and the guistie, such
as with false Optics still do look upon thee:
but fright not Lovers, we dare look on thee
in thy wo^st shapes, and meet thee in them too. --
Stay, these trees I made my mark, it is hereabouts,
-- Love guide me but right this night,
and Lo^ers shall restore thee back again
those eyes the Poets took so boldly from thee.

Exit. A Taper, Table out. Enter Aglaura, with a Torch in one hand, a Dagger in
the other. AGL. How ill this does become this hand? much worse
this suits with this, one of the two should go:
The she within me says, it must be this, --
honor says this -- and honor is Thersames friend.
What is that she then, is it not a thing
that sets a price, not upon me, but on
life in my name, leading me into doubt,
which when 'thas done, it cannot light me out?
For fear does drive to Fate, or Fate if we
do fly, ore-takes, and holds us, till or death,
or infamy, or both do seize us.
Puts out the light. Ha! -- would 'twere in again. Antiques and strange mishapes,
such as the Porter to my Soul, mine Eye,
was never acquainted with, fancy lets in,
like a disrouted multitude, by some strange accident
piec'd together; fear now afresh comes on,
and charges Love too home.
-- He comes, he comes. --
A little noise below. woman, if thou would be the Subject
of man's wonder, not his scorn hereafter, --
-- now show thy self.

Enter Thersames from the vault, she stabs him as he rises. THERE. Unkindly
done --

AGL. The Princes voice, defend it Goodness?

THERE. What art thou that thus poorly
have destroyed a life?

AGL. Oh sad mistake, it is he?

THERE. Have thou no voice?

AGL. I would I had not, nor a being neither.

THERE. Aglaura, it cannot be?

AGL. Oh still believe so, Sir,
for 'twas not I indeed, but fatal Love.

THERE. Loves wounds used to be gentler than these were,
the pains they give us have some pleasure
in them, and that these have not.
Enter Ziriff with a taper. Oh do not say 'twas you, for that does wound again:
guard me my better Angel,
do I wake? my eyes (since I was man)
never met with any object gave them so much trouble,
I dare not ask neither to be satisfied,
she looks so guiltily --

AGL. Why do you stare and wonder at a thing
that you your self have made thus miserable?

ZIR. Good gods, and I of the party too.

AGL. Did you not tell me that the King this night
meant to attempt my honor, that our condition
would not admit of middle ways, and that we must
send them to graves, or lie our selves in dust?

ZIR. Unfortunate mistake!
Ziriff knocks. I never did intend our safety by thy hands:
Enter Pasithas. Pasithas, go instantly and fetch Andrages
from his bed; how is it with you Sir?

THERE. As with the besieged:
my soul is so beset it does not know,
whether't had best to make a desperate
sally out by this port or not?

AGL. Sure I shall turn statue here.

THERE. If thou do love me, weep not Aglaura:
all those are drops of blood, and flow from me.

ZIR. Now all the gods defend this way of expiation;
Think thou thy crime, Aglaura would be less,
by adding to it? or can thou hope
to satisfy those powers, whom great sins
do displease, by doing greater.

AGL. Discourteous courtesy!
I had no other means left me than this,
to let Thersames know I would do nothing
to him, I would not do unto my self,
and that thou take away.

THERE. Friend, bring me a little nearer,
I find a kind of willingness to stay,
and find that willingness something obeyed.
My blood now it persuades it self
^ou did not call in earnest,
makes not such haste --

AGL. Oh my dearest Lord,
this kindness is so full of cruelty,
puts such an ugliness on what I have done,
that when I look upon it, needs must fright
me from my self, and which is more insufferable,
I fear from you.

THERE. Why should that fright thee, which most comforts me?
I glory in it, and shall smile ^th' grave,
to think our love was such, that nothing
but it self could e're destroy it.

AGL. Destroy it? can it have ever end?
will you not be thus courteous then in the other world?
shall we not be together there as here?

THERE. I cannot tell whether I may or not.

AGL. Not tell?

THERE. No:
The Gods thought me unworthy of thee here,
and when thou art more pure,
why should I not more doubt it?

AGL. Because if I shall be more pure,
I shall be then more fit for you.
Our Priests assure us an Flys^m,
and can that be Elysium where true Lovers
must not meet? Those Powers that made our loves,
did they intend them mortal,
would sure have made them of a courser stuff,
would they not my Lord? --

THERE. Prithee speak still,
this music gives my soul such pleasing business,
takes it so wholly up, it finds not leisure to
attend unto the summons death does make,
yet they are loud and peremptory now,
and I can only --

Faints. AGL. Some p^ying Power inspire me with
a way to follow (...): heart will thou not
break it of thy self.

ZIR. My griefs besot me:
his soul will sail out with this purple tide,
and I shall here be found staring
after't, like a man that is come too short of the ship,
and's left behind upon the land.
She swounes. Enter Andrages. Oh welcome, welcome, here lies, Andrages,
alas too great a trial for thy art.

AND. There Is life in him: from whence these wounds?

ZIR. Oh it is no time for story.

AND. It Is not mortal my Lord, bow him gently,
and help me to infuse this into him;
the soul is but asleep, and not gone forth.

THERE. Oh -- oh: --

ZIR. Hark, the Prince does live.

THERE. What e're thou art have given me now a life;
and with it all my cares and miseries,
expect not a reward, no not a thanks.
If thou would merit from me,
(yet wh'would be guilty of so lost an action)
restore me to my quietness again,
for life and that are most incompatible.

ZIR. Still in despaires:
I did not think till now 'twas in the power
of Fortune to have robbed Thersames of himself,
for pity, Sir, and reason live;
if you will die, die not Aglaura's murdered,
that is not so handsome: at least die not
her murdered, and her murderer too;
for that will surely follow. Look up, Sir,
this violence of Fortune cannot last ever:
who knows but all these clouds are shadows,
to set off your fairer days, if it grows blacker,
and the storms do rise, this harbour's always open.

THERE. What say thou, Aglaura?

AGL. What says Andrages?

AND. Madam, would Heaven his mind would admit
as easy cure, as his body will,
'Twas only want of blood,
and two hours rest restores him to himself.

ZIR. And by that time it may be Heaven
will give our miseries some ease:
come Sir, repose upon a bed,
there is time enough to day.

THERE. Well, I will still obey,
though I must fear it will ^e with me,
but as it is with tortured men,
whom States preserve only to wrack again.

Exeunt. Take off table. Enter Ziriff with a taper. ZIR. All fast too, here
They sleep to night
i'their winding sheets I think, there is such
a general quiet.
Oh! here is light I warrant you:
for lust does take as little rest, as care, or age.
Courting her glass, I swear, fie! that is a flatterer Madam,
in me you shall see trulier what you are.

He knocks. Enter Queen. ORB. What make you up at this strange hour my Lord?

ZIR. My business is my boldness warrant,
(Madam)
and I could well afford to have been without it now,
had Heaven so pleased.

ORB. It Is a sad Prologue,
what follows in the name of virtue?

ZIR. The King --

ORB. I: what of him? is well is he not?

ZIR. Yes, --
If to be on's journey to the other world
be to be well, he is.

ORB. Why he is not dead, is he?

ZIR. Yes, Madam, dead.

ORB. How? where?

ZIR. I do not know particulars.

ORB. Dead!

ZIR. Yes (Madam).

ORB. Art sure he is dead?

ZIR. Madam I know him as certainly dead,
as I know you too must die hereafter

ORB. Dead!

ZIR. Yes, dead.

ORB. We must all die,
the Sisters spin no cables for us mortals;
they are threads; and Time, and chance --
trust me I could weep now,
but watrie distillations do but ill on graves,
they make the lodging colder.

She knocks. ZIR. What would you Madam?

ORB. Why my friends, my Lord;
I would consult and know, what is to be done.

ZIR. (Madam) it is no^ so safe to raise the Court,
things thus unsettled, if you please to have --

ORB. Where Is Ariaspes?

ZIR. In's dead sleep by this time sure.

ORB. I know he is not! find him instantly.

ZIR. I Am gone. --
Turns back again. But (Madam) why make you choice of him, from whom
if the succession meet disturbance,
all must come of danger?

ORB. My Lord, I am not yet so wise, as to be
jealous; pray dispute no further.

ZIR. Pardon me (Madam) if before I go
I must unlock a secret to you; such a one
as while the King did breathe durst know no air,
Zorannes lives.

ORB. Ha!

ZIR. And in the hope of such a day as this
has lingered out a life, snatching, to feed
his almost famished eyes,
sights now and then of you, in a disguise.

ORB. Strange! this night is big with miracle!

ZIR. If you did love him, as they say you did,
and do so still' it is now within your power:

ORB. I would it were, my Lord, but I am now
no private woman, if I did love him once,
(as it is so long ago, I have forgot)
my youth and ignorance may well excus^.

ZIR. Excuse it?

ORB. Yes, excuse it Sir.

ZIR. Though I confess I loved his father much,
and pity him, yet having offered it
unto your thoughts: I have discharged a trust;
and zeal shall stray no further.
(Your pardon Madam:)

Exit. ORB. May be it is but a plot to keep off Ariaspes
greatness, which he must fear, because he knows
he hates him: for these great Statesmen,
that when time has made bold with the King
and Subject, throwing down all fence
that stood betwixt their power
and others right, are on a change,
like wanton Salmons coming in with floods,
that leap over wyres and nets, and make their way
to be at the return to every one a prey.

Enter Ziriff. ZIR. Look here vain thing, and see thy sins full blown:
There Is scarce a part in all this face, thou have
not been forsworn by, and Heaven forgive thee for it!
for thee I lost a Father, Country, friends,
my self almost, for I lay buried long;
and when there was no use thy love could pay
too great, thou made the principle away: -- Prompt. --
As wantons entering a Garden, take
the first fair flower they meet, and
treasure't in their laps.
Then seeing more, do make (...),
throwing in one and one, till at the length
the first poor flower o're-charg'd, with too much weight
withers, and dies:
so have thou dealt with me,
and having killed me first, I will kill --

ORB. Hold -- hold --
Not for my sake, but Orbella's (Sir) a bare
and single death is such a wrong to Justice,
I must needs except against it.
Find out a way to make ^ee long a dying;
for death's no punishment, it is the sense,
the pains and fears before that makes a death:
To think what I had had, had I had you,
what I have lost in losing of my self;
a^e deaths far worse than any you can give:
yet kill me quickly, for if I have time,
I shall so wash this soul of mine with tears,
make it so fine, that you would be afresh
in love with it, and so perchance I should
again come to deceive you.

She rises up weeping, and hanging down her head. ZIR. So rises day, blushing
at nights deformity:
and so the pretty flowers blubbered with dew,
and over-washt with rain, hang down their heads,
I must not look upon her.

(Queen goes toward him.) ORB. Were but the Lillies in this face as fresh
as are the roses; had I but innocence
joined to these blushes, I should then be bold,
for when they went a begging they were never deni'de,
^is but a parting kiss Sir --

Enter Pasithas, and two Guard. ZIR. I dare not grant it. -- Pasithas -- away
with her.

A bed put out: Thersames and Aglaura on it, Andrages by.
THERE. She wake't me with a sigh,
and yet she sleeps her self, sweet Innocence,
can it be sin to love this shape,
and if it be not, why am I persecuted thus? --
she sighs again, sleep that drownes all cares,
cannot I see charm loves? blessed pillowes,
through whose finenesse does appear
the violets, lillies, and the roses
you are stuffed withal, to whose softness
I owe the sweet of this repose,
permit me to leave with you this, --
Kisses them, she wakes. see if I have not wake't her,
sure I was borne, Aglaura, to destroy
thy quiet.

AGL. Mine, my Lord,
call you this drowsinesse a quiet then?
belee^e me, Sir, 'twas an intruder I much
struggled with, and have to thank a dream,
not you, that it thus left me.

THERE. A dream! what dream, my Love?

AGL. I dreamed (Sir) it was day,
and the fear you should be found here.

Enter Ziriff. ZIR. Awake; how is it with you, (...)?

THERE. Well, extremely well, so well, that had I now
no better a remembrancer than pain,
I should forget I e're was hurt,
thanks to Heaven, and good Andrages.

ZIR. And more than thanks I hope we yet shall
^ive to pay him. How old's the night?

AND. Far-spent I fear, my Lord.

ZIR. I have a cause that should be heard
yet ere day break, and I must needs entreat
you Sir to be the Judge in it.

THERE. What cause, Zorannes?

ZIR. When you have promised --

THERE. 'Twere hard I should deny thee any thing. --
Exit Zorannes. Know thou, Andrages, what he means?

AND. Nor cannot guess, Sir, --
Draw in the bed. I read a trouble in his face, when first
he left you, but understood it not.

Enter Zorannes, King, Ariaspes, Jolas, Queen, and two or three Guard. ZOR.
Have I not pitched my nets like a good Huntsman?
Look, Sir, the noblest of the Herd are here.

THERE. I am astonished.

ZOR. This place is yours. --

Helps him up. THERE. What would thou have me do.

ZOR. Remember, Sir, your promise,
I could do all I have to do, alone;
but Justice is not Justice unlesse't be justly done:
here then I will begin, for here began my wrongs.
This woman (Sir) was wondrous fair, and wondrous
kind, -- I, fair and kind, for so the story runs,
she gave me look for look, and glance for glance,
and every sigh like eccho's was returned,
we sent up vow by vow, promise on promise,
so thick and strangely multiplied,
that sure we gave the heavenly Registers
their business, and other mortals oaths
then went for nothing, we felt each others pains,
each others joyces, thought the same thought,
and spoke the very same;
we were the same, and I have much ado
to think she couldbe ill, and I not
be so too, and after this, all this (Sir)
she was false, loved him, and him,
and had I not begun revenge,
till she had made an end of changing,
I had had the Kingdom to have killed,
what does this deserve?

THERE. A punishment he best can make
that suffered the wrong.

ZOR. I thank you, Sir,
for him I will not trouble you,
his life is mine, I won it fairly,
and his is yours, he lost it foully to you --
to him, Sir, now:
A man so wicked that he knew no good,
but so as't made his sins the greater for it.
Those ills, which singly acted bred de^paire
in others, he acted daily, and never thought
upon them.
The grievance each particular has against him
I will not meddle with, it were to give him
a long life, to give them hearing,
I Will only speak my own.
First then the hopes of all my youth,
and a reward which Heaven had settled on me,
(if holy contracts can do any thing)
he ravished from me, killed my father,
Aglaura's father, Sir, would have whor'd my sister,
and murdered my friend, this is all:
and now your sentence, Sir.

THERE. We have no punishment can reach these crimes:
therefore it is justest sure to send him where
they are wittier to punish than we are here:
and cause repentance often stops that proceeding,
a sudden death is sure thegreatest punishment.

ZOR. I humbly thank you, Sir.

KING. What a strange glass they have showed me now my (...)
in; our sins like to our shadows,
when our day is in its glory scarce appeared,
toward our evening how great and monstrous
they are.

ZOR. Is this all you have to say? --

Draws. THERE. Hold: -- now go you up.

ZOR. What mean you, Sir?

THERE. Nay, I denied not you, --
That all thy accusations are just,
I must acknowledge,
and to these crimes, I have but this to oppose,
he is my Father, and thy Sovereign. --
It Is wickedness (dear Friend) we go about
^o punish, and when we have murdered him,
what difference is there 'twixt him and
our selves, but that he first was wicked? --
Thou now would kill him' cause he killed thy Father,
and when thou have killed, have not I the self same
quarrel?

ZOR. Why Sir, you know you would your self
have done it.

THERE. True: and therefore it is I beg his life,
there was no way for me to have
redeemed the intent, but by a real
saving of it.
Be ready Courtiers, and Guard, with their swords drawn, at the breasts of the
Prisoners. If he did ravish from thee thy Orbella,
remember that that wicked issue had
a noble parent, Love, -- Remember
how he loved Zorannes when he was Ziriff, --
there is something due to that. --
If you must needs have blood for your revenge,
take it here -- despise it not Zorannes:
Zorannes turns away. The gods themselves, whose greatness
makes the greatness of our sins,
and heightens 'em above what we can do
unto each other, accept of sacrifice
for what we do against them,
why should not you, and it is much thriftier too:
you cannot let out life there, but my honor
goes, and all the life you can take here,
posterity will give me back again;
see, Aglaura weeps:
that would have been ill Rhetorique in me,
but where it is, it cannot but persuade.

ZOR. They Have thawed the ice about my heart;
I know nor what to do.

KING. Come down, come down, I will be King again,
there is none so fit to be the Judge of this
as (...); the life you showed such zeal to save,
I here could willingly return you back;
but that is the common price of all revenge.

Enter Guard, Orsames, Philan, Courtiers, Orithie, Semanthe. JOL. ARI. Ha, ha,
ha: how they look now?

ZOR. Death: what is this?

THERE. Betrayed again;
all th'ease our Fortune gives our miseries is hope,
and that still proving false, grows part of it.

KING. From whence this Guard?

ARI. Why Sir, I did corrupt, while we were his prisoners,
one of his own to raise the Court; shallow souls,
that thought we could not countermine;
come Sir, you are in good posture to dispatch them.

KING. Lay hold upon his instrument:
Fond man, do think I am in love with villainy?
all the service they can do me here
is but to let these see the right I do
them now is unconstrained, then thus I do proceed.
Upon the place Zorannes lost his life,
I vow to build a tomb, and on that tomb
I vow to pay three whole years penitence,
if in that time I find that heaven and you
can pardon; I shall find again the way
to live amongst you.

THERE. Sir, be not so cruel to your self, this is an age.

KING. It Is now irrevocable, thy Fathers lands
I give thee back again, and his commands,
and with them leave to wear the Tyara,
that man there has abused. --
To you Orbella,
who it seems are foul as well as I,
I do prescribe the self same physic
I do take my self:
but in another place, and for a longer time,
Diana's Nunnerie.

ORB. Above my hopes.

KING. For you, who still have been
the ready instrument of all my cruelties,
and there have cancelled all the bonds of brother,
perpetual banishment: nor, should
this line expire, shall thy right have a place.

ARI. Hell and Furies. --

Exit. KING. Thy crimes deserve no less, yet cause thou were
Heavens instrument to save my life,
thou only have that time of banishment,
I have of penitence. --

Comes down. Ziriff offers to kiss the Kings hand. JOL. May it be plague and
famine here till I return.
No: thou shall not yet forgive me:

KING. Aglaura, thus I freely part with thee,
and part with all fond flames and warm desires,
I cannot fear new agues in my blood
since I have overcome the charms
thy beauty had, no other ever can
have so much power, Thersames, thou look pale,
is it want of rest?

THERE. No Sir; but that is a story for your ear --

They whisper. ORS. A strange and happy change.

ORI. All joys wait on you ever.

AGL. Orithie,
how for thy sake now could I wish
Love were no Mathematick point,
but would admit division, that Thersames might,
though at my charge, pay thee the debt he owes thee.

ORI. Madam, I loved the Prince, not my self;
since his virtues have their full rewards,
I have my full desires.

KING. What miracles of preservation have we had?
how wisely have the stars prepared you for felicity?
nothing endeares a good more than the contemplation
of the difficulty we had to attain to it:
but see, Nights Empire's out,
and a more glorious auspitiously does begin;
let us go serve the gods, and then prepare
for jollitie, this day I Will borrow from my vows,
nor shall it have a common celebration,
since 't must be,
a high record to all posterity. --

Exeunt omnes. Epilogue.
Plays are like Feasts, and every Act should be
Another Course, and still variety:
But in good ^aith provision of wit
Is grown of late so difficult to get,
That do we what we can, we are not able,
Without cold meats to furnish out the Table.
Who knows but it was needless too? may be
'Twas here, as in the Coach-mans trade, and he
That turns in the least compass, shows most Art:
How e're, the Poet hopes (Sir) for his part,
You Will like not those so much, who show their skill
In entertainment, as who show their will.
FINIS.

