THE EXAMINATION OF M. THOMAS CARTVVRIGHTS late apology,

Wherein his vain and unjust challenge concerning certain supposed slanders
pretended to have been published in print against him, is answered and refuted,

By MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE.

Calumniari est falsa crimina intendere. Marcianus L. 1. ff. ad. S.C.
Turpilianum. Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, printer
to the Queens most excellent Majesty.

Anno 1596.

TO M. THOMAS CARTwright Master of the Hospital at Warwike, give these in the
I Will of Gernesey, or else where he shall be then resiant.
ALthough, Sir, many of your good friends and folowers have both long looked,
and much desired to hear from you: yet, I do assure my self, they looked for
nothing less then to receive from you such a slender and trifling pamphlet as
this, which goes under the name of your apology. they expected rather to see
those famous observations of yours, which you have written against the Rhemish
annotations upon the new Testament, which they esteem so highly, or else some
such like notable learned, and laborious work against the common enemy. I,
for my part, when I first heard, that your name was once again come in print,
and that ye had now at length broken your long kept silence, looked (at the
least) for some Tanquam elephanti partum.
great and learned volume in defense of that cause, for which you have so much
practiced, and so long and vehemently contended; and which you were wont so
highly to magnify. I did well remember how you promised, that for In the front
of his first reply.
Syons sake you would not hold your peace, nor for Hierusalems sake take any
rest. as if this matter of your forged discipline were your only Syon, and
that holy Jerusalem, for which you contended. you told us further, and that
(I think) in very good sadness, that 1. reply.
if every hair of your head were a life, you ought to afford them al for the
defense of your cause. You affirmed also that your discipline Preface 1. reply.
is agreat part of the Gospel: that it is a 1. and 2. reply.
matter of faith, and an essential note of the Church: that the Church without
it, is like a garden Pref. 1. reply.
without a hedge: nay finally M. Cartwr. table.
that it is Christ's kingdom upon the earth. I could not therefore think
otherwise, but that now you had undertaken the defense and accomplishment of
that most glorious and necessary work. Neither could I imagine, that 1 Thessalonians.
2.
contrary to the Apostles example, you would seek for glory at men's hands; or
else like the princes of the Jews, John 12.
esteem more the praise of men, then the glory of God: and to come nearer you,
that you would abandon the defense of your Syon, yea and of your holy city
Jerusalem, and would suffer your hedge to go down, and your Church to lie
waste, and plainly would renounce a great part of the Gospel, and of your new
faith, and all this to talk The argument of M. Cartwrights book.
of the use of money, and purchases of land, and Hackets and Copingers matters,
and your own fancifull opinions, and vain praises.

Yea, and all that have heard of your fame, expected far other matters, then
this short pamphlet like two ballades stitched together at your hands: and not
only expected, but also desired and wished, that if needs you would take pen
in hand, you would travail in your former cause, rather then in this private
quarrel betwixt your self and me. and that also was my earnest desire. not
that I would have that fire stirred, which once you had kindled, and is now
either quenched or well covered; but that I hoped, that by your defense all men
should clearly see, first the nakedness and weakness of your cause, which
with no eloquent gloses you could cover, nor with pretense defend; and next,
that the same is not ouerborne by authority, as some bear men in hand, but
rejected, repelled, and despised, as a new forged devise, repugnant to al
antiquity, to all justice, to al reason, and truth.

As for this your apology or brief answer, as you call it, it satisfies no
man's expectation, or desire, as I think. if you respect the principal cause;
it is altogether impertinent, if you seek to justify and clear your self,
you have done just nothing. that is apparent by these particulers. You deny,
that you did execute any part of your brother Stubbes his last will. an unkind
part (you must needs confess) especially if he requested you, or meant to put
you in trust. but what is that to the matter? that you have dealt in the
execution of my Lord of Leycesters will concerning the stock of his Hospital,
you cannot deny. Likewise most apparent it is, that you have dealt (how well, I
know not) in diverse other civil causes. which is sufficient to make that cause
good, for which I alleged that argument. You say also, that you have not three
or four mannours; and percase you are sorry for it. but what apperteineth that
to your eldership? I trust you mean not, if you had them to convey them over
to some friends in trust for maintenance of a learned ministry, for want of
which your consorts pretend to be so much offended. Neither is the want of
land or fee any blemish to your credit. for many very honest, and learned men
have not so much as one quarter of your revenues. you tell us that you leant
not 300. li. to Francis Michel, but only 200. pound. and yet neither is greatly
material, whether it be. rather then you would loose either 200. or one hundred
pounds, you would percase wish you had never spoken word for your consistory.
you take it in evil part, that I should call the Hospital, whereof you are
master, your Hospital; and yet is the speech common, and no harm meant, not
is it any advantage to your cause, whether it be called my Lord of Leycesters
Hospital, or your hospital. if so be you might have had your foolish course,
many learned men would not have been so well maintained, as the poor of your
Hospital. Such like be your complaints, where you take your self charged to be
a man that has strange conceits concerning extemporall prayers, and working
of miracles. neither of these matters apperteine to your consistorial
government, nor greatly touch you in reputation. Your acquaintance with
Copingers causes, and allowance of Martins libels, I confess, are foul
matters, and touch you in your reputation; yet do they concern the
consistoriall cause, but little.

Besides this, albeit your principal drift in this your apology was to clear
your self of all notes of disloyalty, and lewd opinions, and lewd practices;
yet have you done none of these. nay in those matters that concern Stubbs his
will, the purchase of lands, and lending of money, wherein you seem to have
most advantage, you do but trifle. all this now I will briefly note, but the
proofs you shall see largely deduced in the discourse ensuing. First where I
do make diverse questions, and some that touch you very nerely, you pass the
most of them over with silence. but if you would have justified your self, you
should have answered them al, and that in direct and plain terms. I Answer
to the petit. p. 186.
ask you whether Fenners book which he entitleth sacram Theologiam, and which
you seem to allow, contain not strange divinity: and gladly would I know, if
you mislike any thing in that book, what the points are you mislike. you
answer nothing. I Ibid. p. 189.
demand of you whether Barowes erroneous conclusions do not follow of your
assertions. And what say you to it? forsooth nothing. I ask if the Prince
refuse to reform the Church, how far inferior magistrates, and the people may
proceed therein; and thereto your answer is Ibid p. 194. and 195.
silence. I demand of you, if you and your consorts do not think the
practices of Geneua and Scotland for the setting up of their discipline
lawful, and worthy to be followed: and to this you say Ibidem p. 195.
nothing. I demand further, whether you and your fellows have not assembled
in synodes and conuenticles, and there decreed and enacted certain
Ecclesiastical canons and rules, and subscribed and practsed them contrary to
her Majesty's laws, and the statutes of the Realm: and you also answer, as to
other matters. I desired to be resolved, whether you had disgraced her
Majesty's Ecclesiastical laws, reformation, and government, and you respect my
desires nothing. Diverse other matters likewise I demanded of you, unto which
you answer nothing. nay in the matters concerning Hackets practice, and
Martines libels, and her Majesty's supremacy, you answer imperfectly and
insufficiently. you dare not set down my whole question, nor confess al was
done concerning Copinger and Martin. nor will you answer directly to those
particular points of her Majesty's supremacy, which the statutes and laws
give her. and do you think, that this kind of answering is sufficient to
clear you. Why, then let Sanders, Allen, and those Papists and traitors which
confess so much in terms, as plainly and openly as you do as yet, be
cleared. concerning Stubbs his will, and your dealing with Francis Michel, and
others, you have also perverted my meaning, and altered my words, and manner of
writing. who then sees not how little means you had to clear your self,
being put to these hard shifts, and not daring to set down his words, whom you
pretend to answer? but this we shall see more evidently when we come to the
examination of the particulers of your brief.

Further, your answer is altogether insufficient. you do still cry out in your
tragical manner, slander, slander: and yet you do not understand what is
slander. you ought therefore to understand that slander is, L. 1. ff. ad S. C.
Turpil.
when matters criminal are purposely, and falsely objected. but those things, of
which you go about to purge your self, are either not criminal, or else most
true, and in part by your self confessed. your self confess, that some
things objected to you are in their own nature indifferent. how then are they
slanderous? that you were acquainted with Hackets and Copingers practices, and
disliked not Martines courses, shall be proved. that you would not at the first
answer to certain points concerning the Queens supreme authority in causes
ecclesiastical, you In this book and in the question concerning that matter.
confess. how then can you say, you are slandered? because forsooth, as you
would insinuate, you did afterward acknowledge it, and now offer to swear it.
and yet you will be taken halting, when you come to the particular points of
that authority. You deny that you allowed M. Fenners strange divinity
concerning ouerruling and deposing of Princes by inferior magistrates; yet have
not I said more then your own words will prove and justify. That which I say
concerning working of Miracles and extemporal prayers, you wittingly, as it
seems, mistake, and answer not: which argues, that your conscience told
you, that I said nothing therein but truth, and truth whereof you are
ashamed. the execution of wills and purchase of lands is not criminal. beside
that, what I said either concerning such matters, or else your manner of
employment of your money, in effect and substance shall be proved sufficiently.
what reason then had you so unadvisedly to challenge me, and so deeply to
charge me with this heinous matter of slandering? nay what meant you, or how
durst you once talk of slanders having your self slandered the
ecclesiastical policy of the Church as unjust; the reformation thereof, as
profane and impure; the authority of Bishops practiced in this Church, as
antichristian and contrary to Gods word; the clergy of England as destitute
of an ordinary and lawful calling, you having no other order then Deacon, that
I know; the people of this land Cartwr. table.
as refusing Christ to reign over them; the preaching of the word, as not
orderly; the administration of the Sacraments in this Church, as not pure nor
sincere? neither have you so good reason to charge me, as I have to charge you
with slandering me, having without cause imputed this unto me, and charged me
with shifting, and I know not what unchristian dealing, and having put forth
and excited your friend to rail on me, and charge me with diverse odious
matters in the preface to your book. matters, which I do the less regard, for
that as he has rashly charged me; so he has wickedly blasphemed God, saying
that God has blasted my pen with a lying spirit, attributing therein the
wicked act of lying to God himself, which is the Spirit of truth; and not
only to me, which confess my self to be subject to many errors. of this, M.
Cartwright, me thinks, you should have had more care, and used therein more
diligence, and not suffered such blasphemies to pass in the forefront of your
book.

But, may you say, if you have not slandered me; yet you have wronged me. as if
it were wrong to deal against the troubler of our peace, the chief author of
your schism, the disturber and slanderer of this Church and state. and yet
have I done nothing otherwise, then beseemed me. In my first books I dealt
with you no further, then the cause constreined me, and your importunity, that
first began to oppugn the Church, provoked me. In my answer to a certain
petition in the behalf of your self, and your side, I do confess, I dealt
with you more particulerly. but I was drawn to it by the authors odious
questions and courses. When the petitioner said, Quaere of Matthew. Sutcliffe,
who is ever carping at M. Cartwrights purchases, why he may not sell his fathers
lands, and buy others with the money: how could I satisfy the man, unless I
touched you particulerly. blame therefore him that began the braule, if you
find your self therewith agreeued; and not me, that did nothing but defend
my self, and answer.

What should I speak of the harshnesse, and roughness of your style? your
book it self, albeit I say nothing, will herein say sufficient. against so
megre and wretched a discourse, what need I say any thing?

Yet partly least you should enter into presumption, as if you had triumphed
over me, and sufficiently justified your self; and partly also to repress
that hautines of spirit that possesses you, and makes you so impatient of due
reproof; and partly to cure your followers of that mad humor, that makes them
suppose you to be a man without blame and error; I have undertaken to examine,
and to look into this treatise of yours more particulerly, although otherwise
most unworthy to be refuted, or looked upon. and the rather for that your
friend that has made the preface before your book, does make such great
brags of this defense, and stands so confidently upon your innocence, and
would have all my writings esteemed and judged according to this rule.

I have also added such questions as you omitted, praying your answer for my
satisfaction. if you mislike this course, blame your self, that drew me forth
to justify my doings, and would not give me any rest by your importunity.
but if you do still like it, and will further proceed to charge me with
slandering you; then for your own credit, if not at my request, set down my
words truly and wholly, and forbear to forge and devise matters calumniously.
I have showed you both in this book and in my answer to M. Throkmorton a
precedent. deal not worse with me, then I have done with you. but percase all
this request is needless. for I trust his example, (who now is silent, as it
seems, for ought he dare auowe) will teach you not to stir coals well
covered too rashly, nor to prate of needless matters foolishly, nor to run
wilfully into danger, when no man drives you.

This my answer, albeit you look not for it, I dedicate to your own self,
and not without just cause. challenges they say require answer, and Iueunda
rerum verissitudo.
one good turn requires another. all men that have good minds yield (...).
like for like, and pay home Quod a se allatum est, id sibi relatum puter.
Terent. in prol. phorm.
as much as they have received. yea grateful minds Vberiore mensura quam
acceperis. Cicer. ex Hesiod.
pay all with ouerflowing measure. I do not look for any thanks at your
hands. I know it is an ungrateful world. yet if you will patronize this book
and vouchsafe to stay the unbridled tongues of your disciples, that in their
Bacchanall banquettes and disciplinarian feasts degorge their malice, and
speak their pleasures of whom they list, I will accept it at your hands as a
favor, and put it into the reckening of your good doings.

More I have to say unto you: but the rest you shall receive in my answer to
your challenge, praying you to think nothing overmuch, nor lightly to condemn
any thing, before you have talked with your friend Master Throkmorton, to whom,
I doubt not, but you will discommend me, and therefore I desire not to be
commended to him. and so committing, and commending you both to your sober
thoughts, I bid you, a dieu.

MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE.

To the Reader.
IT may be, gentle Reader, that either thou may think me contentious, that
have entered into this quarrel with M. Cartwright, being a matter very
frivolous, and no way to any good purpose: or else very idle and at great
laisure, that have nothing else to busy my self withal, unless I do dispute
and talk of Hackets and Penries matters, and M. Cartwrights lands and
livings, and also of his domestical and inward affairs, and his private
conceits and opinions. But yet, if thou will be pleased to consider either the
great credit and fame, which M. Cartwright has among his followers, that
admire all his vanities; or else the importunity of him, that made the preface
to his book, that would have all my writings measured by this false and
deceiuable line of M. Cartwrights apologeticall challenge, by the which he
supposes him to be cleared, and me to be quite disgraced, and therefore
seeks to discredit all that I have written in the common cause by the
supposed untruths and slanders uttered against him, of which he takes me as
convicted: I trust thou will pardon me, although I do examine even these fond
toys, and fancies, not worth a straw; and grant, that it is to some good
purpose, if I do clear my self of those fond and ridiculous imputations,
which he would so willingly, and yet does so unhandsomely fasten upon me.

I was not ignorant, that wise men do well perceive this to be an uncertain,
and deceitful rule, considering that such as write best are not void of
errors, and very learned men do often slip: yet such is the justice and
clearenesse of my cause in this controversy betwixt M. Cartwright and me, that
I would not fear for once to allow this rule, and to make the most simple
judge of my dealings herein. the which help seeing my cause does afford me, I
thought it not convenient to leave to such clamorous adversaries any pretense
of advantage.

I am therefore to pray thee not to account me for this cause either
contentious and quarrelsome, or else unwilling to accept of conditions of peace;
but rather to pity me, whom such contentious fellows with their vain
iangling, and clamarous complaining will not suffer to rest. I did never
challenge any as yet; but still wrote against those, that had first entered into
voluntary quarrels against this Church and state. such was my discourse against
Bellarmine and the Papists: such also were those two books which I wrote
against the whole fraternity of the disciplinarians, and their extrauagant
fancies. neither had I to do either with the author of the petition, or with
M. Job Throk. before they did challenge me. seeing then this my answer to M.
Cartwright is of the same nature, why should the same be more blamed, then my
other doings?

As for my leisure, I assure thee, it was never less. for yet there are not
many days passed since the Fleet returned, wherein I was with others in her
Majesty's service in the journey of Guadix: and to set my things in order, and
to refresh my self of my former travails, some time is required. as for
idleness, I do detest it, and M. Cartwright and his friends (I think) will
thereof discharge me. yet if his peremptory dealing, and his proloquutors
insolency would have suffered me to rest; I could now have been content to
put over M. Cartwrights brief until the next return. but being provoked by
both, either to yield my self to have done notorious wrong, or else to make
answer; although my other business was great, and my ease none at all, yet have
I thought good to send them both away with a quick dispatch to rake up some
new accusation or rather calumniation against me at some other time.

This, certes, is the cause that specially moved me to look into this new
matter, although both for the baseness of the subject, and insufficiency of
the handling of the cause most unworthy to be answered, read, or regarded. for
(I pray) what does it concern, but M. Cartwrights private causes, with which,
were I not drawn to it, I am most unwilling to meddle? yea, and in this cause
of his own, how does he be have himself? does he not forbear to answer
the greatest and most of those questions which are demanded of him? the
examination of particulers, and the reading of this treatise will declare it.
To come to the argument of this pamphlet, let us see how he handles it. he
says and in great words gives out, that I have slaundred him, and that,
forsooth, in two diverse points, whereof the first (as he says) concerns
common manners, the second touches his own estate. but when he descends
from the top of his high style to talk of particulers, either he does not
rightly allege my words, and so fails in his ground; or else frankly
confesses as much as I say; or else the matters wherewith he takes himself to
be charged, are not criminal. but suppose I had spoken somewhat, that might
offend him; yet I trust his estate is not so high, but that it may be touched.
I do not think he desires any royallestate, as some have done; neither any
privileged place, such as licencious persons seek. for mine own part, I must
needs say, that I have not read a more fond and frivolous dispute.

Like to M. Cartwrights book is that preface which bears a great room in
this small treatise. like lips like lettise: both vain, both deuoyde of wit
and learning. yet of the two the preface is more fond, advancing M. Cartwright
to the state of innocence; and more odious, being fraught with diverse railing
reproaches. the author seems to Master Job Throkmorton an old friend of
mine, who by commending of M. Cartwright sought to be revenged on me. And what
he could not win by commending him, that he seeks by railing and Inter
hypocritas faceros sanniones faceti trendentes contra me dentibus suis. Psalm.
35.
gnashing his teeth upon me. such merry malicious fellows well does the
Prophet describe in his 35. Psalm. and such dealing is not strange in that
gentleman, to whom I wish no other pain, then that for his scorning and
railing, for which his own friends call him gibing Job, he do not in the
end weep full bitterly. I had thought the evil speed and success he had
in his last letter would have admonished him to surcease writing either of
letters, or prefaces. But he is of the number of those whom no harm will make
wise, and percase is content especially for M. Cartwrights sake, to suffer some
few gentle blows in deduction of those pains, which otherwise he has
deserved.

Against both the preface, and M. Cartwrights brief challenge I have published
this brief answer. by which I trust (by Gods grace) to defend my rightful
cause. thou thereby shall reap this profit. thou shall see, that these men,
so they could retain their old credit, could be content to see the cause of
their discipline deserted, yea, and M. Cartwright and M. Throkmorton will I
trust make so good use of it, as to learn to master their affections, and to
tame their hauty mind, and to rest when they are in the wrong, and to forbear
to draw men into quarrels that wishes them all humility, and meekness that
should be in men of their sort. I would to God, that these that so eagerly
pursue me for supposed matter against themselves, would in the end come home,
and make an amends for that public slander and disgrace they have offered to
the state. But what do I wish that, which will not be had? such men as are
settled in their wicked purposes and courses, will not lightly give over, that
which once though unadvisedly they have begun. I would therefore if their
heads will not be advised, yet wish their followers to take heed, how they be
abused by them, and to look for better ground, then such froward leaders
strange conceits.

This answer I pray thee read with patience, and look not for any great
learning in it. for it was devised on the sudden, and beside that, it is framed
upon a base subject, and a light matter of fact, and very needless, if M.
Carwright could so have been contented. Is it possible to draw water out of
flint, or likely that we shall gather grapes on thistles? M. Cartwright does
not boast of miracles as he says, and I never professed that I could work
them. what fruit then is to be expected out of this rockie soil? Well, such
as it is, I pray thee accept this discourse. and I would it were better for thy
sake. The best is, it shall not be long, nor I hope tedious: and therefore
leaving all other preambles, I come now to the examination of the book it
self. But first a few words concerning the two diverse titles, that this petit
pamphlet has in two sever all places put before it.

The answer to the two Titles.
The first title is this.

A brief Apology of Thomas Cartwright, against Whatsoever therefore he is
charged with and is not here answered, is no slander.
all such flanderous accusations, as it pleases M. Sutcliffe in his several
pamphlets, most I do him no wrong.
injuriously to load him with. Under that title is written this posic.

A Apply this to Job Throk. and you shall see it fitteth him well, having been
silenced with shame enough.
righteous man abhors lies: but the ungodly shameth himself, and is put to
silence. Prou. 13.5. The second title is set down in these words.

A Note that he says brief, and forgot answer, that is in the written copy:
which shows, that in deed this which M. Cartwr^ says, is no answer.
brief of Thomas Cartwright to the printed slanders of M. doctor Sutcliffe
deane of Exeter, so far as they concern the same Thomas Cartwright.

The Answer.

ALthough titles of books be according to the authors fancies for the most
part; and therefore not much to be regarded: yet forasmuch as there is some
matter in them worthy to be marked, I thought good to begin with them. The
first thing that I observe is the contrariety and repugnance that is in the
titles: which argues, that the authors could not well tell, what to make of
this treatise. The second is the notorious falsehood contained in the titles,
which declares their bad dealing. The last is a plain confession of the
adversary against himself. for if all slanderous accusations be answered, then
whatsoever M. Cartwright is charged with, and not answered in this treatise,
the same is confessed to be no slander.

The repugnance appears diversely: the first title has apology, the second
has brief. yet neither is every apology a brief, nor every brief an
apology. true it is that the written copy has, a brief answer. but al
comes to one reckoning. for every brief answer is not an apology, nor
contrariwise. Nay the same makes much against M. Cartwright. for his friend
perceiving that his M. Cartwrights brief confessed by I. Throkmorton to be no
answer.
brief contained no sufficient answer, put out answer, and only left us a
brief: as it were a brief or writ to summone me to look to their dealing,
and crafty co^ueyances; or else a brief or sum of their manifold folies.
the first title does pretend that M. Cartwr. is injuriously laden with
slanderous accusations; the second makes light of the matter, and complains
not at all. and sure strange it were, if a man should be laden with so few
lines, and such light paper. the first braggeth that al accusations are
answered, but M. Cartwright seems more wise; and therefore professes no such
general answer to be made. The first calls my books pamphlets (no doubt
the writer was angry with them:) the second has more gentle and modest
terms. is it therefore likely, that M. Cartwright will agree with me, that
even at the first dash is so far fallen out with his friend?

The falsehood of these titles shall be discovered throughout this whole
answer: and may also in part appear by this, for that they both pretend, that
I have slandred M. Cartwright. and yet neither he nor his friend that so
saucily prateth in the preface shall ever be able to justify their pretense.
for L. 1. ff. ad S. C. Turpil.
slander is a false imputation of matters criminal. but the matters which M.
Cartwright takes on him to answer are either most true, or not criminous.
Besides that, it is one thing to charge a man with matters criminal
iudicially, and in his own defense; another to charge him extradicially; or
iudicially, and by way of accusation. but that which I allege is by way of
exception and in my defense, and not with a mind to accuse. Let him therefore
that charge me with accusation justify his charge, and note the time and
place when I committed this fault, and the words of my accusation. In deed I
moved certain questions. but there is great difference betwixt questioning
and accusing. the end of questioning is resolution: the end of accusing
punishment. let him therefore show whom I have accused, or prosecuted in
judgment to have him punished. Last of all the author of the first title
complains of injurious dealing. but M Cartwright I thank him does friendly
discharge me; and I doubt not, but I shall be able most clearly to discharge my
self.

The confession of the adversary against himself is most apparently set down
in the first title. for if all accusations that savor of slander, are answered
as the title pretends, then is M. Cartwright not slandered when (if questions
be charges, as he says) he is charged with diverse foul and dangerous
matters; a brief of which I will here set down, to let him either understand
his fault, or else, if he will not acknowledge it, to provoke him to frame us a
more sufficient answer.

A note of certain special matters which have been demanded of M. Cartwright
and his consorts, and whereto in this his brief he answered nothing.
FIrst I Answer to the pet. p. 185, q. 2.
demanded of all the disciplinarians, of which I take M. Cartwright to be the
leader, whether those that would overthrow not only the privileges and
liberties of the Church of England, but also the whole Ecclesiastical estate,
their jurisdiction also, and livings; seek not the overthrow of Magna charta,
and infinite statutes, and of a great part of the common laws of the Realm,
and seek thereby the dishonor of her Majesty and the state, by requiring at
her hands things that tend to the violating of the oath of Princes taken at
their Coronation, and the overthrow of the rewards of learning. and whether
such as are chief doers in these causes, are longer to be suffered to proceed
in their presumption. This I demanded, to this M. Cartwright says nothing.

Likewise, Ibidem q. 4.
I asked whether the book of Fenner that is entitled, sacra theologia, and
came forth with the allowance of M. Cartwright contain not strange divinity.
This question contains many members, even so many as there are strange
positions concerning the holy Trinity, the Law, the Gospel, the Sacraments,
and such holy mysteries of divinity. yet M. Cartwright satisfies me in
nothing.

Thirdly, Ibidem q. 5.
I desired to be resolved, whether it be not reason to make M. Cartwright
recant those dangerous opinions, which under his credit come forth commended
in that book. And whether he and his fellows have not made a new book of
prayer and administration of Sacraments, and practiced the same or some part
thereof without authority: and whether they deserve not to be called in
question for publishing of new confessions of faith, and new doctrine. and
what answers he? forsooth nothing. It might also further be demanded more
particulerly of M. Cartwright, whether in that communion book which the
disciplinarian faction offered to the Parliament, and desired to have it
authorized and received throughout the Realm, and which for the most part was
either framed by his advise, or allowed by his consent, there are not two
articles taken out of the Creed, namely that of Christ's burial, and his
descending into hell, and whether there is not a new article added binding all
men to believe their new discipline. making that a matter of faith. and whether
this be not a plain violence offered to men's consciences, and an alteration of
our ancient faith. Likewise whether there is not one petition wanting in the
Lords prayer, and their new paraphrase upon it. Theolog. sacr. lib. 1.
Likewise whether M. Fenner in his book of divinity, which M. Cartwright as
it were authorizeth with his letters of commendation, do not confound essence
and person in the divine nature, and divide the persons of the Trinity into
two members, and talk foolishly of the eternal generation of the Son of God
and of the proceeding of the holy Ghost, and teach that hatred as it is one of
the attributes of God, is the essence of God; And lastly whether M. Cartwr.
will allow this for sound divinity. In his next writ of slanders, may it
please him to shape us a direct answer to these matters. Ibidem q. 21.


Fourthly it was demanded by what authority the ministers of foreign
Churches take on them to prescribe forms of discipline and new laws to our
Church. Likewise it might be asked by what rule M. Cartwright takes on him the
ministry in our Church having no ordination (unless it be of deacon)
according to the laws of this Church.

Fifthly I desired to be resolved, Ibidem q. 22.
whether all the errors of Barrowisme do not follow, and may be concluded of
M. Cartwrights and his consorts assertions. and whether it be a matter fit
that these men should deal with that sort of sectaries, and not rather be
constrained publicly to recant their own foul errors. All these questions M.
Cartwright answers with silence.

Sixthly, Ibidem q. 24.
I moved a question whether M. Cartwright and his consorts do not either
flatly deny or call in question the principal points of her Majesty's
supremacy. and whether they take not from her power to ordeine rites and
orders for the Church; likewise authority to nominate Bishops, to appoint
Ecclesiastical commissioners, and to delegate learned men to hear the last
appeal from Ecclesiastical courts, to call synodes, and other authority given
to the prince by the laws of England: and endeavor to bring in foreign
laws, and jurisdiction repugnant to the statute of the princes supremacy, and
prerogative, and the laws and liberties both of the Church of England, and of
her Majesty's subjects. if M. Cartwright meant to have satisfied the doubt
concerning his opinion, and conceit of her Majesty's supremacy, as he goes
about it; he ought to have answered this question directly and particulerly.
not doing it, who sees not that he slideth away in clouds of generality, and
private conceits of his own fancy concerning this matter?

Seventhly it was demanded, Answer to the petit. q. 26. and 29.
whether by M. Cartwrights rules in those places where they are received the
Church goods are not spoiled, and the livings of the ministry divided, and
rewards of learning taken away, and also whether, if the same should here be
received, the like wrack would not be wrought, and her Majesty deprived of
tenthes and subsidies, and a great part of her revenues, and of many faithful
and loyal seruitors, which by those laws being made unable to live, would
also be made unable to do her service. He has nothing to answer, that will
make for him.

Eighthly it was asked, Ibidem qu. 30.
whether M. Cartwright and his followers have not in all places where they have
been received, made sects and divisions, and hardened men's hearts, and filled
their minds with pride and humorous vanities. to which he says nothing.
Percase he knows it is no slander.

Ninthly, Ibidem qu. 31.
I demanded whether it be not dangerous for this state, that M. Cartwright and
his partakers have so much urged this Church to imitate the examples of Geneua
and Scotland, considering the dangerous courses which they took, and the hard
effects, that followed of them. It cannot be denied: and therefore M.
Cartwright holds his peace.

10. Ibidem qu. 33.
The question was asked whether that the subversion of the state of the Church,
which follows necessarily of M. Cartwrights disciplinarian devises, is not a
great scandale, and hinderance to the reformation of true Religion in other
places. It is most apparent, and therefore M. Cartwright forbeareth to answer.

11. Ibidem q. 34.
It is demanded whether M. Cartwright do not as well subject Princes to
excommunication, as Sanders or Allen or other Papists: and whether his
doctrine is not as pernicious to princes authority, as theirs. It must needs
be granted: and therefore he passes by, and says just nothing.

12. Answer to the petit. qu. 49.
A doubt is made whether M. Cartwright does believe, that subjects may rebel
against such Kings, as they account Papists or tyrants, as some of that side
have taught: and he passes by in a grave silence.

13. Ibidem qu. 51.
It is asked, whether M. Cartwright and his fellows have not assembled in
synodes, or rather conuenticles, and there enacted and decreed certain rules
and orders contrary to her Majesty's laws, and also subscribed them and
procured others to subscribe them, and by all possible means gone about
without authority to put the same in practice, and to discredit and disgrace
the laws of her Majesty, and ancient government of Christ his Church. This is
most true, and therefore passed over in silence.

14. Idemaunded also whether they have not in their said orders, Ibidem qu. 52.
which they call holy discipline, taken al authority in Church causes from the
Christian magistrate, and given it to their consistories and synodes, in so
much that the magistrate is not once mentioned in that platform; and further I
would know, how the sufferance of these proceedings may stand with the majesty
of a Prince, and with government. Likewise it may be demanded of M. Cartwright
how he that has bound himself to this form of discipline by his word and
subscription, may be thought to allow of her Majesty's supreme government which
the laws of this land do give unto her. In this case he is as silent, as
Harpocrates.

15. Ibidem q. 53.
I desired to know whether M. Cartwright have not taught, that the authority
which they challenge to their elderships and synodes by their holy discipline,
as they call it, is neither increased nor diminished, whether the prince be
Christian or heathen; and likewise, if he do not think, or have not taught,
that the authority of a Christian and heathen prince is all one, and that a
Christian king has no more to do with the Church government, then any pagan
prince, or Emperor has: but he will tell us nothing.

16. Ibidem q. 54.
I asked M. Cartwright whether he and his adherents have not put the greatest
part of their discipline in practice, without her Majesty's consent,
authority, or allowance: and likewise without her authority or knowledge have
not both made secret meetings, and established diverse new orders, and broched
new opinions, and all contrary to the doctrine, faith, and government of this
Church of England: this string M. Cartwright dare not touch.

17. Ibidem. q. 55.
I asked him whether he was not presumptuous (if no more) in doing these
things, and whether he ought not to be brought publicly to submit himself
for his faults. Likewise it may be here asked of him, whether having both in
Fenners book, and his replies and writings taught, written, and allowed diverse
points of false-doctrine; he is not to be brought to a public recantation, for
satisfaction of those weak ones, that he has offended: will it please him
yet to answer this question directly?

18. Answer to the petit. qu. 57.
I demanded whether M. Cartwright swore truly in the Star Chamber, when he
affirmed on his oath, that he never affirmed or allowed that in every monarchy
there ought to be certain magistrates like to the Spartaine Ephori, with
authority to control and depose the king, and to proceed further against him,
seeing he called M. Fenners book wherein these points are expressly set down,
the principles and grounds of heavenly Canaan, and does not only without all
exception allow it, but also highly commend it: this is also a point which he
dare not answer directly, and plainly.

19. Ibidem qu. 58.
I would also understand whether M. Cartwright and his fellows have not
confessed on their oaths taken in the Starrechamber, that notwithstanding all
that care that has been taken for the perfecting of their platformes of
discipline, they are not yet resolved upon diverse points. and whether they did
wisely to subscribe to such orders; or dutifully, to animate certain gentlemen
of mean understanding in divinity, to present such a confused and imperfect
platform of government to the Parliament, that it might be confirmed, and
received throughout the whole Realm; and last of all whether it were wisdom
to dissolve a state already settled, and to embrace a government whereupon the
authors themselves are not yet resolved, nor (I think) ever will be, and
wherein others see notorious absurdities, imperfections and injustice. does not
he that holds his peace, consent?

20. Ibidem qu. 59.
I desired to hear whether M. Cartwright and his companions do not say upon
their oaths, that they meant to have been suitors to her Majesty and the
Parliament for the receiving of their draught of discipline before mentioned,
and subscribed unto by them, as a perfect plat of Church government commanded
by Gods word, and therefore do utterly disclaim by a most necessary
implication her Majesty to have any preeminence and authority in
Ecclesiastical causes by the word of God, seeing they do not give any
authority in their perfect platform to the civil magistrate, but yield all
that power to their synodes, classes, and consistories. It may also be further
demanded of him how this form may be deemed perfect, seeing they confess
they were not yet resolved upon diverse points. M. Cartwright answers nothing.

21. I demanded whether M. Cartwright did not understand, Answer to the petit.
qu. 60.
that Copinger pretended an extraordinary calling, which moved him to attempt
matters, that might prove very dangerous. It might also have been demanded of
him, whether albeit he would not be acquainted with the particulers of his lewd
purposes, yet he knew not that something was in hand, for his and others
deliverance out of prison, and for the advancement of the consistoriall
government. M. Cartwright stands mute.

22. Ibidem qu. 61.
I doubted whether M. Cartwright mainteyning the excommunication of princes by
the eldership, and other points of Fenners book does not maintain doctrine
as dangerous, as Sanders, Rosse, and Allen, that maintain the excommunication
of princes by the Pope and the Popes proceedings. and yet M. Cartwright
resolves me not.

23. Ibidem q. 75.
I demanded whether M. Cartwright did reueile to any magistrate the letters of
Copinger, or his strange deseignements: but he deigneth not to satisfy any
such demand.

24. Ibidem qu. 92.
I asked whether M. Cartwrights answer to the Rhemish annotations upon the new
Testament co^taine not diverse points of doctrine contrary to all the fathers,
to the faith of this Church, and all sound divinity; and why if it be
otherwise he does not subject it to the censures of the learned. and what says
he? nothing.

25. Ibidem qu. 93.
I desired to know whether M. Cartwright or some friend of his did not threaten
excommunication against a certain merchant at Middlebourg, if he would not
desist pursuing a servant of his that had wasted his goods, and whether such
courses be allowable. All, or most of these questions M. Cartwright passes
over in silence, and does not so much as touch them in his apology, how nigh
soever they touch him.

Beside these questions, diverse other matters were asked of of M. Cartwright in
the Star Chamber, whereto he has either answered nothing at all, or nothing
to purpose.

Being demanded, Interrog. 2.
how far forth he has affirmed or allowed the Queens authority
Ecclesiastical to be restreined by the injunctions, under color whereof
diverse allow and swear to the supremacy, that otherwise condemn it, M.
Cartwright says, he is not bound to answer, the secret of his opinion
(belike) he fears to disclose.

Being demanded, Interrog. 3.
whether he has maintained or allowed, that the king being no pastor, doctor
nor elder, is to be accounted among the Church governors, and whether in a
well ordered Church the prince may ordeine orders and ceremonies in the Church;
M. Cartwright says, he is not bound to answer, and being reexamined, as the
Judges determined he ought, he persisted in his former obstinacy. a plain
argument of his perverse opinion concerning her Majesty's government in causes
Ecclesiastical.

Being demanded, Interrog. 4.
whether he did acknowledge the Ecclesiastical government established by her
Majesty to be lawful and allowable by Gods word, M. Cartwright answered, that
he took not himself bound to answer: and so persisted being reexamined. ergo
he thought it not lawful.

Being demanded, Interrog. 5.
whether he would acknowledge the Sacraments to be duly and sincerely
ministered, as they be ordained to be ministered by the book of common prayer,
M. Cartwright answered, that he was not bound to answer, and reexamined still
refused to yield any further answer. does he then think them to be sincerely
and duly administered in our Church?

Being demanded whether he thought those that favored not the discipline to
be accounted Christian brethren in the same sense, Interrog. 6.
and as properly as men of his opinion, M. Cartwright refused to answer as to
a matter impertinent. behold, I beseech you how he accompteth of us, that
mislike his new disciplinarian devises.

Being examined whether he thought the Church of England refusing the
presbyteriall government to be the true Church in as proper sense, Interrog. 7.
as that Church that embraces the same, M. Cartwright according to his old
tune refused to answer, and said he was not bound.

Being demanded, Interrog. 22.
how far he has affirmed that without breach of the peace of the church of
England as it is now governed, men might treat of alteration of laws, and
proceed to practice the new discipline, he makes a slight and insufficient
answer.

Being demanded at how many classical or synodical assemblies he had been
present, Interrog. 23. and 24.
and what was treated in them, he either staggreth, or answers not.

Being demanded, Interrog. 24.
whether in their assemblies they had not treated and concluded diverse matters
direct contrary to the Ecclesiastical laws, as for example, that unpreaching
ministers are no ministers, that no obedience is to be given to Archbishops or
Bishops, that their ordination was to be received only as a civil ordinance;
M. Cartwright answers, that they were treated of, but not concluded, and
prays not to be pressed to answer further, viz. how far these matters were
liked of. which argues his dislike of Ecclesiastical laws, and presumption
in determining against them.

Being demanded, whether he had not treated, Answer to the interrogat. in
Star Chamber Interrog. 27.
or propounded certain means of maintenance for Archbishops, and Bishops,
deanes and other officers and ministers Ecclesiastical, having lost their
Ecclesiastical preferments, of which he then doubted not (so friendly was he
to us) he says, that he is not bound to answer. a plain and evident proof,
that in his conceit he had cast us all out of our livings.

Being demanded, Ibidem interrog, 29.
whether in a certain assembly in the county of Cambridge (he being present)
it was not concluded, that Homilies and the Apocryphal scriptures were not to
be read in the Church, that the calling of Bishops was unlawful, and that
notwithstanding any sentence of deprivation given by them the ministers of the
disciplinarian faction were to continue their ministry, and the discipline to
be taught, and to be practiced by those that were well instructed, he denies
that he is bound to answer. whereby it appears how presumptuous he was in
going about to dissolve her Majesty's Ecclesiastical laws and government.

TO conclude this point, compare I beseech you, this answer and apology of M.
Cartwrights with my questions and the interrogatories, whereupon he was
examined in the Star Chamber throughout: and you shall find that he passed by
most of my questions in silence, not once daring to touch them, or to look
upon them; and that he was no way able to clear himself of those matters
that were objected against him in the Star Chamber: and I think, he will
not, sure I am, he cannot deny so much to be true. if he do; let him take what
time he will, and directly and particulerly answer these questions and
interrogatories in his next apology. but I know he neither means so to do,
nor can well do it. I do therefore conclude first, that (if as he says and
disputes in his whole answer) all questions be charges, or (as the title
has) accusations; then is he accused and charged with diverse enormous
matters. Secondly, if he has answered all slanderous accusations in this his
apology, then that all these things which are not answered are truly
objected, and are no slanders. Which being granted, it will follow that his
friend had small skill that painted him out in the proper lineaments, as he
says, of innocence. and if he say, that this is nothing but a cavil; then
let him the next time answer all these matters directly and sufficiently; and
I my self will give him, not only the robe of innocence, which his friend
bestows on him, but also will crown him with a garland of glory, and place
him in the triumphant charet of victory, to his perpetual honor among all his
folowers, that like of his disciplinarian forgeries.

Those words also out of the Proverbs, which are set under the first title,
are a most evident testimony against the author of the Preface, who likewise
seems to have fitted to himself this sentence. for, if righteous men abhor
lies, why has he told his Lady so many vain tales and fables? forsooth,
because he is an ungodly fellow. and therefore that is come to pass that
follows in the sentence: the ungodly shameth himself, and is put to silence.
for M. Job Throkmorton in his rude and evil shapen letter has shamed himself,
and as a man that is at the end of his role, having reeiued his answer is put
to silence. Let M. Cartwright take heed that his hap be not like his fellows,
and that for expected glory he receive not shame, and stop when he has
run his course in a suddein silence. This sentence therefore, albeit the same
neither agree with the Hebrew text, nor with the old Latin translation, nor
with the Geneuian translation in English, yet shall pass for once, without
correction.

In the second title M. Cartwright calls me doctor, I trust he does it not
in scorn. for the time was when himself desired both the degree and title of
doctor, and yet could not have it. percase he was put back for his
innocence. sure somewhat it was, that made the University deny that to him,
that it uses to deny, but to very few and for just causes. Beside that, he
would have doctors to be chief men in the new commonwealth of his consistory,
and great pillars of the disciplinarian state.

He does also call me deane of Exeter, giving me an office which himself
has condemned as antichristian. but his sentence is declared erroneous, and
foolish. For what reason has a master of an Hospital to condemn a deane? the
time was, I thank him, when he seemed very careful how deanes and others,
which he had determined by his magistrale authority should loose their
livings, should be maintained. but now he is acquitted of that care, and turned
along to look to his domestical affairs. May it therefore please him to let
deanes alone, and look to his own reckenings. if not, he shall well
understand, that deanes are in honesty and otherwise, above such as he is,
though he were master of more then one Hospital, and that himself is no such
man, but that we may talk of him without incurring scandalum magnatum.

This answer he calls a brief. and what brief? forsooth a brief to
printed slanders. as if there were any relation betwixt briefes and slanders,
or else, as if slanders were properly said to be printed. Sure, if M. Cartwright
were so wise as he is taken to be, he would never have printed these slanders
himself, nor published this simple and weak discourse, nor without cause or
good purpose brought his name into question. But seeing he would needs have it
so, who can be against it? should the consistoriall elders proclaim a fast and
desire God to turn his mind? Nay seeing he will make himself the subject of
this dispute, and call me forth to contend with him, let us begin and see what
either his friend in his preface, or himself in his brief returnable 10.
days before this term, can say for their defense. and least either might
complain of wrong, they shall both speak in their own natural language. List
therefore I pray you. for here comes in the prologue, a goodly grave fellow, ye
need not doubt.

The preface set before M. Cartwrights book, and the answer to it.
IF thou be desirous, good Reader, to Will you see the counterfeite of a dizard?
see the right portraiture of He means folly. for innocence dwells not
here about.
innocence truly set forth unto thee in her A very proper piece of work.
proper lineaments; then read this discourse, which is not Not long, nor wise,
nor learned.
long. The Answer.

STrange it were, I confess, and worth the seeing, if a man might see the
right portrait of innocence, and that truly set forth in her proper colors
and lineaments, as this preface promises. but alas where is she? and how shall
we come to have a sight of her? how shall we know her and discern these
proper lineaments that he speaks of? The prefator like a monte bank he
points to this discourse which he imagines to be a rare piece of
workmanship painted out by M. Cartwright, as it were another Appelles; and
promises that within we shall see this strange creature he speaks of. but
he does but abuse his reader, to feed him thus with strange fancies. We have
sought every corner of this treatise, and find nothing but a rude piece of
work not worth the reading: hard words, disioynted sentences, weak proofs,
bad answers, and nothing worthy commendation. as for innocence, it was not
there to be found. nay while we sought for innocence we found nothing but a
certain odd fellow in a corner, whose head was all distempered with rheumes
of discipline, and a number of indigested conceits, and by him the author of
this preface pointing at him, and calling all men in, to behold innocence.
But those that saw them both, and their demeanours as well as I, said that
there was nothing else to be seen but a trifling pamphlet, and that all the
Prefators devise was nothing but a pack of foolery.

But to leave this fellows painting and pourtraying, that has no more skill to
paint then a cobbler to draw like Appelles; and whose bad grace is such, that
there appears no other work of his beside distempered humors, reproachful
words, and vain and idle talk; What more ridiculous prosopaea could be
devised then this, to make M. Cartwright that always hated plays and spoke
against them, to play a part? and what part? forsooth a woman's part, which of
all parts he most detested. The especial grace of a prosopopaea is to observe
decorum, the which by this manis no way regarded. for what is more childish
then to make an old man play a child's part? and M. Cartwright to play a woman's
part? nay what more absurd then to make him as clear as innocence? for if
this were true, then was he wrongfully conuented by the Lords in the
Star Chamber. And besides that M. Cartwright was very simple not to be able
to show us this clear innocence, which is here so inuisibly portrayed. How
innocent he is shall appear by his defense and this answer. but this to the
prologquutors vain entrance telling us of the portrait of innocence.

The preface. Being, thou see, thus provoked as Who was it, that did thus
challenge innocence? and where?
she is, or rather, to speak the truth, thus violently drawn into the
encounter by the wretched assaults of an Men have great reason to beware of the
leaven of the Puritans, and Pharisees.
unleavened mouth: yet mark I pray thee, how she caries her self, and how
she comes All armed like Pallas. whereby it appears that Job Threkmorton is
not this innocence. for he never yet bore arms to do her Majesty service.
armed into the field.

The answer.

All this bill is erroneous. Being, says he, thou see, thus provoked. yet
he has better eyes then common, that can see any step or likelihood in M.
Cartwrights discourse, of any such matter. I for my part certes never provoked,
or encountered or used violence to innocence. neither dealing with M.
Cartwright, the person on whom this vizard of innocence is vnhandsomly put,
were either my reasons so simple, that he has yet come forth to answer
them, nor his cause so good, that he might well put the same upon any further
trial. His dealing therefore in this case that abandoned the field was rather
wretched then mine, as those that fly before the enemy and dare not make head
are most miserable and cowardly soldiers. yea in these matters that he goes
about to answer, he has so badly acquitted himself, that beside this fellow
that has no judgment, none will clear him. But could he clear himself in
them, yet there are diverse other matters to be objected to him of which he
shall never be able to clear himself. his errors and ignorance in divinity
proved by his commendations of Fenners book: his implied denial of her
Majesty's prerogative and power in making and abrogating Ecclesiastical laws,
and appointing of commissioners and delegates, his malicious purpose to
overthrow the present Ecclesiastical government, his saucie and uncivil
railing and dealing against the prelacie of England, his notorious untruths
and forgeries in maintenance of his new devises: his schismatical meetings and
conuenticles, his usurpation of the ministry without just calling, his
turbulent dealing for his eldership, and many other matters to be objected
against him shall he never be able to answer. What a ridiculous matter then was
it, that M. Cartwright should still be made to play the part of lady
innocence, a lady that he and Job Throkmorton should seem to be but little
acquainted withal? nay how absurd was it, that so grave and ancient a man as
M. Cartwright, at the bending of whose brows all the aldermen of the Church
stood amassed, should here be stripped of his priestly ornaments, and put into a
woman's attire to play innocence, of whom now we must speak only in the
feminine gender, and make a confusion betwixt him and Mistress Cartwright,
giving him the title of she, and disabling him for ever being president of the
consistory? this is therefore absurd and ridiculous talking. That which he
says of unleavened mouths is mere railing. a matter not strange with M.
Throkmorton, whose mouth is leauened with Pharisaisme, and black with
Puritanisme, and distasted with late learning they say of certain Hebraismes.
He tells us further, and taking a stand upon an oken tree in an iuie bush
wills us to mark. for he has sprung innocence like a seely partritch out
of the bushes of M. Cartwrights book, and she forsooth flies out all armed.
which is not only absurd, but very miraculous. For what more absurd, then that
she should come forth out of a discourse, and like Pallas come all armed: or
more miraculous, then that all this should be wrought by certain words
without all coniuration or legierdemaine of the proloquutor?

The preface. These are no pieces of M. Cartwrights arms.
Patience, mildness, truth, and a good conscience, this is her Do the same
pieces serve for armor and weapons?
armor, these be her weapons, and with these only she Puritan innocence
fights: godly innocence is peaceable.
fights repelling and striking back all the bitter Yet they say M. Cartwright
wardeth but badly.
darts, that are thrown against her only with, the Lord rebuke thee; and
Witness his first and second replies.
none otherwise.

The Answer.

It is no marvel although we have wars, when innocence her self is made
such a great fighter, and quarreller. but this is the Prefators art. and yet
they say, he is no such great warrior, that all the while that diverse valiant
men were on the Seas, and at Cadix in her Majesty's service, was either writing
such railing and lewd prefaces in corners, as this: or else calculating the
success of his devises by the aspect of the stars, or else feeding his
carkase with deintie fare, and his envious mind with malicious reports. A very
hasty fellow to fight in words: so hasty that he had no leisure to fit his
sentences. for, I pray you, how are these words, patience, mildness, truth
and a good conscience, governed? but his disioynting of sentences is not the
worst of his cause. a fouler matter it is, that arming M. Cartwright with
innocence, and other virtues and good parts, he forgot both wit, and charity.
right according to his own brainlesse doings, that in them have no wit: and
according to the Puritan dealings that are commonly without charity. Besides
this, all this description and armor consisting in many virtues, no way
belongs to M. Cartwright. That he has no good voice nor face to play
innocence, it appears by his answers in the Star Chamber, by his
writings, and all his dealings. As for patience, how can he claim it, that is
so impatient of due reproof, and comes behind M.I. Throk. that now for ought
I know holds his peace, unless he percase speak in this preface? And what
has he to do with mildness in whose face there is a storm of anger, and in
whose writings there is such rough, and rude dealing against laws, and against
his superiors? Now where there is forging, devising, and Machiauelian
plotting, how can there be either truth, or a good conscience? All which
courses if they shall be proved to have been used in his doings and writings,
then it is clear, that M. Cartwright is no such fighter, nor so well armed as
is reported. which also appears in this, that throwing down his arms
wherewith he was wont to fight, and abandoning that cause for which he in time
past made such bragges, he does now only skirmish with certain vain fancies,
as Ulysses did with shadows in his feined descent to hell. Now he has lurked
a great while, Vt marinae filius Thetidis sub lachrymosa tempora Troiae. if
Vulcane would make him a harness for his head, it would do him percase more
good, then all his furniture.

Further he tells us, that the same things do serve M. Cartwright who is
figured under innocence both for armor and weapons. he means perhaps to
thrust all men through with his head piece. which is a strange case. But what
should a man marvel, if this fellow confound armor, and weapons, that would
confound both Church and common wealth?

Finally as if M. Cartwright had not been abused sufficiently by the Prefator
in disguising him in the womanish attire and habit of innocence, he does here
make him play the part of Michael the Archangel, of whom he is made to borow
these words, The Lord rebuke thee. a person no way becoming him, having in his
replies used far other style and language, and not contending as Michael did
about the body of Moses, but about mere shadows and fancies. Let M. Cartwright
take heed so many parts has he played, that the Prefator if he continue on
this course a while, make him not play S. George on horseback. for that in
deed is his best part, threatening so long and striking never: riding
continually, and yet never coming to his iourneys end. All the world knows
and sees, that neither his deeds, nor his words are angelical. neither is he
so victorious as Michael, being no way able to make head against his
adversaries, or to answer their arguments.

The preface. Far He was not indeed, like Salust, an eloquent Orator.
unlike to that babbling declaymor, who left us this How is it a lesson?
lesson of old: si quam maledicendo voluptatem Note coepisti with an oe diptho^g.
coepisti, eam male audiendo amittes. If thou have taken any pleasure in
speaking that thou should not: thou must loose it again by hearing that
thou would not.

The answer.

That M. Cartwright was unlike Salust, or that I fail not, the author of that
oration wherein these words were written, is not denied. for neither has he
the eloquence, nor the skill in Latin, that he that made that oration, had. nor
did that author so fondly talk and vainly write, as M. Cartwright does. What
reason then has this odd babbler, and rayler, to call him a babbling declaymer,
but to show us, that this sect takes pleasure to bite both quick and dead,
and to babble without either rhyme or reason? beside this, what notorious
ignorance is it to call these words which the Orator utters against his
adversary, a lesson, as it were of a teacher to his auditory? indeed this
Prefator does well practice this supposed lesson, albeit he has not so well
learned the same. For if he had, he would not have written cepisti with an oe
dipthong. he might therefore do well to spare to speak Latin, and let us
hear some better English.

The preface. Well knew the defender, that howsoever this might be Does not
he feed his flesh as well as others?
pleasing to the flesh, or keep The Puritans do well like this music.
descant with our corruption, yet he that says, mihi vindicta, had taught him
another lesson, Namely that it could in no sort suit with the Here is great
talk of sincerity, but no good dealing.
sincerity of the Gospel, to give check for check, and rebuke for rebuke.
and therefore it is, that in his whole apology he has not I report me to his
words, beside that, what M. Cartwright wants, that M. Prefatour supplieth, with
whose doings, he was well acquainted.
given his adversary so much, as one glance of reproach.

The answer.

(...). Now off go the robes of innocence, and that mask wherewith he has
been hitherto disguised, and M. Cartwright is brought forth, and spoken of in
the masculine gender. but that he should be such a mielmouthed fellow as not
to give his adversary one glance of reproach he would be sorry. For I pray you
what does this word slander set in the front of his book import? and why
does he so often charge me with untruth, shifting, and unchristian dealing.
Besides that, is it likely, that this preface wherein so many reproaches and
malicious terms are stuffed, should be put there without his priuitie? or must
not he justify his preface, and answer for his friends folly? Last of all, if
he spare me here, which I know not for what respect he does it, yet does he
not spare my betters else where. But, to cut this fellow down with his own
phrases, he keeps descant with his corruption, and pleases the flesh as much
as his fellows. and what needed this brief, if he had not sought revenge, and
meant to be quit with his adversaries? Let him therefore hear his fellows
grave censure, that this his doing does not suit with the sincerity of the
Gospel, and take this of me that he has been taught better lessons. But what
praise his doings deserve, we shall better consider of in another place. here it
shall be sufficient for us to show, that M. Cartwright would not fare so deintily
nor feed so fatly, nor sing so merely as he does, if he did not both please
the flesh, and keep descant with his corruption too. But let him sing descant,
and take pleasure in his crochet music as much as he list: he is to answer
it, and not I. so long as he breaks not our patience with his importunate
clamours, nor drives the consort out of tune, I will not contradict him.

The preface. Let this then be the A pattern whereby to shape out an
hypocritical grimare.
pattern (good Reader, whosoever thou art) how to These fellows do wrestle
much, but affection foyleth them still.
wrestle with thy affections in the like assaults.

The answer.

In the former part of this preface, you have seen how the writer has played
the painter: now to teach you, that he has more shifts and occupations to
live by then one, he takes upon him to play the doctor, and teaches us that
himself never learned; to wit, a long lesson of patience. so little does he
know in what ground he stands, or what is convenient for him, that he
preaches patience out of his preface. Well, seeing he will needs teach us
lessons, let us listen what he says. Let this, says he, be thy pattern. a
misshapen pattern, certes, not worth two patars. for who wrestleth worse then
he, that runs out of the listes? and who is less valiant then he, that
being as it were blown away with a tempest of his affections, for a simple
revenge, set out this simple pamphlet good for nothing, but to make patterns
for his daughters pincases? The sequel will declare the same to be true.

The preface. It is lamentable, I confess, that such unclean mouths as Viz.
Of Job Throk. and his selowes.
this, should Viz. As the author of the preface does.
thus take their liberty to M. Cartwr. has much disgraced himself, to suffer
such a lewd and foul mouthed proctor to plead in commendation of his
innocence and patience.
disgrace at will.

The answer.

If this man's mouth had bin clean, he would not have vttred so many foul
words, as he does. wherein I would he did not bewray as well the malice of his
heart, as the venim of his tongue. but this is but a peccadillio with this man.
A worse matter it is, that even now having proposed unto us a pattern of
patience, and set madame innocence before our eyes, that gave not so much as
one glance of reproach to his adversary, he looking beside his pattern does
give reproaches to those that are not his adversaries, and does degorge his
stomach I know not against whom, calling them Rabshakeh, Senacherib, Shemei,
and unclean mouths. by common construction of speech the words this, and
thus, where he says such unclean mouths as this, should thus take, are
referred to the next person, that is to M. Cartwright and himself. so wisely
does the man couch his words, that he condemns himself. and yet I am not
ignorant, that he means others. percase the rout of Martinists and such like,
which have black and foul mouths, and have taken to themselves liberty to
say what they list. If he mean me, as commonly he does falling into his
railing rage, he is to understand, that I have wronged none, nor spoken against
any, but such as with open mouths have too long spoken against her Majesty's
laws and government, the reverend Prelates of England, the ancient rites and
ceremonies of Christ's Church. A matter much indeed to be lamented, albeit
Martin and his brood, when time was, made a jest at it.

The preface. But muse not at it, good Reader. Here he loses himself in a
common place.
it has been so in all ages, and will be so still. for so long as the Lord
gives Satan leave to buffet and assail his Church, so long thou may be
assured there will Nor a Martin, nor such like railers, as this Prefator.
never want a Rabshakeh, a Shimei, or a Senacherib to play their parts.

The answer.

So long as Martin has any of his race living, or M. Cartwright may command
such writers, as the author of this Preface; there shall not indeed want
Rabshakethes, Shimees, and Senacheribs to rail against Gods Church, and to
vex honest men. All this therefore, albeit spoken against others, yet most
fitly may be applied against the heads of this sect. For who I beseech you has
more railed against the Church of England, and the present government, then the
authors of the admonition, then M. Cartwright I Penry, Job Throkmorton, and
such Martinistes? who more like to Rabshakeh, Senacherib, or Shemei then they?
they take themselves indeed to be the Church: but that is common to all
schismatics, which profess to be that they are not. Haeretici and
schismatici, says S. Lib. de fide and Symbolo c. 10.
Augustine, congregationes suas Ecclesias vocant, sed haeretici de Deo falsa
sentiendo ipsam fidem violant. schismatici autem discissionibus iniquis a
fraterna charitate dissiliunt, quamuis ea credunt, quae credimus. quapropter
nec haereticus pertinet ad Ecclesiam catholicam quoniam diligit Deum, nec
schismaticus quoniam dilig it proximum. Lib. 1. contr. Parmenium.
Optatus calls them rebels to the Church, and says they are cut off from the
Church. De si l. ad Petrum. c. 38. and. 39.
Fulgentius does not only exclude schismatikes out of the Church, but tells
them that eternal fire is their portion. The Church is but Joan. 10.
one fold, and Romans 12.
one body. how then are they of the Church, that as fishes slipped out of the
net as it is written Luke 5. so are they departed out of the fold, and divided
from the body? Are they to be reputed members that have no better union with
the parts and true members of the Church? They allege they are no
schismatickes. but that is as clear, as that schismatickes are no members of
the Church. For first they have divided themselves from their Bishops, next
they have erected, as it were, new altars and forms of sacraments; thirdly
they have ordained ministers to themselves, and refused the ministers of the
Church; and finally have publicly oppugned both the governors and government
of the Church. and therefore either is not the Church of England Gods true
Church, or these men are schismatickes. Who then does not muse at the
impudency of this fellow, that compares those that defend the state and peace
of this Church against mutinous Martinistes unto blasphemous Rabshakeh, and
such railing fellows; being himself a chief railer, and seeing his fellows
to have railed so injuriously against the Church of England? As for those whom
he accuses, they would be much ashamed, if they should not deal more
modestly then he does, and far more charitably.

The preface. Nevertheless herein thou may This sect does well comfort
them selves with wine and comfits. this exhortation is therefore needless.
comfort thy self, if thou mark how, and in what sort this reuiling Viz. Of
Martinists, and deformistes.
generation is curbed, as it were snaffled and restreined by the powerful and
righteous hand of God, that in the midst of their forwardnes and boldness
to blunder out what they list without blushing, they can hardly for their lives
What a blundring stir have we here?
blunder out a truth, as if the Lord in his secret judgment had purposely and
apparently O not orious blasphemy, of a wicked tongue!
blasted their pen with a lying and distempered spirit.

The Answer.

We do in deed much comfort our selves considering the special providence of
God, and diligent care of the magistrate, that has curbed and snaffled the
mouths of the Martinistes, which like wild asses lift up their heels and put
forth their railing tongues against the fathers of this Church, and the chief
governors of the Ecclesiastical state. Neither are we to fear, that such
odious declaymers as this, that has now taken to himself a little more
liberty then ordinary, shall still be suffered to blunder out their
tempestuous and railing speeches. As for those that have written in defense of
the laws of England and ancient rites of the Church, they are not to take it
to heart, albeit by this lewd fellow they be railed at, as a reuiling
generation, that blunder out untruth without shame. It is the fashion of
heretics, schismatickes and wicked companions to rail at honest men. so did
Celsus and Porphyrius rail against the Christians, the Arrians against
Athanasius, the schismatic Donatists against S. Augustine, the Anabaptists
against true believers. What then although this railing Prefator do degorge his
malice against us? why? has he not also blasphemed the holy Spirit of God?
does he not say, that God does blast men's pens with alying spirit,
attributing the wicked action to God, which is the fountain of truth and all
goodness? read the words, and examine them; and you shall find it to be as I
say. He says not, that God does send out wicked spirits, or suffer wicked
spirits of lying to blast men's pens: but, that God blasteth men's pens with
a spirit of lying: as if Gods breathing or Spirit did infect men's pens with
lying. Look on it M. Cartwright, and be ashamed to have such blasphemies in
your book. at the least reprove him for it. as for Job Throk. whose style this
seems to be, he is ashamed of nothing. Is it not sufficient for you to abuse
men, but you must also blaspheme God? And you my masters of the railing sect of
Martinistes, before you accuse others of reuiling, and blundring out untruths,
look on your selves and your fellows. I think M. Cartwright will not deny,
but in his books he has written many untruths, and both he and others are
still blundring out their consistoriall conceits, in which there is neither
truth, nor reason. But this man had only care to speak evil, that which
should be his special care, he does not regard. for he proves nothing. I trust
M. Cartwright, who is now canonized by this Prefator, and become S. Innocent,
or rather innocence it self, will reprove him for it: and therefore I
forbear further to distemper his discrasied brain.

The preface. All which if thou find verified But if this be gainesaid, and
just exception taken against it, all this is but a foolish fancy.
without all gainsay and exception in the writings of M. D. Sutcliffe and
others of that I wonder what hair these men be of, that have not one hair of
an honest man.
hair, and withal if thou see these men that do thus Is any more heady or
desperate then your selves?
headily and desperately lash on in disgrace of others, to be themselves in
their several accusations so palpably taken tardie, that the very walls and
This stony rhetoric is able to move any stony heart.
stones of the street may convince them of untruth: if, I say, thou find this
to be true (and for If this be your proof, I desire no better proof of your
foolery.
proof thereof I refer thee to this short and modest defense) have patience
in thy self, and give the glory to God, who does thus, thou see, in his
wisdom make a way and passage for the clearing of the innocent, even through
the mouth and Evil come to him that maliciously thinks.
malice of the accuser himself.

The answer.

If any man be able justly to prove, that to be verified in any writings which
this man affirms, and no way is able to auerre: then let me receive shame,
and this man glory. Nay if I do not justify as much as I have affirmed, let
me have punishment: which will wonderfully content this malicious generation.
nay I will not take vantage of his words which give color to any
contradiction or gainsaying. But if I do not justify such matters, as I have
affirmed; let law pass. But if I do not only gainsay, but justly gainsay M.
Cartwr. defense, which is the whole proof of all this proud brag: then let
me have this bragging fellow esteemed a vain man without all judgment, or
modesty. Of what hair he is, I will not dispute, they say and I see, he has
not one hair of an honest man. He says also, that other my fellows writings
shall be apparently convicted of untruth without all gainsay. and for proof
refers us to this brave defense of M. Cartwright. But his assertion is very
impudent, and his proof ridiculous. for how does M. Cartwright convince those
against whom he says nothing? was not the Prefator ashamed to shuffle things
thus together? sure neither my friends nor I am afraid of any thing M.
Cartwright either has said, or can say against us. Neither do I think that he
shall speed better then his friend Job Throkmorton did the last year. he
bragged much of his defense against my slanders, as he called them. but the
matters are proved so true, that albeit the man has great lust to bite and
grinneth and grumbleth in corners, like a rough haired water spaniel, yet I do
not once, as yet, hear him openly bark. And I hope likewise in this treatise
so to refute this brief, that M. Cartwright will be advised, ere he send me
forth his reply. by which I doubt not, but to make clear that I have not
disgraced any wrongfully, nor been so unadvised, as this man gives forth very
unadvisedly, and impudently. There shall it appear also whether I have been
taken so tardy, that the stones and walls may convince me of untruth, as he
affirms very ridiculously. for what more blockish devise, then to make stones
and walls disputers? Are these fellows so powerful that they can make walls
to speak, and so dull that they cannot convince me, when stones and walls can
do it? The walls he says shall convince them. o brave flower of thetoricall
amplification worthy to proceed from a man made of doogeon, nay made of stone,
and to be set in a wall to confute all men that shall contradict the fancies
of Puritanisme! But enough is said of these great brags. of the performance you
shall hear more hereafter. as also who be those innocents, and malicious
accusers he prateth of.

The preface. Concerning such things as it pleases him so If constantly, then
virtuously.
constantly to No bastardes shall be fathered on him.
father upon M. Cartwright, and others by I never fathered any thing on him by
heresay only.
heresay and report, I Do you not hear I. Throk. cornemuse.
cannot but muze that a man of his Of what coat, iacket or ierkin are ye.
coat and calling is no more smitten and abashed at it then he is. for
presuppose, that one should hear by report, that M. Sutcliffe was once taken
with A ridiculous devise now newly cogged by Job Throk. or some such mate.
Ask Beza whether it be true.
false dice at Geneua, and thereupon being forced to fly the town, should ever
since bear a kind of inueterat hatred and malice to M. Beza and the I never
hated them, nor had to do with them, or they with me.
elders there: this being known only to us by Lie not so impudently.
report (how true soever the thing might be in it self) I would feign know
for my learning, whether this were aequa la^ce, or how it might suit with any
measure of indifferency, forthwith without any further Can you show that I
publish matters only upon heresay? if not, blush.
examination to spread it abroadin print.

The answer.

I must needs confess, that if I did ground my self in those matters which I
affirm concerning M. Cartwright upon a bare hearesay, or report without
further examination, I had cause to be ashamed. the more shame for this
impudent companion to forge and cogge a matter not so much as upon hearesay,
but without hearesay. and to charge me with This is as true, as that my plate
if at pawn at a butchers house in Warwike.
false dice and driving out of Geneua: matters which (God let me so ever enjoy
his favor) as I never, so much as heard reported my self, before I read the
same in this preface. so far am I from being guilty of this ridiculous
coggery. To satisfy those that know me not, I answer first that I never
could play nor used to play at dice in my life. secondly that I never was
before the elders of Geneua while I was there. thirdly, I never hated them nor
had cause to hate them, albeit I enquired whether any such Ecclesiastical
officers were ever in the Church or no. fourthly M. Beza, and the elders will
give testimony of the untruth of this matter, and I doubt not but Beza, if he
could have said any such thing of me, railing at me for no cause, would not
have spared me in this point. fifthly M. Francis Brace a gentleman of
Worcestreshire, and M. Miles Bodley a known minister of this Church can
testify that I came from Geneua with credit, and with the favor of Beza and
others the chief men of that city. for with them, I came thence. Lastly if
any such thing had been, it would have been spoken of before this, it being 17.
year since I came from thence. this report I think M. Throkmorton devised
taking the pattern from himself being a cogging fellow, and driven, or at least
running away out of the Parliament house for his lewd misdemeanors. the same
touches me nothing. And thus much for this bald matter, and shameless slander
to imitate my friend Jobs words. As for those matters, that I object against M.
Cartwright, they are of another nature. at least grounded upon sure proofs of
records, confessions, witnesses, reasons, and such as M. Cartwright examining,
shall confess his fellow Prefator to be unwise to devise this matter, or to
compare it with his. as more evidently shall appear hereafter.

The preface. And yet this ye shall Name the particulers, and examine Master
Cartwrights brief.
find to be an usual and ordinary course with M. As honest a man as I.
Throk. or M. Cartwright, and never called in question, as they have been.
Deane of Exeter in his solemn I inform against none, but deal with them on
the way.
informations, and personal pleadings against I speak much against Hacket,
Copinger, Wigginton, Vdal, Penry, Throk. Are these your good men?
goodmen.

The answer.

I would to God the men, against whom I plead, were so good, as they would
seem to be. sure I am, none are such as they should be. for then would not M.
Cartwright nor his fellows so violently have oppugned the Ecclesiastical
regiment of the Church of England, nor contumeliously have disgraced the
reformation begun by her Majesty, nor impugned the princes authority so
baldly, nor railed against the chief prelates so impetuously; neither was
Hacket hanged drawn and quartered, nor was Penry hanged, nor did Copinger
pitifully languish away, nor was Job Throkmorton endited, nor were M.
Cartwright and his fellows conuented in the Star Chamber for their
goodness. Note therefore, that if sometimes speeches pass against them, it is
not for their goodness, but for other matters: and that this Forespeaker has
no reason either to call these goodmen, or to condemn those that defend
Religion, justice, laws, and government against the malcontent mothes, and
perturbers of this state.

But whatsoever men they be, I do neither inform, nor begin any quarrel
against them. I did answer the author of the petition, and did not challenge
him. Likewise I answered M. Job Throkmorton, and the man cannot say, but he is
answered. Neither did I publish any thing against M. Cartwright, but diverse
years after he had reuelled against the clergy of the Church. Personally I
dealt against none, but such as had personally dealt against us, and professed
themselves enemies of the Church.

The matters that I charge them withal are built upon other grounds then
hearesay. and that shall M. Cartwright well perceive when we come to refell his
frivolous answers. M. Throkmorton has found so firm reasons alleged against
him, that he has given over to contend vainly with words. and I doubt not,
but others upon trial shall find the like. What an impudent fellow then was
this to say, that my usual and ordinary proofs stand upon hearesay. but if any
did; yet do they excel Throkmortons answers. for we cannot hearesay that he
has publicly as yet, answered any thing in defense of his calumnious letter.
so that it should seem, his defense stands neither by truth, nor hearesay.
More wisdom therefore were it for him, not to name the Deane of Exeter in such
scornful manner, when all scorn him rather, that was overthrown in his own
challenge, and never showed himself either at home or abroad to have any value.

The preface. Your partial dealing, and corrupt judgment has made you very
remarquable.
Mark it who list in him. if the case concern any of these disciplinarians,
he is of that Is this any dispraise, to want neither wit, nor matter?
good nature and ready wit, that rather then he will be to seek for matter, he
will not stick to rake the channel sometimes, and take whatsoever comes next to
hand, though it lie all to be trodden and This raking and seraping of matters
together, does argue, that this man talks like a channel taker.
trampled on in the streets, yea and of that which, I believe, the poorest
scauanger in a town would be loath to stoop for, he with a little help and
forbishing of M. Can you disprove his survey?
Surueyor of discipline, frames for the most part some As yet, in truth you
are silent, and say nothing to these conclusions.
irrefragable and tempestuous conclusion against these new platformers. and
then for sooth to the press it must in all Unless the platformers had too
much posted in setting forth their devises, they would not have set forth so
crooked forms.
post have with some rhetorical varnish of innovation: as if Albeit I could
make quidlibet ex quolibet, yet can I not devise what to make of this foolish
discourse.
quidlibet ex quolibet, or as if the poorest and most Our records are drawn
out of M. Cartwrights replies, and their own writings. Will they then call
them patcheries?
patched record under the Sun (that blasheth it may be, to see the light)
were evidence strong enough against a Do you call your self so? why then do
you blame others for so terming you?
Precisian.

The answer.

He that list but to mark this kind of writing, he cannot I think be much
enamored with the author. What a stir is here with raking of channels, and
talking of scauangers? o miserum lector obturanasum. our author all besmited
with dirt, and inface to infacetior rure, is drawing of a draught of phrases
from the chanel, and from underneath men's feet. a very base and filthy kind of
style. Besides that, very wisely he sets down matter, that makes against
himself. for first he confesses, that the things I object are so common, that
they are to be found in the streets, and in the channels. belike they are
foul matters. Next he says, that I want no matter. which is true, and yet no
great commendation for me. for he should have a barren head, that dealing
against this sect, should want matter. thirdly he confesses, that my
conclusions are irrefragable and tempestuous. which declares the goodness of
my cause, and the weakness of the adversary. yea and albeit he should not
confess it, yet would the silence of Job Throkmorton, that of a clamorous
Martinist is now made a silent Varro lib. 3. de ling. las.
Harpocrates, prove the same. As for that which he says against those
evidences which I have produced in my writings, they are such as Job Throk.
cannot disprove, and M. Cartwright will not deny, yea and all indifferent men
cannot but allow. Nay the most things, that I object are proved out of M.
Cartwrights replies, Martins libels, Job Throk. authentical writings, which I
trust this fellow will not call patched records, nor think so basely on them,
that they are to be thrown down the channels, and trampled on with men's
feet: or if he call these records base and patched; reprehend me for calling M.
Cartwrights bundle of replies, a fardle of foolery. Diverse things you shall see
confessed. some things are proved by the records in the Star Chamber. yea and
against M. Throkmorton there be diverse matters of record to be shown. which I
hope he will not, and sure I am, he may not deny. And does he call these
things patched records, and torue papers cast forth into the streets, which
no scauanger would stoop for? sure his aldermen which now and then consist of
such scauangers, botchers, and base people would be glad to have such records
to justify their doings withal. and yet albeit they moile in the mire, and
rake the channels for all matters, they can find nothing that makes for them.

He obiecteth also unto me my posting things (as he calls it) to print, but
he much forgets, how this has been the common fault of his consorts, that
have so posted to set forth their protestations, declamations, and replies,
that for haste they forgot their duty to their superiors, and had no laysure
to correct their lewd speeches, and heretical opinions. As for my self, (I
must co^fesle, I should be much ashamed to set forth such patcheries, as this
preface, or as M. Cartwr. brief, or M. Throk. letters, and libelling devises,
and such admonitions, protestations, declamations and triobolar libels, as this
sect has published within these few years. Lastly he tells me, I make
quidlibet ex quolibet; and yet I cannot make a good Church officer of any of
these new elders, nor a good elder of a scauanger, nor albeit I should refound
him, a wise man of the author of this preface.

The preface. Now there be that Your thoughts are conceited, your opinions
foolish.
think, that of all other charges thus strangely and unworthily imposed upon
this reverend man, the charge of ignorance, and that his works should be a All
earned men that read them, will testify the same.
fardle of fooleries, is the most out of joint and approaching nearest to If he
were not past shame, he would not thus trifle.
impudency. But sure for mine own part, I do not think so; neither do I
see, why his adversary might not with as great reason, yea and with as good a
conscience appeach him of ignorance, as of disloyalty. For allow that our Will
they deny his replies to be a fardle of foolerie? it shall be proved.
universities together with foreine nations may sufficiently control the
reporter in the one, yet this lets not, but that the countries, and places
of the man's resiance, can for There is now great need. where is then this
plentiful testimony?
need, give as plentiful testimony in the other. and therefore why a man of
that easy gift, and rolling vein, so I never slipped into heresy, nor
disloyalty as this sect has.
slipper in the sear, as M. Sutcliffe, should make it more deinty to spare M.
Cartwr. in his learning, then he does in his loyalty (having the like warrant
and authority for both) I Mark how this fellow confesses, he sees neither
reason nor sense.
see neither reason, nor sense.

The answer.

Here the Prefator moves a needless controversy, whether M. Cartwright may
with better reason be charged with ignorance, or with disloyalty. A matter
which I not so much as thought of; and very prejudicial to M. Cartwrights
credit, whether it be resolved or disputed on. and yet this Prefator not only
disputes it, but resolves it also and says, How others think, that to
charge M. Cartwr. with ignorance is mere impudency. so many universities,
Churches, and nations being able to control it: and that he may with equal
reason be charged with disloyalty, and ignorance. a matter founding very
harshlie (I think) in M. Cartwrights ears. for which I refer the man over
to be bastonated and corrected by M. Cartwright. that which he says against
me, whom he supposes to have charged M. Cartwright both with ignorance, and
disloyalty, remains of me to be answered. He says first, that others
think, meaning his own consorts. but if the Prefator will not believe what
honest men upon just cause report, it skilleth not much, what such companions
think. He gives M. Cartwr. the title of reverend. yet does he little deserve
it, that never reverenced his superiors, nor respected antiquity, nor cared
for law or duty. He disputes, as if I should charge M. Cartwright simply
with ignorance, which I do not remember. true it is, that I do charge him with
ignorance in diverse points. and that charge is neither strange, nor undeserved,
nor untrue. His ignorance in all antiquity is totoo apparent. for all his plot
of discipline is nothing, but a mere mistaking of ancient histories. all old
writers do testify, that the ancient Church next after the Apostles had diverse
degrees of ministers of the word, and commonly name them, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons. that appears out of Dionysius commonly called Areopagita, out of
Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Eusebius, Hierome, Augustine, Theodoret and all the fathers, whose words are often cited by us to that purpose. The authors of
the Cent. 2. c. 7. de gubernat. eccles.
Centuries confess, That the fathers of the Church that succeeded the
Apostles, had degrees of persons in the Church. And yet M. Cartwright imagined,
that all Bishops and ministers of the word were equal; and went about to prove
it out of the Centuries. The ancient fathers give authority to Bishops over
teaching elders; he abrogateth all authority from them, and makes them
equal, and all one. They speak only of elders that were ministers of the
word; M. Cartwright affirms, that the priests that came to the council of
Nice, (of which mention is made in In vita Constantin. lib. 1.
Eusebius and Lib. 1. c. 8.
Socrates,) were governing elders. But he should remember, they gave no
definite voice, and should have been excluded from the company of their wives,
if Paphnutius had not resisted the purpose of those, that would have that
decree pass: which to interpret of elders only governors, is mere ignorance
in matter of history, and direct against M. Cartwr. plot.

His ignorance in the fathers appears both by the former argument, and by his
continual misallegation, and misconstruing of them. To go no further, examine
that chapter or 1. reply.
section which he has framed to prove that the election of ministers ought
to be made by the people. And also 1. reply. p. 99. and 100.
those places where he would prove, that Bishops whereof the ancient fathers
make mention, were only pastors of one parish, and had none other pastors or
parishes, but one underneath them.

His ignorance of divinity is testified to the world, first, by his unadvised
approbation of Fenners book, which is the overthrow of all divinity, although
called by M. Cartwright holy divinity, and approved for an excellent piece of
workmanship: next, by the new confession of faith, and new forms of
sacraments set down in that new Communion book, whereof he was either chief
author or chief favorer and approuer. Lastly in that new discipline, which
he falsely affirms to be drawn out of Gods word.

His ignorance in the Latin tongue is made famous by that Epistle of his, that
is set before Fenners book, which is the only thing of his, that ever I saw
in Latin, and is full of soloecismes. In the beginning there is a gross
soloecisme in these words: Tua legens, etc. subijt mentemde Mose viro Dei
historia. Likewise an improprietie in these words coelestis Canaan axiomata.
for axiomata signify rules of art, not laws of state. These words, vt me
adomnia mea officia quae in te proficisci possunt arctius deuinxeris, have bad
sense, and a barbarous phrase. In the 2. page lin. 14. communices, is put for
communicaris nay, as it seems he understands not Latin well. Cyprian has
sportulantes fratres in a certain Epistle. this he 2. reply. tract. eldership.
imagined to be brethren of the basket, where it may appear Cyprian mean^
brethren, that received wages. So that if he were to be charged with
disloyalty, as well as with ignorance, in some points, yea and not very
difficult neither, it were no wisdom for I. Throk. to be his half.

I do also call his replies a far^le of fooleries, ^haynous, and odious crime.
yet I suppose there is no learned man, that thinks otherwise. M. Whitakers
gives a very hard censure upon his second reply, wherein notwithstanding M.
Cartwright seems most to triumph. Quem Cartwrightus (says In a certain
letter to be shown.
he) nuper emisit libellum, eius magnam partem perlegi. ne viuam, si quid
vnquam viderim dissolutius, ac pene puerilius. Verborum satis ille quidem
lautam ac nouam suppellectilem habet, rerum omnino nullam, quantum ego iudicare
possum. Deinde non modo perverse de principis in rebus sacris atque
Ecclesiasticis authoritate sentit, sed in M. Whitaker touches him as well for
disloyalty as unlearned writing.
Papistaru^ etia^ castra transfugit, a quibus tamen viders vult odio capitali
dissidere. Verum nec in hac causa ferendus, and alijs etiam in partibus tela a
Papistis mutuatur. denique, vt de Ambrosio dixit Hieronymus, verbis ludit,
sententijs dormitat, and plane indignus est, qui a quopiam docto refutetur.
That which I say in general, he says in particular. neither do I think,
that either any University, or sound learned man will say the contrary.
Against the first reply this may be said, that if he show learning in any
thing, it is in the treatise of election of ministers. which notwithstanding is
either translated or stolen out of a In append. ad catal. test. verit.
treatise of Illyricus of the same argument. That which he has of Archbishops
and Bishops, as most of his other devises, he boroweth of Calvin, and Beza. and
indeed to say truth, he is most skilful in Caluins institutions. but take him
beyond that, and he wandreth and turns like a mariuer tossed on the sea
without help of star, or compass. I will not speak of his style, that is
so hard and rough, and so stuffed with far fetched, and out stretched
metaphors. This book of his will give testimony, how unpleasantly he writes.
and I mean not to follow him further, then is necessary to justify my former
sayings; which upon peine of hearing the lie, I am compelled to maintain. But
says he, Vniuer sities, Churches, and nations will give testimony of his
learning. true, and often times they give it upon favor or other respect. which
whether it be done in him or no, I will not examine. for I deny not, that M.
Cartwright is a man learned. but that he is excellently learned, and not
ignorant in the points wherein I have justly noted him, that would be proved.

As for the charge of disloyalty, I do not think, that I have simply and
directly laid it upon M. Cartwright. yet, if any such matter should have been
spoken, it might reasonably well have been justified. M. Whitaker in the place
before recited does touch him for the same matter: and his books published
abroad do sufficiently convict him. In a Disciplina eccl. sacra Dei verbo
descript.
certain form of discipline, about which M. Cartwright and diverse others had
long beaten their heads, and which they profess to be that discipline, which
they desire, as drawn out of the Scriptures for the good government of the
church, all government is given to the eldership, and the princes authority
neither excepted, nor mentioned. to this form M. Cartwright subscribed. Beside
this, if disloyalty be nothing, but a course either repugnant, or diverse from
laws and duties; it is no such heinous matter to charge him with disloyalty.
for what are his replies, and all his actions, but contradictions, and
spurnings, and mutinous repinings against laws and governors? I need not to
object unto him his familiarity with I. Throk. a man so well acquainted with
Penry, Hacket, and Copinger, nor his own knowledge of their general bad
intentions. neither will I put him in remembrance of all his negotiaon about
the new discipline, and the new Communion book: nor his secret consultations,
nor his intelligences with men of foreign nations, and all for alteration of the
ecclesiastical state, and laws. I will not say all, until I be urged. in the
mean while M. Cartwright has reason rather to think me patient in suffering
his abuses, then himself abused, or iniuried in this point, that is therein
touched so gently: and evil does this Praefator deserve at his hands, that
gives occasion to look upon the man's old sores, which were now bound up; and
to rub up matters both forgiven, and forgotten. himself, certes, was not wise,
to renew this quarrel, which he will, ere long, wish ended, and buried in
silence. the whole brotherhood of deformity will wish he had been well couched
in a soft featherbead, to dream of a new plot of reformation. But does the
Praefator say, the countries and places of his resiance give plentiful
testimony for his loyalty; as if guilty persons convicted by witnesses, and
evident proofs, were to be acquitted for general testimonials given to every
body upon every light occasion. It is a common saying, that Plus creditur vni
affirmanti quammille negantibus.
one witness in the affirmative proves more then 1000 in the negative. how
can they then that knew not these matters clear him, that is convicted by
witnesses, and his own writing? the Praefator therefore, that could neither
see reason, nor sense in my doings, seems to have little sense of seeing,
neither has he any great judgment in discerning. he denies all, but what
proof does he bring for his denial? just nothing; but slipping into his
hunters vein, says, I am slipper in the sear. which kind of style does
argue this preface to be I. Throk. a better hunter then writer, and a man of so
slipper and light behauior, as that Th. Cartwright for all his great learning,
can not defend him nor guard him from just reprehension.

The preface. The The best of this Preface and treatise, is stark naught.
best is, thou have here by this means (good Reader) in the evenness and How
then happens it, that he complains of wrong?
equabilitie of the Doctors hand toward this man, an infallible line laid
before thee, whereby thou may measure all the rest of his All these are
naught but railing words of a chafing Proloquutor.
reproaches so unconscionably thrown upon others. for has he dealt More
truly, Christianly, and charitably, then he has dealt with the whole Clergy
of England.
truly, modestly, charitably, and Christianly with this man? then make thou no
doubt or question, but he has affoorded full as good measure to others. On the
contrary, has he made no bones hand over head, and that beyond all I have
kept better compass then M. Cartwright.
compass of Christianity, to speak his pleasure of this man, being a man so
notably graced in By gifts he fares the better.
gifts, and one that has so many uncontrollable What notable graces, and
certain evidences of honest carriage of himself he has, does cuill appear by
this Brief.
evidences of his wise, and dutiful carriage of himself?

The answer.

It should seem, that Job Thr. who (I think) was the rude author of this
unpolished and uncivil preface, would very gladly take some advantage of my
unadvised dealing (as he takes it) with M. Cartwright, to clear himself: as
if that which I said against him were nothing, because it is not true, as he
believes, that I bring against M. Cartwright. but it will not be. This
therefore is to be put among the rest of his odd, or rather mad conclusions,
which in his moody passion he frames beside all mood and figure. his argument
stands upon particulars, and therefore has no good sequel. for he that
speaks untruth in one thing, may well speak truth in other things; and
although a man should uncivilly demean himself toward one; yet does it not
follow, that he should do it against all. for if that were granted, then were
not M. Cartwr. and Job Throk. to be credited in any thing, uttering so
manifold untruths in many things. nor were they to be so well accounted of
among their consorts, that have so misdemeaned themselves against the Prelates
of this Church, and diverse other honest men.

To let the advantage of the bad sequel of this argument go, I will not stick
to grant M. Throk. this favor, that my dealings with M. Cartwright be taken as
a pattern of the rest of my writings. such is the assurance of my plain, and
honest dealing with him, and of his bad dealing and misdemeanors against the
state. God is my witness I have not charged him wittingly with untruth, nor
dealt unconscionably with him: and that I hope to make good either by M.
Cartwrights own words, or by evident and sufficient proofs. and so not only
M. Throkmortons cause will still lie in the suddes, but M. Cartwr. also will
win small grace by his calumnious, and erroneous brief. Besides all this,
there is no small difference betwixt M. Carwright and M. Job Throkmorton. he is
a man not unlearned nor uncivil, nor furious: M. Job is neither well learned,
nor stayed, nor wise. but be he what he will, I will, by Gods help, justify my
doings to be far more charitable, just, and honest, then either his, or M.
Cartwrights. how well they are able to clear themselves of unconscionable, and
dishonest practices, does partly appear by that which is said against Job
Throk. and he can not answer; and partly shall more appear in this Treatise,
against M. Cartwright, and as often as they shall dare to stand upon their
pretended, and puritan innocence. Neither have I, as he leudly affirms, taken
things hand over head, or rashly spoken what I listed, but with good reason and
deliberation, and that according to good dealing, and a good conscience. for
proof whereof, I appeal, not only to all judicious and in different readers,
but also to M. Cartwrights own weak discourse; wherein, either in effect he
confesses as much as I say; or else can not prove that I have done him wrong.
Wherefore let these uncivil terms of untrue, and dishonest, and
unconscionable dealing, and such like, be esteemed as the froth of the foul
mouth of an angry and clamorous adversary, that has more malice in his
stomach then wit in his head, and more audaciousnesse to affirm, then power
to prove, or cause to utter. Of M. Cartwrights gifts I will not dispute. of
his honest carriage, I will reason no more then I am urged to; and that in his
proper place.

The preface. If he have done this (as the reading of this This Apology will
rather condemn him, the^ clear him.
apology will make it clear unto thee) then what reason have thou to marvel,
if thou see him now and then most Foul and shameful words, without cause
vttred.
fowly and shamefully ouer-reach himself against others, that are far I.
Throk. short of M. Cartw. and both short of duetiful dealing.
short of this man in judgment and sufficiency?

The answer.

What reason this babbling fellow has to repeat these words so often in this
preface, which should be so short; let the reader judge, unless he meant with
his tediousness to recompense M. Cartwrights brevity, I see none. With like
reason he begins to be angry with his reader, and to chide, and say, What
reason have thou to marvel? as if any had cause to marvel at any thing here,
save the presumptuous folly of the author of this preface. I for my part, how
short shaped so ever M. Throkmorton may be, and of what small judgment and
sufficiency he is, I may truly say, I have offered him no wrong, nor M.
Cartwright neither. Nay, albeit I had said more, yet should I neither have
ouer-reached my self, nor their deserts. Let him therefore cease his foul
speeches, and shameless outcries, and stay until he hear what I shall say to
M. Cartwrights apology. which is so far from clearing either of these two,
that both of them, I doubt not, will wish it had been in a clear fire, when
first it was printed.

The preface. It is I pray you, where?
written of Socrates, that being unjustly put to death without cause: while he
was He imagines he went to hanging.
going to execution, his Would M. Throk. wife do the like in like case?
wife followed him aloof off, howling, and weeping, and crying aloud: o my
husband dies guiltless, dies guiltless. Whereupon the good old man looking
back upon her with a frowning and angry countenance, replied Not one word so.
thus: why thou foolish woman, would thou have me die guilty? This being a
speech of an heathen man void of the true knowledge of God, will Do you
believe the resurrection of speeches in your puritan creed?
rise up (I fear) in judgment against many of Us puritanes, that want no
corruptions.
us, that profess christianity in this age, whose common corruption is such,
that when we are wrongfully burdened with any matter of disgrace, we fret at
nothing more, then that the thing is Therefore to makey our worship leave
fretting, nothing shall be objected here but truth.
false, that is so charged upon our Brave heads to bear charger.
heads. Why, if I were guilty, (says No wise man will so say.
one) or if it were true that they report of me, it would never grieve me:
whereas in truth (if we did rightly consider of it) it should grieve us and
This humility purita^s want as well as Lombards.
humble us most to be guilty, or that these things should be true, that are
thus blown abroad against us. Will thou Will ye see a Friar frapart begin to
preach?
know then good reader, how to carry thy self when thou art He tells not how.
thus injuriously dealt with by any false charge or imposition? Look upon the
Not upon I. Throk. nor his consorts.
example of the holy Saints and servant of God in the Scriptures, and as thou
see them do, so do thou. Anna when she was charged by Eli to be These men
when they are charged truly, do not answer so mildly.
drunken, did not fret or snuff at it, or look upon the man with a
disdainful eye, but in much patience and modesty made answer: Nay my lord
not so; I have drunk neither The puritans are unlike to Anua, for diverse of
them can not well dine without good claret wine and sack: and some drink rosa
solis, and sinnamom water.
wine nor strong drink, but have powered forth my soul before the Lord: count
not thy handmaid a wicked woman, for of the abundance of my grief have I
spoken, etc. S. Paul likewise when he was charged by Festus to be beside
himself was (we see) no whit distempered, or inflamed with it, but made
answer in all wisdom and reverence: I am not These fellows are not charged
to be mad, but when they are in deed besides themselves.
mad most noble Festus, but I speak the words of truth and soberness, etc.
this then must be thy course (good reader) and these be the M. Throk. never
found them yet.
steps that thou must tread in. thou know whose counsel and admonishment it
is, not to suffer I trust John Penry did not suffer, but as a malefactor.
as a malefactor. Look thou to that then in any case.

Hic This prefator albeit he have a brazen face, yet has nothing to do with
this brazen wall.
murus aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
Keep thou still a Listen M. Throk.
good conscience, and let the To have clear hearts, these fellows degorge
their filthy stomachs.
clearenesse of thy heart and innocence of thy hands be as a wall of brass
unto thee, and leave the rest to the Lord, to do what seems good in his own
eyes. and then if Satan do rage, or his Such were the Martinists.
instruments do revel or revile never so much, terming thee a drunkard, a mad
man, a traitor, a conspirator, an innouator, or what they will else: be not
thou Why then is this prefator thus troubled?
troubled or dismayed with it, but rather rejoice and give God thanks. For if
thou be able truly to say with the Apostle: by honor and dishonor; by good
report and cuill report; as deceivers and yet true, etc. then (howsoever the
blood thirsty may As the dogged Martinists did.
gnash and grind their teeth at thee) thy conscience may be at The reprobate
past feeling, are at peace with themselves.
peace, and thou may cheerfully answer thy good friends (that are
peradventure agrieued to see the falsehood and indignity of the impositions
laid upon thee) as Socrates Before he reported these words otherwise.
did to his wife. Why my As Socrates spoke to his wife, so the puritans speak
thus to theirs.
masters, would you have me suffer guilty, or be slandered and evil spoken
of deservedly? Thus doing what know thou whether the Lord (who has the
hearts of all men in his hands) will If M. Throk. and M. Cartw. understand this
of themselves, they do but dream.
make thy condemners to be thy clearers, and thy enemies thy friends, yea and
turn all this storm and tempest of That which is said of M. Throk. and M.
Cartwr. shall be proved to be no untruth, storm at it as much as they list.
untruths to thy further peace clearing, and security in the end? for was
there ever a more bitter and malicious enemy, then Saul was to David? and yet
we see how the Lord forced this wretched man (after many false surmises, and
unjust ielousies of treason and conspiracy against him) to pronounce sentence
for These men are more like Saul, then David.
David's acquitall in these words, thou art more righteous then I.

The answer.

All this is nothing, but a vain declamation of an idle fellow to exhort men to
patience. wherein the author pleases himself far better, then he contenteth
others. For what, I pray you, makes this to purpose, how patiently or
impatiently this sect does hear their faults reproved? It is written, says
the prefator, of Socrates. but where I pray you? forsooth no where, save in
this preface, or in some such like trifling ballade or pamphlet. For Socrates
was not led to execution, as this fellow, that has the fear of the gibbet
still before his eyes, imagines; but died of poison in his own house, as
Iudic. Socrat.
Plato and other witness: who make no mention of the houling of his wife, upon
which this supposed discourse is grounded.

He tells us further, how the speech of Socrates shallrise up in judgment
against many puritans: which is a very strange case. for if speeches rise up,
beware of M. Cartwr. replies, that are so full of words without matter, and
are light like bladders full of wind, and likely to fly sarre abroad. The rest
of this discourse is an idle digression, wherein the author falls into a
foolish chafe with those, that fret when they are falsely accused; and is angry
that all his consorts are not so patient as was Anna, David, Paul, and other of
Gods servants. but he has no reason. for his fellows be liker to railing
Shimei, and such malcontents as Shibah, or Ahitophel, or like Jeroboam. For so
these men would have us all to worship and fall down before their
church-aldermen, which are nothing but a pack of golden calfes like those of
Bethel, and would turn men from a settled state to seek a new church
discipline, as Jeroboam turned the children of Israel from the service of God,
to embrace a new worship in Bethel.

Further he exhorts all that love the eldership, to suffer false reproaches
patiently. yet I know none that reprocheth them falsely. nor does Job
Throkmorton cease whining, albeit he can say nothing for himself, nor can M.
Cartwright keep silence, albeit he would seem patient, as appears by his
brief. evil therefore does this exhortation sit in this man's mouth.

He does also exhort men, not to suffer as malefactors: but this comes
somewhat to late. for John Penry and diverse of his consorts have suffered as
malefactors already. For answer of the rest of this section, I refer you to
the notes in the margent of the text: a worthy answer for such vain words.

The preface. And who knows, whether the Lord may work the No doubt he would,
if I had committed like offense.
like effect and remorse in M. Sutcliffe ere he die, even to force him in like
manner (after all his Cease your foolish railing. and prove that I have
unjustly accused any.
bundle of outcries and unjust accusations) to O fond and simple fellow, as if I
had done like Job Throk. I know not what!
pass the white stone on the behalf of the accused, and himself to
pronounce: That certainly Thomas Cartwright and What has Egerton to do here?
St. Egerton are more righteous then he, and thereupon to add Speak for your
self. and play the fool still, I will play no part in your fooleries.
farther as the same Saul did afterward, I have sinned, I have played the
fool, I have erred exceedingly, in slandring and belying the innocent. O vain
man to talk thus, what is good for others, that knows not what is good for
himself!
Sure I am, it were happy for him, if he might live to do this of conscience.
but whether he do or no, labor thou always (good reader) so to I walk not
then in the way of puritans, nor sit not in the seat of scorneful Martinists.
walk as thou may not justly be touched with any thing that may be a stain
to thy holy profession.

The answer.

Here toward the end of his preface, the author forgets himself, and
falls into a dream. wherein he imagines that in the end M. Cartwright and
M. Egerton, and I shall become friends: which is not unlikely. but not in that
sort, which he fancieth; but rather when Th. Cartwr. and M. Egerton shall have
publicly retracted their errors, and acknowledged the wrong they have done to
the church of England. which if reason and conscience move them not to do:
yet I hope law will in the end enforce them. But if they refuse to stand to
law, and will still rage and rail against the ecclesiastical state: rather
will children throw stones at them as against mad men, then wise men pass any
white stone of absolution on their side. As for my part, I have not written any
thing concerning the cause of this church, whereof I need to stand in doubt as
they have done. Wherefore the prefator may do well to turn his speech to his
friends, that percase may hearken to his advise, and follow it. He knows, that
in this cause I am his adversary, and am well acquainted with his folly;
wherein I leave the man still rauing like those that cast stones into the air,
and so proceed.

The preface. And so harboring still in thy breast the He is altogether a
stranger to this crooked generation.
comfortable guest of a good conscience (as an asswagement of all the miseries
and Does he not plainly confess himself to be a malcontent.
discontentments of this life) cease not to pray in the He says well in the
spirit: for voices of prayer, or praises for her Majesty, or the state we
seldom hear to proceed out of their mouths.
spirit for the peace of Jerusalem, and for her right excellent majesty,
that has been so long Gods good instrument of that happy peace, that as Joshua
commanded the Sun to stand, till he were avenged on his enemies, so the Lord
would command this This sunshine the disciplinarians have much obscured
with the mistes of their turbu- Ient stirs.
sunshine of our peace to stand, and never to go down, till all the Then
should M. Cartw. and I. Throk. lie in the mire.
enemies of his church be brought low to the dust. and as that was the
longest day that ever was, so this having been already by the mercy of God the
happiest, may also prove by the power of God to be (...).
the longest reign that ever was. That the date of her life may (if it please
the Lord) end with the Vae generationi huica ferme^to Tharisaorum. Bornard. in
cant.
last date, and dissolution of this earth, to the Diligamus non verb and
lingua, sed opere and veritate. 1. Joan. 3.
continuallblisse and renown of this land, to the terror and amazing of the
wicked, to the comfort and rejoicing of the godly, and to her own everlasting
peace, and happiness in the life to come.

The answer.

Of all the guestes that come to the synoddicall meetings, and houses of these
sectaries, there is no greater stranger, then this guest called Good
conscience, that he talks of. for neither in their public writings against
the church, and chief governors thereof, nor in their private negotiations
and contracts, do they (for any thing I can learn) use either good
conscience, or good dealing. Other good fellows there are, that do frequent
their houses more often, as pride, disdain, malice, envy, hatred, detraction,
lying, oppression, folly, fury, and such like, with which they are better
acquainted. but it is an easy matter to hide soul matters under fair words.
Wolves are disguised often times in sheeps clothing: and poison is sometimes
given in honey: Impia sub dulci melle venena latent. Take heed therefore of
malcontents, that cut men's throtes with their good conscience: and do not
straight think, that these men love her matestie, for that they make such
glosing and flattering prayers. it may be, in ore mel, in cord fell. All men
honor the sun in the midst of the firmament, but when night comes, they
fall on sleep and forget all. And of them we may truly say, That they
flattered with their mouth and dissembled with their tongue, Psalm. 78.
but their heart is not upright. for if these kind of men had truly loved her
majesty, and from their heart prayed for her, they would not have prayed for
her in spirit only, as this man would have his consortes to do, but expressed
their affection in their words: they would also in their prayers as other good
subjects do, have expressed and given to her, her due style. they would not
have covertly and cunningly taken from her all power in ecclesiastical
gouemment, as they have done, not once so much as mentioning either her, or her
royal authority in their book of holy and synoddicall discipline, to which
M. Cartwright and many others subscribed, they would not have impugned her
laws, and by right and wrong sought to have altered her government, and to
have established new laws and orders in this church. they would not have
disgraced that blessed reformation which we do enjoy by her means, neither
would Gilby p. 66. 88. and 142. and Motion with submiss. p. 31. 32. 33.
they have resembled her to Jeroboam, Ahab, Iehoram, Ahas, Gedeon, Nadab, Saul,
Iehu, and Asa in those points wherein they failed in their duties toward God.
neither would M. Cart. have made her majesty and all princes subject to the
eldership. which is nothing else but for the supremacy of the Pope, to bring in
the supremacy of the eldership, and (as he 2. part 2. reply, page 65. and 92.
says) to make princes to lick the dust of their feet. so that where we had
well hoped that we had been delivered from kissing the Popes feet, they would
make us not only to kiss the feet of a pack of base pezants and artizans,
but also to lick the dust under their feet. Much (I do know) they do brag
of their loialtie and good minds. but give me the heart, and let them leave
their glorious words. What service at any time have they done her majesty at
home or abroad, in arms or in peace, in the church or common wealth? nay
rather where have they not been ready to Martin was then published to make a
mutiny at home, when the Spaniards were on the coast, to fight with us abroad.
cross those that have been ready to do her service, and to trouble the
state at home, as valiant men defended the same abroad? they may do well
therefore to have a more principal regard of her majesty, and their duty
toward her hereafter, and not either to shut her out of their discipline, as
they have done, or else to prefer Th. Cartwr. innocence before her safety,
as this wretched prefator has done, painting him out first in many strange
colors, and gilding, as they say, earthen pots in many golden words, and not
remembering her, save in the last clause, and to no purpose. Which fault to
amend, let us desire God not only to shield her from her open enemies, but
also to discover all her dissembling friends, and to guard her from their
treacherous practices, and lewd disgraces; that she may be no less victorious
over her open foes, then secured from her pretended friends. But enough of this
malicious, and yet most worthless and graceless preface. Let us now come to
M. Cartwrights brief, which is the foundation of the prefators vain brags,
and that thing that gave the title to this work, and with whom our principal
purpose is to deal, if it may so please his highness, who scarce vouchsafes
to look down upon me, or to speak to me in his Treatise. the words of his
brief, I set down truly and entierly, least thereby he might think to
escape with some advantage.

THE EXAMINATION OF M. Cartwrights Apology.
M. Cartwright. HIs Great words small reason.
slanders are either in Do slanders consist in breach of duties?
breach of necessary duties imposed upon all Christians, or in things which in
their nature being Who ever heard of any man slandered for use of things
indifferent, beside this abbreuiator?
indifferent, are by him (in respect of mine If he have any royal or honorable
estate put on him by ye eldership, it is more then I knew.
estate) given out as things of no good report.

All these words M. Cartwright does falsely entitle D. Sutcl ffes charge. So
little had he to say, if he would have reported my words as I spoke them.
In the former kind is his charge of conspiracy with Hacket and Copinger, to
a mutual communication with Copinger by word, writing, and consenting fol. 10.
p. 2. and fol. 44. p. 2. and that he did not dissuade him, but rather willed
him, that he should attempt nothing but by advise, and that he should be wise
and circumspect. Which words he sets down in a diverse letter, from the
letter of his own book: as if they were words of a letter of Thomas
Cartwright to Copinger. fol. 48. p. 2.

Matthew. Sutcliffe.

THe Prologue ended, now comes M. Cartwright in to play his part: but so
unhandsomely, as that every judicious reader complains, that he is greatly
abused both by the Prologue and by him. The Prologue told us of a man that
should play innocence, and come in armed with patience: but M. Cartwright that
should do the feat, fails in both: for neither does he deal justly, as
becomes innocence; nor patiently, as armed with patience. The first is
proved by diverse reasons thorowout this whole treatise, and here especially in
that he changes and falsifieth my words. The second is evident, in that he
cries out of slanders, and has neither patience to bear, nor wisdom to
forbear. Oh that he could as well endure to hear himself reproved, as
commended! certes these impatient complaints of slanders had not needed. but I
see, men naturally love to feel themselves clawed, and think themselves
worthy of all praise: and M. Cartwright himself, for all his supposed
innocence, is not yet sufficiently purged of this humor. There is nothing that
tends to the exalting of his credit and reputation, but he embraces it: he
is content that Chap. to F. 1585.
special prayers be made for him. A certain follower of his signifies that
upon M. R. to F.
news of his deliverance, the society being called together, there were
Psalms of thanksgiving, and prayers, and a Sermon made for the same. It
pleases him that his adherents make such account to see him, to confer with
him, to read his books. I would gladly know (says Gelibr. to F.
one) when I might come from Oxford to London to see M. Cartwright. I thank
God (says Far. to Litl.
another) I have satisfied in part my longing with conference with M.
Cartwright, of whom I think, as she (he means the Queen of Saba) did of M.
Cartwright another Solomon.
Solomon. Fenner writing against M Bridges, p. 120.
says, that the form of government set down by M. Cartwright, is commanded
by God. he has percase consulted with God himself. We want books ( Gel. to F.
an. 1586.
says one Gellybrand) whereby we may come to the knowledge of the truth. I
mean (says he) T. C. books. A brave direction to come to the truth. One
Gayton in a letter to Field prays him to remember to reserve for him one of
the rare birds books: and says that well he may be called Cartwright. viz.
for well writing. How birds may write, and how he may allude from the name of
Cartwright to cunning writing, I forbear to dispute. for it were to no purpose
to ask reason of every action of these men. M. Cartwright also does well like
to hear of his own praises. commonly they call him most reverend, as did one
Chap. to F.
Chapman. Gayton calls him a rare bird, and that is no owl, but some phoenix.
Far. to Littl.
one does esteem him, as the Queen of Sheba did Solomon. Wiggington Exam.
Wigg.
confesses, that Arthington, Copinger, and Hacket, the very day that the two
first made their Proclamation in Cheapeside, told him that M. Cartwright had
done more against Antichrist then any in the world, since the Apostles times.
but yet that is nothing in respect of that which one writes to Cholm. to Field
1582.
Field of that man. Sicut discipuli (says he) olim presto habueaunt ipsum
dominum: ita magistrum Cartwrightum dominum meum habeo praesentem. He compares
himself and his fellows to the Apostles, and M. Cartwright to Christ. and M.
Cartwright disdeineth not to be called of his fellow minister lord. nay M.
Trauerse disdeinfully checketh Trau. def. p. 32.
M. D. Bridges for that he said, Cartwright, without giving him his titles. all
this pleases and contenteth M. Cartwright reasonably well. but now that I do
plainly tell him the truth, he is offended, and cries out of slanders. Is it
not verified in him, that is commonly said, that flattery procures friends,
and truth enemies? Well, let us see what reason he has to complain thus
grievously of slanders.

His slanders (says M. Cartwright) but whose slanders, his conscience percase
would not suffer him to set down: or if his conscience, that is herein
hardened, would suffer him, yet by Gods just iudgeement he did not, to declare
the wrong he has herein done to me. for if by slander he mean that which in
Latin we call calumniam, I have not slandered him; for ff. ad S.C. turpil. l.
1.
calumnia est criminis falsi in alium intentio: as has been showed. but that
which I say, either is not criminous, as himself in part confesses, saying,
that my slanders are but reports in matters indifferent: or else very true, as
shall be auerred. l. eum ff. de iniurits.
Eum autem qui nocentem infamauit, non est bonum, aut aequum ob eamrem
condemnari. If by slander he mean that which we call iniuriam, and vnde actio
iniuriarum oritur, then have I not iniuried him, nor slandered him; for my
writings, as they were all begun and published in defense of laws and orders,
so was there nothing in them but according to law. ff. de iniuriis. l.
iniuriarum.
Is aute^, says Vlpian, qui iure publico vtitur, non videtur iniuriae
faciendae causa hoc facere. iuris enim executio non habet iniuriam. but with M.
Cartwright and his consortes it is not so clear; for first they have
injuriously uttered words to the disgrace, not only of particulars, but also
of the whole clergy of this Church of England: and therefore by the laws of
the Romans are condemned; and that first, for uttering reprochful words: and
next for their infamous writings. l. Item apud labeon.. ait praetor. ff. de
iniuriis.
qui aduersus bonos mores conuicium cui fecisse dicetur, in eum iudicium dabo,
says the Praetor or chief Justice of Rome. Hi qui, says ff. eod lib. illud..
si quis librum.
Vlpian, librum ad infamiam alicuius pertinentem Listen M. Throl morton.
scripserit, composuerit, ediderii, Listen M. Cartwright.
doloue malo fecerit, quo quid eoru^fieret, etiamsi alterius nomine ediderit,
de ear agere (sc. iniuriarum) licet. These are therefore libellers,
slanderers, and by law not to be received as witnesses in judgment, nor to
make testament. I would be very much ashamed, if they had any such matter to
object against me.

And yet notwithstanding both his own guiltiness and mine innocence M.
Cartwright, as I perceive, meant to charge me with slanders, and that not only
in breach of necessary duties, but in things indifferent also, as he says. a
matter very strange, and new, and to express them lively, like to his fancy
of discipline: that is, fantastical, and very absurd. for neither is the
breach of duty the object of slander, nor do reports in things indifferent
bring infamy, but so long has the man been striving about things indifferent,
as he calls them, that he knows not the difference of things simply evil,
or absolutely good or indifferent. Beside that, he shall find by particulars,
that either I do not object the matters which he would enforce upon me, or
that I do prove them sufficiently. Wherefore, unless his estate, of which he
here speaks, be greater then I do imagine, it will be no slander to tell him,
that his division of slanders, and first entrance into his purpose is very
rude and simple: and that he does me wrong to challenge me either for slander
or wrong offered to him. and that shall appear, by the grace of God, thorowout
this whole discourse.

The first thing wherein he charge me to have slaundered him, is conspiracy
with Hacket and Copinger: a matter, that I utterly disauow. Why then does he
not justify his charge, and bring in his proofs? in the places which he
quoteth in my answer to Throkmortons letter, there is no such matter. Nay, I
do not so much as name conspiracy in respect of his dealings with them. if any
do charge him, it is his own guilty conscience, that does charge him, and his
foltring tongue that runs percase unawares upon the truth. for mine own
part, I do neither charge him, nor can I discharge him. good dealing therefore
required, that he should have set down my words as I wrote them, and not thus
falsely to forge odious matters, and so to refute them. is this the sincerity
he professes? is this the good dealing we are to expect at his hands? and
does he think to discharge himself, or win credit by this dealing? Praetor
edixit, says Prator. ff. de iniuriis.
Vlpian, qui agit iniuriarum, dicat quid iniuriae factum sit. quia qui famosam
actionem intendit, non debet vagaricum discrimine alienae existimationis, sed
designare and certu^ specialiter dicere, quam se iniuriam passum contendit. Why
then does not M. Cartwright specify the injury, and prove it by direct
words, or witnesses? does he not see, that even heathen men do abhor and
condemn this unchristian and uncivil kind of dealing?

Indeed I confess that I wrote first that M. Cartwright had intelligence of
Copingers matters. and that M. Throkmorton gently confesses, and Edm.
Copingers letters testify: secondly, that M. Cartwright had secret conference
with Copinger. and that is partly testified by Copingers letters, and partly
confessed by Job Throk. and somehat by M. Cartwr. himself; albeit the same was
done indirectly by interposed persons. thirdly, that he consented, as it
seems, to Copingers devise for the violent deliverance of him, and certain
his companions. and this Copinger Vid. fol. 44. p. 2.
writes, and diverse presumptions prove, which anon shall be examined. but M.
Cartwr. to make the charge more heinous, leaves out the words, as it seems,
and where I speak of consenting to one matter, he applies it to all Hackets
treasons, where with I do not charge him. Nay, where M. Throk. says that I
would feign have M. Cartwr. M. Egerton, and M. Vdall to be traitors and
conspirators, I do plainly deny it, and disauow it. I would then have all men
judge, what manner of dealing M. Cartwr. uses in this place, nay I would
himself would consider it: and then if he have but common reason, he must
needs be ashamed. fourthly, I confess I wrote, that M. Cartwright did not
dissuade Copinger, but rather willed him, that he should attempt nothing but by
advise, and that he should be wise and circumspect. and that these words were
of a diverse letter from the rest of the book. but the reason was not to
signify this to be M. Cartwrights, but Copingers letters: as M. Cartwright
might have seen, if he had not been blind, and would have confessed, if he
had not meant to quarrel, and by false iugling to take some little advantage.
further I do not charge M. Cartwright. why then does he charge me further?
and this that I have said is most true. Why then does he without cause cry out
slanders, slanders? do I charge him so farte as he says? or do I not say
truly in that I have reported of him? Yes verily. and I doubt not but the
truth will appear by his own singlesoled answer to the foresaid supposed
objections, that here follows.

M. All this book being ignorantly and corruptly pointed, I have corrected,
not meaning to take advantage of small matters.
Cartwrights answer. Hacket was a man whom to my knowledge I Do I say you did?
never saw. so was Arthington until he was freed of his We Englishmen say,
emprisonment.
prison he endured for his And has his treachery no other more special name
with you?
misdemeanor. With Copinger I had acquaintance upon occasion of M. Ambrose
Copinger, chief officer to the right honorable the Earl of Warwike. for
coming to his house Ergo not voluntarily.
necessarily for the settling of the estate of the hospital of the Are not you
of those, that have men's persons in admiration for hope of advantage?
right honorable the Earl of Leicester: there I met with this Copinger sundry
times, some three or four years before this lewd practice brake forth With
the former two I had never I do not charge you with it. but with the third
actour you had.
conference either by letter, or otherwise by message sent from them to me, or
from me to them.

Between Copinger and me touching this matter I am charged with, this M.
Throk. and Copingers letters do speak further.
only passed which follows: While I was in You will not deny, but it was for
just causes.
prison in the Fleet, M. Rafe Hockenhull propounded unto me, as things he
desired to be resolved of in the behalf of one of his acquaintance, whether
there were any Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists in these days. I answered,
that those callings ceased many hundred years ago, and as no Apostles were
ever hereafter to be looked for, so the other If all were ceased, how happens
it, that these are sometime expected? and why more then Apostles?
two were not to be expected, unless God in the utter wast and desolation of
the Church did extraordinarily raise them up for th'erection of a Will you have
Gods Church laid sometime in dust, and new made as Adam was of clay?
church out of the dust and that therefore there was no use of such men But if
the Church lie wast, as some of your consorts say it does in England, then you
confess these callings have place here.
amongst us. To a second question, how and by what marks such a one, as
thought himself one of these might in deed know, whether he were so or not; I
answered, that this doubting of the matter, was an evident and an invincible
argument that he was none. for that such as have a calling immediately from
God, are not to What is this, but to give the bridle to all fanaticall spirits
to range up and down without restreint?
ask counsel of flesh and blood, as those that have the undoubted testimony
of Gods spirit unto their spirits, that they are called of him. Whereupon M.
Hockenhull telling me, that it was Copinger which had entered into such conceit
of himself, I This and that which follows would be proved. for Copingers and
Throk. letters import the plain contrary.
desired him to deal with him, for dissuading him from such frantike opinions;
which he told me he did accordingly. And afterward somewhile before his lewd
practice brake forth, he admonished some of his kindred before Copinger
himself, that if he belonged to him, he that day before the morrow would make
him fast either in Bride well, or Bedlem. After some space of the demand of
these questions, he sent by M. Then did not M. Hockenhull take him for a Bedlem
mate.
Hockenhull to entreat, that he might come to me into the Fleet. for that if
he might so do, he did not doubt, but he would show me such evident tokens
of an extraordinary calling, as I should have no power to deny it, and that he
would for further security in this matter, come waiting upon M. Hockenhul in a
This showed he had some bad practice in hand, wherewith he would not have M.
Cartwright endangered.
blew coat. To whom I returned this answer, that if he came to me, I would
not once so much as speak with him, for that his disease was of that kind as
needed some other remedy then disputation. And if he desired to be resolved of
the truth in that matter, there were He thought him not vnworworthy to be
conserted with, but would not now confer with him himself for fear of
danger.
other both for their learning and liberty more fit to deal with him, then I
was. Not long after this the same M. This also shows him to be no Bedlem
fool.
Hockenhul told me, that because Copinger might not come unto me, he had
written me a letter, which he had sent by him. To whom I said, I would
receive none from him, and so returned his letter without But will you deny
that you heard it read, or knew the effect, or returned answer, all which
Copingers letters testifies
so much as once taking it into my hand, or looking upon the superscription.
Nothing less.
Whereby may appear, how untrue it is, that I and Copinger had mutual
conference by word and letters, to whom in my knowledge I It is enough, if he
wrote to you.
never wrote in my life: assured I am, never since he entered into this wretched
practice. After this I heard of M. Hockenhull, that Copinger would inform her
Majesty of certain Why did not M. Cartwright bewray this to some magistrate?
horrible treasons committed by personages of high calling both in Church and
common wealth. which as I always esteemed vain, knowing the broken wit of the
man, so when by report I understood the Then had he intelligence of matters as
they passed.
particulers thereof (which argued one Tyndarus imputed also madness to one
that might bewray him. Plaut. in captiuis. and it is an ordinary practice so to
do.
berened of common sense) I desired Why did he not tell M. Ambrose Copinger of
this? forsooth he meant only to wipe his hands, and let the man run on.
old M. Michel, that if Copinger came to the right honorable my very good Lady
the Countess of Warwike for her mediation unto her excellent Majesty for such
matters, as he would deliver, he would signify that although I knew her
wisdom otherwise able easily without any writing to sound his folly, yet that
it would please her to take this notice of me, which otherwise she might be
ignorant of, that he was overtaken with strange conceits of some extraordinary
calling, and gifts he was farthest from.

Again, this whole matter of Hackets conspiracy being by commission to
certain of her Majesty's most honorable counsel, and otherwise and grave men
commended to be examined: I leave it to be considered whether M. D. Sutcliffe
be so quick sighted as by himself and his Inquisitors find out heretics,
not conspirators.
inquisitors, having (for any thing I can learn) but the I had beside that Job
Throk. letter to a Lady.
same grounds her Majesty's commissioners had, to find out that, which men of
so great wisdom and circumspection with so great means as they had of
commandment over all that might bring any light unto that matter, could not Of
favor they winked at lesser faults and of grace passed over M. Wigginton, M.
Throkmorton, and M Cartwright.
find out: and whether this dealing of his be not some charge of want in them
It was neither of these, but their favor, and the clemency of these times.
either of wisdom in not finding it out, or of fidelity in not once calling me
to th'answere of it.

Moreover Arthington being compact in this conspiracy with Hacket and
Copinger, if there were any No man says hand, but head.
hand of mine in that wretched practice, in all likelihood Arthington must
needs be He as a simple man was an instrument, and no deviser. and therefore
knew little.
privy unto it. he is a man alive, let him be examined, and a man also whom I
What need this to be repeared that is not to purpose?
never spoke too, nor caused to be spoken with in my life. His I do neither
accuse him, nor reason in this sort.
reasons to induce his Reader to think his accusations to be true, are (so Do
you confute and remember not what? o brave S. Innocent!
far as I remember) these: the first is touching our mutual conference by
letters, which is Not never can be. for that he had intelligence of Copingers
matters by letters and otherwise, which is all I said, he confesses.
already answered. Another, my concurrence with Copinger in fasting. I confess
that as there was just cause for humbling my self in fasting, in feeling the
displeasure of her excellent Majesty, and others in great authority under
her, so did I sometimes M. thinks, if he had much bestowed himself therein,
he should have been more spent, and less fat.
bestow my self in that exercise. but that I did it the same day that Copinger
and his accomplices, or at the least with any notice either given to him of my
fasting, or recetued from him of his fasting, I And Copinger confidently
affirms it, who is rather to be believed in this case, being a man not
partial against M. Cartwright.
utterly deny, as a thing most untrue. A third reason is, that Hacket and his
fellows commended me at the cross in Cheap above the writers of our age. I
acknowledge their great folly in that commendation, or madness rather, who^ am
That is true. but the question is not, what is true, but what the traitors
spoke and thought.
scarce worthy to bear the books after many that have lived and yet do live
in this age, yea and I have not seen the like humility in this man, for this
therefore, transeat.
in this Church of our land. But M. D. Sutcliffes report herein is not upright,
for although I was not present, yet I heard of diverse, that were standers by,
that their excessive praise A notorious untruth refuted by all Copingers
letters of M. Carwr. and by the standers by, and by witnesses examined, and on
record.
was of Thomas Cartwright, that had been sometimes, when he The Barowists and
others say, he is in deed much changed.
first wrote in the cause of the discipline of the Church, but not of him as he
now was, for that, as was said, he was fallen away from his former love.
Lastly, that M. Cartwright says he was a medler in those matters, and well
understood them, it appears by a letter of I. Bowmans a servant in Oundle to
Wigginton: I desire (says he) to send me the copy of a writing which you had
from M. Cartwright upon the court matters, when goodman Hacket was with you the
first time. M. Wigginton I am assured never received from me any Ask John
Bowman.
writing during the time of my imprisonment, or afterward, or at any time of
my life to my best remembrance; whereof let M. Wigginton that lives be
examined. But if he had received a writing of the M. Cartwright cannot salve
his credit, unless he put the court into the Star Chamber. o wretched
excuse!
court matters in the Star Chamber, how thereof can it be concluded, that I
was a meddler in this matter, let all men judge. for my part I You will not
understand it. but if you meddled not, why had Wigginton those intelligences
from you, but to disperse them, and to make your faction ready?
understand no sequel of it. Upon all which both witnesses, and reasons, I
leave it to be judged, how untrue it is, that M. D. Sutcliffe does charge me
with, He does most peruersly allege my words, and mar my meaning.
touching the matter of Hacket, and Copinger, etc. both in words, writing, and
consent, which A ridiculous defense.
never spoke with them of it in my life, never wrote unto them, nor received
writing or message from them, further then Job Throkmorton says more then this.
I my self have confessed. Whereof let it also be further judged, whether I
was consenting to that To some part you were, as Copingers and Throkmortons
letters signify, and your self confess here.
wretched practice.

Matthew. Sutcliffe.

Thus you have heard M. Cartwrights long answer to a short matter. or rather
an answer abounding with words, and deuoid of all good matter, and (to say as
you shall find it by examination) so insufficient and disioynted, as that I
doubt not, but if my words were rightly set down, and not either cut shorter,
or made longer as a certain tyrant did his unwelcome guestes, his own answer
would clear me both of slander, and injury.

The first exception therefore that I may justly take to his answer, is this,
that he omitteth, and dare not set down the words of my books, wherein he
takes himself to be charged. the second is, that he answers not to these
matters, wherewith he says he is charged. the third is, that he forgeth
matters never meant nor intended by me. the last is, that he misplaceth my
words, and peruerteth my meaning, and yet answers nothing sufficient to
clear himself.

The first is proved by the words that follow: In my answer to the petition of
the disciplinarians I demanded this question, Page 197.
Whether M. Cartwright and some of his fellows and folowers, had not
intelligence of Hackets and Copingers practices, and whether they understood
not, that Copinger and his fellows or some of them pretended not to have an
extraordinary calling, which moved them to attempt matters which might prove
very dangerous to themselves; and whether also they knew not, that the actions
which they purposed to attempt by virtue of their calling did tend to their
deliverance out of prison, and to the advancing of the holy cause, as they
termed it; and did not thereupon hold a fast, and pray, that God would give
success to such means, as should be attempted for their deliverance, and for
the setting up of their discipline: and whether M. Cartwright and the rest did
not well understand, to what end extraordinary callings did tend; and lastly,
whether these points being to be proved against them, they have not bin
mercifully dealt withal, that have not therefore been called in question. I did
ask further if M.G. Wiggington did not confirm Coping, in his purposes, and
was not well acquainted with his bad practices. I did likewise demand if M.P.
Wentw. did not in a letter written to Ed. Copinger pray God to direct him, and
did not by Iosuahs words encourage him. and whether M. Job Throk. did not write
a letter to the same man to advise him: and whether M. Cartwr. M. Egerton, M.
Charke, and Vdall did not receive letters from Copinger concerning his intended
practice, and M. Egerton write to him again. of all which this may be
collected, that M. Cartwright either by himself or his friends, knew all this
practice. In my answer to Job Throk. I said, Fol. 10. p. 2.
that M. Cartwright did never so resolutely answer Copinger, but that he still
hoped to have his allowance, and that Copinger dealt with him, not so much
concerning revelations, Page 44.
as extraordinary callings. And in another place I say, that great mercy has
been extended to M. Cartwright, having run such a course against laws, and
being so deeply engaged in Copingers cause; that he is not further called to
answer. all which M. Cartwright has passed by for the most part, and buried
in silence.

That M. Cartwright has not satisfied so much as concerns these points of
Hackets practices, is evident by his answer. for he has not answered any of
these particulars: which he must do before he be cleared. That he forgeth
matters, it is proved evident by that which is said already. for he says,
that I charge him with conspiring with Hacket, and communication with Copinger:
which is untrue. The last point is also proved by comparing my words with his
answer. for where I say M. Cartw. was The answ. to I. Throk. letter f. 44. p.
2.
engaged in Hackets and Copingers cause conferring both by word and writing,
and consenting (as it seems) to his devise for the deliverance of himself
and other his companions then in prison: he leaves out the words, as it
seems, and adds this word, communication: and where I say, he seemed to
consent to his devise concerning the deliverance of the prisoners, he would
have it, that I simply charge him with consenting to all his conspiracy. such
manifest force must he offer to my words, before he could make any show of
answer. yea, and when he has done all this, what does he answer that may
satisfy either his friends or enemies concerning these matters?

I said in effect he had intelligence of Hackets and Copingers practices, and
liked them as far as they pretended the advancement of his consistorian
discipline, albeit I will not say, he knew the particulers of the course they
meant to hold. And that this is true, is proved, first by Copingers words, who
had no reason to speak untruth: then by M. Throkmorton his dear brothers
letters, lastly by M. Cartwrights own confession. From you, says In his
letter to M. Cartwr. dated 24. of Febr.
Copinger to his reverend friend M. Cartwright, I received this message, that I
should attempt nothing, but by advise of those, which you would procure to
counsellme. Afterward he desires, that monday being appointed by M. Cartwright
for conference might hold, M. Throkmorton In his letter to a certain Lady.
says, that having recovered himself, he signified to M. Cartwright in the
Fleet what had passed betwixt M. Copinger, and himself. How then could he be
ignorant of matters, having such a good intelligencer as M. Throkmorton, who
knew whatsoever passed? M. Cartwright in this answer confesses how M.
Hockenhul carried diverse messages betwixt himself and Copinger, and one letter
also of Copingers to him. Likewise that he knew how Copinger meant to discover
certain horrible treasons (as he pretended) to her Majesty, and what the
particulers thereof were. which argues, that M. Copinger would conceal
nothing from his loving and reverend friend (as he calls him) M. Cartwright.

To all this what answers M. Cartwright? he says, first that heneuer saw
Hacket to his knowledge, nor yet Arthington until after his imprisonment. But
what then? have not many enterteined practices of treason, and rebellion with
the Pope, and Spanish king, that never saw their persons? it suffices that
they have received letters, messages, or means from them. the which course M.
Cartwright held in his business likewise. for albeit he knew not Hacket nor
Arthington, yet he confesses he was acquainted with Copinger, and received
messages from him by M. Hockenhull. The parts therefore of this answer are
like the of spring of Cadmus, which killed one another. Besides the confession,
it must be remembered, that Job. Throkmorton brought intelligences from Copinger
to M. Cartwright. Lastly M. Copinger does write very familiarly to M.
Cartwright, and says in effect, that although he might not come to him
without danger to both, yet desired to be approved of him, promising to
declare to him, or such as he should appoint, both generalities and
particularities, so far as he desired to look into them. For before that, he
wrote, that he had entered into a course that was likely to bring danger to
himself. If then M. Cartwr. refused to co^ferre with Copinger, or to receive
letters from him, it was only for fear of approaching too nere to danger.

Secondly, he alleges for himself, that albeit he was in deed acquainted
with Edmund Copinger, and had assoiled the said Edmund two questions propounded
to him by M. Hockenhull, and had received a message from him first, and
afterward seen a letter of Copingers written unto him: yet he answered the
questions little to Copingers fatisfaction; and that he would neither receive
his message, nor read his letters; And further, that he dissuaded Edm. Copinger
from his frantike conceits by M. Hockenhull, and gave notice to the countess
of Warwike, that M. Copinger whereas he meant to discover certain treasons to
her majesty, was not to be regarded, as a man overtaken with strange conceits
of an extraordinary calling. But all this is either unlikely, or else makes
nothing for M. Cartwrights clearing. for albeit he might make show by M.
Hockenhull to dissuade Copinger from his course, and seemed to reject his
conference, and his letters: yet in truth his meaning was only to keep
himself from danger, and not to break of Copingers pretended enterprise. for
that does Copinger plainly affirm, and reason confirm. For first M.
Cartwrights answer concerning extraordinary callings not so ceased, but that
in the wast of the Church they might have place, did stir up him to think,
that discipline which M. Cartwright compares to a wall and hedge being
wanting, this church admits such callings. yea, and Copinger himself In a
letter to M. Charke.
says, that it cannot be denied but the waste of the church is great, and that
there was place for extraordinary men. Secondly, if M. Cartwright meant to
have dealt peremptorily: he might easily have cut Copinger short by publishing
his follies, and giving warning to all his folowers to avoid him, but to do
that was not for his profit. Lastly, albeit he gave some notice to the
countess of Warwike of the man's weakness; yet was it not such as stopped his
course, which he might have done, if he would have told all.

That these things which M. Cartw. tells us, are unlikely, it partly
appears by Copingers letters, who rested satisfied with M. Cartwrights
messages; which otherwise he would not have done: and partly by the dealing of
Throkmorton, and P. Went. M. Egert. and others, who still dealt with Copinger,
with whom if M. Cartwr. had refused to deal, they would have shunned him as a
serpent. Further the same is proved by M. Hockenhuls intercourse, who would
not have come so often from him with letters and message, if he had been a man
frantike, or light headed, and cast off by M. Cartwright. Again, the same is
confirmed by M. Cartwrights own words, and confession. for if he had thought
him unworthy to be talked with, he would not so often have heard of him, nor
sent him over to be conferred with all by others. Lastly, that Copinger was
neither frantike, nor so accounted of, appears by his well written letters,
by his questions, by his sober behauior, by his cunning practices, and lastly,
by the opinion of He calls Edm. Copinger his dear brother.
Job Throk. and P.W. that wrote to him as a man of some note among that sect.
neither seems he to have other folly, then the common folly of puritans, who
being otherwise not unwise, yet hold frantike and foolish opinions.

Thirdly he says, that if he had been guilty and not detected of these
matters, that either the commissioners in that cause had not used diligence or
faithful dealing therein. which is a very dishonorable surmise against men of
such honor, and no way concludes for M. Cartwr. purpose. for we may not
think, but that they saw both Wiggingtons and M. Cartwrights, and others
dealing, and were notwithstanding content with the punishment of the chief
heads of that conspiracy. Besides that, time that brings matters to
knowledge, has declared things that then lay hid, and Job Throkmorton and M.
Cartwright themselves have told tales.

His last argument to prove his innocence, is this, that Arthington cannot
accuse him of these matters. which is rather a ridiculous conceit, then a sound
argument. for those that manage any such wicked plot, do not make all their
partakers acquainted with all their secrets.

Neither does he avoid such matters as may be alleged to justify so much,
as I said against him. nay, he does not only mistake my objection, but the
reasons also. He says, that the first reason of my accusations was drawn
from his conference. yet I do not accuse M. Cartwr. nor do I object that
which he pretends, nor do I reason as he says. yet if to prove that M.
Cartwr. had intelligence of Copingers matters I said, there did letters and
messages pass betwixt them, it is no bad reason, nor is it answered.

Neither do I say, because they salted together, that M. Cart. was guilty of
Copingers practices. yet if they fasted and prayed together that God would give
good success to the matters then intended, it is not likely but M. Cartwright
understood what was intended; for who does pray for such things, as he
knows not?

Thirdly, I should reason ridiculously to say, that every one whom the traitors
named and praised, were privy to their treasons. I would therefore wish that
M. Cartwr. would show, where I do thus reason, as he does charge me. yet if I
should say, that M. Cart. did so demean and carry himself, hat these traitors
supposed they had great interest in him, and therefore praised him so highly; I
think I should not say amiss. Further methinkes it is some fault to give
occasion, as he has done to the Baroists, and these Hacketians thus furiously
to oppugn the church. Therefore does S. Augustine De eiuit. Dei, lib. 20. and
21.
say, that the last judgment is deferred, that heretics and schismatikes that
hurt after their death by their actions, writings, and examples, may receive
punishment according to their demerites. But says M. Cartwr. their praise was
excessive, and I am not worthy to bear the books after many that live in
this age, yea, and in this church of our land. A goodly matter, and worthy to
be noted! as if any did either charge him, or suppose him to be so admirably
well learned; or as if that were the question here, and not rather; what mad
conceit these mad fellows had of him. He says therefore further, that they
commended him as he was first, and not as he was now: A matter that I never
heard before this, nor can believe. for Copinger did still speak of him with
reverence: and all that ever heard the words as far as I can learn, say as
I have reported. But whether it be so, or no; sufficient it is, that these
traitors had such a great conceit of his writings which he does auowe; and
many do very well like, and these traitors commended as setting forth the
grounds of those things, for which they did strive, and in tumultuous sort
seek to win them. My report therefore is very right, and M. Cartwright by
his favor is fowly either mistaken, or in his own ginnes taken.

Lastly, says he, M. Sutcliffe concludes, that I was a medler in these
matters, upon advantage of certain words of a letter of one John Bowman of
Oundle. true. but neither does this conclusion amount so far, as M.
Cartwright would force it, (for I do not there conclude, that he consented to
Copinger, as he does affirm) nor can he deny, but that my reason is good to
show him to be a busy medler in these causes. therefore does he answer first,
that he never wrote to M. Wiggington in his life to his remembrance. as if many
things of his come not from him by his servants and friends, which he never
wrote, and as if it were not his practice to deal all by third persons, as
appears in this matter of his with Copinger. He answerreth therefore
further, that it might be some writing of the Court matters in the Starchamber.
as if M. Cartwright or any else were so simple, that he could not distinguish
the Court from the Star chamber. Now that this writing should come to
Wiggintons hands, and at such time as Hacket was with him, it is a plain
presumption, that M. Cartwright had some interest in Wigginton and Hacket, and
these two in him: unless he would have us surmise, that all happened by chance
without any purpose of his, and that the Court matters Bowman speaks of were
rather concerning the civil state then their disciplinarian causes.

Wherefore if we consider Copingers letters to M. Cartwright, that do plainly
argue the approbation of his purpose, though percase not the particular means
for fear of himself; and also M. Cartwrights answer of extraordinary
callings not ceased now, especially in the ruins of the Church, which Copinger
took as granted; and the messages sent to and fro by M. Hockenhull Confessed
by M. Cartwright.
betwixt M. Carwright and Copinger; and how that M. Cartwrights Proved by their
letters and Copingers examination.
friends, viz. M. P.W. M. Egerton, M. Vdall, M. Charke, and a certain lawyer,
who in these causes kept nothing back from him, knew of the dangerous course
that Copinger had entered into, and how that M. Cartwright had That Cartwr.
confesses, and M. Egerton did the like.
put him over to be conferred withal by others of his friends, and how he
himself had That does Copinger affirm.
once appointed him a time to confer with him which for fear of danger he
durst not hold; and how M. Throk. letters to a lady.
M. Throk. acquainted him with all matters, that had passed betwixt Copinger
and him, and how That appears by Copingers letters.
M. Cartwright and others of his friends did fast and pray about those matters,
that were then intended by Copinger, and how that That M. Cartwright confesses.
he heard the particulars of the treasons, that Copinger meant to utter, and
understood of his familiarity with Hacket by M. See M. Throk. letter.
Throkmorton; and how John Bowman does testify so much in a letter to
Wigginton.
intelligences did fly from him as from a head into the country abroad, and
so came to Wigginton and Hacket. How can any indifferent man think, but that
M. Cartwright had notice and intelligence of Copingers matters, so far as
himself desired? and who doubts of his consent, when he communicated these
matters to no magistrate, nor others, but such as he supposed would be
assistants, and ayders to the building of his Babylonicall eldership, which by
confusion of tongues we see is now come to nothing? that therefore which I do
say, is most true; as standing upon confession, witnesses and records: and that
which he answers is most weak and simple, as standing only upon his bare
and simple denial, which he is bound to make. that cannot be answered, this
is refuted with diverse letters, witnesses, and good arguments. sure if
innocence should plead in this simple sort, all the standers by would take her
for counterfeit, and the Judges condemn her as guilty. but this is only the
ridiculous conceit of the Prefator. M. Cartwright when he has read this
treatise (I think) will not stand upon any such high points, especially when
he sees no point of his answer left sound, and unshaken.

M. Cartwrights answer concerning the report of his miracles. Being (as I
feel my self) short of the ordinary works of my I pray you what is your
calling?
calling, both in Did never any work miracles but men perfect in all duties?
general duties of Christianity, and in the particular way of the government
of mine own family: woe should be unto me, if I should vainly boast of
miraculous works, which my self have especially written against, in But he
condemns not extraordinary callings: therefore not miracles.
condemning extraordinary callings, whereof miracles are the seals. yet M. D.
Sutcliffe seems to A false collection, and leuder reason. I neither
insinuate; nor albeit other esteem them, does it perteine to M. Cartwright.
insinuate thus much (I say insinuate) for that the brethren he brandeth to
have them in estimation (I doubt not) he means to be men so favoring me, as
they would be loath to do it, if they thought it would not stand with my good
liking. Now let the town wherein I dwell be examined, whether any voice
tending heereunto did ever come If not from you, yet from your followers, which
is all I said.
from me. and as I think none can be produced, that will glory in this folly;
so my desire is, that when this legend shall come forth, All this stir M.
Cartwright makes against his followers, that are the men only I know speak
of his miracles.
there may be for the credit of him that sets it out, the names of the
reporters, and likewise of the brethren laid down that are guilty of the
dotage he speaks of; that thereby they may be cleared, or otherwise He
should rather clear himself, then talk of condemning others.
pass condemnation of the folly he charge them with.

Matthew. Sutcliffe.

In this answer M. Cartwr. does me some wrong, but himself and his cause
much more. for he charge me, as if I should say, he wrought miracles, or
promise to set out his miracles, which in truth I do not. M. Cartwright has a
great facility in imposing of matters falfly, and confuting that which no man
holds, easily.
nay I do not so much as say that his legend is promised to come forth, as he
untruly writes; but that it shall appear whether he liked of revelations or
not, when the legend of his miracle; shall come forth. he does himself wrong
when he thinks himself slandered, when no man speaks of him, nor does so
much as mention any matter criminal. for I think it not such a heinous matter
for a man to think that God does work some things by him miraculously. Let
all men judge what a brave brief of slanders we have here, when this is
received as one of the capital slanders concerning breach of necessary duties
imposed upon all Christians. what more vain and ridiculous dealing can be
imagined? the which shall better appear by answer to his own words.

Woe, says he, should be to me if I should vainly boast of miraculous works.
as if any man did charge him with this matter. as for my self, I do not so
much as insinuate any such like thing. nay I do rather laugh at his folowers
great folly, that do admire such a troublestate, as a saint, and imagine, and
give out, that he works miracles, when himself does deny it. but percase
albeit he does not vainly boast; yet it may be he boasts not vainly. Why then
does he say, Woe to himself? forsooth, because, as he says, he is short of his
duties both in general and particular, and also has condemned extraordinary
callings. yet this second is false: for God, In the answer to the objection
concerning Copingers matters.
said he before, does extraordinarily raise them up in the desolation of the
Church. the first is not concludent. for God has wrought miracles by diverse,
that have come short of their duties.

Yet he says, I do insinuate that he boasts of miracles. and why? because he
says the brethren would not else like of them. a worthy reason! for if M.
Cartwright did boast of all things which his fancifull followers do like of,
he should boast of more vanities and fooleries, then he has hairs of his
head. further, he would have the town examined, wherein he dwells, whether
any voice did ever come from him by way of boasting of his miracles. as if it
were not anoyance enough to examine his vain answers, but we must examine all
his fantastical disciples, yea and others to. or as if his followers might not
give out, that he is an holy man, and works miracles, and yet he not able to
work other miracle, then as iuglers do, that make all that behold them
wonder, when they do nothing but play a little legierdemaine.

Yet because he will needs have me examine the matter, I have been content to
do him this favor: and do find that in deed, albeit I have not hitherto said
so much, yet he has not only boasted, but also most vainly boasted of his
miracles, if we may believe his hearers, for they say that one Testified by
diverse honest men in Warwike.
Chaplin of Warwike being taken sick in the hall of the hospital, where M.
Cartwright contrary to laws of hospitality had reuelled at him, and
threatened Gods judgment against him for his supposed drunkenness; he not
long after the man's death going up into the pulpit, and taking the history of
Ananias and Saphira Act. 5. for his text, did there say, that Chaplin was
stricken, as was Ananias and Saphira. which is nothing else but to compare
himself to Peter, and to make the death of Chaplin no less miraculous, then
the death of Ananias and Saphira. Only this seemed to be all the difference,
that Peter did not rashly judge of Ananias and Saphiraes death, nor declare
them unworthy of burial, whereas M. Cartwright did, as Chaplins well willers
complain, thunder out his detestations against Chaplin being dead, and said he
was unworthy of christian burial. such is the man's christian modesty and
discretion.

In the end, to make all sure, he desires that when the legend of his miracles
shall come forth, there may be for the credit of him that sets it forth,
the names of the reporters, and likewise of the brethren laid down, that are
guilty of this dotage. Wherein I cannot but wonder what he has to do, to
accuse others of dotage, especially his own dear friends, having nothing to
answer for himself. He does not say, whether about Warwike he has not heard
reports of his miracles: nor does he tell us, that he has condemned such
reports, or denied that he can work miracles. but would have those condemned
of dotage, that mean to set forth the legend of them. yet neither have I said
that he works miracles, nor can I believe any such matter. This is in deed
his own folly, that ridiculously gloried as they say, in the death of Chaplin;
and of his folowers, that believe that in truth he can work miracles. for
that is the speech of his credulous disciples about Warwike: and I my self
have heard those that stoutly have maintained so much to my face. and that
first for the strange death of Chaplin. Secondly, for that one These matters of
Brown and Harris will be testified: and I think himself will not deny that
there is such a report.
Brown died, after that M. Cartwr. had denounced Gods judgments against him
for denying that he had begot his maid with child: and yet his wife and others
say, the poor man was impotent and unable to do it. Thirdly, for that one
Harris being threatened with Gods wrath by M. Cartwr. not long after languished
and died. But the man was a weak fellow, and being for displeasure and because
he was no friend to M. Cartwrights discipline, by one Dulhams means pressed
forth for a soldier, died for fear and grief, as they say: where note by the
way that all the report of M. Cartwr. miracles consists in the discouraging,
and killing of poor christians. therefore does he well to deny, that he
does work miracles. for this is nothing but miraculous malice, which they
report of him: and I am much to thank him, that takes my part against those,
that do make him a saint, and a great worker of miracles, and that denies all
the legend that goes through the hands of simple people which by his fained
holiness, and strange grimaces, and pretensed gestures, have been deceived.

But did he work miracles, or not; how unadvisedly has he in this place made
such outcries of slander upon my words? where is the slander? and how is it
proved? is it not a miracle that M. Cartwr. should thus fowly be mistaken? let
him therefore hear what the law faieth; He that brings his action of
injurious or slanderous speeches, l. praetor ff. deiniurijs.
says the Roman praetor, must name the wrong, and signify his proceeding
directly. if not the party accused goes quit, and the accuser is to be
condemned of calumniation. which is right the case of M. Cartwright. for he
says, he is slandered. yet can not say wherein, nor deny that which I have
said, nor well gainsay the common report. let him therefore have the sentence
of the law.

M. Cartwrights answer to these words: being examined in the Star chamber
upon certain points of her Majesty's supremacy, he refused to answer, and
pleaded, that he was not bound. I refused it, as esteeming it Do the lords
propound matters impertinent? and is it impertinent to declare himself a
loyal subject?
impertinent to that cause, not otherwise. unto which afterward, upon
commandment I gave answer in writing unto her Majesty's most honorable
council. and to her Majesty's But not to the particular points of it.
supremacy I have been sworn at the least five or six times. and if there be
doubt of any change of my judgment, I am ready to take the You take the oath,
but interpret the law contrary to ye meaning.
oath again.

Matthew. Sutcliffe.

Behold I beseech you a heinous slander, for which not only M. Cartwr. but the
whole consociation of Puritans is grievously scandalized. I said, that M.
Cartwright refused to answer directly being examined in the Star Chamber.
Well, what says M. Cartwright? does not he confess as much, as I said? he
cannot deny it. His words are plain. I refused it, says he. but if he had not
confessed it, yet would the record in the Star Chamber have convinced him.
Now then, when himself confesses, and the record testifies as much as I say,
how happens it, that his own words are so clear, and mine reputed
scandalouse? or why should not he as well be thought to slander himself, as I,
seeing he confesses that very matter, which I do object? But, says he, I
refused it, as impertinent. as if that were material for what cause he refused
it, the question being only whether he refused it, or no. But to take away
all excuse, it shall be proved, that it was very pertinent, for first, what more
pertinent to convince him of notorious disloyalty, then to show that he had a
bad conceit of diverse points of her Majesty's supreme authority? Beside that,
judge (I pray you) whether every one is not bound to yield an answer to his
superiors in all matters that touch his alleagiance. Last of al, it cannot be
surmised, that so honorable and wise Lords and Judges would require answer to
matters impertinent; neither if it were impertinent, had M. Cartwright reason
afterward to answer it, as he did.

Therefore to make his matter most clear, he says, he has been sworn five
or six times to her Majesty's supremacy, and is So Feckena^ abbot of
Westminster to Bishop Horn, said, he was ready to swear.
again ready to take the oath, if any doubt be made of his judgment therein.
As if there were any question of other matter, then whether he once refused to
answer concerning matters of her Majesty's supremacy, or no. Beside that,
diverse Papists have been often sworn, that now are of a contrary opinion: yea
and some of them pretend readiness to take the oath, yea and take it, but with
those qualifications, and interpretations, that do sufficiently testify their
bad minds. According to the meaning of the statute I think he will not take
the oath. for then he should declare, that the Queen has power to establish
and disanull Ecclesiastical laws, to appoint Ecclesiastical Judges, officers
and commissioners, to hear appeals or to appoint delegates to hear them when
they are made from Ecclesiastical courts, to nominate Bishops, to receive
first fruits and tenthes of Ecclesiastical livings, and such like rights and
privileges, as the statutes of this land give her. but that he may not, nor (I
think) will not do, for that the laws of their discipline deny it. if so be he
would, I confess, he should satisfy me in this point: but he should utterly
ruinate the foundation of his aldermens consistoriall jurisdiction, to whom
they give most of these things. Yea and I doubt, whether others would be
satisfied. for as in religion it is a note of an heretical disposition, to
doubt of the grounds of our faith; so in policy it is a note of a disloyal
person, to doubt of the princes lawful authority, which the statutes give
her. In which case seeing you were once, albeit now you utterly deny it; I pray
you let us not have you too much boast of your innocence, and that in such
long Prefaces, as that before your short brief: especially seeing heretofore
you have written and done many things to the praeiudice of her supremacy in
Ecclesiastical causes.

In the book of your holy discipline, wherein you hold, that a perfect form
of Church government, such as is prescribed in Gods word, is contained, you
have utterly excluded the princes authority, and debarred him from all
government. for you have not so much as mentioned him.

In one of the disciplinarian books of common prayer, This book they sought
to have confirmed by act of Parliament.
and administration of Sacraments you leave out the Christian magistrate, in
another there is some mention made of him, but it is in the end of the book,
and after all the officers of the Church described.

Thirdly in direct terms you say, that the Christian magistrate can no more be
an officer of the Church, 2. reply. p. 420.
then the pastors can be magistrates. how then can he be supreme governor of
the Church, that is no governor at all, 2. repl. 2. parl. p. 147.
as you say? You hold also, that a Christian magistrate has no more authority
in the Church, then a heathen prince. which is sufficient to exclude him out of
the Church government. Finally you do subject him to the excommunication of
your elderships, and place the magistrate among those that are to obey, and the
elders among commanders.

Fourthly you will not deny, but that the Papists deny her Majesty's supremacy
in causes Ecclesiastical. how then can it be said, that you hold a good
opinion of it, when you in your books do give her no more authority then they,
and abridge the same as far as they do? 2. repl. p. 48.
Do you not deny, that the prince ought to be called the head of particular
and visible Churches within his dominions? Do you not likewise Ibidem p. 157.
and 167.
take from him authority to determine of Church causes, and 1. reply p. 192.
power to ordeine laws and ceremonies? It cannot be denied, your words are
plain. all which you borow from the Papists. They subject the prince to the
Pope, you to your elderships, neither can you show any other difference betwixt
your selfs, and them. For where you say first, that you do not exempt your
ministers from the punishment of the civil magistrate, as the Papists do their
Priests, you err in both. for both would you claim immunitie for your
ministers, and they do not simply exempt their priests, but in certain cases.
The authors of the Admonition 2. p. 65.
admonition would have themselves and their companions by act of Parliament
exempted from the authority of Justices, and from their enditings and finings.
In your Lib. 2.
reply, you would have the authority of the civil magistrate to descend from
Christ, as God, and not as mediator; whereof it follows, that Christian
princes have no rule over their subjects as Christians, but only as men; De
visib. monarch. lib. 2. c. 3.
as Saunders also holds. all of you deny, that any appeal is to be admitted
from the determination of the synod to the prince. How then are not the
synodes exempt from princes jurisdiction, when the prince has no authority
over them? yea and in Suffolk certain of this sect in a supplication to the
Lords of her Majesty's counsel affirm, that it was a hard course, and tending
to the discredit of the ministry, that their ministers should be presented
before the Judges and endited, arraigned and condemned. Contrariwise Against
the apology of the Church. p. 306.
Harding says, that good Kings may put Bishops and priests in mind of their
duties, and bridle both their riot and arrogancy. And in Ibidem p. 303.
another place, that a prince may make laws for the observation of both
tables, and punish the transgressors. Feckenam To bishop Horn.
offers to swear, that her Majesty has under God the soueraintie and rule
over all persons within her dominions, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
temporal. Fatemur personas Episcoporum qui in toto orb fuerunt, says De
visib. monarch. lib. 2. c. 3.
Sanders, Romano Imperatori esse subiectos. And for civil causes, it is their
common opinion, that Harding reioynd. f. 379.
priests may be conuented before civil Judges. and for Ecclesiastical causes
certain Act. of Parliament anno 1584. acts. 2.
ministers of Scotland refused to answer before the king.

Secondly you say, that the Papists will have the prince to execute whatsoever
they conclude, be it good or bad; which you will not. For you grant the prince
authority to set order where there is no lawful ministry, and to stay
unlawful decrees of lawful ministers. As if the Hard. confus. apol. p. 304.
and 317.
Papists did not grant as much: or as if Papists held, that the princes were to
execute wicked decrees. Again it is evident that you would have all men to
stand to the Admonit.
determination of your synodes. And albeit your synodes do decree bad things,
yet you will not give princes authority to judge them. How then can they stay
them? will you give them extraordinary authority? that is your meaning. But
how shall we know when they work by ordinary, when by extraordinary
authority? Beside that, you deny this extraordinary authority as long, as
there is a lawful ministry. And albeit your doings be unlawful, yet you will
not be stayed by the prince.

Thirdly you 2. p. 164.
affirm, that you do not utterly seclude the prince from your
Churchassemblies. for oftentimes a simple man and (as the proverb says) a
gardner has spoken to purpose. So you count the prince as a simple fellow, and
as a poor gardener among the magnificoes in your elderships. You say, he may
have a voice, call a counsel, and appoint times to meet, but he 2. lib. 2. p.
157. and 156.
may neither judge nor make orders, but ought to confirm and execute the
decrees of the counsels. And do not the Papists the like? It is most apparent
both in our own countreymens writings as in Devisib. monar. lib. 2. c. 3.
Sanders and Confut. ap. p. 304.
Harding and in Bellar. de magistr.
others also. If then the Papists; sure you have no good conceit of her
Majesty's supremacy. And this In a certain epistle concerning M. Cartur.
reply.
M. Whitaker and others have noted before me, lest you imagine me to be the
author of this charge.

Fifthly being demanded by me, whether the disciplinarians, whose leader and as
it were oracle you are, do not in effect deny the principal points of her
Majesty's supremacy, and take from her power to ordeine rites and orders for
the Church, and right to nominate Bishops, and to appoint Ecclesiastical
commissioners, and to delegate learned men to hear the last appeal from
Ecclesiastical courts, likewise authority to call and govern synodes, and
other prerogatives and rights given to the prince by the statutes and laws of
England: and finally whether you do not endeavor to bring in foreign laws
and jurisdiction repugnant to the statutes of supremacy, and her Majesty's
prerogative: you answer nothing. Which is nothing else, but a plain
confession, that you dare not directly, and in plain terms declare your
opinion concerning the foresaid matters; and do indeed abridge her Majesty
of a great part of her royal authority.

Lastly when you were called upon your oath in the Star Chamber to answer to
diverse points of her supremacy, you show your self to have a perverse
opinion, and therefore dare not answer directly. Being Interrog. 3.
demanded whether you have not taught or allowed, that the prince being neither
pastor, nor elder, is to be accounted among the governors of the Church, or
among those that are to be governed: and also whether in a well ordered Church
he may ordeine orders and ceremonies therein: do you not say for all answer,
that you are not bound to answer? and do you not persist therein? Now how can
it be supposed, that you allow the prince to be supreme governor, that will not
acknowledge him to be any governor of the Church at all? or how can it be said
you allow the points of her Majesty's supremacy, that will not confess she
has power to make orders or to ordeine ceremonies for the Church? True it is,
that you offer to swear to the supremacy: so likewise does Fecknam. I do
here presently (says Fecknam to Bishop Horn.
Fecknam) offer my self to receive a corporal oath upon the Evangelists,
that I do verily think and am persuaded in my conscience, that the Queens
highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, and of all other her
Majesty's dominions, etc. and that she has under God the souereintie and rule
over all manner persons Ecclesiastical and temporal. And yet he does not
believe the several points of her Majesty's authority, nor acknowledge them.
So likewise it may be, you will acknowledge her Majesty's authority in
general terms, and yet will not acknowledge the several points of her
authority. You do also offer to swear to the supremacy, but you have a
perverse interpretation, by which you overthrow all the chief points of it in
effect. Your pretense is the interpretation of the iniunction. which kind of
bad dealing, and meaning you detected sufficiently in your answer to the 2.
interrogatory in the Star Chamber. For being demanded how far forth you
have affirmed or allowed the Queens authority Ecclesiastical to berestreined
by the injunctions, you say, you are not bound to answer. By which it
appears, that you think the injunctions restreine her authority, and that
so far, as you dare not tell us what you think. Wherefore if in deed your
opinion be sound concerning her Majesty's supremacy, answer these matters
directly, and tell us what she may do, and what she may not do by the laws of
your discipline: and whether you mean to hold your former opinions, or
renounce them. For whatsoever you swear; your books, and the Queens
authority given her by the laws of this land, cannot stand together.

M. Cartwright, answer being charged to have highly commended M. Fenners
book, which Fenneri Theolog. Sac. lib. 5. p. 187.
gives authority to inferior persons to restrain their sovereign, as did
the ephori in Sparta.

I You utterly mistake it.
take it, M. Fenner gives no such authority, but only where the laws of the
land do establish such an authority, as the ephori in The ephori were of
Sparta, the city, not Lacedemonia the country.
Lacedemonia had. and if M. Fenner did, yet how does my epistle commendatorie
set before his book Because you allow it, and commend it, and set it out.
make me of his judgment? as if he that commends a book justifies
whatsoever is in the book, or as if notwithstanding M. Fenners And more
presumption, made notorious by his extrauagant divinity.
singular learning (which for his age many, I doubt not, both at home and
abroad do esteem) you allow it, and disallow it to? or can you deny that you
commended his rules, as (...) coelestis I CanCanaan?
might not, or do not differ from him in some things contained in his book.
besides, he himself confessing, that by oath in the Star Chamber I have
disauowed the allowance of any such opinion, which he fathereth of M. Fenner,
let it be considered with With a good mind to show your contradictions, and
how hardly you are drawn to obedience.
what mind he so often rubbeth upon this point. and both for this and the
former charge, I leave it to be considered with what What civil honesty have
you to charge me with slandering you, or urge me to move these matters?
Christian modesty M. Sutcliffe may now the If you quiet not your selves you
must hear it the fourth and fifth time.
second and the third time move question (and that in print) of those things
to our discredit, which her Majesty's most honorable council was pleased,
should be In law we convent you not, in writing we may discourse upon these
things as often as you pretend innocence.
no further proceeded in, and that he is not You do not content your selves
with it, albeit never so light in respect of your faults.
contented with that imprisonment we endured, which their honors are satisfied
with.

Lastly, my judgment in sundry matters of the discipline That is sufficient.
excepted, wherein differing from sundry learned men in our church, I have the
consent of many worthy churches, and godly learned, both of this and Speak not
this for shame, for before Caluins time, your fancies were never heard of.
other ages, I would be ashamed for that singular mercy God had showed me by
her Majesty's most gracious government, to come Yet I have been in many places
in her Majesty's service, where I could not see you.
behind M. Sutcliffe in any duty, that my poor hand is able to reach unto.

What is this to Fenners cause?
And that he If I dare you, it is because I know you cannot.
dares me not once, but sundry times to answer touching these matters of
discipline, I think it not so Why did you then first begin this braule?
fit for me to undertake it, there being so many better able thereunto then I,
especially in this declining and forgetful age of mine. and yet if my answer
might have either that At Geneua you may have both.
allowance of print, or passage that his has, and none other were found, I my
self in this weakness I am in, would not be behind with answer to any
thing that he has been able to allege in this behalf, A ridiculous surmise.
if there be any thing in his writings, the answer where of is not already set
down by such as have written in that cause. and that my silence in the cause
of discipline is not altogether of the I do think M. Cartwright able to do,
and write well. but not in this cause.
inabilitie or fear M. D. Sutcliffe would so willingly fasten, or rather force
upon me, let this be for an An argument most weak, for it is more easy to
refute the Rhem^sts false annotations then to establish new found conceits.
argument, that where I was set That should be done by the learned fathers of
the church.
on work by the right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham for the answer of the
annotations of the Jesuits upon the New testament, and had travailed therein
to a rude and first draught of a great part thereof: understanding from some in
authority, that I might not deal with it, I did not only not set any thing
out my self, but also Good for you, and for the cause.
earnestly labored by letters and friends here, and in Scotland both the
hinderance of the printing some parts thereof, which being brought to Sir
Francis afterward (much against my will) came into the hands of diverse, to whom
I would Such is the pride of these men: they will not suffer their doings to be
corrected.
never have let them come.

In the margin oueragainst these words (hinderance of the printing) is this
note placed. And This note serves to underprop the former weak argument.
but to no good effect. for the insufficiency of this, might deter him from
attempting the other labor.
if he stayed the publishing of that whereunto he was once allowed by
authority, it is not in all likelihood to be thought, that he would hastily
publish any thing of himself, howsoever he might be persuaded of the truth of
it.

Matthew. Sutcliffe.

In this answer there are two principal questions, that should have been
resolved by M. Cartwright, if he meant to conclude ought against me. the first
is, whether he did highly commend M. Fenners book or no, wherein this strange
position mentioned in the title of his answer is contained; the second,
whether granting so much as I charged him withal, he was herein slandered, as
in every of his several accusations he pretends. of these two questions M.
Cartwright resolves nether. with what face then can he say, that he is
slandered, not being able to deny any thing which I say, nor to justify his
wrong imputation of slander? did he think, that I should never return to
look into these matters? if he did, what hope has he to make them good?

Beside this wrong, where I say that Fenner gives authority to inferior
persons, as indeed he does: he cunningly foisteth in superior persons. as if
either he meant to If he say, that a prince may be ouerruled by inferiors, he
denies the princes souereignty. if in such common wealths where the
magistrates have indeed superiors, he deny their authority, he speaks, as a
man ignorant of antiquity and state.
deny the princes supremacy, or their authority (if any such may be) that
have authority over the prince or king; as the Romans had over kings, that
were their vassals and tributaries, of which we talk not, nor make any
question. such goodly discourses makes M. Cartwright all muffled about the
eyes with the mask of innocence, so that he could see nothing, unless it were
to misalledge my words, and to answer nothing to purpose. yet least his
clients and followers might think, he had said great matters; let us examine
even this nothing.

He says, that M. Fenner gives no such authority, as is said, but where the
laws of the land do establish such an authority as the Ephori in
Lacedaemonia had. A matter, as I showed, that made not to purpose, and which is
also very false. for M. Fenner, as M. Cartwright should not be ignorant,
speaks of laws drawn out of the word of God, to which all princes ought to
submit their scepters. further he speaks generally. he therefore that takes
it otherwise, does both mistake and misconstrue.

Driven from this ground he flies to the second, and says, that he is not
of M. Fenners judgment. which sits him not well to say, unless he will
contradict himself in his epistle. for the matters contained in M. Fenners
book he calls (...), leges, and iuracoelestis Canaan. Now, I trow, he will
not deny Gods laws, or as he calls them the laws of heavenly Canaan beside
this he reuiewed the book and corrected it as appears by these words.
Cupiebam (says The words of M. Cartwrights epistle before M. Fenners book.
M. Cartwright) libellu^ hunc quem sane praeclarum abs te accepi, nec indignum,
vt ei legendo vadimonium (quod dicitur) deseratur, pro voto and postulato tuo
meliorem and cultiorem ad te remittere. ad quam rem quid attulerim, tu apud te
statues. having then corrected what he thought amiss, will not M. Cartwright
defend the rest; especially having made all so neat, and fine? thirdly as those
that l. lex cornelia. ff. de iniuriis. si quis librum.
publish and commend, or write or make books containing slandrous matter, are
to answer for whatsoever is therein contained, so they that publish and
commend books containing heretical and treacherous, and lewd opinions, are to
answer for them much rather. in what case then is M. Cartwr. that by his
excessive commendations has given vent to this book, which no wise man I
think will value? is not he perjured, that denies that doctrine on his oath,
which is contained in the book which he allows? as for M. Fenner let him
rest in peace. he was towardly, but in setting forth this book, too forward;
yea and percase M. Cartwrights judgment therein did not a little abuse him.

Thirdly he goes on, and would have it considered, with what mind I do so
often Belike this point galled him, and therefore he would not have it touched,
or rubbed.
rub over this one point, seeing in the Star Chamber he disauowed this
opinion fathered upon M. Fenner as I do confess. as if it were sufficient to
deny it, when a man has done leudly: or else if a man might not note his
notorious contradictions, that is still opposing himself against the state.
let him therefore rather consider, how unchristianly he has dealt with many
good men, and recant the wrong he has done in disgracing of this church of
England, and the state, and call back his lewd epistle, and that lewd book
that has, and does still give occasion of just offense, let him also be sorry
for his oath so rashly taken, and ashamed of his notorious contradiction in this
matter. finally, let him deny, that the eldership has authority to correct
and excommunicate princes; and give unto them their due and right, and he shall
neither be further rubbed, nor hear more of me.

Fourthly, to press me down with the authority of the Star chamber, he
goes on, and yet leaves it to be considered, with what christian modesty I
may so often, and that in print move question of things to his discredit,
which her majesty's most honorable counsel Let him show this.
was pleased should be no further proceeded in, and that am not content with
his imprisonment, which their honors are A manifest untruth.
satisfied with. as if christians either used not, or might not talk of
matters examined, and ended in courts of public justice, especially so long as
they did not control them or mislike them. nay therefore are such matters
heard publicly, that men may have notice of them, and talk of them. and
sometimes the sentences and proceedings of judges are published abroad, that
men may talk of them; that by the punishment of law breakers, and disloiall
persons, others may be warned and restrained from running into such like
disorders. Assuredly, if the strange opinions, and undutiful behavior of these
men, as they are well known to the judges, so had been well known to the
people; men would never have either admired them or followed them, or praised
that discipline which they seek for. Neither do I think, that there is any
order in the Star chamber to the contrary, Why does not M. Cartwright note
it, if he know any such matter? it was their honors pleasure to show him great
favor, and to accept of a certain submission he made, as I have heard: but
that he should be quite discharged, I cannot believe. for M. Cartwright may
remember, that he stands His bond is in the court of the commission for
causes ecclesiastical.
bound to appear at any time within 20. days warning given to him. which
argues that albeit he be dismissed upon hope of amendment; yet he is not
discharged. dismissed he is of great favor, and through her majesty's
exceeding clemency. but if he run on his old courses, and accuse those of
wrong that did him exceeding favor, he may percase understand what formerly he
has deserved. and if he be not dealt with all iudicially by law, yet may it
please him to give us leave to talk of his misdemeanors extraiudicially, until
such time as he reform them. He is loath to have his All this sect does stand
more upon their credit, albeit the same be little, then upon the truth of
their cause.
credit touched; yet has not he spared his superiors, against whom he has
dealt. why we should not handle these points, there is neither law, nor
commandment, nor reason to the contrary.

What cause then has M. Cartwright to insinuate, that I have made a breach of
christian modesty in speaking of them? may not a man with christian modesty
note the faults and errors of these men, especially when they go about to
defend them? I never sought quarrel, nor entered into these matters, before I
was thereto urged, and provoked. M. Cartwright (I think) does know that I did
not so much as move question of these matters, before I was drawn into them,
by a lewd and contentious companion of that sect, that in a book entitled A
petition, would needs name me, and move diverse questions to the disgrace of
the present government of the church, of which I am a minister, and therefore
deeply therein interessed; and to the discredit of diverse good men, and my
good friends: nor before that Job Throk. a great champion of puritan
chivalry, and a noble pillar of Martinisme, would needs charge me with
slandering of the whole brotherhood of deformation, and go about to justify
the chief heads, and maintainers of that faction. being then named in print,
and railed at in print, and called forth in print to justify what I had said;
how could I with any honesty forbear to answer in print? nay so far am I
from infringing any point of christian modesty in this behalf, that I should
greatly have offended on the other side, if being charged with diverse bad
opinions and misdemeanors, I should have neglected them, and held my peace.
Ruffinus does not think him to be a christian, that being noted of heresy,
does dissemble the matter, and hold his peace. and Lawyers say, quod negligere
famam crudele est. he that strikes must not think much to have his blows
warded. (...), says Achilles. Iliad. 1.
but these fellows when like Thersites they have railed and spoken evil of
others, yea of princes; do disdain to hear themselves justly reproved, and
most arrogantly disdain to have themselves touched. most vain therefore, and
causeless is this complaint.

But I deal very hardly (as he thinks) and unchristianly, that am not
content with his imprisonment, which satisfied their lordships. which is a
matter more, then he knows; sure more then I can learn, or believe. for
albeit of favor it pleased them, and of their great benignity and clemency
to inflict this punishment only; yet how knows he, that they were satisfied
therewith; especially seeing they are not yet discharged? but were it true, yet
what a ridiculous point is it to think, that men may not speak of matters,
for which malefactors are imprisoned, especially when they or their friends do
repine and grudge at their punishment, and pretend hard dealing and injustice,
as the petitioner and Job Throk. did in the behalf of M. Cartwr. and others?
neither was the imprisonment of M. Cartwr. so grievous, or costly to him, that
either himself or others should complain, or lament for the remembrance of
it. So soft was his lying, so trim was his lodging, so pleasant was his
company, so dainty was his fare, so great were the gifts he had, so diligent
was his wife to rake in rewards; that many brave men of good desert, that serve
her majesty in her wars would be content (the shame only except) to
exchange the commodity of their places with him. but if these men have not what
they would, or if their pillowes lie not right, they think all men do them
wrong, that do not pity them. yea, albeit they murmr at their judges; yet
would they have no man to open their mouth against them.

Lastly, he enters into comparison with me, and says, be would be ashamed
to come behind me in any duty. wherein it had been good if he had hired M.
Throk. or some of his friends to speak for him. This domestical testimony of
himself sauoureth strongly of folly and arrogancy, and is little to be
respected. yea, albeit his deserts were greater, yet is the comparison odious,
and loath I am to follow M. Cartwright in this vanity. yet thus much I may say
for my self: that I never was imprisoned for any undutiful and disloyal
opinions and misdemeanors, as he has been, neither did I ever hide my head in
corners as he has done: nor did I ever so nearly touch her majesty's royal
prerogative, her revenues, and her laws, as M. Cartwright did; nor ever have I
written books in defense of a new government of the church, nor maintained the
same directly against laws, as he has done and does. Again I think M.
Cartwright was never employed in her majesty's service, as I have been now this
fourth time: yea while I was in her service in the journey of Guadix, he
employed all his time and labor in setting forth and printing this most
simple brief. o what brags would he make, if ever he had done her majesty
service, that is not now ashamed to brag of his duetifull behavior toward her
majesty, whose whole time has been employed in oppugning that ecclesiastical
government, which by her authority is established! so little does he shame to
look into the crooked course of his whole life and study.

For answer therefore to this objection, M. Cartwright does insinuate, that
all other matters being equal, he is behind me only in his judgment in
matters of discipline. which is untrue. for notwithstanding that judgment, he
might have done her majesty service, if he had would, as I have done. Beside
that, this only dealing of his about his fancifull discipline is matter
sufficient to convict him of notorious misdemeanors, and undutiful carriage of
himself, as has been declared. neither is his defense of any moment, where he
says, that many are of his opinion. for in every lewd practice there are
lightly many consorts; and heretics and schismatikes want no folowers. Beside
that, it is untrue that many worthy churches and godly learned of this and
other ages are of his opinion. for before Caluins time his discipline was never
heard of. and albeit now some churches do embrace his opinions herein: yet do
they not consent with M. Cartwright in many points. nor I think did they allow
any negotiation and practice for the establishing of his new discipline in this
land by forging, railing, libelling, and disloiall dealing. Would therefore M.
Cartwr. do me this favor in two other sheets of paper to show that godly
learned men of other ages were of his opinion, and that other churches allow
his courses, he should clear himself of the suspicion of a great and
notorious untruth.

The rest of M. Cartwrights answer in this place is nothing, but an idle
digression nothing pertinent to the clearing of the objection concerning his
judgment of Fenners book, and the authority by him given to certain Ephori
to ouerrule princes, yet least he should compleine he were not answered, I am
to crave pardon, if I examine this also. He says first, that although I dare
him not once, but sundry times to answer touching these matters of discipline,
yet it is not so fit for him to undertake it. To this I answer first that
albeit I should dare him, yet it is no slander to his worship that I dare him.
it is rather shame for him, that he comes not forth being dared. Secondly he
does me wrong to say, I dare him. for he dare do any thing, yea things very
absurd, and unlawful. But in deed I do in diverse points challenge him to
maintain his bold and rash assertions, and that not to stir contention, but
to show that albeit he dare do it, yet he can not maintain his cause. Thirdly
I do maintain, that there is no man that has more reason to answer in these
causes then he. and that first, for that he in this Church first of all in
large books defended these opinions. Now why should any be thought more fit to
speak, then he that first made challenge, and entered the liftes in defense of
this cause? Secondly there is none whom that side does more desire should
answer then M. Cartwright. Thirdly they imagine that none is more able.
Fourthly the cause of others is deserted. Fifthly none promised or bragged so
much as he. Lastly of all men, I would that M. Cartwright should specially
answer, that when it appears, how the patriarch of discipline can say
nothing; his followers that are abused, might soonest be moved to change
opinion. And if neither his adversaries provocation, nor his friends desire,
nor his own reputation, nor his cause deserted, nor his own great words and
brags do move him: I see no excuse he can have, but the impossibility of
defense, and the untruth of matters heretofore defended by him.

He pretends age and forgetfulness, but the first is not sufficient, the
second is absurd. for he ought not to forget his duty, nor what he is to say
for himself. He says also, that others are more able. but I dare say, he
believes it not, and his friends by no means will admit it. Therefore when
no just excuse can be alleged of silence, he proceeds saying, that if either
his answer might have allowance of print or passage, himself in that
weakness he is in, would not be behind to answer any thing, that I have
been able to allege in these matters. as if he might not as well print and
pass his books at Geneua or Heidelberg, as he did his first and second
replies. Beside that, if the matters he stands on be such as he says, then
ought he to care for no allowance, nor passage. for if discipline be a part of
the Gospel, and so constantly to be defended, as that he ought to give his
life for it, yea so many lives as he has hairs of his head; these are no just
excuses why he should fly back. Further, when he printed his first books he
desired neither passage nor allowance, why then should he now desire it, more
then then? Is his heat of zeal cooled, or is he grown wise? nay he says he
is grown weak. percase he has taken some rheum or cold that has disordred
the records of his fancy, which is the proper seat of his discipline. But
this is no allowable excuse, especially seeing he doubts not but to answer
whatsoever I have been able to allege: for so he says. Yet his friends do
rather look for performance. For his bragges, I say nothing, but as the Poet
says, (...). Let us see your promises achieved, and then crow out your
victory. In Theatet.
Plato says, it is a crauenly cock, that cries so loud before the fight.

That M. Cartwright means not to deal further in this matter, I take this as
a presumption, for that he doubts whether there be any thing in my
writings, which is not answered already by those, that have written in that
cause. for that is only a cloak for his sluggishnesse, and the weakness of
his consistoriall discipline. but such a cloak, as bears out neither wind,
rain, nor Sun. I wonder that he should make such an exception, and that not
without some note of a hard forhead and conscience. For he knows that the
books I have written, whereof one is in Latin, the other in English, are
directly against their discipline, which argument none to my knowledge ever
handled severally and purposely either before me, or after me. Other books
that have been written in this cause are rather for defense of the present
government, then against their new discipline. How then can my books be said
to be answered in other treatises, that are rather written to oppugn our
government, then to defend theirs? especially seeing in my books all these
arguments are answered which here and there others have written for the new
discipline. Somewhat I confess has been written since, but nothing to the
purpose, nor orderly, nor schollerly. As for M. Beza it pleases him to rail
on me, and give me evil language which God forgive him, and I forgive and
forget, but to the matter he answers nothing. Nay his discourse is such as
rather we do pity the man for his age and weakness, then value any thing he
has said. and yet both M. D. Sarauia has answered him, and so have I, and
have the book ready to be printed, if any begin but once to stir in the
cause. Wherefore good M. Cartwright either let me have public, or private
answer to content me, or else leave of your bragging promises. if not,
whatsoever you say, all your folowers will mislike you, and your adversaries
take your silence for confession.

In the end of this answer of his, he goes about to prove, that his silence
proceeds not altogether from inabilitie or fear, because having proceeded to
a rude His answer consisting of diverse pieces, collected by diverse of the
fraternity in Cambridge, known to be of small sufficiency, he has no such
cause to tell us of his great labors taken, and learning showed therein.
draught of an answer to a great part of the Jesuitical annotations upon the
New testament (of which he makes a great brag) yet being countermanded he
did not publish them, nor (as he says in the margent) uses hastily to publish
any thing, howsoever he might be persuaded of the truth of it. but of all
others, this reason is most simple and least concludent. for the case is far
different betwixt the publication of his answer to the Rhemish annotations,
(which I know not why he calls Jesuitical, or his answer, being pieced
together by diverse other) and this expected defense of discipline. for that was
never expected at his hands, nor promised, nor could without others help be
performed: this was both much expected, and in his first replies in effect
promised, and this he thought himself once able to perform. beside that, all
his partakers desired his defense of the new discipline, which they expected
would be a work very complete, and the rather they desired it, because others
abandoned the cause. but his answer to the Rhemish annotations, wrought out in
the monastery of S. Laurence for the most part very rudely, beside his own
followers, none expected, and some wise men thought meet should be stopped,
both for the discordance of the parts, and for yt by his simple dealing in many
points, especially concerning discipline, he betrayed our cause, and did give
more advantage to the adversary, then all his side would have done good. and
lastly for that M. D. Fulke very sufficiently and learnedly before him had
dealt in the cause. neither does any well advised man think it expedient, that
he should deal in the public cause, unless his writings might be publikly
reuiewed before they were printed, which his haughty spirit could by no means
endure. the which appears by his words in this place. for albeit some part
of the preface to his book was brought to those that had authority to peruse
it, yet he signifies that if he could have chosen, it should never have come
to their hands. it was not therefore his moderation, that stayed the printing
(for he confesses that some parts were already going to the press) but the
insufficiency of his work, and the authors pride, that would admit no
correction; and lastly, for that D. Fulke of blessed memory, a man more
judicious, and learned, then he, had travailed therein more sufficiently, and
perfectly before him. and thus much by the way to take away his frivolous
excuses of his silence in the cause of discipline, in which first he was so
fiery and furious. Now let us return to his foresaid brief of slanders.

M. Cartwrights answer being charged, how that upon the coming forth of
Martin, he is reported to have said, that it was no matter, if the bishops were
so handled, seeing they would take no warning.

Let it be judged (says he) what What guiltines of conscience is it that
suffers him not to deny it?
christian love it is to commit such things to print upon a It is to be
testified by witness.
bare report. and if the reporters had been named, as in other cases where he
does call out the persons by their names, the truth might have the better
appeared. for me I am able to produce witnesses, that the first time that ever
I heard of Martin Marprelate, I testified my great misliking and grief, for so
naughty and so disorderly a You misliked the course, but not at the first, nor
that BB. should be abused.
course, as that was. and therefore where fol. 51. p. 1. he asks when I will
condemn the unlawful and uncivil practice of Martin and Penry? I ask again
what You take on you the office of a doctor or pastor, which is an office to
do that, very sufficient.
office or charge I have to publish condemnation upon every unlawful and
uncivil This touched your cause nearer, then other writings.
writing that comes abroad? and yet I have witnesses, that even publikly when
I was allowed to preach, I condemned all dealing Note that he misliked not
Martin, but all dealing in that kind, because his side was thereby nearly
touched in that kind, and sound themselves unable to answer.
in that kind. Matthew. Sutcliffe.

M. Cartwright would accuse me of want of christian love in committing these
things to print (as he says) upon bare report. but all men do see a great
want in him of Christian wisdom, to accuse others for reporting such things,
as himself dare not deny. what proof therefore needs, when he dare not
deny what is alleged, or what needs other accuser, when his own conscience
does accuse him of speaking these words? and yet if other proof be required,
it shall be testified by him that heard it, although now I forbear to name my
friend, that is loath to come in print. in old M. Bodleyes house the words were
spoken. and if the man were alive, I suppose he could witness them. besides
him there are diverse about Warwike which will testify, that he said, it was
the justice of God, that bishops whose calling was unlawful should so be
handled by Martin. let no man therefore doubt of the truth of this report.

But says he, I am able to produce witnesses, that I misliked so naughty a
course. which shall not need. for I will not deny, but he misliked the course.
yet not at the first, but after that himself felt the smart; sure, that bishops
should be railed at, he did not mislike. and worthy it is to be marked, that
he says he misliked the course, and not the purpose and thing that Martin
aimed at. yet certes if he had misliked either the course or the malicious
matter of those execrable libels, he would one time or other have publicly,
or privately declared his mislike of those matters and courses, and rebuked the
authors, and neither have read the books nor suffered his friends to read them.
doing any of these, how can it be thought that ever he misliked that bishops
should be so unchristianly, and consistorianly dealt withal?

He answers that he had no office to condemn every unlawful and uncivil
writing. I grant. yet being either preacher, or doctor, or private lay man, he
might have declared his opinion; especially seeing so many did depend upon it.
therefore he says, that being allowed to preach, he condemned all dealing in
that kind. which I can hardly believe. for how is it likely he should condemn
Martin, using so familiarly the authors of Martin, viz. John Penry, that was
not many years ago hanged; and M. Job Throk. whom God preserve from hanging.
besides that, he can not deny, but that either he has the book, or has had
or read the book, and heard that his partisans do commonly read the books.
Cod. de. famos. libell. l. vnic.
Now the civil laws condemn not only the authors of libels, but also all
such as have them, or find them, and do not tear them, and burn them. in
what case then should M. Cartwr. be, that not only has by his scoffs and
flowers of railing traced out a way for Martin, but also had the books of
Martin, and is so well acquainted with the authors? the truth is, that M.
Cartwright and his confraternitie of disciplinarians, so long as the libels of
Martin went currantly through every man's hands without all answer, or
opposition, so long they liked them well, and much ioyed in their brother
Martin, as a worthy champion of discipline, and a brave author of their
reformation. but when as one began to whip him as an ape, another to bang him
as an ass, another to cut him down with an hatchet, and that diverse of the
brotherhood began to see themselves soundly lashed, and felt themselves
unable to proceed in this course: as men unwilling to see their own faults in
print, and impatient to be touched in their credit; they began a little to
reprove libelling: not because they misliked their merry mad friend Martin, but
because they would reprove and speak against those, that spoke against
themselves. so M. Cartwright percase condemned all dealing in that kind,
albeit he do well love and like M. Throkmorton, and praise his Martinicall
writings. Well therefore it may be said, that albeit he liked well of Martin,
yet he condemned all others dealing in that kind, and that he is
notwithstanding guilty of slandring many good men, liking so well the authors
and libels of Martin. that I have slandered him in reporting thus much, he has
no reason, nor wit to say: for were it untrue; yet every untruth amounts
not to slander; and being most true, and not directly denied, how shamed he
not, to note this as a slander?

M. Cartwrights answer being charged, that he commends extemporall prayers
most highly, as being uttered by the holy Ghosts secret inspiration, and for
that when the time was, he would scarce be induced to like of a prescript form
of prayer.

Where in my reply, or in treatise of Who can make any sense of all this
sentence?
what matter I remember not, nor M. Sutcliffe (I believe) shall ever show that
Tho. Cartwr. has so little knowledge of divinity as to He has affirmed worse
matters.
affirm, that the extemporall prayers of any (how able soever in these days)
are uttered by the holy Ghosts secret inspiration. and in what place, or time,
and in whose hearing could I scarcely be In your first reply page 106. where
you argue as long as you can against it.
induced to like of a prescript form of prayer? the They shall be noted to
your grief.
noting of these circumstances which he does diligently, yea curiously (where
he thinks they may serve the turn) would easily have bewrayed the untruth
thereof. my continual Your practice is no good rule. no not of your own
opinions.
practice in the ministry witnesses against it. for in the space of five
years I preached at Andwerpe, and Middleborough, I did every Sunday read the
Who prescribed you that form?
prayer out of the book. and all the while I preached at Warwike, there were
few sermons I ever made there, but (to my remembrance) I did shut up the viz.
extemporall.
prayer either before, or after the sermon with the Lords prayer. besides
that, the prayer before the sermon ordinarily was a set and All this proves
not prescribed.
accustomed form of prayer, howsoever I read it not out of the book, and
likewise was that after the sermon some small part excepted, where in my prayer
I applied some principal points of the doctrine then handled. all Al which is
beside your purpose, and makes nothing for you.
which I would not have done, if I had not allowed, yea well liked also a
prescript form of prayer. and hitherto of the former kind of Neither are they
slanders, nor concern they necessary duties.
slanders concerning the breach of necessary duties imposed upon all
Christians. the second of things Note how he is slandered for things
indifferent.
indifferent in their own nature follows. for as touching his charge of
Odious railing, a thing put among things indifferent.
odious and Do I say you are ignorant in railing?
ignorant railing etc. I refer my self to indifferent judgment upon the
books which are extant. Matthew. Sutcliffe.

The beginning of M. Cartwr. answer to this charge, has no sense to be picked
out of it: which I take to be the correctours fault, and so let it pass. his
meaning is, that I can not show either in his reply or other treatise of his,
that he has so little knowledge in divinity, as to say that the extemporall
prayers of any in these days are uttered by the holy Ghosts secret
inspiration. wherein he does himself wrong to call his knowledge of divinity
in question. for to say what I find, if he approve M. Fenners book so far
as his epistle commendatory pretends; his skill in divinity is nothing
singular. the same does appear by strange points holden in his replies. but
better should I judge, if leaving his busy kind of dealing against the state,
he had written any book concerning points of faith. Yea in this very point in
hand I do wonder how he has here slipped. for being charged by me for better
liking of extemporall prayers then any prescript form of prayers, as is true
indeed, and shall be verified against him: here very ignorantly he falls into
the contrary error, and says, he is not so ignorant of divinity, as to
affirm that the extemporall prayers of any in these days are uttered by the
holy Ghosts secret inspiration. which is to deny the working of the holy Ghost
in the prayers of the godly, and to contrary the holy apostle, which Romans 8.
says, that the holy Ghost helps our infirmities when we know not what to
pray, as we ought. and if our prayers were not aided by Gods holy spirit, they
would not please God. so that to charge him herewith; is no slander, nor if I
should so say, is it criminal to say, that extemporall prayers of godly men
devoutly and discreetly conceived are uttered by the inward motions of Gods
holy spirit inspiring them. but indeed I do not charge him herewith, but say,
that M. Cartwr. does commend extemporall prayers, as uttered by the holy Ghosts
secret inspiration. which is true. for whereas the authors of the admonition
do Admonit, to the Parliam.
say, that in the time of the apostles the minister spowred forth hearty
supplications to the Lord, as the spirit moved them; M. Cartwright does take on
him the defense of this admonition. beside that for my part I never heard M.
Cartwright refuse to use extemporall prayers. and I doubtnot, but he thought he
prayed by the motion or assistauce of Gods spirit. yea and all the brotherhood,
as they are mistermed, does use long extemporall prayers both before meat and
after meat, especially at great feasts; for then they make longest prayers, now
they doubt not, but they pray as the spirit gives them utterance. although
indeed some of their speaks do rather savor of the pot, then of any goodness,
finally, all the Baroists upon these foundations, and the common practice of
extemporall prayers, have condemned all prescript forms of prayer, which
declares that they understood M. Cartwright as I do.

Secondly he asks me, in what time and place, and in whose hearing he could
scarcely be induced to like of a prescript form of prayer. and says, that if
these circumstances had been set down, the untruth of my allegation would have
appeared. and that his continual practice in the ministry does witness
against me. Wherein I cannot choose but wonder that he should so much forget
himself, and wilfully abuse his reader. For first he may remember, that the
admonition which he takes on him to defend does hold, that in the primitive
Church the ministers were not tied to any form of prayers invented by man. And
that my L. of Canterbury refuting this error, he goes about to 1. reply p. 106.
answer his reasons, and yields not till afterward; so that it appears he
was not easily induced. he may also remember, that he would In the end of his
first reply.
have all Apostolical orders now received and used. Beside that, his continual
practice is to use no prescript form of prayers, but such as himself
deuiseth, and so do the whole race of these sectaries, yea and so often times
have they been heard to commend extemporall forms, and to dislike prescript
forms, that I wonder how it comes to pass, that M. Cartwright should here
maintain the contrary. But let us see his reasons. First says he, my
continual A weak reason. for his practice is not always according to his
opinion, and doctrine. He was wont to speak against dispensations, and non
residence; and yet now is non resident from his charge, and prayed to be
dispensed with, as they say.
practice in the ministry does witness against it. a matter notoriously
untrue. For as long as he was in Cambridge, he prayed as it pleased himself,
and used forms by himself devised. And so like wise do all his followers,
and those have I heard most commended which preaching continually, yet every
day used new forms. And albeit M. Cartwright did read prayers at Antwerp and
Middleborough out of the book, as he says, yet that does not show that those
prayers were prescribed to him. neither were his forms of prayer at Warwike
such as this Church of England prescribed, but such as himself devised. Yea
although he said the Lords prayer, yet in that sort it was not to him
prescribed, as he said it. I beseech you therefore judge what a heinous slander
this is to say, that M. Cartwright scarce could be induced when time was to
like of a prescript form of prayer, when he is not able to show that either
by doctrine or example he approved prayers publicly prescribed, nor would ever
suffer himself to be tied to the orders of the Church of England. And thus
much is sufficient for answer of his slanders supposed to be published by me
against him, concerning breach of necessary duties. Wherein it may clearly
appear, that either he does lewdly collect that which was not meant, or
seek to shun that, which cannot be avoided. Did you ever before this hear
of a man so slandred with truth, and matters not criminal? but belike the man
was podagricall, and cried before we came near him.

Now we are to proceed to examine his second branch of slanders concerning
matters indifferent, the which is as strange as the other. so strange are they
both, that in no good author I ever read the like. But before we begin; a
word or two concerning that wrong that M. Cartwright thinks to be done to him
being charged, as he says, with odious railing. which yet I trust he will not
count slander, both for that it is left out of his division, and for that it is
most evident, and true. That he raileth vnciuily these particulers testify.
his adversaries he co^pareth to dogs and gheese. the ministry of England he
calls rouing, his adversaries learned works he calls dung. the Bishops he
calls Popish and antichristian. Me he does charge with unchristian and
immodest dealing, and suffers his friend in the preface to cry out with full
mouth against me. Infinite are his flowers in this kind. which I doubt not in
every ma^s account are odious, yet should I do him wrong to call it ignorant,
the man having so good skill and so excellent a vein herein. only let him not
use it to much, nor brag of it. For the more skill he shows herein, the
less commendation he shall deserve. odious railing, and Christian discretion
hardly meet together in one man. But let us proceed to the rest.

M. Cartwrights answer being charged not to have refused the execution of his
brother Stubbes his will.

I was not (says he) so much as That argues your evil deserts toward him.
named in my brothers will, and to put of M. Sutcliffes shift of answer he has
made to excuse himself in his latter book, that by the word of last will he
Set down my words, and they will convince you of untruth.
would understand any conueyance lately made before his death, wherein trust
was committed unto me, I answer that my brother Stubbes did never either long
before, or soon How could he commit trust being dead?
after his death put me in trust with any of his How happens it then he so
soon resigned the things morgaged?
worldly estate either by word, or writing. But there percase was.
Neither is there ( as M. Sutcliffe surmiseth) any unkindness of my brothers
toward me, in not putting me in trust, which would not that way be employed,
or my unkindness toward him, who trusted him with my whole estate that way.
And that my brothers wife and kindred rested not satisfied with my dealing,
Neither, as your bad conscience testtfieth.
either is an untruth of M Sutchffes, or a most causeless complaint of their
behalf. For where in regard of my wifes portion of two hundred pounds, I had
an annuitie in fee simple, for default of payment whereof after his death,
(besides th'annuitie and arrerages) I had a lease of anhundreth jeeres This
either was in trust. or else intolerable usury.
granted me of certain pastures to the yearly value of six pounds by
estimation for a pepercorne only, I was content (to the end the lands might be
What became of your annuitie then?
sold for the satisfying of my brothers Were you none of them?
creditors) freely and for naught to release my interest in that lease, which
the law for want of payment of the annuitie did evidently cast upon me. Also
to yield up mine annuitie for the A great matter! unless the annuitie were, as
it were a cloak for usury, and therefore great.
same sum of money I had paid to my brother, without both which my brothers
land would have found no convenient sale for the payment of his creditors
until this day. And of my dealing herein I take They knew not all.
witness S. Robert Germin of Suffolk, M. Atkins, and M. Tindall of Lincolnes
Inn: who were (in deed) the men my brother trusted with his worldly estate:
and who (in my judgment) acquitted the trust my brother reposed in them
accordingly. Matthew. Sutcliffe.

I will not deny, but there might be some mistaking in him that brought me
this report of M. Cartwrights dealing in the execution of M. Stubbes his will.
for, as M. Cartwright affirms, and by perusing his will I find, his brother
did not so far trust him. But assuredly my purpose was not to wrong him.
neither to my knowledge have I done it, were all true that M. Cartwr. says,
which not withstanding I am not bound to believe. For I do not Answer to the
petit. p. 8. and 9.
say, as M. Cartwright untruly affirms, that he was content to be executour
to his brothers Stubbe^s his will, but that he refused not the execution of his
will. And that was not only reported to me, but believed, for that common
humanity and the office of a kinsman and brother required it at his hands,
and for that in truth M. Cartwright confesleth, that there were dealings that
passed betwixt him and his brother in trust. But be it, that he was either not
so greedy as to desire, or so inhumane and unkind as to refuse in part to
execute his brothers will going in his countries service, and having none
nearer to him then M. Cartwright; what slander is this? Is it a dishonest part
to execute his brothers will? nay it is a rude and inhumane part to refuse to
do it. But may not ministers deal therein? yes: and as honest men as M.
Cartwright too. neither does Cyprians case concern our times. Why then should
this be a slander? forsooth (percase) because he has taught, that ministers
may not be excutors of wills, nor deal in civil causes. and therefore he would
be loath to deal in matters of wills. Why then does he deal in civil causes?
why does he deal in leases, in money, in lands, and all those things that
executors deal in? why is he still master of an Hospital? and if to charge
him in this be no slander, sure no slander it is to charge him in the other.
Untruth it may be, but certes no slander. What then if neither it be untruth,
nor slander? has M. Cartwright any cause to complain? assuredly for ought M.
Cartwright has said as yet, there is not any untruth in any words to be found.
For if so be M. Stubbes did never offer it, nor name M. Cartwright his
executor, then true it is which I say, that he refused it not. And why? because
it was never either offered or meant. But because indeed I supposed there had
been some intendement in M. Stubbes to put trust in him, it shall be showed
that in that sense he has not refuted my words.

He says first, that he was not named in his brothers will. Admit it were so.
yet diverse do administer goods, that are not named in the testators will:
those especially that have trust put in them. Beside that, he does not deny,
but he might be named in the scedule mentioned in the will, and which is a part
of the same. Thirdly he confesses that he yielded up a lease worth 6. pound
yearly above all reprise for nothing, and his annuitie for the sum his
brother had of him: which declares, that this was a matter of trust. for I do
not believe, that M. Cartwright was so tender hearted, as to give a way his
things for little or nothing. Fourthly why should mistress Stubbes and her
friends complain of M. Cartwright, if nothing was put to his trust? that her
complaint should be causeless, is ridiculous. that she complained, his
conscience well knows, and it shall be verified if he will. but seeing he
will needs show himself so unkind, as to abrenounce his brothers last
requests, and so inhumane as not to see his brothers last will executed, be it
so: and let this be put among the uncivil and unnatural rules of
puritanisine. yet if he deal in the business of his hospital according to my
lord of Leicesters or my lord of Warwikes last will, I doubt not, but he will
prove an executor of a will. but forsooth he will not execute any man's will, but
great lords. howsoever it is; my argument which in my answer to the petition I
made against M. Cartwright and his discipline stands firm. for if M. Cartwr.
deal in the government of his hospital, and other civil causes of his own;
albeit he take himself to be a minister of the word; then either he does
against his own rule, or else has no reason to exclude ministers from dealing
in civil causes. but it appears he deals in civil causes, yea and that as
may by his own simple tale be presumed, very hardly. for if beside his annuity
and writing for it, he had a lease worth 6. li. yearly for one peppercorne,
it appears that hard dealing in his conscience weighs not so much as one
pepper come, especially if he meant to take the advantage.

M. Cartwrights answer to a certain question of mine concerning purchasing of
land and buying of leases.

Here (says he) is a Here is impudent dealing. show my words to this effect
if you can.
charge of a purchase of three or four good mannours, and two good leases, and
both got (for the most part) by the Do you say so your self? I say it not.
spoil of the hospital, except the price of some small cottage etc. for the
purchase of three or four mannours, I never purchased any manor in my life,
but the manor of Saxmund. M. Calvin never purchased so much: yet was he as
learned as Master Cartwright.
ham in Suffolk, whereof I have yet but the moity, neither shall have these
fourteen or fifteen years, if one M. Iohnsons leaese be auailable, as hither
to he has enjoyed it by If by you, then you do enjoy it.
me, who have not disturbed his possession. the rent that he yields for the
one half of the demaines is but thirty shillings by year. the rent of the
demaines that I receive (although Are you a racker of rents, and tormentor of
tenants?
enhanced as far as the tenant may bue thereof) is but 26. li. by year, the
other rents for copyholds come yearly to a 3. li. or there abouts, as I His
forgetfullage, of which he spoke lately, makes him forget the just of his
rents.
remember. so that the whole of that I receive comes to little above 30. li.
by the year. to Was not your lands sold long before your purchase?
purchase this, I sold of the inheritance my father and grandfather left, as
fair a house for a farm not only as is in that town where it stands, but
in diverse towns about, which had between eight or nine score acres of arable
land belonging unto it with Small matters in that country: all lying common.
commons, meadow, and pasture agreeable to the farms in that country, by year
more then three times worth the value, that either my father, or I received for
it. and yet we received All is between, nothing just.
between eight and nine pounds yearly of clear rent Tell what you sold it
for, and it will appear that Saxmundham cost you much more.
discharged of all quit rents. that M. Sutcliffe may the better I have no
leisure. and I trust you tell true.
enquire into it, the farm is situat in Waddon in the county of Cambridge,
where I had also a coat with a close adjoining unto it, which I sold when I did
sell the other. Now Name, where I say it.
where he says, I purchased my lands with my hospital, I know not why he
should so often term it Because you are master of it forsooth.
my hospital, rather then (as it is truly called) the hospital of the right
honorable the earl of Leicester. but this I know and profess constantly,
that neither I Nor did any to your use, not your wives use, or childrens?
nor any for me purchased one foot of Percase you have bestowed all in leases
or other commodities.
land for me since I came to the hospital. I sold an annuitie in fee simple
of That seems to be bought for one hundred pound. which is no usury.
12. li. 10.5. by year since I came thither, as my lord chief Justice of her
Majesty's Common plees does well As if he remembered all fines and bargains
made before him.
know, before whom I acknowledged a fine. It is no matter, your revenues being
great other ways.
leases of the hospital I never made but one only, for which the house and
What received you?
not I received 30. li. and because he draws me to these accounts of the
hospital, I will offer, and in the hearing of any equal and indifferent
auditor will make it clear, that besides my Travel about civil causes.
continual travel for the settling and suites of the hospital, which I (never
brought up there to) would not have undertaken for any money, but Why have you
your stipend?
only for conscience and duty to the poor hospital my An executour of his
will in that.
L. trusted me with: I have laid out of mine own purse Can you charge the
hospital with no more?
40. marks over and above that which I have Let us know your allowances, and
we will confess it to.
received, or am like to receive, unless the stock which is holden from the
house be recovered this partly may appear by an account I gave unto her
Majesty's commissioners who had charge (among others) to enquire and certify
the whole estate of the Who has made it poor, having such good revenues?
poor hospital. Now for the two leases in Welborne, they were Might not other
lands also be bought to M. Cartwrights use by his friends as well as these
leases?
bought by a friend of mine, who being the principal dealer is left Because
the question is only concerning M. Cartwright.
out, whether to draw more envy to me, let it be judged, especially of that
which hereafter shall appear. I confess I should have had a part therein, but
they were never enjoyed either of him or me, but were I trust you had money for
them.
released to M. Morgan, for that he was not able without his What conscience
then had you first to take them?
utter undoing to perform them. and where he I say not so. I only talk what
might be made of them. which I hope M. Cartwright looked well to.
says they were worth to me two hundred marks by the year, they never have
been nor will be worth to us both two bundred farthings in all. More then that
(albeit my L. chief Justice of England deals very honorably with us) yet I
refer it to his judgment (if his lordship will be pleased to speak in so
private a matter) that we are great Of gain hoped for, or in M. Cartwrights
own opinion.
loosers by M. Morgan. and M. Morgan (if he have but a spark of good nature)
shall be constrained to He eried out of your biting usury, they say.
confess our kind and christian de aling with him both in releasing his
bargain for a Where is that sum now bestowed?
sum far underneath the value it was worth, and Not without consideration, I
trust.
forbearing him many years with much patience, after the forfeiture of his
recognizaence, and many promises broken with us. now where he excuses these
two last charges of being executor to my brother Stubbes, and of purchase of
lordshippes (as he does excuse many other things) in that he does propound it
only in a question; it is You are unworthy to be accounted a disputer, that
take this for granted.
unworthy of any answer, not only because a Strange logike like to the
strange discipline.
que^stion does more strongly sometimes auow then a bare affirmation, but
because he is so violently and bitterly carried against the petitioner for the
things he has set down by The reason is for that he seems not to doubt of
his questions.
way of question, and for his Where do I make such excuse? shame you not to
devise these soolish shifty?
excuse of being mistaken by the report of others. I refer it once again to
judgment, how it fitteth with the credit of a minister of the Gospel, to
publish (and that inprint) If you can prove, that I do so, you shall have the
garland, and be crowned king of the Consistory.
what soever he receives by report to the discredit of a Where were you
ordained minister?
minister of the Gospel. and unless M. Sutcliffe will I will bring forth God
willing, that whereof you will be much ashamed.
bring forth his reporter, some will happily conceive, that it is the
invention of his own head. and Do you doubt of that, you affirmed even now?
if he did receive it by report, yet seeing he would blow it abroad by so
strong a blast, as the print, at the least he should not have simply affirmed
it, but set it down as a report. lastly, where he says, he desires not to be
acquainted with my estate, he forgets himself. for in his former book (as
I remember, for I have You were not then wise to speak without book so merely
imagined vatrueth.
not the book at this present) he It stands you upon to show where.
promises to be a diligent surueyour, or auditour of mine and other men's
lands. and in deed he is over diligent, that can find lands of mine in Hane you
indeed neither land, lease nor fee, your self nor other to your use in
Norfolk nor Warwike shire?
Warwikeshire and Norfolk, whereof I my self, nor any of my friends know not
one foot. yet M. Doctor Sutcliffe admonished in this behalf of his It will
appear otherwise. for indeed albeit I have not affirmed that he has three or
sour mannours, yet he has in value more rent then some five or six mannours
in England.
untruth set forth in his former book, and occasioned thereby to correct
himself, fears not in this later to affirm boldly, that if he have done
amiss, it is because he has set down too little, too much (says he) I have
not set down. f. 69. p. 2. f. 70. p. 1.

Matthew. Sutcliffe.

M. Cartwright in the title of his answer does directly affirm, first that I
charge him with the purchase of 3. or four good ma^nors, and secondly that he
has purchased them with the spoil of the Hospital. and thirdly by both these
charges would he insinuate, that he is grievously slandred. These three points
therefore do rest orderly to be discussed. To the first I say, that I do not
charge him to have purchased 3. or 4. Lordships. why does not he that so boldly
avouches this of me, and pleads so long against me for it, set down my
words or note the place where they are to be found? Is he determined still to
use such perverse and strange dealing? In deed I confess that I asked a
question of Tho. Cart. how a man might by selling a coat and a few acres of
land buy 3. or 4. lordships. But every one that asks a question especially in
matter of fact, and concerning other men's dealings does not affirm so much as
he makes a question of, for then were questions and affirmations all one, and
it were unlawful to ask question in any doubtful cause. And then should the
petitioner and other of M. Cartwr. consorts that have made many questions of
very odious matters, affirm the same. which were a point very dangerous not
only to the authors of the book, but to the whole Puritan faction, that so
well liked it.

The petitioner does ask whether men ought to incur penalties for opinions
they held doubtingly.

Secondly he demands, whether the form of prayers and administration of
Sacraments, the attire of ministers, and other ceremonies of the Church of
England are more agreeing to the Church of Rome, or the Apostles and primitive
order. I trust M. Cartur. will not affirm thus much in behalf of the author of
the petition.

He asks of me why M. Cartwr. may not sell the lands he had from his father,
and buy other with the money, as well as some of the Bishops, etc. Yet he is
not so to be understood, as if he said, that Bishops sell their fathers lands,
and buy others. For few of them buy, whatsoever they sell, and few may be
compared herein to M. Cartwright, and his fellows. who under pretense of
refusing livings have by begging, and whining, and shifting, and compleyning of
persecution enriched themselves and their children: while Bishops have hardly
bin able to bear the charge of their office and place.

He also demands whether the Archbrshop; of Canterbury should not rather be
called Popes, then Primates. yet I trust he will not affirm it. he has a
little more honesty, as I think.

He asks further, whether Christ being before the Bishops, and should answer
as Bambridge and Johnson did, should not be committed. yet I hope he is not so
blasphemous a wretch, as to compare Christ with such fellows; or so lewd, as
to say that he should be conuented, or committed.

An other question is likewise demanded, whether ordinaries have not
contrived, promulgated, and published articles (he means orders) in their
own name, without her Majesty's assent. yet I doubt, whether he will stand to
affirm so much.

He asks whether Ecclesiastical Judges are not in the Praemunire,

Like wise the distracted Abstractor does frame many odious interrogatories,
which albeit he be, as they say, a mad fellow, yet he will not affirm, neither
I hope will M. Cartwright make affirmations of them. He asks whether the
Bishops have not made vnle arned and criminous ministers, and suffered them to
continue all her Majesty's reign. And, whether the Archbishop have not
dispensed contrary to Gods word, and may exercise absolute authority, and
whether the Archbishop being an excommunicate and simoniacall person may resort
to the Pope for absolution. Yet I think the man has more shame and modesty
then to affirm any such matter. Is it not then a matter very ridiculous, that
M. Cartwright will have questions to be affirmations? Beside that, it is very
dangerous to his faction, that has moved so many dangerous questions. but to
affirm that a question does more strongly auow then an affirmation, as does M.
Cartwr. is most strange and absurd. Neither do I so reason against the
petitioner, as if every word of his questions were by him auerred and affirmed,
but first because his questions are for the most part grounded upon matters of
Law, of which every one is to take notice; Next for that he does not only make
a question, but also declare his own opinion. As for example, one of his
questions is this.

Quaere of Matthew, etc. why M. Cartwright may not sell the lands he had from his
father, and buy other with the money, as well as some of the Bishops, who by
bribery, simony, extortion, racking of rents, wasting of woods and such like
stratagemes wax rich, and purchase great Lordships for their posterity.
Beside this in other places he has fufficiently declared his meaning. as for
my case it is quite contrary, I speak of matters of fact, wherein I am
ignorant, and desire to be resolved, and yet M. Cartwright will do me no
favor, and disdeineth out of his high throne of the eldership to speak to me
a poor Christian, desirous to learn of his worship. Well therefore does he
to add, that sometime a question does more strongly auow, then an affirmation.
for it is some what to much to say, that it does so at all times: and not true
that it does so at any time. But were it true, yet should he win nothing but
discredit, to reason thus of particulars. for although sometime M. Cartwright
does say well, yet he does not so always.

But suppose yt indeed I had signified, that M. Cart had purchased lands, and
bought leases more in value, then 3. or 4. good lordships: yet should it be no
slander. and that first, because it is true. and next because it is no
dishonestie to purchase, or provide by honest courses for his wife and
children. The first appears by these particulers. he confesses that he has
bought the manor of Saxemundeham, the moity whereof is worth about 30. li.
yearly. now he knows there be diverse manors that are not 5. li. rent.
Secondly he cannot deny, but he with one Fludde had two leases of M. Morgan
worth 200. marks, as both M. Fludde and M. Morgan and others will justify. He
had also his brothers lands tied for his annuitie, which since that he has
sold as is said for a great sum. Let him therefore tell us what he has done
with his money and all that he has gotten since. for either must it be employed
in lands, or leases, or some trade, or else at use. but this he denseth, and I
think he uses no trade, and therefore that remains. Beside that M.
Cartwright has large contributions, and gifts, and cannot choose but win well
by his Hospital. What is then become of all he has gotten? Has he spent it
in alms? he is none of those that means to merit by alms deeds. Has he
spent it in hospitality? nay he commonly feeds at other men's trenchers. Does
he spend it in servants? he keeps few or none, and that the rather to move
men to give largely. His apparel is not costly. At London he spends nothing
in Innes. What then remains, but that his money should go to increase his
revenues? for I know none so uncharitable as to think that he hides his
talents in a napkin.

But says he, he has gained little by the Hospital, save travel and charge.
for the Hospital owes him forty marks. as if it were not an easy matter
to gain well, and by clayming large allowances when he spent little to make the
Hospital indebted to him. Again he says, that he has sold away the two
leases in Welborne and his annuitie. as if so be he had not money for them. and
I trust his conscience would not suffer him to be a looser by them. For having
paid 420. li. for Morgans leases, he and his fellow had 600. pound again. a
small gain when you deal with men of good clean consciences.

Further he says, that he has no lands in Norfolk nor Warwikshire. yet in
the section next before he confesses, that he had lands of his brother
Stubbes bound for his annuitie, and who will believe, but that he has employed
the money that came of the annuitie and leases that he sold, or else has some
others to do it for him, either to his own use, or to his wives or childrens
uses? and all this, albeit I desire not to be acquainted with his estate, I
have by certain intelligence understood. M. Cartwright says that in a certeme
book (he knows not where) I promise to be a surueyor or auditor of his and
others lands. but unless he can show the place, we must record it as untruth.
And in the mean while we take him for a man that speaks he knows not what,
and that is written he remembers not where.

By this which is confessed, and I have learned, it appears that if I had
said, that his revenues are more then some 3. or 4. Lordships, yet the untruth
had not been such as is pretended. for you see what is confessed, and what is
more, every man may conjecture. But in deed I do not say so much, but
doubting of the matter, because of the uncertainty of men's reports, I only
asked the question, wondering in deed, how of so little beginnings he could
arise to such wealth, and not believing, that such a simple ferme as Waddon is,
and the fermes are in that country (albeit the number of acres were so great,
as he affirms, and I do not believe) and which (I doubt not) was spentmost
during his abode in Cambridge, and in his travel, could be sold for a fifth part
of that money, which now he is worth in lands and goods.

I need not therefore to make an excuse, as being herein abused by others;
neither did I: although M. Cartwright very untruly says, I did so. and
therefore refers it to judgment again, how it stands with my credit to
report whatsoever I he are by report. to whom I answer, that this makes
little for his credit to speak untruth, and to forge matters never said, nor
thought. let him show first where I excuse my self by report. next where I
report whatfoeuer I hear of others. and lastly, that these matters against him
stand upon report only; and are utterly false. if not, then whether he be
minister or not (which justly may be doubted) he must understand, that he has
done me wrong. and if he be a minister, that he has taught falsely, and
charged me untruly, and is far more at ease then his fellow ministers, which
has gotten so great wealth, and is at so little charge.

To the second point of his charge I answer, that I never said, that he has
gotten three or four mannours by the spoil of his hospital. why then does
he charge me with so saying? is this the sincerity of the doctors of
discipline to exclaim upon men for slanders, and yet not to be able to show
any good matter, but such as they forge themselves? that I never said so, what
proof need I, but that he does not in one word go about to answer any such
thing? Beside this look my books, there will no such matter be found. Indeed
I may say that the stipend of his Hospital being toward 50. li. is a good
help to him, and I say that the law presumes that he has gotten most part
of his wealth by his Hospital. and that is true, as appears by the council
of c. Inquirendum de peculio cleric.
Rhemes, and c. si quu sane. codem.
Toledo, and diverse other doctores in c. inuestigandum codem.
canons, that hold that the wealth of priests comes by the Church livings.
and yet that it is so in his case, I will not directly affirm considering the
great gifts he was wont to have by those of his side. But now that simple
fools do cease offering to this saints shrine, and that the idolatry and
superstition thereof is discovered, it seems, he is much offended.

The third point is easily cleared. for if he were never charged with spoiling
his Hospital, as himself afraid of some shadow that troubles his conscience
does surmise: how can he be said to be therein slandered? That in his purchases
he is not slandred, it does appear by that which is said before.

And this may be enough, and percase to much for my clearing touching this
matter. for what pertains it to me, what M. Cartwright has purchased, and
how? only thus much it makes for the cause, that M. Cartwright having
atteined to so great wealth and living, by what means few men know; he has
no reason to compleine of persecution, or to exclaim and cry out against the
livings of the clergy, and to offer them as it were a pray to those rauinors,
that would help to advance his strange novelties. Neither (I think) will he do
so any more, nay now he has much a do to hide what he has gotten himself,
and would gladly if he might go clear away with it: and cannot well do it,
unless we believe his bare word, which is less then a bare report, which
notwithstanding he little esteems. That he cannot thus clearly carry away
the matter, his own suspicious answer shows. he does not tell us when he
sold his fathers ferme, nor what he had for it. neither dare he declare what
he paid for Saxemundham manor, nor whether M. Johnson that enjoys the moity
of the demaines paid him any consideration. He does likewise concele from us,
what money M. Stubbes had for his annuitie, and what the money was he ought
him. Likewise he tells us not, what he gave with his daughter Mary, nor what
he means to give with his other daughters. He does not tell us what M.
Morgan had of him for his leases, nor what money he had back from M. Morgan.
neither does he set down his stipend of his Hospital, nor what money he has
leant to M. I. Throkmorton, nor what corn, or other things he has had of
him; nor any particulers whereby it may appear, that all his wealth may rise
out of his fathers ferme, his wives portion, and his Hospital. Nor dare he show
what sheep and cattle he has, nor what his wife has got by making mair. who
can therefore believe otherwise, then that he has more then he dare make show
of, or that he has less, then I supposed he had? if he will yet say
otherwise, then let him answer to these points directly, and I will my self
acquit him, if he can discharge himself. If he dare not, let him not
henceforth say any more that I have slandred him.

M. Cartwrights answer concerning the employment of his money. What store of
money I have, I Yet despise not poor men, not exclaim against the supposed
tiches of the clergy.
am not bound to give M. Sutcliffe account. what skill I have to make use of
it, may partly appear by the leases of M. Rather by his confession, and outcry
against your dealings.
Morgan. and now it will further appear by my dealing with M. Francis Michel.
Where first, as before he would I do not so make him, nor shut out the other.
but he may have interest notwtstanding any spech of mine.
make me alone the owner of the two leases, shutting out the principal
dealer: so here for the end before rehearsed, be makes me M. Michels
creditor for 300. pound, whereas the recognizance he forfeited Such packing I
see is usual with these men.
was to my friend, and not to me, and his principal debt was only 200.
pound, and not 300. pound. Now when the day of payment approached, he came to
me in the Fleet, and offered me interest to for bear, which I But your friend
would not.
utterly refusing, did notwithstanding at his earnest suit and compleint of his
distress yield to forbear the debt, and gave him a writing of my hand to
this effect, that I was But his friend perhaps would have the forfeite or
interest.
for mine own part, content to forbear him with these conditions, first that
my grant should not be hurtful to my Viz. His factor for usury as it seems.
friend not then in town, and secondly that it should not be prejudicial to
the principal sum of 200. pound. and whereas he says in the margent, that
he will prove this I say no such matter. but speak only of the note, which
in effect is not denied.
interest by showing the note of mine own hand, let him show the note, and let
him shame either me or himself. And if that be not sufficient to clear my It
consists not in these petit toys.
righteousness in this cause, I appeal to his own father M. He can say farte
more then I have alleged, if he list.
Michel, who was privy to the whole course of our dealing with his son. and
we are so far from taking Because where it is not, it cannot be had.
interest of him, that to this day being about five years at the least, since
the money was due, we have not received so much, as the principal which we
only demanded of him, although we had sued out the forfeiture of his
recognizance. And touching the matter of interest, albeit I have always been
of What is your opinion against all antiquity?
judgment for the lawfulness of it, so it be with such caution as charity
(the rule of dealing with our neighbor) be not How can that be, when we
should lend without usury?
broken: yet in the time of my greatest necessity, when I was beyond the sea,
I receiving assurance only for the Is it bare that comes without interest?
bare money I left in the hands of my friends, did meuer But had you not after
10. in the hundred?
covenant with them for the value of one penny; but was content with what soever
they themselves of their own accord did allow, whether any thing or That your
friends did doubt of and therefore gave you largely.
nothing, Which dealing allowed of those that are the most bitter aduer saries
of interest, M. Sutcliffe may think with himself, how untruly he deals
with me in his I charge him no further ^he^ ^is own writing charge him.
accusation of double vsance.

In the margent over this word note lin. penult, these words are set: here M.
Sutcliffe is put to the iumpe of apiece of his credit.

Matthew. Sutcliffe.

Upon sight of a certain note drawn out of the original of M. Cartwrights
hand, I do collect by that which merchants say, that he meant to have double
vsance, I do not charge him with it. only I affirm, that merchants say he
had double vsance. why then does he charge me untruly? beside that, why does
he not clear himself, if he account it a slander? that he can not do it, it
is too too manifest. for first he allows usury, and next answers this note
of his own simply: and thirdly he may be convicted by witnesses. I have (says
he) been always of judgment for the lawfulness of interest. wherein he
shows himself to have small judgment, not being able to distinguish
interest, that is in all contracts so much as concerns a man's profit or
loss, from usury that is in lone of money: and secondly, allowing usury
contrary to all divinity, law, and reason. neither does his exception avail
him. for vulesse charity be in Quid foeuerari? quid hom ine^ occidere? Cato
apud Cic. off. li b. 3.
cutting of throats, charity is not in usury, but in lending freely. the note
does testify that he forbore his money so justly two months which merchants
in their exchanges observe, that he is vehemently to be suspected for
receiving double vsance, M. Morgan much complained, that he was eaten up with
usury. and M. Michell, if he were called upon his oath, would say this money
of M. Cartwright did him no good.

Besides usury there appear diverse bad practices in M. Cartwrights dealings.
first it is no sign of honest meaning, to make bonds to a third person, it
argues that he meant to have that, which he was ashamed to take. besides it is
no good course to entangle young men in bonds, their fathers being yet living.
the l. 1. ff. des. C. Macedonian.
Romanelawes make such bonds void. neither does it any whit relieve him,
that he says, he has not yet his principal. for usurers often times loose
all. whatsoever M. Cartwright had, he meant to have large allowance. for he had
judgment for the forfeiture. thirdly, nothing would content M. Cartwright but
a recognizance, to show that he meant to have land for money.

But says he, what use I can make of money, appears by the lease of M.
Morgan. In the written copy which M. Cartwright himself gave out, it is 14.
li. 10.5. but because it is too much to take so much for 100. li. he takes
his pen, setting down 12. li. 10. s. confuting himself with his own hand, and
making no conscience to tell untruth, and therefore his bare word is nothing:
at ye most, it is but bare proof.
true. for M. Morgan did grealy complain of your hard dealing, the same also
appears by the note made to M. Michell, yea and by the man's testimony. but
nothing makes the same more evident, then the dealing with M. Stubs, for to
take an annuity of 12. li. 10. s. yearly for one hundred pound (as it seemed
you did, and must confess, if you will tell what money he had of you) and
afterward to release the annuity for an hundred pound, is nothing but to take
12. li. 10. s. yearly for the use of an hundred pound. Likewise he that
delivers out two or three hundred pound, or such a sum of money upon a
lease, and afterward releaseth his bargain for his money again, and percase
half so much more, cannot escape the note of a biting usurer. how nere this
was to M. Morgans case, I report me to M. Cartwrights conscience, and M.
Fluddes and Morgans testimony, which must needs testify that for 420. li.
they received 600. li.

He says further, that the recognizance wherein M. Michell stood bound to his
friend was but for 200. li. yet the copy of the note which was under M.
Cartwrights hand does mention 300. li. but M. Cartwright has gotten the
original into his hands, and so presumes to say what he list. but first the
writer shall testify against him, and next his own conscience. but says he,
let him show me the note, thereby either to shame him, or my self. and in the
margent it is said, that I am put to the iumpe of a piece of my credit. as if
it were not sufficient that there was such a note. or as if my credit depended
on such patched notes. will M. Cartw. say on his credit that there never was
such a note, and that it was only for 200. li. he will not, I am assured, and
therefore what need solemn proofs where the matter in question cannot be
denied?

He alleges also, that he cannot yet have his money of M. Michell, which is
the case of many that lend for interest, and abridgeth the suspicion of usury
nothing. Lastly, to show his good dealing, he says, he had nothing for his
money, but what his friends voluntarily gave. but that he does not specify,
neither does he show whether he expected the same or not. which if he did
would convince him of mental usury, all this defense therefore is defective.
for neither does he allege matter sufficient for his discharge, nor brings
any other proof, then his own single and bare word, which I believe no more,
then I believe M. Throk. word if he should be examined at the bar, and plead
not guilty. he that is charged can do no less then deny, but where be his
witnesses? where be the proofs?

Thus you have heard M. Cartwrights defense of himself in matters needless,
if he could have contented himself; wherein albeit he would blot others, and
clear himself, yet all falls out against him, and makes for his adversary,
it may be M. Cartwright will think otherwise, and reply, but if he purpose to
salve his credit, let him no more forge and devise matters on his own head,
and as he pleases himself, but let him deal plainly, and set down my
words as I wrote them, not as himself wresteth them, and then I doubt not,
but his own eyes will see, and his own confcience condemn his own errors.
all the worst I desire him is, that he may see them, acknowledge them, and
amend them, if he will not amend them, yet let him make an end of these foolish
challenges, that will be accepted, (he may assure himself) much to his hurt,
and prejudice. if he will make no end of quarrelling, let him not complain, if
his follies be laid open to the world. and if he will needs write, let him
leave these trifling controversies, and employ his wit, and labor in the
common cause. if he will both quarrel and trifle; I can not for my part, but
be sorry to deal with so quarrelsome and trifling an adversary: and his friends
lament, that he has fallen on such a base and worthless argument. only I.
Throkm. percase will take pleasure in these courses, and furnish him with store
of prefaces, such as is set before this brief: but he had better consult with
wifer heads, and take an other course. it may be he will not hear me: I will
therefore forbear to urge him further, and commend him to God, and leave him
to the counsel of his best friends.

Escapes amend thus.
Fol. 3.2. line 27. read, clear you? fol. 4. b. line 15. read, particularly?
fol. 7.2. line 32. read seems to be. fol. 17. a. line 35. read, unchristian
dealing? fol. 17. b. annot. 1. grimace, fol. 20. b. annor. 3. read, are ye?
fol. 23. a. line 35. read definitive.


