A MOTIVE TO GOOD WORKS. Or rather, To true Christianity indeed.

WHEREIN BY THE way is showed, how far we are behind, not only our
forefathers in good works, but also many other creatures in the ends of our
creation: with the difference betwixt the pretenced good works of the
Antichristian Papist, and the good works of the Christian Protestant.

By Phillip Stubbes, Gentleman

MATTHEW.5. verse 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater Noster row, at the sign of
the Talbot. 1593.

To the Right Honorable Cutbert Buckle, Lord Mayor of the City of London, P.
S. wishes all prosperity in this life, and in the life to come everlasting
salvation by Jesus Christ.
Having a desire (right Honorable) to see the state of this our noble Island
(in the bowels whereof as in the womb of my mother, I was both bread and borne,
and wherein I have lived even to this present day) I took my gelding about the
Annunciation of S. Mary last past, and so trauayling from place to place,
within one quarter of a year (or a little more) I performed (by Gods good
providence, and his blessed protection) as much as I purposed, compassing the
whole realm (in effect) round about. Which long and wearysome journey, (albeit
to my great charges, and pains) I undertook, partly for my private pleasure
and recreation, partly for the auoydance (if it might please God) of this
general infection of the plague, which now reigns and rages not only in
this honorable City, but also almost throughout the whole realm universally,
and partly to acquaint my self with the manners and dispositions of the people,
and finally, to see and view all such monuments, edifices, and memorable
deeds as our good Ancestors have left behind them. In all which my progress
(right honorable) observing every little circumstance as nearly as I could, I
found (if not all) yet very many things out of order, and far from that
perfection, which I hoped, and looked for. For as concerning the people, I
found them in most places, dissolute, proud, envious, malicious,
disdaynefull, covetous, ambicious, careless of good works, and almost
altogether irreligious. For the Countries themselves, I found them both
pleasant, and delectable, and abounding with all kind of commodities and
store, so as nothing seemed to be wanting that man's heart could desire under the
sun, save only good people, and the same thankful to God for his so great,
so inestimable, and so infinite blessings bestowed upon them. And as for the
ancient monuments which our good forefathers left us (as namely Hospitalls,
Spittles, Alms houses, Churches, Chapels, Schools of learning, Bridges, high
ways, pauements, causies, and the like) I found them, some quite dissolved,
(so as scarce any small remembrance thereof is in many places to be seen) and
othersome so ruinate and decayed, as if the first founders thereof were now
living and should see them, they would not take them for their own, but
rather for some disproportioned miscreants foysted in, in their places. Which
general decay of all good works, or rather plain defection and falling away
from God, (right honorable) when I considered, returning to London from my long
and paynefull journey, and having reposed my self there a little, I was moved
(I protest before God) even in conscience to write this little treatise, to the
end, that either by example, exhortation, or one means, or other, I might
stir up the minds of men, (at least of those whose hearts God has touched)
if not to do good works themselves, yet to maynteyne those which our
predecessors have left behind them. The want whereof, as it is a blemish to
our profession, so is it a cause that makes the enemy to bark against us, as
if our Religion were nothing else but plain talking, and not walking, nay
plain Atheism, and Libertinisme, for so they falsely bear the world in hand.
And therefore I pray God we may, if not for conscience sake, yet for fear, or
if not for fear, yet for very shame now at the last endeavor our selves to do
good works, and to leave some monuments and testimonies of our christian zeal,
and charity behind us. For else I am afraid, least not only our good
forefathers, but also those which we accoumpt profane and wicked persons (as
Christ speaks) shall go before us into the kingdom of heaven. But of these
matters we shall have occasion to say more in the further discourse of this
book, and therefore to bend my style toward your honor. After that I had in
some sort penned this little treatise, I considered with my self to whom I
might dedicate the same, and so after many ratiocinations pro and contra, I was
at the last resolved to consecrate the same rather to your Honor, than to any
other, and that for two causes: First, for that it has pleased God, to call
you (and that most worthily) to the regiment of this so famous and populous a
City, to this end (no doubt) that by the sword of authority you might
suppress vice, and by the scepter of wise government, you might command and
enjoin men to the practicing of good works. And secondly, for that the same
God has made you not only zealous of religion, but also of good works, all
which hereafter (Christ willing) shall be registered in their due time and
place, to your immortal fame, honor, and renown. Accept therefore (my very
good Lord) according to your pristine affability this little Treatise,
published in your Honors name, and admit both it and the Author thereof, into
your patronage and protection, so shall I think my self sufficiently
remunerate, and the Church of God being edified thereby, shall praise God for
you to the end. And thus I most humbly take my leave. From my lodging by Cheap
side this 8. of November. 1593.

Your Honors in all duty,Phillip Stubbes Gentleman.

To the courteous Reader.
COnsidering with my self, (gentle Reader) the great decaie, or rather the
plain abolition and extermination of good works, in these our unhappy days,
I was persuaded to publish this little Treatise, to the end I might stir up
(if it be possible) the minds of men to the exercising and practicing of the
same. The Argument (I appeal to thy conscience in the fear of God) is good,
the end and purpose of the Author also commendable, and therefore I doubt not,
but it will be both well liked, and also no less esteemed of al those that
fear God, and then for the liking or disliking of the other, I am so far off
from caring for it, that I pray God I may never, neither say, do, nor write
any thing, that may be liked or applauded of them. For the manner of the
handling hereof, I have not desired to be curious, neither to affect filed
phrases, culled or picked sentences, nor yet lofty, haughty, or far fetched
epithites, but a plain, bare, and naked style, for I seek not vainglory,
nor worldly praise, (which many green heads make so much account of,) but
profit to the reader, and gain of Christian souls unto GOD. And for those
faults which have passed either my pen in writing, or the press in
printing, I pray thee (friendly reader) either amend them with thy pen, or else
cover them with the veil of modesty. And if thou reapest any commodity by
these my labors, ascribe the glory to him whom the heavens do worship, the
Angels reverence, and the powers adore. And thus I commit thee to God, and my
book to the censure of the godly wheresoever dispersed upon the face of the
earth.

Thine in the Lord, Phillip Stubbes, Gentleman.

Faults escaped in printing.
Fol. 89. line 23. for chase, read chastise.

Fol. 94. line 1. blot out these words, Let us rest contented with whatsoever
he does.

Fol. 95. line 22. for renumeration, read remuneration.

Fol. 96. last line, for in that famous, read to that famous.

Fol. 102. line 2. for per sanctis, read pro sanctis.

Fol. 102. for supereminentibas, read supereminentibus.

Fol. 113. line 2. for chiefest work, read chiefest mark.

Fol. 120. line 1. for a moment, read a monument.

Fol. 122. line 12. for pessessions, read possessions.

Fol. 154. line 20. for at last, read at least.

Fol. 159. line 17. for what soever, read wheresoever.

Fol. 164. line 1. for willingly, read willinglier.

Fol. 168. line 22. for defile, read defiles.

Fol. 188. line 13. for momentary, read momentany.

Fol. eodem line 21. for holy Job, read the holy man Job.

A MOTIVE TO GOOD WORKS.
The first Section.
Wherein is showed the end of man's creation in this life, and how all creatures
do serve and obey their creator better than man in their several callings,
with an exhortation to good works.

IF God created the whole world, with all things contained therein, of infinite
variety, to this end, that he might be glorified by them, and in them (as
without al controversy he did) than much more created he man to the same end,
whom he made after his own similitude and likeness, endued with almost
unspeakable graces, and whom also, he constituted Lord and ruler over all his
other creatures. And therefore, even as an earthly prince (that should promote
and advance the meanest vassal, or basest peasant of his realm as it were, from
the dunghill, to great honor and dignity, making him not only ruler over all
his jewels and treasure whatsoever, but also chief ruler and governor under
him over all his people) might in reason look for greater gratitude, love,
obedience, and loialtie at such a ones hands, whom he should so advance, than
at the hands of the rest of his subjects, whom he has put in subjection: so
the heavenly king calling us (as it were) from the dunghill, and advancing us to
great honor and glory in this world, and making us Lords and rulers over all
things under him, does, and in all reason may, look for greater thankfulness,
love, and obedience at our hands for it, than he does or may look for, at
the hands of all or any of his other creaturs, whom he has put in
subjection under our feet. And yet notwithstanding whether they or we in our
several conditions and callings, do glorify him the more, it will easily
appear in the further discourse of this book, if we compare their doings and
ours a little together. And first to begin with the Angels. The Angels
(which as Paul says, are ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14
and most glorious substaunces, created for the execution of Gods will, and for
the comfort, defense, and protection of such as be heirs of salvation in
Christ) are so ready and pressed to execute and accomplish the will and purpose
of God, that they fail not in the least point. And therefore when God sent
them not only to denounce, but also to execute his judgment and decree over
Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 19.22
they were so precise, and so exquisite in performing the least circumstaunce
of their commission, that they told Lot they could do nothing till he were
gone forth of the city. Again, God commanded them not only to comfort, but
also to feed the good Prophet Eliiah, when he fled from the face of cruel
Iezabel, 1. Reg. 19.
who presently obeyed, as you may read in the sacred history. They were sent
to comfort Hagar, Genesis 21.
who fled from the presence of her mistress Sarah, Genesis 16.
they performed their embassage, both feeding and also comforting of her. Genesis
21.
They were sent to accompany Jacob traveling from Haran toward his native
Country, they obeyed presently without all reluctation or resistance. An
Angel was sent to deliver the three children Shadrach, Dan. 3.
Mishach, and Abednego, from the fury of the raging furnace, who without delay
accomplished his charge so strictly, that the very hairs of their heads were
not once touched, nor so much as any smell of fire felt about them, although
they walked up and down the fiery flame. The Angels also were sent to pitch
their tents about the good Prophet Elisha, 2. Reg. 5
and to defend him from the violence of them that were sent to take him: they
straight way obeyed, compassing him round about with fiery chariots, as it had
been mighty mountains, not only defending him from harm, but also striking
his enemies with palpable blindness. Tobit. 5
They were sent to conduct Tobias in his journey to Rages in Media, they
straight obeyed, guiding him not only thither, but also bringing him home
again to the no small joy of his old parents. They were sent also to comfort,
to feed, Dan. 6
and to deliver Daniel out of the Lions den, they feed him by the Prophet
Abacuc, comforted him by most sweet words of consolation, and finally
stopping the mouths of the greedy lions, delivered him by the power of him
who works whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth. They were sent to
conduct the Israelites thorough the wilderness, Exo. 1^
they obeyed, going before them in the day time, in a pillar of a cloud, and
in the night time, in a pillar of fire, shielding them from their enemies on
every side. 2. Sam. 24
They were sent to strike the host of David with the pestylence, they obeyed,
slaying seuaentie thousand before they ceased, and being commanded to stay
their hand, they stayed forthwith. They were commanded to slaie all the
valiant men of San^^^rib king of Asbur, 2. Chr. 12.21
who invaded ^^dah with a mighty host in the days of Hezechia, they
presently slew all the princes, captains, and famous men of the army,
according to their commission enjoined them by the Lord. Luke. 1.26
To conclude, 27
they were sent to salute the virgin Marie, 28
and to signify unto her the mystery of the incarnation of our savior
Christ, they presently without all delay obeyed, as you may read more at
large in the Gospel after S. Luke. I might here infer many more the like
examples, of the obedience of Angels toward GOD who made them, but these
few (least I might seem tedious) at this time shall suffice. Now who sees not
(except he be wilfully blind) the great love, and holy reverence, the great
obedience and dutiful alleageaunce which these holy Angels do bear toward
their God? how ready they are to execute his will? how pressed to perform
whatsoever he does inioyne them? and how loyally and how faithfully they
behave themselves in all things? And never was there one found disobedient or
rebellious against his blessed will, since that great defection and apostasy
of the first Angels, who now being transnatured, and degenerate into devils
for their sin of pride and disobedience, are condemned to everlasting
destruction, as holy Jude bears record. Jude verse. 6
And upon the otherside, who sees not our disobedience, our infidelity, nay,
our plain perfidie our unfaithfulness, our undutifulness, our disloialtie
and treachery? In a word, who sees not our contumacie, insolency, pride, and
rebellion against our God in all things? So that there is no more comparison
betwixt the holy Angels and us, in our obedience and service of God, than is
betwixt light and darkness, fire and water, life and death, sin and virtue.
Let us therefore throw down our selves in all humility before his footstool,
confessing our sins, and crave mercy at his hands for Christ his sake. Let
us cast away this filthy Philautia, this self love, this ouerweening of our
selves, and account of our selves as we are in deed, sackes of ashes, bags
of wind, bubbles of water, worms meat, and no men. Let us say with the
Apostle, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing: let
us hold that for truth, which the holy Ghost uttered long since by the mouth of
holy David, there is not one good upon the earth, no not one, they are all gone
out of the way, they drink up iniquity as it were water, and swallow down
wickedness as it were bread. True therefore is that sentence pronounced by the
mouth of God himself in the 6. of Genesis The will of man is wicked, Genesis 6.
and set upon wickedness even from his very cradle, or rather from the very
womb, as the Psalmist David witnesses, where he says, Behold I was begotten
in wickedness, Psalm. 51.5.
and in sin has my mother conceived me; So that our wills (except they be
regenerate, and sanctified by the spirit of God) are nothing else but puddles
of sin, sinckes of iniquity, and quagmires of all abhominacion, belching
forth filthiness, and breathing out ungodliness, even to the polluting (if it
were possible) of the very heavens with our sin. And therefore must we needs
confess with the Apostle, It is God which works in us both the will, and the
deed, even of his own grace, mercy, and love, which he bears toward us in
Christ. And yet notwithstanding there are some, that will not stick to affirm
that thought is free, and that it is lawful for us to think what we will good
or evil. But I would feign learn of these cunning sophisters, whether they
think it lawful (and no sin before God) to think an evil thought, although
secretly in the heart? I think they will say no. For our Savior Christ
conde^neth an evil thought as a most heinous sin saying, Math. 5.28.
he that but lusts after a woman in his heart, has committed adultery
already before God, and is as guilty thereof in the justice of God, as though
he had committed the fact: where you see he makes an evil thought, or
conceit of the heart equiuale^t with the deed before God.

Again, our savior Christ reckning up a great catalogue of sins which defile
a man, amongst the rest brings in evil thoughts, Math. 15.18 19.20.
not only for one, but as chief and principal. So that I conclude, that
every evil thought, secret motion, private affection, or conceit of the heart
whatsoever, is not free (as some Lybertines would have it) but rather
damnable: for, is it lawful for a man to think, to conceive, to meditate, and
reuolue mischief and wickedness in his heart, and can the same be free and
without sin before God? Is not he the searcher of the heart and raines, and
knows not he our thoughts long before they be conceived in our minds?
Respects not he the heart alone, and shall we say that an evil thought is
free? God forbid. In deed every good thought is free, and proceeds from the
spirit of grace, suggesting the same unto us: but every evil thought is
damnable, and proceeds from the spirit of the devil, and the stinking pumpe
of man's corrupt and canckred nature. Let us therefore pray unto GOD to
sanctify our thoughts, and to rectify our secret cogitations, that we may
meditate and think of those things which may please him, and by his holy
grace may manfully put the same in practice, to the glory of his holy name and
our eternal salvation. But let us come to other of his creatures. You would
think it strange, if I could prove that even the very devils themselves do
fear the majesty of GOD more than man, at lest more than some men, yea, and
be more obedient, duetifull, and pressed to do his will, and yet it is most
true they are so. For we read in the sacred history, that the devils do
tremble and quake at the very name of God, and that they are and ever have been
ready at hand to execute the will and good pleasure of God. Yet I must needs
grant in deed, that this their fear, is a servile and slavish fear, and
this their obedience, is a forced and coacted obedience, and not voluntary, nor
proceeding of love nor good will, but rather of fear and constraint: but how
ever it be, it is yet far better than the fear and obedience of some
miscreants toward God, who will never be drawn, neither by love, fear, nor
scarce constraint (if they could otherwise choose) to the obedience of God and
executing of his will. Naie, there are some so indurate, and so frozen in the
dregs of their sin, that neither fear of hell, nor love of heaven can once
move them to leave their sin, being of this resolution in deed, that there
is neither God, nor devil, heaven, nor hell, no immortality of the soul, nor
any life after this. If these were not their persuasions, they would never live
as they do, worser than the devils themselves, who fear and tremble at the
majesty of God. But they are so far off from tre^bling at him, that they
believe there is no God to reward virtue, nor Devil to punish sin after this
life. And therefore may I conclude, that such Atheists are worser than the
devils, for they believe both. But let us leave them to themselves, and proceed
in our intended discourse. The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Signs, and
Planets, with all the rest of the celestial bodies whatsoever, we see what a
notable concord, what a pleasant consent and sweet harmony they keep, and
observe in their several progressions, places, and reuolutio^s, even from the
beginning of the world to this present day, not one of them rebelling or
disobeying the law of their maker, nor so much as once steppi^g aside from
perfourming that office and duty, wherein God has placed them. The Sun was
created to give light, to divide the day from the night, Genesis 1 ^.
to distinguish betwixt times and seasons, and to fertillize and make fruitful
the earth by his heavenly influence, which otherwise of it self is barren and
unfruitful. The Moon in like sort was made to give shine in the night, to
fructify the ground, and (as it were) to dominiere and to bear rule over the
huge and mighty seas, Genesis 1 ^.
by her celestial power and heavenly influence also. The stars were likewise
created, not only as ornaments to decore and beautify the heavens, but also as
helps and adiuments, to the fructifying and increasing of al things upon the
earth, and to conduct and guide mariners and seafaring men amidst the surging
seas. Now who is so blind, that sees not, and that by every days success,
the truth of these things? who sees not I say, how strictly, and how precisely
every one of them do perform their duties and offices in their several
places and degrees, according to the first ordinance of God their creator,
without all reluctation, repugnance, or disobedience whatsoever. And therefore
I will not doubt to conclude, that these celestial bodies do reverence, honor,
and obey the ordinance and decree of their maker, far better than man, and
yet were they created for the benefit, use and service of man. The fire also a
pure element, was created by God, to give light, to warm and heat, to dry,
to purge, to cleanse, and purify, all which several properties we see it
yields and every day performs. The water he created to humect and
moisten, to feed, nourish, and sustain, to run, to wash away, to scour,
and make clean, and these things we see by daily experience it performs
without resistance. The trees likewise were created to burgen and bring forth
fruit and fragrant smells, as well for the pleasure and delight of men, as also
for his singular profit and commodity. In a word (for that I will not be
tedious to the reader, especially in a matter cleerer than the light) the earth
the mother and procreatrix of all things, was created, and commanded by God to
bring forth fruit, as herbs, flowers, corn, grass, and other species and
simples of infinite variety, serving not only for the sustentation of man and
beast, but also for their pleasure and health, in like manner. Now the earth,
like an obedient child, yields her self to the laws of her creator,
performing what so ever God has enjoined her, and that without all
degeneracion, resistance, or rebellion. What should I speak of brute beasts,
which are singular in this kind? Of creeping things upon the earth, of flying
fowls in the air, of fishes in the Sea, and other creatures without number
(of all which if I should speak severally, rather time than matter would be
wanting) which all fear, honor and obey the ordenance, and law of their
creator, and in their nature, and kind, do glorifye him more than man. Yea,
such is the rebellion, the ingratitude, the unthankfulness, and blockishnes of
man toward his creator, that God himself is forced to complain of it by his
Prophet, and to prefer the obedience and knowledge of brute beasts before
his. The Ox (says he) knows his masters stall, and the ass his cribbe,
but my people will not know, nor obey me. And as brute beasts do excel man
in the observing and keeping the laws of nature, so do they excel most men
in temperancie, sobriety, abstinence, gratitude, kindness, and many other
virtues besides. For take me the insaciablest, or rauenoust beast in the world,
let him be never so hungry, and yet when he comes to his meat, he will eat
no more than his nature is able to bear, and his stomach well to digest.
Again, let a beast be never so thirsty, and let him have the best drink in
the world, yet will he drink no more, than will suffice him. And which is
more, there is not any beast that will eat oftener than he has need, but
when he has eaten his belly full, then will he take his rest, and absteyne
from eating, till he feel himself either hungry, or at least, till his
former meat be perfectly digested. But you shall have some men, that will
never stint cramming, and ingorging their filthy paunches with delicate
meats, and their heads with strong drinks, till (nature being surcharged)
they vomit them up again like fylthie dogs. And whereas brute beasts (as I
noted before) will not eat till they have need, these epicures, and filthy
belly gods (for so the Apostle Paul calls them) will do nothing else
(almost) but eat and drink every hour, and that not only of the day, but
also of the night, neither keeping order, diet, mean, nor measure, but as
though they were borne to eat and drink, and (clean contrary to the rules
of the wise Philosophers, who taught, that we should eat to live, and not
live to eat) to consume and devour the good creatures of God, they spend
their whole lives, or the most part of them in filthy gourmandize, gluttony,
drunkenness, riot, and excess, like Sardanapalus that filthy, and swynish
Epicure, whose damnable opinion was, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla
voluptas. Eat, drink, and be merry whilst we be hear, for when we be gone,
there is no pleasure to be found. And truly the Epicure says well (in some
sense) for, there is no joy, no felicity, no comfort, nor pleasure after this
life for him, nor such as he was: but for the children of God, their joy,
their felicity, their comfort, and pleasure indeed, begins not till after
this life in the kingdom of heaven.

Now for gratitude and kindness of brute beasts not only one toward an other,
but also toward man their enemy, we read of many, and almost incredible
examples, recorded by ancient, and approved Historians. But of many I will
recite one or two. The Romans had a law or custom amongst the^, that what
servant soever should run away, or make escape from his master, without his
leave, or license, should be cast into a den of Lions to be devoured. It fell
out so that a certain servant ran away from his master, and fearing to be
apprehended, fled into a great forest, or wood, where finding a cave or den in
the ground, he entered in, minding there to end his languishing and pining
life, having been in the cave but a small space, there came in a monstrous
great Lion, who in pursuing of his pray, had pricked his foot with a thorn or
stumpe. The poor wretch, seeing the Lion come in, looked for nothing else but
present death. The Lion espying the man, came sawning upon him, and offered
him his foot: the seely fellow gathering a little courage, by reason of the
fawning of the Lion, looked upon his foot, and espied a great thorn, or
stumpe in it, and so plucked it out. The Lion in luye thereof, not only fead
him from day to day, with such homely meat as he could get, but also defended
him from the violence of all other beasts. At the length, the poor slave
being weary of his savage life, left the Lion, who conducted him safely
forth of the wood: he had not been long abroad, but he was espied and
taken, and in fine, condemned to be cast into the den of lions. Now it fell
out so, that the same lion, out of whose foot he had plucked the thorn, was
taken and kept amongst the other lions. Well, the poor wretch was cast into
the den amongst the lions. This lion looking upon him, knew him, and in
regard of that good turn which he had done him in plucking out his thorn, not
only not hurt him himself, but also defended him from the rest of the lions,
who would no doubt have presently devoured him. The people beholding this
strange event, wondered, and demanded of the man the cause thereof: to whom
he told all the whole matter in manner as is aforesaid. Then presently the man
was taken out, and not only pardoned and set free, but also had the lion given
him, who became so gentle, loving, and kind to to him, that he lead him up and
down the streets, as it had been a tame lamb, with this inscription written
in great charectors, and fixed upon his back, Behold a man that helped a
lion, behold a lion that saved a man. Again, there was a certain man that had
a spaniel or dog, and traveling by the way was assailed by thieves, with whom
he fought very sore. The dog also for his part, was not behind, for although
he was but little, yet he bit them by the legs, and was in the end sore
wounded and hurt. At last his master was slain, and being by the thieves
drawn aside, and cast into a brake of fern, the poor dog came to him, and
licked his wounds: and seeing him eat no meat, ran to houses about, and
getting meat, brought it to his master, and put it into his mouth. Within a
little after, a Justice of peace riding that way, the dog ran to him, and
weeping, and houling, guided him to the place where his master lay slain. The
Justice following the dog, found the man killed, and his mouth full of meat. And
causing his man to male him behind him upon his horse, carried him to the next
town, and buried him. The dog following apace, marked the place where they
laid his master, and they being departed, he came to the grave, and scraped a
hole upon it, where he lay night and day, mourning and houling pitifully. At
the last the Justice caused him to be caught and brought home to his own
house. where he kept him. In the mean time, great inquiry was made every
where for the murderers, diverse were apprehended and taken upon suspicion,
and araigned. The justice sitting upon the bench, and his dog betwixt his
legs, so son as ever he came to the bar that murdered his master in
deed, the dog leapes from betwixt the Justices legs, and running through
the prease of people, caught him fast by the leg that slew his master, and
would not be taken of, without much a do. This fellow being straightly
examined, confessed, that he was the very man in deed, who with his own
hands committed the murder. There was also another dog, who when his master
was condemned to be cast into Tiber, and there to be drowned, leapt in after
him, and held up his head so long, as til they were both drowned together,
rather choosing to die with his master tha^ to live without him. These be
wonderful and rare examples of singular gratitude, love, and affection even in
brute beasts, and such as may make us ashamed of our ingratitude,
disloialtie, and want of love, not only toward God, but even one toward
another also. I might here allege almost infinite other examples of the like
kind, but these shall suffice at this present. By these few we see, how far
bruit beasts do excel us, and how far we are inferior to them in many
things. And may not this make us to blush, that brute beasts shall set us to
school, to learn of them gratitude, love, affection, and kindness one toward
another? And which is yet more to our shame, do not all creatures of God
continue and persist still in the same state and condition, wherein they were
created, without either degenerating, corrupting, or deprauing of their first
nature, or being, man only, and the infernal spirits excepted? They rebel
not, they repine not, they murmr not, they grutch not, they go not out of
kind but do those things whereto God and nature has ordained them. Besides
all this, they sin not against the majesty of God by any kind of actual
stnne. But how far we are degenerate from that excellent state and condition
wherein we were created, how far we are off, from performing the works of
our creation (nay rather what sins do we not daily commit) I appeal to
every man's conscience that is not wedded to a preiudicate opinion, nor chained
in the fetters of fo^d conceit. For albeit we were created at our first
creation, holy, pure, innocent, and without sin, endued with almost
unspeakable graces, above all other creatures (the holy Angels excepted) as
namely, faith, hope, love, charity, wisdom, knowledge, yea, and a certain
faculty, or power, which we call free will, by force whereof we might have
stood in innocence still, if we had would, all this I say notwithstanding, we
are yet so far off from honoring and glorifieng of our God for these his
inestimable blessings bestowed upon us above al creatures, as we dishonor,
displease, and offend him more than all or any of his other creatures
whatsoever. So that if ever, eue^ now is verified, that divine oracle
pronounced by God himself, All flesh has corrupted his way before God, Genesis 6.
there is none that seeks the Lord aright, no not one, from the swain to the
priest, all are gone out of the way, walking craggie paths and by ways, to
their own confusion. From the top of the head to the sole of the foot, there
is not one whole place, (as the Prophet Esaie Esa. 1
speaks) but all full of botches, blaines, ulcers, and sores, God be
merciful unto us, and hasten his kingdom for his elects sake. Yea, we are so
far grown into sin, that sin is grown into habit, or rather iuto nature
with us. And yet are there not a few, that think all things they do are well,
and justifiable before God, according to the old proverb, Suus cuiusque
crepitus fibi been olet, that is, every man so flattereth him self in his
own conceit, that he dares to stand upon his guard, and affirm, that sin
is no sin, but virtue, and virtue no virtue but sin, censuring all things
in the vain balance of his own deceitful fantasy, after the corrupt
imagination of his own heart. Wherefore (even in the bowels of Jesus Christ) I
beseech all that have any spark of Gods grace within them, any fear of God,
any love, any remorse of conscience, any regard of the salvation of their
bodies, and souls, in the life to come, now at the last to rouse up
themselves out of the cradle of security, and drousie lethargy of sin, wherein
they have long slept, and by the examples of bruit beasts, to do the works and
offices of their vocation and calling. Let us cast off the works of darkness
(as the Apostle exhorts us) that is, the works of sin, and put upon us the
armor of light, that is, the works of righteousness, holiness, and truth,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil, as the same Apostle in an
other place wills us. Let us consisider and weigh, that we are they upon whom
the ends of the world are come, and that the bridegroom Christ Jesus
stands before the doors. Let us think that the judge is at hand to su^mon us
to the dome, who though he defer his coming, yet be sure he will come at the
last, and reward every one according to his doings in this life whether they be
good or bad. Let us think that he who has committed his talents to us, will
one day demand accounts of them. Remember these things whilst thou have time
(dear Christian) and do the works of mercy. Follow the council of the holy
Ghost by the mouth of David, Eschew evil and do good, Seek after peace, and
ensue it. Oh let not brute beasts, and unreasonable creatures go before thee
in the doing of their duties. Think thus, that he to whom much is committed,
shall be accomptable for much, and then reason thus with thy self. As the Lord
has bestowed many great blessings and graces upon me, far above many other of
his creatures, so will he require of me, that I should love, honor, obey,
magnify, praise, and in all my actions glorify him more than any other
creatures. And know this whatsoever thou art, high or low, rich, or poor,
young, or old, that thy years, nay that thy very days, hours, and minutes of
hours which thou have to live, are numbered with God, and, that thou can not
by any means possible pass the same, no not the twinkling of an eye, or the
least period of time that may be; and therefore good David prayed the Lord to
teach him to number his days, that he might know how long he had to live. But
admit that thou live to 60.80. or 100. years, alas, yet are thy days full of
misery, affliction, calamity, vexacion, and trouble, Genesis 47.9^
as good Jacob said unto Pharao, being demanded how old he was, few and evil
are the days of thy servant. But say that thou should live to hundreths of
years, as many of our forefathers did, yet must thou needs die at the last:
Ada^ lived nine hundred years and od, and he died, says the text, Abraham so
many years, and he died, Isaac so many years, and he died, Jacob so many years,
and he died, David so many, and he died, Solomon so many, and he died,
Methusale^ so many years, yea, the most of any that ever lived upon the earth,
and yet, says the text, he died, so that the foot of the song is still, and he
died. Irreuocable therefore is the sentence of God against al flesh, Dust thou
art, and into dust thou shall return again. The same thing witnesses the
Apostle Paul, Genesis 3.
where he says, Destinatum est omni homini semel mori, It is appointed to
every man to die once, and then to come to judgment. Revel. 22
Then seeing the case stands thus, that we must all die, and that we shall
carry nothing with us but our good works, and our bad (as John witnesses in the
22. of the Revelation, saying: Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for
they rest from their labor, and their works follow them) let us, I say, in
the name of God, resolve our selves to glorify our God by good works in this
life, that we may be glorified of him for ever in the life to come.

The second Section.
Wherein is showed how necessary good works are. Of the great Zeal of our
forefathers in doing of good works, Of their simplicity and plain dealing:
and of our want of both.

NOtwithstanding all that has or can be said to this purpose, there are some
Atheistes, that hold, and also teach, that Christ being come, and having shed
his blood for us, has hereby so satisfied his fathers justice, and paid the
ransom for sin, that now whatsoever we do is no sin. Nay, further, they
will not stick to affirm, that Christ has taken away all sin out of the
world, and therefore we cannot sin. Another sort of Locustes, they affirm,
that as a man cannot be saved by his good works, so he cannot be condemned by
his evil works, and therefore it makes no matter (says these Libertines)
whether a man does the one or the other. But these be all most execrable, and
damnable opinions invented by the devil, and broched by his members, to the
utter destruction and confusion of as many as follow them. Let us that be
christians, and hope to be saved by the merits of Christ's blood, rather obey
the counsel of the holy ghost, who warns us to work out our salvation in
fear and trembling, and in another place, make your salvation sure by good
works. Let us with the Apostle James, show forth our faith by our good works,
being assured, that that faith, which brings not forth good works in some
measure, is no true justifying faith, but a dead faith, such as the devils
have, who are said to believe and tremble. The tree is known (says our
savior Christ) by the fruit, and a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, nor
a bad tree good fruit. To the same effect Christ tells us in another place,
that not every one that says unto me, Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven, he shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven. And the Apostle James tells us, that not
the hearers of the law, but the doers shall be justified. And therefore let us
brag of a naked and bare faith as long as we will, I am fully persuaded by the
spirit of God, that if we have no other faith, than such as brings forth
no good works, we can never be saved by it. For a true, lively, and
justifying faith, can no more be without good works, than the Sun without
light, or fire without heat. And yet do I not attribute justification to good
works neither (for that were to attribute that to the effect, which is proper
and incident to the cause, or efficient) but to such a faith as brings forth
good works, to the praise and honor of God. But of this hereafter in his due
place, and now to return to the matter in hand.

It was told Saint Paul, how that some preached CHRIST upon envy, some of
malice, some of pride, some of one affection, and some of an other: who
answered, I am glad so that Christ be preached, whether it be of envy, of
malice, of pride, or of any affection else whatsoever: and even so say I, I am
glad that good works are done, whether it be of envy, of pride, of
vayne-glory, or of any other affection else, and I pray God to raise up more
good men to do more good works: for our great talking, and little walking, our
great prating and protesting, and little or no working, makes our enemies the
Papists to open their mouths so wide against us, and to slander both us, and
our profession, affirming that we teach nothing but carnal liberty, and
abandoning of all good works. But how false this their shameless slander is,
shall afterward appear (Christ willing) in his place. And yet truly I must
needs confess, that even as the Apostle told the Galathians, the Gospel was
evil spoken of, and slaundered amongst the Heathen through their wickedness, so
I say, the Gospel and word of salvation is blasphemed, and slaundered amongst
the Papists (who are not-only scandalized thereby, but also in effect utterly
dissuaded and drawn away both from us and our religion) through our
inordinate, and licentious lives. Yea and would God it were not true (with
grief of heart I speak it) there are I fear me more good works done daily by the
Papists (if they may be called good works, and not rather works of civil
office, which the heathen, the Turks, or Jews may do) than by the
Protestants. For he the Papist trusts most blasphemously, and sacrilegiously
to be saved by his works, and therefore he is careful to do the^, the other
trusts to be saved by a bare and naked faith (deceiving him self) without
good works, and therefore either cares not for the^, or at least sets little
by the^. By which means it comes to pass, that many men had rather deal
with him that is a palpable Papist, than with him who is a precise Protestant.
And certainly to speak truth, there is many times found plainer, and
co^scionabler dealing among most of the^, than among many Protestants. And if
we look narrowly into the former times, and ages past, we shall find more
godlynes, devotion, and zeal, (though it were but a blind zeal) more love
one toward an other, more simplicity in dealing, more fidelity, and
faythfulnes every way to have remained in them, than is now to be found amongst
us. A ma^s bare word or naked promise then, was better than any bands, bills,
or writings now. They passed their conueighances, and state of lands in those
days, by so slender words, and in so few lines, as now it is sooner wondered
at of all, than followed of any. They studied not to coin quirkes and
quiddities, nor to hammer clauses, and prouisoes to circumuent and deceive one
another. But now adays we must have, if not, so many skins of parchment, yet
so many lines as they had words, and a great sort more, and yet all will not
serve neither, but master Lawyer (forsooth) will find you a hundred holes in
it. And for good works, who sees not that herein they went far beyond us,
and we far enough behind them. For example. What memorable, and famous
buildings, what stately edifices of sundry kinds, and what ancient monuments
have they left to the world behind them? What Churches, Chappells, and other
houses of prayer did they erect, to the end the religion and service of God
might be continued amongst all posterities to the end of the world? Yea, what
Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, and other religious houses to their infinite
cost and charges (albeit they were afterward most horribly abused by Popish
Locusts, that came out of the bottomless pit, as out of the Trojan horse, to
the destruction of the Church of God) did they build, and erect? What number of
goodly Bridges did they make? What, and how many alms houses, hospitalls, and
spittles did they found for the relief of the poor, and endowed them with
co^petent lands and liuelodes for mayntenance of them? What high ways, what
pauements and causies for the safe and easy passage of the people did they
make? In sum, what famous Colleges, Halles, and Universities for the
co^seruatio^ of learning did they found and edifye? What Schools, and free
schools as well in the Universities, as also in the countries abroad, did they
erect, and endowed the^ with wonderful goodly revenues lands and rents, for
the maintenance of poor scholars and propagatio^ of learning and knowledge
amongst all posterities to the end of the world? For proof whereof, and to the
end I may stir up the minds of this frosen and key cold age of ours to the like
practice of good works, I will give you a taste of certain notable personages,
men and women, that were famus herein, and that as briefly as I ca^.

It is recorded by ancient and credible historians, that one Cantabar a
Spanyard before the incarnation of Christ 375 years, not only built, but also
furnished with learned me^ the thrice renowned and famous University of
Cambridge. Afterward being somewhat ruinate, and decayed through the calamities
of those times, it was reedifyed, and restored to his pristine state by
Sebertus king of the East Angles in the year of our Lord 656.

Hugh Balesham Bishop of Ely built the College dedicate to S. Peter, now
called Peter house, or Peter College in the year of Christ 1284. and endowed
it with great revenues.

Richard Badewe then Chaunceler of Cambridge laid the first foundation of Clare
Hall, now called the University Hall. Afterward it was enlarged by Gualter
Thacsted, and lastly by Elizabeth Lady of Clare, who called it after her own
name Clare Hall.

Pembroke Hall was founded by Marie of Valentia, sometime wife to Adomare de
Valentia Earl of Pembroke, in the year of Christ 1343. and by her endowed
with great possessions.

Corpus Christi College was founded by the Aldermen and brethren of Corpus
Christi guilde, with the help of the fraternity of S. Mary's guilde in the
year of our redemption 1344.

Trinity Hall being first an hostell was purchased by John Crandon prior of
Ely for his brethren the Monks of that house to study in, which Hall afterward
by the industry, and good help of William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, was
converted into a College, and by him endowed with goodly revenues.

Gonuill and Caius College was built by one Edmund Gonuill in the year of
grace, 1348. and one Caius a Physician in the year of Christ 1557. and by them
endowed with large possessions.

King Henry the syxt built a most famous College now called by the name of
Kings College in the year of our Lord 1443. and adjoined to it, a most
sumptuous Chapel.

This Henry the syxt also built Aeton College, (where are maynteined
threescore scholars, who in time, as they rise in learning, are promoted to
Kings College) and gave to them both goodly possessions.

Margaret Andegauensis, wife to King Henry the syxt laid the foundation of
Queens College in Cambridge, in the year of Christ 1448. and being not able
by reason of the iniquity of the time to finish it, it was afterward perfited
by Elizabeth wife to King Edward the 4. in the year of our Lord 1465.

Katherine Hall was built by Robert Woodlarke Doctor of Divinity, and
Chancellor of Cambridge, and by him endowed with co^pete^t possessions.

Jesus College was converted from a Priorie into a College by John Alcocke
Bishop of Ely, in the year of Christ 1502. and by him, both reedifyed and also
possessed with sufficient revenues, the rents whereof were afterward enlarged
by Sir Robert Read Knight, Doctor Eleston, Doctor Royston, and Doctor Fuller,
with others.

Christ's College was first founded by King Henry the syxt, who named it Gods
house, afterward it was translated by the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond
and Darby, in the year of our Savior 1505. and called Christ's College. To
this College Edward the 6. conferred one fellowship, and three schollerships.

That honorable Knight also Sir Gualter Mildmay and Edmund Grindall late
Archbishop of Canterbury, were notable contributors, and benefactors to this
College, and gave to it annual pe^sions for ever.

Saint John's College was translated from a Priorie into a College, by the
Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond, and Grandmother to King Henry the eight in
the year of our Lord 1508.

Magdalen College was converted from a house of Monks into a College by the
noble Duke of Buckingham in the year of our Lord 1519.

This College has since been greatly repaired, and beawtified with goodly
buildings by Sir Christopher Wray Knight, late Lord chief Justice of England.

Trinity College was erected by King Henry the 8. in the year of our Lord
1546. who gave unto it yearly for ever 1300. pou^ds besides the old ancient
possessions. Qu. Mary augme^ted the same College, and gave to it in lands 338.
pounds.

Sir Gualter Mildmay Knight founded a goodly College, called Emanuell
College, in the year of our Lord 1584.

The Lady Francis Countess of Sussex has also begun the foundation of a new
College, and has given to the same 5000. pound in the year of our Lord 1588.

But to come to the University of Oxforde, and so to make an end.

Alfredus sometime King of this land, for the zeal he bare to good letters,
erected the University of Oxford in the year of our Lord 872. but some
attribute the first building of it to Mempricius before Christ 1015. years:
othersome ascribe it to Vortiger after the birth of Christ 474. years.

King Aluredus, or Alfredus whether you will (for he was called by both those
names) built the University College, which being afterward almost defaced,
William Bishop of Durham repaired again, and gave to it goodly revenues in
the year of our salvation 1217.

Bailiol or Ballioll King of the Scots, built Balioll College in the year of
our Savior 1263. and his wife Deruergulla endowed it with yearly revenues.

Gualter de Merton sometime Lord Chancellor of England, built Merton College in
the year of our Redeemer 1264. and invested it with great and large
possessions.

Gualter Stapleton Bishop of Exceter built Exceter College in the year of our
Lord 1316.

Edward the 2. after the Conquest, or as some hold, Sir Adam Brown Almoner to
the said King, built Oriall College in the year of our Lord 1323. Robert
Eglesfield Bacheler of Divinity, built the Queens College in the year of our
L. 1340. whereto Edmund Grindall Archbish. of Canterbury, besides 100 pound in
money which he gave in his life time, gave also 20 pound a year for ever. The
same Archbishop also at his death gave to the same College many goodly books,
and ten pound in money to buy chains to tie them in, besides plate, and other
jewels of great value.

William Wiccam sometime Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Chancellor of England,
built a most stately College called New College, in the year of our Lord
1375. and gave to it goodly revenues. The same Bishop also built a goodly
College in the suburbs of the City of Winchester for the better erudition of
youth in good letters.

Richard Flemming Bishop of Lincoln in the year of grace 1420. built Lincoln
College, and bestowed upon it lands and possessions, which remain to this day.

Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury built All Souls College in the year
of our Lord 1437. and gave to it large revenues.

About the same time, Humfrey called the good Duke of Gloucester built a most
famous School, called the Divinity School, wherein he placed a goodly
Library of 129. chosen books, which he had gathered out of the most places in
Christendom to his unspeakable great cost, and charges.

William Wamflet Bishop of Winchester in the year 1459. built Magdalene
College, and gave fair lands, and goodly possessions to it. He built also a
good part of Eaton College, besides a free Schole at Wamflet in Lincoln shire.

William Smith Bishop of Lincoln built Brazen nose College in the year 1513.

Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester erected Corpus Christi College in the year
1516. and endowed it with sufficient revenues.

Thomas Wolsey Cardinal and Archbishop of York, founded a goodly College
called Christ's College, or Christ's Church in the year 1546. and gave to it
many and great possessions.

Sir Thomas Pope Knight reedified Trinity College in the year 1556. which
College was first founded by Thomas of Hatfeild Bishop of Durham for his
Monks, and bestowed great possessions upon it also.

Sir Thomas White Knight repaired the college first begun by Henry Chichley
Archbishop of Cantuburie, and called it Saint John's College, whereto he gave
in revenues for ever five hundred pounds a year, and this he did in the year
of Christ 1557.

The said sir Tho. White also founded a hall for students called Saint John's
hall, but sometime Gloucester college, which being suppressed, he bought it
with his money, and placed therein a principal, and a hundred poor scholars
and more, and having made great reparations of the same, he adjoined it to
Saint John's college, which before he had founded. He also erected free
schools at Bristow and Reading. Moreover, he gave in his life time two
thousand pounds to the city of Bristow to purchase lands, to the value of
one hundred and twenty pounds a year, for the which the Mayor and communaltie
of Bristow in anno. 1567, and so yearly during the term of ten years
following, should cause to be paid at Bristow one hundredth pound. The first
eight hundredth pounds to be lent to sixteen pore young clothiers and free men
of the same town, for the space of ten years, fifty pounds a piece, they
ptuting in sufficient sureties for the same. And at the end of ten years,
the same to be lent to other sixteen, at the discretion of the Mayor and
communaltie aforesaid. The other two hundred pounds to be employed for the
provision of corn, for the relief of the poor of the same City for their
ready money, without gains to be taken. And after the end of nine years on
Barthelmewe day in the year one thousand five hundred seauentie and seven, at
the Machaunt sailers hall in the City of London, to the Mayor and
comcommunaltie of the city of York, one hundred and four pounds to be lent
to four young men free of the said City of York five and twenty pounds a
piece for the space of ten years, without paying any interest for it. The
four pounds overplus of the hundred and four, he gave to the Mayor and
communaltie for their pains.

The very same or the like order he took for the delivery of one hundred
and four pounds, in the year of our Lord 1578. to the City of Canterbury
in the year 1579. to Reading. 1580. to the company of the Merchant Tailers.
1581. to Gloucester. 1582. to Worcester. 1583. to Exeter. 1584. to Sarisburie.
1585. to Westchester. 1586. to Norwich. 1587. to Southamto^. 1588. to Lincoln.
1589. to Winchester. 1590. to Oxford. 1591. to Hereford East, 1592. to
Cambridge, 1503. to Shrewsburie, 1594. to Linne, 1595. to Bath, 1596. to
Ipswich. 1598. to Colchester, 1599. to New Castle, and then to begin again at
Bristow one hundred and four pounds, the next year to the city of York,
and so forth to the said cities as before, and the same to continue for ever.
Also this said sir Thomas White gave to the Mayor and communaltie of Couentrie
one thousand and four hundred pounds to purchase lands to the value of three
score and ten pounds a year, which rents he devised as follows. First, that
twelve poor inhabitants of the foresaid city, shall have paid them four
and twenty pounds yearly the eleventh day of March, that is, forty
shillings a piece for ever. Furthermore, he devised for the space of ten years
to commence within one year after his decease, to four pore men of the said
City forty pounds yearly, vz. ten pounds to each of them for nine years after
the receipt thereof in free lone. And after those nine years were expired, to
other four poor men of the same city for nine years, and so from nine years
to nine years for ever. At the end of which nine years, he devised that the
mayor and communaltie of Couentrie for the space of thirty years, shall
employ the said forty pounds yearly to two young men of the said city for
nine years in free lone for ever, and so after those nine years, from nine
years to nine years for ever. And after the expiratio^ of those thirty years,
the said forty pounds to be delivered to one young man of the said City in
free lone for nine years, and so from nine years to nine years for ever.
Afterward he devised, the said sum of forty pounds to be delivered to
Northampton, and to be lent to one young man of the said town for nine years
in free lone, and so from nine years to nine years for ever.

And then the next year after that, to the town of Leicester, as aforesaid.
The year following to the Town of Northampton, as aforesaid. The next year
after that to the town of Warwike, as aforesaid.

And then again to Couentrie for one year, and so to the other towns
aforesaid one after another for ever. But to leave this worthy person, and to
hasten unto others.

John Alcocke Bishop of Elie founded a free school at Kingstone upon Hull,
and gave to the same certain lands for ever.

King Henry the sixth built Eaton college in the year of our Lord 1443.

Our most gracious and dread sovereign Lady Elizabeth, the Queens Majesty
that now is, whom God preserve for ever, not only reedified, but also
enlarged with great and ample revenues the famous free school of Westminster.

John Collet Deane of Paul's founded a goodly free school in the Churchyard of
Saint Paul's in London, called Paul's school, in the year 1510.

John Tat builte Saint Anthonies school in London.

The Worshipful Company of the Merchant tailers built a famous school in the
City of London, called the Merchant tallers school. anno 1560.

Hugh Prise Doctor of the law, founded a new college called Jesus college,
in the year 1572.

King Bladud founded the University of Stanford, and brought Philosophers from
Athens thither. Besides all which Colleges, Universities, and schools of
learning, we read (almost) of infinite Churches, Temples, Chapels, Abbeys,
Frieries, Monasteries, and other religious houses, not only in England, but
even throughout all christendom, which they (our forefathers I mean) have
founded and erected to their perpetual praise, honor, and renown. But of many,
hear a few.

King Ethelbert for the singular zeal he bare to religion, built St
Augustines, a goodly Church in Canterbury. He built also S. Paul's Church in
London, and S. Andrews in Rochester.

Cissa built the Abbey of Abingdon, and Erkenwald Bishop of London built the
Abbeies of Chertsey and Barking.

Ostricke Duke of Gloucester, founded the Abbey of Gloucester. Remingus Bishop of
Dorchester built a goodly new Church in Lincoln. Osmond Bishop of Sarisburie
founded the Cathedral Church of Sarisburie, in the year 1091. Herbert
Bishop of Norwich built the Cathedral Church of Norwich, in the year 1202.

Queen Mathild built the church of the Trinity within Algate in London, in the
year 1108.

One Peter a Priest of Colchurch was the first that built London bridge of
timber, in the year 1562. And yet ceased they not here, but other some built
hospitalles, spittles, and alms houses for the poor, as namely, Walter Brune
Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, founded the hospital without Bishops
gate in London.

John Lowkin sometime Mayor of London builte a Chapel and an hospital, for
the poor at Kingstone upon Thames: he built also the Parish Church of Saint
Michael in crooked lane.

John Philpot Mayor of London, gave certain lands to the chamber of London,
for which they are to pay seven pence a piece to thirteen poor persons for
ever, in the year 1379.

One William Seuenocke founded in the Town of Seuen-oke in Kent a freeschoole
and twelve almes-houses, in the year of our Lord 1418.

John Clapton Mayor of London built a stone bridge at Straitford upon Auon, and
also a high way of four miles long, in the year 1492.

John Milborne builte certain alms houses by Crochet Friars in London,
wherein are maintained twelve poor people, who have their dwellinges rent
free, and two shillings six pence a piece the first day of every month for
ever.

Nicholas Gibson builte the free school in Ratcliffe by London, gave ten pound
a year to the master, and twenty nobles a year to the usher for ever:
besides, he built there certain alms houses, for fourteen poor people,
who quarterly receive vi. shillings eight pence a piece for ever.

Sir Thomas Lupton knight, founded a free School, and certain alms houses at
Arendale in Northamptonshiere, where seven poor people have eight shillinges
eight pence a piece the quarter for ever.

Sir Rowland Hill Mercer of London, caused a causie or pauement to be made in
the high way betwixt Stone and Nantwich in Chesshire for horse and man to
pass. He caused the like causie to be made betwixt Dunchurch and Brausen in
Warwikshier well nere three miles in length. He gave twenty pounds in money
toward the making of Royton bridge: he made also four bridges, two of stone,
and two of timber, he built also a notable free school at Draito^ in
Shropshier, with lands sufficient for master and usher for ever. Moreover, he
gave in his life time five hundred pounds in money to the hospital of
Christ's Church in London, and an hundred pounds at his death.

Sir William Peter knight, besides that he gave one hundred pounds a year in
lands to Exeter college in Oxford, builded also ten alms houses in Ingerstone
for twenty poor people, every one of them having two pence a day, a winter
gown, and two loads of wood, and amongst them all keeping for six kine
Winter and Summer for ever.

William Lamb, Gentleman of the Chapel to king Henry the eight, made the
great conduit nere Holborne bridge in London, carrying the water by pipes of
lead above two thousand yards, and this he did of his own proper cost and
charges, amounting by estimation to the sum of fifteen hundred pounds.

The same master Lamb gave to the parish of Saint Faiths under Paul's in
London six pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence yearly to be
distributed equally amongst twelve pore people every fridaie twelve pence in
money and twelve pence in bread for ever. He gave also to Christ's hospital
yearly for ever six pound, and an hundred pound in money to purchase lands to
the same. To Saint Thomas hospital in Southwarke, he gave 4. pound a year
for ever. To the hospital called the Savor, he gave sometimes ten pounds at
once toward the buying of bedding for the poor. He gave to the Company of
the cloth workers in London four pounds a year for ever. He gave to the same
company his dwelling house, and other lands to the value of thirty pounds a
year; to hire a Minister to say service every wednesdaie, fridaie, and
saterdaie, and to preach four sermons every year after his decease, in the
Church called Saint Iamesses in the wall by Cripple gate in London, and also to
give to xii. poor men to every one a freeze gown ready made, a shirt of
locoram, and a new pair of shoes, and to twelve pore women, twelve gowns of
freese, twelve smockes, and twelve pair of shoes for ever. He also erected a
free school and six alms houses at Sutton Valens in Kent, with sufficient
allowance and mayntenance for them both. He also gave to the towns of Ludlow
and Bridgenorth, to either an hundred pounds a piece, to set poor men on work
withal. He gave also toward the setting of poor men on work in Suffolk an
hundred pounds. I might here recite many more such like examples of our good
forefathers, if I feared not to be tedious, but I will wade no further herein
at this time, hoping that those few (except we have shaken hands with all
godliness, made a league with death, and a covenant with hell, as the Prophet
speaks) will yet some what serve to the stirring up of our drousie minds to
the exercise and practice of good works, and to leave behind us to the
posterityes to come, some fruits of our faith, some seals of our profession,
and some pledges of our christian love and charity, as our good ancestors have
done before us. For, is it not a shame unto us, that our forefathers living in
the times of superstition, when popery and Idolatry had ouerflowed (almost)
the whole world, and having but as it were, a glimmering of the glorious light
of the Gospel of Christ, should notwithstanding so far pass us in good
works, as that we may not once be compared to them in any small measure? Oh
what a condemnation will this be unto us? It had bin better for us a great
deal, we had never known the truth, than knowing it not to follow it, as
Christ witneseth in a certain place, if I had not come unto them and done
those works which none else could do, they should have had no sin: yea I pray
God that publicanes and sinners do not go before many of us Protestants into
the kingdom of heaven, for we talk much, but walk nothing after it. And
therefore now at the last even in the name of God, let us contend and strive one
with another in an holy zeal, if not to excel, yet to match, or if not to
match yet to come somewhat near our forefathers in doing of good works. Let
us follow the council of Christ, who says, Let your lights so shine before
men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your father which is in
heaven. And doubtless God is glorified by us in nothing more, than in good works
(being done in faith according to the word of God) and in leaving of monuments
and remembra^ces of our christian love, and godly zeal toward the brethren
behind us. And no marvel, for in the very actio^ of good works we effect
three most excellent virtues, and christian dutiess as first, we glorify God in
our selves, and by our selves, secondly, we relieve, sustain, and comfort our
poor brethren, and thirdly, we move their hearts, their souls and spirits to
thank God for us, to pray for us, and to praise the Lord for his blessings
bestowed upon them, in the moving of our hearts to the succoring of the^. For if
the goods that we bestow be the Lords, and not ours (as without all
peradventure they are, the Psalmist bearing witness, where he says, Domini est
terra, and plenitudo eius, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
and the Prophet affirming the same, speaking in the person of God, gold is
mine, silver is mine, and all the riches upon the face of the earth is mine,
and have not my hands made them all?) and if it be God that gives both the
will and the deed (as the Apostle says it is) then great cause have the poor
souls to praise the goodness of God for his fatherly care, and merciful
providence toward them, in succouring, and relieuing their necessities by the
hand or ministry of such, and such his servants. And upon the other side,
happy and blessed art thou, whom God thy creator does use as an instrument to
do good, and to relieve his Saints upon the earth that have need. It is a
testimony to thy conscience that thou art a child of grace, a vessel of
salvation, and fea^^ed up to the day of redemption. But here (peradventure) it
may be objected, that these men that did these works were for the most part
Papists, and therefore their deeds were naught, and no better than the works
of the Turks, Infidels, or Pagans. I grant that the most part of them were
indeed Papists, but yet it follows not therefore that they were absolutely
evil, because they were done by Papists. The Devil may do, and sometimes
also does a good work (but yet against his will, and by divine impulsion) is
it therefore evil because he does it? he confessed that Jesus was the son
of God, is it evil therefore to confess Christ because he did so? is good
seed the worse, though an evil man sow it? so a Papist may do good works, and
to a good end, is it therefore evil because he does it? but if he do them to
this end, to be justified, to purchase heaven, and to merit everlasting life
by them, then in respect of the doers, and in regard of the ends whereto they
are done, they are altogether unlawful, and no good works indeed, but rather
pledges and seals of condemnation against the doers. Yet notwithstanding in as
much as the most of these works (although they were afterward horribly abused
by others) tended to the glory of God, and benefit of the common wealth, they
were therefore good works, and notable testimonies and demonstrations as well of
their great love and zeal, as also of their godliness. For example, Is not this
a good work, to build Churches, Chapels, and other oratories, and houses of
religion, wherein the preaching of the word of God, and other exercises of true
religion might be practiced amongst all posterities to the end of the world?
yea it is such a work, that I pray God send us more of them. For it is
lamentable, in some parishes, the people are forced to go three or four nay
five or six in some (peradventure) eight or ten miles to the Church, for want
of Churches nearer them. Shall we think to build Churches was no good work,
because they were afterward profaned by Idolatry, and polluted by
superstition? What thing is there in this world, but it has been, is, or may
be abused? And shall we take away the thing it self, because of the abuse?
Then farewell meat, and drink, farewell apparel, yea, farewell word of God
and all, for every one of them has been, is, and will be continually abused
to the end. But in as much as the abuse is not of the substance of the thing,
but merely accidental, take away the abuse, and let the thing remain still.

There are in deed neotericall and fantastical spirits, start up of late,
that would have all Churches pulled down, and defaced, to the end, that their
private conuenticles, and Jewish Synagogues might take place. And truly, the
world is now almost come to their humor: for now every one seeks to pull
from the Church, to raze, and deface it, by all means possible: accoumpting
that well gotten, what soever is extorted, or purloyned from it, quo iure,
quaue iniuria, either by hook or crook as they use to say.

And the same to be true in deed, does the present state of the most of our
Churches in England verify. For where I have trauayled (as I have trauayled the
whole realm over) I have found in most places, (nay almost in all) the
Churches to lie like barnes, some thatched with straw, and which is worser,
some with broom, bent, loope, reed, and I cannot tell what rubbish else, the
windows all to torn, the walls cleft and rent asunder, the roofes rayning in
without measure, and the chauncels (as they call them) either pulled quite
down (I will not say begged of some greedy puttocke or insaciable cormorant
or other, to build his own house withal) or else ready to fall upon their
heads every day with every little puff of wind. And as for the pues and
seats, they are such as would make a man to loath to come in them. Their
flowers or pauements are so far from being tiled or paued, that there is
nothing to be seen, but sand and dust a foot or two thick, so that if you
stir your feet never so little, all the Church is full of dust, enough to
stifle or choke a man.

Again, in othersome places, I have seen the Churches strawed over either
with hay, grass, straw, sedges, bent, loope, or such other trash, worser than
I have known many swyne to lie in. Yea truly I have seen some Churches (as I
have said) to lie far worser than either barnes, or stables, God be
merciful to us. For, the one, they will keep well, and repair for the
safeguard of their corn, the other for their beasts and cattle. And is it not
a lamentable case, that the Church and house of prayer (for so Christ calls
it, My house shall be called the house of prayer, but you have made it a den
of the eues) should lie so beastly, our own houses in the mean time being
most stately, sumptuous, and gay? Good King David was of an other mind, when
he said, Shall my house be of Cedar, and Cipres wood, and the Ark of God to
lie in Tents? and therefore made he infinite provision to build a Temple for
it. Is it now time to build your own houses, and is it not time to build the
Lords house says the Prophet? Well, I will say no more hereof, but I pray
God, that the reverend Bishops (to whom God has committed the dispensacion of
his word, and the scepter and rule of his spouse upon earth) may look better
to the building, repairing, and keeping of the Church of God, and house of
prayer. Now to go forward. Is it not a good work to build bridges, to make
causies, pauements, and high ways, that travelers may paste safely from one
place to an other? There are some, and not a few, no doubt, that think it no
good deed whatsoever it be, if a penny of money must go from them, and
therefore they care not, if al good works were buried in the grave of oblivion,
that they might never see the light, but as abortiues to be utterly smothered
for ever. Hereof is it, that we cannot so much as find in our hearts, not only
not to build, but not so much as to maynteyne and repair those bridges, high
ways, causies, paueme^ts, and other ancient monuments of good works, which our
Ancestors have left behind the^, as to their inestimable charges, so to their
perpetual praise and renown, so far off are we from doing any of our own.

I my self, having trauayled over, and about the whole realm, have found
diverse Bridges, yea, and that over mighty waters, either clean broken down
(without any great hope of building again in haste) or else so shaken, rent,
and torn, that it would fear a man either to go, or ride over them. I could
name above an hundred such in England, but for that I will offend no man by
name, I will ouerpasse them, beseeching God to put into the hearts of our
Magistrates, and Rulers, that they may be amended. For I am sure, there are not
a few both men and women in England drowned in a year, by reason these
Bridges are not maynteyned. Our good Ancestors not only built them, but also
left (for the most of them) both lands and rents to vphould them, I pray God,
they be not imbezeled, and purloyned from them, and bestowed an other way.

Good Lord, I can not but wonder at the bountiful liberality of our
predecessors, they built all these edifices and buildings from the ground, of
their own proper costs and charges, without all contribucions, or collections
that we read of, and yet we can not so much as maynteyne, and repair them,
except we have contributions, collections, and gatherings throughout the realm
for every little Bridge. And if there be but a small Bridge to be built from
the ground, Jesus what a piece of work we make of it? yea, we must have a
license to beg all over the land for it, or else it will never be built. So
that I verily believe, if we should have but even one such a building, to make
as we have some in England, built by our ancestors, Oh it would shake the very
foundations of the common wealth, nay I think assuredly, they would never be
able to perform it: not for that we are not able, but for that we are
wretched, and miserable, for there is greater riches and wealth in England now
(Gods holy name be praised for it) than ever there was since the beginning of
the world by many degrees, and yet we will part with nothing to any good work,
so covetous are we, and so void of that holy zeal, and burning charity which
our forefathers had. To go forward. Is it not a good work, to build Colleges
and Universities, to erect free Schools, and houses of learning (being indeed
the very seminaries of all wisdom, learning and knowledge) for the better
education of youth in good letters, whereas otherwise ignorance, and barbarism
would ouerflow us? And yet notwithstanding all this, you shall have some giddy
heads, that would have all Universities, Colleges, and Schools of learning,
to be utterly suppressed and overthrown, which were even to pluck the Sun out
of the eleme^t, the stars out of the sky, and the Moon out of the heavens:
for as the world without the one, would seem (as it were) a confuse chaos, and
palpable darkness, so without the other should we be all as dizarts, sots, and
peasants, yea very buzzards and blockheads, little or nothing differing from
brute beasts. Nay to wish the overthrow of them, is to wish the subversion of
the word of God, and of religion, with a universal confusion of all things.
For are not Universities and Schools, the way to learning, and knowledge? Is
not learning the way to wisdom? and is not wisdom (as it were) the very
fynewes, and tendons, that hold together the whole body both of the Church and
commonwealth? Nay to say more, is not wisdom the very life of them both? and
therefore they that desire the decay of the one, do wish the destruction of
the other. But yet to wade in this matter a little further. Is it not a good
work, to erect Hospitalls, Spittles, and Alms houses, wherein all such as be
either old, aged, impotent, blind, lame, halt, or otherwise decrepite, might
be relieved? yea, I hold it to be one of the chiefest good works that a man
can do in this life. For does not Christ accoumpt it done to himself,
whatsoever is done to his poor members upon earth? And therefore I pray GOD,
to raise up more such men, as may erect mo such houses, yea, if it were in
every City, town, and village. Then should we have either none, or at lest,
fewer beggars (as we call them) amongst us than we have (according to the
commandment of God) who says, Let there be no beggars in Israel: that is,
amongst those that profess the Gospel and religion of GOD, whilst those
that were old, halt, blind, or lame, should be there harbored, and other
lusty vagabonds who were able to work and would not, should be compelled to
work by severity of law. And to this end, as I would wish more hospitalls for
the relief of those that are not able to work, (as I have said) so would I
wish that there were mo houses of correction, in every shiere one at the
least, to punish and chase such lusty knaves and queans, as go roagueing about
the Countries, not laboring at all, but living upon filching, stealing,
purloining, and pilfering from others. I remember there were certain motions
of late for the erectio^ of such houses in every shire, but there is nothing
effected as yet: Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus. It was too good a
work to take place with us: we have many good motions, but few good effects
follow, God be merciful unto us. But here a question may be asked, whether the
building of monasteries, priories, and other religious houses, were good works
or no? I answer, that in deed they had a zeal in them, but not (as the
Apostle says) secundum scientiam: and they built the^ to a good intent, as
namely, that the service and religion of God, might be maintained and
continued in them for ever. And therefore if they were afterward abused, (as
they were in deed, as is before remembered) and perverted to another end, than
was intendended by the first founders of them, by a sort of caterpillars, and
idolatrous locustes, that conuersed in them, and poisoned the whole world with
the filthy dregs of their fornication, the fault was in the abusers, not in
the founders. And yet I will not justify the founders for their good intents
sake neither. For a good intent is no good intent, except it have his ground
and warrant out of the word of God. It is not enough for a man to do evil,
and then to say, he did it to a good intent. Saul for a good intent (as he
pretended) as namely, to sacrifice to the Lord, kept alive the best of the
cattle, contrary to Gods commandment: but notwithstanding his good intent,
God cast him of for it, and deposed him from his royal dignity, telling him,
that he delighted more in obedience than in sacrifice. But howeuer they were
built, or to what end or purpose so ever, sure I am they were pulled down to a
better purpose, as being in deed the dens of thieves, the neasts and cells of
vipers, the dungeo^s of dragons, the harborows of cocatrices, and the cages of
unclean beasts. And yet as I thank God for the overthrow of them, (for that
they had almost drowned, and in short time would, not almost, but altogether
have drowned the whole world, with the filthy puddle of superstition, idolatry,
infidelity, buggerie, and sodometrie) so could I have wished that the lands
and revenues of them had been better employed, as namely, to the mainteuaunce of
Colleges, and schools of learning, to the maintenance of preachers, throghout
the land, to the relief and sustentation of the poor, and defense of the
common wealth, and such other good purposes, then should not our land have
been pestered with so many vpstart single-soled Gentlemen as it is. But it was
the will of God, that those things which were the bane of his Church, and the
poison of his children, (and therefore stood as anathema and accursed before
him) should not now be any means to build up, or repair his Church again
any manner of way. The Lord has all means in his hands, and both can and
will (in his good time) build his Church by other means than by the relics
of Antichrist, orrmaenentes of idolatry and superstition.

Therefore let us rest contented with whatsoever he does, knowing let us rest
coytented with whatsoever he does, knowing that his will is the perfect square
rule, of all perfection, and that he does all things for his own glory, and
the good of his Church.

But to return to the matter in hand, and so to conclude this point. I grant
indeed that the building of Abbeys, and Monasteries, in regard of the abuses
which afterward insued of them, and by them, was altogether unlawful,
pernicious, and execrable, yea, altogether abominable, and consequently
intolerable, yet in respect of the intentions of the first founders of them,
and of the end whereto they were erected (as namely to the end that God might
be glorified by them, and his religion exercised, maintained, and practiced in
them amongst all generations, to the end of the world, and the like) I say in
respect of these ends, they were not altogether so unlawful, nor intolerable:
but being done to these ends, to maintain superstition and idolatry, to
justify us before God, to purchase righteousness, to merit everlasting life,
and the like the^ were they abominable and detestable before God and man. But
whatsoeeuer the building of the^ was, good or badde (as good it could not be)
these are not such, as the papists that live in this age, do greatly accouut of
to be good works. And therefore to the end no man may hereafter be ignorant
hereof, I will as briefly as I can, endeavor my self to set down in order, some
such as the Papists now a days do account for good works in deed, and such
as deserve (say they) in this life infinite renumeratio^, and in the life to
come, everlasting salvation. These and such like are they, as follow.

The third Section.
Wherein is contained a brief rehearsal, of such works as the Papists do
account to be good works, and of great merit, and desert before God, though
they be repugnant and contrary to the word of God, and therefore ca^ they
merit nothing but damnation in the justice of God.

THE Papists account it a work of infinite merit, and unspeakable deserte, to
persecute the Church of God, to murder, and kill his Saints, to massacre his
children, and to shed innocent blood. That this is true, I refer you to the
registers and records of all ages and times that have been since the beginning
of the world to this day, but especially in that famous ecclesiastical
cronologie of Acts and Monumentes of the Church, made and published by that
reverend Father, and learned divine, master John Fox, wherein you shall find
almost infinite millions of blessed martyrs, which have been murdered, and put
to most cruel death by these bloud-thirstie Papists, yea, in five years space,
to wit, in the days of Queen Marie, you shall find welneere, if not
altogether one thousand men, women, and children of all ages, degrees, and
sexes, to have been, some hanged, strangled, murdered, burned, racked, and
otherwise most cruelly tortured, and put to death for the testimony of Jesus,
and for the word of God.

If you list to have further proof, I refer you to that most perfidious,
cruel, and more than barbarous massacre of Paris, wherein were murdered and
put to the sword, above forty or fifty thousand protestants within the
compass of one month, throughout the whole realm of France. And yet was this
bloody cruelty and slaughter of Gods Saints so much applauded of the Pope,
that he not only dispensed with the murderers, but also granted them
pardon, and indulgence of all their sins, besides large promises of rewards
made to the perpetrators thereof, as also bone fires, banquettinges, and
feastinges throughout all the City of Rome for joy, as though it had been the
year of Iubelie, or the creation of a new Antichrist. And herein they do
but their kind. For it is the badge of the Church of Antichrist, and the
cognisaunce of the synagogue of Satan, to persecute, murder, and kill the
Church of God. It has been so from the beginning, and shall be so (as John in
the Revelation most prophetically speaks) to the end of the world.

Cain was a figure of their bloody Church, who persecuted his brother, even to
the effusion of his blood. Esau was also a type of their Antichristian Church,
who persecuted Jacob, threatening his destruction, and which no doubt he had
performed, had it not been wisely prevented by his mother. Ishmael was the
like, who persecuted Isaac. Pharao the very same, who persecuted the
Israelites. And truly this is a notable, and an infallible mark, to know the
Church of GOD by, from the synagogue of satan. For the badge of the Church of
God is to be afflicted, persecuted, and to have their blood shed.

Contraryly, the mark of the Antichristian church is to persecute, to kill, to
slaie, to murder, and shed blood to the end. It was never read in any age or
time, that the church of GOD did ever persecute, or shed blood, but was
always persecuted, and had their blood shed by the synagogue of satan: and
yet for all that, (which is myraculous) the Church of God has, does, and ever
shall flourishe and increase still more and more, maugre the heads and spite
of all Papists, and schismatikes whatsoever. Yea, by how much the more they go
about to suppress it, by so much the more it increases daily: much like to
the Palm tree, which, the more weight it has laid upon it, the broader it
spreads his loppes and branches on every side.

True therefore is that saying of an ancient father, Sanguis martyrum semen
Ecclesiae, The blood of martyrs is the seed of the Church. And therefore
would I wish all Papists to leave off from murdering the poor Saints of God
any longer, for this, if for no other cause, yet for that they shall never be
able to prevail against them, no, they are so inuinsible through the might of
Christ, who reigns in them, and strengthens them, that the gates of hell
cannot prevail against them, nor death itself overcome or vanguish them, but
even in the midst of the raging flames they triumph over it. The Papists also
think it a work of inestimable merit before God, to lay violent hands
upon the Lords anointed, to kill and murrher Emperors, Kings, and Princes,
and when they have done, they are canonized Saints for their labor. A fit
guerdon for such a fact. For as a holy writer says, Multi adorantur per
sanctis in hoc mundo, quorum animae in inferno sepeliuntur, Many are worshipped
for Saints upon earth, whose souls are buried in hell. Such Saints are
these whom the Pope does thus canonize. Good king David inspired with the
spirit of God, was of another mind when he said, God forbid that I should
lay violent hands upon the Lords anointed. The Apostle Paul was endued
with another spirit, when he said, Omnis anima potestatibus supereminentibas
subdita sit. Let every soul (he says not one soul, or some souls, but
every soul) be subject to the higher powers, his reason, for there is no
power but of GOD, the penalty or dannger of those that do resist, and those
that do resist (says he) the power, they resist the ordinance of GOD, and
purchase to themselves eternal damnation.

Then I would ask these murdering Papists, if they that do but resist the
power, do purchase to themselves damnation both of body and soul, oh then
what do they purchase, that not only do resist, but also murder and kill
the Lords anointed? And yet their delight is in nothing so much, as to imbrue
their cruel hands in the blood of kings and princes. For example. What
Emperors have they poisoned, yea, in the very wine of the challice? What
Kings and Princes, what Peers and Nobles have they most cruelly murdered in
sundry parts of the world? Did they not most traitorously murder the good
Prince of Orange with a dagge? The late famous King of France with a double
poisoned knife, by the subornation of a Iacobine Friar? Do they not now also
by all means possible, by all plots and devises, seek and practice the death
of him who at this present is the most lawful king of France? Have they not
murdered two or three of the late kings of Scotland? And to come nearer home:
Have they not practiced and attempted the murdering of our gracious sovereign
Queen Elizabeth, by infinite ways and means, and by innumerable plots and
devises? As first by sending in a number of Jesuits and seminary priests
stark roagues and plain traitors, into her Majesty's realm, to withdraw the
hearts of the people from their allegiance, and to raise up wars, and
commotions in every place? And when these devises and driftes did not, take
effect according unto their expectation, then they suborned and hired a sort of
desperate, graceles, and reprobate villaynes to kill her Majesty's royal
person, as namely, Parry, Sommeruile, Arden, Throgmorton, Babington, with 13.
more of his colleagues, and confederates, besides many more, which hear to recite
were but superfluous. All which notwithstanding (Gods name be praised for it)
received such condign punishments for their deserts, as I pray God all
Traitors against their Prince and Country may do.

They hold it also for a principal good work, and of great merit, to take
armor, and to raise up wars for the mayntenance, enlarging, and augmenting of
their pretenced, conterfeite Catholic Church, or rather most devilish
antichristian synagogue of Satan. And therefore is the Pope, with his
Cardinals, Abbots, Friars, Monks, and all other consorts of that viperous
generation, sworn at their creation, that they shall to the uttermost of their
powers defend, maintain, and enlarge (as they falssely call it) Saint Peter's
patrimony. And to this end, does the Popes unholy holiness send abroad his
bandogges the Cardinals, his curre dogs the Abbots, and Monks, and his
spanyels the sneaking Friars, into every country, to persuade Kings and
Princes, to take Arms against such, and such, for such and such causes as he
himself shall frame in the forge of his own brain. And the better to effect
his purpose, he sends them, either some lowsye indulgence, or else some
beggarly pardon or other in a Bull of lead, and that of all their sins for
ever; or else he sends them some scalde relic or other, and if that will not
serve, sometimes he sends them a goodly ointment, called rubrum vnguentum,
which will work more then all the rest. And when he has thus set them
together by the ears, then commes he as a ravenous Gripe, and deuoures either
the one, or both of them at his pleasure. And thus rages he every where,
through-out Christendom, so that in my conscience, the Pope, with the rest of
his brood, are the very authors of all the wars and bloudshead in all Europe
at this present, and that for the enlarging (forsooth) of Saint Peter's
Patrimonye? What wars has he raised heretofore in Spain? What wars has
he, and at this present does he manage, and maynteyne in the Kingdom of
France, in Flaunders, and in the low countries, in Germany, in Italy, and
sundry other places of the world, it is impossible to number the infinite
millions of Gods saints, that he has murdered, and been author of their
murders, what wars he has raised, what tumults he has caused, what
rebellions, insurrections and commotions he has stirred up throughout all
Christendom, and all to maynteyne his paunch, his honor, his glory, his
renown, his dignity and estimation in the world. And yet all will not serve,
for (thanks be to God) he cums tumbling down every day. And the more he
strives to be honored and magnified in this world, the more is he hated of God,
and detested of men.

The Pope and Papists also accoumpt it a good work to set up stews and
brothell houses, whether every man may resort at his pleasure, and that sana
conscientia, with a safe conscience, as they say, and enjoy his whore or whores
as many as he list, and no man may say black is his eye, or Domine, cur ita
facis? because forsooth the Pope has dispensed with him in a wanyon. And as
though this were no sin, but rather a good work, (for so he and they all
account it indeed) he tollerateth Buggery, Sodometry, and other filthy sins
for money, which are not once to be named amongst the children of God. And this
is his reason. Is it not better (says this vile beast) for me to tolerate
them, receiving yearly a million or two of gould for them toward the
maintenance of the Church (or rather his own carren carcass) than they to
commit them secretly, without my tolleration, I receiving nothing therefore. But
how light soever they esteem of whoredom, the word of God condemns both it,
and the doers thereof to hell. Was not Sodoma and Gomorrha consumed with fire
and brimstone from heaven for this filthy sin of whoredom and buggery, and
yet think they to escape free? The whole world (eight persons only excepted)
was drowned in that great and universal deluge for the same sin of
whoredom. The city of the Sichemites was wholly destroyed, and put to the
sword for the same sin also. There were slain of the Beniamites in one day
25000. for the defiling of a Levites wife. Iudic. 20.35.46.
Nu. 25.8.
Zimri and Cosbi were both slain for their whoredom together, by Phinehas,
whose fact so pleased God, that he turned away his wrath from the rest of the
people, that they were not destroyed. Besides examples, the Apostle Paul
says, that neither whoremongers, adulterers, nor incestuous persons, shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven. The Apostle John says, marriage is honorable
amongst all me^, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers God
shall judge. But this wind shakes no corn as the Papists say, for the Pope
ca^ easily wipe away all this, and a thousand times more with a word. What? am
not I Christ's viccar general, and Peter's successor? Have not I claues regni
caelorum? the keys of the kingdom of heaven? have not I potestatem soluendi,
and ligandi, power to bind and loose? In a word, am not I God, and can not I
forgive sin at my pleasure? Oh blasphemous mouth, God shall destroy thee with
the breath of his mouth. The very Jews shall rise up in judgment against thee,
and condemn thee, who said, Can any man forgive sin, (...) God alone?

They think it also a good work, and of great merit, to gad up and down the
countries on Pilgrimage, to this place and that place, to this he Saint and
that she Saint, yea, although it be as far off as Rome, Constantinople, or
Jerusalem is hence, the further, the more merit, to visit Bethleem where
Christ was borne, the holy Sepulcher where he was buried, the holy Cross
whereupon he suffered, the nails that were driven into his hands and feet,
the spear that was thrust into his side, his blood that was shed when he
hanged upon the Cross, the milk of Mary's breasts (or else they lie) the
cratch or manger wherein Christ lay, with infinite the like supersticious
relics too long to be recited here. To all which must be attributed a divine
worship, with kneeling before them, praying unto them, believing and trusting
in them, and above all (for this is the chiefest work they shoot at) offering
unto them (as it were a sacrifice to Baal) gould, silver, jewels, and precious
stones of infinite variety. These things although they do the idols no good
(for so I will not fear to call them) yet do they serve to inritch these
ambicious and greedy Priests, who daily gape for such prays. And truly, but
that the judgments of God are a deapth without bottom, his counsayles
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, I would wonder that any man could
be so blinded, or besotted, as to travail so many hundred miles, nay, so many
thousand miles sometimes (in the mean time not regarding his or their poor
wife and children at home how miserably so ever they lived) to this Saint, and
that Saint, to this Idol and that idol, as though one were better than an
other, or, that one could help better, or more than an other. Therefore it is
true which the Apostle by the holy Ghost utters of such men, where he says,
when men will not believe the truth, then God gives them over to a reprobate
sense to believe lies. Alas, did they, or do they think, that these idols
can do them any good, either hear their prayers, relieve their necessities,
or grant their petitions? No, no, this was but the subtlety, or rather plain
knauerie of the covetous Priests to get money withal, although to the
destruction of their own, and infinite millions of Christian souls besides.
Full well was it said therefore of the heathen Poet, Oh auri sacra fames,
quid non mortalia pectora cogis. Oh cursed love of money, what wickedness is
there in all the world which thou will not cause a man to do for the love of
thee? This caused the holy Ghost to denounce, that covetousness is the root of
all evil. Oh remember what the Apostle says, Godlynes is great riches, if a
man be content with that that he has. Forget not what he tells you in an
other place, those that study to be rich in this world, fall into diverse
temptations, and snares of the Devil. Seek therefore to be rich in God, and
not in the transitory vanities of this life, which vanishe away like a scumme
or bubble, before a man have any use or fruition of them. Deceive the world no
longer with your bableries for filthy lucre sake, repent and turn to God, for
he is merciful, and would not your destruction.

Again, the Papists accoumpt it a wonderful good work to make and erect
Images, and Idols in Churches, and crosses in high ways, to creep to them
bare foot and bare legged, to kneel before them, to adore and worship them,
to pray to them, to trust and believe in them, to ask and look for all good
things at their hands, to offer to them, and in sum, to attribute all divine
honor and worship to them, being notwithstanding stocks and stones, dead and
insensible creatures, and which (as the Prophet says) can neither hear, see,
smell, taste, nor understand, no nor so much as stir out of their places. If
they be overwhelmed with dust, they can not so much as make themselves clean,
or if they be thrown into the fire, they can not rise up again: and therefore
not without cause does the Lord pronounce accursed, both the image, and the
image maker. And as for crosses, I see neither reason, nor scripture for them,
why they should be set up either in Churches, Churchyards, high ways, or any
place else. Oh but say the Papists, it does a man good to look upon that
engine whereupon Christ dyed: But if they will needs have crosses to gaze
upon, let them look upon every Christian man, and woman, who (their arms
being spread abroad) do resemble most lively both the cross, and also Christ
himself, a thousand times more truly, than these idolatrous counterfeite
crosses of wood, and stone. And because they shall see the small, or rather the
no necessity at all of these crosses amongst us Christians, I will show the
original of them, how, and upon what grounds, and for what causes they first
came up. The heathen people, and infidels, denegers of the faith, and professed
enemies to Christ Jesus, reproched the Christians, and cast in their teeth,
that their Savior, and their Messiah in whom they trusted, was hanged upon a
cross between two thieves, as the most notorioust malefactor of all, to his,
and their perpetual approbrie, ignominy, and shame for ever, as they most
blasphemously affyrmed. The Christians heerevpon to show that they were not
ashamed, neither of Christ Jesus, nor yet of his cross, caused to be set up as
well in Churches, and Churchyards, as also in high ways, streets, and lanes,
diverse and sundry crosses; which custom has continued, and descended (as it
were by succession) from them unto us at this day. Now who sees not hereby
the small necessity of them amongst Christians? For at this day there be none
that do upbraid us, that our Savior in whom we believe, was hanged upon a
cross, and therefore, the cause of the erection or setting up of crosses being
ceased, let the crosses themselves be removed also. For certainly the
continuance of them in high ways, or elsewhere, does maintain a notable
branch of Popish idolatry, and superstition amongst us, whilst some when they
pass by them, will give them the right hand, put off their caps, make
obeisance, and worship them (as that archtraytor and seducer of Gods Saints
Campion did, passing along the cross in Chepe side. Others (forsooth) will
kneel before them, creep to them bare foot, and bare legged, and offer to
them. And others that will not seem so gross, will yet make a thousand crosses
on their forheds, and breasts, being of this mind, that the sign of the cross,
has power to defend any one, not only from all corporal enemies, but also
from all the devils in hell. And therefore as it is a moment of great
superstition, so I pray God it may be removed from amongst us. But if it be
objected, that it keeps in our minds, the remembrance of Christ, and of his
death, which he suffered upon it: I answer, we have no warrant out of the
book of God, to keep any such superstitious crosses amongst us, to any such
end. For the word it self was given us to that end, to keep in memory, and
(as it were) to paynt out unto us the death and passion of our Savior Christ,
and not such Popish trash. To that end also were the Sacraments left us, with
the ministry, and preaching of the Gospel of Christ, and therefore their
objection is scarce worth the answering.

The Papists also hold it to be a work of unspeakable merit, for a man or
woman, either before they dye, or else at their death, to give the greatest
part of their goods and lands (the more, the more merit) to popish priests,
though in the mean time, their wife, children, and whole familyes go a
begging all their life long) to Monks, and Friars, with the rest of that
filthy generation, to the end, they may pray for them when they are dead, to
say masses, trentalls, diriges, de profundis, Ladies psalters, and I can not
tell what riffe raffe else for them: bearing them in hand, that their souls and
the souls of al their friends, parents, kindred, and aliance, shall not only
be relieved, but also clearly delivered thereby out of the pains of
purgatory, which otherwise should lie there broiling in fiery flames seven
years for every sin that ever they committed in this life, either in
thought, word, or deed. Which if it were true, (as it is most false and
blasphemous) I could not blame men, though they gave all they had, and more
too, to the Priests. But alas, who sees not the vanity of this fond
opinion of Purgatory? If Masses, Diriges, trentals, de profundis, Ladies
psalters, and such pelting trash, could redeem us from pain and punishment
after this life, and place our souls in joy and bliss, I pray you then what
is left to the blood of Christ to do for us, just nothing at all. And why died
Christ, if we might have been redeemed by corruptible money, lands, or
pessessions, as the Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint Peter do reason? What can
be more derogatorie to the death of Christ, and the efficacy of his blood,
than this? You were not redeemed, (says Paul) from your sins, neither by
gold nor silver, but by the precious blood of that immaculate lamb Jesus
Christ. And does not the apostle John thunder out unto us, The blood of Jesus
Christ does cleanse us from all sin. And as for the ridiculous opinion of
purgatory, it is so foolish a thing, that I am ashamed to bestow any labor in
confuting of it, as having indeed neither ground out of the word of God (no,
nor so much as one syllable sounding that way) nor any approved or autentike
writer, except out of such apocryphas, as Ovid, Virgil, and other heathen
Poets. And yet for all that, the Papists have gained as much, (I suppose) by
the broching of this fraibugge, or scar-crow Purgatory, since it was first
hatched, as all christendom is worth besides. But to proceed.

The Papists also hold these to be singular good works, yea, the chiefest
of all, to hear Mass devoutly every day, to worship Saints, to observe
and keep precisely all holy days, Saints days, anp feastiuall days, (as
they call them) to give frankely to begging Friars, Nunns, and Ankresses (which
were a sort of secluses, or rather plain prostitute whoores, mued up in
cloisters, celles, vautes, and holes, under ground, only to serve the Monks,
and the Abbots turns at their need, whereof I could give you a thousand
instances, if it were not from my purpose) to mumble up a great rabble of Pater
nosters, Creedes, Aue Mary's, and the like upon their beads, to contribute
liberally to the making and christning of bells (and to be godfathers and
godmothers to them) to the buying of wax candles, tapers, and lyghtes, to buy
coapes, challices, surplesses, and other vestmentes of the Church, to give
soule-cakes (for so they shame not to call them) or rather foole-cakes against
all souls day, for the redemption of all christen souls, as they
blasphemously speak. They account it also a work of great merit, to disple,
to whip, and scourge themselves with whippes made of ropes ends, of cords,
and some of wyre, with little rowels of spurs at the ends, wherewith
(forsooth) they must whippe themselves naked, till their bodies appear all
full of bloody gores, and in so doing, they merit the devil and all, I should
say heaven and all. They account it also an excellent good work, and of great
merit, to lie al night upon the boords, or the bare ground, to wear shirts of
hair, to fast with bread and water, to carry candles, tapers, and palms up
and down the church, and round about the Churchyard, to see and worship their
little God of the pix, that hangs so pretily in a string, like a Be in a box,
to receive holy bread, and holy water, to go to shrift, where every one must
confess his sins to the Priest, and receue absolution, but specially the
women, who many times have their absolution given them, with a Friars tail.
These, with infinite the like, are the good works of the Papists, whereby they
trust to gain heaven, and to merit everlasting life whether God will or no.
Yea, they will have it by merit, and not by mercy, and therefore God is bound
to give it them, ex debito, and ex opere operato, of duty, in regard of
their works, and not ex gratia: and good reason, if it be so, for does not
the Apostle affirm, that to him that works, is the hire given of duty, not
of favor. Now they do all, and more too (or else they lie) which God has
commanded them, and which is more, they have not only works enough of their
own, to save themselves withal, but also works of supererogation, which will
help at a dead lift, if need be, to sell or give to others, and therefore they
must needs (as I say) come to heaven, whether God will or not: but God grant
me, and all that appertain to him, eternal life for his mercies sake in
Christ, and let the Papists challenge it still by their works, merits, and
deserts. And truly, I cannot but wonder, that the Papists should be so blinded,
as to think, that any works at all (much less these, having no warrant at
all out of the word of God, but rather quite contrary, and utterly repugnant)
should merit and deserve the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life, being
indeed such as Christ speaks of. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the ordinances of men. But to conclude this point. The Apostle says,
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, but these works of the papists are not of
faith, and therefore are sin. And to prove that they are not of faith, I reason
thus. Whatsoever has not his ground and warrant out of the word of God, is
not of faith, but these works have not any ground out of the word of God, and
therefore are not of faith. Therefore would I counsel all Papists to abandon
their works, especially these which I have recited, to the devil their
author, from whom they first came, and to do those works, which God has in
his holy word commanded, and which in mercy (but not in merit) he has
promised to reward at that day. And now because neither they, nor any else
shall be ignorant, what those good works be, which God has commanded us
to do in his holy word, I will decypher forth unto them (though not all) yet
some of them, in as few words as I can.

The 4. Section.
Containing a description of such works, as the Protestants do account for
good works, and which in deed are good works, and grounded upon the word of
God. Wherein by the way also is showed every ones duty in his several
calling in this life.

OUR savior Christ in the five and twentieth of Saint Mathewes Gospel, sets
down a notable Catologue of good works, amongst which he accounts this to
be one, namely, to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, to cloth
the naked, to visit the sick, and those that be in prison, to lodge the
harbourlesse, and to entertayne strangers, and wayfaring men. This did good
Abraham well understand and practice, who is said to have sat in his tent
door in the heat of the day, Genesis 18.1.2
of purpose, to inuit and call in strangers, wayfaring men, and trauelers,
and to relieve them. And therefore when the Angels came to him in the form
of men, he is noted by the holy Ghost, to have entreated them, nay, to have
compelled them to eat meat with him in his house. Good father Lot did the
very same, watching in his doors or gates, to harbor poor strangers: and
therefore when the Angels came into Sodom, like strangers and pilgrims, he
compelled them in some sort, Genesis 19.1.2 3.
to enter into his house, and to take such lodging and entertaynment, as the
country would yield, and his state was able to afford. And hereby many, (as
the Apostle notes) have received Angels into their houses at unawares in the
forms of men. But now adays there are many, that are so far off, from this
kind of liberality toward poor strangers, or beggars as we call them, that
they will shut up their gates, when there is any meat or drink stirring. And
which is too bad, I have known some, that have caused the poor to be whipped
away from their gates. Again, othersome although of great reuenews, because they
will not keep hospitality, nor relieve the pore at home, they will give up
house, and either go soiorne, and table with some friend, or else take a chamber
in some city or town, where they will keep no house at all, but with a man, and
a boy (and it is well if that too) live both meanly, basely, and obscurely, to
the blemishing and steyning of their worship and credit for ever. Even they
whose lands and possessions are worth (peradventure) 500. pounds a year, yea,
it may be 1000. pounds a year, whose parents and ancestors kept 20. or 40. me^
in a livery, mainteind great hospitality to the relief of all the country
about them, even they I say will not stick to do so. And yet will all their
reuenews scarce serve to maynteyne this small port withal, notwithstanding
that they so rack their lands, raise their rents, and exact such fines and
incomes, as they make twenty times so much more of their livings now, as their
forefathers did in times past.

Now if it be demanded, how they carrying so low a sail, can spend so great
revenues, which were wont to maintain so many score, and to relieve so many
thousands of poor souls. I answer. They spend it, (as I suppose) for the
most part, either in sumptuous apparel, gorgeous buildings (both which are at
this day too rife in England, if it pleased God) or else in feasting and
banketting, in roieting and gourmandizing, besides other chamber works, which
I blush to name. For (as the Apostle says) it is a shame once to speak of
those things, which are done of them in secret. God turn their hearts, and
give them grace to contain themselves within themselves, to mayntaine
hospitality for the relief of the poor, and to uphold that port, worship,
and credit, which their forefathers did.

Our savior Christ says, that a cup of cold water given in his name, shall
not be left unrewarded at the later day. And the Apostle Paul commends
hospitality, as one of the works of mercy, calling it in many places, a
sweet smelling sacrifice, pleasant and acceptable to God. Alas, let them
consider, wherefore did God give them such great store of riches, and large
possessions in this life, above their fellows brethren, was it not to do good
with them, and to help those that have need? Let them know it was not given
them to misspend in riot and excess, in pride, in gluttony, or drunkenness,
in whooring, no, nor in hawking, and hunting, nor in any other such kind of
vanity. No, no, it will not go for payment at the day of judgment, when it
shall be said unto them, read rationem villicationis tuae, come, give accoumpt
of thy Stewardship. I would wish them therefore to learn even of the unjust
Steward, spoken of by our Savior Christ, to make them friends of the wicked
mammon. And surely (to bend my style to all in general) I would council all
men to study to be more careful and diligent in doing of good works, to
feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to harbor the harborlesse, to visit
them that be sick, and in prison, and to do to all men, as he would wish
all should do to him, if he were in like condition. Say not (as Saint James
notes, the rich merciless men of his time to have said) I have not for you
now, come again an other time, God send you comfort, and so they give them
nothing, themselves notwithstanding in the mean time, flowing, nay,
ouerflowing with the abundance of all things. Saint Augustine tells us, that
look what apparel we have in our presses, what clothes in our chests, what
garments in our warderobes, more than we wear on our backs, they are (says
this holy Father) none of ours, but the poores, and to withhold them from them
having need, is to rob and spoil them. And as the same author says, if he
shall burn in hell, that has not clothed the naked, fed the hungry, nor
harbored the harborlesse, oh where shall he burn, that has robbed and
deprived the poor of that that they had? And yet I am not of that foolish
pity, that I would have a man to give to every one without exception: for
herein there is great discretion to be used, and many circumstances to be
considered. First, we are to confer with them (before we give them any thing)
of the word of God, and of religion, to the end, we may know, whether they
be true christians indeed, or no. Secondly, we are to consider whether they
be old, blind, lame, or otherwise diseased and infirmed. Thirdly, how they
came to this poverty, whether by the hand of God, as by fire, shipwreck,
death of cattle, or any other the like judgment and visitation of GOD. And
fourthly, what has been, and is his life and conversation, and in what sort
he spends and imploieth his goods, all which, if we find to stand with the
fear of God, and a good conscience, then are we to relieve such a one to the
vtterwost of our ability. But to those that be either Atheists, or obstinate
Papists, young, lusty, and able to work, and yet will not, I am not to give any
thing, for in releeuing of such, besides that, I maintain them in their idleness
still, I also offend both God and my brethren. Of such, the Apostle gives a
peremptory commandment, that they who will not labor, should not eat. Now
in the giving of our alms, we must have regard specially to these six things.
First, we must see that we give our alms for the love we bear to God, and to
our brethren for his sake. Secondly, that we give them not for vayneglory, to
be magnifyed and praised of men, as the Pharisees did, who sounded trumpets
before them when they gave their alms. Thirdly, we must give our alms
voluntarily, willingly, and without co^straint, grudging or murmuring: for the
Lord (says the Apostle) loves a cheerful geuer. Fourthly, we must give
liberally, and not niggardly, for (as the same Apostle in an other place
notes) they that sow sparingly, shall reap sparingly. Fifthly, we must give
our alms whilst we have time in this life, as Paul says, dum tempus
habemus, faciamus bonum ad omnes, whilst we have time let us do good to all
men. We must not leave it to our executors to do after us, who (peradventure)
will part stakes, and give one penny to the poor, and reserve three for them
selves. It is not worth a blewe peese to give them, when thou see thou must
needs leave them, and can enjoy them no longer. Sixthly, and lastly, we must
give freely, looking for no reward, merit, or recompense for it again. But to
leave this, and to go forward to the rest.

It is also accoumpted by Christ a good work and a work of mercy, to visit
those that be sick, and in prison, and to relieve them. Those that be sick,
we must comfort, exhort, dehort, counsel, and persuade, as we see their
present state and condition does require: and besides, if they want any
necessary thing, that either we have, or can any way procure them, we are to
help them to it, and to relieve them. And those that are in prison, we must
visit also, and not only relieve them with meat, drink, and clothes, but
also with our counsel and wisdom, to the uttermost of our abillitie. But as
we are in this case to relieve all, so are we much more bound to relieve
those that are indurance for the word of God, and the testimony of a good
conscience, not suffering such to lack in any case. It is also a good work to
set up hospitalls, spittles, and alms houses, for the relief, and
sustentation of the poor. In which kind we have many good men (thanks be to
God for them) that have done notably, I pray God increase the number of them.
But because I have spoken of this matter somewhat more at large in the
beginning of this book, I will now therefore say no more of it, referring the
reader to the same place. It is also an excellent good work to erect Colleges
and Schools for the increase and propagation of good letters, as without
which, barbarism, and palpable ignorance would quickly ouerflowe us (as I have
noted before) and we in short time should become little differing from brute
beasts, I pray God therefore to open the hearts of all men and women that be
able, to be more beneficial to them, but of this I have spoken more largely
before in the second Section of this book.

It is also a good work, and a work wherewithal God is highly pleased, to
contribute liberally to the mayntenance of godly Pastors, and Preachers. For
(as the Apostle Paul reasons) if they minister unto us heavenly things, it
is a small matter, if they reap of us earthly things. And yet there are some,
nay too many Machianelists, that think, and say, they have too much, and that
all is well got, that is got from them. But if they knew the excellency of
their office, and the incomparable dignity of their high calling, if they knew
whose place they supply, and whose person they represent in their office, if
they knew how dear they are to the Lord (in so much as in a certain place he
says, they are as dear unto him as the apple of his eye) if they knew that
epithites, and names of honor are attributed to the^ by God himself in holy
scripture, as namely, angels, lights, ambassadors, messengers, legates,
pastors, preachers, doctors, besides many other titles, and denominacions of
honor. Briefly I say, if they knew that to detract from them, is to withdraw
from God, and from his holy ministry, they would not think all won that is
extorted from them. God says, touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm. And our Savior Christ says, he that receives you, receives me, and
he has rejects you, rejects me, accoumpting what soever injury or wrong
is done to them, to be done to him self. And therefore do I hold this as an
infallible maxim, that who so ever deteyneth, or withholdeth any thing of that
which is right from his Pastor, or Preacher, neither loves God, Christ's Jesus,
nor yet his holy ministry: for so our Savior affirms, he that loves you,
loves me, and he that hates you, hates me: and again, the Prophet speaking
in the person of God, says, bring corn into my barnes, that there may be
meat in my house, calling the barn and house of the minister his own barn,
and his own house. And yet there are some so straight laced, that they would
not have the ministry to live upon tithes (forsooth) but upon contribucions,
that is, plain alms indeed: so that every one should give them what they
would, little or much: which if it were once effected, then might the ministry
quickly go a begging, as they do now almost in Scotland. If this be not the
way to bring the ministry into contempt, the Sacraments and word of God into
hatred and religion into detestacion, Say if this be not the way to bring in
plain Atheism, and consequently confusion and overthrow of all things, I
know not what is. For take away reward from learning, and who will set his
son to learning? who I say will set his child to the University, and bestow
almost all he has upon him to get him learning, whereas afterward he shall
live but as a beggar all days of his life? But as I would wish that they, who
be good, able, and sufficient preachers indeed, should have living enough, so
would I wish, that those who have too much, should part with some of their
superfluity to others that either have too little, or just none at all. For
you shall have some, that can speak but little congrue latin, much less
preach the word of God (nay would God they could read english well) and yet
they have, some of them two, some of them three, and it is well if not four
benefices a piece, you shall have othersome fine scholars, and famous preachers
indeed, want even competent mayntenance. And therefore could I wish (if it
might possibly be brought to pass) that a more equal distribution of livings
were had amongst us. But it may sooner (I fear me) be wished for, than hastily
effected. Now as this is a great plague to our Church, so (I doubt) least in
time, these impropriacions will be the bane of the same: I pray God to move her
Majesty's royal heart, and the hearts of her honorable Council to redress
this great calamity, if it be his blessed will. But whether am I carried? It is
a good work in a Bishop to preach the word of God truly, to minister the
Sacraments sincerely, to execute ecclesiastical discipline, and other censures
of the Church seuearely, to rule and govern the Church of God uprightly,
according to the word of God, to constitute and place in every several Church
and congregation (as near as is possible) a good and sufficient preacher, and
to see that every one in his particular charge, and calling, do his duty
diligently. He must be an example to his flock, as well in life, as in
doctrine, else what he builds with one hand, he pulls down with the
other. Yea, he must be of that holy conversation, and integrity of life,
that even they that are without (as the Apostle speaks) may be won, and
reclaymed thereby. Briefly, he must be in all points such a one as Paul
describes to Timothy, 1. Timot. 3.
1,
and to such a one is all honor due, 2,
3,
as 4,
the same Apostle says in an other place, 5,
those Elders that govern well, 6,
7,
are worthy of double honor.

It is also a principal good work in a King, or Prince, first, and above all
things to establish the true religion and worship of God, to abolish all
superstition, idolatry, and Popery, to root out all vain tradicions,
ordenances, and constitutions of men, either not grounded upon the word of
God, or else repugnant to the same, ever taking the word of God for his
tutchstone, and square rule, to leuile all his actions by.

It is also a good work in a King of Prince, and his very duty, to publish,
and enact good laws, and wholesome Statutes, tending to the advancement of
virtue and godlynes, and to the suppressing and overthrowing of all sin and
wickedness, to see justice ministered to all men alike, without parcialitie,
favor or affection, to restrain, and inhibite all gnawing usury, extortion,
and exaction, to suppress all robbing, murdering, slaying and killing one of
an other, to defend the pore from the injury and violence of the mighty, to
punish sin in all men, according to the nature and quality thereof, as well in
the nobility, gentry, and yeomanry, as in them of the lowest degree, knowing
that the judgment is the Lords, that they be the Lords ministers, and that
they carry not the sword for naught, as Paul witnesses, 1. Cor. 14.
being also assured of this, that the Lord respects no man's person, neither
has he granted any greater charter to the mighty, than to the poor, to
sin. No, no, they have neither commission nor privilege, either of immunitie
or impunitie, no more than the poorest swayne or meanest peasant that lives
upon the face of the earth has. But the soul that sins shall dye, says
the Apostle, of what condition, estate, or degree soever they be. Yea, the
greater honor, or dignity that the Lord bestows upon any one in this life,
the greater innocence and perfection he requires at his hands, so far off is
he from dispensing with any to sin. Princes therefore Noble men and
Gentlemen should be examples of godlynes and holiness to those that be their
inferiors, for it is an old proverb and very true, Quales Principes,
Nobiles, and Gubernatores, tales populi, and subditi, Such as the Prince,
Nobles, and Gentlemen are, such are commonly the people and subjects also.

It is also an excellent good work in a Prince, to see that every one, man,
woman, and child, be Cathechised and taught the true Religion of God, and to
compel them to hear, read, meditate, confer, and talk of the same,
contrary to that blasphemous opinion of the Papists, who teach, that the
knowledge of the word of God amongst the Layty (as they call them) does make
them Heretics. But our Savior Christ teaches us another lesson, Scrutamini
Scripturas, Search the Scriptures, for in them, ye hope to have eternal life.
And in an other place again, Search the scriptures, for they are they which
testifye of me. Also in the Acts, we read, that the Byrreans searched the
Scriptures daily, to see whether those things preached by the Apostles were so,
or not, and they are wonderfully commended therefore by the holy Ghost in the
same place. Again, when the Pharisees came to Christ, tempting him, concerning
the faith of the resurrection, he answered them, ye err, not knowing the
scriptures, nor the power of God. So that whereas the Papists contrary to all
truth, do hold, that the knowledge of the scriptures is cause of heresy, we
find here by our Saviors own words, that the ignorance of them is cause of
all errors, heresy, and supersticion. David in his first Psalm verse 1.2.
Psalm. 1.1.2.
accoumpted him blessed that was conversant daily in the word of God, saying,
Blessed is the man, that does not walk in the council of the wicked, nor
stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful, but his
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in this law does he exercise himself
day and night. Again, in the syxt of Deuteronomie we are commanded by
express words, Deuteronomy. 6.
that the word of God shall never go out of our hearts, that we shall teach
it to our children, that we shall talk of it when we are in our houses, when
we go by the way, when we lay us down, and when we rise up again, and
to bind it as a sign upon our arms, and as a frontlette before our eyes,
and which is more, to write it upon the posts of our houses, upon our
walls, and upon our gates: so far off ought we to be, from not reading,
or studying, or meditating of it. Our Savior Christ in the Gospel after Saint
Matthew, Matthew. 4.
says, non solo pane, man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. Why then, if we live by the word of God,
and if it be the spiritual food of our souls (as it is in deed) what
cruel tyrants, and bloody soule-quellers are the Papists, to deprive us of
that whereby our souls should live? But yet I cannot greatly blame them, for
since the word of God came abroad, and that it was lawful for every one to
read it in their mother tongue, the least child that is (almost) can spy out
their knavery, their shuffling, and iugling: whereby it comes to pass
(thanks be to God) that both they, and their pestilent religion is out of
conceit with most men, and I pray God they may be daily more and more, till
neither the memory of the one, nor yet the mention of the other be once heard
of upon the whole face of the earth. To conclude this point, it is a good work
in a prince, to protect, and defend his subjects and people, as well from all
extreme violence of foreign foes, as also from all oppression and wrong of
domestical enemies, and finally to compel every one in their several callings
(as well of the spirituality or clergy, as also of the temporaltie) to do
their duties, and to keep their standinges, that the common wealth be
peaceably maintained, and God glorified, who be blessed for ever.

It is a good work in inferior Magistrates and rulers, to execute their
princes laws indifferently, without respect of persons, neither regarding the
rich and mighty for their wealth, nor contemning the poor for their poverty.
And to this end it behooves them to carry a single eye, and to have the fear
of God before their faces, and a good conscience in their breasts, that they
take nor receive no bribes, nor rewards: for as Solomon says, Gifts blind
the wise, and rewards pervert judgment. And as it is their duties to
minister justice to all, so must they do it with expedition: for he that
delayeth justice, is as culpable before God, as he that gives false
judgment, and both are abomination to the Lord. And yet for all that, you
shall have some suits (which peradventure might be decided in half a day)
continue notwithstanding seven years, yea, sometimes twenty years, to the
utter undoing, if not of both, yet of one of the parties at last, and in the
end, he that has money, and is able to wage his law lustily, goes away
many times with the game. But how ever it be, let justice be ministered with
expedition, cut off all delatoryes, all Tarde venits, all put-offs, all quirkes
and quiddities coined in the deceitful mint of man's brain for filthy lucre
sake.

For by this delaying of justice (though in the end it go on the poor man's
side, as sometimes it does, though not very often) the poor man, with his
wife and children, having spent all in the law, are constrained, either to
beg, or at least, to live in extreme misery all days of their lives after:
so that it had been as good he had lost it at the first, as to spend more
than it is worth, and to recover it at the last.

To the end therefore that justice might be ministered with expedition, I
could wish there were men of discretion and judgment deputed and appointed
in every shiere, and furnished with sufficient authority to determine all
matters, quarrelles, suits, or controversies, whatsoever might arise within
that particular shiere or county: so as none (except upon some special
occasion) should need to go further for justice. For now many men are forced
to travel two hundred or three hundred miles in the deapth of winter, in which
one journey some spend even all they have, and more too, and yet when they come
where they would be, their suit is as far from an end, as it was at their
coming forth. And thus is the poor man thorough pure need, not being able
to prosecute his seven years suit, forced to loose all, and constrained to
beg home, peradventure two hundred or three hundred miles, as I have said, in
the midst of cold winter. To proceed.

It is a good work in a subject to love, honor, and obey his Prince in all
things not repugnant to the word of God, for so the Apostle commands, Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.8
3.
for there is no power but of God, 4.
and the powers that be, are ordained of God. 6.
And in his Epistle to Titus, 7.
Tit. 3
he wills Titus to put us in mind, that we be subject to principalities, and
powers, and obedient, and ready to every good work.

It is also a good work in a subject and his duty, not only to bear
faithful allegiance to his Prince in his heart, but also to wish him well, to
love him, to speak well of him, and most heartely to pray for him, for so the
Apostle to Timothy, Timoth. 2.
the second Chapter, exhorts us, saying, I exhort therefore, that first of
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men, for kings and princes, and for all that be io authority, and he
rendereth a reason why we should pray for them, that we may lead a quiet
and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty under them. But here
arises a question, whether we are to obey our Prince in all things or not?
I answer, If our Prince be a good prince, and does publish good and
wholesome laws, agreeable to the word of God, then are we to obey them in all
things, and to adventure and hazard both our lives and goods, as well in
defense of him and of his laws.

Upon the otherside, if our prince be a wicked Prince, bloody, cruel, and
tyrannical, and does constitute laws and statutes clean contrary and
repugnant to the word of God, then we are thus to do, we must submit our
selves under his scepter, and in all humility and humble obedience lay down
our lives at his feet, rather choosing to die, than to do any thing contrary to
the word of God, and good conscience, so far off ought we to be from taking
arms against our prince for any matter whatsoever. For the Apostle says
flatly, that those who do resist the powers, Romans 14^
do resist the ordinance of God, and do purchase to themselves eternal
damnation. And hence is it, that we never read so much as of one traitor or
proditor of his prince and country, that ever prospered, or had good success,
but in the end they were overthrown and brought to confusion, and I pray God
they may so still, that hammer any matter, or contriue any plots against the
Lords anointed in any country or nation of the world whatsoever.

It is a good work also in subjects to love one another, to pray one for
another, and to do to others, as they would wish others should do to them,
for this is the whole law and the Prophets, says our Savior CHRIST, that is,
he that loves God above all things, and his neighbor as himself, fulfilleth
the whole law.

And truly not without cause is it said, that love fulfilleth the law: for if
I love my neighbor as my self, then will I do him no wrong, neither in word
nor deed, I will speak no evil of him, I will not detracte him, slander him,
nor any kind of way hurt or annoy him. This caused our savior Christ to
say, By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if ye love one
another. This caused the Apostle Saint Paul to cry out, Owe nothing to any man
but this, that you love one another. This caused the same Apostle in an other
place to say, Though I speak with the tongues of men, and of Angels, 1. Cor
13
and have no love, I am as a sounding brass, and tinkling cimball. And though
(says he) I had the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets, and
acknowledge, yea, if I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and
yet had no love, I were nothing. And though I feed the poor with all my
goods, and though I give my body to be burned, and have no love, it profits
me nothing, says this Apostle. Yea, such a precious thing is this love, that
in the last verse of the same Chapter, he prefers it before either faith or
hope, and that very worthily, for faith and hope shall both cease, and have an
end, when we shall have attained the full fruition and possession of those
things which we look for after this life, but love shall ever remain, and
never have end, amongst the Saints of God in the kingdom of heaven, when
all things else shall be vanished away like unto a scumme. Then if we must
love all men, we must hate none, no, not our very enemies, but contrariwise,
love them, pray for them, and every kind of way seek to do them good: for
so our Savior byddeth us, If thine enemy hunger, give him bread, if he
thirst, give him drink, for in so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon
his head, as the Apostle speaks.

And in another place, Christ bids us, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, for, says he, if you love those
that love you, what great thing do you? Do not the very publicanes and
sinners the same? We must neither curse nor banne them (as they say) nor in
any sort seek to be revenged of them, what wrong so ever they have done to
us, but refer the revenge to him who says, Mihi vindicta, and ego
retribuam, Vengeance is mine, and I will reward. For to revenge every wrong,
and to contend for every straw one with another, is even as if one member of
the body, should rise up and rebel against another. Therefore even as the
members of our natural bodies, do agree together in a most pleasant harmony
and sweet consorte, do love one an other, suffer one with another, rejoice
and sorrow one with another, and one help another, in case any be
distressed: So let us agree together one amongst another, one love an other,
one help, comfort, and relieve another, to the uttermost of our power. Let the
counsel of the Apostle sink deep into our hearts, where he says, Weep
with them that weep, mourn with them that mourn, and be of like affection
one toward another.

Let not brute beasts and unreasonable creatures teach us wisdom, who love
all other of the same kind, and do willingly converse with them, than with
any other of a contrary kind. Let us not fall out amongst our selves for every
trifle, nor go to law for every light occasion, or rather many times for no
occasion at all. Let not the greedy Puttocks the Lawyers make you beggars, and
themselves Gentlemen with your goods. Let your controversies rather be decided
at home, by your honest neighbors and friends, and rather be content to lose a
piece, than to go to law and spend all thou have, and in the end peradventure
lose all too. It is a good work, if any be fallen to extreme poverty, either by
piracy on the seas, or robbing on the land, by fire, by death of cattle, by
suretiship, or any other like accide^t whatsoever, to relieve such a one, to
help him, and to restore him again to the uttermost of thy power, that
afterward by gods good blessing and thy good means, he may do good in the
common weal, and thank God for thee all days of his life after. It is a good
work in every one that is able, to lend either money or goods, or whatsoever
else his neybour stands in need of, without usury, interest, or gain,
according to the saying of our Savior Christ, lend to him that would borow,
not loking for any thing again, and thy reward shall be great in heaven. But
some are of mind, that usury is nothing else but an eating, a gnawing, a
co^suming, and an utter undoing of my brother (for so indeed the etymology of
the word sounds) so that say they, as long as we eat not, gnawe not, nor
consume not our brother (though in the mean time they take never so much
interest of him for their money) it is no usury. But if this be not a eating, a
gnawing, a co^suming, and an utter undoing of my brother, to take after twenty
pound, yea, thirty pound in the hundred (as many do) then I know not what
is. But if they would know what usury is in deed, according to the sense of
the word of God, I will tell them,

Usury is any thing over and above the principal which was lent, be it never
so little, either in money, corn, grass, grounds, lands, meat, drink,
clothes, or any thing else whatsoever. But now a days there is no sin so
gross, which is not blanched and smeered over with such counterfeit colors,
that except a man have an eye illuminate by Gods spirit, he shall take it
either for a virtue, or at least for no sin at all, But woe be to them
(says the Prophet) which call evil good, Esaias. ^.
and good evil, sweet, sower, and sower sweet, light, darkness, and
darkness light. I doubt these excuses and gloses will not go for payment at
the day of judgment, let them flatter themselves as much as they will in their
foolysh imaginations.

It is also a good work in every one to fast from sin, as much as he he
can, and from all excessive use of meats and drinks, which might any way
move or stir up the body to dissolutenes and wantonness. And therefore the
Papists do belie us, in that they affirm, that we never fast, and that our
preachers do preach against it, as against a thing altogether unlawful. But
as they speak truth in this, so let them be believed in every thing else.
Indeed we hold, (and that truly) that all meats may be eaten at all
times, and at all seasons of him that has faith, for so the Apostle teaches,
saying: Now the spirit speaks evidently, Tim. 4^
that in the later days, some shall depart from the faith and shall give heed
to spirits of error, and doctrine of devils, which speak lies thorough
hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with a hot iron, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which GOD has created to be
received with thanksgiving, of them which believe, and know the truth. And
in another place he says, Every creature of God is good, and nothing ought
to be refused, if it be received with faith and thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer. So that we hold it a matter
merely indifferent, to eat, or not to eat at all times. We repose no
religion in eating or drinking, but hold it rather for a matter of policy
than of divinity.

Our Savior Christ says, there is nothing that enters into man, that defile
the man, but those things which come out of a man, those defile a man.

It is said also in another place, All things are clean to those that be
clean. And further we read in the history of the Acts, how the Apostle Paul
himself was commanded in a vision (as it were by oracle from heaven) to eat
of all meats contained in the sheet, being also forbid to call that unclean,
which God had sanctified, and made clean. And therefore (I say) we hold it
lawful by the word of God to eat all meats at all times, yea though it were
in Lent it self. But yet if it please the Prince for policy sake, and for a
common wealth (for that, at that time of the year, all creatures do breed and
engender together, and therefore, besides, that they are not so wholesome as at
other times of the year, if they should then be killed and eaten, as they are
at other times, there must needs grow great dearth and scarsity of them) to
command us to abstain from eating of flesh that time of the year only, we
willingly obey it, as a matter of policy, and not of divinity, religion, or
conscience. And albeit, it be objected, that Christ fasted 40. days, and 40.
nights, yet it follows not, that of necessity we should absteyne from flesh
only for so long; no more than it follows, that we must absteyne from all
other meats, because Christ did so. We have no one syllable in the word of
God for our warrant to do so. Nay, if we would imitate Christ's example in this,
we are not able. For can we absteyne from all kind of sustenance whatsoever
40. days, and 40. nights as Christ did? And yet if we will follow strictly
his example, we must do so. Therefore it is true, omnis Christi actio, nostra
est instructio, non imitatio, every action of Christ is our instruction, but
not a president to follow in every thing. And doubtless, if he would that we
should have absteyned from the eating of flesh in Lent only, he would have
given us some precept or other, or at least some one word or other sounding
that way. To conclude therefore, we hold, that fasting from meats and
drinks, is both good and godly, and many times very necessary, to tame the
wanton affections of the flesh, and to subdue them to the spirit. And yet we
look not to merit by our fasts, neither yet do we fast in honor, or worship
to any dead Saints, as the Papists most blasphemously do. And thus much of
fasting. Now to go forward.

It is a good work in every one, to prevent, and as much as lies in his
power, to hinder and stay every evil action, or ungodly deed, which either
he knows of his own knowledge, or else is informed, and advertised of by
others, is like to come to pass, if he do not, he is as guilty of the mischife
whatsoever it be, that happens, as he that committed it. And therefore it
stands every one in hand, to take heed to himself, that he be not partaker
of other men's sins, for every one has enough, and too many of his own to
answer for, God be merciful to us. It is a good work in every one to
practice sobriety, temperancie, and frugalitie, as well in his meats, as also
in his drinks, to eschew all gluttony, drunknes, riot, and excess, to use such
apparel and attire, as is decent and comely, rather obeying necessity, than
serving curious phantesie, knowing that our apparel was given us to cover our
nakedness withal, and to hide our shameful parts, and not to puff us up into
a proud humor, or vain conceit of our selves. And trust me truly, I see no
greater reason that we have to be proud of our apparel, than the poor Lazar
has to be proud of his rags and clouts that wrap his sores. It is a good work
in every one to moderate his affections so, as he neither think, meditate, nor
practice any evil against any man, that he refrain his tongue from all manner
of swearing and blaspheming of Gods most holy name, that he fall out with no
man, curse nor ban not any, finally, that he keep his eyes from beholding of
vanity, his ears from hearing of filthiness, or ribaldry, and his hands and
feet from committing of evil. Now if these be good works (as they are indeed)
then most unhappy are they, that be so far from doing any of them, that they
daily and hourly practice the contrary, and will justify themselves too by
the word of God. For says one, is not swearing tolerable? does not God say,
thou shall honor me, and swear by my name? and therefore they conclude, that
God is rather honored, than dishonored by swearing. Othersome, when a man
reprooues them for it, will ask him, why? Is it not lawful for a man to have
God in his mind, and to name him often? yea, the oftener, the betters. Thus
these reprobate miscreants iustifye themselves in their sin, and abuse the
word of God to their own destruction. For answer to the first. I grant
indeed, that God is honored by swearing by his name, in this sense, when a
matter or controversy falls out, which can not otherwise be determined than
by an oath, then are we (being called by the Magistrates, and those that are in
authority) to depose the truth, by the invocation, and calling to witness of
the name of God; or else, in a private action betwixt party and party, to end a
controversy, we may lawfully take an oath, for so the Apostle says, let an oath
make an end of all controversies. In these two respects it is lawful to swear
as I have said, and God is honored thereby, if we depose the truth, as he is
truth. But as he is honored by these two kinds of oaths, so is he dishonored,
and displeased with swearing by him at every word, in our ordenary talk, and
that upon every trifle, or light occasion, or rather for no cause at all. This
kind of usual swearing, is altogether forbidden by our Savior himself,
Math. 5.33.
where he says, Swear not at all, 34.
neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God, 35.
nor yet by the earth, for it is his footestoole, neither by Jerusalem, for it
is the City of the great King, neither shall thou swear by thy head, because
thou can not make one hair white or black: but your communication shall be
yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than this, comes of evil. The
Apostle S. James also warns us to the same effect, Jacob. v. 12.
saying, but above all things (my brethren) swear not neither by heaven, nor
by earth, nor by any other kind of oath, but let your communication be yea,
yea, nay, nay, least you fall into condemnation. The very same does Solomon
teach us, when he says, The man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with
iniquity, and the plague of God shall never go from his house. And yet
notwithstanding all this, there are not a few that make even as it were an
occupation of swearing, and forswearing, of blaspheming, cursing and banning at
every word, accoumpting him a peasant and no man, that cannot swear it out
lustely. In which point the devils are better than they, for (as the Apostle
James records) they tremble and quake at the very name of the Majesty of
God: but these desperate roagues, and shagd hayred ruffians are so far off
from trembling or quaking at the name of God, that they rent, and tear him in
a thousand pieces at every word as much as lies in their powers, blaspheming
both him, and his glorious name, without all remorse or conscience. But let
them take heed, for surely I am of this mind, that it were better, (though
both in the justice of God be damnable) to kill a man, than to swear an oath,
or once to blaspheme the name of God any manner of way, for the one is the
breach of the first Table, which respects the worship of God only, the other
is but the breach of the second Table, which compriseth our duties one toward
an other. And as it is forbid to swear vaynely by the name of God in our
ordenary talk, and familiar communication at every word, and for every trifle,
so is it also forbid to swear by any other, than by God alone in the two
respects before remembered, and neither by Saints nor Angels, Sun, nor Moon,
Stars, nor Planets, bread, nor salt, fire, nor water, nor any other creature
else what so ever: neither is it lawful to swear by any counterfaite oath, as
fay, or fecke, gogs bud, gogs lownes, nor the like, for all these kinds of
swearings are abomination before the Lord, who has given us an express
commandment, that we neither swear by their idols, nor yet once make
mention of their gods in our mouths. For whatsoever we swear by, we make an
idol of it, and a false God, attributing that honor and worship to the
creature, which is due to the creator, who only is to be invoke and called
upon as a witness in all our actions, and none but he. And now to the
second part of their blasphemous allegacion. Whereas they say, that it is
lawful to have the name of God often in our mouths, and the oftener, the
better. I answer, true it is, we ought indeed to have the majesty of God
both in our hearts, and in our mouths, and the oftener the better, but how?
not in blasphemous sort, to make a stale or a jesting stock of him, (for we
are forbid to take the name of God in vain, and the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain) but in all holy reverence, devotion,
and obedience, yea, in all holy fear, and trembling. This the Apostle meant,
when he said, If any man speak, let him speak as says the word of God:
again, let your communication be such as may minister grace to the hearers.
Let these lusty Caueliroes take heed, how they dally with the Lord any while,
for (as the Apostle notes) God is a consuming fire, and in an other place, it
is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of God, yea, he is that stone, that
upon whom soever he falls, he grindeth to powder. But to draw toward an end.
It is a good work in every one to be careful of his brothers good name,
neither backbiting, detracting, slaundering, nor any way discrediting him by
word or deed, but rather seeking by all means possible to conserve his credit
as much, yea, and in some respects, more than his own. And if he know, or
hear any thing which might sound to the impayring of his credit, or blemishing
of his good name, to bury it in the grave of oblivion, that it may never rise
again, nor come to light, to the disparagement or prejudice of his brothers
good name for ever. What shall we say then to those vile persons, and scummes
of the world, not worthy to have common breath amongst christians, who are so
far off from christian charity, that albeit they neither know, nor in truth
never heard any evil of their brother, will yet in the fullness of their
malice, coin and forge matter defamatorie against him, and when they have
done, publish it to the view of the world in railing pamphlets, and paltrie
libels, to his unjust infamy, and their own perpetual shame?

The badge or cognizance of the children of God, whereby they are known and
discerned from the children of the devil, is love, as our savior Christ says
himself, By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you love
one another. Again, the badge or cognizance of the children of the devil,
whereby they are discerned from the children of God, is hatred, rancour,
malice, envy, lying, slaundering, detracting, and backbiting of their
brethren, and the like. Now then, these fellows are so far off from wearing
the cognizance of the children of God, that they marshall themselves under the
standard of the devil, being invested with his cognizance as his servants and
vassals. Is this to do to an other, as they would wish an other should do to
them? Is this the nature of that love, which Paul describes, where he says,
Love suffers long, 1. Cor. 13.
is bountiful, enuieth not, does no evil, is not provoked to anger, thinks
no evil, reioyseth not in iniquity. Is this the fruit of that love, which the
Apostle Peter goes about so earnestly to persuade us unto, 1. Pet. 4.8.
where he says, But above all things (my brethren) have fervent love amongst
your selves, for love shall cover a multitude of sins. The Apostle S. John
says, 1. Ioh. 4.16.
that God is love, and that those that dwell in love, dwell in God, and God in
the^: Then it must needs follow, that if those that dwell in love, do dwell in
God, then those who dwell in hatred, rancor and malice, dwell in the devil,
and the devil in them: Now then, whether these men dwell in God, and God in
them, or not rather in the devil, and the devil in them, let the world judge.
Again, the same Apostle John in the same place aleaged, says, If any man
affirm, that he loves God, and yet hates his brother, he is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. Now then, what kind of people these are, and how
insufferable in a common wealth, who delight in nothing so much, as to broch
lies and slanders against their brethren, and where they hear any thing
against any man, without examination of the quality and property of the party
that told the^ of the person whom they concern, or of the matter it self,
they presently spue out their malice in libelling and pamphletting against
him, as though all were true that is reported of every man.

These kind of fellows are worser than the caterpillars or locusts of Egypt,
who devoured but the fruits of the earth, these the good names of men, yea, and
of such men, as in comparison of whom, they are notworthie to be named, the
same day the others are named in. They are worser than ravens, or kites, who
will not eat their pray before it be dead: but they will devour the good
names of their brethren being on live. Such curre dogs would be hanged up,
as will snappe every body by the shinnes, living to the hurt of all and good
of none.

And therefore I cannot a little marvel, that our grave and reverend Bishops,
and other inferior magistrates and officers, to whom the oversight and charge
of such things are committed, will either lisence, (which I trust they do not,
for I will hope better of them) or in any sort tolerate such railing libels
and slanderous pamphlets, as have been of late published in print one man
against another, to the great dishonor of God, corruption of good manners,
breach of charity, and in a word, to the just offense and scandal of al good
christians. And truly to speak my conscience freely, I think there cannot a
greater mischief be suffered in a common wealth, than for one man to write
against another, and to publish it in print, to the view of the world. I wis
the noble science of printing was not given us to that end, being indeed one
of the chiefest blessings that God has given to the sons of men here upon
earth. For is not this the next way to broach rancor, hatred, malice,
emulacion, envy, and the like amongst men? nay is not this the next way to
make bloodshed, and murder, to raise up mutenies, insurrections, commotions,
and rebellions in a christian commonwealth? and therefore would I wish both
the books, and the authors of them, to be utterly suppressed for ever, the one
by fire, the other by the halter or gallows, if nothing else will serve. But
what should I say? I can not but lament the corruption of our time, for (alas)
now adays it is grown to be a hard matter to get a good book licensed,
without staying peradventure a quarter of a year for it, yea, sometimes two or
three years, before he can have it allowed, and in the end happyly rejected
too, so that that which many a good man has studied sore for, and traueyled
long in, perchance all days of his life, shall be buried in silence, and
smothered up in forgetfulness, and never see the light, whilst in the mean
time, other books full of all filthiness, scurrilitie, baudry, dissolutenes,
cosonage, cony-catching, and the like, (which all call for vengeance to heaven)
are either quickly licensed, or at least easily tolerate, without all denial
or contradiction whatsoever.

And albeit it may be answered, that such filthy baudy books are not licensed
by the Magistrates, as I think in deed they are not (for what man can with a
good conscience license those books to be printed, which are seared with a
hot iron, and branded with the black cole of Gods curse) yet
notwithstanding, as long as they tolerate, or suffer them either to be
printed, or to be soulde in their Shops, they are as culpable and as guilty
before God for them, as the authors of them, and look what evil comes by
them, they shall one day answer for before the tribunal seat of God, because
it was in them to have suppressed them, and did not. But I will leave them to
their judge, to whom they either stand or fall, and who will one day reward
every one according to his doings. It is a good work to meditate, and to
think, that this life is but momentarie, short, and transitory, no life
indeed, but a shadow of a life, or rather a meditation of death (for so good
men have called it) a pilgrimage, a thorough-fare, an Inn, or hostrie, a place
of trial, of adversity and calamity, a vale of woe, and a sea of all
afflictions and miseries. The consideration of this, caused the holy Job, that
mirror of patience, Job. 14.
to burst forth into these speeches. Man that is borne of a woman has but a
short time to live, and is full of misery, he springs up as a flower, and is
cut down, he vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not.

It is a good work for the children of God, to set their minds of heaven, and
heavenly things, to meditate of the joys of heaven and of the glory prepared
for such as walk here with their God in all holy obedience and christian
humility before him. Finally and last of all (because I would draw toward an
end, though there be no end indeed of good works) it is a good work to
mortify our carnal lusts, and to slay our inordinate affections, to crucify
the old man, with the whole body of sin, and to put on the new man Christ
Jesus, walking and going on from faith to faith, from hope to hope, from
repentance to repentance, from holiness to holiness, from grace to grace, from
perfection to perfection, and from one good work to another, till we attain
to the end of our hope, which is everlasting life, in the kingdom of heaven.
These be those good works indeed which (as the Apostle witnesses) Christ
has ordained, that we should walk in them. These be those good works
which Zachary proves to be the ends of our redemption, Luke. 1.74.75.
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. These are
the oil which every Christian is to have in his Lamp, Matthew. 25.
and which the foolish Virgins wanting, were shut out, and excluded the
kingdom of God. These be they that I would council every Christian man, and
woman, that have any regard of their salvation, to practice in this life,
leaving the Antichristian works of the Papists, as abortiues, and miscreants,
to their father the Devil, from whom they first came. For persuade thy self
whosoever thou art, that without these good works, and the like, it is
impossible for thee to see the face of God to thy salvation, otherwise than the
devils, and the reprobate, who shall see the face of God (I grant) but to
their everlasting condemnation: So thou without good works may see the face
of God with the^, but to thy utter confusion and destruction both of body and
soul for ever. Be zealous therefore (good Christian) of good works, do good
whilst thou have time, for the night of death will come when thou can not
work, redeem the time with well doing, as the Apostle speaks, yea, withdraw
from thy sleep, from thy meat and drink, and from thy necessary affairs, to
do good. Remember thy years are few upon earth, and thou have but a short time
to live, and to work in. Admit thou attainest to forty, fifty, sixty, or it
may be eighty years (whereto few do come, in comparison of those that die
before) alas that time is nothing neither, in regard of the perpetuity and
eternity of the life to come. Have ever in thy mind that golden sentence of
the Apostle, He that sows little shall reap little, and he that sows
plentifully, shall reap plentifully. Let the words of our savior never slip
out of thy remembrance, Beatius est dare, potius quam accipere, It is a thing
more blessed to give (meaning to the poor) than to receive. Give therefore,
and lend freely to them that have need, loking for nothing again, and thy
reward shall be great in heaven, says our savior Christ. Consider it is
said, What is given to the poor, is lent to the Lord, and look what thou
laiest out, it shall be paid thee again. Distrust not Gods promises, for he
is yea, and amen, in all his sayings, and faithful and true in all his
doings. He both can, for that he is almighty, and also will, for that he is
merciful, most bountifully remunerate, and most liberally reward them for
whatsoever good thou do in this life, yea, so precise is he herein, that he
has bound himself with a promise, that he will not leave so much as a cup of
cold water given to any in his name, unrewarded at that day.

The fifth Section.
Wherein is showed the ends of good works, and of our justification by faith
only, with a conclusion exhortatorie to good works.

NOw as thou art to do good works, so thou must take heed, that thou do them
not, neither for desire of reward, nor yet for fear of punishment, but for the
love and obedience which thou bear to thy God. And so far off ought
thou to be from thinking to be justified, or to merit any thing by thy works,
(as the blasphemous papists do contend) that thou must both think and say as
Christ teaches thee to say, When thou have done all that is commanded thee to
do, thou art yet an unprofitable servant, and have done but thy duty, nay nor
thy duty neither, no not in any small measure. No, although thou were stable
to do all the good works in the world, and all the good works which the word
of God does command thee, yea, and in that perfection which GOD does require
of thee, (which thing never any was, nor ever shall be found able to perform,
Christ Jesus only excepted) yet could thou neither be justified before God,
nor yet merit any thing by them ex opere operato, as the Papists do dream.
But yet they are in deed notable seals and testimonies to thy conscience, that
thou art the child of God, and coheire with Christ Jesus of the kingdom of
heaven. And hereof is it, that the Apostle bids us make our salvation sure
by good works, not that good works are any efficient cause of our salvation,
but do assure, confirm, and seal up unto us our salvation purchased by
Christ.

They are therefore most excellent fruits of our faith, and infallible pledges
of our election in Christ, but no causes of our justification before GOD. For
even as no fruit can make the tree good, which by nature is naught, so no good
works can make a man good before God, who before was wicked and evil: for as
the tree must of necessity be good, before it can bring forth any good
fruit at all, so a man must be sanctified and regenerate by the spirit of
God, before he can do any good works, acceptable unto God, which once being
accomplished, the^ follow good works, as the effect from the cause. And
therefore I cannot but wonder at the more than palpable blindness of these
iusticiaries, and merit-mongers, the papists, who believe that good works can
justify us before God. Our savior Christ says, Without me, ye can do
nothing. Whereto the Apostle seems to agree, when he says, It is God which
gives both the will and the deed, even of his good will and then alas, what
place of merit is there left for us? And whereas they object, that God has
promised to reward our good works. True it is, he gives us grace, first to
will, then power to perform, and put in practice every good work that we
do, and has bound himself with a promise to reward these his own gifts in
us. But this reward stands in the mercy of God, not in the merit of the
work. Let us therefore, abandoning our own merits, as filthy dong, hold the
mercies of God in Christ, to be our righteousness, being assured, that if the
Lord should enter into judgment with us, waying our very righteousness in the
balance of his justice, and rewarding us according to our deserts, we should
be utterly condemned, and cast away for ever. This the Prophet Esaias
confirms, where he says, That all our righteousness is like a menstruous
clout, than the which, there is nothing more filthy, stinking, or fulsome. To
which sentence Saint Barnard seems to allude, saying: Ve vniuersae iusticiae
nostrae, si remota miserecordia iudicetur. Woe be to our righteousness, if we
should be judged with out mercy. And yet the papists are persuaded, that they
are not only justified (that is, pronounced just before God, freed from sin,
and all punishment due for sin) but also that they merit the kingdom of
heaven, and everlasting life by their good works. Yea, they have not only
good works enough to save themselves withal, but others also, and these they
call works of supererogation, that is, when they do more good works, and in
greater perfection, than God either can or will require of them, as I have
noted before, and therefore with the overplus of these (forsooth) they will
help their fellows, if they will pay well for them, else get they none, for,
No penny, no Pater noster. And is not this a pretty matter, that they can, not
only save themselves, but also others to, by their works of supererogation?
What should a man care for doing of good works himself, when for a little
money he may buy enough of others? The five foolish virgins would have bought
oil of the wise, but it was answered them, they could have none, lest there
were not inogh for them both. Whereby we see, that as no man can buy the good
works of another, so no man has enough to save himself. The Apostle Peter
says, There is no other name given under heaven, whereby man can be saved,
but only Jesus Christ. And if good works could save us (as the same Apostle
reasons) then had Christ died in vain. For how vain a thing had it ben for
the majesty of God, to have sent his own son into this miserable world, to
take our nature upon him, and to shed his most precious blood for us, if we
could have justified our selves, or purchased our salvation, either through
our inherent righteousness (as the papists most blasphemously affirm) by our
merits, or by any other means whatsoever. And therefore Paul was bold to
conclude, that we are justified by faith only, without the works of the law,
Being justified (says he) by faith, we have peace with God, thorough Jesus
Christ. And to the Galath. he says further, that as many as do rely upon the
works of the law, Galath. 5.
are under the curse, and banished from grace. To which the Prophet Abacuc
seems to agree, saying, the just shall live by faith. But what shall we say
then to the Apostle James, who says, we are justified by works, and not by
faith only? I answer. There are two manner of iustifications, one absolute
before GOD, the other demonstratiue before the world. Paul writing that we
are justified by faith only, means absolutely before God. James saying, we
are justified by works, means demonstratiuely, before the world. Again,
Paul wrighteth of the efficient cause of our justification, James of the
effect. Paul had to do with them that contemned faith (as the Heathen, Jews
and Turks do now) and therefore he attributed (and that worthily)
justification, to faith only. James he had to do with them that contemned good
works, as things of no value, affirming, that bare faith alone, was sufficient
to salvation, and therefore he attributes the more to works, thereby to draw
them to the practicing of them. Again, Paul speaks of such works as go
before justification, James of such as follow after. Paul means not of a
bare and naked faith without good works, but of such a faith as can no more be
without good works, than the sun without light, or the fire without heat.
James he means of a bare, naked, and dead faith, such as the very devils
have, and as the very heathen, and infidels have. So that in substance and
matter, they both mean and speak one and the same thing. For truly, as faith
is the efficient cause of our justification before God, so our works are the
effects or fruits issuing thereout, whereby we are known to be justified
before the world. And therefore let us brag of our faith as much as we will, if
it be but such a faith as brings forth no good works, we can never be saved
by it. This is not that justifying faith which Paul speaks of, nor which the
children of God have, but a dead faith, a barren faith, an historical faith
which the devils and all reprobates have. But here percha^ce some captious
sophister will ask me, if we cannot be justified by good works, to 'what end
then should we do them? To whom I answer. We are to do good works for six
causes especially: first for the love and obedience which we owe unto God:
secondly, for the mutual love, and brotherly charity which we bear one
toward an other: thirdly, to make our salvation sure and certain unto us, as
the Apostle says, Make your salvation sure by good works: fourthly, for the
zeal we have of the glory of God: fifthly, to draw others from sin, to the
practife of godliness by our good example: and sixthly, for the increase of our
own reward in the life to come, where no good work (such is the bountiful
liberality and merciful beneficence of our good GOD toward us miserable
sinners) shall be left unrewarded. And albeit that good works are no causes
of our justification, nor that thou can not be justified by them, yet can
thou never be saved without the^. And therefore would I wish every one that
has a care of his salvation, to labor, study, and endeavor night and day to do
good works. Remember how notably our forefathers have behaved the^ selves
herein, what monuments of charity, and alms deeds, have they left behind
them, to the posterities to come, and yet lived in fear and trembling. And do
we think to come to heaven, and leave no good works behind us at all, but
rather infinite millions of wicked deeds, and ungodly examples, which cry for
vengeance before the throne of God night and day incessantly? Oh let us
remember and never forget (if it be true which some do hold, as I fully
persuade my self it is) that as our wicked deeds, and evil examples which
we have left behind us in this life, do hurt unto other, and dishonor the
Majesty of God, so shall our pain be increased, and augmented in hell for
evermore world without end. And again, as our good deeds, and good examples
which we have left behind us in this life, do good to the Saints of God upon
earth, and increase his glory, so shall our glory, and our joy be increased
from day to day to the end of the world in the kingdom of heaven. Let either
the fear of the one therefore (dear christian) or the love of the other, move
thee now at the last to this resolution of good works. Let not the vayne-glory,
and deceiptfull honor of this world beguile thee, let not covetousness blind
thee, nor any private affection else, move thee to do evil, or to deceive any
more in bargaining, selling, or otherwise howsoever, for the Lord (as the
Apostle witnesses) is the revenger of all such wickedness: and though thou
escapest for a time the laws of men, yet can thou not escape the judgments
of God, but in his good time he will find thee out, and recompense thee
according to thy deserts. Remember that Solomon was rich, and had as plenty of
gould and silver as of stones, jewels, and ornaments great store, with
fish-pondes, orchards, gardens, forests, parkes, men-singers, women singers,
music, and all pleasures else under the Sun, and of them all, he pronounced
this sentence, Vanitas vanitatis, and omnia vanitas, Vanity of vanities, and
all is but vanity. Consider with thy self, and often reuolue in thy mind the
words of our savior, Heaven and earth shall pass, but the word of God
indureth for ever. And again in another place, No man's life stands in the
abundance of those things which he possesses. And again, What will it
prevail a man to win the whole world, and loose his own soul. Remember the
rich glutton, though he fared dilitiouslie, and ruffeled in his silks and
veluets every day, yet in one moment his soul was taken from him, and he
lodged in hell. Take example by the rich man in the gospel, who flowed with
such abundance of all things, that he was forced to pull down his old barnes,
and to build new ones, was it not said to him, Thou fool, this night shall
they fetch away thy soul, and then whose shall those things be which thou have
gathered. Oh what a vain thing is it therefore, for a man to rake into his
hands five hundred or one thousand men's liuinges, and to leave it to his
children, who for the the most part, spend it either in hauking, hunting,
dicing, carding, or else in whooring, gourmandizing, and infinite the like
vices, (for, Male parta, male dilabuntur, Ill got, ill spent) whereas in the
mean time, thou must go to the bar to answer for the getting of them,
peradventure to everlasting damnation both of body and soul. Therefore have a
care whatsoever thou be, that thou get thy goods in the fear of God, and with
a good conscience, so shall they prosper with thy children after thee, and thou
blessed eternally. And when thou have thus got them, be careful how thou
bestowest them, and to whom thou geuest them. For it is not enough for thee to
say, I gave so much, and so much to my carnal kindred, friends and aliance:
but if thou have given so much and so much, to the poor, so much and so much,
to this good end, and to that good end, to this good work, and that good
work, to remain to the posterities after thee to the end of the world, oh
then well is thee, and happy shall thou be, yea, then shall thou be sure to
attain to the end of thy hope, that is, everlasting life. To the which, he
bring us all, that apperteyne to his kingdom, that dyed for us, to whom with
the Father and the holy Ghost be all glory and praise for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

