TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
The humble petition and information of Sir Lewis Stucley, Knight, Viceadmirall
of Deuon, touching his own behavior in the charge committed unto him, for the
bringing up of Sir Walter Raleigh, and the scandalous aspersions cast upon him
for the same.

BEing deterred by your Majesty's more important affairs, from any hope of
redress of those scarres cast upon my reputation by Sir Walter Raleigh at his
death, without some remonstra^ce of the business made by my self; I have
presumed to offer to your most Excellent Majesty, a just defense of my
carriage in that affair: Wherein as I hold it the part of an honest man, to
prefer public duty before private affection; so I cannot but keep the
heart of a Gentleman, which is ever more sensible of a wound given to his
reputation, then to his life I have noe pleasure to fight with a ghost: But
seeing an Angel of darkness, did put on him the shape of an Angel of light at
his departure, to perform two Parts most cunningly; First, to poison the
hearts of discontented people; Secondly, to blemish me in my good name, a
pooreinstrument of the just desires of the State, with false imputations: Give
me leave, most Gracious Sovereign, to speak for my self: which I do not to
insult upon the dead, but to defend my self against the false reports of the
living, taken from the dead upon trust, to strike me directly, but through my
sides indirectly, aiming at a higher mark. All men have long known, that this
man's whole life was a mere sophistication, and such was his death, in which
he borrowed some tincture of holiness, which he was thought not to love in
his life, therewith to cover his hatred of others in his death. As it
appears, that being moved by the Deane of westminster, and thereupon
promising charity to me in the prison, does thus vent his hatred on the
Scaffold, in show of charity to the living, to take heed of so dangerous a
man. An uncharitable charity, not much unlike that man's repentance, who
purposing to hang himself, writes his repentance of that sin before hand in
his book, which he did purpose to commit.

Yet will not I take upon me to judge of his last repentance, I leave him unto
God, to whom he stands or falls; but I would he had given a better sign of
it, then by godly words at his death to gather credit to himself to work upon
the compassion of men, thereby to infuse more warily the venom of sedition
into the hearts of as many as he might, and to gain reputation upon his
Sovereign, but to spend his malice upon me your poor servant, who did
nothing, but execute your just Commands, with the peril of my life. Witness
his open inuitation of diverse to his death, wherein he meant, as in his last
Will and Testament, to lean a Legacy of his hatred unto me, to be executed
upon me by them to my destruction.

But it is nothing in respect of his general end, to spread by them whom he
had invited, the contagion of his seditious humor unto others, which the event
does manifest: That it grows very questionable, whether this man did more
hurt by his life, or by his death: By his life through his ill example; By his
death through his false testimony to traduce the Justice and instruments of the
State. Yea but it was the testimony of a dying man, now a penitent (as alsay)
as some say, a Saint, even then when as himself said, it was no time to
flatter or fear Princes: yea, but it was the testimony of an enemy, of a
perjured, of a condemned man. First, of an enemy, and of an angry enemy,
even with your Majesty that would have justice executed on him, upon his
original condemnation, who were satisfied, as he publicly did speak of his
innocence in that cause, as privately before he bewrayed his deep
coffeehouse, when it was urged, that the testimony of the Lord Cobham was
never retracted, Sir Walter Raleigh did peremptorily deny it. To whom answer
was made, that then the public Act registered in the Counsel book would
manifest it, for there it appears. So feign would this man cast aspersion upon
your Justice for taking the life of an innocent in that cause, wherein he was
condemned by his Country. When this would not serve his turn, then did he
fly to the Commission of a general; pleading it as an implicit pardon of that
former offense: Not considering that being already a man condemned for treason,
he was, as the learned in the Law held, incapable of another trial, by which
he might have been found as Nocent as before. For he having a Commission, to
go into those parts of America, vnpossessed by any Christian Prince in league
with your Majesty, and no where else, either to plant or trade, he made his
design for the River of Oreonoque, where he knew the Subjects of the King of
Spain were already planted, which, as he confessed under his hand to your
Majesty, he concealed from you; and this under pretense of his gold Mine,
which he did apparently to this end, to break the League, and to imbroyle the
two States. Many Generals have for exceeding their Commissions been punished,
even for good services: how then could he have escaped, for this his
disseruice, being against his Commission, if he might by the law have been
tried upon it? Its clear then, that he was angry with your Majesty for
commanding Justice to be done upon him: how then could he choose but be angry
with me the poor Instrument who brought him back to Justice, from whence he
intended often to make an escape?

First at Sea, upon his return, making motion to be set on shore in France,
and to quit his Ship to his company on that condition; for the which he was
blocked up in his Cabin a month together, as himself has confessed unto me,
and is to be proved by diverse of his company: By which it is clear again,
that out of his guiltiness, he did not so much trust in your goodness, as he
said on the Scaffold he did too much, or else he had not suffered death. Next
at Plymouth, after he was by your Majesty's special command, committed to my
keeping, he plotted with two French Captains; by name with Captain Flory,
and Captain Le'Grand, to escape in one of their ships, then there in
harbor, as he then confessed to the Lords Commissioners, it being first
evidently proved against him; by which it appears again, he did not trust
your Majesty's goodness, as he writ and said at his death. But I am sure by
this he did much wrong my kindness, to my undoing, had not the goodness of
heaven prevented him. Next he plotted his escape at Salisbury; which my worthy
Cozen William Herbert first discovered to your Majesty. Last upon the same
Saturday when I received your Majesty's Commission, by my Cozen Herbert, by
whom also I received intelligence, that at that instant, he was flying from my
custody without my priuity; not having as yet made him any semblance of
condiscent, so that I almost came on him at unawares, even at the instant that
he was putting on his false beard, and his other disguisements: Which declares
he did still distrust your goodness; doubtless out of the conscience of his
guiltiness, whatsoever he writ or said to the contrary. And is it any
marvel then, that he was angry with me at his death, for bringing him back?
Besides, that being a man, as he was thought, of so great a Wit, it was no
small grief, that a man of so mean a wit as I, should be thought to go
beyond him. Yea, but you should not have used such craft to go beyond him; No?
Sie ars deluditur art. Neque enim'lex iustior vlla est quam'necis artifices
art perire sua. But why did not you execute your Commission barely to his
apprehension on him in his house? Why? my Commission was to the contrary, to
discover his other pretensions, and to seize his secret papers, etc. And can
any honest Subject question mine honesty, in the performance of such a
Commission, which tended to the discovery of the secret intentions of an ill
affected heart to my Sovereign? How can any dislike this in me, and not
bewray his own dishonest heart, unto the State? Yea, but though another might
have done this, yet how might you do it, being his kinsman and his friend?
Surely if I had been so, yet in a public employment, and trust laid upon
me, I was not to refuse it, much less to prefer private kindness or amity,
before my public duty and loyalty: For what did I know the dangerous
consequence of these matters, which were to be discovered? or who knows them
yet, of those that make themselves my competent Judges? But if there were no
kindred or amity between us, as I auow there never was, what bond then might
tie me to him, but the tie of compassion of his misery? which was in my
Sovereigns heart to distribute, when he saw time, that did command me, and
not in the dispensation of me, nor of any other instruments power, that is to
be commanded. Hitherto I have proved he was angry, both with your Majesty,
and with my self, and therefore his testimony ought not to be of any force
against me. It follows next to prove, that his protestations and oaths,
concerning others were false, both before he came to the Scaffold, and upon the
Scaffold. Before, against Queen Elizabeth of infinite famous memory, who
advanced him with great favor from the dust. For one day my self vpbrayding
him with the notorious extreme injury he did my father, in deceiving him of a
great adventure which my said father had in the Tiger, when he went to the
West Indies with my Uncle Sir Richard Grenuill; which was by his own
confession worth fifty thousand pound: which came all to his hands, my fathers
portion at the least being ten thousand pound that he might lawfully claim:
He answered that the Queen howsoever she seemed a great good mistress unto
him in the eyes of the world, yet was so unjust and tyrannous unto him, that
she laid the envy as well of this, as of many other her oppressions upon him:
and that she took all the pearl in a Cabinet unto her self, without ever
giving him so much as one pearl. This he swore to me, and to Captain
Pennington, he did so basely and barbarously rail upon that our most
excellent Queen oftentimes, as he can attest, that no man has cause to
believe his oath against others, that would break his oath of Allegiance to so
excellent a mistress, that had raised him from such meannesse to such
greatness, as we of his country did well know.

Now that he swore that he was not guilty of the plotting of the Earl of
Essex death, nor did insult upon him being dead, there is a Gentleman of worth,
which about that time came from out of a long captivity, which he had
suffered in Spain, who touched at Sherborne, and Sir Walter Raleigh asked him,
What they said in Spain of Essex death: He answered, They heard not of it
there: But that he was sorry he heard in the Island voyage, That the Earl had
brought him to his mercy. To which Sir Walter Raleigh answered, But I trust I
am now quittance With him; which this Gentleman is ready to attest. Besides, in
his Letters written to others, he did ordinarily vpbraid him, That he died
like a Crauen: and in another, That the great boy dyed like a Calfe: And he was
often heard to say, That he died like a fool, and like a coward: So
persecuting his ghost, and insolently trampling in his ashes; that it thence
grew into many men's mouths; That it was better to be a living dog, then a
dead Lion. But a more evident demonstration there cannot be of any thing, then
that an old Warder of the Tower will depose, that he saw Sir Walter Raleigh
the night before the Earls suffering, with his footman only with him, to come
to the Tower, and heard him give strait instructions to the Lieutenant of the
Tower for execution of the Warrant, for that worthy Lords execution, which
shortly followed him. Whether then he for swore not himself even at his death
for publicue applause, about the not plotting the destruction, and not
insulting on the death of that most noble Earl, and excellent Saint of God;
whole Christian humilitic and charity, if Sir Walter had followed, he had not
called his repentance and Saintship so far into question, as now he has
done, and so seditiously have poisoned the hearts of discontented people, nor
so maliciously wounded the reputation of an honest Subject: Who upon just
reason, believing the disloyal and dishonorable words spoken by such a
proud vassal against your sacred person to Monsieur Manourij, as other his
disloyal deeds which he intended against you: That if he had escaped, he was
like to prove as dangerous a Traitor to this Crown, as ever Antonio de Pcres
was to the Crown of Spainc; took them to heart, and performed my best deuoyer
to bring him unto Justice. But whether, I say, he forswore not himself in
these things, I refer my self to them that are better acquainted with the
Tragoedie of that time.

Not to forget in the end, that which he confessed himself unto me and
others, that he took an oath upon the Bible to his Company, which he purposed
to break; which perjury, his Lady has said, was the cause of all his ruin.
And what interpretation can my greatest enemy make of his oath, which
voluntarily he swore unto my self in the Lieutenants dining chamber, the
Wednesday after his commitment; which was, That he loved me as well, as any
friend he had in the world; to which I have substantial witness. But in all
these things he used an aequiuocation, as he does in these things now
concerning me. To which I answer in general once for all, Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton, father to his wife, was thought justly to except against the
testimony of one Vaughan, brought against him, because he was a condemned man:
And may not I then except against the testimonic of Sir Walter Raleigh, urged
against me upon the Scaffold, coming from an Outlaw after Judgment, even in a
case of high Treason? Yet to answer in particular to the points, he says
first; I never did receive advice from my Lo. Carew to make mine escape. And I
do now verily believe he never did receive any such advice, as I ever said to
the Lords: But that Raleigh told it unto Stucley, yea, and that many times, I
will auow it unto death, and take the Sacrament upon it.

To the second; I never named my Lord Hay, and my Lo. Carew, in other words
and sense, then as my honorable friends: amongst other Lords my honorable
friends. That is very true, and I would the rest of his Honorable friends
understood how far he named them, as well as I do. But as ever I believed,
that he did abuse their Honorable names, to seduce me, and to draw me to his
purpose: So did I promise to my self, that some of the chief of them being
joined in the bond either of blood or affinity with me, a poor Gentleman,
would be a comfort unto me in the way of my loyalty, and renounce the
testimony of such a disloyal man, that was never true to any, but to
himself. There is no man's displeasure can further hurt me, then he has
threatened me, That if I revealed the things he told me in private, I should
die for it. And die for this cause I am content, so it be not by an assacinate:
But whenever I die, there shall die your Majesty's faithful and loyal
servant, and one that will part with his blood at as dear a rate as he can.

For the third, concerning the showing of a letter to me about money, his wife
if she were put to her oath, can tell whether it were so or no. But under the
former protestation, I auow it to be true, that he showed me such a letter;
though I think it not true what the letter spoke. I omit his perjury in
swearing he had no design for France; when as Sir John Fearne, and Captain
Penington are able to testify upon their oaths, that he often told them he
had commission to stand them in stead from the High Admiral of France, which
confirms the testimony of M. Mannowry, who saw the Commission at Plimmouth, as
he will deposeit. I urge not his perjury in that Article concerning Sir John
Fearne, that he never had it in his thought to go from Trinidado, to leave his
company: which Sir John Fearn is ready to prove, by the deposition of 60.
persons, that Sir Walter propounded it unto them, whatsoever he intended. And
therefore how this man equiuocates at his death, all the world may see. O
barbarous cruelty, to leave so many gentlemen, when he had secretly heard that
his son was dead, to the mercy of their enemies, without hope or means to
return. Where he also persuaded Captain Penington to go away, who answered
him, he would rather die then lay the guilt upon his soul, of the death ofso
many gentlemen: But if I would, you lately swore you have no money left, quoth
Captain Penington, without which we cannot victual at Virginia; Tut,
whatsoever I swore (said Sir Walter) I have 300. pieces in a corner at a dead
lift; as he confessed also to the Lords that he gave one hundred and fifty
pieces to his company to come home: And how then can that be true, which he
swore at his death, that he carried but 60. pieces with him, and brought home
near the same sum. Certainly perjury was but a Peccadillio with this man,
which he showed also toward me, when he protested that I persuaded him to go
to Sir Edward Parrhams fathers house, which is most untrue: For Sir Walter
Raleigh having a secret intention, which afterward appeared to play the
mountbanke at Salisbury to pretend the taking of a doze of poison, by which he
deceived me first, that by me he might deceive others, which was a most base
unmanly part; thought Sir Edward Parrhams fathers house, whom he thought to be
a Papist, to be a fit subject of suspicion, which he meant to cast upon his
friend, who had so lovingly and worthily entertained us. For, said Sir Walter,
though the Gentleman would not hurt me, yet there might be Priests or
Jesuits there that did it: For I remember after my mornings draught, of a
cup of Ale, which Sir Edward Parrham offered me in the Hall, I felt presently
a kind of excoriation in mine Intralls, as if some Jesuit had been the
Butler. Now when I saw the pustales break out upon him at Salisbury, my
Compassion I confess was too credulous to report from his mouth so much,
wherein I made no lie, but told a lie: Non mentientis astu, sed compassionis
affectu, which has been ill required by him to whom I showed it. But I am
heartily sorry for it, that being so far abused as I was, I should wrong my
true kinsman, which moved me after to no small just indignation against Sir
Walter, who had thus abused us both. When I heard of his often purposes to
escape to mine undoing, to draw him forward to it, which he intended of
himself by making of a lie, Non amore mendacij, sed officij, the rather
because he had inuegled me to hurt my kinsman by telling of a lie, which I
doubt that Divinity would not bear but reason of State, (as the best
Philosophers do hold) does bear it to be lawful to lie for the discovery
of Treason to do service to the common wealth. Yea, but they say, that he
has not left so sufficient a man behind him, and that therefore his death is
a loss to the commonwealth; I doubt much of both. But no man denies, but he
had many sufficie^cies in him: But what were these, but so many weapons of
practice and danger to the State, if he escaped, being so deeply tainted in
so many points of discontent, dishonesty, and disloyalty? He knew, as he writ,
that as in nature, so in policy, A priuatione ad habitum non fit regressio, and
therefore being desperate of any fortune here, agreeable with the height of
his mind, who can doubt, but he would have made up his fortune elsewhere upon
any terms against his Sovereign and Country? No Coriolanus heart could be
more vindicatiue, then he was unto them to whom he did impute his fault. Yea,
but he died most resolutely: Yea, but he was taken most sheepishly. Never was
there man out of the conscience of his own corruption and guiltiness so cowed
at his taking, as he was; trembling and weeping to come before Justice. Yea but
he gathered his spirits afterward, and died resolutely. Even so has many a
Jesuit done at Tyburne; a cancred enemy to God and his Sovereign: But with
this difference, that they died in hope of false Martyrdom, and this with a
desire of a false popular fame.

But he died like a Saint too: He has before very much called his
Saintshippe into dispute by the carriage of his life: We may now judge of it,
by that he did a night before his death, who after his Conferences with the
Deane of Westminster, for his better instruction, and preparation of his soul
for God, called the Keeper of the Gatehouse (Master Weeks) to him, and was
curiously inquisitiue to know, whether he had any Romish Priests under his
charge, and custody, and what they were; but upon his answer (that he had not
any) whether he mistrusted that Master Weeks would not deal plainly with
him, or would not be true unto him, he presently surceased from any further
Inquisition of that matter; which whether it might proceed of an irresolution
in the Religion wherein he professed himself to die, or out of a popular
affectation to insinuate and apply himself to all factions, I leave it to the
censure of the Judicious Reader, and of such as best observed the whole Scene
of his action upon the Scaffold. But to go further, they say he died like a
Soldier and a Saint, and therefore then to be believed, not only against me,
but against the attestation of the State. O wicked times, to say no more! But
my hope is that Religion and the fear of God, and the conscience of our duty
and loyaltic to your Majesty, will sway more with the most and best, by that
time men shall from the State be better informed. Opinionum commenta delebit
dies, veritatis iudicia confirmabit, says Tully. Wherefore I do here make two
most humble petitions to your most excellent Majesty. First, that seeing I
your poor loyal Subject am burdened and oppressed, with the Testimony of a
bitter enemy, of a periurd and condemned man, which is against all reason,
conscience, and law: That I may have your Majesty's leave to the confirmation
of the truth, which I have avowed to be sufficient; to receive the Sacrament
upon it in your Majesty's Chapel. The next is, that your Majesty will be so
gracious unto me, as to suffer a declaration to come forth from the State, for
the clearing of these matters, and further satisfaction of the world: By which
it may appear, that the Justice of God, and the Justice of the King, did never
better meet together in one man: Which my just and humble request, I hope your
Majesty will not deny to

Your Majesty's loyal Subject and Servant, JEWS STVCLEY.

Imprinted at LONDON by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. ANNO 1618.


