THE EPISTLE THAT JOHAN STVRmius, a man of great lerninge and judgment, sent to
the Cardynalles and prelates, that were chosen and appointed by the Bishop of
Rome, to search out the abuses of the church, Translated into english by
Rychard Morysine.

JOHAN STVRMIVS
TO THE Cardynalles and prelates appointed to search out the abusyons of the
church, sends gretyng.
YOUR BOOK written at the commandment of the bishop of Rome, co^teynyng such
things, as ye think make most to the restauryng of religion, being brought
unto us this last month, styred diverse men to speak dyuersely of you. And
all be it I think you ought little to pass, what every man says of these your
deuyses, yet except men wise and learned do allow them, I can not think,
that in any assemble of men mete to sytte in a council, ye can obtain that
you go about, that is to restore the church unto her old state and pristine
dignity. For all be it, all things are to be redressed by good counsel,
which you, being men of such prudencie, may, if ye list, lightly invent,
yet except the learned sort do approve your inuencions, men woll not think,
that ye have found such ways as ar most mete for that purpose. Wherefore for
as much as I am now in those places, and among such men, as prudently judge
of your business, and seeing I well perceived, what men judge of you, I thought
it very convenient, brefely in writing, to show you their sentences, that ye
thereby may perceive, what they allow, what they myslyke, and what they would
have handled after other sort than ye have done. Many hope well both in your
learning and judgment, whom also this new devise of the bishop of Rome,
brings into good opinion, that one day a better agreement may be made betwixt
us. For as long as the bishop of Romes ears were shytte against all
truth, and open to all flatterers, there was no place for medycine to work
in. But now sithe there is a bishop of Rome, which sekethe men, among whom
some ar such as are not wont to flatter, some such as woll not lie, many of
great learning: Certes either now remedies shall be found, to heal the
great and long disease of the sick church, or else it being beaten thus on
every side, weakened, and decayed, woll undoubtedly shortly all together fall.
Those that were in your places before, would acknowledge no fault. They styffely
defended all to be well done, that bishops of Rome had been authors of. This
error is now taken awey by you, which show, not only much hurt and open
ruin of the church, but also confess and acknowledge bishops of Rome to have been thautours of it, which believing in the sayings of flatterers, thought
them selfs lords of laws. This your sentence was very pleasant unto al our
men here, because they hope, even as ye do se, the calamities of religion, the
ruin of honesty, and utter destruction of the church, except remedy be
found, that so ye wol as much as in you lies, stay these grefes, that they go
no further. It is a rare thing and much more than men could hope for, that
there should come a bishop of Rome, which should require his prelates, upon
their oath, to open truth, to show abuses, to seek remedies for the^: so
that if any thing be otherwise agreed upon by you, than right religion may
bear, the fault shall be yours, the bishop of Rome has little here to be
charged withal. Wherefore you that are chosen to so godly and necessary a
thing, ye ought with all mature diligence, to study and labor, that this that
ye have begone, may come to a good end. AND seeing you have the bishops assent
and commandment also, ye ought in no case, to let so godly a thing, to quayle
at your hands. If this bishop continue alive, and be still of this mind, if
it be true that you say, ye lack nothing, but your own good will, to
return many commodyties unto all men of Christis relygion. If he shall
change his mind, yet you se there is a way opened for all men, to enter into
your dispraises, if ye be found thoccasion, that such hope as men are in, be
now quite taken from them. For that that should be so commodious, so wholesome
unto the hole world, ones power given to you to bring it to pass, if ye
list, can not be neglected of you, without your great shame. Wherefore while
it is his will, which bears greattest struck among you, ye must while he
lives, take the time, and let not such occasyons slyppe. By this your
industry, fydelitie, prudence, and virtue, relygion, that is almost fallen,
may be set up again. If for age he be taken from you, yet ye must now make
such foundations, that they which shall be created after him, may not let
slyppe a mattier of such weight, without their great shame. You must provide
that as soon as it may be, good men and well learned in deed, may study for the
redress of the church. In these your labors, ye shall have many that wol be
glad to help you, many princis, many their subiectis, which may make a
just convocation, many many woll be glad to help such as frankely show
their judgments, much rather than those, that bind them self to the
servitude of flattery.

THE authority of councils is decayed long sythens, because they have been
rather called for the satisfyeng of the bishop of Romes appetites, avarice,
and ambition, than for the setting forth of religion. And also such men have
come to it, as would not plainly express such fautes as they knew, but rather
served his turn, unto whom they aknowlege them selfis greatly to be bound. For
how can a bishop of Rome think to be corrected of them, whose liberty he
has taken away? whose wylles and favorable voices, he has won with greatte
rewards and promyses. Wherefore ye think as ye should, where ye say, that a
bishop of Rome ought not to be lawles, under no law, neither that what him
lusts, is lawfulle, but rather that he should lust those things that laws
allow. Here ye have gotten great praise among our men, because ye are the
first of this your order, that durst pronounce it mete for a bishop of Rome,
to keep al such laws him self, as he would have obeyed of the church.

ALSO that that you said next unto this, was spoken of you very prudently,
that no lordshyp is committed to the bishop of Rome, but rather a certain
cure, by the which he may distrybute things in the church, according to
good order: and so that he is rather a curate of such things, than a lord of
them, and that men are committed to his faithfulness and dilygence, he him self
having neither dition ne power above laws, no domynation, ne reign, whereby
he may either change or violate any law. If ye admit this to be true, and
wolle utterly grant us this, a great part of our controversy is taken away,
grantynge us also this, that we did not dissente from you without great and
just causes. For if ye will grant it, to be only a ministration, that the
Bisshoppe of Rome is chargid with, must you not agree to this also, that all
other magistrates in the church, be none other thing, but minysters of dyuine
cures: so that if their ministration be good, and for the wealth of the church,
and according to the laws, they should continue still: if it be unprofitable,
hurtful, if it be full against ye laws, such their honor should be taken away
from them, like as it is commanded in many places of holy scripture.

Wherefore ye added this unto the other very well, that laws ought to continue
ever, and that they might not be taken away, either by any bishop of Romes
privilege, wresting, or indulgence. For if this were laufull, what should be
left untouched in any place, what should be safe and sure, if when will would,
lust may dyspense with law? We see, while bishops of Rome, now of late have
take upon them such dispensations, what windows they opened for tyranny to
crepe in at, for religion to crepe out at. Now where laws be kept, this also
shall remain, that they be made bishops, and teachers of the people of god,
which are known to be learned, to be of great innocence of life, to be of
faith and diligence in doing their duty. For if we wol have the world
amended, we must have the people good, well instructed and taught, they must be
as a field well tilled. Man is well tilled, when he has a good preacher, in
whom is great knowledge, study, and pure mind, without which prechers, neither
the people can be well taught, nor the church flourishe, neither the teachers
own authority be esteemed.

Again, what a goodly thing is it, that ye write of such as commit simonie?
which are so many, that if your sentence may have place, and they removed, as
the law will, which by force of friendship or money, have gotten promotions, ye
shall scrape out many blottes, that now defyle religion, ye shall also with
your ease come to that, that you seek, that is, that mete ministers be made in
the church, ministers laufully created, which should have both lerning and
honest life, always present with their flock, there doing that that saint
Paul and general councils, would a sheparde should do to his flock.

These be the things, that make many of us hope well of you, and think that
ye intend well. It is very new and strange, a thing scase hard of, that me^ of
your order should judge freely. In thassemble made at Nuremberge Adrian, than
bishop of Rome, did aknowlege many such things as ye do now: and all be it
they would his authority should be highest, yet there were very many of other
astates, that could not abide, that he should aknowlege such things to be
true. I pray you is not this even to grant bishops of Rome impunitie of all
that they lust? and yet when they have done worst, to make the^ think it a
shame bishops of Rome to say they have done evil? Wherefore I must speak unto
you Contarene, and you Sadolete, and you Federike Salernitane, and you also
which ar chosen to do this thing, I must call upon you, that you apply this
mattier, and think that at this time it is put in your handis, to restore to
the church both her health and dignity again. If you diligently and faithfully
do as it becomes to you to do, you shall see a flourysshynge common welthe
of Christ. If contrary wise you do it negligentlye, and think rather upon
your own gaynes, tha^ upon the amendment of things amiss, men herafter wol
never seek redress of matters at your hands.

But for as much as I have showed you, wherein your book pleseth many, now I
woll alsoo tell you, what many think wants in it. And here I woll let
certain things pass, which seem very needful to be decyded. yet saying they
are by noughty custom long sythens received, I wol not now much touch them.
I can not see by what reason you can call the bishop of Rome universal
bishop, for as much as saint Gregory, a man vehement, and very desirous to
amplify that dignytie, refused this name, as a voice of Antichriste. Like
reason moved the other.xx. bishops, which were before Gregory, to refuse that
name, all be it the council of Calcedonie gave it them. But let us pass over
this disputation, and give for a season him that now is, so to be called, we
recke not so much what he be called, as that he do such things as become him,
that is, that his power and all his studyes may be converted to the setting
forth of the glory of Christ. Tyranny is much against the setlyng of things,
this title universal bishop brings violence with it, violence brings
destruction of honesti. Wherefore they that be of great wit and honesty, and
can foresee things, would this usurped title, thoccasion of all these hurtis,
were taken away, as a thing very pestilent. This cause moved Pelagius and
Gregory to refuse this name, all be it many good men being deceived, frankely
offered it to them.

Many men are sorry, that in this your devise no mention is made, De doctrina
religionis, which most specially ought to have been entreated of. For to
speak somewhat of this, what people, what city, what multitude of men, in
especial through your dominions, can you find, that is well instructed in
points of religion? God seems never to be more alienate from us, than when we
be ignoraunte in his gospelle, which ignorance has been so great, that not
only the rude people have not known, what is contained in holy scripture, but
also this ignorance has been found in bishops and cardinals of your order.
In so much that we in our time have seen bysshoppes of Rome utterly
ignorant of holy scripture, and all together vntaughte in relygion. For to
let pass Innocentius octauus, and many other like, I pray you Sadolete, what
learning or study in holy Scripture was in Clement the.vii. whom you
wonderfully praise? Can you make any man believe, that knew him, that he had
any knowledge in holy scripture, nay, that he ever thought thereon, to the
end he would either read those things, whereupon our religion is grounded, or
here them declared to him by any other? I think that neither you, nor any
other of those, which knew the facion of his life, can remember, that ever
Clemente for his knowledge, caused at any time a book of scripture to be carried
about with him. Thus while we cloak ignorance, while we say men have that
they have not, while we study to please, often times we assente to their vices,
and give very evil example, by praisynge them that deserve disprayse, and often
times cause those that follow their vices, to think, that their fautes may be
borne, because that by our lies and flatteringes, Clementes vices and such
other are covered. I woll not name other of your order, both men of filthy
life, and utterly unlearned. These examples that you have had before your eyes,
might have exhorted you to speak somewhat of doctrine. I doubt not but you
know, how necessary a thing the knowledge of Christis doctrine is. For if
the mind be stired up with lively teaching, to put full confidence in Christ,
and is after this confidence fulle inflamed with the love of religion,
honesty, and goodness, it is almost necessary all kinds of vices to reygne
there, where no voice instructed with godly sentences is hard, Christ must
needs be unknown there, where his benefits with all his acts lie unspoken
of, which is even in every place, where you have power and rule. What can be
more folisher, than to take Erasmus colloquies, and scolastical disputations
away, leaving unto wicked foul and inueterate custom, the rule of religion,
and for holy things to teach trifles. I say not this, that I much allow the
manner of our disputations, or that I think studies can not be maynteined
without Erasmus dialoges. Schools use many things in our days, that are to be
corrected, eloquence, wisdom, and knowledge in divinity, may well be
attained without such ways as men now use: but yet it greueth me, that ye
omytte things of most weight, ye and most necessary, while you embusy your
selfs about small and tryfelynge matters. How be it we fear that Erasmus
colloquies are not banysshed out of the schools by you, because they hurt
good manners, but rather because they do note many things, which lawfullye
may be reprehended in you. As long as Erasmus was alive, ye could allow his
wrytynges, or at the least ye could keep your selves from reprehendynge
them. But to let these things pass, we must here stycke with you, and say
that ye ought, where as ye so ernestly touch such trifles, somewhat to have
said of this, that in France and Italy the gospel is neglected, fancies and
fables are taught, and ignorance of relygyon taken for best excuse. Who
seethe not, how all things are turned from true to false, from godlynes to
lucre, from best to worste? For what thing can be taught sincerely there,
where superstition is come into the place of relygion, man's philosophy, into
the place of divine wisdom, Socrates for Christ, Aristotle and Plato instead
of holy writers? And yet I would not these things so to be taken, as thowghe I
did dysprayse phylosophie: for this kind of lerning has many commodities in
it, but yet the thing stands thus that except man's mind be guided and led
with divine knowledge, it wandereth out of the right way, gadding hither and
thither, uncertain where it may stand. For as long as the mind is not
constant, which is while ignorance rules, how can men do their duty?

It was meet, ye should have thought somewhat upon these things, and that an
amendment of abuses, is than like to be had, when men's minds are better
instructed in religion. Blindness of wit, and ignorance of goddis word, has
both brought in many evil things, and driven away many good. I see not how
this your way may be defended, except ye think thus, by good ministers, being
ones laufully instituted, true doctrine may be easily restored. Whereof ye
could make no mention in this your devise without great offense of the^, whom
ye take for greattest. But if it be so, that you being sworn to utter to the
bishop such things, as you thought metest to be reformed, can not without
great fear speak of things very necessary, lest ye should alienate those
from you, which bear the great stroke, what hope and trust may we have, that
the old and true ecclesiastical discipline shall be restored again by you?
One of these three things must be true, either ye hate the truth, and so do
dissemble, or else for fear ye dare not utter it, and so keep it down by your
minysters, or else ye minded not the truth. If ye woll say, ye minded not
the truth, ye condemn your self, if ye lay fear for your excuse, we wol
be sorry, that the troth may not come into the light, for popish power and
cruel tyranny. Certes either ye hate truth, or else they be afraid of it,
whom ye have in reverence for their ample benefytes toward you, and whom ye
alsoo fear for the great power they may use against you. Ye can not be
ignorant in this, the hole world knows, that the gospelle of Christ is
taken from your churches. Men would this gospelle were restored again, and
though ye say nay, they woll have it again. Your threttes avail littell, your
priuey watches are not regarded, your turmentes, your fire shall have lyttel
place herafter. The mischefes be openid on the one side, the benefytes on the
other, from the which if ye go about to keep all men, ye must be at war,
not only with men, but with god and Christ also. Our men have no
greatter argument of your fall, than that they see, ye have a vain hope,
utterly to oppress truth: ye seek to do your lusts, by vyolence and
strength, rather than by common counsel and lauful disceptation: ye seek to
abuse kings and their authority, rather tha^ to mayntein your own,
according to the old dyscipline. Ye may so stire up men's stomakes against
you, that except you use less proteruite and stubbernes, than ye have
heretofore, they wol by force of arms seek to oppress this your power. I pray
god I be deceived in thus prophecienge. I pray god that concord and
conformity of minds may rather make a peace and tranquillity, than men be
driven to amend things by strength and manslaughter.

I pray the Contareyn, the Theatine, the Sadolete, the Friderike, I beseech you
for the learning, prudencie, industry, and virtue that is in you, look upon
the calamities, which do afflict the commonwealth of Chrystendome, bring
equity with you, use indifferency, which is very necessary in things thus
troubled. You Sadolete do lay many things to our charge falsely in your
dialogues. Surely but that I think ye do it rather upon ignorance and falls
persuasion, than by judgment, I see not how you can excuse this your fact,
if good men be judges betwixt you and us. We do not aknowledge such fautes to
be in us, as ye charge us withal, we take all men to wytnes, that judge truly.
We doubt not but they wol say our doctrine lacks such fautes as ye find in
it. If you come to judge with this opinion in your heed, condemnynge our
writings before you se them, we can not give you the praise of equity, of
good doctrine, of faithful handlynge of things, of godlynes, which al we
wyshed to be in you. The unworthy handlynge of things carries me away, sorrow
troubles me, doloure causes me to write somewhat more sharply than mine
intent was: and yet who lusts truly to judge, shall find this to be an
admonition of one that coueteth to show him self a citesin of Christis commonwealth, ennemie to no man, enemy to nothing, vice only excepted. We strive not
with you for any matter of our own, We contend not with you for your
possessions, which I and ours grant you without any envy, we do not contend
ne desire, that you be put down. We seek not, that your power utterly be
taken from you: My desire is, with all the rest of our sort, that the
congregations authority may stand fast, we labor, that if we shall leese
all, that yet we may keep the doctrine of the gospel, for the teachinge of
goddis people, that they being heirs with Christ, may know their fathers will
by Christ. every man would his last will were known to his heir, let
Christ have such liberty with us, let his testament and last will,
containing in it nothing but words of life, sentences declared by goddis own
voice, left unto us as witnesses of his assured promises, declari^g the just
title that we have to our inheritance, let this be taught unto all men.
Wherefore good men do require, that you take more head of goddis doctrine,
which as it has made them much better than they were, or without it, could
have been, so they think it may and wol work like effect in all other after
this. If you woll keep such richesse, power, and possessions, as ye have, our
desire is, that you so keep them, that men may perceive, ye have them to the
amplifieng of religion, and setting forth of the glory of Christ.

Now what say ye of the sacraments and ceremonies of the church? Is not the
use of them al wonderfully defiled? and yet ye think no remedy is to be
invented for the abolysshynge of their fylthy abuse. No, no, you hold your
peace, as though this part of Relygyon were very clean, no fault to be
found in it. To speak somewhat de Eucharistia, have you not perverted the use
of this sacrament, with ye name also? For where as it was first instituted, as
a thing to lift up men's hearts unto hope and faith, and profited none but
such as took part of it, you have made it a solitary and a private work, or
at the least ye have yielded so much to the covetousness of priests, that they
have of a frank and free communion, made it a fair marchandyse, and their
prayers very salable by it, in so much that we be come to that point now,
that a great sort of men think, the mass can do more for us than Christis
death. This also is taken for truth, that though men do not correct their
life, neither absteyn from their wickedness, yet these holy and anointed
merchants may obtain forgyuenes of sins for them: And that the authority
of this institution should be counted the greatter, they think that even the
very heryng of mass is of great momente to swage the anger of God, and to
mitigate the pain due for sin, not only paste, but also for those that they
purpose in their mind to do. And we both by holding our peace, and also in
very deed do allow the same abuse, which is brought in against the institution
of Christ, the use of the apostels, contrary to the custom of our
forefathers, against the express words and mind also of the laws. And that
this abuse might continue the longer, and not be perceived, mass by the
ennemie of god has been brought into Italye, France, Germany, Spain, to be
said in latin, which often times is not understand of the priests them
selfs, much less of the poor men that stand about it, being laborers,
workmen, nothing less than seen in latin. Again the priests eat alone
that that many should eat of, the death of our lord, and very lord is not
there declared nor showed to the people. They bring men into a certain fear
and consternation of mind, they labor not, that men may have a true
confidence in Christis promise, they study not, that by the memory of
Christ, our hope should be increased, our charity and love toward god and
our neighbor augmented, but endeavor them self as though it were with
certain iugglynge castes, to bring the people from right Judgment.

Now as the solemn use of this sacrament is defourmed, so many other
ceremonies are perverted. Images which at the beynnynge were set up only for
to make us remember things absente, are now highly worshipped. At the first
men did but look upon them, now they fall upon their knees before them, they
pray to them, and are many solemn peticions of them, they trym up their bones
with gold, they set up their sepulchers, they find stocks, before the which
men's minds, while they worship that they ought not to worship, are poluted.
Scase the Egiptians were so folish in their religion, as we be in ours, which
have a certain facyon prescribed unto us of god. We think god chaungethe his
will, as the time is changed. We think we may set up graven Images, cast
images, and painted stocks, we have imagined saint Christofer, to be much
holyer than Abraham or Iosue. The Jews could not worship Moses as a god, we
may bow and knele to saint Damyans image. We think we honor them very
little, except we give unto them, part of our goods and inheritance.

What should I say of your indulgences and pardons? as their name is new, so
the thing is fainid, vain, and very foolyshe. What shall I say of your penance,
that you are wont to enioyn such as confess their fautes? are they not false,
perverse, inverted rather for lucre and tyranny, tha^ for thamendement of his
life, that seeks remedy? Ye think all such as in deed seek for salues to
cure the diseases of sick souls, worthy to be hurlyd out of the church: ye
condemn them of heresy, which do what they can, to bring in pure religion
again: ye say they take away the light of religion, which go about to
purge ceremonies: ye say, that they ryfle thautoritie of the church, which go
about to confirm it. Would god our intentes and your thoughts, could be laid
before men's eyes: truly we shall not have the assente of other nations, before
your deeds be so opened, that they may not only be perceived, but also seen
with men's eyes. For I pray you, what thing else do you, than under the
color of correctinge of a few things, go about to recover your usurped
authority, justly taken from you by certain nations? what coueit you more,
than that you may distroy them, whose industry, faith, constancy, and love
of religion hitherto withstand your appetites. Certes you might lightly bring
this to pass, if you could call such a council, as the council of
Constancy was. Men do not meruayl, that there be a few things in this your
deliberation, which may seem to show a certain simplicity, and a good mind
toward religion. For great myschiefes are to be shadowed, under the image of
virtue: men that have judgments be sorry to se you so busye in maynteynynge
vain ceremonies, and to pass over true doctrine, as a thing not worthy to
be regarded. I pray you, how greatte a thing is hit, or to what purpose,
that you speak of relygiouse men's apparayle? Our forefathers took it for a
great shame, that religion should be tried by this cote, or that cote, by this
color or that color. Do not those rules of monks, which are ascribed to
saint Augustine, saint Francis, saint Benedicte, forbid notable facions of
garments in a solitary relygion, and count religion to stand in good life
and honest manners, nothing less than in coules and kyrtelles? Your ceremonies
be as acceptable unto God, as the fastings of the Jews were unto Christ. O
cruel devotions, in which when people ar ones intanglid, thereto allured,
either by falls superstition or folly, there is no hope to get out of that
dungion, wherein because a man falls without consyderation or aduysement, he
loses all liberty, and can not return to the state and dignity that nature
set him in, to the which god calls him, where also he might do more good to
the common weal, than he now can, being in bondage and servitude. What
step of religion remains among monks, since ye brought them to certain
devotions against their will, to certain ceremonies that can not be ended, but
when life departs? How many of those points shall ye find in monks now
adays, that sayncte Augustine and Chrysostom do require in monks? Those
that God calls to teach his people, ye shut up within cloister walls,
among an ydel sort of men. they that might do good in the common assembles of
their cou^treye, after ye have ones made them religious, may have nothing to do
with the common welthe. such as nature has given quickenes of wit, love
toward letters, study and time to attayn knowledge, those you ioyn with such as
neither love learning, nor them that be learned. Our forefathers did institute
this monkysshe life, because they would have men holy, learned, fytte to serve
their country, and not that they would them to tarry perpetually in a corner
sole, doing good to no body. Would god you could bring monasteris to their
right use agein. How many flourishynge commonweals should you than see? What
plenty of goodly wits? what copy of good and learned men? You lack nothing
to thestablysshinge of high tranquillity and wealth, but a good will to give
honest counsel. But there be two things, which bear a great stroke in all
mattiers, and they both are against you in this contencion, Known truth,
and Life worthy comme^dation, For the way that ye have inverted, in forbiddinge
priests marriages, can not be commended in men that live so fleshly, as
priests now adays do. It is foolysshe, and much again reason, that you
would the decrees of a few later popes to be kept, and the constitutions of
the Apostelles, and also the decrees made in the cou^cill at Nece to be broken.
For all be it after this Councille, there were new laws made, which plucked
from the clergy their wives: Yet were there some nations that kept their
hold, and would not let things be taken from them, that they saw nature
required, and our forfathers allowed. At the last, Gregory the.vii. came,
which by violence stirring up much contention, utterly forbadde priests to
marye. But Pius the second spoke much more godly, which was wont to say,
that there were great causes to pluck wives from priests, but yet much
greatter causes to give them wives again. If ye had followed this man's
saying, as ye ought, ye should have done much better service to the bishop
of Rome, than ye do now. For you se, what great hurt we have thereby, and how
the church is spotted with the wanton and filthy pleasures of priests: which
things we can not forgette, yet they may, if you woll, with the consent of
good men, be taken away, and the old custom restored.

These be the things that make our men, whose special care is, to se religyon
flourysshe, to think as they do of you. For where as ye say the bishop of
Rome is not a lord of things, but a dispenser: where ye would the canons and
decrees to be perpetual, not ones to be made, and after broken: where you take
away simonie, where ye require mete ministers, they highly allow it, and much
desire yt ye think as you say. For they that look ernestely upon your
devises, are affrayde, because they se you pass nothing of true doctrine,
because you suffer the use of sacramentis to be peruertid, because they see you
occupied in things partly light, partly false, because they see you
carefulle for relygiouse cotes, for priests marriages, and litelle or nothing
to study by what means the great sores of the church may be healyd, but
rather to search ways to dispatche al such as in any point go about to bring
you to the doing of your duty.

Furthermore as al these thingis that you write of, if they come oone by one,
be either vain, wicked, or falls, so if they come all together, they be such,
as in our time can not be brought to pass. For it can not be suffered, that
ye most desire, that is, they may not be judges, that are most worthy to be
accused. For seeing you wol thauctorite to be theirs, that are now chief and
principal in the church, which if the ancient laws might florishe and have
place, should have littel or no power at al, what thing shall we hope for, to
be ryghtely decreed of you? There be many, which partly by succession of great
inheritance, partly by the benefittes of kings and princis, are so auaunced in
wealth and riches, so corrupted in manners and life, that they can in no wise
sustain your correction: they may disanull your sentence very well,
forasmoche as you woll all judgment and authority to be in them. They wol not
forsake the trade of their life, used now a long season, avarice woll not let
them, ambition will not suffer them, their other fantasies and pleasures can not
abide an honest reformation which fancies no man living can take from them,
nor redress, except it be by death or vyolence.

Wherefore except you grant us to have mete and convenient iuges, that may
bring with them to the council, truth, and liberty, to say as they shall
think, ye shall neue^ amend things amiss in the church. For like as
CHRIST did not commytte the amendment of the Synagoge to the Priests and
Pharisees thereof, but to the Apostelles and his mynisters, as our forefathers
did not commytte Relygyon to the collegyate priests of Greece, or of Rome, but
unto them, which were confyrmed by the goodness and might of god: so ye ought to
commytte the common welthe of Christ, to such as can be content to use their
dignity to the setting forth of honesty and relygion, and not to such as
abuse their office, to the defacyng of troth, Relygyon, and all godlynes. Ye
cast those out of your Church, which note your vices, and those that have
most need of all to be corrected, ye make arbytrours and iuges. Is this any
other thing, than to let old rotten bows grow stylle, and to pluck up the
young plants that now begin to spring in grounds more fertile tha^ yours
is? I say not this, that I would men should think, I iuged none among you to
favor the troth, or that at least there be not some of your side, which
would religion were redressed: but I speak it, because ye woll such to have
authority, as should, if laws might have their places, if canons might bear
the stroke, if symonie were taken away, if fytte and true minysters were
ordained in the church, not only change their manners, but also leave their
astate and kind of living.

The bishop of Lege, a man of the same place that ye are of, very covetous,
very cruelle, and nothing learned, is (as ye know) departed: ye have many
such monsters with you at this present time, in the court of Rome. I wol not
name the^ that be alive, I speak of that holy bishop, because it is well
known, what he was: If ye give men of his sort license to judge, and make
such decrees, as they would were made, you may be assured, they wol never
admytte yours, neither any other, that shall be ought worth. Wherefore men
think, that you have taken upon you this consultation in vain: They fear ye
cast them in a vain hope, you do so surely, except this kind of judges be
rejected, and such chosen as love much more the commonwealth, tha^ their
private commodities.

But now let us come to this, that ye say of the bishop of Rome, you woll
three things to be in him. First, that he be bishop universal, second, that
he be bishop of Rome, Third, that he be a prince and lord of certain frank
cities and common welthes. Of these three we grant him but one, that is, to be
bishop of Rome: for this is his function, this is his office, and this alone
appertained unto him as long as Christis doctrine flouryshed: the other twain he
has and does usurp arrogantly, much against the word of god, and far
contrary to the aunciente custom of the apostels. But where as many things
ought to be corrected among you in your own consistory, of what one I pray
you, do you admonyshe the bishop of Rome? wherein do you rebuke him? Do you
lay anything to his charge for the treadyng down of Christis doctrine? Do you
write any thing of his ambition, any thing of his corrupt and vicyous
manners, any thing of such shameful and abominable crimes, as can not
without greatte grief be named, nor thought upon without much offense of
chaste minds? ye speak of priests garments, and of the horedome of Rome,
here ye make a great complaynte, here ye be long and very copious: but of the
deprauate use of the Sacrament, you speak never a word. If ye suffer these
abuses in Rome, What shall such nations do, as oonely fear your name, and
can not here your voices, being far from you, nor be taught, your
negligence being so greatte as it is? What shall we think you wol do in other
matters, when in a thing most weighty and necessary ye be so negligent? For
where as that sacrament was instituted by god, not invented of men, taken from
above, not given us for a season, left with us from the beginning, hallowed,
not boughte, sent us from god, not gotten by favor of men: a thing not to be
other wise used, than it was first ordained fore, a very gift, and given to a
certain end: Do not we worse than yuel, by our crafts to change and convert
it to disceytefull merchandise, to let no man be parttaker of it, but such as
pay, and such as believe the spots of the soul, be washed away therewith,
such as believe the grefe of conscience is taken away by it? It has chanced
in this thing, as it lyghtlye does in all other, Those that are best, are
soonest brought out of order. This, because it comes not under the eye of man,
but is comprehended alone by thought and cogitation, may be lightly stayed,
stopped, and altered, by false persuasion, which the rude multitude, dotynge
age, and long custom, often times bring men unto. If the will of god, were as
sone perceived in a man's heart, as the fire is, when it is put unto any part of
the body, we might care the less to seek the right knowledge of god. No man
cries, but when he is peined. But for as much as we have need of quyckenesse
of wit, industry, and diligence, we do very yuel to think no part of the
body of Christ diseased, where many parts are sore sick: worse, to be
negligent in redressynge and curing of them, where good men have openid their
diseases unto us. In your counsel ye disclose certain little soores, but the
root of them, which be in those members, without the which life can not
continue in the body, you speak nothing of, neither ye do mark, that the
very bloudde of the church and body of Christ, is corrupted, the liver
infectid, the heart and the brain diseased, and the lu^ges tendynge to
putrefaction. For as the body of man can not continue without bloudde, without
the liver, without the heart and the lounges: so the relygion of Christ is by
and by lost, where as true doctrine, good intent, good mynisters, and the
right use of religion is not. If ye wol restore again the right use of such
ceremonies, as be not contrary to Christis laws, if you woll suffer every man
to have knowledge of the gospel, if you woll grant, that men may be laufully
assembled together: if you wolle make good rulers in the church: we wol join
with you, ye shall find nothing in us that ought to grieve you, we wol forget
all old grudges.

You deem wrongefully of us, where you think, that we would have all
ceremonies taken away: For when we saw the most part of them very naught,
we retained still the necessary, and threw away the naughtye: and yet we are
in deuysinge, which of the rest we may keep or amend. For this I know
assuredly, more reverence is borne among us to the sacramentis of the Altar
and Baptism, thanne is in those places, where your customs are yet
maynteined. Our holy days are so well appointed, so bestowed in honest
vacation, that they may be more than comparid with yours. And seeing that all
these things be foul out of order, not only in other places, but also in Rome
at the bishops nose, it were your duty to set them forth to be amended.

But thus far we have spoken of the bishop of Rome, why do you speak nothing
to prove him a prince as ye call him? where has he right to usurp states in
common welthes? By what right has he Rome, Rauenna, and other cities, by
whatte right has he mynished the emperors power? It is a holy point to take
the charge and rule over wydowes, and fatherles children, and to maynteyne
their goods in safety: and yet the law woll not, that men of the clergy
meddell with the one or the other, though it be a thing very necessary. Now if
the law wol not suffer them, to meddel with the ordering of pryuate men's
goods, wol you, that he take upon him, to rule a hole comminalte, which is
expressly forbidden, as a thing not lauful for him that rulith ye church. And
though it were not forbid by the laws: yet because it is not mete, that one
manne shall rule in so many matters, in so many places so far a sonder, you
like prudente men should have counsayled your bishop, to have employed the
most part of his care, in the redressynge of Christis religyon among his
people. It is yet fresh in memory, what wars, what manslaughter, what ruin
has ensued, since bishops of Rome have taken upon them, to be kings and
lords of states. If ye will still maynteyne and keep his authority hoole and
sound, ye must scrape out these blottes, by holy gouernyng of goddis people,
and increasynge of true religion. It is not inoughe for you to have kings to
fight in your quarrel, that you may reign continually, and reteyne stylle your
might, strength, and power: except you fulfylle those things, that ye
profess, except ye restore again Christis religion in those cities, where ye
have cast it out, except your life be such, as Christ requires, except ye
intend nothing, but that that good men allow, except you can procure the
favor of god by other means than ye have done hitherto, except ye do this,
ye shall se shortly, that they, which now mainteyn you, wol endeavor them
selves to pluck you down to your confusyon. Ye can never make the name of
Luther so hated, but that when your falshod is known, the troth woll appear.

Thus have I brefely showed, what men that can judge of religion may allow,
and what they mislyke, in your dyuysynge together: Now shall I shortly show
you, what men also se lackinge in you, to the gyuinge of good counsel in
things amysse. First to make a perfect work, and to redress that, that is
amiss, the chief fundatio^ and rote of all must be, the true knowledge of
scripture, of this ye should have spoken and admonysshed the Bishop of Rome.
This knowledge is utterly depraved and not had. For where so ever be no teachers
of the gospel, there man's mind can not be lift up unto God, nor have no
perfect affiance in his promyses. And without this affiance, we have no hope
of salvation. Therefore for as much as among you, saints merits are more
esteemed, then the voice of Christ: priests disceytfull ceremonies more than
true prayer, popes pardons and absolution more than the promise of god:
temporal pain of the body, more then the amendment of the life: it shall well
appear, that neither true religion is taught in your churches, neither
steadfast affiaunce in Christ is, where you teach, neither known, which way
health of soul may be gotten. Learning enters into the heart by the ears,
and some things are taught (as saint Austen judges) by ceremonies, as well
as by words. Both these are necessary to be had in the church: but where
as your facion of teaching is naught, and your ceremonies deprauate, ye shall
never build a strong edifice upon so yuell and weak a fundation. For though
there be some ceremonies almooste as necessary as teaching, yet if they be
not well used, they do much hurt, and often times hinder very much true
relygyon.

I see well inoughe, how hard it were to make men of your side to grant
this to be true, that I say. For when the judgment is ones corrupted, and
their manner of living contrary to Christis teaching: it is not possible, that
goddis doctrine and good lyuinge should be restored by them, as long as they
love to live as they do. They can not be entreated to be so much against them
selfs: and yet saying Christ woll have it so, force must extort of them, that
they ought freely to grant us. For it can not be denied (the most part of men
perceive it al ready) that Christ neded not to have come hither and dyed for
us, if we might or may opteyne heaven by masses, by our good deeds, and other
ceremonies. Adimantus, an hethen man, as PLATO records, knew well inoughe,
that nothing could opteyne the favor of god, but only justice and good
living: and that no man could live well, but he that knew, that god is, and
that god cares for us, and is ryghtefull judge over all our works, and looks
not for Sacrifice, but for cleanness of mind. And therefore, he refused and
disalowed the opinion of them, that thought a man, which had done his
neighbor wrong, might by sacrifice apeise the wroth of god, no mendes made
to the party that had received the wrong.

In this ye se, that we, having the laws of god, perceive scase so much, as
gentiles did by the light of nature: we scase se, that where as the heart is
not truly fyxed in god, there is neither love, ne reverence toward him: But
truly where as these two be not, there auailith another sacryfyce, ne none other
ceremonye. Where as the knowledge of god is, there is love, there god is
honored, there the heart desires nothing contrary to goddis will, but
refers all his acts and deeds, to his pleasure and commandment. For it
can not be, that men be void of all affections, as the Stoikes mente, it can
never be, except it be in a christen man, whose mind being inspyred, and
always ruled by god, does nothing, that may show any affection to be in him,
nothing that may hurt him, or any other his neighbor. These philosophers
saw, that a man ought to master all affections: yet they them self could
never atteyne to it. Why? because they knew not god. For seeing all thing is
corrupted in us by nature, we being naturally inclyned to all manner of
Concupyscence, if Christ be not showed and preached unto us, by whom we
receive health from god, all our thoughts must needs be troublesome,
dangerous, and naught, all our endeavor tends to our own profit, and
seeks little the knowledge and honor of god. Christ therefore must be taught,
which gives us quietness of heart, and forgyuenesse of sin, which alone
coud and has delivered mankind from the pain dew for his trespases.

Wherefore first and foremost, the Bishop of Rome should have been put in
remembrance hereof. Seco^daryly, because there be few, that teach well, they
would be diligently sought out, that are able to fake the office of a preacher
upon them. But now adays, ye do not only not pass of them that preach
well, and have done so, long sythens, ye do not only not pulle them to you,
but you flee from them: ye do not only not aid them, but you keep them in
chains: ye reteyne them not in towns, but ye exile and banysshe them: ye
deliver them not out of danger, but ye most iniustlye and cruelly slay them.
What other thing is taught in our churchis, but that all writings, all
ceremonies, should tend to teach men knowledge, to show them, that all men's
nature is corrupted, and that by the death of Christ we are delivered, and by
him have we opteyned forgyuenes of sin and bliss everlasting. It is falsely
reported of us, that we discourage men from doing good works, falsely feyned,
that we intend to break all good order and ceremonies. And what a cruelty is
this of you, while we go about to put down all those things, that can not
stand with Christis teaching, whiles we study to reyse and set up again the
true ceremonies, whiles we fetch in agein the true trade and old fasshion of
preaching, what cruelty is it, to offer us the galowes, burning, and such
other most terrible peynes? Greeks of old time were never so cruel (albe it
they offered for sacrifice, to their falls goddis, men alive) as ye be to us in
your punishme^tes. This cruel manner of punysshement causes us to think, that
it is impossible for you to judge uprightly of our matters. And all be it that
after so many books made by us, ye might have been well satisfied, instructed,
and taught, what mind we bear to Chrystis relygion: yet how yuel so ever
you think of us, ye should have minded a council general, and such as good
men might have been called to, of whose good life and good learning, there
might appear sufficient testimony. And forasmoch as in a general concill,
there ought to be no suspityon, either of cruelnes or of forcynge of any man,
there would have been chosen such a place, where as all men might have resorted
to gether, and freely have spoken their minds, and also where such might have
been kept out, such I say, as for their naughtye life, and ignorance of
scripture, for their symonye and other vices, no law woll admytte to meddel
with matters of the church. For if they may not be suffered to speak in
matters, that chance daily, much less they ought to be hard in such a
solemn assemble, specially at this time, where as al things are ruffled in
the church, and very few things are in good order. Among so many bishops as
are in Almain, there is not one, that ought to be hard there, if the old
canons might be restored to their old vigor and strength. In France there
be but few, and yet more than be in Almayne. Of Italy I can say nothing.
ENGLAND is aloone perelesse, wonderfullye amended: ENGLAND may be a mirror,
a guide, a teacher, an exaumple to all the rest.

There be many among you, that cry and say, that no man ought to have a
voice in the general cou^cill, but they alone that are of the clergy: and of
these ye take not the best learned, but woll that greattest in dignity, have
the chief suffragies: whose sayings if they be allowed, if good living and
good lerning be not regarded, what good can come of councils? Therefore in this
point ye should have moved the bishop of Rome, to opteyne of kings, and of
all nations, honest men, men well learned, men of holy conversation: that
general councils thereby might recover again their old authority, in truly
defyninge of matters, which thing councils of late have lost with a great
shame. And this most specially must be forseene, that their judgment be
not allowed, which say, that men of Luthers sect ought therefore to have no
audience in the council, because they have broken the decrees of councilles:
For hitherto no man could prove that saying true. And I say more, No
councilles are of any valor, or ought to be kept, but they, wherein nothing
is decreed, contrary to the wrytynges of the apostels. Their books, that you
call Lutherans, bear sufficient record, that they have written nothing
contrary to the honor of Christ, nor the mind of thapostels, nor yet
against ancient councilles: which ought to be as a rule for us, their after
comers. If ye wolle, that the church flouryshe, and the flock of Christ
prospere and increase plentuousely, Take away all gay, high, and honorable
titles, set lower yuel gotten honor, let frauds and gyles have no place, let
good living be preferred, have respect to right knowledge, put hereunto
dilygence, things can not but amend. No men may bring this to pass better
tha^ you, none shall have more praise of wisdom, or greatter profytte thereof,
than ye. You shall than be in high reputation, if by your diligence and virtue,
the world be brought to live well and godly. What honest life can there be,
where as religion is distroyed, and where good ceremonies ar clean misvsed?
What pleasure, where as is so great debate and discord? Here ones again
Contarene, I beseech the for thy great lerninge, and so do I the Frederike,
bishop of Salerne, for the honor that thou haste had by refusyng to be a
cardynal. I beseech and pray the also Sadolete, for the honor that thou have
had by lerning I beseech you all, which are deputed to debate these things,
that through you the old manner of learning may be restored, the old Canons
have their place again, and that the naughty and peruers use of ceremonies by
you may be amended. You ought in no wise to let this occasion slyp your
hands, if you be desirous to further Christis religion. For it is nothing so,
as you fear that it is: you think it impossible, that we should agree with
you: you think, that no communication between you and us, can bring us to an
unity and concord: because men of a long time have said, that we take away
all ceremonies, and that we woll suffer you to have nothing, which has been
instituted sith the apostels time. This report as touching the ceremonies, we
say, is a false lie, and so we prove it by our deed. For where as there be three
sorts of ceremonies: one, which is necessary, we mayntein most ernestly: an
other, which is contrary to goddis laws, we can not abide: as for the
third, our mind is to use a moderation. For if there be any good order at all,
which saint Paul commands us to have, for the mayntenance and confirmation
of that feyth, which we ought to yield to god and Christ, this same must needs
remain in ceremonies necessary, and in those that are moderated. Surely they
that wolle maynteyn those ceremonies, that are falsely feyned, and contrary to
goddis law: either they do not understand, what the truth requires, or else
for their own private weal, they wolle not suffer a necessary reformation to
be had. And for because Sadolete, ye do not perceive the difference, that we
put herein, ye accuse us, and bear men in hand, that we would have no man
better than other, that we would no resort of people should be to churches, no
knelynge, no singing, no sensyng should be in the temples, that we would the
universal church were subverted, so that if your authority were ones taken
away, we might do every thing at our pleasure without any reproach. We be
content with all ceremonies, that in any wise be conformable and agreinge to
our religion. Yea this also we permytte, that what so ever does not defyle
our religion, should be left to the determination of a general council:
They be no trifles, that make us to refuse your authority, usurped power, and
naughty censures. Sadolete, I would have you show, what councils took upon
them to talk of this popish and priestly apparayle, that you write of.

For holy days Sabbatius a Jew did his part, he caused strife and trouble: and
for the same matter there was variance between Policrates and Uictor: But you
know, that Irineus greatly mysliked their discord, because that diversity
either in holy days or fasting days breaks not the bond of relygion, ne of
Christis feithe. What does saint Augustine in his letters to January? Does
he not even the same that we require? He requires a mean in ceremonies. Does
he not also lament, that the burdeyn of ceremonies be more heuye unto us, than
ever were any to the Jews? What would he do now, when all thing is done for
the serving of men's appetite, for ambition, and for desire of lucre?

Against such foolysshe trifles what I pray you says Esaias, what Ieremias,
what Amos the prophets? Esaias forsawe these ceremonies, and these yuell
customs, he saw, that vain vanity should follow the destruction of the
Jews, which he shows expresselye: and yet we make as though we read of no
such thing.

Herein I se not what you can lay against us, more than the authority of
the canons, and the church, whose authority we would were safe, and in full
strength. But this must alwais be one special point in the laws of the
church, that prestes live well and teach well, that they be present and abide
upon their benefices, and that all they be deposed, which have gotten any
thing in the church by money. Neither he should have any benefice with
cure, whom the court carries from it, or he that leaves his flock, and
follows an hawk, prickynge to the partrige instead of preaching to his
parysshe. For as long as these things are suffered unpunished, how is it
possible relygion to be kept, and ceremonies vnabused? For let the least part
be ones mysvsed, and the rest can not long continue safe. But you woll not
touch the diseases, that ye were set to seek fore: another ye woll suffer the
partis soore grieved, to be healed. Ye esteem more the smooke of the sensars,
bowynges and crouchynges, more the apparaylle that men go in, than ye do the
knowledge of right religion, or the fear of god, or his honor: where as in
deed, these things are of necessity, and the other for the soul health
nothing at all. Never the less they may in some case be suffered, and are
tolerable: but these that I shall now rehearse, can another be wynked at, another
defended, as not to aknowlege the abuse of the sacrament of the altar: and the
abuse of ceremonies, as that monks and pristes have liberty to live unchaste
and uncleanly: and those that endeavor them selfs to amend it, to be
troubled, ye and iuged of you unworthy to be in the company of good men. We are careful and sorry for this perverse judgment: we go not about to break the
ceremonies, specially those, that may stand with Christis relygion, we promise
you to keep them still: only do you this for your part, see that those
thniges be restored, without the which, neither the dignity of the church,
another the authority of Christis name can continue.

Now here I wol come unto an other point, that much lets our agreement. Ye
complain greatly, that we be over stubborn and rude, and that we intend to
destroy al jurisdiction, and to take away all riches from the church. This
you say, may not be suffered. For it is an aunciente custom, that noble men,
that come of great stocks, be honorably promoted: from whom so great
commodities can not be taken away, without high displesure, and great danger.
If this be the worste, we shall lightly be delivered from great grefe and
trouble, and shortly be joined with you. For seeing there be three sortis of
men in the church, that rule: one of them mete to teach: an other, mete to
mainteyne the power and riches of the church: the third, which sometimes
has both the things aforesaid, and yet is mete for ner another. If you will
be content to reiecte the last sort, and suffer the other two to be severed
and divided distinctly the one from the other, I trust all strife and grudge
between us, shall be by those means quite abolyshed, and clean forgotten. For
you require in the minysters of the church good life and learning. Let us have
such as be able both for their learning, and for their living, to govern the
people, put a difference between them, and the other that have in their
governance the goods of the world, and of the common weal: do this, and we
trust sone to have an end of all matters, that we can not now agree upon, or
at the least wise a greatter moderation of our grudges and stryfes. There be
some me^ of great blood, which woll be ashamed of the gospel: and there be some,
that faithfully woll keep the goods of the church. No man can make tyrants
believe, that it is more honor, to be loved and honored of their subjects,
than to be feared of them. But it were a shame for any christen man to think,
that it were a higher dignite, to have great power and might, tha^ to profess
the gospel, in such wise as may stand best with godly living. We are moved by
authorite of many great wise men, to set an order between these two sorts.
To let pass saint Augustine, ^omil. 98 ^n Matt.
saint Ambrose, and other perfect bishops, did not Chrisostom, before a
multitude of an hundred.M. me^, in a sermon, grievously lament, that bishops
were taken from the cure of their church, and ocupied in money matters?
Thapostels also put a difference between the office of bishops and decons.
These two sorts had never be^ sondred, but yt they inspired by god, did se
before, that at one time or other, some would refuse to keep these orders,
taken by them. But peradventure some me^ wol say, noble me^ have given great
riches to the church, it is convenient, yt their posterity be sonest p^ferred
unto the same. First noble men are not forbid, neither to profess the gospel,
another to have the governance of money and cites. If there be of them, that be
unmeet to have ye one or the other, there be laws, that wol such to be
regarded, as come of those ancestors, that first enriched this or that
church. Finally al riches would be so disposed, that none lack, and an order
taken after every persons degree and sort, which order must so long be kept,
as religion take no hurt by it: an equal and a convenient distribution should
be made to men of every degree. We may lack riches in Christis church, but if
we be spoiled of true doctrine, than of necessytie we are destitute of all
relygyon. Therefore we woll not strive with you for riches: we require to have
Chrystis doctrine, we desire to have true ministers, we wyshe ernestly to have
a free councille in a safe place, where me^ may speak boldly, whither good men
and well learned may be called, where the naughty and ignorant persons shall not
be admytted as iuges and chief doers. If you grant us these things, and wol
also help us in them, we woll not meddell with great men. And yet as we woll
not willingely give them the riches of the church, that be of great power: so
if they woll needs have them, we wol not greatly stick therein. If they desire
to have gold and riches, and the governance of commonweals, we wol not
strive with them: for we seek not for such things, no no, when all this that
ye seek is taken a way, the church remains still: so that Christis learning
do remain and the gospel florishe. Sacrilege is a shameful deed, and worthy
great punishment: and against this many laws be made: certainly it is a kind
of Sacrilege, not to dispense the goods of the church to the^ that be nedy.
And they that do not distribute them in this wise, do veraye naughtily. True
it is, that at this hour the goods of the church be meruaylous great and
abundant, we would have them well dysposed, but we would in especial have the
disposition and distribution of them committed to the prechers of the gospel,
and ministers of the church. If they that be rulers, rule the church well, we
ought to rejoice at the common profit of christen men: but if they rule not
well, and can not be amended by power, we ought to be sorry. Never the less, we
may not take the matter so grievously, that men think, we would rather have our
part of the riches, than se the gospel go forward. Therefore let us be at a
point for the teaching of the gospel, for the sacraments, and for the
ceremonies: and we wol never strive with you for the riches, which we were
better to lack than that for them Christis glory should be hindered. I se,
there lacks nothing, to bring us to a perfect peace, if ye wol put a part
al displesure and hatred. Ye, not redyng our books, have withdrawn your hearts
from us, ruled by the report of them, that love us not. And so you believe,
that we intend to distroy al good ordinances. And on the other side, because
we are put in fear by many examples, we can not yet, but suspect and think,
that you intend not a true and an ernest reformation of the church. If that,
that we mean and go about could synke into your heedes, if we had some certain
assurance, and good token of your diligence and unfeigned faith, we should be,
both out of much trouble, and with one mind we with you, would endeavor our
selves to do those things, that were best for the common welthe of
Christendom.

I suppose ye be none of them, ye trust, by force of arms, to maintein your
power, and by violence to keep under your adversaries. I remember, when poor
Luther was alone, and at war with all the world, no man being more hatid
than he was: all his enemies could not take his life from him. These studies
ar now so increased within few years, so many following him, that now they
fear little your thretnynges. They have many and great tokens, that god
fauorith them: so that if you intend any thing against them, they surely
trust, that no battle shall preuaylle, nor have any success against them,
being in danger only for the love they bear to Christis religion. Wherefore
while you have time, think upon this mattier, look well about you. If you
wolle be ruled by reason, we shall easilye defend our part, so that our iuges
be indifferent and just. If the matter must be tried by force of arms,
First this were a cruel way, to put so many commonweals of Cristendome in
hasarde: Secondarylye, There is great danger in this thing, by reason your
adversaries strength is waxen puissant and mighty: And it may chance, that
when men shall se, that ye intend to use crueltye, many moo woll take our
part, thanne yet are known to be of our side. Finally, admyt that ye might
have the upper hand, and opteyne your purpose, either by unjust judgment,
or else by force and vyolence: yet where crueltye, vnrightous dealing, and
grudge of conscience is, there can ye not lead your life in honor, much
less in pleasure. Ye can never so destroy us, but the fundations and roots
woll remain, whereof always some shall spring, that woll be able to judge
truly of our matters. Again, although you should destroy us all to gether:
yet there is a GOD, that sees all things, and is hable to revenge our
quarrel: there is a CHRIST, in whose tuition and defense we are all, which as
he was cause of health in the world, so is he able, to restore again his
religion, though it were utterly distroyed.

I speak not this Contarene, by cause I judge you by these your devises, to
intend myschiefe, but because there be many among you, which if they might
have their minds, would cause more mischiefs in Christis church, than ever we
saw hitherto. But I judge this of you, that god may rule your hearts, I know
that ye lack neither lerning nor wysedom, it may be that ye wol love his
honor, and bear a zele to his truth, ye may forsee that, which shall both
please god, and be much to your honor. You among all men ar chosen for
great causes, your honor is to restore Christis doctrine, and to appoint such
as woll and shall be able to teach the gospelle, to amend the ceremonies, and
to put a difference between the mynysters of the church. By these means you
may bring in use again the old manner of lerninge, the old disciplyne of the
church: without the which neither your dignity can be commendable, nor your
authority continue any longer, nor religion flourishe at any time. For there
is no honor, where as is no good gouerna^ce: where governors live not well,
they can have but small commendation. Men can neither be obedient, another love
you that do not your duty. men would be taught and helped out of ignorance, for
many men's hartis be won this way, and authorititie lightly opteyned. But when
subjects be not set by, and officers do not their duetyes, then authority
wastes a pase, no man obeys them, but either for fear or flaterie. Whereby
it follows, that with authority, honor decreaseth: and so religion is much
hyndered. Wherefore I pray you, put your helping hand to the relygyon of
Christ, now being in decay and redye to fall: heal you those old great
and almost desperate diseases, with which the church is sore vexed, and
pyneth dayelye away. And for as much as you your self acknowledge many and
grievous fautes to be in the church, befydes many mo, that you speak nothing
of: be you content, that our men restore the foundation and ground of relygyon
among them selfs, hyndre them not, suffer them to accomplysshe the work,
which they fortunately have begun. If there be any thing, as ye say there
is, that is not to be allowed among us, let there be appointed a councille,
where freely, and without fear of punysshemente, men may say their minds, in
all mattiers. Let all affections be laid aparte, which may hyndre the
truth: and use such as shall hurt no man, as shall break no laws, but
rather reteyne equity. For who can approve, excuse, or allow any council,
wherein men's private commodytyes are only regarded, wherein occasyons are
sought, for to put men to death, wherein cornars are serched, to cover and
hyde vice? All manner of general Councilles ought alonelye to be kept, to the
furtheraunce of commonweals, and in them ought to be used no cruelty. In
them must reign feith and dylygence, to cure all dyseases. Wherefore let
there be no encrochynge covetousness in you, put away al cruelty: let none
come there, that favor vice, or at the lest let them be no iuges there. Let
them be sought out, which rather seek the welthe of the hole, than of a few,
which are glad of justice and equity. If ever there were or can be any time,
wherein it was, or can be needful to seek such remedies, to use such industry
and dilygence, as we require in you, truly it is even now in our time, where in
deed no medicine can be ministered, to diseases, that have of a long season
been roted in the church without great peril and danger. For where as vices
have their defense of long custom* a cloker of error and naughtynes* aided
by barbarous ignorance, that has ruled religion, and all other things, these
many years, where as councils have been called, not for reformation of things
out of order, but rather to maynteyne ambityon and pride, where as there has
been no man that would or could without peril open the diseases, and show
remedies for the same, think that it is now your part, in this light of
truth, you having also power now in your hands, by the consent of your
bishop, to swage and appease all our troubles, to make a peace and concord
between us, to deliver the world from miserye, which daily increases, to
plant and set forth new rotes of true religion, fancies removed, and old
doctrine established again. Think that he is above you, that made this world
and rules it. Remember he sees, and is judge of all that you go about, and
that you can not swage his ire, much less have his favor, except ye do well
and mean truly. Consider, that there have benne and ever shall be men in this
world, which can truly judge of your life and manners. If they disalowe your
acts and deeds, they woll here after grudge to give you that authority,
which were necessary for you to have. Thus fare you well.

At Argent. The.29. of March. Anno domini. 1538.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAS BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS. EXCVS.

ANNO. M. D. XXXVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


