THE GAINS OF SEEKING GOD. In two Sermons, preached in the Parish Church of
WESTMINSTER: By Christopher Styles.

ECCLVS 33.16. Behold, how I have not labored only for my self, but for all
them that seek knowledge.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, 1620.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir HENRY HOBART, Knight and Baronet; Lord Chief
Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Chancellor to the PRINCE
his Highness: all spiritual Graces, temporal Blessings, and eternal
Happiness be multiplied.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
Upon the assurance of some interest had in your Lordships savor (which I hope
I have not utterly lost) though it be long since I was known unto you, yet
because you were my first good Master, under whom I served, in your Church at
Somerton in Norfolk, by the space of four years; and more, till God provided
for me a good Living in another place, which now I have unfortunately left: And
now having a small means to live upon by my great pains in the Parish of
Westminster, being so near to your Honor; and being requested to put this
Sermon in print, I am bold (as well to satisfy my good Friends requests, which
were hearers of the same, as for the benefit of all well-disposed Christians)
to commend the same unto your Lordships favorable acceptance, for by your
Honorable countenance I hope to reap much comfort for this my small labor, I
aim at no other end in this Enterprise, but to show my thankfulness to your
Honor, and to all my charitable Neighbors, therefore if rash and riotous
Censurers, be never so envious in their talk, against these my weak
beginnings, yet if your Lordship be pleased, to grace my good meaning, with
your Honorable countenance, I shall be bound to pray daily for the
continuance of your Lordships health and prosperity, and will ever remain,

Your Lordships daily Orator and most dutiful Servant, CHRISTOPHER STYLES.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, if with a godly mind thou seek only to profit and comfort
thy soul, and not by vain and idle cauils (Nodum in scirpo quaerere) to find
a fault not offered: I wish this Book may be to thee as Rachel and Leach were
to Jacob, fruitful, and delightful: and this I certify to thee. I did not
rashly, but very timorously, undertake this burden to content my friends, and
could not be so much encouraged by many, as I was discouraged in my self: At
last resolved, because the Method of my Teaching herein is only be way of
exhortation, Paraphrastically expounding every word of my Text (which is not
the most unprofitable way whereby the hearer may be edified) therefore I
thought it might be acceptable, and this made me the bolder to satisfy my
Friends desires, and publicly to make my self acquainted with your Christian
Carriages: Well-minded people will not deny my common Courtesy (that is) to
judge of my labors as if they were their own: and this is all I ask.

C.S.

THE GAINS OF SEEKING GOD.
PSALM. 69.32. Seek after God, and your soul shall live.


THe Book of Psalms is a spiritual Library, whether the whole breadth of
Scripture may be reduced for authority of the Scripture contained in this Book,
we find it admitted into the Church, as a Book of absolute Divinity: and so
approved throughout the New Testament.

This Psalm out of which I have chosen my Text, is a lively description of the
passions and patience of Christ, and his members (the Church.)

These words which I have chosen for my Text, are an holy instruction left for
all Posterities, wherein they are showed the gains of seeking God; whatsoever
else we seek for, our labor is but lost, but in seeking after God, we shall
enjoy the fullness of all true comfort to our souls, which only is in God;
then seek after God, and your soul shall live.

In these words of my Text, two things are to be observed, first, a precept,
(seek after God) secondly, a promise, (and your soul shall live.)

In this precept also, three things are to be considered. First, how we should
seek after God, and that must be (debito modo) in the right fashion and order.

Secondly, when we should seek him, and that must be (debito tempore) in a
fit and right time.

Thirdly, where to seek God, and that must be (debito loco) in the right
place.

Of these points only I purpose to entreat at this time, reserving the other
part, which is the promise, until another Sabbath.

For the first part of the precept, how we should seek God, nature it self
will teach us, if we have lost a Jewel which was most dear unto us, first,
to seek it in sorrow for the loss: secondly, with diligence to regaine it:
thirdly, with constant perseverance till we have found it.

Oh, then let not the man endued with grace, plead ignorance in seeking God,
but, first, lacrimabiliter, mournfully: secondly, diligenter, faithfully:
thirdly, perseueranter, constantly in perseverance, never give over until you
find the Lord.

The blessed Virgin Marie returning homewards from the Feast, and not finding
him whom her soul loved (the child Jesus) went back again to Jerusalem, and
sought him, saying, Luke 2.48.
Ego and Pater tuus dolentes querebamus te: Thy Father and I, have sought thee
sorrowing. And thus recovered she the Jewel of her joy.

The ryotous Prodigal, having wasted all the Treasure, by which he should have
lived, and now remembering, how in his Fathers House the hired Servants had meat
enough, and he was ready to perish for hunger, he sought his Fathers love
again, mournfully confessing, and saying, Father, Luke 15.18
I have sinned, etc. and so was received, with feasting and joy.

Marie Magdalene, out of whom Christ had cast seven Devils, and was the only
friend and comfort of her soul, when she came to the Grave, and found him not
there, she bowed her self into the Grave, John 20.13
and wept, because they had taken away her Lord, and she knew not where they
had laid him; and in this sorrowful seeking, she found him to her great
comfort.

Jesus himself while he lived in the World was never seen to laugh, but
often weeping.

Wise Solomon, in the depth of his Divinity, Eccles 2.2.
said unto mirth, what aylest thou? and to laughter, thou art mad? Oh blessed
Jesus, how should I think to find thee in pleasure and joy, whom thy Mother
could scarce find with tears.

Take heed therefore, you that feast it with Nabal, brave it with Haman, and
carouse it with Belshazzar, and revel with Herod, not at all regarding to
seek the Lord, lest the Lord on a sudden, deal with you, as with them, and
turn your feasting into fasting, take the cup from your mouth, and fill you
with spuing, turn you out of all your iollitie, and having perpetual shame
upon you: this can God, and this will God do, if you do not humbly prevent
his Judgments, seeking to his mercy mournfully. Gods Words prevail much
with men, and more with God, but tears constrain compassion: our sins are
cause enough to weep for. Melt then your hearts in sorrow for your sin, as
holy David did, whose heart in the midst of his body, was even like melting
Wax: that God may quit your souls with peace, and seek him (lachrimabiliter)
mournfully.

Secondly, in seeking after God, we must use faithfulness, without slothful
negligence, and seek him (diligenter) diligently, as the woman in the Gospel
seeking her Groat that was lost, Luke 15.8.
did light a Candle and sweep the house, and sought diligently until she
found it. Eccles. 9.10
And as Solomon the wise Preacher has taught thee, All that thine hand shall
find to do, do it with all thy power.

And as David seeking the Lord, did seek him with his whole heart, For you
shall seek me with all your heart, Ier. 29.14.
and I will be found of you, says the Lord. And if thou seek the LORD with
all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 4.29.
and with all thy soul, Pro. 10.26.
thou shall find him. For as Vinegar to the teeth, so is a slothful body to
them that send him.

Therefore the sleeper shall be clothed with rags, Pro. 23.21.
and he is denounced accursed that does the work of the Lord negligently: Ier.
48.10.
The Lord loves a cheerful giver, (as Zacheus) and will be found of them
that seek him diligently, that is, faithfully.

But such is the madness of this rude age wherein we live, and the blindness
of worldly minded men, that they esteem no labor too much, in seeking after
worldly gain, which cannot profit them: and in seeking after the pleasures of
this life, which may much annoy them, but will not step one foot toward
Heaven, with an holy desire to seek after God. In whom is the fullness of all
true felicity. The Apostle complained not without a cause, Phil. 2.21.
That all seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ, but if thou
desire to find Heaven, seek after God by Jesus Christ, who is gone thither
before to prepare a place for you, and seek him (diligenter) with all your
hearts, diligently.

Thirdly, would thou find the Lord, thy only Comforter, seek after him,
(perseueranter) constantly with perseverance, and be not weary of well-doing,
for in due season ye shall reap, if ye faint not, therefore seek the Lord
and his face evermore. Cant. 3.4.
As the Spouse never ceased to seek him whom her soul loved, till she found
him and took hold of him, and left him not.

A Ship that has made many a fair venture on the Sea, and after perishes in
the Haven, brings loss and sorrow to the Owner, that hoped for gain. And a
Soldier that faints before the battle be ended, must expect shame and
death in stead of Victory: So he that seeks after God, and fails in his
intended course, before he find him, must needs bring loss and sorrow to
his soul, and expect confusion for salvation. For the Crowue is given only to
the Conqueror. Apoc. 2.10.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life; the
fire of Gods Altar must never go out, so the zeal of a constant Professor
must not be extinguished by worldly care. No man that puts his hand to the
Plough and looks back, Luke 9.62.
is apt to the Kingdom of God.

Remember Lots wife, Gen 19.
who for looking back, was turned into a Pillar of Salt: And having once begun
to seek after God, Col. 3.1.
and to seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God, Col. 2.20.
why as though ye lived in the World, are ye burdened with traditions: The
Prophet testifies that the life of a righteous man shall never fade; Psalm. 1.4.
and that the heart of a righteous man shall never faint; Psalm. 112.8.
if his faith were enjoined to seek after God, through all the fiery trials
of this World, and all the fiery flames and torments of Hell, it would not
stick at the condition, being before with confidence persuaded, Philip. 1.6.
That he that has begun this good work in him, will perform it until the
Day of Jesus Christ. Thus must you seek after God, Psalm. 51.17.
with a sorrowful heart, which he shall not despise; you must seek him
diligently that you may be counted worthy to escape all those things that
shall come to pass.

And that you may stand before the Son of man, Luke 21.36
and you must seek him with perseverance, and never give over for any
temptation, lest you fall away, for God is faithful and will not suffer you to
be tempted above that you be able, 1. Cor. 10.13
but will even give the issue with the temptation, thus: Thus, to seek the
Lord, always longing after the God of our salvation, we cannot chose but
find the comforts of his graces in our souls, and be assured to be
delivered from the power of darkness, Col. 1.13.
and to be translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son, whether he bring
us all, that has so dearly bought us with his precious blood, even Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

Thus you have heard the manner how to seek God: It follows whereby we may
learn the time when to seek God, which is our second observation in my Text,
as in the time of sin; Iam. 1.14.
the lusts of our own concupiscence led us astray from God, so now in the time
of grace, through the preaching of the Gospel, being led by the Spirit in the
light of faith, we make haste to return and seek after God in whom alone we
may find true rest unto our souls (debito tempore;) in a convenient time. And
as at al times, and in all places, it is meet to seek unto God, Romans 11.36
Of whom, and through whom, and for whom we live and move, and have our
being. So we are taught in holy Scriptures, of three times most convenient to
seek after God; First, (Dum dies est: Secondly, dum praesens est: Thirdly, dum
misericors est.) First, while it is day, Nicodemus, John 3.2.
though he was a Ruler of the Jews, and a Teacher in Israel, has this Record
left in Scripture against him, that he came to Jesus by night.

And the Spouse in the Canticles confesses, Cant. 3.1.
why she could not find her Love, that is, because she sought him by night,
and our Savior himself teaches, John 9.4.
The night comes when no man can work. In the night of Ignorance we are
more prone to seek after Error, then the Truth; In the night of sin, we
seek for the things that please men, and not the things that please God, and
in the night of death, we shall not be able to seek at all: For who shall
give thee thanks in the pit? therefore holy David, longing for the God of his
salvation deferres no time, But flies to the Lord before the morning watch,
Psalm. 130.6. Psalm. 63.1. 2. Chron. 33 3.
and promises early to seek after God: King Iosia, when he was but yet a
child, began to seek after the God of his Father David. Verily, the children
of this World are wise in their generation, observing days, and months, and
years, and times, and shall the sons of men harden their hearts; God
speaks by his holy Prophet, To day, Psalm. 95.8.
if you will hear my voice, etc. and shall we harden our hearts to day, and
let sin grow till to morrow.

Shall we give the crop to Satan, and set God to gleaning, who knows if he
shall live, repent, or escape. Suddenly may his wrath be kindled, and in the
time of vengeance he will destroy. Our Life is the Way, Heaven is the Country:
here make thy peace with God, that he may receive thee there, unto euerglorie
for evermore. Thus seek to God while it is day.

Secondly, to seek after God (debito tempore) in time of opportunity, is,
while be is present, as the Prophet says, Esaias 55.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nigh. It is
anexcellent example to us, in observing the fittest time to seek God, if we
consider the complaint of the Spouse in the Cantic. saying, It is the voice of
my Beloved that knocks, Cant. 5.2.
saying, open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled, for my head is
full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night (all blessings and
happiness are now to be received at the hands of God) whilst he is present.

But whilst she rose to put on her Coat, Verse 6.
her Beloved was gone, I sought him (said she) but I could not find him, I
called him but he answered not: Mat. 25.10
So the foolish Virgins had the door shut while they fetch Oil: This World is
the seed place, Heaven is the reaping place, here they that sow in tears,
shall reap their joy in Heaven; as this day leaves us, so shall that day find
us; now God is present unto all, then only unto his: I go my way and ye shall
seek me, John 8.21.
and ye shall die in your sins, for whither I go, ye cannot come. Now,
therefore seek to follow after God, most sweet, most mighty, and most wise:
therefore he will receive us gently, (Eum qui venit ad me, non reijcio for as)
He that comes to me, I cast not out of doors: most mighty, all power
belongs unto God, he will defend us stoutly, If the Lord be on my side, Psalm.
118.6.
I will not fear what man can do unto me, most wise, so he will lead us unto
happiness: because you have followed me in the Regeneration, You shall sit
upon twelve Thrones, Mat. 19.28
and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, as a stone cast up, rests not but in
the center: so let all them that are cast forth into the world, not rest, but
in the Lord.

(Domine fecisti nos ad te, etc.) O Lord, thou have made us for thy self, and
we can find no rest unto our souls, but in thy self: Art thou sick of sin;
The whole need not the Phisician, but the sick; I came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners, to repentance. Art thou oppressed with poverty, cast all
your care on him, for he cares for you? The Earth is the Lords (which if he
gives thee not, he has reserved Heaven for thee) a happy exchang! Art thou
grieved with disgraces; the rebukes of the foolish, the scorn of the wealthy,
and the disdain of the proud, he brings thee glory for thy shame? Therefore
open the gates, O ye righteous, and the King of glory shall come in, while he
is present: what would thou have that thou may not? what would thou be
that thou can not? if now thou seek after God, who is able to give all
things, and will deny thee nothing whilst he is present, (Nunc vacatur Deus
negotijs nostris.) Now God has taken time to hear our complaints, to plead
with man, and to furnish the lower World, and all things contained therein,
with the rich blessings of his love; whilst therefore he is present to hear
thee, whilst he is present to help thee, absent not thy self by sin; but
seek after God whilst he is present with thee.

Thirdly, if you will seek after God (debito tempore) fail not to do it (dum
misericors est) while he is merciful. He that has a suite to his King, will
observe a time when he may find him best pleased; now is the time of mercy,
now every one that seeks God faithfully, shall find him joyfully, but when he
has begun to judge in Righteousness, that shall be the time of Judgment,
not of Mercy: When the good man of that house is risen up, and has shut too
the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, Lord, open unto us, Luke 13.25
he shall tell you, I know you not, whence ye are, Depart ye workers of
iniquity, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: yet therefore let him
that has continued in sin, ten, twenty, thirty years and more; turn unto
God that he may have mercy upon him, Esaias 3.18.
for yet will the Lord wait that he may have mercy upon you, and be exalted
for his compassion; and surely great is the mercy of God in exspecting our
conversion, for he would not bear with the Angels but cast them down from
Heaven suddenly like Lightning, for but once sinning against him; he also
banished the first man out of Paradise for breaking one Commandment: but he
has borne with us a long time, and we have broken all his Laws, still
exspecting our conversion till our last age. (Nolo mortem peccatoris) I will
not the death of a Sinner, therefore cause one another to return and live, but
he that will not be converted, Eccles. 8.11
and because sentence is not speedily executed against every evil work, does
fully set his heart in them to do evil, shall surely suffer the greater
Judgment.

(Nam quos hic diu longanimiter portat, Illos Deus grauius damnat) The longer
God forbeareth a sinner, the more grievous shall his punishment be at last, as
in the examples of Pharaoh, Sodom, the old World, and the Jews. Now cries
John the Baptist, Make straight the way of the Lord, this is the time of
mercy. Now cries Jesus Christ, I am the door, by me, if any man enter in, he
shall be saved. Now does the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that
is a thirst come; and let whosoever will, Reu. 22.17.
take of the water of Life freely; For, behold, I come shortly, and my reward
is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be: (who will not
be drawn by love, shall be driven by fear) now God punishes man of his
mercy, that so he might convert him to himself: the evils which we suffer
in this life compeld us to go unto God: happy is that misery that urges us to
be better. Those whom Christ hereafter (if they continue in sin) will punish
with confusion (if they repent) he receives them here with mercy, to the
end, hereafter, to crown them for ever with glory, as he did Mary Magdalene,
repenting: The prodigal confessing, the Disciple denying, and the Thief of
the Cross converting, Lord, teach us so to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom, and turn to thee in time, while the day of our
life shall last, and while thou art present, in thy favor toward us. And
whiles thou art a merciful God unto us, and thus seeking, so let us find thee
for evermore, Amen.

Now you have bin instructed in the manner how to seek God, and the time when,
It follows necessarily, you should learn the place where to seek God, which
is the third circumstance of our first observation, seek him in (debito loco)
in the right place, God is not in the strong wind of pleasure and delight, 1.
Rin. 19.11.
that makes so many swell in vanity: God is not in the Earthquake of
covetousness, which puts the soul in danger of a dismal downfall: God is not
in the fire of sloth, that consumes the souls estate in grace, by lustful
cogitations, but in the soft still voice of Humility, Contemplation, and
Prayer; therefore to seek him in the right place, Search the Scriptures, John
5.39.
and they shall tell you of me. Inquire there and thou shall find him (In
praecepio humilitatis pauperibus) In the Manger of Humility, presenting
himself to the poor (In deserto contemplationis vigilantibus) In the
Wilderness of Contemplation, declaring glad tidings to the watchful (In
Templo exorationis disputantibus) In his holy House the Temple of Prayer,
speaking peace to his people, that call upon his Name, there and no where else
can thou find him, who desires to seek elsewhere, must go out of the World.

First, if you will seek him in the right place, Luke 2.12
you shall find him (In praecepio humilitatis pauperibus) You shall find the
Babe swadled, and laid in a Manger. This was to give us an example of perfect
Humility, and Patience, and how to embrace Poverty; all which he has even
chosen as his one part, that we might never despair being his partners; Psalm.
113.5.
For who is like the Lord our God, who has his dwelling so high, yet humbles
himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and Earth. And thus says the
holy One, Esaias 57.5.
I dwelt in the high and holy place with him also that is of an humble and
contrite spirit, to receive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to the
contrite heart: be not displeased with thy poverty, for nothing can be found
so profitable for thee, Heaven is the purchase of the poor, and it is the
sum of Religion, to imitate his example whom thou do worship, and, Behold,
Luke 9.58.
the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

All the Saints of God wandered up and down, In Sheep skins and Goat
skins, Heb. 11.37.
destitute, afflicted, and tormented, 1. im. 6.8.
whom the World was not worthy of: Therefore having food and raiment, let us
therewith be content to follow after Righteousness and Godliness, and to
finish our course in patience. Luke 12.24
Consider the Ravens, they neither sow, nor reap, neither have Storehouse nor
Barn, yet our heavenly Father feeds them; How much are ye better then the
Fowls. Consider the Lillies, they neither labor nor spinne, yet Solomon in
all his Royalty was not clothed like one of these, If God so clothe the Grass
of the Field, how much more will he clothe them that truly obey him, Therefore
ask not what ye shall eat or drink, or wherewith you shall be clothed, for
all such things the people of the World seek for, but seek you after God, and
the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and all these things shall
be cast upon you. (so far as they shall be necessary and profitable for
you.) Thy Savior Christ, despise the World, our forefathers in Christ, and
all the holy Saints of God, did use the World as if they used it not, and who
would not gladly lose the World to win Heaven. The joys of this World are
but the Devils Poisons: here are no true joys, but there are the true joys
placed, Luke 24.5.
where the true life is gone before; And why seek you the living amongst the
dead, He is risen, he is not here. The comfort of light is best known in
darkness, of health in sickness, of honor in baseness, all these may thou
find in God, not in the World: thus he has made our life tedious and full of
troubles, lest being delighted in the way, we should forget the Country
whereto we are traveling, for we have here no continuing City, but seek on
to come even a house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens, oh,
seek him thus, (debito loco) in the right place, Psalm. 113.6.
That he may lift thy poor soul out of the mire of afflictions, and set thee
with the Princes and Saints in Heaven for evermore.

Secondly, seek him (debito loco) in the right place, seek him in (in deserto
contemplationis) in the Desert of Contemplation, all you that wait in patience
while the Lord shall come in power to deliver you out of all your fear;
behold, I will allure her, Hose 2.14.
and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak friendly to her (in solitudine
gratia conseruatur) in desert places and solitary, a man is made more apt for
Prayer: therefore Isaac went forth to pray in the field toward the Evening,
Genesis 24.63
and Jesus sent away his Disciples, and went into the Desert alone to pray. Mat
4.1.
The Angels found Jesus in the Wilderness tempted; much likelier it is we
shall be tempted in the Cities of Society, seeing all companies (aut pares
querunt aut faciunt) do seek their like, or do make them so, that keep
company with them. And it is certain (qui iunguntur in peccato, ne seperantur
in poena) they that join together in the same sin, shall not be separated
from the same punishment.

Thy soul being easilier lost in company then alone, should therefore live
alone, that she may please him alone, whom she has chosen alone.

Thy beloved (oh soul) is shamefast, and is unwilling to show thee
familiarity in the common presence: Leave therefore public company, yea,
leave thy private family, and receive the blessing of his love alone, Cant.
7.11.
(hear what he says) Come, my well beloved, let us go forth into the field,
let us get up early to see if the Vine flourish, if she has budded the small
Grape, or whether the Pomegranets flourish, there will I give thee my Love.
Again (in solitudine cum Angelis conuersatur) In solitary places Angels have
often been seen to converse with men.

Jacob was comforted by the Angels in the Wilderness, Genesis 28.12. Exodus 3.2.
as he fled from his Brother Esau. Moses was instructed by the Angel of God in
the flaming Bush in the Wilderness, what he should do to deliver Gods people
out of bondage. Mat. 4.11.
The Angels came and comforted Jesus in the Wilderness after he was tempted
of the Devil. The farther from the World, the nearer to God: as an Apple Tree
planted where the branches spread over a common way; those branches so
spreading are always subject to spoil, and are made a prey to every
Passenger, but those that grow in the compass of the Owners ground, bear
fruit unto the Planters profit; so the man that spreads his heart to entertayne
the World cannot keep innocence to the end, whereby it often falls out that
God loses his due, which is their heart, and they their desire, which is
Heaven; as in the example of Ananias and Saphira. Acts 5.5.
Again (In solitudine scandalum malignorum euitatur) In desert and solitary
places we escape the poison of slanderous tongues, therefore John Baptist,
being to prepare the way of the Lord, Mat. 3.1.
had his continual abode in the Wilderness, where he taught all that came
unto him: When God gave Israel a Law, it was in the Wilderness, Exo. 19.20.
where he spoke unto Moses in the Mount; Mat. 5.1.
When Jesus made that heavenly Sermon to the multitude, he went into a desert
place, and there taught them from the mountain; by which examples we are
learned that whosoever will be good Teachers, and good Hearers, must separate
themselves sometimes, and for the most part, from common and public Societies:
for in desert and solitary places, the mind is enlightened, so it fared with
that great King Nabuchadnezzar, who secing nothing but confusion, while he
lived in his stately Palace at great Babel, Dan. 4.34.
could yet behold Gods glory in the Heavens, being banished: also in desert
and solitary places, the heart is inflamed with good desires, Judith 8.5.
therefore Judith built her Oratorie in the top of her house, that the
priuatenesse of the place might increase the zeal of her affection: also in
desert and solitary places, the soul is often ravished with the contemplation
of Heavens sweetness, as John the Evangelist being banished into the I Will
Pathmos, Revel. tot.
writ a whole Book of sweet Revelations there. I speak not this to animate
our Separatists, whose daily practice is to draw the Communion of Christ's
Church into private Conuenticles, but of the mutinous multitude of this Age,
that join hand in hand, and have all one Purse, and are all of one mind, to
do evil, and to work all uncleanness, even with greediness: these, yea
these are they, whom I would have, and whom I do beseech, to consider of
their ways, and works, by themselves alone, and of Gods presence, instantly
able to reward every man according as his works shall be, lest the Lord should
suddenly pluck them away; when they shall find none to rescue them, thus by
private conference, (Confession and Absolution) between their souls and God,
let them seek out of desert places, even seek after God by themselves alone,
that so they may taste the sweetness of Gods grace and mercy, in the secrets
of their souls for evermore.

Thirdly, would thou know where to seek God (debito loco) come to the
Temple, where the lips of the wise preserve knowledge, they shall counsel thee
(in templo exorationis) in the Temple of Prayer, God stands always ready to
hear all those that call upon his Name, and to answer all their souls that
desire instruction. There you cannot fail to hear of him: for in his Temple
does every man speak of his honor. When Solomon prayed in the Temple, and
offered unto the Lord a Sacrifice, 1. King. 9.3
then God promised his blessing to that house for ever: When King Hezechia
spread the blasphemous Letter of railing Rabshakeh, 2. King. 19.14.
before the Lord in the Temple, God promised to deliver the King, and put his
foes to confusion. We read of Jesus in the Temple, Luke 19.45
how he whipped out the Merchants: posed the Doctors; and daily taught the people.

First, He whipped out the Merchants, saying, My House shall be called the House
of Prayer, but you have made it a Den of Thieves, (mark I pray you) he
suffers none to buy and sell, but taught the mall, that came to hear and
pray: such still are welcome to their Savior: but in this monstrous Age, most
do come to make merchandise, both in and of the Temple.

Some make merchandise in the Temple, and teach not the way of God truly, but
for fear or flattery, speak not at all, or speak pleasing things, and spare
to tell the house of Judah their transgressions, and the house of Israel their
sins, that they might forsake their wicked ways and turn again unto the
Lord and live. And some make merchandise of the Temple, and are not at rest til
the House of God lie waste, Hag. 1.4.
or if not quite waste, yet more then half spoiled: dealing with the
Lmbassadours of the Lord, as the Princes of the children of Ammon dealt with
the Messengers of David, who shared of the half of their beard, 2. Sa. 10.4.
and cut off their Garments in the middell, so too many at this day have spoyld
the Treasures of the Temple, strangely metamorphosing Parsonages into
Vicarages, and Vicarages into Donatiues, and Donatiues into Pensions, leaving
scarce the price of a Liuerie for the Priest, that wayteth on the Altar, and
should live of the Altar.

But the Lord will one day come against them as he came against Antiochus that
sought to destroy the Temple of God, he did it not, 2. Mat. 9.5.
but while he thought to do it (mark that) the Lord plagued him with a
Disease in his bowels, invisible, and incurable, so that he died: so you that
now live of the spoils of the Temple, God will one day whip you out with a rod
of Iron.

Secondly, Jesus was found in the Temple posing the Doctors: a good Lesson for
us all to learn: First, for us Ministers, for he that desires the office of
a Bishop must be apt to teach, being sufficiently instructed to convince
Heresy, to exhort unto Godliness, and to rebuke them that sin before all,
that others also may fear, or else he is unworthy to be a Master unto the
Israel of God, if he be ignorant of these things.

Secondly, here is a good Lesson for you to learn, that come to the Temple and
House of God, to be made partakers of his holy Word, come not hither, to hear
the Preacher, as the Jews came to hear Christ, that they might entangle him
in his talk, nor as Herod who heard John Baptist gladly, yet cut off his head,
nor in presumption with the Jews to teach your Teachers: if you do? then as
Christ says, take heed how you hear. And know that all we that have our
errand from Heaven, and are called of God as Aaron was, have knowledge joined
with authority sufficient, without fear of them that have authority to kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul, boldly to preach the Gospel of
Christ Jesus even before Kings, and to make you tremble at our Doctrine, Acts
24.25.
as Foelix did to hear Paul preach of Judgment. And can so easily confute
such busy Ignorants, that they shall willingly confess unto their shame; we
teach as men having authority, and not as the Scribes.

Thirdly, Jesus sat daily in the Temple to teach the people: he that will take
the fleece, must feed the flock.

For whosoever shall perish in thy Fold (for want of instruction) his soul
will I require at thy hands, says the Lord; and my sheep hear my voice
(mark that) if it be our duty to teach, its your duty to hear. Therefore, I
admonish you all, examine your selves how you have profited in the School of
Christ, long has the holy Gospel been taught unto us, if we be not bettered
by these holy Councels, its a sure token, that we have not yet sought after God
(debito modo) as we ought, with our whole heart, mournfully by Repentance;
diligently seeking nothing but God, constantly not fainting till we find his
Spirit answering our spirits in love. Its also an infallible token of our
irregular life, careless of our small time of abode, in that we will not seek
him (debito tempore) while it is day watchfully: while he is present
cheerfully, while he is merciful acceptably. Its also a manifest testimony
of our contempt against God refusing to come where God is, for the Lord is in
his holy Temple, Psalm. 11.4.
therefore we must seek him (debito loco) In his Temple, to power out our
hearts in Prayer before him: In his Temple to learn instruction, and to
incline our hearts to understanding. In his Temple reverently to obey our
spiritual Teachers, and not to resist the authority of their Doctrine nor to
make difference of the holy Word of God, and of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, by
having in respect of persons, any man, but only for the words sake.

Thus to seek after God (debito modo, debito tempore, debito loco) we shall be
sure to find him with joy unto our souls: which blessing God grant unto us
all, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE GAINS OF SEEKING GOD.
PSALM. 69.32. Seek after God, and your soul shall live.


THis Text I partly handled before, leaving the rest till now: then I divided
it into two parts, first, a Precept, in these words, Seek after God: secondly,
a Promise, in these words, and your soul shall live. The first part, which is
the Precept, I handled then at large, of the second part which is the Promise,
I purpose now to treat, and do humbly beseech Almighty God his assistance,
and your gentle patience.

Here indeed is the true gains of seeking after God, for so says my Text,
(your soul shall live) In the handling whereof, these are the chief points
wherein to insist: first, the dignity conceived in the Word (soul:) secondly,
the quality in the Word (your:) thirdly, the utility and comfort of the
soul, in these words (shall live.)

First, the dignity of the soul fitly mentioned in the very Word it self
(soul) shall more plainly be conceived in the consideration of these three
circumstances: first, the condition of the soul, while we consider the matter
and essence whereof the soul consists. For, behold, In the souls Creation
God only made it according to his own Image, a spiritual and incorporeall
substance: And Augustine reasoning about the soul, says thus (Anima est
incorporea substantia regens corpus, sicut enim in Deo vna est essentia, and
tres distinctae personae: sic in anima vna est essentia and tres distinctae
potentiae, Memoria, Intelligentia, Voluntas) which is thus in English: The
soul is a spiritual substance, governing the body, for as in God there is
but one essence, and three distinct persons: so in the soul there is but one
essence and three distinct powers, that is, the Memory, the Understanding, and
the Will; (but howsoever) the immortality of the soul may be proved in this,
in that it never cease to live, even in misery.

Thus you see the dignity and excellent nature of the soul, for according to
the Image of God, the soul is made reasonable, and may be employed about
every thing, but cannot be satisfied with any thing, for it being made
capeable of God, whatsoever is less then God, is unable to fill it.

O noble Creature, thou soul, which art only ordained for the fruition and
vision of God, O my soul that art formed in the Image of God, betrothed by
faith, and endued with the Spirit, love him, O love him, of whom thou art so
much beloved, O knit thy heart unto him, that has knit himself to thy soul,
and seek after him that seeks for thee, O seek after God, etc.

But alas, for the stiff-necked, hard-hearted Sinner, what shall become of
thee, why do you so neglect the salvation of your souls which are immortal.

If thou did truly know the dignity of thy self, O soul, whosoever thou
be, thy sins would be abominable unto thee: a noble spirited man scorns rude
and base companions, and all men naturally do shun the plague, and their
dearest friends possessed therewith: There is nothing so base as sin, the very
plague and infection of the soul: Oh then forsake and loath thy dearest
affections so long as they are in love with sin, and let the consideration of
thy souls dignity keep thee in innocence for evermore.

The second circumstance to be considered, whereby we may know the dignity of
the soul (is by comparison) wherein it shall appear, how infinitely the soul
exceeds the body with all the members thereof, and all things whatsoever have
been created besides: Every soul is better then every body, for that that
gives life, is better then that which receives it, and the soul gives life
to the body: yea, so much as the Firmament of Heaven is more beautiful then
the Earth: so far does the soul exceed in glory the beautifullest body
that ever was framed. O how admirable is the diverse colored beauty of all the
Esements, and of all the celestial Firmament, how pleasant and profitable unto
us, and how necessary the service of them is for us, and yet all these were
made but for the soul: thou, O God, that have made all things, have placed and
subjected all these things under man's feet: that only Man remaining Lord over
all thy Works, should himself remain only thine, and which is more, all
outward things are created and ordained for the body, but the body it self
is subject to the soul, and the soul it self is subject unto thee, that it
might only serve thee, only love thee, and only possess thee alone. The price
of the whole Word is not to be valued to the worth of the soul; for what shall
it profit a man to win the whole World and lose his own soul. We read
that the holy Saints have crucified their own bodies, and chastized themselves
with hard penance, and all that they might save their souls: Gal. 5.4.
For they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts of it: O you holy Saints, and dearest friends of God, tell us, O tell us,
why with so many Watchings, so many Prayers, and so much Discipline, you have
so cruelly mortified your flesh.

O most glorious Martyrs, why have you exposed your selves to such cruel
torments, that you have not refused to die, yea, even a violent death, with
cheerfulness embracing such a sentence? O blessed Jesus, why did thou
suffer three and thirty years together, hunger, thirst, labor, sweat, deep
wounds, and finally death it self, they answer all aloude, it was for the
soul? therefore it is manifest the soul is more precious then all the other
things of the world: Seeing then all things are but vile in comparison of the
soul, why do we so vainly care for the preservation of every thing but the
soul: our bodies, our riches, our cattle, our garments are curiously decked
and provided for, but alas, few men have any respect at all unto their souls,
O unhappy wretched men, why are you so careful about many things, nay, every
thing, saving this one thing, for which all your care should be bestowed?

Remember Christ's counsel to Mary's complaining Sister ( Martha, Martha, thou
carest and art troubled for many things, but one thing only is necessary, O
then, beloved in the Lord, let us lovingly care for this one thing (our soul)
in the faithful preservation whereof consists all things else that pertain
to man's eternal happiness, which God give us grace truly to perform for ever
more, Amen.

The third circumstance to be considered, whereby to know the dignity of the
soul, is by the habitation being capeable of such a glorious Tenant as the
Holy Ghost for God has created the soul to no other end but for himself,
which is to be his habitation, so that the soul is called the Temple of God,
As the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you (if you be the holy seat of God) thither our Savior
coming to keep perpetual Holidayes, has ordained all things necessary for
the honor of his entertaynment. So long as God dwells in the soul of a just
man, Psalm. 91.1.
He has commanded an Host of Angels to guard him; He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: Psalm. 34.7.
And the Angel of the Lord tarryeth round about them that fear him, to
deliver them.

Behold, the dignity of the soul, how God has appointed the Angels, that are
so noble Creatures, to be their keepers; Man made lower then the Angels, yet,
lo, attended by them: Surely, its great dignity to the soul, that every man
at his birth has an Angel chosen to be his keeper; And this Angel is so
employed about our business, as a Messenger always running betwixt the
Beloved and her Love, offering our Desires and Prayers, as an acceptable
Sacrifice unto God, and bringing down the Royal Present of Gods holy Gifts
into the soul, still stirring up the soul to all good works, and laboring
to appease Gods wrath, that it should never be kindled against us: this Royal
prerogative of the soul, to entertayne God as a Ghest, truly describes the
dignity of the same, which all this while is attended with an Army of
heavenly Soldiers. 2. Kin. 6.17.


Again, whilst God inhabiteth the righteous soul, he makes it a continual
feast, in the large open Chamber of a quiet conscience, and gives them the
Bread of Life to feed upon, even by breaking his own precious Body unto them,
the effect of bread is to preserve life, and to strenghten man's heart: So
Christ that is the true Bread come down from Heaven, gives them spiritual
Bread (his Body) thereby to preserve the life of the soul; Labor not then
for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to everlasting
life, which the Son of man shall give unto you, for him has the Father
sealed.

Again, yet whilst God in habiteth the righteous soul, he brings her a
greater blessing then Caleb could bestow upon his Danghter, although he gave
her the Springs above and the Springs beneath, a rich Dowry: Josh. 15.19.
For, whereas Man by nature and sin is made barren of all Grace, yet being
bathed and washed in the euer-streaming Fountain of Christ's Blood by
Repentance, and renewed by the Grace that is brought unto her through our Lord
Jesus Christ. She is made fruitful in every good work, and to walk
acceptably before God.

The Apostle showing the Corinthians, That the unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of GOD, says, such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified: behold the dignity of the soul, in the estimation of her
price; For, says the Apostle, ye are bought with a price: 1. Cor. 6.20
Great is the price of the soul, whom nothing could redeem but the blood of
Jesus Christ: God make us careful of this dignity for evermore, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

In the second place we are to consider the quality of the soul, which may
be understood in the three powers of the soul, which I told you of before,
and is mentioned in this word (your.)

First, (Sapientiam docet) It teaches us Wisdom: Secondly, (Munditiam
seruat) It preserves us in Innocence: Thirdly, (Constantiam nutrit) it
nourishes our Constancy, who were else utterly unable to fight that great and
tedious battle between us and our spiritual enemies. It teaches us
wisdom three ways, (intelligende praeterita) by understanding the things
long since past. (Iudicanda praesentia) in being able to discern and judge of
those things that be now present; (Expectando futura) in expecting good things
to be received hereafter at the hands of God.

First, (Intelligendo praeterita, bona Animae Sapientiae) Wisdom is the
treasure of the soul, a good man knows all things which God has made to be
known, as well those things of the World which are past, as the things that are
to come, even the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal Power and
Godhead, are seen by the Creation of the World, being considered in the
Creatures his Works: This made David sing, The Heavens declare the glory of
God, and the Fi mament shows his handy-worke: the soul is only capeable of
Reason, and therefore considering the worthiness of her self, the vileness
of the body, and the shortness of this life; therefore she chooses rather to
provide for the Life to come which is immortal, then to regard at all this
life which is so transitory, this makes us to worship God, before whom we
must stand to render our account at the Day of Judgment: this made holy David
faithfully to apply his heart unto Wisdom, after he knew how few days he
had to live: this knowledge and understanding, is the true difference between
Man and Beast, and therefore we read of Paul's complaint, that he had fought
with Beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men, that is, beastly men, carnally
minding earthly things, but not sauouring the things of God: and surely, he
that is ignorant of these things, may be said to have no soul, as we read of
Ephraim, Who was said to bec like a Dove deceived without a heart, Hose 7.11.
that is, without a soul: worldly wisemen are even like Moles and beasts (In
terra sapienter se habent, supra nihil vident) They behave themselves orderly
upon Earth, but see nothing concerning the mysteries of Heaven, but it is the
soul does teach us to understand wisdom secretly, O give me understanding
and I shall live.

Secondly, (Iudicando praesentia hoc iudicium nihil aliud est quam reddere
cuique quod suum est) This judgment is nothing else, but for us to give every
man his own. Therefore let every man arise, and sitting in Judgment upon the
Throne of his soul, let his thoughts accuse or excuse, let his conscience
witness, and let his memory give right Judgment in all things concerning
himself, and God, and man; For himself, let him forsake sin: For God, let
him punish sin: For men let him do good.

Righteousness is nothing else but not to sin (Iustus quod contra Iustitiam
fecit per lachrimas punit) A just man punishes that sin with tears, which
he has committed by frailty. If we would judge our selves, we should not
be judged, therefore, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even
so do ye unto them, for thus is the Law and the Prophets.

God has ordained us to be Judges in the Court of our consciences, that we
might arraigne our sins and put them to death.

This is the wisdom of the soul, (never to consent to any, though never so
good) if he do the things that are evil, and never to contradict any man
(though never so evil,) if he do the thing that is good. This Judgment can
no ways be so truly performed, as by the help of the memory in our souls,
one of the powers of the soul, that keeps the whole course of our life in the
comeliness of good order.

Thirdly, (expectando futura bona) expecting good things to come, which proceed
from the grace of God through a good conscience, and this is in the choice of
the will: Many things seem hard to the unwilling, but nothing is uneasy to a
good will, for if a small reward in this life, makes us esteem great labor
little toil; how much rather should our eternal reward of that blessedness
to come, make us cheerfully to meet all confronting troubles, and comfortably
to expect all succeeding graces and offered blessings, which God has assured
to them that obediently serve him, who would not expect the reward promised,
(yea though he be a sinner) seeing God is merciful: The Psalmist thus
reasons with his fainted soul, Why art thou so heavy, O my soul! and why
art thou so disquieted within me? O, put thy trust in God, for I will yet give
him thanks which is the help of my countenance and my God. Three things do
move the soul in willingness, to wait for the blessings of Gods reward.
First, the Charity of our adoption, who being slaves to Sin and Satan, by
Jesus Christ, are now called, the sons of God. Secondly, the truth of his
promise, who is never forgetful of his Covenant made to a thousand
generations. Thirdly, the possibility of his performance, to whom all power
belongs, and who is merciful to reward every man according to his works.

The Husbandman patiently expects the fruits of the earth; and a good pawn
is counted a sufficient security: We have Gods Word and Sacraments, and Christ
himself has laid down his life for us (cum opus proficit praemij fiducia
crescit) when the work is finished, the expectation of the reward increases:
Thus, behold, wisdom is infused into man by the powers of the soul, and this
is the first quality to be observed in the soul (sapientiam docet) it
teaches us wisdom.

Secondly, (munditiam seruat,) it preserves us in innocence and sanctity;
the Psalmist propounds a question, and answers himself, Who shall assend
into the Hill of the Lord, or who shall rise up in his holy place? even he,
that has clean hands and a pure heart, and has not lift up his mind unto
vanitic, nor sworn to deceive his Neighbor, he shall receive the blessing of
the Lord and righteousness from the God of his salvation: And what part of man
can perform this, but the soul? the soul and spirit only keeps the heart
from evil thoughts, the mouth from corrupt communication, the hands from
hateful works, so that hereby we are taught, the soul preserves us innocent
in heart, in word and in deed.

No man puts a precious ointment which he is desirous to preserve and
keep, 1. Cordis.
into a vessel that has been used to filthy and corrupt savors, therefore
wash your hands, O sinners, and cleanse your hearts, you double minded; keep
your hearts clean that would receive the graces of God, for God will not send
down his grace to enter into that heart that is accustomed to sin. It is
easier to make him rich that has a great substance left of Parents, and is
careful to preserve the same, then for the prodigal, that has already
consumed the inheritance of his fathers. So he that yet has preserved the
virtues of nature, may more easily be enriched with the graces of the Spirit,
then he that has lost the innocence of his soul: The life and spirit, yea
even the understanding of the heart is of the soul, and comprehended in this
one word, soul: this is the great Wheel, that sets all the rest agoing (unto
good or evil:) as it is, so are they even all the parts and members of the
body; The innocence of the soul consists in the forsaking of sin and
following of grace, when we cease to do evil, and learn to do well: if the
heart be free from evil thoughts, all the body shall be free from sin;
therefore when God willed Jerusalem to wash her heart from wickedness that she
might be saved (he concluded) how long shall evil thoughts remain within you:
there sin begins, Ier. 4.14.
there the roots are fastened, pluck up the roots then, and it shall be
impossible for sin to prosper. It was David's petition, Make me a clean
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Thus you see the soul and
spirit keep the heart in innocence, and so all the body shall be clean from
sin, also the soul and spirit of man, while he lives, must keep the mouth
from corrupt communication: 2. Oris.
As in the tongue of a Swine, we do judge of the soundness of the body, so
by the words of the mouth, the cleanenesse of the soul is conceived; for when
a good man opens his mouth, behold, as it were in a temple, the glorious
similitude of a holy Soul: A good man out of the good treasure of his soul
brings forth good things, therefore let no corrupt communication proceed out
of your mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that ye may
minister grace unto the Hearers, and grieve not the holy Spirit of God. Iam.
3.6.
By his evil words, we know, that an evil man's tongue is set on fire of
Hell; And by a good man's words, Act. 2.4.
we conceive his tongue to be set on fire by the holy Ghost; therefore the holy
Prophet exhorts, O sing ye praise with understanding, no member without the
body, no part or faculty within the body is capeable of understanding, but
by the soul, and only by the powers thereof is understanding infused into
other parts, as you have been taught already: if therefore ye will grace your
selves, and edify your Brethren, and glorify your God. O let your souls
speak first unto your tongues, and be a watch unto your mouths, and set the
seal of wisdom upon your lips, that ye may speak with understanding, it is
the phrase of the wise Jew (therefore I pray bear with me,) The hearts of
Fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their heart. If
therefore you desire to be counted wise and would not speak like fools,
often let your souls take heed unto your mouths that you offend not in your
tongue: according to your words will all men judge of your lives, if your words
be profane, your conversation cannot be holy, if your words be good, men will
judge your lives to be honest; by good words the soul is delighted, by evil
words the soul is grieved: But take heed if one of us will scarce abide where
we have rude and base entertainment, how much rather shall the holy Ghost (the
souls ghest) being daily disquieted with blasphemies, and disgraced with
filthy talking, seek to change her habitation, and leave us destitute of all
grace. Again, the soul must be our guide and lead us in our actions, that
we may do all things to the glory of God. Grace is the life of the soul, by
which only man is taught the knowledge of his sins, the love of God, 3.
Operis.
and how to cleave fast unto him, now it is impossible for us to judge whether
grace be in the soul of man or no, but by his outward actions: for the habit
of the soul is known by the works of the body, the work shows what the
soul is, every man's life is as his soul, therefore says our Savior, let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven, and we say a wicked man has an
unfaithful soul; a good man is known by his works, as a Tree by his fruits,
do well then and men shall speak well of thee. The soul moving the members of
the body to do good, makes the whole man delightful to be in the assembly of
the faithful, as the Prophet says, I was glad when they said unto me; we will
go into the House of the Lord, and all my delight shall be in the Saints that
dwell upon Earth, and upon such as excel in Virtue.

Also she teaches them innocence in their private life, knowing that they are
always in the sight of God, and therefore they abstain from all iniquity;
and she teaches them to deal justly and charitably with all men Magistrates
to deal co^scionably in their Offices, Subjects to yield reverent obedience to
the Magistrates: briefly, so to live one with another, that the fruits of our
faith may be made manifest unto all: and she teaches them of what calling or
condition soever they be, so to exercise themselves in their several
vocations, that they may be profitable and helpful to themselves, and private
Families to the Church and members of God, and to the whole Common Wealth
wherein they live: Thus you see the quality of the soul to keep us innocent
in our heart, our mouths, and our works, which God grant unto us for evermore.

Thirdly (Constantiam nutrit) it nourishes Constancy: which is these three
ways (humiliter accipiendo) humbly taking up our Cross: (patienter tolerando)
patiently bearing our afflictions: (fideliter diligendo) faithfully loving our
Fathers correction.

First, (humiliter accipiendo) while troubles do assault us, our souls are
humbled within us, there is given us a prick in the flesh to buffet us, lest
we should be exalted above measure: the weak flesh is ready to shun all
encumbrances, like the Sluggard that says, There is a Lion in the way, and a
Bear in the streets: or the Spies that spoke of the great Giants of Anacke:
but the valiant Spirit and soul makes us willing to meet with any cross; and
to embrace every temptation cheerfully: As Job when he had lost all his
estate, and had no friends left him, rebuked his Wife for that she would not
willingly receive evil at the hands of God as well as good; likewise holy David
said of Shimei, he curses because God has bid him curse David: and as Paul
flies not, being persuaded not to go up to Jerusalem, but answered, I am
ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

He has done half his work that begins well, the willingness of the
soul, does minister strength to the Labourer, that he may not faint in the
Work of the Lord, nor be weary of well-doing: It makes things that be most
hard and difficult, to seem easy to be done: therefore begin willingly, for
by continual labor strength is attained, this willingness is only in the
soul.

Secondly, (patienter tolerando) the state of man's body is utterly incapable
of grief, but the soul must bear the burden of affliction: Lo, Job 13.15.
though he kill me, yet yet will I trust in him: Patience is the closet of the
soul wherein it is preserved from all injuries of temptation: therefore when
Christ our blessed Savior told his Disciples of the ruins of the World, and
terrors of the last times, he wishes them to possess their souls with
patience. This makes the Proverb true (Vincit qui patitur) He that suffers,
overcomes; not with fighting, but with patient bearing: as Eleasar, being
ready to give up the ghost, 2. Mac. 11.30.
said, The Lord knows manifestly, that whereas I might have been delivered
from death, I am scourged and suffer these sore pains of my body, but in my
mind I suffer them gladly for his Religion.

The stalk of a rotten Apple will not endure the least wind without falling:
so the patience of an unfaithful soul, will not endure the least wind of
temptation without falling into final desperation, as Achittophel and Judas
Iscariot: What is the cause (beloved) that so many endure great labor, and
take sore pains to do evil, and to weary themselves in the ways of
wickedness, and we will not patiently endure the least pains in the
profitable paths of godliness, and that some labor more for death then we for
life, as Thieves and the wicked Judges, is it not the corruption of an
unfaithful soul? O then let us not be as naked men in the midst of our
armed enemies: A raw Tyle cast into the water is easily dissolved, but being
burnt in the Furnace does wax hard and durable: so man living in the waters of
sin is full of carnal pollution, but being burnt in the fire of holy love,
or in the furnace of tribulation, his soul is constant in holy devotion:
therefore as Bears are made fat by stripes, and the Ass is fed with a whip;
and the Salamander delights in the fire: so let our souls take food and
fatnes in temptation, and be delighted in the patience of true constancy
foreuermore, Amen.

Thirdly, (fideliter diligendo) when we consider the sweetness of Gods
mercy, sparing when we deserve punishment, etc. How can we but open our
souls in love and sing to God, It is good for me that I have been troubled,
etc. Thy Rod and thy Staff do comfort me, O how great is the multitude of thy
Mercy, O Lord, The Lord is gracious unto every man, and his Mercy is over all
his Works: and it is an especial duty of Religion for love of God, wisely to
avoid the snares of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: for the soul that is
enlighted by God, does drive away the wicked motions of temptation, as the
Sun draws up the mists from the Earth, and this love of the soul being
firmly fixed upon God, does easily overcome all fear, even the fear of
Poverty, the fear of Death, and the fear of Judgment; for perfect love
casts out fear; and love is strong as death, Much water cannot quench love,
Cant. 8.7.
neither can the floods drown it: The love of God is in us, and unto us the
life of our souls; O then let our souls live to praise him, God even for his
love will not shrink from us; so let our souls in faithful love to him be
constant in all service appertayning to him, humbly to take up our cross daily
and follow him, patiently to endure his chastnings of love, and faithfully to
love him for his gracious mercies toward us, for his provident preservation of
our lives and estates, and for his mighty deliverances out of all our
temptations: And God almighty give us all grace to perform this truth for
evermore, Amen.

In the third and last place we are to consider, the utility and comfort of
the soul, which is contained in these words (shall live) carnally, we say,
they that live in mourning and misery, seeking for help of God, and seeing it
yet far from them, they are counted among the dead which be out of mind, and
live in the grave, and they that are (voti compotes) satisfied according to
their hearts desire, and frollick it in mirth and joy, are said to live: And so
spiritually we say the soul that truly seeks after God, only delighting
in the Lord may be truly said to live in God, these three ways, first (per
abstractionem desiderij) by the restraint of his desire: secondly, (per
dispositionem voluntatis) by the disposition of his will; thirdly, (per
praesentiam adiutoris) by the presence of his friend and helper.

First (per abstractionem desiderij) your soul shall live (that is, it being
now dead by sin, and dead by sorrow, yet God shall speak peace unto your
souls, and you shall live being refreshed with the blessing of peace) David
complains of the deadly ebb of his estate, how his enemies live and are
mighty; they come in, no misfortune like other folk, neither are they plagued
like other men; but I am clean forgotten as a dead man out of mind, and am
become like a broken vessel, and when he desires to live, he describes the
manner he would live, Ps. 144.12.
(that our sons may grow up as the young plants; and that our daughters may
be as the pollished corners of the Temple; that our Garners may be full and
plentious withal manner of store; that our Sheep may bring forth thousands,
and ten thousands in our streets; that our Oxen may be strong to labor, that
there be no decay, no leading into captivity, and no complaining in our
streets. O, this is a life indeed! happy are the people that be in such a case,
but the just live even as well, in that they do (abstrahere desiderium)
restrain their desires from carnal and temporal delights: The soul here is
put for the life present, because all our life is in our soul; therefore the
souls of the Saints do even now seek heaven, as Paul who desires to be
dessolued and to be with Christ: And David has rather to be a dore-keeper in
the House of God, then to dwell in the Tents of ungodliness; Zacheus so far
restrained his greedy appetite, that he gave half of that he had to the
poor, and restored his wrongs done to any fourfold; and the Prodigal
considering his Fathers bounty, will be no more a son, but a hired servant;
and surely, beloved, if we did but once taste in our souls the gracious mercy
of God toward us, we should have less respect to the world, and more care to
receive heaven: give to your souls the fullness of all pleasure, which Solomon
inioyed, and with him you will cry out, All is but vanity and vexation of
spirit: or let souls choose any peculiar delight that this world can afford to
comfort her, yet will she not be satisfied, seeing God alone is the Alpha and
Omega of all her happiness. Therefore, I exhort and beseech you all (beloved
in the Lord) put a bridle upon your affections to restrain those boundless
and ungodly lusts, whereto our flesh is too too prone, and seek after God in
your spirits with truth, that your souls may live in peace and joy.

Secondly, the soul is said to live (per dispositionem voluntatis) by the
godly disposition of her will. A faithful soul is the House of God, because
God is sed to dwell in her, in this life present, by the sweet taste of his
gracious love administered unto her; and in the life to come, by the blessed
fruition of his glory: (now) it is most meet that every Master or Lord should
have command of his house, and so should God of our souls; therefore it is our
duty, even as Christ has taught us, to submit our will to his will; not my
will, but thine be fulfilled, thy will be done in earth as in heaven: O Father,
from this time forth for evermore, Amen.

Secondly, the soul may be said to live (per dispositionem voluntatis) by the
disposition of her will, which ought to be conformed according to the will of
God, and that is, that no man should go beyond the statutes of Gods holy Law
and Commandments; and that every man, as far as possibly he may in all
things, should conform his will unto the divine will and pleasure of God;
according to the saying of our Savior, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me; for the wicked do
not cease to sin, though they have no power to perform sin, and though
they have no means or opportunity to act sin yet have not left their will
and mind to sin; if they might be suffered; as we may say of Infancy,
Sickness, Old Age and Captivity, the will is the root (planted in the soul)
the words and works of a man are but the fruits, and its unprofitable that
other branches should spring forth, but such as the root in the earth does
yield; a will well disposed of all other good gifts of God is certainly to be
accounted the chief gift unto man's salvation, for from a good will all good
works are produced, and where a slave does live in servile fear, and has a
will to revenge, he would assuredly perform as much if he were as sure to
escape punishment; the zeal of a good will should increase by love, as fire
does by the addition of wood.

As in the two sisters Martha and Marie there were two wills, that is to say,
Active and Contemplative, and both were harmless and laudable, so it is
impossible for the soul to enter into the heavenly Country that is not
exercised in one of these, that is, a willing desire always to practice the
works of mercy, both by charitable gifts and godly counsel to the Brethren,
or always to be devoted unto the holiness of godly meditation, making the
Law of God the Glass of his life, the words of God the path of his way, and
the examples of the Saints the pattern of all his works: these are the two
wings of the soul whereby it may be lifted up to Heaven.

First, the continual meditation of Gods mercy: Secondly, the faithful
assurance and confidence we have in our Mediator Jesus Christ. Why do thou
straggle and run astray, O wretched man, after many things? seeking rest and
comfort to thy soul and body, love one thing which shall suffice thee, for
all things whatsoever thou desire (tell me, O my soul) where is that thou
love, where is that thou desire, sure it can no where else be found, but
where it can never be lost, even where Christ reigns for evermore in glory?
the life of the body is the soul, and the life of the soul is GOD, O then
delight thy self in the LORD, and he shall give thee the desires of thy soul,
O live in God and be drawn to everlasting life and glory by his love, For
he that lives unto God, is dead unto sin; and he that lives unto sin,
is dead before God; therefore let the worthiness of your soul win you to
the love of God: let the quality of your souls work in you the
righteousness of God, and let the utility and comfort of your souls drive
you continually to seek after God: O seek after God and your souls shall
live for evermore.

Thirdly and lastly, the soul may be said to live (per praesentiam adiutoris)
by the sudden presence of his friend and helper, many man fainting and ready
to perish in the raging fury of their enemies, 1. Sam. 20.3
as David, when Jonathan comforted him, was again refreshed and as a man
revived with life, confirmed his patience until he had possessed the promise of
his Inheritance with peace.

Genesis 15.1.
Abraham's heart was dead, yet when God told him, I am thy buckler and exceeding
great reward, the fear which he had of five Kings, was with him accounted
nothing: so when the just who are accounted as the Apple of Gods eye, and the
Signet of his right arm are encompassed with all manner of troubles, their
hearts are stablished and shrink not, For if God be with us, say they, who
shall be against us: Thus when you behold the dignity, quality, utility, and
comfort of the soul.

Love God above all; be patient in all things, and be assuredly refreshed in
the hope of Gods neuer-fayling help. Which God Almighty grant us ever to
perform through Christ Jesus, Amen.

FINIS.

