Suff. ss. Memorandum that the (...)day of(...) Anno Dom. (...) in the County
aforesaid, upon his Recognisance acknowledged according to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided, is Licensed, assigned and allowed by
(...) Justices of the Peace of the said County, to keep a common Victualling
and Alehouse, in (...) aforesaid in the house wherein he now dwells, until
the Sessions of the Peace, to be holden next after Easter, next ensuing: so as
in the mean time he do observe and keep the Articles hereunder specified. In
witness whereof, the said Justices have caused the common Seal, by his
Majesty, for this purpose specially assigned, to be hereunto set the day and
year first above written.

Articles to be observed.
THat he suffer no neighbors children or servants, nor any dwelling in the same
Town to be tippling in his house.

That none be suffered to tipple in his house in any day* above one hour.

That none be suffered to tipple in his house on the Sabbath and festiual
days at the time of Sermons, or Service, nor any time after nine of the clock
at night.

That if any vagabonds or suspicious persons come to his house, he shall
acquaint the Officers with it, And so if any goods be offered in his house to
be sold by any.

That he suffer no Diceing, Carding, or other play in his house.

That he suffer no drunkenness, or other dissolute disorder to be in his
house, and if any happen to be, to acquaint the Constables of the Town with
it, that the offenders may be punished.

That he shall not brew in his house, but take his drink from the Brewer where
it may be had, and the best to be but at (...)the barrel, and the small at
(...) the barrel.

That he draw out his drink by the Ale-quart or pint, and not by iugges or
cups, and sell the best after the rate of three pence the Ale-gallon, And the
worst after the rate of two pence the gallon, And that if he must needs brew
himself, to make it so, as he may sell it at the price aforesaid.

That he suffer no flesh to be dressed, or uttered in his house, upon days
prohibited.


