A RECEITE FOR GRACE.

IN A SERMON PREACHED in the Parish Church of Westminster.

By CHRISTOPHER STYLES.

PSALM. 84.12. The Lord will give grace and worship, and no good thing shall he
withold from them that live a godly life.

^EACE PLENTY (...) WISDOM (...) printer's device?

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY FRANCES, BARONESS OF BVRGH, Dowager of
Thomas Lord Burgh, Knight of the Honorable order of the Garter, and sometime
Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Governor of Brill: grace and peace be multiplied.
MAdam, as ever since my first coming to Westminster, I have liberally tasted
of your Honorable bounty; so now your daily charity unto me, has made my
life so much more comfortable. Many, who have received great and special
favors done by your Honor for their good, have confessed themselves bound in
all thankfulness of duty and service as debtors unto you: Amongst the which,
my self (most deeply engaged) have thought it meet to show some token of this
my duty and thankfulness to your Ladyship: (And that is this book, an
unworthy present) which I beseech you to accept of, as you shall be pleased to
judge of the matter, not of the bringer.

So it is, that God being the spiritual Physicion for the soul, and Mankind
his Patients: the Prophets and Preachers of Gods Church, are (if I may so
term them) his Apothecaries to apply the spiritual Physic prescribed unto
them, in the sacred bills (of Gods Book) the holy Bible.

Of which number my self being one (though the most unworthy of all men)
having received this sacred bill, my text, as a receipt for grace, which I have
applied unto this Congregation:

And now by experience, finding it probatum, part of the best physic that can
be ministered to such an ungracious world (as this wherein we live,) I have
therefore committed the same unto the Press, for the public benefit (so far
as may be) of Gods holy Church, and do commend the same unto your Honorable
protection. For which I shall ever acknowledge my self bound, to remain

Your Honors daily Orator, CHRISTOPHER STYLES.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, (I confess, the Press is oppressed) and there is no end in
making of books, (and every Preacher is not fit to be a Writer) I do also
humbly acknowledge my defect in both: what bold presumption then does spur me
forwards to so dangerous adventures? Only these weak reasons:

First, a diligent desire not to be idle, as also to use it for a better
means whereby to shun idle and evil company.

Secondly, writing makes our knowledge more certain, and our speech more
ready and perfect.

Thirdly, because we are called to teach the Word of God, as well by writing,
as by word; by pen, as by voice; therefore the Prophets wrote hidden mysteries;
the Apostles profound doctrines; and John the Evangelist, a whole book of
Divine Revelations; and not without command.

What if my plainness be not well taken of the envious? (let them that are
gald, kick) my faithful meaning herein, is for the common good of the
multitude; and yet I know, the most good will redound unto my self. Therefore
(good Christian) though I write not excellently, pleasing things to delight
thee, and to profit all: yet if I write honestly plain truth, which no doubt
will comfort many, especially my friends, and all such as fear God without
dissembling: Strain not thy conscience to cavil at words, and to wrest them
contrary to good meaning: if any small fault has escaped me, consider thy
self (in another, or the like kind) may commit a worse: for Humanum est
errare: It were beyond humane nature not to err; therefore let thy charity
cover that, which thy envy would disclose: for Diuinum est amare: it makes us
like unto God, to love: for God is love. Use thy discretion: and so farewell.

C. S.

A RECEITE FOR GRACE.
2. COR. 6.1. We therefore, as workers together, do beseech you, that you
receive not the grace of God in vain.


IT is wittily observed, that all the Epistles of Paul stand on two legs; that
is, Doctrine, and Exhortation: therefore to trouble you with no further
circumstances; this Scripture, my Text, is nothing else but an exhortation to
reduce the wandering Corinthians from their disobedience and ignorance, to the
careful practice of religious holiness. And for as much as they have heard
the voices of Christ's spiritual Trumpetters (now a good space) threatening the
judgments and fierce wrath of God against the obstinate and impenitent sinner,
and proclaiming the free pardon of Gods rich mercy, to all that truly repent,
and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel: that therefore they would no longer
dis-hearten their teachers, and despise the Grace that is brought unto them by
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and so forsake their own mercy: but humbly
to submit themselves in all obedience unto those holy counsels, and walk
worthy of their vocation in newness of life; that others may glorify God for
their gracious conversion, and holy conversation.

Now for our better ease in proceeding to handle these words, let us observe
these circumstances following: First, the Apostles unity and consent with the
other teachers, in these words, We are workers together. Secondly, his
humility, in these words, do therefore beseech you. Thirdly, his fidelity, in
these words, that you receive not the grace of God in vain. Now repeat all the
Text.

First, to speak of unity: we read, that unity is said to be understood three
ways: first, it must be within us touching our selves, by an absolute assent,
and consent of al our understanding parts, that the mind may be settled, Psalm.
108.1.
as David's was, who said, O God, my heart is ready, etc. that is, that we may
be firm and stable in all our counsels and resolutions: Iam. 1.8.
for the Apostle says, A wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways.

Secondly, it must be in us touching God, by faith and love; for faith unites
our understanding; and love, our affection unto God: while we endeavor to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.3.
Thirdly, it must be in us touching our neighbor, by brotherly love: for it is
meet that he which is united unto God, should be in unity with all the world:
as the Apostle speaks elsewhere, Above all things put on love, Col. 3.14.
which is the bond of perfectness, and let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to the which you are called in one body: and this is the unity here
meant, Psalm. 3 3.
Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in
unity. The Apostle Paul not presuming to build the faith of the Church upon the
foundation of his own doctrines only, confesses himself to be but a
fellow laborer, saying, 1. Cor. 3.9.
We together are Gods laborers: ye are Gods building, and Gods husbandry.

Our Savior Christ chose twelve Disciples, whom he sent forth to minister
comfort to the Elect of God, as well by doctrine as by miracles, wrought among
them: and there arose a strife amongst them, Luke 22.24.
which of them should be the chiefest: but he told them plainly, The Kings of
the Gentiles reign, etc. but it shall not be so: but let the greatest among
you be as the least, and the chiefest as he that serves. In the members of the
body, all are not created for one service; and, all the members have not one
office: for the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the
head unto the feet, I have no need of you; yea much rather, those members of
the body that seem to be most feeble, are most necessary.

Thus you see, as in the building of an house, all are not master builders; but
some are bringers of stone, some hewers of stone, and some are appointed to be
drawers of water, and hewers of wood in the Lords house, yet all but
fellow-seruants to God the great King, and fellow laborers in Gods Church.
What a shame and scandal then must needs come upon the Church, when some will
domineere most imperiously, and some of necessity shall be forced to serve as
slaves, and to perform their daily task for scorning taunts? Our Apostle
speaks in another place thus, I am the least of the Apostles, not worthy to
be called an Apostle (for who is worthy of these things?) yet I have labored
more than they all: so it is most miserable, if any spiritual laborers should
be forced to take up the just complaint of churlish Nabals servants, 1. Sam.
25.
and say to their Mistrisse the Church, Surely evil will come upon our Master,
and all his family, for he is so wicked that a man cannot speak to him. But my
purpose is only to apply this doctrine to you, beloved.

Behold, the Master is maintained by the diligence of his servants; the
servants are all under the same subjection and obedience to their Master: shall
he therefore that is put in the chief place, smite the servants, and the
maids, and eat and drink with the drunken? Surely the master of that servant
shall come in a day when he thinks not, Luke 12 45, 46
and in an hour when he is not aware, and shall cut him off, and give him his
portion with the unbelievers.

I fear, it is a fashion amongst many masters, that the Master will make small
conscience in the usage of his servants (for the most part) although they be
their chief vpholders. But let them know, they also have a Master in heaven.
And I fear also, that too many servants will be dogged to their fellows, if
they be but a little inseriour unto them, in time, or place: but (I say unto
you, from the powerful authority of Jesus Christ) it should not be so. Follow
the example of this blessed Apostle; and if you be workers together, live in
unity of love, and peaceably one with another: and so no doubt but the God of
peace shall make you prosperous, with the rich blessings of his abundant love
for evermore.

Secondly, we are to observe this blessed Apostles humility, in these words, I
beseech you. It is truly reported by a reverend Doctor, that the Ministers duty
is set forth at large, and that most sweetly, in 1. Corinthians. 4. and in this
present Chapter of my Text. The Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, sent forth his
Disciples, Luke 10.
to be Lambs amongst Wolves, not Wolves amongst his holy Lambs; and he called
Peter to feed them, Ioh. vlt.
and not to fight with them. And the Apostle Peter himself tells us, We must be
laborers in Gods vineyard, 1. Pet. 5.3.
not Lords over Gods heritage: Spiritus Dei, nec mendax, nec mordax: He that
has the Spirit of God, is neither a liar, nor a reuiler: they must be Doves,
not Serpents; Lambs, not Dogs; without gall, without sting, without biting;
that is, they must study to be loved, not lothed, for their doctrine.

And here let me tell you (beloved) though some be of a generous, hopeful
disposition, even such as will be easily drawn by good words, to do good;
yet this Age affoords so many obstinate Atheists that will not know God, and so
many hypocrites and Machiauilians, that will not obey God in Spirit and truth,
but follow after vanity and lyings, that scarce can most forcible arguments
drive them from their wicked errors. Here I accuse none: let every man's
conscience be his own judge.

Thus our Apostle, after long labor amongst the Corinthians, finding them
diligent obseruers of his doctrine, rejoices for the confidence he has of
them, as in the next Chapter, at the last verse: and therefore now he teaches
them no more with a rod, 1. Cor. 4.21.
but with love, and in the spirit of meekness. Ye are a building, beloved: and
ye know ever, the building will decay without repairing. Doctrines for faith,
and exhortations for life and manners, are the only means which the Ministers
of Christ must use for the repairing of man's decaying soul. Therefore suffer
the words of exhortation gladly, knowing that you are bettered thereby in the
estate of your souls, concerning God, your selves, and all the world. An
excellent example we have from our Savior himself, Discite ex me, Mat. 11.29.
quia mitis and humilis sum cord: Learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in
heart. And surely, if reverent humility had not been the best ornament for us,
Christ himself would never have been a patteme of that glory unto us: but as
the Apostle shows elsewere, I beat down my body, lest I should teach
others, and be my self a Castaway. So I pray and beseech you, holy Fathers,
and reverend brethren, 1. Tim. 4.16.
that you take heed unto your selves, and to your doctrine, to continue
therein, that so you may save your selves, and them that hear you.

Consider, how vile a reproach it must needs be unto the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, if we shall teach others to obey that, which our selves will by no
means endure: as the Scribes and Pharisees laid heavy loads on the people,
which themselves would not touch with the least of their fingers. Therefore this
blessed Apostle does teach the same thing which he did practice; and as he was
humble of life in his public conversation; so in the humility of words he
frames his exhortation with gentle persuasions, to win them to God, and to
do good.

And surely, in denouncing the threatened judgments of God, no doubt it is (as
I my self have observed by experience) great ease and comfort to the sinners
soul, if in condoling sorrow, with all meekness and humility, they do
beseech that may command: that is, if we do so teach the people, that by our
gentle words, and humble speeches, they may conceive our loving compassion
toward them. And as the Jews said of Christ, when they saw him weeping for
the hardness of their hearts, at Lazarus grave, Ioh. 11.36.
Behold how he oued him! So the people, when they shall behold the Preacher
stand over the graves of their souls (now dead by sin) crying out, and
proclaiming the vengeance of God against every sin, and weeping for the
daughter of Sion, because of the neemesse of her judgment, and for the
hardness of her heart, that at the least they may be forced to say within
themselves, Behold how he loves us! It may be the best means also to provoke
them to consider of the estate of their souls, and to search and try out all
their ways, and to turn again unto the Lord.

Thus let our charitable compassion in teaching, win the people to contrition
and conversion; and let the hearers tears be the Preachers praise.

And here I must admonish you, beloved, that you do not rashly and
irreverently accuse your Teachers; and when they generally aim to smite at sin
with the two edged Sword (Gods Word) that then you make no private or
particular application of his words against his meaning. For we come not, as
Nathan did to David, poynting at the sinner, 2. Sam. 12.7. Mat. 13.3.
to say, Thou art the man: but as the sower that comes to sow his seed, if it
lights on stony ground, where it cannot take root, that is, hearts so
hardened by sin, that they cannot repent; we sorrow that we have labored in
vain, and may justly take up Saint Peter's complaint to our Savior, that we
have fished all night, and caught nothing. And if our seed fall by the
high-way-side, as when we speak to unprepared hearers, where the fowls of the
air gather it up; such are wandering looks, idle apparel, vnreuerent gesture
of the body, and the like; still we have cause to mourn, because you sorrow
not: or if our seed fall among thorns, where the covetous cares of the world,
the lustful pleasures of the flesh, and the diabolical life of pride spring
up to choke the Word, and to catch and cavil at him that sowed the Word; yet
still we must arm our selves to bear this injury. But if our seed fall upon
the good ground of a sanctified heart, an honest heart prepared to receive the
Word with joy, and to embrace the Teachers thereof with delight: lo, those are
easily moved with our doctrines, and sweetly drawn by our entreatings to bring
forth the fruits of a godly life, in the holiness of their conversation. And
these we do beseech, and for their sakes, and by their examples all the rest,
that they receive not the grace of God in vain. And so I come to the last and
great part of my Text, the Apostles fidelity, who labors to teach that only
unto them, which is most profitable for them, namely, how to retain the grace
of God, and that they in no wise receive the same in vain.

Thirdly and lastly, in speaking of the Apostles fidelity, mark here how he
does not seek to please them with words, but in soundness of doctrine does
instruct them, and teach them the way that they should choose; namely, that they
may grow in grace, and not to receive the grace of God in vain.

Amongst many other attributes and titles whereby God is described, he is
called Gracious: Exodus 34.6.
not for that only he is so in himself; but because he gratifieth all sorts.
This word Grace, is understood three manner of ways:

1. Sometimes it is taken for grace and favor, by which a man (through his
gracious carriage, in word and conversation) becomes acceptable, and
obtains grace and favor in the eyes of all that are not envious; Prou. 3.34.
Luke 2. vlt.
and so he gives grace to the humble: and so Jesus grew in wisdom and
stature, and in grace and favor with God and men.

2. Sometimes it is taken for the undeserved grace and favor, which is offered
to any out of good will; or to an offendour, after some injury received at his
hands: as when the King pardons offenders, and one forgiving another their
trespasses. Genesis 6.1.
So Noah found grace in the sight of the Lord, when all the rest of the world
were drowned, save only himself and his small Family. And so the Angel told
Mary, Luke 1.30.
that she had found grace and favor with God. Therefore without any merit of
hers at all, it pleased God to choose this Virgin, above all other Virgins in
the world, to bear his Son, her Savior, in her womb. Thus Paul also, by
the grace of God, became a faithful Preacher to the Church of God, that a
little before was a cruel persecutor of the same; and now became a chosen
Vessel to bear the Name of God unto the Gentiles. Act. 9.15.


3. Sometimes it is taken for those gifts that come of Gods grace, and that as
well such natural graces, (such are faith, repentance, and all the godly
motions of an holy soul) (as Lydia when she believed, Peter when he repented,
and Job, when he trusted God) as also unnatural gifts; such are knowledge,
understanding, utterance, and grace.

Grace is effectually in the Elect, by the sense, knowledge, and effects
thereof; but simply it is in God alone, in whom all virtues are most perfect
and absolutely excellent; for the proper seat of grace is in God, and
consequently in his Son Jesus Christ; and all that we receive, is from God,
and comes down from above, Iam. 1.17.
even from the Father of light, with whom is no variablenes, neither shadow of
turning. The least gift is a grace: therefore let our prayers and praises
ascend up unto God, that he may be pleased to power down the blessing of his
gracious Spirit upon us: when we feel Gods grace, let us give humble thanks
and praise unto God for it; and when we feel the want of grace, let us pray
heartily unto God Almighty for it: and God give us all grace to perform this
duty faithfully, for evermore.

Grace is a name derived of joy, for nothing is so fruitful of joy as grace;
and grace in the primitive signification, is nothing else but a free love and
favor of a superior to his inferior, for his comfort and joy; as of a Prince
to his Subjects, of a father to his children, of a master to his servants, and
of God to the faithful: whereby every one in their several functions,
diligently and faithfully do the work of their calling, in cheerfulness
without grudging, being always assured of their Sovereigns gracious love and
favor unto them.

Moreover, grace is said to be the light of the soul; and therefore he that
is destitute of the light of grace, dwells in the darkness of sin, and
without it shall never see the light of glory and joy: for grace is the pledge
of glory, and be cannot lose the one, that keeps the other, nor obtain the
one, without the other. Heb. 4.26.
Let us therefore go boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may receive
mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need.

By grace a man is taught to know his sin, to love God above all, and
evermore to cleave steadfastly unto his gracious promises; and without this
grace of God, it is impossible to please God, or to do good. Grace is said to
be in a man that has received it, as Art is in the workman that is skillful
in his trade; always present, but not always working: therefore be not
high-minded, but fear: and if thou feel grace present with thee, yet fear,
lest thou be slack and negligent to perform those good works which she
exciteth thee unto: if thou feel a defect of grace in thee, the rather
fear, because the strength of thy soul is departed, and thy best guide
seems quite to forsake thee: if the sense of grace return to thee again,
yet fear, lest thy sins bereave thee again of this sweet comfort:
whatsoever we have, we receive by grace from God through Jesus Christ; and it
is therefore called grace, because it is given gratis. Now in a full fountain,
we may take up as much water as our vessel will contain; and if it takes up
but a little, the defect is not in the fountain, but in the vessel: so in
Jesus Christ, who is the fountain of life, full of grace and truth.

Thus you see, beloved, grace is the comeliness of all things, the joy of all
things, and the perfection of all things: and this grace is thus distinguished,
to be Infusa, Diffusa, Effusa: powered in, spread abroad, and spreading forth.

First, 1. Insusa.
it is said to be infused and distilled into the heart, soul, and conscience
of man, whereby he is restrained from evil thoughts: for as the small drops of
rain do pierce the hardest stones that lie under their droppings, and a
little water will bring the clay to an excellent temperature, which otherwise
is hardened by the Sun: In like manner, even by the sweet and gentle
operation of Gods holy grace, that heart, which so long was hardened like a
stone, by sinful actions, and the continuance of wicked practices (as we read
of Nabal) it is now by the spiritual infusion of grace, 1. Sam. 25.
easily pierced and pricked with compunction, as the Jews at Peter's preaching:
Act. 2.37.
so likewise the droping dew of grace, being once infused into the heart now
hardened against the glorious sunshine of the Gospel, as Saul's, Act. 9.1, 2.
does easily mollify and become like David's heart, which was even like melting
wax. And whereas before, all such made no conscience in practicing all heinous
sins; now Gods grace is infused into them, it will not admit so much as an
evil thought to tarry with them. Lord, evermore give us this grace.

Secondly, it is said to be scattered, 2. Diffusa.
sild out (as it were) to be spread abroad in the heart. And as the good wine
which Jesus made of the water, Ioh. 2.^.
was filled out of the stony pots, to be served unto the ghests at the marriage
table: So the joyful gift of grace, being once infused into the heart of earth
and stone, is filled out (as it were) and proceeds by the mouth, into words
that are always gracious, Ephesians. 4.29.
to edify all those that shall be ghests at the Supper of the Lambs
marriage. Revel. 19.9.


As the sweet Singer of Israel sweetly prophesied of Christ, Diffusa est gratia
in labijs tuis, Psalm. 45.3.
Grace is powered out by thy lips (for so S. Jerome reads it, and thus
expounds it) Because (says he) the law came by Moses, Ioh. 1.17.
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Full of grace are thy lips (for so
the common translation bears it,) for with a word thou healedst every disease:
with a word thou made the sea to be calm: with a word thou did command
the winds to be silent: with a word thou calledst Lazarus, and he came forth of
the grave, when he had lien dead there four days before. Finally, with a
word, whatsoever, and whenever thou speak the word, the grace of thy lips
has brought it to pass; as when thou did send the Holy Ghost to sit upon
the Apostles in the likeness of cloven tongues of fire, Act. 2.3.
thou did thereby teach them to speak learnedly, effectually, and
graciously. Here observe, that into whomsoever grace is once infused, it will
suffer no evil thoughts to remain there any longer: so likewise it being
scattered in the heart, it spreads further of it self, and fills the mouth
with the praises of God, according to that sweet saying of the Royal Prophet:
Psalm. 115.17, 18.
The dead praise not thee, O Lord, neither all they that go down into the
silence: but we will praise the Lord from this time forth for evermore. And
most true it is; for how can they praise God, whose hearts are dead by sin?
But such as are quickened by the life of grace, do (doubtless) praise the
Lord with joyful lips.

Thirdly, 3. Effusa.
Grace is said to be powered out in great abundance, ouerflowing (as it were)
and streaming forth unto all our actions. Genesis 2.
For as out of Eden there went a river to water the garden, and from thence it
was divided, and became into four heads: so by the Holy Ghost, from Jesus
Christ our spiritual Eden of pleasure, the river of grace goes forth to water
the spiritual Paradise, man's heart, (Gods garden of delight,) Psalm. 147.11.
and from thence it is divided into so many heads as we have actions; that so
all our thoughts, our words, and our works may begin, continue, and be
finished by grace: Romans 6.14.
and therefore (says the Apostle) Sin shall now have no more dominion over
you, for you are not under the law, but under grace. By which grace we are
taught, first, what to desire, and that is, to do well all the days of our
lives, even to do the will of God our heavenly Father for evermore. Also it
teaches us what to avoid, and that is, all ungodliness, which corrupts our
understanding, and all wordlines, which corrupts our affections; that with
pure hearts, and clean hands, we may truly serve God in holiness and
righteousness for evermore.

Finally, it teaches us how to live; and that is, soberly, and not
lasciuiously, touching our selves; justly, and not deceitfully toward our
neighbors; faithfully and devoutly in our religion to God.

Thus you have heard (beloved) at large, what grace is, and what be the powers
and virtuous effects of the same. And now I will conclude in a word, to show
you who they be, and how it is, that so many receive the grace of God in vain.
He receives the grace of God in vain, that is not exercised in the practices
of obedience, even good works: as holy David speaking of the blessed man,
Psalm. 1.2.
says, In Gods Law he will exercise himself both day and night: therefore if
we desire to have the grace of God to abide with us continually, of necessity
we must keep our selves from vices, and nourish this holy Spirit of grace,
with the virtuous exercises of a godly life. The Sun in the firmament (as much
as possibly may be) does spread his lightsome beams in every place, and upon
every thing in common: so does the light of Grace from the Son of God) But as
the light of the Sun cannot enter into that house where the doors and windows
are shut of purpose to keep it out: and as a green piece of watery wood does
strive to quench out the fire with its moisture: So grace does not enter into
the heart of that man which is bard up in the darkness of sin; and that heart
that is full of the watery humors of lustful concupiscence, even (as it were)
of set purpose, and of an evil will, does oppose it self against grace,
seeming to quench that holy Spirit, by which they are sealed unto the day of
Redemption. As he carries his instrument in vain, that will not work with
it: so does he that has received grace, and will not work out his salvation
with fear and trembling. He that employed not his talent, Mat. 25.31.
was condemned as an unprofitable servant, to be caft out into utter
darkness. No man will keep an idle servant that will do no work, no, nor
yet an idle horse that is fit for no service: and therefore what, thinks the
slothful Christian, shall fall upon him, that daily does receive all blessings
and graces from God, and yet will do no good work whereby God may be
glorified,
the Church edified, or the Commonwealth wherein he lives, may be the better
for him? As that tree cannot bear fruit, whose root is dried up; so that man,
whose heart is not moystened by grace, cannot bring forth the fruits of good
works. As a stone cannot move upwards, except it be helped; nor a hatchet cut,
unless it be moved; so man can do no good work, 1. Cor. 15.10.
without the help of Gods grace. By the grace of God I am that I am (says
Paul) and his grace which is in me, was not in vain: but I have labored more
than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which is in me. Every man that
would be gracious, and not receive the grace of God in vain, must carefully
and faithfully observe two points:

First, to be humble, for by humility the grace of God is obtained: and so the
Apostle teaches, how God resists the proud, Iam. 4.6.
and gives grace to the humble. The gentle water of grace does still descend
from the steepy mountains of pride, to the lowly valleys of humility. In the
Virgin Mary's Magnificat, she teaches us how she came to obtain Gods grace:
For (says she) he has regarded the lowliness of his hand-maiden. Luke 1.48.


Secondly, if we desire to receive the grace of God not in vain, we must
practice piety and godliness, for grace is no otherwise to be preserved: for
God and his gifts are so absolutely holy, that they cannot be joined with any
sin. Grace and sin cannot agree in any soul; for where sin raigns, there
is no grace; and where grace is, there no sin can rule. Therefore every one
that seeks or desires to be possessed of grace, must discharge his soul of
sin. And that he may obtain grace, let him deck himself with humility; and
that he may preserve grace, let him practice piety, never to receive the grace
of God in vain. There be four tokens, whereby we may know them that receive
not the grace of God in vain, from them that do receive this grace in vain.

First, he that faithfully endeavors to keep the commandments of Almighty
God, and does daily reprove and amend his ways, and goes from strength to
strength (still as it were leaning upon the staff of Gods grace) to turn his
feet, and his affections unto Gods testimonies; although this man be not
absolutely perfect in the sight of men, yet is it a sure to (...) that the
grace of God ^^elleth plente (...) and that not in vain.

Secondly, he that is free from the poll^^^on of (...) has overcome the
corruption of ^^s nature, it is manifest by the victory, that the grace of God
has made him a joyful conqueror: for he that thus overcomes himself, is
better than he that ^^^neth a City.

Thirdly, he that always iudg^^^ charitably of others, without contempt or
disgrace, and so bears himself in all his actions peaceably and contentedly,
it is a manifest testimony that such a man's life is rightly ordered and squared
by the Spirit of Gods holy grace.

Fourthly and lastly, he that can bear all his afflictions patiently without
fear, cleaving fast to the promises of God, such an one does truly show
himself to be vpholden by the power of grace.

And these few words shall be sufficient to point ou^ unto you the true stamp
of a gracious man, and to show you what I have conceived out of these words of
my text, concerning unity, humility, and fidelity. God Almighty give such a
blessing to this doctrine, that what we have heard with our ears, we may
truly treasure it up in our hearts, and diligently practice it in our lives,
for evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen, Amen, So be it.

FINIS.

