A BRIEF REPLY TO A certain odious and slanderous libel, lately published by
a seditious Jesuit, calling himself N. D. in defense both of public enemies,
and disloyal subjects, and entitled A temperate wardword, to Sir Francis
Hastings turbulent watchword:

Wherein not only the honest, and religious intention, and zeal of that good
Knight is defended, but also the cause of true catholic religion, and the
justice of her Majesty's proceedings against Popish malcontents and traitors,
from diverse malicious imputations and slanders cleared, and our adversaries
glorious declamation answered, and refuted by O.E. defendant in the Challenge,
and encounters of N. D.

Hereunto is also added a certain new Challenge made to N. D. in five
encounters, concerning the fundamental points of his former whole discourse:

Together with a brief refutation of a certain calumnious relation of the
conference of Monsieur Plessis and Monsieur d'Eureux before the French king,
lately sent from Rome into England; and an answer to the fond collections, and
demands of the relator.

Deuteronomy. 13. That prophet, or dreamer of dreams shall be slain, because he has
spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God. Matthew. 7. Beware of false
prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves. Zenodotus. (...). i. Halter me these wolves. Theocrit. in Bucoliastis.
(...). that is, as if he should say, If you nourish up wolves and dogs, they
will in the end devour, or bite you. Imprinted at London, by Arn. Hatfield.
1600.

To N. D. alias Noddie, that lately took upon him to plead for P.P. and for
all the Popish faction and heresy, O. E. wishes the knowledge of truth, and
more love and loyal affection to his Prince and country.
SIr N.D. or Noddy, or howsoever it shall please you to style your self, being
a man but of two or Homo trium literarum.
three letters, it should seem you were in a fit of a choleric fever,
when you wrote your late Wardword. For every where you fret, fume, and chafe,
and all the dishes of your feast are chafing-dishes, and hot words both against
your adversary, and others. No doubt you were distempered, or else I think,
you would not have raued, or rather raged after such a mad fashion. You seem
also to be full of galls, scabbes, and sores. For what else should make you to
cry, and exclaim so passionately, when you are but lightly and tenderly
touched? I can compare you to none more fitter, then to that vlcerous fellow in
In Niptris. Cicer. Tusc. 2.
Sophocles, that could not abide the hands of surgeons: Abscedite, says he,
dimittite.
Nam attrectatu, and quassu saeuum amplificatis dolorem.
Your self and your cause is so full of botches, that you can abide no shaking,
nor handling; and therefore with Ibidem.
Philoctetes may say, Iam iam absumor, conficit animam
Vis vulneris, vlceris aestus.
Like you are to dame In the Italian legend, in the life of Saint Catharine.
Bonauenture sister to Catharine of Siena that noble Romish saint, that was
like to die, as often as she heard but one foul word; so tender hearted was she.
And you are so tender eared, that you cannot abide to hear any evil word of
the pope, or of his agents. He may proceed against us, as an enemy; and his
agents may broch rebellions and treasons, and else what mischief they can; and
yet we may neither touch your holy father, nor lay open the lewd practices of
enemies and traitors. And because Sir Francis does touch the hostile actions of
the Pope and Spanyard, and treacherous practices of Romish priests and
Jesuits; you In the preface to the Wardeword.
leap suddenly into your raging and impatient fits, and complain of railing
and calumniation saying, that his discourse is an injurious pamphlet, and a
biting libell, and that he is enraged with a furious vein of inuectiue spirit
neither sparing God, nor man. And as if this had not been sufficient, you tell
us further, that the This applied to Andreas Philopater or Parsons, is true.
flowers, or rather furies of his discourse are lying, forging, falsifying,
ignorant vaunting, odious scoffing, malicious calumniations, seditious
interpretations, bloody exaggerations, barbarous insultations, and that he
rusheth further to the open assault of foreign monarkes, their honors fame and
reputation.

But rage, and revel as long, as you list: I doubt not, but all honest men
will commend us, and all moderate men will allow us to speak in defense of our
Prince and country. Our country is dear unto us, and if all valiant men
ought to venture their lives for it, little should we deserve, if we would not
open our mouths to speak for it. Heathen men by no pretense of religion could
be drawn from defense of their country. Fabius Maximus was wont to say, that
those attempts were done according to religion, that were done for the safety
of the state. Dicere ausus est, says De senectute.
Tully, optimis auspicijs ea geri, quae pro salute reipub. fierent. And Iliad.
(...).
Hector said, that whatsoever the chanting of birds foretold, it was best to
defend valiantly a man's country. (...) says he, (...). And shall we under a
pretense of false religion abandon true religion, for which we are to forsake
father, mother, wife and children, and all we have, and for pretense of (I know
not what) danger, forsake our most dear country, for which every honest man
ought to give his life, and all he has? If you talk with Parsons the Jesuit,
he will tell you, that it is no such discommendable matter, to speak what we
can in defense of our country, and of religion, especially against the public
enemies of religion, and of our country, and against disloyal traitors, that
are with their entisements drawn to rail against their Prince, and to betray
the cause of religion, and their country. Be they monarkes, or be they friar
frapartes, popes or cardinals, terrestrial gods, or carnal men: if they be
our enemies, and seek our destruction, and the destruction of our religion,
Prince and country; I esteem him but a base fellow, that fears to encounter
them in any sort. That privilege does the law of war give unto us, to strike
any, that will come against us in the field. Certes, if it be free for you to
defend the cause of public enemies, that with fire and sword seek to destroy
us; of wicked and traitorous priests, Jesuits and their consorts, that by
secret practice would undermine the state, and bring foreign enemies upon us;
of impious and idolatrous heretics, that go about to erect idolatry and
popish impieties; you must give us leave to speak for our religion, that is
most catholic and apostolic; for our Prince, that is so gracious and
merciful, and offends in nothing more, then showing such grace, and mercy
to so merciless and wicked traitors, as seek her destruction, and the
desolation of this country; for our selves, that profess true religion, and
abhor Romish idolatry, superstition and heresy.

With Sir Francis you have no reason to be offended, if you be, as you pretend,
a friend to her majesty, and the country. He speaks against the Spaniard:
and why should he not, the Spanish king, without all just cause, professing
himself our enemy? He weighs little the popes authority. And has he not
reason, the pope in his tyranny showing himself, not only to be our enemy,
but also the enemy of Christian religion, and of Christ's church? He touches
also the practices and treasons of Gifford, Worthington, etc.
priests and Parsons o^ Delman, H^it, Walpooi^, etc.
Jesuits, and their adherents: but not without just cause, seeing they have
showed themselves not catholics, as you term them (for catholics never held
either any such religion, as theirs is, nor sought by violence to murder
lawful Princes, and ruinate their native country) but dangerous traitors, and
most malicious Testified by Sixtus Q^intus declaratorie sentence against the
Queen.
enemies of their country. Likewise he commends her Majesty's clemency, and
you have no cause to dislike the same, least percase it may please God to turn
her heart through your ungratefulness, and hateful practices, from her
intended course of clemency, which is not well fitting for your sharp humors,
into a course of justice, which your treacherous and most wicked practices do
draw upon you. This is his course against enemies, this is his dealing with
his sovereign. He neither iniustly charge his enemies, nor does he basely or
seruilely flatter his friends and superiors.

But admit your adversary had not used either that moderation in his style, or
sincerity in his dealing, which might pass the just censure of severe judges;
yet no man has less cause to find fault with these courses, then your self
and your consorts. For in railing and calumniation no man may compare with you.
It is not one only biting libell and injurious pamphlet, which you have set
out, but very many and diverse. I will deal plainly with you, for that I am
well acquainted with your style, and know your lewd packing, and practicing,
and can convince you, if you have your steel vizor on, and shame not to deny
so plain matters. I say then, that you Robert Parsons falsely abusing the name
of Jesus, to ouerthowe the truth of Jesus, have published first certain
chartels against your friends in Oxford: secondly, one famous or rather
infamous libell against the Earl of Leicesters commonwealth.
Leicester: thirdly, another single Entitled, a confutation of pretended fears.
libell against the late Lord Treasurer: fourthly, another infamous The words
by no loyal subject may be spoken.
libel against her Majesty, and against all her chief counselors under the
name of Andreas Philopater. Neither can you excuse your self, that A Jesuit
residing in the court of Spain, and Parsons disciple and Agent.
Creswell was the man that made the Latin, which you cannot do, when as you
either made it first in English, or else gave him all his argument. Fifthly, you
help Allen in his libell against the Queen and state anno 1588. and published
diverse copies. Sixthly, you set out Dolmans treacherous discourse to show your
self not only a libeller, but a notorious traitor and sworn enemy to your
country. Albeit The discovery of a countersect conference.
one of your friends does only term it a chartell or libell. This wardword
shall make up the seventh libell; and the patched relation of the conference
betwixt M. Plessis and Eureux, sent us lately from Rome, the eight. Beside
these you have published diverse base and paltrie pamphlets not worthy to be
mentioned: and these be the flowers or rather furies of your writings, and the
fruits of your inuecti^e vein. Never did any use more lying, forging, false
dealing, scornful gibing, odious bragging, then your self, in all your
writings. Your own The priests banded in England against the Jesuits.
friends accuse you of Machiuilian and Turkish practices, and well do your
writings and doings deserve these titles. The like also may be verified of
Sanders, Rishton, Ribadineira, Allen that hungry cardinal, and other your
friends. Tisiphone and the furies of hell spoke with their toongs, wrote with
their pens, and wrought in their malicious hearts. It is your self therefore,
and your treacherous consorts, upon whom all the reproves, wherewith you load
your adversary, do light fitly, and lie heavily.

And that you shall perceive by this discourse ensuing. Wherein, if I reform
your error in many things, whereof before you were ignorant; you are to thank
me. If you fee the hostile dealings of your friends the pope and Spaniard
declared and auowed; and your own and your consorts treasons, and a great
mass of your hidden villenies discovered, and take it grievously: you may
thank your self, that gave the occasion. If any Papist find himself agrieued
with my plainness; let him impute the fault to you also, that first began to
stir these coals, and to the mysteries of popish religion, that contain such
deep matters of rebellion and treason; and not to me, that being thus
provoked, have so plainly revealed them.

Because upon small advantages, you have made great triumphs, and called your
adversary forth to answer you, as it were in eight encounters; vanting and
facing, as if you were to play your masters prises: I have taken upon me to
join with you upon your own ground, and to try with you at your own weapons,
hoping to prove you ignorant both of state matters, wherein you pretend to
know such secrets, and also of sound divinity, and other learning; of which
your friends and your self make such vants. For matters concerning Sir Francis
Hastings his own person, I refer you to his own answer, that may
sufficiently satisfy you. For the rest I thought it not amiss to discourse
with you more at large.

And because you go about to carry away matters with fair pretenses, as if
you papists the popes children were the only catholics, and did profess the
ancient faith of the catholic church, and as if all others were heretics, and
wrong believers; I do also upon your lend glosses draw you out into five new
encounters; wherein if you ward not the better, it shall be proved, First,
that you are no catholics, nor hold the catholic faith; secondly, that your
religion is a new devise, and not the ancient religion of Christ's church;
Thirdly, that you are heretics; Fourthly, that the Romish Church is the harlot
of Babylon, and not the true church of Christ. And lastly, that your consorts
have been executed for treason most justly, and not for religion. Which being
proved, I trust, your self will confess, that we have just cause to
maintain that religion, that we profess, and to withstand antichrist, the
Spaniard, and all their adherents, that go about both by force and treason, to
work the destruction of her majesty and this state; and all because we do
publicly maintain this truth. And although you will not confess it, that
shut your eyes against the light of truth; yet I hope all the world shall
perceive both the wrongs of the pope and Spaniard, and of your self and other
rinegued English, that adhere unto them, and also the justice of our defense,
that are forced sometimes to take arms, and use our best means for the
sauegard of our country, our Prince, our wives, our children, our liberty,
our laws, our friends, most violently and wickedly oppugned under the pretense
of restoring Romish religion.

This discourse it may please you to accept, as proceeding from him, that is
desirous to inform you of a truth. And well can you not refuse it, seeing it
is an answer to your challenge, and contains a reply to your eight
treacherous encounters, and your bold and shameless petitions. Seeing you are
come into the field, you may not refuse to defend your self. Seeing you
present unto us your petitions, and are become an humble suitor at the court,
you cannot refuse your answer and dispatch. I do also desire answer in my
new encounters; and protest, that if you come not forth; you shall be baffuld
for a coward, unworthy to bear arms in this kind of warfare. If you be not
at leisure, by reason of your treasonable negotiations against your country,
let Creswell or some other treacherous babbling Jesuit stand forth, and try his
skill. It stands you much upon. If you cannot without railing, and
calumniation make an answer; then I hope, that all such, as you have abused,
will forsake you, as railing heretics, false teachers, and false traitors to
your country; and that they will also abandon the new devises, wicked
heresies, and strange religion which the popes and papists most wrongfully
called catholics, under the color and false mask of catholic religion, and
the catholic church, have defended and maintained. At the least they will take
heed, how they either run wilfully into dangerous treasons and rebellions, or
ignorantly admit into their country foreign enemies upon the popes warrant, or
upon pretense of religion, which they are never able to maintain, to be either
ancient, or catholic, or true.

And this I think will sufficiently clear Sir Francis Hastings both of
adulation, and of calumniation, and all other odious imputations, which you
have laid to his charge: if not in your eyes, nor judgment; yet certes in the
eyes of all indifferent men. As for others, we neither force their might, nor
weigh their malice. Let the ire of foreign princes be never so implacable, and
course of home traitors never so desperate, as you do threaten us: we shall by
the grace of God have means to withstand their force, proceeding from
notorious injustice, and, I hope, that our superiors according to laws will
encounter with the desperate courses of traitors.

Do you leave your threats, and your facing, and forging, and calumniations
and raylings, and in a moderate course prepare your self to justify your
challenge, and with substance of matter to answer that, which we have objected
against you, or else you will plainly declare your self a wrangling traitor,
that have nothing to accuse us of, but that we love true religion, our Prince
and country; nor to hate us for, but that we hate your abominable faction, and
false religion, and mean manfully to encounter both Italians and Spaniards,
and English traitors, and all the world, that shall bear arms against us. If
you shall happen to keep silence, we cannot choose, but proclayme your
disgrace, as abandoning that quarrel, which your self began.

In the mean time, while you are buckling on your arms, I have some words to
speak to the by standers or readers. Be not offended, I pray you. It shall not
be long, before I come into the steccato, and buckle with you again.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
WHat singular clemency has been showed toward the papists in this land, I
think no man of mean knowledge and judgment can be ignorant. Lib. histor.
Genuens. 23.
Petrus Bizarus an Italian writing the history of Genua, and upon occasion
mentioning her Majesty, does compare her to Alexander Seuerus, a most famous
prince for his clemency and other virtues, and testifies, that for twenty
years she governed her kingdom without blood, not suffering any to be
punished, but by lawful trial, and sentence of judges. The which is testified
by as many, as then knew her government, and by evidence of things then
passed. For so long as papists did content themselves with their popish
conceits and opinions, although many of them were false, absurd, and
blasphemous; yet neither did she seek to ensnare them by new laws, nor
execute the rigor of old laws against heretics, yet in force, against them.

In the mean while Thomas Harding Anno 1567.
obtained a bull from the pope, to exercise episcopal jurisdiction in England,
to dispense with irregularities, and to receive all, that would be reconciled
to the pope. Which was nothing else, but the beginning of a rebellion, which
broke forth two years after. For all that were reconciled to the pope,
renounced their obedience to the prince, as their actions did declare. In the
year 1569. Nicholas Morton was sent into England, to stir the earls of
Westmerland and Northumberland, and as many, as he could, to an open rebellion:
which By Sanders his conf^ssion it appears, that popish priests come into
England to stir up rebellion.
Sanders in his book de visibili monarchia, plainly tells, that we should
not be ignorant, why fugitive priests come over into England. These seditious
firebrands did make no small flame in the north parts, and laid plots to
stir other parts of England to coffeehouse, had not God crossed their
desseines.

All this notwithstanding, albeit popish religion, and the proper marks of it
began now to be made marks of faction, and that her Majesty saw by diverse
practices in England and Ireland, that papists did seek her life, and the
destruction of her kingdom, and that the Jesuits and priests that were sent
from Rome, came for no other purpose, then to practice against her life and the
state; yet did she give life to diverse rebels and traitors, refusing mercy to
none, but such as refused to accept her favor and mercy. At Rishtons ap^ndix
to Saners.
one time she caused twenty of this faction to be sent away; and at another
time, two and twenty, and at another thirty, most of them condemned, the rest
guilty of treason, or other capital crimes. And now she keeps diverse alive,
that if they had, either her Majesty in their power, or others, whom they
find contrary to their purposes, would not spare their lives one hour: nor
content themselves with ordinary revenge.

As for obstinate recusants, which (no doubt) for the most part This appeath by
diverse ^tters of popish jests ready to showed.
are secretly reconciled to the pope, and adhere to her enemies, yet do they
enjoy their lands, and goods, and country, and in effect their liberty; and
are only subject to pecuniarie punishments, which either they escape, not
being endited through favor, or by sleightes avoiding the enditement, or by
conueyance of their lands frustrating the law, or compounding for their
punishment.

Compare her Majesty's actions with the cruel proceedings of papists; and you
shall soon see an exceeding great difference. She This is proo^d in the end ^f
our new ^allenge.
executes none for mere matter of religion, unless under color of religion
they be taken practicing for her enemies authority, and against her state, and
person: they spare none. She spares notorious teachers of popish heresies, and
inflicteth only pecuniarie mulctes upon malcontent recusants, that plainly
disallow her government; The massacre of France and Flanders witness this.
they kill man, woman and child, that shall profess true religion. She only
defends her self against those, that are sent to perturbe the peace of her
government; they by torments and rackes seek out peacible persons, and
execute them to death most cruelly. She proceeds according to law, these
contrary to all laws Hist. Natalis Commit.
massacre men, women, and children, whom they suspect to be contrary to
themselves in opinion.

Which clemency of her Majesty, if it had either been well accepted of
foreign nations abroad, or else had mollified the hearts of disloyal papists
at home, all men would have well liked, and magnified. But seeing this
extraordinary favor, or rather remissness of laws and justice toward them
has caused diverse rebellions both in England and Ireland, and made them bold
to attempt against her Majesty's life and government, and given some of them
courage to conspire with foreign enemies, and hardened the hearts of our
enemies against us, and weakened the hands of such, as otherwise would have
been forward enough to attempt against them; and finally dissolved the sinews
of government in suffering malcontents to practice and not maintaining the
present state, and executing laws against offenders: many do think that
against such persons, that are so evil disposed, and so firmly linked to
foreign enemies, good justice is most necessary, and that it is far more
profitable and expedient, to execute laws, then to pardon such offenders. For
while such vipers are suffered to gnawe the entrails of their mother, and yet
are not punished; and malcontents suffered to degorge their poison against
religion, laws, government, magistrates, ministers of the church, and all
honest men; it is no marvel, though the number of disloyal subjects increase,
and though well affected and honest men withdraw themselves, and rest
discouraged. Now of late they A^ appears by the multiplicitie of their
libels, diversely mentioned in this treatise.
have taken to themselves a presumptuous and audacious liberty, not only to
speak their pleasure of her Majesty, and her laws and good friends, but also
to advance the cause of the public enemies of the state. Edward Rishton a
Seminary priest was no sooner by her Majesty's favor He set out Sanders
book, De schismate, and augmented it with infinite lies and reproaches.
delivered out of prison, and from the danger of death, which he had well
deserved, but he published against her and her Majesty's noble father and
brother a most odious and railing libell deuoide of all truth and honesty, and
for more credit to it, set it out under Nicholas Sanders his name and
authority after his death. This course was also taken by Nicholas Harpesfield,
who enjoying liberty to do what him listed, abused his liberty to rail on
his prince and country. These are the men, that go about to make their
nation, and this government infamous and odious to all posterity. And thus we
give life and liberty to those that seek nothing more, then to deprive us of
life, and good name.

Nay they are lately grown so insolent, that they dare not only tax and
rail at religion, and government, but also revel at all those, that once
begin to open their mouth in defense of the truth of her Majesty, of
justice, and of their country; and not only that, but also presume to offer
their paltrie pamphlets to the view and consideration of the Lords of her
Majesty's counsel, which are the chief maintainers of religion and justice.
And that this is most true, we need no further proof, then a certain
treatise entitled a Wardeword, and written in outward show against Sir Francis
Hastings, but in very truth against religion, and this government.

This good Knight of a right zealous mind toward religion, and a loyal and
loving affection toward her Majesty and the state, gives the word to his
countrymen, and stirs up such as sleep in too much security, to consider
the malice of the Pope, the preparations of the Spaniards, and the treachery of
Spaniolized papists, that either at home or abroad entertain intelligence
with them: and seeing foreign enemies seek by force to take the crown from
her Majesty, and to subvert the state, and to plant not only false religion,
but also an absolute tyranny in this land; he exhorts all loyal subjects,
and true English willingly to adventure their lives, and to spend their goods
in defense of their religion, prince and country. He advises also all true
Christians diligently to watch, and to beware of the treacherous practices of
priests, Jesuits, rinegued English, and their consortes, as meaning nothing
else, but the subversion of religion and state. In all which discourse, what
one sentence can be noted unworthy either a true Christian, or a loyal
subject, or a worthy knight? Is it not lawful to oppose himself against
public enemies and traitors, and to show his affection toward his prince and
country? Sure, this our counterfeit N.D. whose name Parsons the Jesuit does
borrow, as he does the name of Dolman otherwhere, is very much offended, that
either our knight should open his mouth in defense of the state, or offer
himself ready to resist the public enemies thereof. Nay further he aduanceth
the Pope and Spaniard, and maintains the cause of known traitors, and
raileth at all, that dare speak any thing against them. Wherein I need not
note unto you either his notorious folly, that showing himself a professed
enemy of his prince and country, yet thinks to obtain favor for his
clientes the papists at the princes hands, or their boldness, that vaunt of
this champion, when no man can like him, but must needs show a dislike of his
prince and country, and bewray himself to be an enemy to the state. But I
do the rather report unto you the sum of this man's pleading, that you may
the better understand the boldness and impudency of this generation, and how
through our own remissness we have suffered them to grow to this height of
insolency.

He appealeth to the Lords of her Majesty's counsel; and I hope they will
censure such a railing libeller and lewd companion according to his deserts.
My self also do commend unto them this whole cause, and doubt not, but they
will maturely consider the pride of the enemy, and the necessity of justice:
and that all magistates and good subjects will concur with them in this case.
Clemency and debonnairetie is very commendable; but to suffer either Gods
honor to be violated through idolatry or superstition, or the Christian
magistrates life or person to be endangered; or the commonwealth to be
undermined for want of due punishment of offenders, is not to be termed
clemency, but rather a remissness and dissolution of government, neither
well agreeing with religion, nor civil policy. 1. King. 15.
Asa king of Judah is commended, for that his heart was upright with the Lord al
his days: yet was it no small blemish to him, that he put not down the high
places, where the people had established another worship, then that which the
Lord had appointed. Manasses likewise, although upon his return from Babylon,
he reformed religion and settled matters in Gods temple; yet is he 2. Chron. 33.
noted, for that he suffered the people to sacrifice in high places. For
idolatrous worship is not to be suffered in any corner, nor by conniuencie to
be dissembled.

Neither is it policy to give too much liberty to such as give open signs of
malcontentment, and either secretly undermine the state, or publicly
transgress laws. That state, says In orat. Aeschin.
Aeschines, is good for nothing, that has no strength to repress offenders
against law. (...). Neither is there any greater malady in a state, as says
Euripides, then when malcontents and offenders are suffered to flourish. (...).
Tullie says, that dangerous and disobedient subjects, are with mulctes,
imprisonment, and corporal punishment to be restreined. Magistratus, says
Lib. 3. de legibus.
he, nec obedientem and noxium ciuem multa, vinculis, verberibusque coercento.
Neither can any commonwealth be maintained, but where there is a correspondence
of punishment to transgression of laws. Noxiae par poena esto, says a wise
Cicero lib. 3. de legib.
politic. And so respective were the Roman laws in this point, that where
by sleight, or want the offender could not have the penalty of the law laid
upon him, they gave power to the magistrate to lay an extraordinary punishment
upon him, that no offense might escape unpunished. Generaliter placet, says L.
quoties. ff. de poenis.
Vlpian, in legibus publicorum iudiciorum, vel priuatorum criminum, qui extra
ordinem cognoscunt praefecti vel praesides, vt eis, qui poenam pecuniariam
egentes eludunt, coercitionem extraordinariam inducant. To spare rebels and
traitors does cause diverse inconveniences. It discourageth loyal subjects to
adventure in defense of the state; it makes the rebels more insolent; it
gives more opportunity to foreign enemies to practice; and finally the
example of sparing some, does embolden other evil disposed persons to attempt
the like. It is an old saying, Impunitas magna est peccandi illecebra. Finally
the law of God does put a sword into the magistrates hand, not for naught, but
to maintain honest men, and to punish the wicked.

Now as it is not safe, nor profitable, to let rebels and traitors pass
without due justice; so it is not religious nor pious to suffer heretical and
false teachers, and spreaders of sects and divisions to escape unpunished, God
has Deuter. 13.
established a sharp law against false prophets, that shall entise men To go
after other gods, or shall go about to turn men from the Lord their God. He
commands the magistrate to put them to death, and Ibidem.
forbids private men To pity them, or keep them secret. The apostle writing
to the Romans Romans 16.
exhorts them, To mark such diligently, as should cause division, and
offenses among them, contrary to the doctrine, which they had learned, and to
avoid them. The L. omnes Cod. de haeret. and Manich.
emperors Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius put heretical teachers to
perpetual silence, and charged inferior officers not to wink at them. L.
cuncti. ibid.
Arcadius and Honorius deprived them of all exercises of their false religion.
L. Ariani. ibidem.
Theodosius and Valentinian the younger banished Arians, Manichees, and all
heretics out of the Roman empire. And for this cause did saint Lib. 1. cont.
epist. Parm^n. c. 6. and epist. 166.
Augustine highly commend the emperors justice: and Epist. 62.
teach, That it was necessary, that heretical teachers should be repressed and
corrected. Certes if laws had been executed against popish priests, Jesuits,
and other friars, and false teachers, neither would they have insinuated
themselves into this kingdom and into Ireland with that boldness; nor could
so many simple souls have been seduced, to the eternal destruction of their
souls, and of some of their l^ues; nor should they so much have increased the
popish faction, as some where they have done.

I doubt not, but magistrates both see those inconveniences, and will remedy
them. And therefore I need not to use many words in this behalf. But because
of late a certain presumptuous and proud Jesuit calling himself N.D. has
taken upon him, not only to plead for Jesuits and priests, but also for
foreign enemies, and notorious rebels and traitors, advancing the cause and
power of the enemy, and by a strange metamorphosis of words turning traitors
into true subjects, and rebellious heretics into martyrs, and by his painted
glosses burnishing out heresy, superstition, and idolatry for true religion,
catholic faith and Gods true worship; I have upon zeal I bear to Gods truth,
and love I owe to her Majesty and my country, and not least of all, for that
hearty affection which I bear to all my Christian countrymen, whom these false
teachers apparelled in sheep clothing with their counterfeite sheep
blayting seek to abuse; undertaken to answer all his pleading, and to
justify the honest and religious intention of that noble knight Sir Francis,
that first adventured to speak against them, and to show in general, that our
enemies are no such bugs, as we need to fear them; nor english fugitives such
innocents, as they are pretended; nor the factious papists so honest men that
we are far to trust them.

And because he shall not complain, that we refuse any indifferent trial, I
have thought it not amiss, to undertake his challenge, and to meet him at
every turn, and in every encounter, following him pase by pase, and joining
foot to foot. He would percase bring it to another trial, Vbi collato pede
dimicandum est; or as Virgil says, Vbi haeret pede pes, densusque viro vir:
and we refuse not, when we shall see him and his consortes come against us in
plain field. But in the mean while we are to try our cause with words, and
not with arms, and to justify first our accusation against Romish religion,
then against the pope, the Spaniard, the Jesuits, Cardinal Allen, the
recusantes, and all enemies, traitors, and malcontentes whatsoever. And
forasmuch as under color of religion our adversary would slily defend all
attemptes and practices against this state, I have with my answer unto this
Noddy conjoined a breife discourse, and in certain new encounters, drawing him
forth into a new combat, proved that popish religion, whereon he so much
stands, as if it were catholic, and the old religion of Christ's church, Is
neither catholic, nor ancient, nor true religion; and finally, that neither
the church of Rome is the true church of Christ, nor the popes agents and
adherents, that have been executed for traitors, true subjects or martyrs.
Which treatise if it profit not obstinate papists, yet shall it greatly
strengthen the hands of good subjects, and of all men well affected, and stay
others that they be not easily carried either into opinions savoring of
heresy, or else tending to disloyalty, and treachery.

I shall not need to tell you what manner of man this N.D. is, against whom
we deal. He declares himself so plainly, that I cannot more evidently
prove him either a malicious enemy, or a disloyal traitor, then he does
himself. For what greater sign of an enemy, then to plead the cause of
public enemies, and to envy that any commendation should be given, or any
blessing happen to this state? What more plain conviction of his treacherous
intentions, then that he extolleth the praises of traitors, and is very sorry,
that foreign enemies and wicked rebels have not prevailed against us? It is
an old saying, that eagles love eagles, and bears well sort with bears.

(...),
(...), as says Theocritus.
There cannot be devised any thing more malicious, then the pope and Spaniard
to the English nation; neither can any speak more spitefully of his country,
of this state, and of religion, then this rinegued English, and Hispaniolized
fugitive. And do we marvel, if they be friends, and join together?

Only this is much to be marvelled, that any sober minded papist should allow
such a proctor to speak for him, or that this Noddy would be so presumptuous,
as to present his fooleries to the council; or so foolish, to think, that
such notorious enemies, and traitors can grace the cause of papists, or procure
them favor, whom his patronage makes much more suspect, then before. This we
may boldly conclude, that whatsoever such enemies persuade or offer, that it
cannot be for the good of our state. It is an old Sophocles in A^ace mastig.
saying, (...). The gifts of enemies tend not to our good. The Greeks, as is
said, in time past would present Minerua of Troy with a horse; but in the
belly there lurked treason. So this Sinon N. D. if such a Noddie may be
compared to Sinon, would persuade us to receive the horse-religion of papists,
and horse-friendship of Spaniards. But if he should prevail, then might we say
of him, as the old man in Plautus in Pseudolo.
Plautus said of Pseudolus, Superauit dolum Troianum, atque vicit Pseudolus.
But I hope I have discovered all the treachery of this Sinon, or Pseudolus, or
false traitor, or whatsoever his malice deserves to be called.

It may be some will mislike, that I should so roughly handle our country
papists and their religion. But they must consider what rebellions have been
raised, ar^ what practices have been attempted against her Majesty, this
state, and all true Christians by this faction. I do not meddle with old men,
that are abused with ancient errors and live quietly, but with factious
papists, and such as aid them, and receive them, and either have
correspondence with foreign enemies, or receive their agents. Now what terms
can be too bitter against these, that seek to bring in strangers, to oppress
all honest men, to ruinate their country, to murder their prince, and all that
shall adhere to her? As for the religion of papists, whereby I understand all
those corruptions, which under the popes authority they have brought into the
church of God, and which the church of England refuses, it is nothing but a
pack of novelties, superstitious vanities and heresies, as we both have, and
always shall be ready to maintain either against Parsons, or the cardinal
Jesuit Bellarmine, or the proudest of that sect and faction. This religion of
popery therefore being not that seed, which Christ did sow in his field the
church, but the cockle, and weeds sown, and set by the malicious man, while
the governors of the church were asleep, what terms could I use more gentle,
then I have done?

This I may boldly say, that I have not followed the adversaries vein in
scurrilous scoffing, nor his vanity in ruffianlike bragging, nor his
sharpness in plain railing. But why should I go about to excuse my self
before the faults be proved? Percase it is no fault to write, as I have done.
And were it a fault, yet I trust thou will bear with my weakness: seeing, as
the Jacob. 3.
apostle says, All of us offend in many things. This I speak in the presence
of God, that my intention was not to wrong any, but only to lay down the
truth plainly, that we may know not only who be friends, who be traitors; but
also, who they be that contend for religion and justice, and who not. Read
with indifferency, and weigh my allegations, and compare diligently my defense
with the Noddies challenge, and then use thy liberty in judgment, and respect
not me, but the cause, and the proofs.

CHAP. I.
That God by means of her Majesty's government has bestowed many benefits
upon the realm of England, as well in establishing true religion, as
otherwise: and that our adversary in his first encounter shows himself both
shameless in denying it, and ungrateful in refusing, and not acknowledging
the same.

ALbeit the malice of papists is great in defacing her Majesty's actions, and
slandering her government; yet who so lists to consider the same with
indifferency, cannot choose but acknowledge her to be an excellent and
singular woman, to be parangoned with the famous women of ancient time, if not
preferred before them. Osorius albeit for his religion opposite to her, yet
could not choose, but highly commend her, both for her manly constancy, and
mature wisdom, and singular modesty. Quid admirabilius In prafat. ante lib.
3. de religione.
says he, quam in foemina virilem constantiam, in virgin senilem prudentiam,
in summa opum affluentia summam modestiae laudem eminere? He praises also her
wit, her learning, and her clemency. Es singulari ingenio praedita, Ibidem.
says he, and magnarum artium disciplinis erudita: laudibus mansuetudinis and
lenitatis, quae cum istius formae venustate consentiunt, excellis, nec eas
lauds, quae ex constantiae magnitudine oriuntur, tibi repudiandas existimas.
Peter Bizarus by chance mentioning her in his story of the state of Genua,
does Lib. histor. Genuens. 23.
call her Lectissimam Heroinam, and nusquam satis amplis laudibus celebrandam;
and doubts not for her rare indowments both of the body and the mind, and
for her clement, and wise government to compare her to a bright star,
excelling the splendor of other princes of her time. And that these praises
proceeded not of flattery, not only their country, the men being strangers to
her, but her noble actions do declare.

All this notwithstanding the papists, albeit tied to her by diverse obligations
both of subjection, and extraordinary favor, yet cannot endure to hear her
praised. The Noddie our adversary although he plead for her favor, yet could
not vouchsafe her one good word. His consorts they have loaded her with many
lend, and slanderous words. Nicholas Sanders and Harpsfield, of whom she
deserved better, began to collect slandrous accusations against her. Edward
Rishton whom she delivered out of prison, and set at liberty, loosed his tongue
to rail against her, by whom he received life. From th^se fountains B^zius,
Ribadineira, and diverse other railing friars have borrowed matter, and published
diverse libels to her dishonor. Neither may it seem marvelous, if malicious
men have spoken maliciously, or if her enemies have declared their ingraffed
hatred against her. Proverb. 29.
The wicked do abhor those that walk aright, or as the old Latin
interpreter has: Abominantur impij eos, qui in recta sunt via. King David
Psalm. 72.
says, That he was accounted a woonderment, or as a monster of many.
Prodigium says he, factus sum multis. She has been a nursing mother to
Gods church, and therefore the enemies of Gods church hate her, and speak
evil of her. Nay they speak evil of her, and persecute her without a cause.
Clement the seventh began the persecution against her in the person of her
parents, declaring the marriage of her father and mother unlawful. Paul the
third, when she was yet an infant, did seek her destruction, as did Herod
the destruction of the innocent children in Bethlehem. Hark how he thundreth
out his sentence against her, declaring her unable to succeed her father in
the crown of England. Omnem Henrici ex praedicta Anna Bollena subolem, says
he, In Bullae Pauli 3. Cont. Henr. 8.
fautorumque suorum liberos iam natos, aut nascituros vsque ad eum gradum, ad
quem iura huiusmodi poenas extendunt, omnibus possessionibus, dominijs,
libertatibus, priuilegijs; honoribus, officijs, bonis mobilibus ac immobilibus,
quouismodo obtentis priuamus, ac infames esse decernimus. See he persecuteth
the king and his children, and all that favor them, although they were not yet
borne into the world. Oh what mischief would he have done, if he had had
power and authority, that thus without all authority and means to wreake his
malice, shows the bitterness of his choler! the popes adherents never
ceased, until they had brought her most innocent mother to her end: which was
the greatest grief that tormented the king lying on his death bed, and sore
repenting himself for the wro^gfull shedding of that innocent Queens blood,
as many then present did testify; and Theuet a friar, a man not suspect, does
leave recorded in his Lib. 16. Cosmogr. universe.
History, of which we shall report the testimony hereafter. Neither did they
only murder the innocent mother, but also sought by act of Parliament, to
disable and from the succession to exclude the daughter. In Queen Mary's time
by diverse practices they sought to kill her. When their malice took no effect,
pope Pius, Gregory the 13. Sixtus quintus, and diverse other popes by wars
and rebellions, have attempted to deprive her of her kingdom. It may also be
probably suspected, that they suborned diverse to kill her, or poison her.
Howsoever they were acquainted with these practices, certain it is, that
diverse of the popish faction have conspired either by sword, or poison, or
other means to destroy her. And now when they are not able to do her other
hurt, they persecute her with their tongue. So wicked men Do scorn the
simplicity of the just, as the holy Job. 12.
Scripture teaches us. They publish infamous libels against her person. This
our adversary does slander her government, as if this land had received no
benefit by that reformation of religion, which God wrought by her means. But
the testimony of enemies and traitors by all laws is repelled.

That God has by her mea^es greatly blessed this land it does appear first by
testimony either of her adversaries, as of Osorius; or of strangers, as of
Petrus Bizarus. Quid magis obstupendu^ says In praefat. ante lib. de relig.
Osorius, quam mollem and delicatam mulieris natural tantis esse virtutibus
ornatam and instructam, vt totu^ regni pondus sustineat, in eoque munere maxima
cum land versetur: quod vix multorum hominum excellentium consilio, virtute,
fide, authoritate conficitur. Bizarus prefers the happiness of England
under her government, before all happiness of former kings, and ages. Illud
duntaxat, says he, Lib. hist. Genuens. 23.
obiter adiecero, Britanniae regnum nunquam ab vllo (pace aliorum dixero) vel
retroactis seculis, vel patrum nostraque memoria maiori cum prude^tia, nec
minori foelicitate fuisse administratum. This he says of her Majesty's
government, writing about the 21. year of her reign.

But what should testimonies of men need, when her noble and famous actions do
sufficiently commend, and set forth the praises of her government? First as it
pleased God by the hand of Judges. 4.
Deborah to deliver his people from the tyranny of Iabin and the Cananites,
that some years had oppressed them: so it pleased him likewise by this our
Deborah to break the yoke of the pope, and to deliver the people of England
from the tyranny of the Cananites the papists, that had diverse years
oppressed us and tyrannized over us. Psalm. 123.
Anima nostra sicut passer erepta est de laqueo venantium: laqueus contritus
est, and nos liberati sumus. Our soul (that we may use the prophets words)
like a sparrow is delivered from the power of hunters; the snare is broken, and
we are escaped. Now how great this blessing is to be esteemed, we may easily
judge by these particulars. First we were delivered from the heavy burden of
the popes decretales, of his excommunications, and his taxes and exactions, of
which the very papists themselves have long complained, and yet find
themselves therewith much agreeued, but that they dare not complain. Friar
Petrus de Alliac. de reform. eccles.
Humbert affirms, that the exactions, excommunications, and constitutions of
popes, were the cause of the schisms of the eastern and western churches.
Dicit quod causa dispositiua schismatis Graecorum inter alias vna fuit propter
grauamina Romanae ecclesiae in exactionibus, excommunicationibus and statutis,
says Peter de Alliaco, who does show many particulars of these greeuances. The
Princes of Germany in a certain diet at Nuremberg 100. grauan. Germ. in
Fascic. rer. expet. and fugiend.
did complain, that the popes did offer the^ A hundred greeuances and wrongs
not sufferable, which they declared by the particulars. And yet none of those
concerned corruptions of doctrine. By her Majesty we became free from all the
popes pillages and exactions, from the injustice of his censures, from the
bondage of his decretals, far more grievous then the ceremonial laws of
Moses, whose yoke notwithstanding, as the Act. 15.
apostle testifies, was so heavy, that neither the people then, nor their
fathers were able to bear it.

Secondly, where in Queen Mary's time the people had the Scriptures taken from
them in their mother tongue, and lived in great ignorance of matters of
salvation, as seldom being instructed in matters of religion; not only the
word of God began again to be publicly read in Churches, but also more
sincerely expounded, then before: neither were any excluded from the knowledge
of the same.

Thirdly, the true administration of Christ's Sacraments, which by the
abominable mass had been abolished, was restored, and Gods people made
partakers both of the Sacrament of his body, and of the cup also; and withal,
the true doctrine of Sacraments was publicly delivered unto the people of God.

Fourthly, Gods true worship was again restored according to his most holy
word, and the practice of the Catholic church of Christ; which before that
had been most shamefully corrupted with popish traditions, and humane
inventions.

Fifthly, the rod of the oppressor by her peaceable government was broken, and
the fires quenched, that had burned so many innocents, and true martyrs; and
the tortures removed, wherewith many honest men had been grievously
afflicted; and peace was given to the church, so that all true Christians might
without fear make profession of their faith, and publicly meet to celebrate
the name of God. Those that were exiled returned, and such true Christians as
kept themselves secret, did manifestly show themselves.

Finally, she did not only restore true religion, and the right
administration of Sacraments, and Gods true worship, but also abolished the
manifold heresies and corruptions of popish doctrine. She shut the mouths of
priests and friars preachers, not of peace nor sent from God, but sent by the
pope and his adherents, to maintain heresy and faction, whose preaching
notwithstanding as says Stapleton, In praefat. ante relict. princip. doctrine.
Is the foundation of Viz. according to the pope^ definition.
Christian religion. Is it not a brave religion, think you, that is built upon
impious popes, friar fraparts, and massing priests mouths? Quomodo Christus
says he, ciusque doctrina, Christianae religionis fundamentum est; sic alij
nunc a Christo missi, eorumque doctrina, praedicatio, determinatio fundamenti
apud me locum habebunt. And Ibidem.
again, In hac docentis hominis authoritate, in qua Deum loquentem audimus,
religionis nostrae cognoscendae fundamentum necessario poni cernimus. Note, I
pray you, how he says most blasphemously, that God speaks by the popes
mouth, and by the mouths of such friars and priests as he sends (for of them
he speaks) and how upon their preaching he builds his Romish religion.
Well, this abusiue foundation is now discovered, and we are taught to build,
not on pope, nor on friars, nor on legends nor lies, nor uncertain traditions;
but upon the word of God. Now also by her Majesty's authority, the most
blasphemous and idolatrous sacrifice, and service of the mass, and the priests
of Baal with their Balaamiticall friars are removed out of the church. The
same is also purged of idols and idolatry, and men from worshipping of stocks
and stones, and rotten rags and bones, and from adoration of angels and men
departed this life, are brought to worship the true and everliving God. Finally
where heretofore men were taught to seek remission of sins by masses,
indulgences, iubileies, holy water, and other humane devises; and believed,
that if they had not remission here, they should at the least find it in
purgatory: now these abuses were quite removed, and men taught, that Christ
Jesus without these ceremonies was the only way to heaven; and that Christians
obtained remission of sins by faith in him; and that no works pleased God,
but such as he commanded. This then is the first and principal blessing which
by her Majesty's most happy government this land enioieth; a blessing I say
far excelling all others, as far as spiritual and eternal happiness
excels temporal commodities. And yet, as appears by the confession of
strangers, that woondred at the happiness and tranquillity of this state in
the troubles, and turmoiles of all our neighbors round about us, God has
accumulated upon this people of England, by the means of her government,
diverse temporal blessings also.

We are therefore secondly to consider, what temporal graces we have obtained
by means of her happy attaining to the crown, and by her government, albeit I
make no doubt, but that all these latter graces do flow from the first, as from
a fountain. For God says 1. Sam. 2.
expressly, That he will honor those, that honor him: and experience teaches
us, that God blesses those nations, which give harbor to his church, and with
a true heart receive his word, and serve him duly according to the same. First
then we may remember, that by her means we were delivered from the thraldom
of the Spaniard, and the fear of foreign lords, into which dangerous state
Queen Marie with her popery had brought this land. Now how great a blessing
this is, we may easily understand, if we do but look either into the miserable
bondage of our neighbors of the low Countries, or else of the Spaniards
themselves. And better then these we could not hope for; but many reasons
might move us to fear worse, of which we shall have occasion to speak
hereafter. In the low Countries during the time of Charles the fifth, it is
Hist. Belgi^. Meterani. lib. 2.
reported and proved by record, That above fifty thousand were done to death
about the cause of religion only: and yet then neither was there any
inquisition established, nor did the Spaniard command so absolutely, as
sithence he has. Since that time all the privileges of the country have been
broken, and such intolerable wrongs offered, and impositions and taxes laid
upon them, that the most abundant country in Europe is now consumed, and
brought to nothing. In Spain the people lives in exceeding fear of the
Inquisition, and paieth the tenth of all things bought and sold in the market,
and beside that diverse customs, and whatsoever burdens or impositions else
the Princes can with any color lay upon them. So that now notwithstanding the
riches of the Indies, the people of Spain for the most part are brought to
beggerie.

Secondly by the abolishing of the popes usurped power, his extreme exactions
ceased, and the public treasure of the kingdom, which by his means was wont
to be exhausted, began to increase; at the least it was kept within the
kingdom.

Thirdly her Majesty restored peace unto us, which Queen Marie intricating
her-selfe in her husbands quarrel, did exchange for wars, and lost Calice,
and all the remainder of her ancestors possessions in France. This peace, but
that the papists have gone about by diverse attempts at home and abroad to
trouble it, has now continued two and forty years and upward. So it
appears what troubles, wants, wars, rebellions, losses, or disgraces have
happened now this many years to this nation, or else are intended against us,
that the same have wholly proceeded from the popish faction, and their
abominable and cursed idolatry and superstition, as all blessings that have
been bestowed upon us, have issued from the fountain of Gods favor for the
maintenance of his truth, by means of her Majesty's gracious government, and
of her fathers and her brothers noble purposes and deseignements. Neither did
her Majesty restore peace to us, only with foreign enemies, but restrain
the cruel rage of popish butchers that murdered Gods saints at home, and made
wars upon them. she, I say, restored peace, and gave rest to Gods church.

Lastly by means of her Majesty's government, the strength of this land is
grown great. Never were there more valiant men of war, nor better men at
sea, then now. Her Navy is exceedingly increased: her munitions and furniture
for the war is exceeding. Never was there in England greater store of learned
men, nor more cunning artificers in all trades. There is no country better
peopled: nor was ever prince more reverenced, or beloved of her subjects.

These blessings God has bestowed on her people by means of her government.
It has pleased him also singularly to bless her both with spiritual, and
temporal graces; and to make her reign far longer, then of most of her
progenitors, and to multiply her days above ordinary. She has also seen
the miserable ends of most of her enemies, and of such traitors, as have
sought her hurt; and long may she continue, and see the confusion of the rest,
to the comfort of all her loving subjects, and grief of her wicked enemies. As
for those, that have either by open force, or private practice sought to
destroy her, they are all perished, and come to confusion: even so Lord let
them all perish, and come to confusion, that hate thee, and thy truth, and the
maintainers and professors thereof.

At this happiness of the English nation, by the happy change of religion
made by her Majesty at her first entrance into her kingdom, it is no marvel,
if this our adversary, and his consorts be repine: for that is the nature of
envy, to be sorry, if she see no cause of others sorrow: Vixque tenet
lachrymas, as the Poet Ovid. Metamorph. 2.
says, quia nil lachrymabile cernit. It is the property also of busy
fellows to be quarrelling, and accusing of others: they feed on accusations
as dainty meat. (...), as says Pindarus. They look not into their own
myseries and calamities, but curiously look into other countries, not unlike
hungry Grammarians, that are descanting still of the calamities of Troie, and
yet see not their own domestical miseries, that more nearly concern them.
But it is true, as one says, That he that is curious in other men's causes, is
also malicious. Which appears true in this our adversary: for gladly would
he, by ripping up our estate, make the world believe, that we have received no
blessing, nor benefit by change of religion: but he demonstrateth nothing but
his own folly, ignorance, and malice.

He P. 1.
begins with a long tale of flattery, and the harms ensuing thereof; and
at his first setting out enters into a common place, as it were into a common
Inn, pleasing and resting himself, but tyring and harrying his reader with
his needelesse fooleries. For what skilleth it, I pray you, to know what a
dangerous beast, a flatterer is? Again who denies, but that flattery is an
odious thing? But what is this to us? Can he show that sir Francis is a
flatterer? no: nay he does not so much as go about to prove any such matter:
nor does he apply his common place to his purpose, but leaves it as a
fragment borrowed out of some frierlike declamation, without any coherence to
the rest of his long speak. Wherefore to help him forth where he fails, we
confess that flattery is a foul fault; and are content, that he should
speak his pleasure against flatterers. For whatsoever he says against them,
falls right upon him and his consorts, who albeit they rail starkely against
honest men, yet are still clawing the pope and the king of Spain, and their
adherents, showing themselves to be clawbackes, parasites, and flatterers. what
the pope says, that they say all; what he denies, they deny. They are of
near kindred to Gnatho, of whom In eunucho. imperaui egomet mihi, omnia
assentari.
Terence speaks, That had no power to gainsay any thing, which his master
said. so says In praes. in relect. princip doctrine.
Sapleton, That the popes determination is the foundation of his religion. They
are also like the parasite in Plautus, whose belly taught him to speak strange
things: for these good fellows for their bellies sake speak, rail, hold
their peace, write, faune, flatter, and unto the popes pleasure turn their
style and their teaching. Mutato iudicio ecclesiae, says the Epist. 2. ad
Lo^emos.
Cardinal of Cusa, mutatum est and dei iudicium. Now by the church he
understands his holy father the pope, who as De princip. doctrine. passim.
Stapleton holds, is the principal subject of Ecclesiastical authority.
him a multitude of parasites does most palpablie flatter. Augustine Steuchus
does honor him as a God. audis says Contr. Donat. Constantini.
he, Pontificem deum appellatum, and habitum pro deo? Gomesius writing upon the
rules of the popes chancerie, says That the pope is a certain visible God.
Papa, says he, est quoddam numen, and quasi visibilem quendam deum prae se
ferens. Stapleton like a shameless parasite does In Epist. dedicat. ante
princip. doctrine.
worship him, as his sovereign God on the earth, Tanquam supremum in terris
numen. John Andreas in c. quanto. de translat. episcopi. and Abbas Panormitanus
in c. licet. de electione, say, That he and Christ have but one tribunal
seat between them. In breuiloquio.
In praef. ant. lib. de pontif. Romans
Bonauenture calls the pope The only spouse of the church, and Christ's vicar
general. Robert Bellarmine, who now in reward of his flattery is made a
cardinal flatterer, does smoothly call Ibidem.
the pope The corner stone of the church, and accompteth him Lib. 2. de pont.
c. 31.
not only A stone most precious, and approved, spoken of by the prophet, but
also as the sun in The firmament, and the head and spouse C. solitae. ext. de
ma. and obed.
of the church. Others advance him above the moon: others say, he so far
Lib. 3. summae. c. 9.
excels the emperor, as the sun in the firmament does excel the moon.
Simon Begnius in the Council of Laterane, does call Leo the tenth, The Lion of
the tribe of Judah: and doubts not to name him his savior: Ecce, says he,
venit Leo de tribu Judah, etc. te Leo beatissime saluatorem exspectauimus.
Another in the Council of Trent says, The pope was that light that came into
the world, abusing the words of the scripture to flatter him: Papa lux, says
he, venit in mundum. Turrecremata Lib. 2. sammae. c. 26.
does call him King of kings, and prince of the church, and says, He has more
perfection in him, then all the residue of the body of the church. To recite
all their flatteries, were infinite: neither is it needful, seeing these are
sufficient to declare them in this kind singular. Beside terms, they do fall
down before him, and adore him, as an idol: they carry him about upon men's
shoulders, and omit no kind of servile flattery. In epist. ant. lib. de
Caluino-turc.
Gifford calls Philip the second king of Spain, The greatest monarke under
the sun: to show himself to be one of the grossest flatterers under the
moon. And this Noddy to show himself a noble parasite, upon whom the rigor
of his whole inuectiue against flatterers does most fitly fall, P. 90.
calls the pope of Rome and king Philip the second of Spain, The greatest
monarkes of Christendom: of which two, the first is no lawful monarke, nor
prince, but an usurping tyrant, and that of more malice, then might. The
second, while he lived was a seely old man, neither in his dominions, nor in
his actions deserving any extraordinary praise, nor being in any sort
comparable to Christian princes, of whom we read in stories. So we see that all
this common place of flattery, as it is far from the matter, so it fitteth
this Noddie and his consorts very properly.

Afterward drawing nearer to his purpose, he Page 2.
tells us in very tragical terms, That notwithstanding her Majesty's good
intentions, there is none so simple that discovers not, nor so evil
affected, that rueth not the difficulties that grow, and are growing by
alteration of religion. but his matters are so well handled, that his
adversaries do easily discover his notorious impudency, and his friends do
rue his simplicity, seeing him to take as granted, and boldly to affirm, That
all men see and acknowledge the difficulties that arise out of alteration of
religion; when none either sees, or justly can affirm any such matter. This,
if he were not a stranger, or rather an enemy to his country, he might know,
that all honest and true hearted subjects, and not only true Christians do
hold, and willingly acknowledge, that the reformation of religion wrought by
her Majesty's means, is the principal fountain, from whence diverse blessings
have issued, and flowed out to the great benefit of many. Neither does any
ampl^^ie these pretended difficulties and dangers, and hold our case ruthful,
but such rinegued English, and traitorous priests and fugitives, as himself
and his consorts are, who repine and grudge at nothing more, then our well
doing and prosperity; and whose traitorous practices, they being combined
with foreign enemies of the state, are the only cause, from whence either any
suspicion or fear can proceed. Beside this, if any calamity did proceed from
this alteration of religion, then should her Majesty deserve most blame, by
whose authority the same was wrought and procured: and so should this
parasite, that would so willingly insinuate himself into her favor, spill all
favor, by imputing to her all our pretended fears and calamities. To clear
himself he says, That this alteration did not proceed from her own
inclination at the first. But while he would seem to excuse her, he does
grievously accuse her, as if she had done contrary to her own inclination,
and had by chance, as it were, and without any knowledge or firm resolution
entered this course. He does also deprive her of the most principal part of all
her glory, which rose especially upon her zeal in reforming religion. Further
he tells a most shameless untruth. for who knows not, that this
reformation of religion did wholly proceed from her own most earnest zeal?
did not she her self, when any difficulties were surmised upon this
alteration, neglect them all? was she not always taken for a professor of
Gods truth? was not this the only cause of Winchesters, and all the papists
hatred and practices against her? finally, where he would gladly yield her
Majesty some praise for her good inclination, he does like a noddie dispraise
her, and charge her to have wrought that, Which all true affected men may rue.

But to pass over his folly, and undutiful behavior toward his prince, to
whom he owes all honor and reverence, and yields none; that which he talks
of our estate, which he imagines to be miserable and ruthful, deserves more
consideration. For gladly would he work a dislike of the present government in
men's minds; and principally he desires men should believe, that all supposed
dangers proceed from the alteration of religion at her Majesty's first coming
to the crown. But for the first, the state of things themselves will answer.
Laws are ordinarily executed, no man is wronged either in his person, or his
lands, or his goods, but he may have remedy. Religion is truly preached and
professed: and if any complain, it is because such malcontentes, as mislike,
and oppugn the government, are too much favored. Against foreign enemies we
want neither means nor courage to resist. And if nothing would move us to
like the state present, yet the malice of traitors, and envy which they bear
against it, may persuade us, that it is well founded and settled. For if it were
otherwise, they would then as much rejoice, as now they sorrow.

For the second we say, that howsoever we stand, true religion is neither the
cause of trouble, nor of danger. For if that were so, then were all princes and
states, that profess religion, in the same case. Again, then should all that
enjoy popish religion enjoy peace also and prosperity: which experience
teaches us to be most untrue. For the Portugals albeit extraordinarily popish,
yet are oppressed by the tyranny of the Spaniards, and the popish provinces of
the low Countries live in great slavery. The French king Henry the third,
notwithstanding his devotion to the pope, was in the end excommunicated, vexed
with rebellions, and most shamefully murdered by a Dominican friar. Don Caesare
d'este duke of Ferrara was not, I trow, of our religion; yet did the pope
excommunicate him, and most wrongfully take his state from him. Lastly, if
religion now professed were the immediate cause and original of any trouble
like to ensue; then should not the papists have been the principal means to
move wars, and rebellions against the state, nor the only practisers
against her Majesty's person and safety, as we have found them to have been.
Wherefore, if we will rightly esteem, we shall find, that as true religion is
the cause of all those blessings we enjoy: so popery, and the faction that
maintains it, is the cause of all practices against her Majesty and the
state, and of all rebellions, and wars, and mischiefs intended against us.
Again, as we were without danger, as long as God was truly worshipped, and
idolatry repressed, and Jesuits and priests, and their abettors diligently
sought out, and punished according to laws, and all concurred resolutely to
maintain true religion and the state: so since Recusants began of some to
find favor; and mass priests and Jesuits have been suffered to practice
without punishment, and idolatry is begun to be privily erected, and some men's
minds grow cold in maintaining true religion, and the present government; it
is no marvel, if some inconvenience be feared. But remove this, there is no
cause, why any should either doubt, or fear. For the pope has business
enough to maintain his own state; and no means to work us trouble, but by
English traitors. In times past he was Stupor mundi, the woonderment of the
world; now he is Fabula mundi, that is, a matter for idle priests and friars to
prate of, but not to be feared, unless we list. The Spaniard has more
reason to fear us, and our associates of the low Countries, that may be lords
of the sea, if we please, and may take what part of the Indies we list; then we
to fear him. Sure if his force had been such as is pretended, never would he
have suffered such scorn, nor descended to such dishonorable courses, as he
has done. Both the pope and Spaniard depend upon the aid of English fugitives
and malcontents. Draw from them this hope, then have you the end of these
supposed fears, and a full answer to this traitors painted tales and fables.

Thus you see this noddy has neither reason, nor truth in his discourse. And
yet that is not all the fault it has. For it is also impertine^t to the
purpose. For what if there were some cause of fear, or doubt? does it
therefore follow, that we have received no benefits, nor blessings by her
Majesty's most happy government, and the abolishment of idolatry, and
restoring of true and catholic religion? If then there be no just cause of
fear, and only certain pusillanimous companions, quake at the popes
thundering, and Spanish bragging, or else pretend to do it, because they look
back to the fleshpots of Egypt, and glory of Babylon; then are we to
acknowledge Gods favor, that has not only given us many graces by her
Majesty's means, but also means to maintain them, and to secure our selves.
And for such cowards as fear foreign enemies, we are to put them into the
next rank to English traitors already conspired with the enemy,

He tells us further, That by alteration of religion in England; Scotland,
Ireland, Flanders, and France, have tasted of many miseries, tumults,
calamities, and desolations. He should have said of many blessings, and
friendly favors. For kindnesses and favors, all our neighbors have received
from us: but those calamities and desolations that he speaks of, have
proceeded from the popes fury and malice, and from his adherents, persecuting
quiet people for the profession of true Christian religion. But let us hear
the rest of his wise tale.

Beside battles, murders, destructions of countries, provinces, towns, cities,
houses, and particular men, says he, three Princes, two Queens, and one
King, have been all brought to their bane, by this occasion. He says further,
That the noble houses and linages of Hamiltons, Douglasses, Stuardes in
Scotland, of Desmondes and other peers in Ireland, have been thereby ruinated:
and finally, That in France and Flanders, there is no end of the account of
those, that have been destroyed by this change of religion: as if we had
procured all these battles, murders, destructions; or as if we, or our
religion, were the occasion of the destruction of princes or kings; or as if
the massacres of France, and those bloody executions, had been committed by
us. What a shameless fellow is this to impute the cause of wars and troubles
to us, that ever avoided wars as much as we could, and offered force to no
man, nor ever stirred, but as defendants for sauegard of our lives? Are lambs
the causes of the cruelty of wolves? or were Christians the authors of the
bloody persecutions of heathen Emperors? all these big words therefore are
nothing else, but arguments of the Noddies distracted mind, and furious hatred
against truth, that exclameth and cries out upon religion, and imputes al
calamities unto it, whereas in truth all the cause of this wrack and
destruction both of states and private families, proceeded wholly from want of
conscience, and hatred of true religion. For if we will look back, and
search the histories of our times, we shall find, that all those tragical
stirs, and hurly-burlies, that have brought not only millions of christians,
but also a great part of Christendom to destruction, have taken their
beginning from the implacable hatred of popes and papists against Christian
religion. Paul the third enflamed the wars against the princes of Germany,
which consumed a great part of that country: himself sent thither great
forces, both of horse and foot, fearing not a little, least Charles the fifth
should make any composition with the Germans.

In the low Countries the people lived in peace and obedience to their
governors, until such time as the popish faction, fearing the ruin of their
Babylon, began not only to make cruel edicts and decrees against the
professors of true religion, but also by force of arms sought to establish
both the Spanish inquisition, and an absolute tyranny.

Vita de Pio. quinto.
Pius the fifth, when the kings of France and Spain grew weary of troubles, sent
his messengers to negotiate with king Philip, and the Cardinal of Alexandria,
to set forward the French king against his subjects. He sent also money and
soldiers to aid the king, to destroy his subjects.

In king Henry the eightes days, Paul the third; in this Queens days, Pius
the fifth, and Gregory the thirteenth, and other popes Sanders de Schism.
stirred up diverse rebellions in England and Ireland against lawful princes.

By the solicitation of the popes agents, many thousands of innocent people
were massacred in France, contrary to faith, and promise. These therefore are
the murderers, and massacrers of Gods saints: these are they which have
occasioned the ruin of diverse noble houses and personages. In England the
earls of Westmerland and Northumberland harkening to the seditious motions of
the pope ruined themselves, and their houses. By the same occasion the house of
Desmond, and other houses in Ireland were overthrown. Why the ruin of these
houses and men should be imputed to religion, there is not any color. In
Scotland the houses and linages of the Hamiltons, Douglasses, and Stuardes do
yet stand, and if any of these houses have run headlong into their own
destruction, it is no fault of ours.

The Queen Douager of Scotland, that was sister to the Duke of Guise died of
sickness. How the last Queen came to her end, I report me to public acts
and histories. Her husband was not slain by men of our side, but of theirs:
not for matter of religion, but for other causes. Our adversary therefore
deals absurdly and like himself, that imputes the faults of Popish
religion, that teaches murder of christians, deposing of princes, subversion
of states and kingdoms, and all manner of perfidious and cruel dealing, to
us. But suppose some error had been committed in France, and the low
countries, why is the same mentioned here, where we dispute about matters in
England? can he not content himself to utter untruths, but he must also
speak impertinently, and so far from the purpose?

To amend the matter, he deuideth all blessings into spiritual and temporal,
and denies that by change of religion we have received either the one, or the
other. For before this alteration, says he, one God was adored not only in
England, but also throughout all Christendom, and after one manner. He says
further, That there was one faith, one belief, one form of service, one
number of sacraments, one tongue in celebration, one sacrifice, one head of the
church, one obedience, one judgment, in time past; and that now all is
altered, the people of England being divided not only from the rest of
catholics, but also from Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists abroad, and among
themselves at home. But dealing with an adversary, and in matter so
controuersious, if he had been wise, he would have brought either better
proofs, or more modesty. To lie notoriously, must needs work discredit to
his cause. First most untrue it is, that before this alteration one God was
worshipped throughout all Christendom, and after one manner. For to speak
truly, the most part of those, that called themselves Christians, lived
without all knowledge of God, or of Christ Jesus, having nothing of
Christianity, but the very name, and the outward Sacrament of Baptism. The
rest, some few only excepted, whom God enlightened with more knowledge, for
God, worshipped angels, and saints, and the blessed virgin. Nay they
worshipped crosses, and crucifixes with divine worship, and fell down before
stocks and stones, and rotten relics; some worshipped the pope as God, and
by him hoped to have plenarie indulgence of their sins. Their manner of
worship was so diverse, that every parish almost had their peculiar saints,
services, festival days and ceremonies.

Secondly ridiculously he does distinguish faith from belief, and most
untruly surmiseth, That there was in time past but one faith and belief, and
that every Christian held that faith. For in some ages before Luthers time the
common people knew not what to believe, nor understood any one article of the
faith. And as for the doctors of schools, they differed in infinite points one
from another, and all of them from the Greek churches, but especially from the
true faith of Christendom taught by Christ and his apostles.

Thirdly it is a palpable untruth, to say, That before this alteration there
was one form of service, one number of Sacraments, one tongue, one sacrifice,
one head of the church throughout all Christendom: wherein so many vain
untruths are contained, that it is not possible to utter them redilie with one
tongue. For not only the Greek liturgy does much differ from the Latin, but
also the Latin liturgies do much differ from themselves, and were so full of
abuses, that the Council of Trent abolishing a number of old missals and
portuises, was constrained to make new, and yet all naught, being nothing like
the liturgies of the apostolic church described by Justin martyr, Dionyse of
Athens, and diverse other fathers. For those of S. James, S. Basil and
Chrysostom are plainly counterfeited.

The number of 7. sacraments was not certainly established nor received before
the late council of Trent. In the C. firmiter. de sum. trin. and side cath.
Council of Lateran under pope Innocent there is mention made only of two
Sacraments, which we retain. In no ancient father, that treats of Sacraments
can this number of seven be found. The apostles delivered us but only two
Sacraments, that is of Baptism and the Lords supper.

In ancient time it was never thought unlawful to celebrate divine service in
any tongue understood of the people. The Greeks even to this day retain the
Greek tongue. The 1. Cor. 14.
apostle does directly condemn toongs used in divine prayers or praises, if
they be not understood of the people.

The popish sacrifice of the mass, and all that abomination was not known of
the ancient fathers, nor instituted by Christ. Then all Christians did
communicate, and receive both kinds, and were otherwise taught, then now they
are. The Greek churches also much differ from the church of Rome: and diverse
forms of sacrifices have been used in this church, until of late the Council
of Trent went about to establish an uniformity, or rather difformitie of
religion.

Finally as the popes headship is now denied of the eastern churches, and so
was for many ages; so was the ancient church utterly ignorant of the matter. If
this Noddy will persist in his error, and maintain the contrary; let him
show, if he can, that in ancient time the bishops of Rome made laws to bind
the whole church, and were supreme judges, and not judged of others, and made
bishops throughout the world, and had that authority to dispense, and pardon
which now the pope craves.

Fourthly where he says, We are divided not only from the general body of
catholics in Christendom, but also from our selves: he tells us his own
dreams and fancies fleeting in his idle brain without any ground of truth.
First it shall not be proved, that we have divided our selves from the
catholic church, or any catholic society. Nay we offer to prove, that the
papists have by their novelties and heresies divided themselves from the
catholic church; and say, that therefore we have left them, that we may
return to the ancient apostolic and catholic church, and catholic faith of
Christ. Secondly the churches of Zuizzerland, Germany, France and England do
neither hold of Zuinglius, Calvin, nor Luther, nor pope of Rome, as do the
blind papists, but of Christ Jesus, and of the apostles, and prophets. Neither
do they disagree among themselves. Nay the contention between Calvin and
Luther is not so great, but that popish doctors have greater. As for our
selves, all of us profess the doctrine of Christ Jesus according to that rule,
that was established by common consent of the church of England: from which if
any digress, he is no more to be accounted of our society then the papists,
that are of the popes retinue.

Lastly where he calls our religion, Parliament religion, he speaks like
himself, that is, falsely and slanderously. For albeit the same be received by
authority of the prince and state, yet is it Christ's religion, and not the
princes.

The L^unctos. Cod. de sum. Trin. and sid. Cath.
emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, decreed, That all people of
their government should hold the doctrine of Peter the apostle, taught by
Damasus bishop of Rome, and Peter bishop of Alexandria, and that they should
believe one God, and three persons: and yet, I hope this Noddie will not call
the faith of the Trinity, An imperial faith. And thus much in answer of his
objection of parliament faith, and of supposed divisions amongst us. But if he
had considered, how that all the authority of their Romish faith, as it
differs from ours, stands upon the authority of late popes, and of the
late conuenticle of Trent, and that both the grounds and positions of it, are
either novelties, or old condemned heresies, and was in Queen Mary's times
established more by parliament, then by authority of the apostles, and how
many and diverse sects they have among their monks and friars, and About the
matter of the sacrament of the Lords supper they have not so few, as 200.
diverse opinions.
diverse opinions among their schoolmen, and how their late writers dissent
both from fathers, and schoolmen, and among themselves; I think he would
have spared either to have objected unto us our dissensions, or to have talked
of the authority of our religion.

To discredit the report of spiritual blessings bestowed on us, he P. 5.6.
says further, That before this change, we believed the catholic faith of
Christendom delivered by the universal church, and grounded upon that rock,
that cannot fail, and now believe only either other men's opinions, or our
own fancies, which choice is properly called heresy: and here he thinks
to have argued like a great doctor. But first as his doctrine is strange, so
his style is new and fantastical. For although he sweat hard in seeking, yet
shall he not find, that any one doctor says, That the universal church does
deliver to every private man the catholic faith: for as schoolmen might
teach him, Actiones sunt suppositorum: and it is not the whole kind, but some
one, or other that does this, or that action. Secondly most untrue it is, That
either popery is the catholic faith of Christendom, or that the apostles, or
their catholic successors taught those errors of popery, which we condemn.

Thirdly he does us wrong where he says, That our doctrine is diverse from the
catholic faith of Christendom. For whatsoever Christ or his apostles taught,
or is delivered in the confessions of faith or creedes generally received of
Christ's Catholic church, that we believe and receive, refusing no point of
catholic doctrine: and all private fancies, opinions, and heresies, whether of
popes, or other heretics, and false teachers, we renounce, condemn, and
anathematize.

Hereof it follows, that the doctrine and faith of the church of England is
most catholic and certain, being grounded upon the apostles, and prophets,
Christ Jesus being the corner stone; which is a firm rock against which the
gates of hell cannot prevail. Grounded it is, I say, upon the writings of the
apostles and prophets, endited by Gods holy spirit, and thereunto not only
Councels and fathers, but also the adversaries themselves, for the most part,
give testimony. But the blind papists have devised and received both new
grounds, of their religion, and new doctrine, which stands only upon the
authority of this pope, and that pope, whose fancy and opinion is all the
certeintie they have. This is that rock, or rather bank of sand, whereon the
miserable papists faith is built. For what the pope determines, that they hold
to be the determination of the universal church. upon his credit they receive
the scriptures. Nay without his determination Stapletonde author eccles.
they deny the scriptures to be authentical. Princip. doct. lib. 9. c. 12.
Stapleton teaches, that the church (that is, the pope) at all times has
power to approve and tax and consigne the books of holy scriptures. In
another place he Ibidem lib. 11. c. 4.
holds, that universal tradition is the most certain interpreter of
scriptures. Generally they hold, that the pope is supreme judge in all
controversies of faith and manners, and that he is the judge that cannot err.
Hereof that follows, which this noddie obiecteth to us, That the faith of
papists is built upon the popes fancy and opinion; which altering from time to
time, the faith of the Romish church, is variable like the moon, and unstable
as the sea. Trusting to the popes determination from the Angelickes, they have
received the worship of angels; from the Collyridians, the worship of the holy
virgin Marie; from the Carpocratians, and Simon Magus, and their disciples, the
worship of images; from the Manichees and other heretics, prohibition of
meats, and dislike of marriage of priests; and from other heretics, other
damnable opinions. So that their faith is not the catholic faith of
Christendom, but mere heresy grounded upon the fancy and opinion of most
wicked and unlearned popes.

But P. 6.
says this Noddie, Why should you believe more your own opinions, then Calvin
concerning the Queens supremacy, Luther concerning the real presence, and
Beza in the church government? I answer first, that these men's private
opinions concern not fundamental points of faith. And therefore that they are
not to be brought forth for instance in this cause, where we talk of the
foundations, and reasons of Christian faith. Secondly I deny that Calvin did
deny the Queens supremacy in ecclesiastical matters, as we hold it. For
neither did he subject princes to popes or priests in matter of their royal
government, nor did he deny princes power to establish ecclesiastical laws,
nor to command for Gods truth, or to provide for the setting forth of true
religion, or redressing of disorders in churches or priests; which are the
principal points of supreme government of princes in their realms and
dominions. Neither do I think, that any ancient father of the church did ever
deny this power to princes. Sure I am, that many have allowed it. The reason
why Calvin did once mislike the title of king Henry the eight, was because he
was persuaded, that he had challenged all that power, which the pope
arrogateth to himself, as head of the church: wherein after that he was better
informed, he changed his style, and retracted his opinion. Thirdly I say we
suspend our opinion, and give no approbation to Luthers opinion concerning the
carnal presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, for that we see that
doctrine to be new, and not taught by the apostolic church. Nay we find it to
be repugnant to the apostles doctrine delivered in Scriptures, to the doctrine
of the ancient catholic church, and to the analogy of faith. Lastly I say,
that in external government it is not necessary, that all churches should
concur and agree, seeing not only the east churches differed from the west,
but the western churches also from themselves. The churches of Afrike had
diverse customs differing from the churches of Italy, and I ib^d. sa (...).
Ambrose in his church at Milan thought it not necessary in all things to follow
the church of Rome. Further I say, that it is not to be doubted, but that it is
better in matter of external government, to follow the consent of antiquity,
and succeeding ages, rather then any man's private humor and opinion: and
therefore I doubt not, but our cause is better, and our ground more certain,
which in searching out the doctrine of Christian faith, do build our selves
upon Christ and his apostles, and upon holy Scriptures, approved by consent of
times, descent of holy fathers and bishops, testimony of the most ancient
church, which all appears in ancient symboles of faith, then that of the
papists, which in doubts and controversies run to this pope, or that pope,
which for the most part is but a block or a sot, and a man ignorant, not only
in the controversies, but often in the grounds, and principles of Christian
religion. Now what assurance the papists can have of their faith, that have no
ground, but in the determination of the pope, I report me even to the papists
themselves, that condemn private opinions, and singular men's fancies, and in
external terms yield all, not to this man, or that man, but to the judgment
of Christ his universal church.

Another spiritual blessing, P. 6. and 7.
says our adversary is, when good works follow faith, as meeknes, penance,
mortification of the flesh, continency, virginity, fasting, praying, alms,
voluntary poverty, renouncing of the world. And that men's savage natures
should be altered by Christ's doctrine, he proves out of Isay the 11. where it
is said, That the woolfe shall dwell with the lamb, and the Pard lie with the
goat. And the calfe, lion, and sheep abide together. Lastly he asks
Whether our doctrine has wrought these effects of peace and meekness, of
penance, and mortification, and the rest. I answer, that the doctrine of the
Gospel has wrought good effects in all true Christians. And that all such do
good works and live according to their profession. And albeit every one do
not so square their lives according to Gods law, as they should do, yet compare
our people with the papists, nay with the priests and popes themselves, whom
they call most holy; and I make no question, but they do far excel them. In
Queen Mary's time this land flowed with blood of innocents. Upon her Majesty's
entrance these cruel executions ceased. Such was her clemency, that she
would not shed the blood of those woolues, that had shed the most innocent
blood of many others. Nay albeit during the time of her sisters reign she had
received many wrongs, yet did she forget al. So rare was her clemency, that
even strangers commend it. Tanta eius animi extitit moderatio, says Histor.
G^nuens. lib. 23.
Peter Bizarus, atque inuata clementia, vt non immerito de illa dici possit,
quod veteres de Seuero Alexandro Mammea matre genito posteris tradidere; nempe
anaematon, hoc est, citra sanguinem gessisse imperium, cum suapte natura semper
a caedibus and crudelitate abhorrens nunquam adduci potuerit, vt aliquem nisi
publico iudicio damnatum, ad supplicium rapi pateretur. Her people likewise did
follow her steps, and never sought the blood of papists, though the world
knows, they seek ours. In France and Flanders our side never took arms,
but in defense of their lives against those, that sought to murder them. In our
victories likewise great clemency has been used. The king of Navarre now
king of France was ever admired for his great clemency. The English entering
perforce into Caliz, and other places showed great moderation in their
victory. In diverse places where religion is professed, adultery is punished
with death, fornication with corporal punishments, other unnatural
filthiness is not named. No where are stews accounted lawful. Neither do we
account any man a true professor, that does not moderate his affections, and
abstain from swearing, drunkenness, pride; and deal mercifully with the
poor, and conscionably with all. If any man do otherwise, he may live among
us, but he is not of us.

But the whoorish synagogue of Rome she is red with the blood of saints. No
tigre was ever more fierce or cruel. This far surpasses the bloody city,
whereof the prophet Nahum. 3.
speaks. the governors of this synagogue like wolves have devoured the
lambs of Christ, and not spared his flock. they imprison the true professors,
they spoil them, torment them, and kill them. Innocent the third caused many
thousands to be slain in France. John the two and twentieth did Io. Villan.
hist. fiorent. 11.
persecute the poor Christians of Armenia, and hired the Saracens to war upon
them, and all, because they would not acknowledge his authority. Martin the
fifth and his successors with fire and sword sought to ruinate the Bohemians,
only for seeking reformation of abuses, and redress for the cruel execution
of John Husse murdered at Constance, contrary to the emperors safe conduct. To
forbear to speak of former times, the world knows, that the wars of
Germany against the protestants, as they are called, were stirred up by Paul
the third and prosecuted with great rigor. By the instigation of bloody
priests of the Romish synagogue the innocent christians of Cabriers, Merindole
and the villages near adjoining were most cruelly slain without respect of
age, sex, or quality. These be the wolves, that in the time of Queen Mary
made such hauock of Christ's flock in England: that have caused millions of
christians in France, Flanders, and other places to be slaughtered. Lib. hist.
24.
Natalis a popish writer says that threescore thousand were murdered in the
massacre of France anno 1572. Cum amirante says he, Lutetiae Parisiorum, and
in omnibus prope Gallicis ciuitatibus caesa fuisse dicuntur plura sexaginta
millibus hominum factionis Vgonoticae, nouae religionis. And therefore he
doubts not to call this execution Cruel and bitter. The numbers of those that
have been secretly murdered by the bloody Inquisitors in Rome, Italy, Spain,
is exceeding great, the cruelty of the persecutors strange, the patience of
saints admirable. Neither do they only practice cruelty against such, as
they account heretics, but also against men of their own religion. Theodor. a
Niem. de schism. lib. 6. c. 36. and Plantina.
Innocent the seventh caused the principal Romans to be murdered, that
seemed studious to defend their liberty. Vrbane the sixth tormented and killed
diverse of his own Cardinals. Platina.
John the 22. drew off the skin of the bishop of Cahors being alive. Idem.
Paul the second by diverse torments vexed diverse learned and good men for small
causes. Alexander the sixth For every light word against him put men to death,
as says In Alexandro. 6.
Onuphrius. His base son Caesar Borgia passed all tyrants of former ages in
cruelty. De ass.
Budaeus called Julius the second for his cruelty, Sanguinarium cleri
magistrum. Leo the tenth, among whose praises aposted flatterers accounted
clemency the chief, committed many cruel executions. The cruel murders of
Paul the third, and succeeding popes are innumerable. Bartholomew de las casas
in his relation to king Philip the second concerning the state of the Indies,
calls the Spaniards Tigres, lupos and leones crudelisimos, and shows that
through their extreme cruelty the people of Hispaniola from three millions
were reduced to 300. Omne ius, says In prologo.
he, ludibrio habentes effusi humani sanguinis stillantibus riuis delectantur.

Neither have the papists more cause to brag of their virginity and
chastity, then of their gentle conditions and clemency. Their priests
forswear marriage, but few observe the laws of chastity. Sacerdotes
fornicationibus coinquinantur, C. 23.
says he that wrote Onus ecclesiae, curati sordescunt in co^cubinatu. Lect.
182. in lib. sap.
William Holcot therefore calls them Priapus his priests and priests of
Dagon. Petrus de Alliaco confesses in his treatise of reformation, That the
whole order of the popish clergy is corrupted with luxuriousnes and other
vices, to the great scandale of the people. Long it were to recount all their
abominations, not only now publicly known, but also whilome testified to the
world by Picus Mirandula, Baptista of Mantua, Palingenius and diverse others.
Boccace testifies, that in the most holy city of Rome Novel. 2.
From the greatest to the least, they offended in luxuriousnes, and that not
only natural, but also against nature: which testimony for very shame they
have of late corrupted, and razed. The popes that should be examples of
holiness, being termed Holy fathers, are more defiled then the rest of that
synagogue with all carnal beastliness. Themselves in their stories do not
dissemble the filthy lives of John the 12. Clement the 5. John the 22. and 23.
Sixtus the fourth, Alexander the sixth, Julius the second and third, Leo the
tenth, Paul the third, and diverse others. Neither is it to be doubted, but
that the rest were like to these. John the eight being a woman played the
whore in the papacy, to declare, that the synagogue of Rome is the whore of
Babylon.

The monasteries of women are little better then common stews. C. 2^.
Veneris prostibulo, says the author of Onus ecclesiae, sunt similiora, quam
dei sacrario. Virginum septa in meretricios fornices and obscaena latibula
conuersa sunt, as says Picus In orat. ad L^on. 10.
Mirandula. Palingenius of monks says, In leone.
they are Raptores, moechi, puerorum corruptores. Petrus de De reformat. eccles.
Alliaco complains of their beastly manners. And this experience teaches to
be most true. Publicly in Rome, and other cities of the popes communion, there
are public bordels. Yea and popish priests as says De art lenon
Agrippa, are wont to set out three or four women to hire, for increase of
their revenues.

Is it not marvel then, that these fellows are not ashamed to talk of
mortification of the flesh, penance and continency, when they wallow in such
filthiness, and commit such abominations, as with modesty may not be named?

The papists also pray, and do almesdeeds: but sure they have no reason to
proclaim them. For under color of their prayers, the monks and friars devour
the houses of widows and orphans. Nay simple people pray they know not what,
and call upon mortal men, that cannot help; and before stocks and stones,
that cannot hear. Besides that, their almesdeedes being bestowed upon monks
and friars, that live in all licentiousness and voluptuousness, and are now
become the only practisers either to overthrow princes and their states, or
else to bring them in slavery of Antichrist, are worthy no reward.

Neither do papists either keep better houses, or take less fines, or use
less swearing and forswearing, then other men. For with us most of them break
up houses, and bind their tenants to as great inconveniences, as any men. Now
of their oaths to their princes and others, they cannot make any great
reckoning, when they are taught, that oaths to princes bind no longer, then it
pleases the pope; and in so many places have rebelled against their lawful
magistrates.

The Noddy he braggeth also of marying poor men's daughters. But yet is not
able to tell of so many married, as dishonested by popish priests, and papists.
Now if he please to name the one, he shall hear the names of the other.

Most absurdly also does he take on him to talk of penance, mortification of
the flesh and fasting, when popish penance is nothing, but external punishment
consisting for the most part in lashing of the body, and other works either
veluntarilie performed, or by the priest enioined. Neither is their
mortification of the flesh any thing, but hard lying, going, as they call it,
woolward, wearing haire-cloth, and such like afflictions of the body. Fasting
likewise with them is nothing but eating of fish. But such penance, such
mortification, such fasting is no where enioined. Besides that, Christ no where
commands any to forswear marriage, or to keep themselves virgins, but such
as have the gift thereof. Neither does he command any to give away his goods,
and creep into a monastery. Nor may we think, that they renounce the world,
or embrace poverty, that as the Jesuits, and other friars do live in goodly
palaces, and have all things which they wanted before in great abundance. If
this were the way to heaven, the way thither were very plain and large, and
most pleasant and easy.

Wherefore if we may judge those to be blessed of God, that live according to
true religion; and those unhappy, whose actions are fierce and cruel, whose
lives are filthy and abominable, and far disagreeing from the truth of
Christian piety: then we have reason to lament the damnable estate of
papists; and to rejoice, that God has given us better grace, then to follow
them in their filthiness, savage cruelties, and notorious impieties. Our
adversary says He has touched before the bloody tragedies raised in France,
Flanders, Scotland, and might add Swizzerland and Germany, where above a
hundred thousand were slain in one year, in the rebellion of the countrymen
against the lords about religion. But the more he touches these matters, the
more shame he shall bring upon himself, and the synagogue of Rome. For not
any of our communion, but the cruel popes of Rome and their agentes have
caused these tragedies. They stirred up the French King and Spaniard to make
wars upon their quiet subjects, that desired nothing but peace. Nay when a
solemn peace was concluded, they made that a trappe to catch a number of noble
men, and others, to murder them. True christians have still suffered: and yet
this savage companion imputes unto them the tragical murders committed by
papists. In Scotland the people never stirred before their lives were sought:
the insurrection of the rusticall people in Germany was for Sleidan.
greeuances offered them by their Lords, and not properly for religion. They
were not of our religion but rose against lords as well of our religion, as
papists; and by our side were both by word, and force suppressed. But the
wars in Bohemia, and Germany, and Swizzerland, were indeed raised by the
popes and their agents, and all the world sees that all their study is to
raise wars and tumults, and to trouble all Christendom. And yet Christian
princes will not see; neither will Christian people beware of such unchristian
courses. As for the people of England, they are to show themselves thankful,
not only for the restoring of true religion, but also for the fruit, that
has thereof ensued in all true religious Christians.

After his talk of spiritual blessings, he passes to speak of temporal
benefits, and says, that If her Majesty, as she entered by general consent,
and was promoted by the forces of papists especially, and showed herself in
all points of religion and behavior a papist, and was crowned at a mass, so
had continued, then had she and her realm been most happy, and first should
have had a most flourishing kingdom united both to her, and among themselves in
religion, judgment, affection, fidelity and friendship. But his tale
consists of diverse foul leasinges, and his conjecture is vain and
improbable. For albeit she entered with consent of all good men, yet it grieved
the papists exceedingly, insomuch that she could not get any one popish
prelate to execute the ceremony of consecration but only one, and he one of
the meanest. The rest like traitors refused. Secondly it is false, that she
was promoted by force of papists. For what needed force, if all were willing
she should be crowned? and if the papists were unwilling, it is not likely,
they would use force, unless it was to force their own wills.

Thirdly it is most false, that she showed herself in all points of religion
and behavior both in her sisters days, and at her coronation a papist. For if
she had so done, why should the popish prelates fear any alteration, seeing
she gave no sign of any, as this babbling companion prateth? And why should
they refuse to sacre her, if she meant to observe all popish ceremonies,
unless they doubted of her title? Lastly it is most false, that she was
crowned at a mass. For she declared plainly, she would no mass, which was
a great occasion, why the popish bishops refused to consecrate her.

But were this true, yet his conjecture of happiness, that would have ensued
of continuance of the mass, is most vain and foolish. For albeit the French
kings Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and Henry the third continued the
mass, and all popish ceremonies; yet neither did the kingdom of France
flourish in their times, nor were their subjects either united to their
princes, or at unity among themselves. Likewise they of the Low countries have
long continued in great troubles and dissensions, and been forced to defend
their lives and liberties against the violence both of the king of Spain
himself, and of his agentes; albeit the king always seemed a sworn servant
and vassal of the pope of Rome, and a firm papist. The Portugals also neither
greatly affect the Spanish king, nor do well sort with the Castilians, or those
that favor them, and have now lost their ancient glory and liberty, albeit
their princes have still continued vassals to the pope. Why then,
notwithstanding the continuance of popish religion, might not dissension as
well have happened in England betwixt the prince and people, and among the people
themselves? do we think, that our nation could still have endured the
insatiable cruelty of popish prelates? or is it likely, that a free people
could have endured the slavish yoke of the pope of Rome?

But be it, that our contrymen could have swallowed all; yet must we
understand, that the pope of Rome would never have suffered her Majesty to
reign, whom both Clement the seventh had declared illegitimate, and Sanders de
schism.
Paul the third pronounced incapable of the crown. This conjecture therefore
of a flourishing kingdom, in case popery had continued, is nothing, but a
vain flourish of a foolish discourser. And so much the rather may we think
so, because no kingdom can flourish without true religion: nor can they long
agree among themselves, that have no atonement with God, nor consent in true
faith.

Secondly he imagines, that great security would have ensued of the
continuance of popish religion. For says he, Then none of these fears and
terrors of invasions, conquests, treasons and conspiracies had ever come in
consideration. But he much mistaketh the knights meaning, if he do suppose,
that he either fears the force of foreign enemies, or the secret practices
of traitors. For he fears them not, but exhorts his countrymen to prepare
themselves to repulse the foreign enemy, that is so busy, and to watch, that
they be not intrapped by secret practices of pretended friends. True it is,
that the rinegued and Hispaniolized English do by all means seek to draw
foreign enemies into the country, and to practice mischief at home; but he
is very blind, that sees not, that we are as well able to resist such
attempts, as ever our ancestors were, and he is a bastardly and dastardly
Englishman, that fears to encounter the Spaniard in so good a cause, or is
afraid of the Spanish brags. In the mean while it is worth the marking, that
this Noddy does signify that either by force, or practice the papists mean to
have their will. And yet some men there be, that will not see their malice,
and think it needless to take any course to resist, and encounter their
practices.

But suppose popery had here continued, how could this Noddy have given us
warrant, that we should have been neither oppugned by enemies abroad, nor by
traitors at home? was not Henry the third of France excommunicated by the
pope, oppugned by his subjects, and murdered by a Dominican friar,
notwithstanding his zeal in popery and all his service done to the pope? Did
not the Spaniard invade Portugal, albeit the people were all of one religion?
Nay he that casts away gods true service, can neither be secured abroad, nor
at home. Nor may we think that the pope would have liked her Majesty with
any condition, unless she would have received her crown from him: which is
a matter most dishonorable to imagine, and abominable to utter.

P. 8.
Thirdly he tells us that if her Majesty had embraced popery, She had been
by all likelihood married, and mother of many fair, and prince like children.
As though if she had pleased, she might not as well have married, continuing
in true religion, as in any other religion: or as if none could have fair and
princely children, but women of their faction. He imagines, that difference of
religion has hindered her marriage, but if he were as well acquainted with
matters of state as he does pretend, he might have known, that diverse great
princes of a diverse religion have sought her, yea that the great monarke, whom
he so highly extolleth would gladly have matched with her, and promised to
procure a dispensation to that purpose. Neither was religion any hinderance to
the marriage of the present French kings sister. But suppose no papisticall
prince would have married with her; yet might she have matched with kings and
princes of true catholic religion, if so she had thought convenient. Again,
suppose she had married, was not Queen Marie also married? yet was she not
mother of many fair and princely children. And the three last French kings
died al not only without fair children, but also without issue. This is then
a mere toie and vain fancy, to talk of children before marriage, seeing God
does often deny this blessing to diverse married folks, and often takes away
children, that are otherwise likely to live.

Fourthly he supposes, if her Majesty had been pleased to have vpholden the
mass, and to continue popish religion, and married, that then the succession
of the crown should have been established in her issue. But he should have
remembered that God says by his 1. Sam. 2.
prophet, that he will honor them, that honor him, and despise them, that
despise him. As for idolaters, and maintainers of strange religions, they shall
not prosper. Beside this, who knows not, that the fruit of the womb is the
blessing of the Lord: and that god does often dispose of kingdoms according to
his divine will, and pleasure? Finally the pope that takes on him to be
Christ's vicegerent would have had a great stroke in this matter, especially if
she had acknowledged his usurped authority. Neither is it likely he would
have allowed her, and her issue, whom diverse of his ancesters by their
definitive sentences had both shamefullie dishonored, and injuriously
disabled. And to bring so great a prince to submit her self to so base a
slave, and of him to receive her right to the crown, were a matter
dishonorable to her Majesty and intolerable to the state, and a frierlike
fancy not to be imagined of any, but of Parsons the Jesuit, and such like
traiterous rinegued fugitives.

But let us suppose, that her Majesty should leave no issue behind her, is she
the first, that has been in that case? and is there no remedy either by laws
already provided, or by wise men to be devised, but that we must needs fall by
the ears together about this matter? This is the supposition of the noddy our
adversary: and this garboyle percase he desires, to gratify the Infanta, and
the Spaniard, whose slave he is: but our trust is in God, and in the
resolution of honest men, that I hope, will provide for the safety of the
state, and look to prevent the malice of those, that are so desirous of our
trouble.

Fifthly he tells us of the popes excommunication denounced against her
Majesty, and makes a great matter of it. And says, That if religion had not
been changed, we should have had no breach with Rome, nor needed to have
feared this terrible thunderbolt of excommunication. But what more absurd, then
to object the breach with Rome, and the popes excommunication, when we esteem
that to be one of the greatest blessings that ever happened to this land, being
thereby freed from the slavery of Antichrist, and the darkness of Egypt, and
do no more fear the popes thunderbolt of excommunication, then a flash of
light out of a lantern. We know what the pope is, and how little power he has
to excommunicate any Christian, being himself excommunicate, and unworthy the
name of a bishop. But to let pass all this which the Noddie our adversary
passes by, and shall never prove; I say, that princes that continue in popish
religion, have notwithstanding felt the sharpness or bluntness of the popes
boltes, I would say bulls, and continued long in the popes displeasure. The
ancient German emperors Henry the fourth and fifth, and the two Fridericks and
diverse other that succeeded them, knew no religion, but that which the pope
taught, which no doubt was a goodly religion; and yet he thundered out his
excommunications against them, and persecuted diverse of them to the death, yea
and after death. Betwixt Lewis the 12. of France, which for his bounty was
called The father of his country, and Julius the second, there happened a great
breach, and out came excommunications against him, and against his followers;
albeit about matters of religion there was no different betwixt them. No man
was more superstitious in popish religion then Henry the third of France; yet
was he slain by a Dominican, and excommunicated by the pope. The same may be
confirmed by the late excommunication of D. Caesare da Este duke of Ferrara,
and infinite examples. Suppose then the Queens Maistie could have liked of
the sect of Antichrist, and his abominable religion; yet would he have
disliked and looked to have had some finger in disposing of the crown: so that
all these supposals rest upon weak grounds, which by no reason can well stand.

Sixthly he says, That if this breach with Rome had not happened, then England
had continued in her old ancient amity with Spain and Burgundy. As if it
were not more hurtful to the Spaniard to break with us, then for us to break
with the Spaniard. Surely if her Majesty would have taken her advantage
either in the Low Countries, or in the Indies, and if the pensioners of Spain
had not been more happy in breaking all enterprises against king Philip, then
men of service encouraged to attempt them; he should well have perceived this
to be true long ere this. And therefore among diverse instructions, which the
emperor Charles the fifth left his son, this was one principal; That by no
means he should break with England. But admit this were a matter dangerous,
to fall out with Spain, how could we have avoided it by continuing in
popish religion, seeing the Portugals, that are perfect papists could not by
any mediation keep their country from his usurpation and tyranny? Naie pope
Paulus the fourth claiming somewhat, that the Spaniard was unwilling to yield,
could by no terror of excommunication hinder Historia Adriani.
king Philips army, but it entered upon the popes country, and prosecuted his
holiness with great rigor. So likewise in Iuliers and Italy the Spaniard has
iniambed upon others right, notwithstanding consent in Religion.

Further he doubts not to affirm, That the wars and tumults in kingdoms
round about us have principally proceeded from alteration of religion in
England. Which is but a ridiculous conceit, and a vain imagination. For when
as yet England continued in popish superstition, the pope and his agents
stirred up Charles the fifth to persecute the princes of Germany, and Francis
the first his officers to murder the poor inhabitants of Cabriers and
Merindol. And when her Majesty came to the crown, all the world knows,
that her study was rather peace then war, as her agents can yet testify,
that often moved both the Spaniard to cease his wars in the Low Countries,
and the French to desist to persecute his subjects, that except in matters of
their conscience promised al obedience. Beside that it is a fond imaginato^ to
think, that her Majesty or her agents had that credit in other countries,
that she could make them take arms at her pleasure. No, no, the world is
witness, that it is the pope, that is the firebrand of the wars throughout
all Christendom. He stirred up Charles the fifth against the Germans, as
appears both by his letters, and negotiation with him, and by the aid he
sent to him against them. He enflamed the wars in France, and never would
let matters settle, as appears by the negotiation of his legates, and by
infinite testimonies. When as yet her Majesty did not so much, as proceed
against any papist for religion; then did Pius the fifth that furious friar
publish his shameless and railing bull against her, and sent Nicholas Morton
to persuade the Earls of Westmerland and Northumberland, and their followers
to rebel against her. And so he declares himself to be Antichrist, that
shall cause all to be slain that will not admit his religion, and that is
figured in the second beast, Apocal. 13.

This companion therefore that does impute the cause of wars unto us, is like
that good fellow, that said the cause why he robbed and spoiled, was because
men carried money with them upon the high way. We cannot hinder the malice and
ambition of the pope and Spaniard, that prosecuteth wars against innocents.
But they are to be blamed, that offer violence to the peaceable, and defend
open wrong, and not they, that maintain their right.

Lastly he tells us, and that in a lamentable voice, That if this alteration
had not happened, we had not seen the deprivation of all the sacred order of
bishops in one day together with their perpetual imprisonment, nor so many
noble houses overthrown, nor so many troubled for persisting in their fathers
faith, and not consenting to this change, nor the torturing, hanging, and
quartering of a hundred priests, most of them gentlemen, and youths of rare
wit. Percase he is hired to shed some few tears. Assuredly he weepeth
without just cause. For neither were all the popish prelates deprived in one
day, nor were they committed to perpetual imprisonment. Nor was any papist
here directly troubled for persisting in his fathers faith, nor have any noble
houses bin overthrown by religion, but rather by rebellion. Neither were those
simple and unlearned youths, whom the popes agents have sent into England, to
prepare the way to rebellion, hanged and quartered for religion, but for
treason. Further we say for answer, that those prelates whom he talks of,
were no bishops nor teachers, but woluish murderers of Gods saints, and
hirelings of Antichrist, whosemarke they bore: and yet diverse of them were
suffered to run away. Some of them were never imprisoned; others were only
restrained, and that either to their own houses, or to places, where they had
all things in abundance. Nay albeit they refused to consecrate her Majesty,
and denied her right; yet she did not, as she might lawfully, use force
against them. But if any should deny to consecrate the pope, albeit no
prince, yet should it cost them their lives. Further the world knows, how
much her Majesty has favored her nobility. She could not do more honor
to any, then to the duke of Norfolk. Yet could she not mollify his heart
toward her. She never thought evil of the earl of Westmerland and
Northumberland; yet did they seek her destruction at the solicitation of a
wicked priest called Nicholas Morton. Henry Earl of Northumberland albeit
far engaged in practices of rebellion, yet was he suffered to enjoy his honor
and living. And diverse that were far interessed in that action, were not
called in question. If then any perished in those practices, the fault was
wholly their own. Her Majesty was sorrowful for their wilfulness, rather
then cause of their overthrow. As for wilful Recusants they were not once
called in question, before that the pope used their obstinacy, as a means to
work the overthrow of the state. And now notwithstanding they do adhere to the
pope, her Majesty's enemy, and will not disauow his authority in depriving
her of her right, which is a matter of great consideration; yet all their
punishment is only a mulct for not coming to church; and restreint, that they
do not easily join with foreign enemies. They enjoy their lands, their
goods, and most of them too great liberty, albeit evil affected to the state,
and wholly addicted to a most abominable and damnable religion. Our brethren in
other places only for professing the truth without other cause, loose not
only goods, lands, and country, but liberty and life also. Wherefore if they
be wise, let them acknowledge, that they live under a gracious Princess; and
see, that such lewd proctors as this, leave prating in their cause, least they
hear that, which shall make them seem unworthy all favor in all indifferent
men's judgment.

Against the poor young men, that have died for their practicing for the pope,
I will not say much. I do rather lament, that they should be so abused, as to be
drawn out of their country to foreign enemies, and to be employed in their
service, either to their own destruction, or to the hurt of their country:
but most of all, that they should, to the final loss of their souls, yield
themselves thrall to Antichrist, and embrace his damnable doctrine, and
heresies. Only thus much, being urged by this Noddies importunity, I could
not choose but say in defense of our religion, and the present government, that
they were executed for treason and not for their heresies, or false doctrine.
Which appears notoriously by their enditements, by the evidence, by the
judgment and manner of execution. That the sentence is most just, it is
evident both by the ancient laws of this land, and by the laws of all
nations. By the 25. Ed. 3.2.
statute of Edward the third, it is adjudged high treason, To imagine the death
of the prince, or to stir up war against her, or to be adhaerent to her
enemies. But there is no one of these, but is adherent to the pope the public
enemy of her Majesty and this state: all receive authority and instructions
from him, and stick not to defend his authority. Most of them are his
salaried scholars, or agents. Many of them have received stipends of the
Spanish king, and some were employed in his navy anno 1588. and sent against
England. All of them desired wars to be raised against England, and some of
them were agents to enduce the Spaniard to make war upon us. That the pope is
enemy to her Majesty and this land, I think no man will make question,
seeing he seeks to deprive her of the crown; raised the rebellion of the
north, and in Ireland; and stirred up the Spaniard to take arms against us;
and himself armed ships and soldiers to fight against us, and sought in plain
terms to depose the prince, and as they In vita Pij 5.
term it, L' abbattimento di quella reina. That this is treason and a capital
crime by rules of state, and laws of all nations, it is apparent by diverse
arguments. Maiestatis crimen est, says l. Proximam. ad l. Iul. Maiestatis.
Vlpian, quod aduersus populum Romans aut eius securitatem committitur. And he
pronounces them guilty, by whose procurement Either foreign enemies are
stirred to take arms; or seditious persons caused to rise; or by whom any
attempt is made against the prince: or that shall l. Lex vbi supra.
run to the enemies: or that shall swear men to attempt against the prince,
or state: or that shall L. quisquis Cod. ad l. Iul. May.
take on him a note of faction. The same laws are also practiced both in
France and Spain and other countries. Alfonso the 9. king of Spain, in his
first book Del fuero real, tit 2. by strict laws provides for the safety of
the prince. And most strange it were, seeing laws provide for the security of
particulars, that the law should not take hold of those, that practice
against the whole state. If then these young men had been of such wit, and
learning, and other good parts, as this fellow pretends; they would never
have suffered themselves to be drawn into a faction against their prince and
country; and others hereafter, if they be wise, will take heed, how they abuse
the princes clemency. In Ireland sufferance and impunitie of such fellows
has wrought evil effects. He that is not blind may also see, what they
entend in England: and, if he be wise, will not suffer such vipers to gnaw
their mothers bowels. So then it appears, that no great incommoditie, but
rather great blessings have happened to this land by the abolishing of popery
and superstition.

But suppose some temporal discommodities had ensued of this abolition of the
mass, and of restoring of christian religion: yet most absurd it were for
temporal commodities to forsake our christian profession. He that takes not
up his cross and follows me, says our savior Matt. 10.
Christ, is not worthy to be my disciple, and not only external temporal
commodities, but our kindred and nearest blood is to be forsaken for Christ's
sake. He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me,
Ibidem.
says our savior. Daniel 3.
Sidrac, Misach and Abednago chose rather to be thrown into the fiery
furnace, then to worship an idol. And shall we for any presupposed fears
forsake our God, and his truth, and fall down before idols, and yield our
selves slaves to Antichrist? a glorious thing it is to attain wealth and
honor in this world, and to be made generals and heads of societies of friars
and monks, and to be made cardinals: but what shall it avail a man, to win
the whole world, if he loose his soul?

Whatsoever therefore may happen, let us cleave to the truth of Christ Jesus,
and hold on our profession unto the end. No man is crowned, but that strives
until he have obtained victory. If we loose goods, lands, wife, children,
father or mother or friend, God can restore them to us again. Nay if we die
in this quarrel, God can give unto us a far better life. Wherefore then
should we doubt, or fear?

Suppose, I say, the woorst, yet have we no cause to doubt. But if we will
rightly consider the present state of things, we shall find, that we have
great cause to rejoice, and hope the best. Our cause is just and honest. For we
stand for our religion, our prince, our country, our reputation, our wives,
our children, friends and whatsoever else is dear to us. Never had this
country more men, nor better means either to defend, or offend. The cause is
not ours alone, but of many others. The enemy never was weaker, then at this
instant. Only this wants, that we deal boldly and resolutely in so honest
and godly a cause, and neither fear the vain brags of foreign enemies, nor
trust the smooth gloses of treacherous friars, popish priests, and rinegued
English.

Now her Majesty is surely possessed of the crown, and so well beloved of her
subjects, as she can desire. Take away the practicing priests, and malcontent
traitors, and at home she has no cause of fear. In time past the popes of
Rome had a strong faction within the land, and divided half of the regal
authority with the prince. The clergy and people, for the most part, were his
vassals. The country paid a great tribute to him. The treasure of the land
was carried out at his pleasure. Many ran to him both for preferments, and
justice. now all this usurped power is abolished, and the people wholly
depends next under God, on the prince: so that her authority and force now
is far greater, then in time past. She wants neither men, nor ships, nor
ordinance, nor munitions of war. If then her Majesty would be pleased to
make an establishment for the wars; and seriously to consider, how to resist
these, that now seek her hurt, and the destruction of her people; we should
soon cause such rinegued enemies of the country to change the note of their
song concerning dangers and fears; and force foreign enemies to think more,
how to defend themselves, then to offend and offer violence to others. Such
is the state of our country, and such are our means. Great cause therefore
have we, to give God thanks, that has bestowed upon us so many spiritual and
temporal graces. And if we do not use them to his glory in exterminating the
wicked relics of Antichristianitie, and defending that truth, which we
profess; we shall show our selves unworthy of both, and hazard that which
now we quietly possess.

CHAP. II.
That the papists, as they are charged by sir Francis Hastings, do hold diverse
absurd positions and principles in their religion.

TO recount and declare all the absurdities and heresies of the popish faction,
would require both time and labor: they are so many, and so intricate. In
number they pass the sand; they are (...), as says I'iad. 1.
Homer. And no marvel, seeing they are builte on the pope, which albeit he be
Sanders rock.
reputed as a rock, yet is nothing but a bank of sand, whereon the papists
have wracked their faith. But of the rest, I shall have time to speak
hereafter. Now I will only mention those, which sir Francis Hastings does
object, and which his adversary goes about to remove.

I say therefore, that it is most true, which he does object, diz. That the
papists hold ignorance to be the mother of devotion. D. Cole a man of no
obscure note among the papists in a certain disputation at Westminster, did
openly affirm it. I tell you says he, ignorance is the mother of devotion.
neither is he singular in this point. Aduers. proleg. Brent. l. 2. f. 71.
Hosius says, that ignorance is not only worthy pardon, but reward also. The
same Ibidem. l. 3. fol. 146.
man also commends the Coliars faith, which understanding nothing said, he
believed as the catholic church, and being further demanded, what the church
believed, said, as he believed: and so persisted in that circle. And in another
Confess. Petricou. de fid. and symb. f. 17.
place he affirms, that Nihil scire est omnia scire, and that it is
sufficient for a man, to believe that which the catholic church believes,
albeit he be not able to show what it believes. And that the synagogue of Rome
holds this opinion, albeit not in plain terms, it appears by their
practice. For they do not willingly suffer the scriptures to be translated into
vulgar toongs, nor permit lay men to read them without license, which is not
easily obtained. Further their public prayers and liturgies are all set forth
in unknown toonges. The people understands neither what they pray, nor what
they believe. The priests for the most part are blind, and so is the people;
and so the blind is set to lead the blind. Paul the second did so hate
knowledge, that he pronounced them heretics, which should once mention the
word Academie. Paulus haereticos eos pronuntiauit, says In Paulo 2.
Platina, qui nomen academiae vel serio, vel ioco deinceps commemorarent.

Likewise they hold, that princes are not to meddle with the external
government of the church, nor to make laws for the establishment of faith, and
manners. Lib. 5. de pont. Romans cap. 7.
Bellarmine does distinguish ecclesiastical government, from civil government;
whereby it may appear, that he would not have the temporal magistrate to
meddle with the church. And in another place he directly Lib. 1. de pont. Romans
c. 7.
says, That the government of the church was committed to bishops and priests,
and not to princes, and that princes ought not to determine a cause of the
church.

Generally they all hold, that the prince is not to reform abuses in
doctrine, but the council of priests: which is a position very absurd. For
first we see, that under the law kings reformed abuses, and established orders
in the church, as appears by the example of Hezekiah, Iosia, David, and
others. Likewise among christians Constantine, Valentinian, Gratianus,
Theodosius, and other princes did not only reform abuses, and condemn
heresies, but Cod. de sum. Trin. and fide cath. and titulis sequentib.
establish orders, and promulge the articles of christian faith. Nay some there
are that think it a matter indecent, and unnecessary either to understand or
to argue of matters of religion. Charles the fifth, as Meteranus in his story
testifies, commanded, that no lay man should dispute of religion; and many
were executed for that cause only. The Italians say, that it is matter for
friars to reason of religion. E cosa da frati, etc.

They hold and teach further, that the pope determining matters of faith is to
be believed, under pain of damnation, and this is that, which Sir Francis
meant, and which both Bellarmine, and all the popish crew writes, and
believes. And yet we find, that he approoueth many damnable heresies, as that
of the Angelickes, Collyridians, Staurolatrians, Manichees in ministering the
communion under one kind, the Pelagians in extolling the merits and force of
works, and diverse others. Boniface the eight holds, that none can be saved,
but such as be subject to the pope. And Bellarmine Lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans c.
12.
concludes, that it is a point of faith, to hold that the bishop of Rome has
succeeded Peter in the universal regiment of the church. So that whatsoever he
commands, that must be believed. Neither may private men dispute of the
popes power. For that, they say, is sacrilege, and no less, then To open a
man's mouth against heaven. And yet his determinations we find to be
heretical, and his commandments wicked, and unlawful.

Lastly they teach, that the pope has power to pardon all sins. And that is
so true, that it cannot be denied. For they give him all Christ's power in
earth. And in the tax of penances there is set down a tax for indulgences
for all sin, yea for Iudaisme, apostasy, Turcisme, Maranie, Paricide,
Sodomie, and whatsoever heinous sin else. And albeit the more learned
distinguish between mortal and venial sin, between culpam and poenam; yet
if ^he pope can forgive all the punishment, then sure can he forgive any sin,
and the rude papists understand no such subtilties. If then sir Francis has
avouched any such matter against the papists, he has done them no wrong.
Neither has this Noddy any sufficient skill to shift off the matter. Much be
braggeth and faceth; but what should we respect words, when we see no truth
in his meaning?

To acknowledge Gods favor toward us in delivering us both out of the
spiritual thraldom of Antichrist, and the temporal slavery of strangers,
and accumulating upon the people of this land, diverse other both spiritual and
temporal blessings, he esteems to be but flattery and fair glosing: and
to charge the papists with ignorance, and strange opinions, he counts no
better then cogging and lying, mixing a number of words borrowed partly of
cheating companions, with whom it should seem he has much conuersed, and
partly of railing sophisters, among whom he has long triumphed. But as I have
wiped away the accusation of flattery, so I doubt not, but I shall easily
answer this cogging mates brabling about lying and cogging.

He takes in great scorn, that it should be said, That a dark and mistie
cloud of ignorance did cover the land in Queen Mary's time; and says, That
it was as wise and learned, as Italy or Spain is at this day, where our
teachers if they should appear, dare not open their mouths in schools, or
matters of learning. And therefore at his pleasure he calls them Sunshine
doctors, and enlightened, and sun borne ministers. Finally he tells us,
That in Queens Mary's time there was as learned a clergy, as in many ages
before, and that our bishops, which in contempt he calls poor creatures, are
no way comparable, to Tonstall, Watson, Christopherson, Fecnam, Gardener, and
White that then lived. But wherein he thinks most gloriously to triumph,
there he shows most folly. For first admit these men, that he names, were
great doctors, yet it follows not thereof, but that the people lived in great
error and blindness: which is a matter so apparent, that it cannot be
denied. For few could say their Pater noster and Belief, and of those that
could by heart say them, not one among twenty understood them. Like parates
they said, Credo in Deum, but understood not what they said. They prayed
likewise, but understood not, what they prayed. Now what avails it to pray
with the lips, if the heart understand nothing? Likewise they came to church,
and heard Mattins, Euensong, and Mass in Latin. But what were English people,
that understood no Latin, the better? They were likewise taught to pray not
only to angels, saints, and to our Lady, but before stocks, and stones,
little understanding the school distinction of Doulia, and Latria, without
which they could hardly avoid the crime of idolatry. The preachers as Cant.
29.
Dante said Preached old wives tales and legends, and scriptures were then not
suffered to be read of the vulgar sort. How then was it possible, that this
people should understand any thing? Secondly we do very well know, what kind
of men these were which the adversary names. Their writings are yet extant,
and nothing singular. And when in the beginning of this Queens days they were
challenged to dispute, and felt their own weakness, they utterly refused.
Procure us the like liberty to dispute in Seuill, or Paris, or Milan, and see
whether we will refuse to dispute with these great Rabbines. Now we confess
indeed, we are not open our mouths in schools in Spain, and Italy. But the
reason is, for that it is death to defend truth. But if we were no more afraid
of their swords, then their arguments, they should soon perceive, that we
both durst, and would open our mouths against the proudest of their Jesuits,
and would either shut their mouths, or make it appear, that they cry and
speak without reason. Wherefore let this lunaticall or extaticall friar either
forbear to brag, or else procure us liberty to dispute: and then he shall
see, how he is unable to match those, whom here he rejects with scorn,
gibing at their lawful wives and children, when he and his consorts, and all
the rabble of priests and friars walloweth in all filthiness and abominations,
making no conscience of whooredome, and publicly maintaining bardassaes and
concubines, and a race of bastardes about them, and many of them doing worse:
all which shall be justified by particulars, if our adversary desire trial in
this point. Lastly it is not the learning of five or six, that can make all
the rest of the clergy seem learned. It may be, these few were tolerablie
learned. But certes the ignorance of the other mass priests was exceeding
great. Now in Spain and Italy not every tenth man understands his Portuis
or Missal, and in matter of religion little or nothing. Wherefore if the pastor
be so ignorant and blind, it is no marvel though the people be far more
blind, rude and ignorant.

He tells us, That it is no haeresie, nor never was so accounted, to read on
the Bible in any language whatsoever. And yields this reason, For that by
license of the ordinary it is permitted to infinite lay people to read
Scriptures in vulgar tongues. Secondly he says, That none was ever called for
this fault only before the Romish clergy, and branded to the slaughter. And
because sir Francis Hastings does hold the contrary, he does give him the
lie, and with very brave words make show, as if he would challenge him into
the field, facing and brauing like a false shameless friar. But when it
comes to the point, he passes over the matter with a few railing words,
showing himself a cowardly challenger, that having given the lie, runs out
of the field without daring to abide other trial, then by the tongue. In which
also I doubt not, but to give him the foil. For the first is very evidently
disprooued by diverse examinatio^s in king Henry the eight, and Queen Mary's
days; where it was objected to lay men, that they read the Scriptures in
English: which should not have been done, unless by that article they should
have been convinced of heresy. The second is likewise disprooued by diverse
precedents and records, whereby it appears, that poor people were both
called, and condemned for reading of the Scriptures. In the beginning of king
Henry the eight his reign, certain were condemned for reading the Epistles
of saint Paul in English, as appears by the registers of Lincoln diocese:
and bishop Longland preaching at their burning, said That they were damned
that moved their lips in reading those chapters of Scripture, for which
those martyrs were condemned. Diverse were abiured for reading scriptures. One
of them was burned with a bible in English about his neck, to declare the
cause of his burning. Both those points are also proved by the provincial
constitution Constable. pro. c. praeterea. de haeretic.
of Thomas Arundell. Statuimus, says he, vt nemo textum aliquem sacrae
Scripturae authoritate sua in linguam Anglicanam, seualiam transferat, nec
legatur aliquis huiusmodi liber, etc. vel public vel occulte sub poena maioris
excommunicationis. qui vero contra hoc fecerit, vt fautor haeresis, and erroris
similiter puniatur. So it appears, it was unlawful to read scriptures in
vulgar toongs, and that such readers were punished as heretics, or suspect of
heresy: and that the challenger our adversary lies notoriously in both these
points. Further he makes a third lie, where he says, that Infinite lay
people are by the ordinary permitted to read the Scriptures translated into
vulgar toongs. For in all Spain I believe he cannot name three that have this
permission, and very unlike it is, they mean that the people shall read
Scriptures translated, when they will not translate them themselves, and forbid
all other translations, but their own. Besides this, who dare desire leave to
read Scriptures translated, when it is a note of heresy with them to desire
such a matter?

But least we should mistake this choleric gentleman's meaning, that is so
ready to give the lie, and the stab for every word, let us hear him declare
his meaning concerning reading of translations of Scriptures in his own
terms. First says he, most certain it is, that no man or woman was ever
forbidden to read any part of the holy scriptures in any of the three learned
languages, wherein they were written, to wit, Hebrew, Greek or Latin. Secondly
he declares unto us, That the restreint of vulgar translations was made only
to this end, that no translations should be used, except it were first
examined by learned men, by order of the bishop and ordinanarie: and then he
says, That such lay men were permitted by the ordinary to use the said
translation, as were thought fit and able to profit by it. And this he
bears us in hand to be the ordinance of the catholic church. But first he
should have done well to have showed us, what catholic church did so ordeine.
For if he mean the conuenticle of Trent, he is an absurd fellow to think
that scum and sink of priests and friars, which there gathered a council
against Christ and against his church, to betray the same to Antichrist, to be
the catholic church. Beside that, their determinations were not only
contrary to Christ's doctrine, but to the authority and practice of the
church, and namely in this, that they limited the reading of Scriptures in
vulgar toongs.

Secondly it is most ridiculous to permit lay men or women to read the Bible in
Hebrew, Greek or Latin, when so few of them among the papists understand those
toongs, and this permission is nothing, but an excluding of vulgar
translations, and barring the people from reading scriptures.

Thirdly it is great ignorance to say, the scriptures were first written in
Latin, and unreasonable to permit the Latin vulgar translation more then
others; and ridiculous, to call these three toonges learned, seeing in times
past unlearned men understood them, and now diverse learned do not well
understand them. Neither is it material, that some hold, that Saint Marks
gospel was written first in Latin. For their proofs are weak, and that is
but one part of scripture. But here we talk of reading all the scriptures.

Fourthly it is most plain, while they allow no translations, but such as
themselves make, and either seldom make any, or making any do most shamefully
corrupt the text, as the Rhemistes have done in the translation of the new
testament, the Jesuits in their translation of the bible into French, and
lately printed at Lions; that they seek either to exclude the people from
reading scriptures, or else to give them poison for Scripture. That is
apparent, for that hitherto they have not translated the Bible into Italian,
Spanish, or Dutch: nor greatly allow the French. This is most evident by the
wicked peruersion of the text, and that both by wrong translations, and also by
perverse annotations, as shall be showed fully, if God send me life, and in the
Rhemish Testament has been already showed by doctor Fulke.

To prove that the order of the Romish church in prohibiting reading of vulgar
translations is good, he alleges further, that forasmuch as many
translations are false, it is fit to examine them, Least for Gods word the
simple might embrace man's word. Again he says, That albeit the translation
be true, yet unless the reader can gather out of it a true sense, it is not
fit he should be permitted to read that translation of Scripture. And this
he believes to be meant by saint 2. Cor. 3.
Paul, who says, That the letter kills, and the spirit quickneth. But if
translations be false, why are not some true translations published, that the
vulgar sort may have benefit by them? Again, if only translations for their
falsehood be condemned, why does the wicked synagogue of Rome In indice.
libror. prohib.
condemn most true translations? Do they not show, that they hate the light of
the Scriptures? Thirdly if none may read vulgar translations, but such as are
able to draw true sense out of them; why are all suffered to read the Latin
being not able to draw true sense out of it? This assuredly is a course to
debar all men from reading of Scriptures, and the Romish synagogue
especially, for that the same draws most perverse interpretations out of
Scripture, and under the name of wholesome Scriptures gives to the people most
poisoned doctrine contrary to Scriptures. Besides it is a course contrary to
the exhortation of our Savior, that speaking to the people said; Scrutamini
Scripturas; and contrary to antiquity, that exhorted the people to read the
Scriptures. Finally he does shamefully abuse the words of S. Paul. 2. Cor. 3.
to the condemning of reading of Scriptures. For if because the letter kills,
the lay people are not to read the scriptures; then none is to read them,
seeing reading and not understanding kills: which is most absurd. Secondly if
the apostle did mean the outward letter without sense, yet would it make
nothing against reading of Scriptures. For if the bare letter without the sense
kills, then ought every man to read diligently, that he may understand the
sense. Thirdly this interpretation condemns the practice of the papists in
reading the Scriptures in an unknown tongue in the church. For if the letter
kill without the meaning, then do the papists kill Gods people, that read
Scriptures in Latin to the people, which understand nothing of the sense.
Fourthly the apostle cannot probably by the letter that kills understand the
scriptures, for then should they be very unprofitable, contrary to the
saying of the apostle that says, 2. Tim. 3.
The Scripture is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct and instruct in
righteousness. Lastly Li. 1. de verb. dei. c. 3.
Bellarmine his companion may instruct him, that none but the Zuencfeldians,
and Drigenistes, by the letter that kills, understand Scriptures, as this
Noddie does, showing himself therein a plain heretic, and enemy to
Scriptures. The true meaning therefore of Paul's words is, that the outward
preaching of the word, being destitute of Gods spirit working internally,
does kill: to the profit or disprofite of reading Scriptures, they make
nothing.

He tells us further, That the understanding of Scriptures is a particular
gift of God reserved to Christ especially, and by him bestowed on the church:
which he proves by this place; Tunc aperuit illis sensum, vt intelligerent
Scripturas: and by the example of the Eunuch, That without Philip the apostles
help could not understand the prophecy of Isaie. Beside all this, he tells
us, That dim sighted people cannot discern things without a guide. All which
reasons do show, that notwithstanding his fair shows, he has but a dim
sight in divine matters, and is but a blind guide, that would draw Gods
people from reading of Scriptures, and percase lead them to the reading of
lying legends, and such like fantastical writings of the Romish synagogue.
Against the reading of holy Scriptures his fond reasons conclude nothing. For
if Christ be the best interpreter, where should we better understand what
his interpretations are, then in holy Scriptures? And if he have bestowed the
gift of interpreting scriptures on the church, how should the people be better
assured of the excellency of the churches interpretation, then by seeing the
same confirmed by scriptures? For which cause the Bereans red the Scriptures,
and are therefore commended.

Secondly if the men that went to Luc. 24.
Emaus, and the Ethiopian Act. 8.
red the Scriptures, albeit they understood them not at the first: why should
Christians be barred from reading such scriptures, as they understand? What
more simple argument can be devised, then this; because an interpreter is
necessary, that we may not read what he interprets in a tongue which we
understand?

Thirdly Philip that taught the eunuch was not the apostle Philip, as the Noddy
our adversary supposes, showing by example of himself, that scriptures are
not much to be red; but Philip the deacon. Lastly it is a matter most
ridiculous, because some places are hard to be understood, to debar the
people from the whole body of scriptures, especially seeing many things are
plain and easy. Nay this reason may better be retorted upon our adversary;
because diverse places are hard to be understood, that we should diligently
read them, and hear them expounded, that we may both by these, and other
places reap profit. And thus it may appear, that even simple women, whom
this scoffing mate calls proud protestant people, and scorneth at them for
reading holy scriptures, would be much ashamed, if they could not reason better
of these matters, then this great popish Rabbin, that takes on him so boldly
to determine matters.

Having thus fondly reasoned of reading of scriptures he concludes forsooth
very wisely, that falsehood and heresy is engendered of reading of scriptures.
And goes about to prove it first, by the example of William Hacket, William
Ieffrey and Joan Burcher; the^ by experience, for that as he believes, more
heresies are sprung up within these 50. or 60. years since scriptures began to
be red in vulgar toongs, the^ in many ages before. But his conclusion is
nothing, but a wicked calumniation of gods holy scriptures: and his proofs
consiste of a pack of lies, and both declare him to be a sclanderous lying
enymy of Gods truth. For it is not reading of scriptures, which he styles rash
reading, being used by lay people, but neglect of scriptures, that brings
forth error and heresy. Philosophers therefore that contemned scriptures were
called patriarchs of heretics; and heretics by De resur. carn.
Tertullian are called Lucifugae scripturarum, for that they fly from the light
of scriptures. And that is proved even by the examples produced by the
adversary. For those blasphemous heretics did not fall into their impieties
and heresies by reading scriptures, but by gyuing heed to fond revelations,
and renouncing scriptures. experience also teaches the same. for while the
light of Gods word was covered, and scriptures neglected, and heed given to
popish decretalles, and Mahomets revelations; all the heresies of papists and
impieties of Mahomet, and many other errors, have been received by people
ignorant of scriptures.

And that reading of scriptures is not cause of heresies, it appears first,
for that not simple people reading scriptures, but great clerks reading
philosophy, and popish Decretalles, and school Doctors, have been authors of
heresies. Secondly in the Apostles times, when all might read scriptures, then
fewest heresies sprung up.

That Joan Burcher conveyed bibles into the court, or had any acquaintance with
Anne Askeugh, which this fellow reports, is a lie devised by himself. Let
him show his author, if he can. that which he talks of Anne Askeugh is
impertinent. But such is his blindness, he will needs have all the world
see the cruelty of papists, that burnt that innocent woman for denying their
transubstantiation, which, if he were wise, he would have either denied, or
dissembled, albeit some other should have spoken of it. And so it appears,
that Sir Francis Hastings had reason to charge the papists with hiding the
scriptures from the peoples eyes, and keeping them as it were covered in
toonges unknown, contrary to Christ's doctrine, and precedentes of antiquity.
And no less reason have christians to detest the boldness of this frapling
friar, that calls preaching, reading, and reasoning of scriptures, clouting
of scriptures. And thus much may serve to show, that the papists deal
injuriously, in taking away translations of scriptures out of the hands of the
multitude.

It is also most apparent, that they rather persuade ignorance, as fit for
their blind devotion, then knowledge: neither is this Rabbin able to show the
contrary. He alleges Thomas of Aquine for his warrant; and says, that he
disputing of devotion, makes ignorance neither to be mother, nor daughter, nor
sister of devotion. But what if Thomas of Aquine does not so teach, does it
therefore follow, that no other teaches ignorance to be mother of devotion?
who would reason so simply and ignorantly, but he? beside this, albeit his
master Thomas does not directly teach it, yet in effect he teaches as much.
For first he shows, 2.2. q. 82. art. 3.
that devotion does most abound in simple people, and in women. And secondly he
2. 2. q. 2. aut. 6.
teaches, that it is enough for the simpler sort, to have fidem implicitam,
and to believe as the church, or as their superiors believe, which is a means
to bring in ignorance. Finally I have showed, that diverse others have gone
further in commending ignorance.

He says further, that all hold what Thomas holds, and so begins to make
a long speak of the nature, cause, and effects of devotion. But first albeit
we granted, that all held that, which Thomas holds, yet it does not hereof
follow, that the papists hold no more, nor otherwise then he holds. For then
what needed so many later books? and therefore this answer is not to purpose.
Beside that, it is false. For the Scotistes in most points dissent from him,
and in many points of school Divinity later doctors do contradict him, as
namely in his opinions of the proceeding of the holy Ghost principally from the
father, of the conception in original sin of the virgin Marie, of the
tormenting of souls in purgatory by devils, of Christ's local being in the
sacrament, and infinite other matters.

He alleges also a saying of Saint Augustine concerning devotion, and To
make the wilful malice of these good fellows appear, says he, Thomas of
Aquine makes this objection to himself. As if either Thomas of Aquines
objections to himself, or else saint Augustines words could ascertaine us,
what these fellows hold, or hold not, seeing they dissent from Saint Augustine
in many things, and in all things do not iumpe with Thomas; and have infinite
novelties more then either of these. Wherefore unless this fellow can show,
that doctors Cole never uttered any such saying, and that the practice of
papists is not, to nouzell their people in blindness and ignorance; he does
but trifle, and shows himself fitter to sit in the alehouse among the
goodfellowes he speaks of, then to dispute in schools.

Lastly he braggeth much of the learning of papists, and tells what
monuments of learning they have left behind them, and what universities they
have built. All which makes nothing to the purpose. For albeit there be many
learned men among them, yet their common people may be very unlearned and
ignorant notwithstanding: which is that, whereabout we contend. Again if their
learning be so great, the greater shall be their condemnation, which in the
knowledge of Christ Jesus are so ignorant themselves, and suffer also the
people to live in ignorance. Lastly albeit we will not deny them to be learned,
yet we doubt not, but to match them with men of our profession; and if we
compare them with the ancient fathers, they will be ouermatched. But whatsoever
their learning is, good it were for them, if they would use it not to their
own, but to Gods glory.

Likewise they teach, That lay men may not meddle with matters of religion:
that is, that Princes have no power to reform the church, nor to make
ecclesiastical laws. And our adversary confesses, That only priests have
authority to define and determine matters of religion. What reason then has
he to quarrel with sir Francis Hastings, seeing in effect he confesses as
much, as he lays to his charge? Forsooth says he, Because these words; To
meddle with matters of religion, may have a double sense. But what if they
might receive a treble sense, if the papists do so remove lay men from
government in ecclesiastical causes, that they need not to care how God is
served, then are they not wronged by him. For he does not mean care in their
own behalf, but in respect of others. And therefore his example of ministers
wives is very impertinent. Neither has he reason to condemn lawful marriage,
when he and his consorts wallow in all filthiness, to condemn, I say, the
apostles doctrine, which allows a bishop To be the husband of one wife, when
he teaches the doctrine of devils, that forbids to marry. Finally Parsons
the Jesuit has no reason to condemn priests wives, when his true father (as
they say) was a parson of a parish. his mother also had been more honest, if
she had been married to the parson his father. These iestes therefore, if he
look no better to his business, may prove him to be irregular, and
incapable of priesthood. But what is that, may he say, when a bastard makes
as good a Jesuit, as he, that is well borne?

Where we say, that the papists stand more on external complements, and
ceremonies, then inward faith and other virtues, only requiring an outward
profession, and outward observations of going to mass, to shrift, and such
like; he is much displeased with the matter, and says, That his adversary
has neither eyes nor wit. And yet this is the doctrine of the Romish church.
Vt aliquis absolute dici possit pars verae ecclesiae, says Lib. de ecclesia.
c. 3.
Bellar. non putamus requiri vllam internam virtutem, sed tantum externam
professionem fidei, and sacramentorum communionem, quae sensu ipso percipitur.
And albeit he should not so say, yet it is apparent, that those are accounted
good Cacolickes, that live in obedience to the pope and observe his laws,
whatsoever they are otherwise. Nay of late time they have canonized murderers,
traitors, and rebels, as for example, James Clement that murthred Henry the
third of France, diverse of the rebels that rose with the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland in the north, and such treacherous priests, as
came from the pope to betraie their country to strangers. In times past also
Thomas Becket was canonized for a saint, albeit he was a traitor to his prince
and country, stirring up foreign enemies against them, moving the pope to
deprive his prince of his crown, running to professed enemies, and consulting
with them to the hurt of his prince, causing the land to be enterdited, and
given as a spoil to foreign enemies; which neither John Baptist, nor the
holy fathers Athanasius, Ambrose, Hilary or Chrysostom either did, or allowed
to be done. And therefore as these examples fit not Thomas Beckets cause, so
Thomas Beckets example does fitly show, how loose men, and disobedient
subjects, are enterteined by the pope, and made saints in heaven, albeit they
deserve not to live on earth. Lipomanus and Surius and others, I know, tell
many goodly tales of this saint, but we must remember, that all the ground
they have is their lying Legend, and percase the popes sentence grounded upon
hearesaie.

Sir Francis says further, that Albeit the pope and his clergy commanded
blasphemies and disloialties, yet blind papists were made believe, that the
pope must be obeyed upon pain of damnation: And his meaning is most true. For
although popes command matters impious against God, and disloiall against
princes; yet their friars and flatterers do commend them for glorious merits
worthy of celestial glory. James Clement the Dominican friar that murdered
king Henry the third of France, is esteemed a martyr of the popish synagogue.
Pope The oration of Sixtus quint. and la fulminante.
Sixtus quintus in the consistory of Cardinals commended this detestable act,
as A work of God, a miracle, a rare exploit of Gods providence, and compares
it, to The most excellent mysteries of Christ his incarnation, and
resurrection. Cardinal Como in his letter to Parry, that went about to murder
her Majesty, calls the work Meritorious. Sanders does greatly commend the
rebels of the north that upon the popes commandment went about to deprive
their liege Sovereign of her crown, and kingdom. And what has either
Parsons the Jesuit, or this personate Noddy (be he what he will) to object
against us in this point? He says it is a shameless slander, to say The pope
commands either blasphemies against God, or disloialties against princes. And
for the rest he tells us, That obedience to the pope is a commendation to
catolike religion. But the first is proved by his decretales, legends,
missals, portuisses, and other rituall books full of blasphemies. The second
is manifest by their practice. There has no such treason almost been wrought
against princes of late time, but the same has proceeded from the pope, and
been managed by Jesuits, and other friars and priests. All the rebellions in
England against Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, and Elizabeth now reigning,
had no other cause, nor original. The late league, or rather late rebellion of
France against Henry the third, and Henry the fourth, was made by the pope,
and enflamed by the vermin of friars his agents. The Jesuits profess
obedience to the pope, as to Christ. Boniface the eight makes subjection to
the pope to be a matter of salvation. De eccles. milit. c. 2.
Bellarmine makes it an essential part of a Cacolike, or true member of the
popes church. And such trust have papists in his judgments concerning matters
of faith, that they think he cannot be deceived. Nay if he once either
command, or determine any thing, they account it no better then sacrilege to
dispute of his doing: and C. si papa. did. 40.
hold, that if he should lead multitudes of souls to hell, yet no man must
say to him, Domine cur ita facis? that is, Sir, why do you so? So generally the
papists do believe the pope, and obey his commandments. Which obedience and
belief no man commends, but those, that embrace all his heresies, and are
ready to execute his treasons. For although we are to obey our superiors, and
that not for fear, but for conscience sake, and ought to harken to our
pastors: yet this is nothing to the pope, that is not our superior, nor a true
pastor, but a woolfe, a hireling, and antichrist, or as some term him, The
head of antichrists kingdom. Beside that, we are not to believe every thing
that our pastors teach; but as Matthew. 28.
far, as they teach the doctrine of Christ Jesus. Nor are we absolutely to
obey, but when they command according to law. O thrice unhappy they, that
take these woolues for true pastors, and believe their heresies and treasons to
be true faith, and obedience!

Finally it is most true, that the papists, when they have committed most
abominable offenses, and lived in all filthiness, are notwithstanding taught,
that the pope has power to pardon them, and absolve them. Bellarmine Lib. 1.
de indulgent. c. 10.
faith, That indulgences are profitable for all manner of persons: and highly
he extolleth the Iubiley, and general indulgences granted by the pope. And for
this cause many silly souls with labor, charge, and danger travel to Rome,
and all with great hope to have their sins pardoned. This therefore is no
calumniation, nor forgerie, nor iugling trick, as this ingling companion
tells us, who himself has many years wandered up and down in foreign
lands, like the Egyptians, or Cingari, and has in his time played many tricks
of legierdemayne, and thinks by his hopping, skipping, and other apish
tricks, that he can make flesh and blood of a piece of bread, and therefore
imagines others to be like himself. But says he, The indulgence is not
available to remove mortal sins, but only to take away the punishment
either in this life, or in the life to come. And so the schoolmen commonly
dispute. But what is that to the purpose, when the common people believes
otherwise, and when in the indulgences they use not so to distinguish? Nay in
the tax of the popes indulgences it appears, that for money they dispense
with all sin. For money they pardon Murder of children, of men, of women, of
wives, of near kindred, fornication, adultery, incest, and all unnatural
abominations. As for all irregularities they make small difficulty. Nay they
give license for Jews to build synagogues, where Christ is blasphemed, and
pardon those that fall into Iudaisme and Turcisme. Pro licentia erigendi de
nouo publicam synagogam, say Taxa poenitent.
they taxa est Turon. 60. ducat. 15. Again, Marrania in amplissima forma
componitur, pro clerico Turon. 15. ducat. 15. pro laico Turon. 4. ducat. 10. So
those, that will not suffer Christians to live and to breath, give privileges
and pardons to Jews, and dispense with apostataes, maranoes, and rinegued
Turks. Neither do they distinguish so subtly, as our wise adversary would
have them. Nor do the papists respect more, then that they may have plenarie
indulgence under seal. But suppose that the pope should only take on him to
remit the temporal punishment of mortal sins, and to forgive venial
sins; yet that is contrary to Christ's doctrine, to the apostles practice,
to the ancient orders of the bishops of Rome, and of the catholic church, and
makes carnal men more licentious in sinning, when the penalty is so easily
redeemed; and spoileth many poor Christians, that give al, rather then they
will endure the supposed extreme torments of purgatory. O miserable and simple
papists, that suffer your selves to be so deluded, and take pains, travail
far, and power out your money, and all to get nothing, but vain words, and
bare lead and paper, without any profit.

He tells us further, That the popes pardons differ from absolution of
priests by the keys. And therein takes some pains to relate the schoolemens
opinion: as if it were material, what such doting divines, and iangling friars
do babble without all ground of scripture, or allowance of fathers. This is
certain, that both the pope himself, and all other priests do challenge their
authority by one commission, and by virtue of the keys. How then comes it to
pass, that the popes power and authority is so ample and large, and other
inferior priests so strait and restreintife, both being joined in one
patent? here the Noddy will be intricated, if he shape not a better answer,
then any is here declared.

He stands also upon this, P. 26.
That it is not more capital to transgress the ordinances of the pope, then
to transgress the laws of God. But what can impudent denialls avail, when
the shameful practice of the Romish synagogue declares the contrary? does
not the whole faction hold, that the popes laws bind in conscience? and is it
not apparent, that murders, adulteries, unnatural abominations, yea Paganism,
Iudaisme, Turcisme, and all atheismes are pardoned, where such Christians as
eat flesh on fasting days, and refuse to worship idols, and to fulfill other
the popes laws, are declared C. ad abolendam. de haereti^i^.
heretics, and burnt without remission?

Finally he says, It is a hard matter to frame his adversaries old head, to
understand the depth of their catholic religion. Which I do believe, seeing
there is no bottom of their turning devises. But if he were wise, he would
rather seek to defend himself, then to teach his adversaries. We desire not
to learn of any such ignorant masters. He and his consortes fly to our Lady,
to Saints, to Angels, to stocks and stones, to rotten relics, to the pope,
and his pardons, and trust by scourging themselves, and by eating salt fish and
playing upon holy days to be saved; and this they learn out of the popes
decretales. Our only hope is in Christ and his merits; and all the doctrine of
salvation, we believe, is contained in holy scriptures: as not only our
Bishops and priests, but also all ancient bishops and fathers of the church
have taught us.

CHAP. III.
That the Pope, and his adhaerents both elsewhere abroad, and also here at
home are most dangerous and malicious enemies, to her Majesty and this state,
and so have always declared themselves to be.

IF this adversary of ours had either bin a good Orator or a wise proctor; he
would have taken great heed, how he had touched any matter, that being opened
might have hurt his Clientes cause; especially where his adversary does not
greatly urge him. But what should we look for better handling of so foul a
cause? sir Francis Hastings aiming at other matters, does but lightly touch the
continued malice of the popish faction against her Majesty, ever since her
first coming to the crown, and that rather to warn the careless subject to
take heed of such an enemy, and to point at such pernicious traitors; then to
hurt such, as have been, and yet are abused by the craft and practice of
others, and are not themselves actors, nor factious, nor malicious to their
country. To hurt quiet men, albeit abused by false color of old religion, it
was no part of his purpose. But seeing this simple Noddie has no more reason,
but to bare and touch that wound, which being seen and touched must needs
grieve many, and shame all the faction of papists, that have shame to hear
their own, and their consorts most abominable practices discovered; I am
content to meet him in this encounter, and examine, whether it be true or no,
that is commonly reported concerning the practices of papists against her
Majesty, and this state. If any mislike this course, let him deal with the
Noddie that drew me into it. For mine own part I was unwilling to quarrel
with them, but seeing they will needs stand upon terms, and challenge
others; I could not choose but answer.

Never any thing in this Realm did more displease the papists, then the match
betwixt king Henry the eight, and her Majesty's mother the Lady Anne Bollenne.
for thereby not only the popes authority to dispense in causes of Matrimony,
but also to judge in causes of princes was called in question. Further they
began to fear, least the king, that was a prince of heroical courage, would
have taken occasion upon this abuse offered him, to have looked into the whole
cause of religion. Here began the hatred against her Majesty, which this
faction has borne her ever since, and which by many attempts against her
parents, and her self they have declared. Clement the seventh albeit he had
received many favors from king Henry, and had promised otherwise; yet whether
won by persuasions of Charles the fifth then being emperor, or else moved
with the interest, that himself had in it, declared the kings marriage to be
void, and the issue of that marriage unlawful. The which sentence was given
Anno 1533. some little time before she came into the world. So that it is no
marvel, if now they hate her, which not only in her parents, but also in her
lawful right was persecuted before she came into the world.

Not long after Paul the third did furiously thunder out a sentence of
excommunication against Henry the eight, depriving him of his kingdom, and
again declaring the marriage with the Lady Anne Bollen to be void, and her
children to be illegitimate. With that fury did he prosecute that innocent lady
and her children, sparing nothing, which might serve to work both their
destructions. And when he could do nothing of himself, he never ceased by
Winchester, and other his agents to pursue the cause, until such time, as they
had caused an act of Parliament to be made against both the mother and the
daughter, and brought the innocent Lady her mother to her end; and, which is
more grievous, they loaded her with many slanders, and reproaches, not only in
her trial, but also in an act of parliament. How unjustly God best knows,
and the king himself acknowledged with great grief at his death, as
Cosmograph. lib. 16.
Theuet a writer no way partial has testified. Plusieurs gentils-hommes
anglois, says he, speaking of king Henry the eightes death, m'ont asseure,
qu'il eut belle repentance des offenses par luy commises, estant a l'article de
la mort: et enter lez autres chooses, de l'iniure et crime commise contre la
dicte roine Anne de Boulan, faulsement vaincue, et accusee de ce qu'on luy
imposoit. It suffised not the enemy, to take away an innocent ladies life, but
they took away also her honor and good name by diverse imputations, which God
the most just judge knows, and, I trust, one day will more plainly declare.
Afterward it pleased God to put in the kings mind to reuerse the act that
debarred her Majesty of her right, which he did by his last will. This so
nearly touched the papists, that, as it should seem, they have abolished it,
thereby endeavoring to take away all monuments and records, whereby her right
might be proved. This rancor of theirs did especially show it self against
her during the reign of Queen Mary. For although her beauty, virtue, good
carriage, and many excellent parts, wherewith God had endued her, might have
moved any to love her; yet in these men these excellencies, and especially her
religion wrought contrary effects. For doubting least Queen Mary having no
issue should leave the kingdom to her, and fearing that she would assuage
their pride and tyranny against Gods saints, and abolish their superstitious
abuses, and heretical doctrine; they sought by all means to cut her off from
the crown. The pope he could not suffer his sentences and decretals to be
reuersed; his adherents could endure no reformation of religion to be
established. Gardener charged her as an abbettor to Wyat, and said she had
intelligence with him. And this our adversary does also signify by his
Mystical bracelet, and other dark surmises. As if it were likely, that a
poor young maiden destitute of friends and means, and in the hands of her
enemies, could help them any thing: or that Wyat would communicate a counsel
of such danger to her, that percase might utter it, and no way could help
him. Howsoever it was, he practiced with diverse to accuse the innocent Lady,
and percase, if God had not helped her, had effected his purpose.

That she held Queen Mary and the state in suspense and care, our adversary
denies not. What then more probable, then that they should seek to disburthen
themselves of that care and jealousy? There are diverse that testify, that
they had diverse consultations against her. Doctor Story showed plainly, That
the papists committed a great error, in that cutting of the boughs, they had
not strooken at the root.

When either for shame, or else because they could find no probable cause
against her, they could not spill the innocent Ladies blood, it is certain,
that they feigned Queen Mary to be with child, to the intent that some
supposed child might be found to succeed Queen Mary, and to prevent the
Lady Elizabethes right.

All this notwithstanding it pleased God, many of her enemies being taken away,
that she should possess the crown. at what time a man would have thought,
they would have ceased to pursue her, against whom they could not prevail.
Yet even then did they also show their malice: and first they caused the Queen
of Scots to claim the crown, and to bear the arms of England. Then by the
way of Scotland the French began to threaten and to invade her country, and
had proceeded further, but that her Majesty's forces did shut them up in Leeth.

Not long after followed the excommunication of pope Pius the fifth, and the
rebellion in the north parts of England. After that Nicholas Sanders stirred up
a rebellion in Ireland. And this N. D. their proctor albeit he would excuse
and clear the papists of all evil meaning, yet could he not forbear to
praise the rebels, and lament their death; which shows how well rebellion and
treason does please this faction, and how little he loves her Majesty, with
whose capital enemies he is so near consorted.

When by sedition and rebellion they could not prevail, hey stirred up Philip
king of Spain to make open wars upon her Majesty, to deprive her of her
kingdom. Neither did either respect of alliance, or shame, or danger draw him
back from this enterprise. The duke of Alua had given the first attempt, had
not the unexpected troubles of the low countries hindered him. And Don Iuan
D'Austria had not failed to make wars upon us, but that God cut him off in
the midst of his deliberations. The year 1588. the Spaniard brought a great
fleet upon this coast; and to correspond with it, there were great land
forces provided by the duke of Parma in the Low countries. Cardinal Allen was
then ready also to utter and throw abroad his excommunications, and slaundrous
His letters to the nobility and people of England and Ireland.
libels against her Majesty, and the state. Neither could the evil success
of that journey make the Spaniard give over his determination.

Beside rebellion and war, they have attempted poison and secret practices to
destroy her. John Someruile was persuaded to kill her, by a seditious priest.
The same execution did William Parry take upon him persuaded by Benedict
Palmio, and Aniball Codret two Jesuits. Ballard a priest by his lewd persuasion
drew Babington, Sauadge, Tichborne, and their companions to conspire her death.
By the means of Holt a Jesuit, Gifford, Worthington, and of certain priests,
York, Williams, Patrick Collen, and others were sent over upon the same
errand. And when with the sword nothing could be done, Lopez by certain
traitors was hired, and Squire by Walpoole was persuaded to poison her. And no
question, but many other attempts have been made against her, although they
are not come to light hitherto. Never I think was one poor Ladies life more
sought, nor by more means. They have left neither force nor fraud, nor any
course unattempted.

Nay not content heerewith, They have In Bulla Pi^ v. and Sixti. v.
cursed all her subjects and friends, seized the persons and goods of such as
they could come by, and by all means sought to overthrow the state. anno
1588. diverse rinegued English, and among the rest the traitorous Cardinal
Allen, came with the Spaniards to fight against their country. From time to
time they run to the enemy, bewray their countries secrets, and diverse of
them even now intertaine intelligence with the Spaniard.

And little it is, God wot, that our adversary, notwithstanding all his great
shows, can allege in his clients the papists defense. First he is offended,
that sir Francis Hastings should say, That by Gods goodness only her Majesty
was preserved, her life being maliciously and with great cunning shot at by the
Romish clergy, and Spain against her. And thereupon alleges three reasons
of her Majesty's deliverance. First says he, King Phillip and the Spaniards
specially favored her for her young years, beauty, felicity, and other her
good graces and talents. Secondly he says, She bore her self for a papist,
and heard two masses a day, one for the quick, and another for the dead, and
received no servant into her service lightly, but with express condition, and
many signs, that he inclined that way. Thirdly he imagines, That she was
kept alive to bar the next praetender, that then was wife of the Dolphine of
France, which for some reasons neither Spanish, nor English could endure. And
these reasons he esteems to be Very potent, and pregnant: for so he
calls them. But if we will rightly esteem them, we shall find them to be
built on false grounds, and to be very impotent, barren of reason, and
ridiculous.

For first most false it is, that the Spaniards so favored her, that they would
either hazard their state, or loose a kingdom for her sake. All which was like
to come to pass, if the lady Elizabeth should atteine to the crown. And very
unlikely it was that the Spanish king, That spared not his Vita di Pio quinto.
own only son, nor blood, nor those that were far nearer to him, then the
Lady Elizabeth, would encurre the popes displeasure, and loose his footing in
England to spare her. But what need we dispute of the Spaniards care and
affection to her, when they suffered her to be imprisoned, evil entreated, and
called in question for her life? As for the Count of Feria, he came to her
indeed, but not for any good intended to her, but either for a complement of
courtesy, or to ask such a question of her, as her manly and stout answer
makes this Noddie, albeit he knew it, ashamed to report.

Secondly her coming to mass, if I may so call it, when mass was said
before her, that unwillingly heard it, was rather of constraint, then
otherwise. As for servants, good Lady, she had no power to entertain any, but
her old servants were removed, and certain were forced upon her, and
commanded to attend her, that she liked not. But be it, she had for saving of
her life, given some hope of inclining to popish religion, as the adversary
falsely and dishonorably imagines; yet papists are not so simple, as to trust
such, as are newly converted. Again seeing the pope had pronounced diverse
sentences against her, to frustrate and make void her right: it could not
avail her any thing to turn to the papists, unless either the pope would
revoke his sentences, or she take the crown at his hands, which I doubt
whether he would have given to her, if it had been in his power to dispose.
King Henry the third of France though superstitiously popish, yet might he not
live, for that he was not for the humor of the pope. Antonie likewise king of
Portugal was put beside his crown, notwithstanding his religion, to gratify
the king of Spain.

Thirdly seeing Queen Mary was like to have children at the first, it is more
likely, that the papists sought to establishe the kingdom in Queen Mary, and
her succession by the innocent Ladies destruction, then to bar another
pretender, which could claim no interest before Queen Mary's death, not then
looked for so soon. Besides it is not likely, seeing the papists sought only
to establish their own kingdom, that they should exclude one, that was wholly
devoted to their religion, for one either contrary, or much suspected. And if
the Spaniardes did respect the Lady Elizabeth in regard of matter of state:
then did they it not for love, as is pretended in the first potent reason.
Lastly it is most-false to say, that the papists sought to prefer Queen
Elizabeth before the Queen of Scotts. For why then did they set her title on
foot at the beginning of the Queens reign? why have they continually sought
to prefer the Scottish title, and to dishable her Majesty's right? To
conclude, why did the Vita di Pio quinto.
pope and his adherents declare the Scottish Queen to be the true and lawful
enheritour of the crown? So it appears; that these reasons are of no force
to conclude, that the papists meant her Majesty any good.

But why they should purpose her hurt and destruction, diverse most forcible
reasons may be alleged. First they knew, that her title, right and reign
could not stand with the popes authority, which is the only line and level of
the actions of papists, and especially in matters of faith. They knew, I say,
that pope Clement had pronounced sentence against her mothers marriage with the
King; and that pope Paul the third had seconded him, and declared her
illegitimate: which sentences could not well be retracted. Secondly they
considered, that she had always been brought up in true religion, and hated
Romish superstitions. Thirdly diverse feared to be called to account for their
injustice and cruelty showed to Gods saints, if she should once attain to the
crown. Fourthly they feared, least she would remember the wrongs, which they
had offered to her self during her sisters reign. Fifthly they saw they should
either turn from their Romish religion or forgo their honors, and livings,
and that they meant not to do: they had so far engaged themselves already.
Lastly the Spaniards, and Italians, and all the popes agentes saw, that if she
succeeded, their hopes were ended, and that they must be packing out of
England. Other reasons also may be alleged to this purpose. but what should we
search out reasons to prove, that a thing was likely to be done, when it
plainly appears it was done?

Secondly he much misliketh that Sir Francis Hastings should say, that Her
Majesty came to the crown with the good liking of all true hearted Englishmen
both clergy, nobles, and commons, and that then satan and his ministers
began to fret and chafe. And what reason has he so to do, trow you? Forsooth
because, as he says, Papists placed her in possession of the crown. Which is
nothing else, but a plain confession against himself, and his clients the
papists, that they are no true hearted Englishmen. For if her Majesty were
placed in her seat by all true hearted men, then albeit the papists concurred in
that action, yet has this Noddy no reason to take exception to these words of
his adversary. But percase he is offended, that Sir Francis should say, that
the papists were angry and fretted inwardly, when they saw Queen Elizabeth
established in her kingdom. As if it were not apparent, how much it grieved
them. Cardinal Poole and some other popish bishops seeing how matters went,
died for sorrow: others fled beyond the seas; the rest hung down their heads
being sick for extreme grief. Neither of all the popish prelates could any one
be found to celebrate the act of consecration, but one, albeit it was no small
danger and disloialtie to refuse to perform it. He that had seen their faces
and countenances that day, would have easily coniectured, how much it grieved
the papists inwardly, and how falsely this false friar N. D. avouches, that
they Placed her freely and willingly. So willing they seemed, that nothing
grieved them more, then that they had suffered her to live. To make his tale
seem better, he says, That most of the nobility and commons, and all the
bishops were papists, when the Queen came to the crown. But he foully
mistaketh the matter. For the Papisticall prelates were no true bishops, but
woolues and hirelings hated for their cruelty and abominations, of all the
people generally; and those of the nobility that were in opinion addicted to
popish religion, yet were not then factiously combined with the pope.

Thirdly he goes about to answer for doctor Story, who upon the Queens
first coming to the crown, did much repine at it, together with other
papists, and said, If they had followed his counsel, they had struck at the
root: meaning no doubt her gracious Majesty. But if he had meant to put in an
answer, that might have carried color, and cleared his client from suspicion of
treason: he ought to have understood the man's faults and cause better, and to
have answered particularly to every point of his accusation. But that, as it
seems he cannot do, that acquiteth himself so badly in this one. First he
says, These words were never spoken by doctor Story, to his knowledge. As if
nothing could be spoken by doctor Story, which came not to his knowledge. but
says he, doctor Story never confessed these words. As if it were necessary
or likely that every traitor and malicious enemy of the state should confess
his treasons, and malicious purposes: or as if it were not sufficient, that
being examined upon these words, he did not deny them, but refused to
answer: which refusal in that case purporteth as much, as a confession. But
suppose he should have denied the words, yet might he have been convinced
by diverse witnesses that heard him speak them. He says further, that doctor
Story had no reason to speak any such words. As if a man never did, nor
could do any thing, but by reason.

Secondly he would willingly mollify Stories words by a gentle
interpretation, and would make us believe, that By striking at the root, he
meant not rooting out of Queen Elizabeth, but rather punishing certain great
men favorers of heretics (for so they term true catholics) and for proof of
this he alleges, how Story on a certain time was in a great chafe, because
he could not be suffered to apprehende a certain gentleman, and cut his
throat at his pleasure, and said, he would no more serve as an Inquisitor,
if he should be so crossed. But both the answer and the proof is nothing,
but vain trifling. For who can doubt, but he meant her Majesty, seeing
otherwise he had given counsel to take away her life; and at that time talked
of no other? Again, what root could he understand but her, that was the
root and foundation of that state, which could not stand with the kingdom
of popery and Antichristianisme? As for those gentlemen, that this fellow
speaks of, they were neither the root, nor the great boughs of our religion.

Lastly granting that Story had so spoken and meant, yet he says That there
was no reason, why he should therefore be executed as a traitor, for that he
spoke those words, as a counselor to his prince. But first he must
understand, that the question is not, whether Story was justly executed, or no;
but whether the papists did not seek the Queens most innocent blood. And this
wise disputer does in effect yield so much, and confess that Doctor Story
spoke these words, and that this was consulted upon in council in Queen
Mary's days.

Secondly it appears by the story of Doctor Stories trial and arraignment,
that he was not called in question for these words, but for high treason: and
that most justly. For first he ran over to the D. of Alua, and other the
Queens enemies, and sought how to stir them up to make war against his
prince, and country. Secondly he practiced with one Preston and Pain how to
make some insurrection in England. Thirdly he entertained intelligence with
fugitive rebels, and known enemies of this state. Beside treasons there was
objected to him, that he had by virtue of his inquisitors office in Flanders
brought diverse of his countrymen in danger, and made great spoil of their
goods. And so evident and plain were the matters objected against him, that he
had no other shift, but to deny himself to be a subject, and to refuse to be
iusticed by the laws of this land; which pleading, I think, his advocate here
will confess to be most ridiculous.

Thirdly it cannot be denied, but the words were spoken not only in Queen
Mary's time, but also in this Queens time. For he was not charged with saying,
If you shall follow; but, if you had followed mine advise: Lamenting, that when
they might, they had not followed his advise in destroying the Queen.

Lastly albeit he had been charged only with those words, which by his
enditement, by the evidence then given, and by diverse witnesses yet living is
refuted; yet to imagine or conspire the princes death, is treason by all laws.
This our adversary therefore, that says, doctor Story was condemned by
shoutes and clamors, as Christ was before Pilate: blasphemeth in comparing a
notorious traitor, and a bloody persecuter of Christ's flock to the most meek
and innocent lamb of God Christ Jesus. And where he confesses, that The
papists think that Story for his zeal in Queen Mary's time, is to receive a
great crown of glory, and fame upon earth: he shows both his own, and
other papists most cruel and bloody mind, that allow of doctor Stories
murdrous and cruel intentions both against her Majesty, and other godly men:
and declares what favor we are to look for at his hands, if once he and his
consorts could have but a finger in government. As for doctor Story, he has
now received his reward, but not of glory, unless he did repent himself of
his heresy, and cruelty; of which he gave small tokens at his death.

After doctor Stories matter, he touches the cause of Pius quintus his
presumptuous excommunication denounced most injuriously against her Majesty:
but very daintily and nicely, not daring to mislike it for offending his holy
father the pope; nor daring to allow it, least he should seem to concur
with those public enemies, that seek to take away her honor, crown, and
life. Gladly he would excuse the papists his clients, but his pleading is so
fond, and foolish, that their enemies cannot desire plainer evidence to accuse
them and convict them. First he shows, and would, if he could tell how,
complain, That the bull of Pius quintus the pope is made a common bugge
against papists every where, as if they were guilty in allowing his fact. And
so he thinks to shift off a foul matter with a few fair words, and with
a finta, or fained show of a down, right blow, to bobbe or rather abuse his
Reader, that looks for sound reason. But he may not think, seeing he is
come into the field, to make a challenge, that he shall so escape our
fingers. First he says, That papists albeit they admit the popes
jurisdiction, yet are not participant of the offense given by the pope. But
how does he prove that? Forsooth you must take it of his own bare word. For
other law or reason he alleges none. So ridiculous an advocate does he show
himself, in the greatest heat of his clients cause. He confesses that
papists allow the popes jurisdiction; and needs must he so do, or else they
should not be papists. Hereof we say, that it is necessarily inferred, that
they are as far guilty, as the pope; and no less to be reputed enemies of
the prince and state, then the pope himself. Pope Pius, as the world knows,
disabled her right, pronounced her excommunicate, deprived her of her kingdom,
exhorted not only foreign princes to make wars, but all her subjects to
rebel against her: finally all such, as should obey her laws, or help her,
he does no less anathematize, then the Queen herself. Praecipinus and
interdicimus In Bulla aduers. Elizab.
says he, vniuersis and singulis proceribus, subditis, populis and alijs
praedictis, ne illi einsue monitis, mandatis, and legibus audeant obedire: qui
secus egerint, eos simili anathematis sententia innodamus. Neither did he
only give sentence against her, but also practice to deprive her. For this
cause he practiced both with French and Spanish, and sent Vincent Lauro bishop
of Mondeui into Scotland, and Robert Ridolphi to make some stir in England.
He raised men and sent money into England, and other places for this purpose.
So it appears that the papists must necessarily allow yea and further the
popes hostile act, if they meant to acknowledge his authority. For otherwise
themselves were excommunicate. Besides, they must necessarily obey the popes
commandment. Neither is it to be doubted, but that diverse principal papists
have entertained intelligence with the pope, and his agents. Lastly it is folly
to dispute what papists do mean, when we see evidently what they do. Upon
every occasion they are ready to rebel against their princes, when the pope
commands. They have showed it in Ireland, in Scotland, and in England. In
France they rose against king Henry the third, that was a man of their own
religion. They profess they are members of the Romish church; which does
necessarily include obedience to the pope. And to conclude, this Noddie
confesses they allow of the popes authority in depriving of princes of their
kingdoms. Wherefore not only all laws of nations, but also all reasons of
state condemn such for enemies and traitors to the state. And strange it is,
that any prince or state can suffer such, as either adhere to foreign enemies,
or else believe that a foreign enemy has power to dispossess the supreme
magistrate of his crown.

He scorneth Sir Francis Hastings for saying, That no child of mortal man,
has power to dispose of kingdoms, or to depose princes, or to dispense with
subjects for not obeying their prince. And makes show of pleading for the
popes authority in deposing princes. But first we do not here reason, what the
popes power is; but whether the papists that allow his jurisdiction are
traitors. Secondly admit that were the question here: yet, I say, that the
saying of sir Francis, as he meant it, is most true. For his meaning is, that
the pope, that is not only the child of mortal man, but a child of
perdition, and the adversary of Christ Jesus, has no such power, as papists
pretend, to depose princes. And the same may be proved even by the examples
alleged in this place, by the Noddie himself. For neither did Peter nor Paul,
which notwithstanding had a far greater authority, then any pope of Rome,
depose Tiberius, Caligula, or Nero: nor is it found in holy Scriptures, that
any high priest of the Jews deposed any king, or discharged any subjects from
their obedience. If he knew any such matter done, why does he not allege
his author, and the names of the parties? Nay it is not to be proved, that
any mortal man can dissolve the bond of a lawful oath, or disannull that
obligation, that is mutual betwixt princes and subjects. Neither is the knight
to be condemned for a prince-idolater, for so saying. But the knave his
adversary, and his consorts are justly to be condemned, as pope-idolaters.
For not only they C. satis did. 96.
call him in express terms God, and give unto him divine power in translating
of kingdoms; but also they acknowledge his judgments to be infallible, and
say that the pope and Christ have but one Consistory, and the same authority
and power. At Rome the people and priests like beasts fall down and worship
him, even as the idolatrous Israelites worshipped the golden calfe in the
wilderness. Do you then think this man to be wise, that so slenderly and
barely touches so great a matter, which the grand masters of the Romish
synagogue with all their learning are not able to prove? Or may he be
thought very sober, where he takes on him to show, that papists are her
Majesty's good friends, and never sought her destruction, even there to
justify pope Pius his hostile acts, that not only sought to deprive her of
her state, but also to destroy her; and to confess that they are the popes
adherents, and allow his jurisdiction? howsoever we are to think of others,
this assuredly is most apparent, that the author of this railing treatise is a
professed enemy of the state. For he does not only disallow all courses
taken for her Majesty's safety, and the safety of this kingdom, but takes
on him to justify rebels, and to defend public enemies. Do you not then take
this fellow to be a worthy mediator to obtain grace for Recusants and
papists? But to leave to show his malice and treason, that every where is
apparent, and to proceed in our discourse, after he had in a slight manner
touched the popes act, he denies, that English papists so soon as her
Majesty was in full possession of the crown, began to fret, and chafe, and
consequently to practice against her. And his reason is, For that it was twelve
years, ere the excommunication of Pius Quintus came out against her. But his
defense is void of truth, his conclusion void of reason. The first is
apparent not only by the writings of the papists oppugning her government, and
by their flight over seas, but also by the obstinacy of the prelates, all
refusing to crown her but one; and by their secret conferences and packings
both amongst themselves, and also with the pope and other foreign princes.
Neither may we think that the Queen of Scots did then claim the crown of
England, or that the French sent over forces into Scotland without their
priuitie. But of this we have already spoken. The second is proved, for that
the exco^municatio^ of that impious pope was not the first cause, but the
extremity of the rancor and malice of papists. Neither was the same procured,
but by great suit and labor, and when all other practices failed. Lastly it is
certain that the rebellion, that after broke forth in the north was long
before plotted, and diverse consultations had, how to dispossess her Majesty
of the crown, and to alter the estate. Sanders in his slanderous and lying
treatise of Schism Lib. 3. de schism.
confesses, that the popish prelates upon the first alteration of religion,
Had determined to excommunicate the Queen, and enterdite the land; and that
afterward misliking that course, they referred the matter to the pope, who upon
their solicitation proceeded to excommunication and open hostility.

To prove that the papists were not cause of the popes hatred against England,
he is not ashamed to say, That the Queen began with the pope, and not he with
her; and that the pope was incited by English protestants, and not by papists,
to proceed against her. He affirms also, That he had great reason to take
this course against the Queen and this land, and that first, for that not
only the body of religion was changed, that had endured a 1000. years before,
and that contrary to expectation and promise, but also diverse statutes made
against him in opprobrious terms, and the catholic body of England forced to
swear against him: and secondly for that the prelates adhering to the pope
were therefore all deprived, and some of them imprisoned. And Thirdly, for that
papists were inhibited to fly the realm, and these that remained were
enforced to participate not only these oaths, but also to eat new
sacrament-bread against their consciences. And Fourthly, for that the pope was
traduced in pulpits and schools as antichrist, and scoffed at in plays as
author of many ridiculous fooleries. And last of all, For that this change was
an example to countries round about us to attempt the like. In which discourse
there are many weak reasons, and diverse strong and impudent leasings. For
first albeit some occasion had been given by us to move the choleric popes
to anger, yet does it not follow, that they had just cause of anger: nor that
the papists did not stir up the coals, and inflame their wrath against us.
Secondly admit princes should offend either against Religion or justice; yet
neither has the pope, nor any bishop any authority to depose them from their
kingdoms. Christ gave his apostles no such power. Nay himself challenged no
earthly kingdom. The apostles taught no such doctrine. Nor did the holy
bishops of the ancient church ever claim any such jurisdiction. Nay the popes
themselves before Gregory the seventh did not presume either to deprive
princes, or to meddle with their kingdoms. But if the tyranny and impiety of
princes grew insufferable, the^ was the same either redressed in the
parliament, and assembly of the estates of the realm, or else by some yt had
lawful power by the custom of the country. As for the popes claim, it is not
only contrary to all antiquity, but to rules of state; and so absurd, that
men in greatest blindness of antichrists kingdom could not endure it. For what
can be devised more absurd, the^ that a ribald friar, or a humorous Italian,
should take on him to depose princes of other countries? Thirdly what reasons
soever foreign tyrrants pretend to offer violence to christian princes, yet
that is no excuse for the subjects, either to enter into disloial practices, or
else to allow their tyrannical and unjust pretenses. And therefore all this
talk about the popes furious excommunications, and other acts of hostility is
merely impertinent, where the encounter and contention is about the practices
of papists, that should show themselves subjects. Fourthly the pope had no
reason to complain, that popish prelates for adhering to him were restreined.
For no state may suffer such to enjoy their liberty, as adhere to foreign
enemies. Nor do the popes suffer their Cardinals or friars to adhere to others,
whom they account their enemies. Fiftlie what had the pope to do withal,
albeit the Queen for causes did forbid her subjects to depart the country?
Has the prince no interest in his subject, but he may forsake him at pleasure?
The pope will not I think give his people that liberty. And if he will not
give that to his own subjects; what reason has he to require it in other
princes subjects? Lastly the pope seeing his authority refuted in
disputations, he should rather in schools and pulpits have taught the truth,
then with arms in open field sought to overthrow the truth, and the state
both together. If he were proved to be antichrist by scriptures, he should
by like course have answered. The apostles never sought to establish their
authority by force of arms, nor by violence to plant religion. The pope
therefore doing contrary, shows himself to be antichrist, and Mahomets,
rather then the apostles successor.

The leasings contained in this allegation are likewise diverse, and shameless.
To say that the Queen began with the pope, is not only false, but also a most
vain and ridiculous conceit. For it is well known, and testified by record,
that he did persecute her in the person of her parents, when she was yet in the
womb, when she was newly borne, and sithence continually: whereas her Majesty
only meddled with her own kingdom without respect to the pope, which has no
more power over her Majesty or other christian princes, then the great Turk.
For both their authorities are alike forced and usurped.

Secondly it is a shameless untruth to say, That the body of religion that had
endured here above a thousand years, should now be changed by us. Let the
Noddy, or because he is but a silly divine, and takes up all at the second and
third hand, let the proudest of that side show, if they can, that we have
altered any one article of the christian faith, or abolished one jot of the
apostles doctrine. As for the private mass without communion, and the
communion under one kind, and the doctrine of transubstantiation, adoration of
the sacrament, worship of angels, saints, images, and rotten bones and rags,
and other heresies and novelties which the papists have more then we; they are
not only beside, but also contrary to Christ and his apostles doctrine, and
the faith of christ's church, as our teachers have heretofore showed, and we
shall be able sufficiently to justify in any free and lawful council and
meeting against the stoutest champions of the popes side.

Thirdly either must he bring proof of a promise made to the pope, that no
alteration should be made in religion by her Majesty, or else he will rest
convicted of another gross lie. As for the woluish prelates it is not greatly
material, what they promised. For in king Henry the eight his days they
promised to maintain the kings royal authority against the pope. Wherein
Gardener, Bonner, and Tonstall were principal agents; yet did they respect
their honest faith, and true promise no more, then if they had said nothing.

The fourth lie made here, is, That statutes were made against the pope with
the most spiteful and opprobrious words that malice could devise. For those
statutes which he means were made rather for restoring the princes right
usurped by the pope, contrary to law, and reason; then directly against the
pope. Again albeit some terms used in the statutes seem sharp, yet come
they short of the popes desert. To accuse the whole state of malice, and spite
for inueighing against the pope, this fellow had no reason, were he not a
professed enemy of his country, and a slave to the pope, and Spanyard, and
other public enemies of this state.

The fifth lie is, That the whole body of England was forced to swear against
the pope. For not any one man (so far is he short of the whole land) was
forced to swear against the pope, albeit he was never so worthy to be abiured,
and detested. Only those that desire either dignities in church and schools,
or public offices in the common wealth are commanded to take the oathe for
the mainteinance of the Queens regal authority. And if they list not, yet may
they live private, albeit they take not the oath. Nay the oath is not tendered
to them.

The sixth lie is, That all the popish prelates and clergy were deprived of
livings and liberty, and committed to prisons, and there continued to their
dying day: His own conscience, if he have any conscience, can convince him of
it. And infinite witnesses testify, and diverse records prove the contrary.
For diverse of the popish clergy fled-ouer sea, as Cutbert Scot, Goldwel,
Maurice elect of Bangor and diverse others. Some changed copy and retained their
livings. Diverse died before they were deprived, as Hopton of Norwich,
Christophorson of Chichester, White of Winchester, and many more. Of the rest
some were never in prison, as Oglethorp, and Poole, others were restreined to
their own houses, as Heath of York, Bane of Lichfeld. Thurlby and Watson
remained in the archbishops house at Lambith. Bourne and Troublefeld delivered
out of the Tower died at their friends houses. Such is the clemency of her
Majesty, and the mildness of our religion.

The 7. lie is, that papists that Did not fly the land, nor were imprisoned,
were forced to participate our sacraments, Which this impious companion calls
New devised sacrament bread: and says, It was anathematized by the Lutherans
the first founders (as he writes) of our religion. A lie composed of diverse
untruths. For first we enforce none to our religion: Nay there is no penal
statute against those, that receive not the Sacraments: the more pity.
Secondly he cannot show where the churches of Germany have either
anathematized or condemned our communion. Lastly we do affirm and offer to
prove against the whole rabble of Jesuits and friars, that the sacraments of
our church which this scornful wretch so impiously rejects, are most
consonant to Christ his institution, and the practice of the apostolic and
catholic church. But the blasphemous mass, the half communion, the
idolatrous worship of the bread of the altar, the abolishing of bread out of
the sacrament, the popish priesthood, the popish sacraments, neither can they
be proved, nor will they be so defended, but that the doctrine of papists and
their practice will always appear to be contrary to Christ his institution,
and the doctrine of the catholic church: and therefore most worthy to be
abolished and anathematized.

It is false also, That the pope was by us made a matter of scorn, or that
this proposition, viz. That the pope is antichrist, and such like, are matters
ridiculous. For such propositions we take to be most true, and dare always
maintain them against more valiant disputers, then this Noddy ever will be.
And therefore we do not think the pope a man to be scorned, but a tyrant to
be seriously shunned and abhorred of all christians. Let this then make the
eight lie.

This is also a lie most palpable and gross, That other princes fearing harm,
that might ensue of the alteration of religion in England, complained hereof
to the pope, and that he proceeded against the Queen upon their complaints
and instance. Let him if he can show these pretended complaints. If he cannot
show them, let him at the least prove them, by some witness, or record. If
not then do I not doubt, but he will prove himself a vain iangler. Which
appears also by this, that Sanders Lib. 3. de schism.
says, The pope proceeded at the instance of English prelates, that referred
the matter to him. Beside that, the pope is not so dull in working mischief,
that he needs the solicitation of others to stir him. Nay it is clear,
that pope Pius Vita di Pio quinto.
stirred up both Philip of Spain, and the French men against us. And the like
industry did Paul the third use in stirring up wars and rebellions against
Henry the eight king of England, and drawing troubles upon the princes of
Germany. No man therefore henceforth can justly doubt, but that all those
practices, which have been lately made against her Majesty have proceeded
principally from the popes malice and rancor against true religion, and the
professors thereof; and next from the malcontentment, and treachery of papists
and their agents. These are the two fountains, from whence all our wars,
rebellions, treasons, attempts to murder and poison princes, and other great
persons, and other such like vilanous practices against the state have flowed.

Now least any scruple might remain in men's minds, he endeavors to show
how far the excommunication of Pius quintus touches the papists in England,
and says, that They are not to discuss the question betwixt the Queen and
the pope, but to love the one and the other. But this resolution is so
insufficient, that it does rather increase, then diminish our doubt. For how
can any good subject love him, that seeks the destruction of his prince? How
can a man serve, not two masters, but two masters so contrary, and adhere to a
religious Queen, if he be a vassal to antichrist? Beside this, seeing
papists make the pope the sovereign judge of these matters, what a ridiculous
conceit is it to think, that a papist can judge otherwise, then the pope
judges or sentenceth? His reasons also are such as can satisfy none of any
mean understanding. First says he, This excommunication is an act of
jurisdiction betwixt two superiors. As if it were not mere foolerie to say,
that jurisdiction can be exercised betwixt superiors, or between equals. And
if papists grant that the pope is superior to the Queen, then must they adhere
to him, and forsake her. Which no doubt they will do, and must do, if order
be not taken with them. Besides we deny that this excommunication is an act
of jurisdiction, or justice. Nay the world sees, it is a mere act of vilany,
and presumptuous tyranny, for a ribald like companion, and a lousie friar to
attempt to depose a prince; and a most notorious foolerie to imagine, that the
popes of Rome who have no right in that, which they injuriously possess, have
power to take away the right which belongs to others.

Secondly he says, That upon the popes excommunication against a prince, the
subjects consent was never asked nor admitted. Why then does the pope
excommunicate all those, that after his excommunication adhere to her Majesty?
Are not his In bulla Pij ^. aduers. Eliz.
words plain? Howbeit I confess, that if rightly we will esteem of matters,
the popes excommunication is no excommunication, he being an usurper and no
judge in this case. And therefore all true subjects are to account of his
excommunication, as of a denuntiation of his malice, and an argument of his
shameful dealing against Christian princes contrary to all precedents of
antiquity: and to esteem them all not only slaves of Antichrist, but enemies
of the estate, that shall not plainly condemn it, as wicked and unlawful. But
if the excommunication should be lawful, yet are Christians to know it, and
allow it, for that it binds not, before it be published, and allowed.

Thirdly he says, It is no new thing for popes to excommunicate princes. And
that the subject is not to be troubled for his old received belief about the
popes authority. But he is much deceived, in things new or old. In faith and
belief all is new, that is not taught by Christ and his apostles. Wherefore
unless he can show this authority to be given from Christ, he must needs
confess the Romish faith therein to be new. Nay he cannot show, that the
popes either claimed, or practiced any such power, as to excommunicate and
depose princes, before Gregory the seventh, that was therefore rightly called
Hell-brand, or the firebrand of the devil, to set discord betwixt Christian
princes, to the weakening and utter overthrow of Christendom, and enlarging of
the Turkish empire. Otho Frisingensis, and Trithemius, and he that wrote the
life of Henry the fourth emperor, do all testify, that he was the first that
attempted to excommunicate princes, and that at the first his excommunications
were little regarded.

Fourthly he tells us, that The subject is not to discuss, whether the pope
had just cause to excommunicate the prince: which altogether overthrows his
clients the papists cause, and declares them to be utter enemies to the prince
excommunicate. For if they may not discuss the popes proceeding, but to
believe, that in his judicial sentences he cannot err, especially in matters
of faith: then must they of force believe, that the pope has done well to
excommunicate their Queen, and must aid him to execute it without further
inquiry; which teaches us without further inquiry also, that all papists
that allow the popes authority in excommunicating the Queen are enemies, if
they be forreiners; and traitors, if they be subjects.

Lastly he refers his clients the papists of England, to consider what the
papists of France did of late, when their kings were excommunicate; and to
English, that lived in king John's time. Which plainly argues, that though he
would have them look smoothly for the time; yet when occasion serves, he
closely signifies that they ought to rebel against their princes. For so did
they of the league in France: and so did the subjects here in England against
king John. And generally all papists are bound to believe, that the popes
excommunications are to be executed; and this is their common doctrine. But
suppose our adversary should teach papists to contemn the popes authority,
which he is not like to do; yet would not his exhortation work any effect.
For always upon the popes excommunication have wars and rebellions ensued,
where the pope has had any authority. This was the beginning and motive of
the bloody wars of the popes against Henry the fourth and fifth, and the two
Fridericks, and against Otho, Philip, and Lewis of Bauier emperors of
Germany. And no other cause can be assigned of the insurrections against king
Henry the eight, and other excommunicate princes. In vain therefore does this
Noddy go about to reconcile the subjects obedience with the exco^munications of
the pope. They never did, nor ever could agree hitherto. Fire and water may
percase be reconciled; but these two cannot. Neither do I think, that he
means to reconcile them. Only he desires some respite, until by our
negligence, either the papists may get a head, or foreign enemies have made
their provisions ready. For how little affection he bears to the prince and
state, it appears throughout all his defense.

In this place he goes about to smooth, and as far as he dare with the
safety of the cause in hand, to defend the insurrection in the north of
England anno 1569. the rebellions in Ireland, the practices of Charles Paget,
and Francis Throgmorton, and diverse other attempts against her Majesty and the
state. Whereas the earls of Northumberland and Westmerland rose in arms in
the north, and spoiled all that quarter, and purposed not only the destruction
of the prince, but also the subversion of the state, and the bringing in of
strangers, as appears by the negotiation of Ridolpho, as it is set down in
pope Pius the fifth his life. he says, They only gathered their tenants
together, and without battle or bloodshed retired. As if they had meant
nothing, but to meet at an ale-stake or May Game. Doctor Sanders raised a
rebellion in Ireland. Francis Throgmorton not only revealed the secrets of the
state to Bernardin Mendoca, and practiced with him, how to draw in foreign
enemies; but also had his finger in other treasons. Charles Paget began a
practice about the coast of Sussex, and was the overthrow of Henry earl of
Northumberland, and afterward continued practicing what mischief he could
against his country. The late earl of Northumberlandes actions were openly
declared in the Star Chamber to be dangerous. The last earl of Arundell was
taken, as he was passing over to the enemies. And yet all these treasonable
and dangerous practices are by him either lightly passed, or else colored.

He says, that Francis Throgmorton died for having a description of some
ports in his chamber. But his own confession testifies, that he was touched
for far greater matters: and I have partly pointed at the same. He says The
earl of Arundell was condemned only for hearing of a mass: and that he had
cause to rejoice, that he was condemned for such a treason. As if it were so
spiritual and glorious a matter to hear a mass. Assuredly in times past
masses were no such glorious matters, when they were sold to all comers for
three-halfe-pence a piece and under. As for the earl, he had great cause to
commend the clemency of this government, or else he had well understood,
that he had committed greater faults then hearing of a mass: all which I
forbear to relate for the respect I bear to his house.

The justice that has been done upon papists that have been convicted
either of rebellion, or secret practices with foreign enemies, or other
kinds of treason and felony, he calls Pressures, vexations, dishonors,
rapines, slaughters, and afflictions: Dishonoring her Majesty and the state,
and calumniating the judges. And yet were more true catholics and religious
christians executed within one year in Queen Mary's time, then traiterous
papists since her Majesty came to the crown. Histor. Genuens. lib. 23.
Bizarus and other strangers do greatly commend her Majesty's clemency, her
very enemies could never appeach her of cruelty. The papists most cruelly
murder those, that are of a diverse religion. albeit they yield obedience to
their prince, and desire to live quietly. Her Majesty executes none to death
for popish religion. nay least she should seem to touch any for religion, she
does oftentimes spare offenders guilty of dangerous practices and treasons.
Likewise in drawing the obstinate to the church there is great moderation used.
Many offend: few are punished, and that very gently. The papists have the
greatest part of the wealth of the land in their hands. Diverse railing
companions are still publishing libels to the dishonor of her Majesty, and the
whole government; neither can this Noddy repress his malicious affection, but
he must needs allow their doings. And yet the papists are spared; although
never the more for his wise pleading.

Finally he commends the papists for their patience. But I think he means
the patience rather of Lombardes, then of christians. For they never had yet
patience, but when they were unable to resist. In king Henry the eightes days
they made diverse insurrections in England. The trumpets of sedition were monks
and friars. In king Edward the sixth his days they stirred in Devonshire and
Cornwall, and all for want of their mass, and holywater, and such like
trinckets. The chief moouers thereof were likewise priests. in Queen
Elizabeth's time they made head first in the north parts, and afterward in
Ireland. by the seditious practices of priests and Jesuits either most, or a
great part of that country is in combustion. Neither have they omitted any
opportunity, to move new rebellions in England. In France they conspired
together against their lawful kings Henry the third and fourth; and never gave
over, until they were overcome by famine, sword and other calamities. and this
is the patience of papists. nay they say, that if the first christians had had
power, they would have deposed Nero, Dioclesian, and other persecutors. Lib. 5.
de pontif. Romans c. 7.
Quod si Christiani olim, says Bellarm. non deposuerunt Neronem and
Dioclesianum, and Iulianum apostatam, ac Valentem Arianum and similes; id fuit,
quia decrant vires temporales Christianis. So when papists are too weak to
resist, then they are content to obey: but give them head; and then beware.
Compare now the doings and proceedings of our side with our adversaries: I
hope there shall be no such wickedness found in our hands. Diligently does this
fellow search matter against us, but finds none.

To justify his consorts, he tells us of Goodman: but we do not allow his
private opinion. Beside that, he does not like rebellion, but misliketh women's
government, which opinion since himself has retracted. Secondly he obiecteth
against us Wyats rebellion. But that was not for religion, but for matter of
state: not against Queen Marie, but against strangers, whose tyranny he
abhorred. Thirdly he tells us, and that in very tragical terms, Of armies,
camps, battles, insurrections, desolations caused in Germany, France,
Flanders, (...) she practice of the world, he was thought not unworthy to be
employed in public causes. His body was misshapen, especially his toes, and
feet, which declared that he was ex (...) genere: that is of the kind of
crooked clawed beasts, but that was covered with his gown and slippers. His
first step out of the university was into the Cardinals house, where he learned
the Cardinals pride, and vanity. His first employment was in the negotiation at
Rome about the kings marriage with the Lady Anne Bollen, who sent him thither
together with Edward Fox to solicit her cause. For his wit and experience, he
was thought fit to be employed, and specially named by the Queen: but his
false and treacherous dealing in that cause, did much hinder the kings
proceeding, as afterward did manifestly appear. Notwithstanding because the
Queen thought he had taken pains, and dealt faithfully with her; she was the
cause, that he was nominated by the king, and so preferred to be bishop of
Winchester. The which that he might seem to deserve, he did publicly defend
the kings supreme authority against the pope, and by an oath, whereof there is
yet a public act remaining, he forswore and abiured the pope. afterward taking
the opportunity of the kings humor, he wrought an alienation of the kings
mind from the Queen, and never ceased, until he brought that innocent Lady
unto her end. and not content herewith he was a special instrument of that act
of parliament, that was made against her marriage, and her issue. Thus this
viper rewarded that good Queen, by whom he was advanced. Nourish up dogs and
they will bite; save the life of a serpent, and he will sting. Now hitherto
Gardener in outward show was a great oppugner of the popes authority, but
whether upon hope of greater preferment by the pope, or displeasure to some
about the king, afterward he began to harken to the pope. Being sent with Sir
Henry Kniuet to Ratisbone to a certain diet holden by the Emperor there, he
was discovered to have made a pack with Cardinal Contarene, and from thence
wrote letters to the pope. Which the king took so offensiuely, that in all
pardons commonly granted in parliaments, he excepted treasons done beyond the
seas: meaning no doubt this treason of Winchester. Returning home now
reconciled to the pope, he proved a great persecutor of true christians. He was
the chief moouer of the king to set out the act of six articles, which was the
occasion of so many innocents death; and in execution thereof this wolf was
always most forward; as contrariwise, if the king was advised to reform any
abuse, he was always most backward. In the latter time of the king he was so
out of his favor, that he came not in his presence. And where beforetime he
was made one of the tutors to young king Edward, and an ouerseer of king
Henry's will, he was quite dashed out, and by no means could be admitted
again, either to his place, in the kings favor, or in his will Which
proceeded, as may probably be coniectured, for that he was the cause of
Queen Annes death, which the king toward his latter end so much repented. In
the beginning of king Edwards days he hindered the journey into Scotland, and
whatsoever might make for the honor of the young king, as appears by his
letters to the Lord Protector. And yet in open terms acknowledged the kings
supremacy, and once more The acts are extant.
denied the pope. But upon the Protectors death, the man seeing a storm
coming, did obstinately resist the kings proceedings, and so was woorthily
deprived of his bishopric, and committed to prison. But being delivered from
thence by Queen Marie, he raged against the flock of Christ like a woolfe
famished, and long restrained. And as before he had caused Queen Anne to
loose her life, so he sought to bring the lady Elizabeth her daughter to
destruction. He was the only instrument to examine and entrap the innocent
lady, and by diverse means sought to suborne false witnesses, to accuse her,
as an abbettor of Wyats insurrection. And so far he prevailed, as a warrant
was brought to Master Bridges then lieutenant of the tower, for her execution.
Thus had the hope of her happy government been cut off, if God had not
stirred up the lieutenant to make stay of execution, until the Queens
pleasure was further known. He was also the only man, that prosecuted bishop
Ridley, and bishop Latimer to death: insomuch that expecting news from Oxford
of their execution: he would not dine before he had heard, that fire was set
to them. But see Gods judgments upon the cruel tyrant: even that self same
dinner, in the midst of his meriment, God so struck him, that he was carried
from the table to his bed, and never rose until he died. So he raged while
he lived, and raued when he died. His actions in his life time were odious,
his body dying did stink so odiously, that his servants could not endure it.
He would not suffer the holy martyrs to speak at their death, and therefore
God stroke him so in his tongue with swelling, that sometime before his death he
was not able to utter one word. and this was the life and death of this
monster. Of other qualities I will not speak. One of his men set out a
treatise against the marriage of ministers; wherein it seems his finger was.
But much more honesty it had been for him to have been married. He wrote
diverse things, but he wrote not only contrary to himself, but also both to
papists and protestants, which his works now extant do show, refuting
notoriously the vain brags, which our adversary makes of his learning.

William Allen was borne I know not where, but he was brought up in the
university of Oxford, from whence either discontented with the present
government, or else induced with hope of better preferment otherwhere, he fled
into the low countries, and there became a reader of the popes broken divinity.
Afterward being nouzled among rebels and traitors, he began to teach positions
of rebellion and treason to his countrymen, that came over, and so instructed
them, that diverse of his scholars proved masters in wilful disobedience and
treason against their prince and country. himself Jn his answer. ad per seq.
Aug. c. 5.
says, That it is not only lawful, but glorious for subjects to take arms
against princes, that will not admit popish religion. He allows and
commends not only the rebellion in England, but also in Ireland, that was
raised for that cause. Neither should it seem, that any practice was made
against her Majesty by the papists, but he either was a plotter of it, or had
understanding of it. When her Majesty sent aid to the distressed people of
the low countries, he by his pestilent persuasions caused Stanley and his
regiment most shamefully to betray Deuenter, nay to betray the honor of his
country, and his prince, and to turn to the enemy. And that it might appear
to be his act, he was not ashamed publicly in a book written, to defend this
treason, and dishonor. For which cause king Philip gave him living and
pension, and the pope at length gave him the title of a Cardinal, and called
he was Cardinal of Saint Martin in Montibus, to show that he sought no low
matters, but would fly to the top of the hills. He was also called Cardinal
of England, for that he meant to be legate of England, and to betray it to the
pope. For these base services he was esteemed both of the Spanish king and
pope, but always as a traitor and perfidious enemy to the prince and state.
Which as it appeared always, so especially in anno 1588. For then was he
appointed to come into England with the Spanish army for the subversion, and
utter desolation of that, which should have been his most dear country. Nay
it is apparent, that this war was especially stirred up by him and his
consortes at home and abroad. Sixtus Quintus The declaration of the sentence
of Sixtus Quintus.
says he, Solicited by the zealous and importunate instance of sundry the most
principal persons of English catholics has dealt earnestly with diverse
princes, and specially with the potent king catholic of Spain, that he will
emploie his forces to the deposition of the Queen, and correction of her
accomplices. He In his letters to the nobles and people of England.
shows that diverse English Did come also in the Spanish army, and navy, and
that he himself would be present to mediate, that the English might be well
entreated of the conquerors: at the least, that they might have their throtes
cut gently. He Ibidem.
curses all those, That should fight for their prince and country, and not
take part with foreign enemies. He exhorts all to rise and fight against the
Queen. If you should, Ibidem.
says he, sit still, or refuse to help the Spaniard, or seek to uphold the
usurper (so he calls the Queen) or her accomplices, you shall encurre the
angels curse and malediction upon the land of Meros, and be as deeply
excommunicated as she is. He discourageth and fraieth all those, that would
fight for their country, and Ibidem.
says, Fight not for Gods love, least you be damned. And to the intent to make
her Majesty and this government most odious, he has published against her
the most execrable and malicious libell, that either by malice could be
devised, or by words vttred. Naie he raileth against all honest men, that were
likely to take her part. And of these libels he had caused whole barrels to
be embarked for England. But God overthrowing the Spanish navy, he thought
it wisdom to conceal the malice of the popish faction, and to trusse up his
fardels, and send his libels back to Rome, least the libell might work a
contrary effect, then that for which it was devised. This expedition
dissolved, this hungry cardinal returned to Rome laden with shame and
reproach, for that his wicked counsels took no better effect. In the end the
pope perceiving he could do no more mischief to his country, and that he was
rather a burden, then otherwise, made small account of him. Whereupon ensued
his death either upon grief, or percase some other secret occasion. So
hateful was his life, and his death miserable and shameful. In all his life
he sought the ruin of his native country, and therefore Gods will was, that
he should die inglorious in a strange country. Seeing then these were the
qualities and proceedings of Gardener and Allen, who does not detest the memory
of two such wicked monsters? The Noddie in this encounter says what he can
both in their excuse and praise: but if he had thought that any would have
come against him, I believe he would have kept silence.

He says first, That none was further from blood and cruelty then Gardener;
and to prove it, alleges That it proceeded only from his gentle nature,
that some of the greatest protestants in Queen Mary's time were not called to
account: and that he labored to save the Lord Sturton condemned for murdring
of Harguill, and the Lady Smith burned for killing her husband, and the duke of
Northumberland condemned for rebellion. Further he tells us, How a certain
bracelet came to his hands containing the secret of Wyats action, and yet that
he never urged the knowledge gotten thereof to the Lady Elizabeth's peril, she
being then an object of love and compassion, rather then of envy and hatred.
And much idle talk he spends about these matters, but his pleading is of
that nature, that his own friends must needs acknowledge that he wants
shame in auowing notorious untruths; and common reason in alleging such
matters as either make against him, or at the least nothing for him. For
wherein could he show himself more shameless, then in praising Gardener for
his mildness and gentle nature, when so many particulars, as we have before
set down, do declare him to be most cruel and savage, not sparing any, that
stood well affected to that religion, which he hated? Beside that, did he not
seek the death of the Lady Parre last wife of king Henry the eight, and the
Lady Tyrwhit, the Lady Lane, and Lady Harbert her three waiting women? Did he
not procure the king to set his hand to the articles against the Queen, and
meant to have proceeded further, had not she by her modest carriage and answers
pacyfied the kings anger? It is also evident, that he pursued doctor Barnes,
and diverse other good men even to the very death. Neither was Anne Askew
tormented first, and then burned without his priuity. Wherefore if diverse
principal protestants, as they are called, or rather Christians were not
called to account; it was rather want of ability then will, that was never
wanting in Gardener to shed innocent blood. For he that caused one Queen to be
slaughtered upon false criminations, and sought the death of an other,
especially aiming at the greatest, while Bonner and his companions were
butchering of the lambs, and lesser sheep of Christ's fold, we may not
think, that he meant to forbear any. No either it was the kings pleasure,
that would not have his servants butchered, or else the strength, or the wise
carriage of the parties, that kept them out of Gardiners hand, that delited in
nothing more then blood.

Likewise it is a notorious untruth, that either by a bracelet, or by any other
sign Gardener was able to prove the Lady Elizabeth consenting to Wiats
attempt. But if he had but had the least argument of disloyalty against her,
she could not have escaped his hands. For albeit there was no color, yet did
he seek to suborne witnesses against her, and promise life to Wiat, if he
would accuse her. What likelihood is there then, if he sought witnesses
against the lady, and that most greedily, that he should conceal an evidence
being happily found, especially such a one as might reveal hidden mysteries?

Thus our adversary groundeth his defense upon untruths. Besides that he
rayseth his building upon things very impertinent, and which make little for
Gardiners credit. He says, He entreated for the life of the Lord Sturton, the
Lady Smith, and the Duke of Northumberland. As if Phalaris and Dionysius and
the most bloody and cruel tyrants, that ever yet lived, did not spare some
offenders, to whom they bore affection: even wolves agree with wolves, and
serpents do not sting one another. If then Gardener favored malefactors,
whoores, and rebels, and such like, and without remission prosecuted true
Christians; it is apparent, that he was extremely cruel, and that his cruelty
was extended against the best men. Sure if this discourser, had been wise, he
would not have mentioned the Lord Sturton, or the Lady Smith, seeing no man
being such as Gardener was, could with any honor speak for them, the one
having committed a most execrable murder upon Harguil, the other having killed
her own husband. No doubt she was an honest woman, that Winchester would
speak for.

He says that The Lady Elizabeth was then an object of love and compashion,
rather then of envy and hatred. The which does argue Gardiners extreme
cruelty, that had no remorse of conscience to shed so innocent a Ladies blood,
forgetting all natural pity and compassion that was due to a woman of her
years, and quality, and in that case.

Where sir Francis says, That recusants cannot profess more loyalty and love
to Queen Elizabeth and to the state, then Gardener did to king Henry, and his
son king Edward, and to the state then; and yet in the days of Queen Marie
betrayed the Queen, and realm into the popes, and Spaniards hands, pulling
off his vizor of love and loyalty, and showing himself in his natural
likeness and qualities: The wise N. D. takes exceptions to his sayings, and
tells him, that either he is ignorant of matters then passed or else
willingly tells untruths: and so he enters into a long discourse
concerning Gardiners fall, as he calls it; and the matching of Queen Mary
with king Philip, and the coming in of the Spaniards, excusing Gardener for
writing against the pope, and flatly denying, that he consented to match the
Queen with the prince of Spain. but first this talk of Recusants is
impertinent in this place, and argues nothing else, but that this point
charged upon Recusants, is a bone too hard for him to gnaw, and a matter which
had bin better concealed then mentioned in this place; declaring plainly, what
we are to expect at their hands, if time serve.

Secondly it is most false, that either Gardener did then fall, or commit a
fault, when he stood for the princes supremacy against the pope, or else
that he condemned his doing therein during king Henry's days. Nay when his
Secretary German Gardener was executed; he had like himself to have passed
the same way, had he not confessed his fault to the king, and desired pardon
with promise of amendment. Likewise in king Edwards days being examined
first, Whether he did not believe, that the king was justly and ought to be
the head of the church of England, and of the synod or convocation: and
secondly, Whether he had not authority, to make ecclesiastical laws, for
church government; he answered to both affirmatively. Which shows, yt this
Noddy was ignorant of matters of those times, and not his adversary. But if i^
writing against the pope he did evil, sure in nothing did he well. For this
was the only act, for which he deserved commendation. To write for the pope,
or to acknowledge the popes authority, is nothing else, but unnaturally to
subject this country to a stranger, and to acknowledge the usurped power of a
tyrant, that is undoubtedly Antichrist.

In this place also the Noddy heapeth up other lies upon the back of the
first, adding lies to lies. He says, That Gardener was one of the chief of
sixteen Counselors, that were appointed by king Henry's testament, and
earnest charge of mouth at his last hour, to govern his son and realm, and
that the king earnestly gave charge, that no alteration of religion should be
made during his sons minority. But neither was he one of the chief, nor
any governor at all. For the king long before his death had dashed him out of
his will, as a turbulent fellow, and not worthy to have such a charge
committed unto him. Neither would he be induced at sir Anthony Brownes request
to admit him again to that place. Secondly this Gardener was neither present
when the king died, nor many days before, being commanded out of his sight.
Thirdly it is most notorious, that ye king dealt most earnestly with Annibault
the French kings ambassador a little before his death to persuade his king to
establish a reformation of religion in France. And therefore this tale of
forbidding alteration, is a mere fiction. Whatsoever the king commanded, that
certes was to Gardener unknown, being forbidden the kings presence. Fourthly
how absurd is it to think, that Gardener durst plead the popes right to the
king, when for this only suspicion, that he inclined to the pope, he had, no
doubt, been called in question, had he not submitted himself to the kings
mercy? That he did so, is a most shameless lie; as also that he denied the
Kings supremacy in his sermon preached before king Edward, which this Noddy
affirms contrary to all truth. And therefore does far better deserve the
title of Steelebrow, then his adversary. sure, if he had not been both
steelebrowed, and beetilbrowed, yea and beetilheaded; he would never have
been so bold in affirming so many untruths without ground or witness; nay
contrary to all record of story, and testification of witnesses.

Thirdly it is most true, That Gardener was a principal actor in matching
Queen Mary with Philip of Spain; which our adversary denies: and most
false, that the Counsel was divided about this matter, some favoring the earl
of Devonshire, others the prince of Spain; which he affirms. That is
proved, for that he wrote and received letters from Charles the emperor to
this purpose; and also in that he was a chief dealer about the articles agreed
upon, at the time of the marriage; and last of all for that the prince of Spain
came first to Winchester, and was married by the bishop, as a man specially
favoring that match. The second point is proved first by the testimony of
Lib. 2. de schism.
Sanders that says, that all the counsel liked this match in regard of
bringing back the church of England to the church of Rome. And secondly for
that the Queen made choice of the earl of Devonshire herself; and such was
her affection, that she had married him, but that all her Counsel resisted it,
and devised most slanderous letters in the emperors name against the young man.
And lastly for that the young earl was suspected for religion, and so given to
his affections, that he did not himself desire any such matter, nor if he had
desired it, could he have bin liked by Winchester. Neither skilleth it whether
Winchester called him his spiritual child, or no. If he did, then was he an
unkind spiritual father, that gave counsel to send his child away into
Italy, where by a most shameful practice of this wicked generation he was
poisoned and made away. Rests then that this practice of Winchester to bring
in the authority of the pope, and tyranny of Spaniards was most dangerous to
this state, and ought to be most hateful to this nation. If he did not please
the pope nor emperor neither, as this our adversary pretends; then was he
odious to all the world.

His sermon certes preached at Paul's cross before the king and Queen, and
popes legate, declared, that as in times past he had used his authority to
persecute poor Christians, so here he did abuse gods word to please the popes
agent, and those that favored his faction. His text was, Hora est iani nos de
somno surgere; which is taken out of Saint Paul's epistle to the Romans. And
out of this he went about to show, that since the church of England had
departed from the subjection of the pope, the people had continued, as it were,
in a sleep: therefore did he conclude, that every man must awake, and return
again to the pope. as if the apostle in those words had willed men to submit
themselves, and to return to the obedience of the pope, and to embrace his
most vain superstitions and his fantastical and impious traditions: which,
god wot, was no part of the apostles meaning. Nay he rather speaks of the
pope 2. These. 2. where he mentions the man of sin, that shall sit in the
temple of God, and advance himself above all that is called God. And in this
place he rather exhorts worldlinges that are drowned in sensuality and
pleasures, and forget God while they follow the vanities of this world, to
awake and call themselves to a serious cogitation of spiritual matters. For
security and senseless stupidity is an image of sleep, or death rather. And
it may very well be applied to those, that either are besotted with popish
ignorance, not knowing any point of Christian faith, or that walk in
darkness of popish errors, and will not awake out of their senseless sleep,
and come to the light of Gods word, that is offered to them. For to speak
truly, the doctrine of popery is nothing, but a doctrine of darkness, of
sleep, of death. But let us see how our adversary defends this noble sermon.
first says he, It was preached before the king and Queen, the popes legate,
the ambassadors of diverse princes, and a great audience. As if many great
fooleries, and vain toys had not been declared before great princes, and
many auditors. The more were present here, the more witnesses there were of the
man's great simplicity, in mistaking; and shameless impudency, in perverting
the scriptures.

Secondly he tells us, How Gardiners discourse was to show, how long the
people of England had run astray, and been in darkness of division and
strife. But first he seemed himself to be as it were in a sleep, when he
talked of darkness, and should have spoken of sleep. For between these two
there is no small difference. For many awake in the night, and others sleep at
noone day. Secondly he commits no small error, where he calls the
separation from popery, Darkness of division and strife. For he that is joined
to Christ, walks in light, and they that live under the pope continue in
Egyptian darkness. Beside, this darkness does rather work confusion, then
division.

Thirdly he says that Gardener uttered two things that greatly moved the
whole auditory. The first was the hearty accusation of himself for his book de
vera obedientia. Which he uttered weeping like a great calfe, and as our
adversary tells us, With such vehemence as he was forced diverse times to make
some pauses. And that these tears were not feyned, says he, It appeared in
this, that drawing to his end, he said, negaui cum Petro, exiui cum Petro, sed
nendu^ amare fleui cum Petro. The second was a relation how king Henry a little
before his death dealt with him secretly and seriously, to go into Germany to a
certain diet, and there to take some course, that he might be reconciled to
the pope. But what makes all this to the true expounding of this text, Hora
est iam nos de somno surgere? Surely no more, then if he should have talked of
clypping of goats, or shearing of swine, and such idle fancies as be
represented to men in their sleep. Besides that here are many untruths
contained, of which I have great cause to doubt, whether ever they were uttered
in so famous and public an auditory, or no. First it is a most shameless
untruth, to affirm, that ever the king desired to be reconciled to the pope.
his words, his actions, yea all his proceedings, tended to the contrary: and
of this point he was so well resolved, that rather he sought to persuade
others, to renounce the pope, then determined himself to return to the pope.
Finally what could be devised more absurd, then to feine that such a noble and
magnanimous prince did voluntarily submit himself to a base enemy, which by
no force nor persuasion, he could be induced to do. Secondly, it is an absurd
thing to think, that if the king meant to do any such matter, he would impose
the charge upon him, that had written against the popes power, and forsworn
it, and until the protectors death in king Edwards days did acknowledge the
princes supremacy. Thirdly it is apparent, that the king long time before his
death suspected him for a secret traitor, and could no way abide, that he
should come in his presence, as the Lord Paget, and sir Anthony Brown, the
Duke of Suffolk and diverse others testified. And therefore if any such thing
had been in the kings head, he would rather have used any other, then him. At
least he would have declared his mind to some of his Counsails beside
Gardener. Fourthly I cannot learn, that ever the bishop of Winchester did
speak these words at Paul's cross. And therefore most like it is, they have
been forged since, and fathered upon him. Lastly if the king would have any
such matter handled, he would not have sent into Germany, but to Rome: neither
needed he to have doubted, but he should most willingly have bin received,
if he had intended any such submission. Al these points therefore seem to have
bin devised by some lying companion, and stand only upon the bare credit of
this our wise adversary, without proof of any one witness or record: and
therefore we may well conclude, that the second thing which he fathereth upon
Gardener is a mere lie.

In the relation of the first thing also there are many untruths. First
whether the auditory were moved, or no, at the bishops sermons; it may be some
question. That the same was not moved to believe the bishop, if he said as
much as is here written, it is most certain, seeing the untruth of his bragges
of the kings favor was so notorious. Secondly that Gardener should weep for
denying the pope, is a most ridiculous fiction. Nay rather it seemed he wept,
that for saving his temporal honors, was here constrained publicly to deny
Christ, and to adhere to Antichrist. Thirdly it cannot be, that Gardener being
near his end should say those words, that are set down by this reporter. For
his tongue was so swollen sometime before his death, that he was not able to
utter one plain word. And if he did sometimes before his death lament his
denial with Peter, yet could it not be, that he meant of his abiuring the pope
(for Peter denied Christ, and not the pope) but of his plain renouncing of
Christ, to please the pope. Fourthly it is ridiculous to think, that Gardener
was a sleep when he wrote his book, De vera obedientia. Nay it was more
likely, that he was brought a sleep when he listened to the popes
enchantements, and forgetting Christ followed the course of the world. Lastly
all his weeping, sobbing, and sighing was counterfeit, and his sorrow feined
only to please the popes legate.

But says our adversary, If ever man might take upon him to talk of a sleep
or dream in matters of our common wealth, then might Gardener do it. As if it
were so great a matter to talk of sleeping. Sure Gardiners and this fellows
talk is so evil fitted, that they seem to dream, while they reasoned of
sleeping; and come not near that sleep, of which the apostle speaks.
Philosophers say that sleep is a binding of the senses, and that it is rather
a time of rest and quiet, then of trouble and tossing too and fro. Further in
sleep men oftentimes do think they see and feel, which they see not, nor
feel not. Absurdly therefore should the times of king Henry and king Edward
be compared to a sleep, if there were in those times such stirs and
troubles, as this fellow surmiseth. Beside that, when More and Fisher lost
their heads, it was no idle fancy, such as is represented unto us, when we
sleep. Neither if the king was so much troubled about matters of religion, as
this sleeping Noddy, or Nodding sleeper pretends, then was he not in a
sleep. So then the similitude of sleep and a troubled state was very unfit.
And yet to fit the same he feineth, I know not what, troubles in the kings
mind about his divorce, and matters of religion, most falsely. For excepting
those troubles which the pope stirred, and Gardener by his evil counsel
procured, there happened to the king nothing more then ordinary. Nay after his
divorce from his brothers wife his mind was settled, and after the abrogation of
the popes authority, both he and his subjects received great contentment; and
his state, great assurance.

He tells further, How Gardener was wont to say of the king, that leaving to
love her, whom by gods and man's laws he was bound to love, he never loved any
person heartily afterward. But this is not likely, seeing Gardener was a
principal agent in the kings divorce, and knew that neither gods law, nor man's
law was against it. Nay he knew, that it was directly against gods law for a
man to mary the relict of his brother, and that man's laws also forbid it.
Lastly it is apparent, that all that allowed this marriage, stood only upon the
popes dispensation, which now all men know not to be worth a straw. Beside
this, all this talk concerning the kings divorce is impertinent to the sermon,
and more impertinent to Gardiners text, about which the question is betwixt us:
and argues nothing, but the extreme hatred and malice of the popish faction
against the noble king Henry the eight of famous memory, whom upon every
occasion, yea and without occasion they are always ready to traduce: and all
because he dispossessed the pope of his usurped authority. This is also the
root of their malice against Queen Elizabeth, which has moved them to
publish so many scurrilous libels against her. Neither have they spared that
innocent king, the hope of our time so untimely taken from us, king Edward the
sixth, unto whom most impudently this railing companion does impute the tumults
and rebellions that were raised in his time by certain seditious priests and
papists in Devonshire and Cornwall. He utters also diverse reproachful
speeches against the Protector, and vainly braggeth of the antiquity of
popery, whose novelties are now apparent to all the world. But what makes all
this either for the defense of Gardiners sermon, or else for the justification
of Gardiners cruel murdring of Gods saints, or for the clearing of him for
diverse practices both against the Lady Elizabeth now Queen, and also against
the state of religion and this realm? Is it not apparent, that this Noddy in
the midst of his long discourse has lost himself, and forgot the matter in
hand? The matter it self does show it. But no doubt we shall hear of him
again shortly in some new practice, or rebellion. In the mean while let us
hear what he has to say for his copartener in all treason the Cardinal Allen.

He says, That the Cardinal, albeit he wished moderation in yoonger men, yet
himself might speak his mind freely concerning the popes excommunication
against the Queen. As if that were not unlawful for him, that was unlawful
for others; or as if it were not the part of an unnatural, disloyal and
impious traitor, so to rail and revel against the Queen, his country, the
state of religion, and all that love her and the state, as this rinegued and
infamous wretch does in the declaration of the pope Sixtus Quintus his bull
against his Queen and country, and in his libels directed to the nobility and
people of England and Ireland, which he meant to have published anno 1588. I
need not to touch other writings of his, for that this passes all. nay therein
he surpasses himself, and all that wrote before him. The Queen he calls at
his pleasure, and does not only by manifold reasons disable her right, but by
infinite calumniations endeavor to make her odious to all posterity, and not
only to her subjects, that now live. He sets forth the Spanish forces,
and stirs up all papists to take part with them upon pain of the popes
curse. He rayleth at all those, that either love religion, or live in
obebience, or favor the state. And yet this discourser does defend his doing
therein, and says he might do it freely. And no doubt, but the papists that
adhere to the popes authority are of his opinion. But will you hear his brave
reasons? As in a great and noble house says he, Iarres and breaches falling
out betwixt the goodman and the goodwife, their eldest children may declare
what they think with reverence to both parts: so in the church her Majesty
being our mother, and the pope the spiritual father to all cacolikes,
Cardinal Allen, Sanders, Bristow, Stapleton and such like, as elder children
may speak their minds as well of the causes of the breaches between them, as
of the right of both parties. This is the sum of his defense; but how
insufficient, you shall easily judge by the sequel. First it stands on false
grounds. Secondly it contains ridiculous matter. Thirdly it makes against
him that made it. For first we deny the pope to be any christians spiritual
father. For he begets none by preaching, but destroieth infinite souls by
maintaining false doctrine, and ruinateth christendom by wars, murders and
treacherous practices. We deny also, that Allen, Sanders or any such treacherous
companion has any prerogative of birthright either in church, or
commonwealth. Nay they have declared themselves to be traitors, and strange
children, enemies to their prince, and country. We say further, that no
lawful bishop, much less the pope, that is only a bishop in name and title,
has power to deprive a prince of his state. We say finally, it is a malepert
part for a child, to determine that the father may put away his mother, and
such a one with a little help will declare his father a cruel husband, his
mother a dishonest woman, and himself a bastardly son.

Secondly it is ridiculous to compare the pope to the goodman, and princes to
the good wife of the house, seeing these two do never keep house together, and
considering that the pope does in his own order utterly condemn lawful
marriage. Again what more fond, then to compare the popes hostile proceedings,
to iarres that fall out betwixt man and wife in a private house? Does the
goodman upon every jar damn, and curse his wife? Does he seek to cut her
throat, as this good fellow does the Queens? Lastly how ridiculous is it to
compare Allen, Sanders, Bristow, Stapleton and such like to children, when they
have declared themselves old knaves ouergrowne in all treachery and villainy,
and run out of their native country? Do children run from their mother, and
forsake her house, to follow a reputed father, I know not where? Is not this
the part of bastardes, and not of children?

Thirdly if children ought with reverence to respect their mother, then is this
Allen a most unnatural son, that has with all villainous and reproachful
terms railed against his mother. Then are the rinegued priests, and Jesuits,
and their consorts murdring parricides, that by all means have sought the
destruction of their mother, nay of the most kind mother, that ever this
people of England had. Again if she be as the good wife, and the pope as the
good man; yet must not he take upon him to be judge in his own cause. Nor
ought any woman to be dispossessed of her right, but by lawful judges, and
orderly proceeding. It is a strange kind of divorce that is made by force of
arms. But what either Parsons the Jesuit talks of the affection of parents,
that never knew his right father; or bastardly traitors talk of the right of
princes, of which they are ignorant, it greatly skilleth not.

Wherefore seeing nothing is more apparent, then that Cardinal Allen conspired
with the pope and Spaniardes to work the destruction of his prince and
country, and came with them anno 1588. ready with fire and sword to destroy
this land, and when he could do no worse, barked out a multitude of hellish
slanders against the prince, the state, and all goodmen; among all the traitors
and enemies of this country he deserves to be in the first rank. The same
account also we are to make of N. D. and all his consorts, that allow his
villainies, and treasons. And thus much may suffice to answer our adversaries
in words. The rest I refer to those that carry the sword, which no doubt
will provide, as in such time of danger the magistrates of Rome were wont, Ne
quid resp. detrimenti ab istis capiat.

CHAP. V.
Of Jesuits, and their disciples, and consorts, against N. D. his fifth
encounter.

THe dispute and controversy betwixt our adversary and us being here about
Jesuits, and their lewd and bloody practices, I would gladly know the
reason, why he runs out into so large and ample a discourse of his father
the pope in this chapter: and the rather, for that he has reserved for him a
proper and a peculiar tract, and a place of great dignity in that part that
follows hereafter. Was it not, think you, to let us understand how nobly
the Jesuits are descended, having Antichrist for their father, and the whore
of Babylon for their mother? If this were not the cause, then let Parsons the
Jesuit, the author of the Wardeword, I trow, and one that for want of a father
is constreined to run to the pope, that is now the father of all ribaldes,
traitors, murderers, empoisoners, and enemies to this state; let him I say
show me, what is the true cause. He may do well also to show us in what
bordell he left the honest woman his mother, and to set down his whole
petigree, that he may clear himself of irregularitie, and let his friends
understand his descent and high nobility. In the mean while let us see what
he has to say, first for his holy father, and next for himself, and his
consorts.

First he is much offended, that the popes doctrine is called, Dregs, poison,
and superstition: but assuredly without just cause. For who sees not, that the
principal ground of poperieis tradition? Themselves say, that traditions are
of equal dignity to the Scriptures. If then it be drawn out of cisterns of
traditions, and not out of the pure streams of gods word, it is no marvel, if
in these cisterns there be found much dregs and corruption. Now add unto
traditions all the popes decretals, and scholasticall fancies and subtilties of
friars and their followers, and then the filth of popish doctrine must needs
seem much greater. Again seeing they have drawn into their synagogue many
customs, whereof some are Jewish, other profane and heathenish, they have no
wrong to be charged with superstition. From the Jews they draw their
Leuiticall priesthood, the forms of their sacrifice, and all the furniture of
the mass, their paschall lamb, their Iubiley, and popedom. From the heathen
they borrow their sacrifices and prayers for the dead, their purgatory and the
parts thereof, their stationarie obambulations about the limits of parishes,
the canonizing and worship of saints departed, their holy water, and many such
like ceremonies. Lastly they have translated many points of old condemned
heresies into their cacolike religion. With the Simonians they buy and sell
freely, not only benefices, and things annexed to spiritual things, but also
sacraments, not sparing their holy God of the altar. Deteriores sunt Judah,
says Christ in Saint Onus ecclesiae c. 23.
Brigits revelations, qui pro solis denarijsme vendidit, illi autem pro omni
mercimonio. She speaks of priests, that trucke, and barter masses for all
manner of commodities, yea to whoores, for a nights lodging. With the Angelicks
they worship angels; with the Staurolatrians they worship the cross, and
crucifixe, giving to the same divine worship. With the Collyridians they
worship the virgin Marie. With the Manichees they bring in half communions or
communion in one kind. With the Carpocratians, and Simonians and heathen
idolaters they fall down and offer incense and worship dumb images. With the
Pelagians they believe merits and justification by works. And almost out of
every heresy have taken a piece, as has been lately (they say) justified
against Giffords treatise entitled Caluinoturcismus. Well therefore may it be
said, that popish doctrine is full of poison: and unadvised was our adversary
to charge us with heresy, or to mention any such matter, seeing the blame must
needs redounde upon himself, and upon his consorts of the Romish synagogue.

Secondly he tells us, That ecclesiastical supremacy over all Christian
nations is proper and essential to the popes office; and that to his
apostolical authority is annexed the office of preaching. But that should more
properly and substantially have been proved. This being granted does show,
that the pope does fail in his apostolical or rather apostaticall office. For
if preaching and feeding Christ's flock belong to the popes office, why does
he not preach? Why does he not feed? Nay why does he famish Christ's flock by
murdering all true preachers, that come within his danger? He answers, that
The pope is obliged to preach by himself, or by others. But Saint Peter a
far greater apostle, and greater man in apostolical government, then the
pope, preached by himself, and put not over his charge, as the pope does, to
Jesuits and Friars, that preach more heresy and sedition, then true doctrine.
The old bishops of Rome also, which were honester men then these late popes,
put not over their charge, but preached themselves, and in their own person
executed all bishoplie functions. Yea and saint Paul tells us, that the
office of a bishop is a good work, and not as the popish bishops make it, a
naked bare title. To conclude, this is also the judgment of In 1. Tim. 3.
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoret, and all that write on the third of the first
to Timothy; from whence our authority is drawn.

He proceeds notwithstanding further, and professes openly, That when the
pope leaves his supremacy, and embraces that religion, that is preached in
England, he cease to be pope. Which I do in part also confess to be most
true. For antichrist shall in the church of God exalt himself, and claim not
only supreme, but also divine power. He shall also defend manifold heresies,
and abhor all true doctrine, that may concern his supreme title. And if he
should not so do, he should not show himself to be antichrist. Herein
therefore the Jesuits and he may be conjoined, and march together hand in
hand. For all of them have shut their eyes and hardened their hearts against
Christ's true doctrine: although it be to their shame in this life among all
godly Christians; and if they repent not, shall be to their everlasting
confusion in the life to come. Yet this hard faced Sycophant sticks not to
glory in his shame, and to rejoice, that the pope and his children the Jesuits
are matched together.

At the length our adversary having highly extolled the father of heretics,
and traitors, the pope, he descends to discourse of the popes darlinges
begotten by him now in his declining state, and decrepit age, the Jesuits: and
says, They have many enemies. A matter true, and by us confessed, and by them
well deserved, being a sect new vpstart, and openly professing obedience to
antichrist, and enmity to Apostolic and true catholic religion; a society
conspiring mischief against al such as they hate, practicing division in
private houses, sedition and trouble in commonwealths, treason against godly
princes, and leaving the marks of their abominations, and wicked actions
behind them wheresoever they come. A generation stirred up by Satan to
disturb the peace of Christendom, and to scourge all those, that are not
thankful for the reformation of Gods church, nor studious in sea^ching the
truth, nor zealous in rooting out of heresies and planting true religion. What
marvel then, if they have many enemies, among those especially, that bear
good minds either to true religion, or to the state where they live? As for
the example of Christian religion, and of the first Christians, and Christ's
disciples the holy apostles, which were every where spoken against and
persecuted, which the discourser our party pretends and alleges, to
justify the general opposition of al sorts of men against the Jesuits, it
fitteth his purpose nothing. The example likewise of godly men, that are often
put to their trials, is exceedingly evil applied to this sect of ungodly
fellows: and most absurdly does he compare these Antijesuites to Christ Jesus,
that was, as it were, a mark set up to be contradicted, and was hated and
persecuted of those, that were of most eminent authority among his nation,
borrowing, as it should seem, a piece of some old declamation uttered in the
college of Jesuits, or else where in praise of this sect, and thrusting it in
here. His defense I say, is absurd, and his comparisons most odious.

First Christ Jesus, that I may begin with him, that is the beginning, and
fountain of all spiritual graces, and whom these Antijesuites do seem in
some things to counterfeit, and yet in most things oppugn, came from God, and
did teach no doctrine, but which he had received from his father; humane
traditions, and pharisaicall boasting of works of the law he disallowed and
condemned. These Antijesuites, that I say no worse of them, come from the pope,
and teach his decretalles and doctrine, grounding themselves upon men's
traditions, and vainly bragging of their own merits and works. Christ Jesus
loved his own and was beloved of his own. These usurpers of the name of Jesus
love none but themselves, and were charged by their own friends, and were
accused of heresy, schism, and many grievous crimes, as witnesses
Ribadineira that wrote the legend of his father Ignatius. Our savior ^or
determining controversies, and finding out the truth, sent us to the law, and
the prophets: these destroyers of souls send us to the pope, and his
tribunal, and most vain decretalles. Jesus Christ, though Lord of heaven and
earth, taught obedience to Caesar, and earthly princes: these fellows albeit
neither lords, nor princes, yet teach disobedience to princes, and dissolve
the bond of obedience, that tyeth subjects to their superiors. Christ Jesus
was the true shepherd, and sought the salvation of his flock; and albeit
injuriously apprehended and cruelly done to death; yet like a lamb did he
suffer, albeit he had power to execute vengeance upon his persecutors. But the
Antijesuites are like wolves in sheep clothing, that practice nothing more
then murder of good men, and subversion of states, and albeit no man touch
them, or wrong them; yet are they upon every excommunication or commandment
of the pope ready to assassinate and murder princes, and whosoever else shall
stand in their way. Christ Jesus was without sin, and a perfect pattern of
righteousness, these Antijesuites are slaves of their affections, and
wheresoever they come, they Hazenmiller, and Simon Lithus, and Arnoldus, and
Doleus in action aduers. Jesuit.
leave behind them a filthy odor of their covetousness, rapines, pride,
vainglory, lechery and all vilenie and beastliness: of which they are
perfect precedents.

Secondly the godly christians of ancient time received no doctrine, but of
Christ Jesus, and his apostles: but these antichristian sectaries have all
their rules from the pope of Rome, and his agents, and not from Christ nor his
disciples. Their doctrine, although it seemed new, yet was it indeed very
ancient: but the rules of the Jesuits are all confirmed within these
threescore years, and all that filth and corruption of popery, which they
with their barking and bauling defend, is but a pack of novelties, or rather
new heresies, invented by diverse false apostles and teachers raised up by
satan, and commended by the authority of antichrist the pope. The first
christian were men of peace, and estranged themselves from princes courts, and
seldom meddled with public affairs; these sectaries are like the frogs of
Egypt, that leapt into all Pharohes chambers and closets. They insinuate
themselves into princes courts, and enter into their secrets; they swarm every
where like lice; they stir up wars, and preach slaughter of true
Christians, wheresoever they come The apostles and first Christians never
taught rebellion, nor murder and empoisonment of princes, nor slaughter of
se^ly fowls, that would not believe their doctrine, though most true; neither
did they publish Christ's Gospel with fire, and sword. But these apostles of
satan preach sedition and rebellion, and persuade desperate and lost companions
to murder, and empoison innocent princes, and promise them for their
wickedness rewards in earth, and eternal blessedness in heaven. They murder
such as will not hearken to the popes laws, and as Mahomet did in times past,
so do these plant their sect, with fire and sword, and all manner of violence.

Finally all the godly both of ancient and late times by their godly life and
fruits issuing of their Christian faith showed themselves to be the true
members of Christ's church, and true Catholics, and by their meekness,
humility and patience wanne to themselves a good name and opinion even among
their enemies. But the rustling and antichristian Jesuits through their
impieties, heresies, pride, covetousness, cruelty, filthy life and
rebellious practices are suspected of Ribadineira, in vita Loiolae.
friends, abhorred of enemies, and generally hated of one and other, those
only excepted, that either know them not, or know what gain they get by their
desperate teaching and adventures. There is no truth in their doctrine, no
humility in their conversation, no honesty in their forced chastity, no
Christian charity or virtue among the companions of that sect or society. And
that shall well appear by diverse particulars, notwithstanding all the fair
glosses of this discourser.

Gladly would he persuade his Reader, That those that oppose themselves
against the Jesuits are either Jews, Turks, and Infidels and such like; or
those that make division, saying, I am of Calvin, I am of Luther; or those that
have made shipwreck of faith; or false brethren, such as love preeminence, as
did Diotrephes; or else worldlings, that follow the world, as did Demas. But in
this division or at least enumeration, there are two gross ^ults committed by
the Noddy. First many things therein are confidently avouched without proof,
that are either very false, or very doubtful. For first the Jesuits have good
correspondence with Jews, Turks, and Infidels, and neither do the Jesuits
persecute the Jews, that are maintained publicly at Rome; nor the Turks or
Infidels, that bend their forces to root out Christian religion, and
extinguish the name and memory of Christ and Christians; nor do Turks and Jews
hurt the Jesuits. Nay with the Jews they have good dealings delivering the^
their money to put out to interest. And so have Jews with the Jesuits. When
the Jesuits of Rome made petition to Sixtus Quintus for some help, to finish
that sumptuous college, which they had begun for the use of their society:
he bad them content themselves with the interest of their stocks of money,
that were in the hands of banquers, and usurers. Likewise the Jesuits
suffering the Turks to enter into Transiluania, Hungaria, and frontiers of
christendom, do not only not oppose themselves against them, but also seek
to set Christians at variance, and to murder and empoison princes, that should
withstand them. Neither do the Jews or Turks malign or speak evil or hurt
of Jesuits. The Jews trade with them. The Turks suffer them quietly amongst
them.

Secondly he does ridiculously and falsely suppose, that some among us say,
they are of Calvin; others, that they are of Luther. He should do us a
pleasure to show, who they be. For we neither hold of Calvin nor of Luther,
no nor of pope Clement, nor any other, save Christ Jesus. If he cannot produce
the parties that are guilty, we must tell him that he is a ridiculous
accuser, that obiecteth that to us, wherein we are clear, and wherein he and
his consorts are most guilty and criminous. For the papists are divided, and
some hold of Ignatius Loiola, some of Francis, some of Dominicke, some of
Brigit, some of Clare, and all of the pope: and such holding and pulling there
is among them, that they have pulled Christ's cote a sunder, and divided
themselves from his church, holding of antichrist, and such rules as they have
received from him.

Thirdly he does but speak his pleasure, where he says, that Such
especially, as have made shipwreck of faith, and ambitious and carnal
worldlings do oppugn this sect of Jesuits. For they have no better friends,
then the ambitious and luciferian popes, the carnal Cardinals, the fleshly
friars and priests, and popish atheists, that have no God but the pope and
their belly; men in condition swinish and brutish, and in their religion
hellish. The first author of their sect was a cruel, proud, and impious
hypocrite. Paul the third, that first confirmed the rule and order of
Jesuits, was a carnal and bloody man. His sensuality appeered in the number
of his whoores and bastardes. His cruelty in the persecuting of innocent
Christians in his wars in Germany, and rebellious practices in England. Of
later popes Gregory the thirteenth was their best friend, and gave them diverse
privileges, and built them an house. Yet was he a carnal fellow, and a mere
politic. He kept certain women, and his bastardes in his time bore no small
swaie in Rome. One of them made love to a man's wife of the house of Glorieri.
Of whom receiving some indignity, he brought the Glorieri into hatred with his
father. Who picking a quarrel to them fined Caesar Glorieri, him that set his
hand to the sentence of excommunication against the Queen, 100000. ducates,
and another Glorieri, that was clarke of the popes checker chamber he put out
of his office, and sold it for diverse thousands of ducats. So you see much
money made of a baudie matter, and you would wonder whether all this money
went; and I believe hardly could you guess it. I will therefore assure you,
that all this money went to the Jesuits, and was most of it employed in the
building of their college at Rome. O holy society, and thrice holy college
erected for the most part by baudrie, and maintained as pope Sixtus said, by
usury! This may serve for a taste to show, that the best founders that
Jesuits have, are carnal and sensual men, that rather then they will fry in
purgatory, will give the Jesuits most of that they have.

The second fault of this enumeration is this, that it is defective. For not so
many atheistes, carnal worldlings, and heretics, as christian and catholic
princes, zealous and godly bishops and pastors, and honest and religious
Christians do detest and abhor this wicked generation. Princes, for the hazard
that they have incurred of their lives and states, have either expulsed them
and banished them their countries, as the French king, the Transyluanian, and
those that profess true religion; or had them in jealousy, as the king of
Poland, and diverse papisticall princes. Godly Christians have reason to suspect
them, and detest them for their abominable doctrine, and treacherous, and
murderous practices. Fathers fear them in regard of their children, whom they
inueigle and steal away. The Venetians dissolved a college in Padua, where
gentlemen's sons were wont to be brought up, for that the Jesuits taking upon
them to teach there, corrupted their youth with their unnatural lasciuiousnes:
and restrained them from teaching others, then such as were of their own
society. Husbands have them in jealousy for their wives, wives for their
husbands. For it is no rare matter for these subuerters of all humanity to draw
wives from husbands, and husbands from wives, yea sometimes through too much
familiarity with women, they spoil the men. A certain Magnifico in Venice
perceiving his wives jewels to be wanting, in the end learned that the Jesuits
had gotten them. To conclude this point, I think the Jesuits will not deny,
but that the Carmelites, and Franciscanes, and Dominicans, and oath orders of
friars are as honest men, as themselves; yet all these do inwardly hate them.
At Vienna they thrust out the Carmelites, at Mentz the Dominicans, at Trier and
Bransberg the Francisca^s out of their houses; which makes these orders to
hate them. In Bauier the priests being brought to poverty and shame by the
Jesuits, have no reason to love them. And thus we see that many honest men do
either suspect or hate the Jesuits; and some also which they themselves cannot
take just exception against.

Let us therefore now consider, whether the causes, that have moved and
occasioned this hatred against the Jesuits, be just or no. The discourser
says, They are had in hatred, and emulation either for their rule and
profession, or for their learning and doctrine, or for their life and
conversation. But first the parts of this division are imperfect; next the same
contains diverse untruths, and more are added in the declaration of it.
Lastly the whole defense parted in this division is not sufficient to justify
the course and actions of the Jesuits, the imperfection may be proved by
diverse particulars. For they are not only hated for these three causes, but
for diverse others. As namely for that they do many things both contrary to
their own rule, and contrary to the rule of Gods law, and Christian religion.
They profess obedience, but they practice sedition and rebellion. Claudius
Matthew a Jesuit and king Henry the third of France his confessor, was the
most principal author and agent in the league of papists against him, and the
peace established a little before. Parsons and Campian were sent into England to
make a faction for the papists. which appeared in this, that they procured a
faculty to suspend the bull of Pius, as far as it concerned papists no
further then, Rebus sic stantibus. These fellows are the principal agents and
stirrers of the rebellion in Ireland. James Gordon, Creichton, and Hayes
Jesuits laid a plot not only for a rebellion in Scotland, but for an
invasion in England. Neither has any war or tumult been raised of late in
any part of Christendom, wherein the Jesuits have not borne a principal
part. They profess chastity, and the law of God forbids all uncleanness.
but how these observe this profession and law, I report me to their own
consciences, to the Jesuits of Rome and Padua, and to their practice in
allowing, and now and then frequenting bordelles. They talk much of voluntary
poverty, and Christ says, all should be left for his sake. But these good
fellows leave Christ for the wealth and ease they find in the order of
Jesuits. They dwell in costly palaces, their diet and apparel is more
dainty and brave then ordinary. The furniture of their houses and churches is
gorgious and princely. Their arms are placed above the arms of princes. most
couetously they scratch and scrape from the orphane, widow and poor, and put
out their money to interest their rule and outward profession is to gain
souls; but their practice is to kill souls. They promise to teach without
reward, but if a great man will give them a million, they take all. Nay they
pretend to beg for banished English, but take most themselves, and by all
practices seek to enrich themselves by bribes and rewards. They profess
religion, and the name of Jesus, but they are the slaves of the pope, and
oppugn the faith of Jesus, preferring the decretals before scriptures in
certainty, and make a scoff at religion. In Venice they painted the virgin
Mary like a Lady in the city, whom they loved: and as Vita Pij Quinti.
Pius Quintus cast an Agnus dei into the river, so these use the same practice
in their coniurations. Nay they administer the sacrament to those, that go
about to murder princes, as Walpoole did to Squire. First then they are hated
for doing against Gods law, and their own written rules. Secondly for their
ignorance in true religion. Thirdly for that they pervert others by their lewd
persuasions, and evil example. Fourthly, for that they pervert youth and teach
them evil manners. Fifthly for that they are not ashamed to defend any old
condemned heresy, or gross new error holden by the pope. Lastly for that they
pervert scriptures, and corrupt the fathers and other ancient writers, both
adding and taking away, and altering the text. Which power Gregory the
thirteenth in a bull bearing date Anno 1575. seems to have given unto them.

That this division contains diverse untruths, it will appear by these
arguments. Where he says, They are hated for their rule, which notwithstanding
is the same in substance with other religions, and a way to perfection, there
are three apparent untruths. First true Christians rather abhor them for
their vnruli^es, then for their rule; and other sects albeit they love their
rule, yet hate the men for their lewd conditions; and their friends in regard
of their rule that agrees so well with the popes humor, do love them. Secondly
this rule is diverse from Christ's rule, which is the only true and direct rule
of religion. It varieth also in infinite points from the rules both of monks,
and begging friars. Neither can this be denied. For if it were the same, yea
even in substance, what should we need this new rule, having Christ's rule?
Beside, what mean the Jesuits to add a fourth vow and so many strange
constitutions and laws? If the profession of Jesuits be the same, that the
ancient eremites or monks professed, why do they tie themselves with such
oaths, and practice in matters of state, and thrust themselves into the prease
of people, which the first monks did not? Thirdly it is most absurd to affirm
or think, that Ignatius Loyola could devise a more perfect rule, then Christ
Jesus; or that Christ devised not a perfect rule, but that we should need
Ignatius a lame soldiers, and blind guides help. The Jesuits therefore are
hated not so much for their rule, as for other just causes. And no more does
the commendation of ancient monks belong to them, then the prases of the
ancient people of Israel to the obstinate Jews that crucified Christ, or of
the old Romans, to the scumme of the world, that does now inhabit Rome.

It is also most untrue, that they are hated for their learning. for not their
learning, but the abuse of their learning which is wholly employed to maintain
heresies, does make honest men to suspect them, and abhor them. Would they
teach the catholic faith as this man pretends they do, they should be
beloved, and embraced. But he must know, that their doctrine of the popes power
and supremacy, of the sacraments of the Romish church, of purgatory and
infinite other points is not catholic. Much therefore is he deceived that
thinks we account the name of a Jesuit to be a crime. for both master
Topcliffe whom he brings in to witness this point, and many others can
tell, that their treasons, practices, and lewdness have made them odious, and
not the name of Jesuits only.

Lastly the defense of this discourser is very insufficient. For it is not
enough to say that they have a rule, and learning, and live orderly, but they
must have their office and calling allowed by Christ Jesus, if they mean to
take upon them the office of pastors, teachers, and governors in Christ's
church. Wherefore either let them show themselves to have a lawful calling, or
let them not think much, to be thrust out, as intruders. We do not find
either in the epistle to the Ep^esians chap. 4. or the first Epist. to the
Corinthians chap. 12. any such extrauagant friars. Neither in ancient writers
is any precedent of their Loyolian profession to be found. Nay we do not read,
that Christ commanded any to forswear marriage, or to give away their goods to
idle vagabondes, or to obey the rules of Ignatius, but rather the contrary.

Further it is not sufficient in terms to praise the doctrine and manners of
Jesuits, unless this discourser were able to justify the same by the rule of
Christ's doctrine, and example of Christ and his apostles, and the holy fathers
of the church. But that will be very hard for him to do. Christ never taught,
that princes were to be deposed by the apostles or their successors, or that
it was lawful to kill excommunicate persons. These teach, that it is lawful
for the pope to depose princes, and that it is lawful for the subjects to
rebel against such, as the pope shall excommunicate, and to kill them.
Benedict Palmio, Parries voluntary confession.
and Annibal Codret two famous Jesuits did not only teach William Parry, that
it was lawful to kill the Queen of England, but also that it was an act very
meritorious, Varade a Jesuit of Lion in confession did absolve Peter Barriere,
that went about to murder the French king now reigning, and did assure him,
that it was a most noble and Christian act, for which he should obtain
celestial glory, as the said Peter being executed at Melun for the said
attempt, confessed: who likewise affirmed, that another Jesuit whose name he
knew not, did concur with Varade in the same opinion. In Paris the Jesuits
not only resolved, that it was lawful to kill king Henry the third, but also
by their persuasions did induce James Clement to effect the same. Richard
Williams, Edmund York, Patricke Ocollen, John Savage, and diverse others, that
have been at several times executed for attempting to kill the Queen
confessed, that they were persuaded to it by Holt, and other Jesuits; and were
also made believe, that it was a most meritorious act. Lately one Edmund Squire
confessed, that he was induced to empoison the Queen by Walpoole an English
Jesuit in Spain. Peter Pan confessed before his execution at Leiden, that
he was hired to kill the Count Morice the terror of the papists, and a great
protector of the oppressed in the Low countries. Neither is it to be doubted,
but that this is the common resolution and judgment of all Jesuits. For if it
be lawful for subjects to rebel against their princes upon the popes warrant
and commandment, as they hold; then is it also lawful to kill them, and
murder them. For arms are not taken up for other end, then to force, and kill
all that resist. Secondly it is not likely, that so many would concur in
this persuasion, if they did not like it. Thirdly they would not teach it
openly, as did Comolet in the last siege of Paris, saying That there wanted an
Ahud, meaning there wanted one to kill the king. Fourthly they would not
otherwise in their colleges dispute and resolve, that it was lawful to kill
princes excommunicate by the pope. And this is proved first by the confession
of one Chastel a scholar of the Jesuits, that wounded Henry the 4. of France,
and purposed to have killed him. And secondly by ye writings of one Ghineard a
Jesuit of the college of Clermont in Paris. In the register of the court of
Parliam. of Paris.
Chastell being demanded Whether this question, viz. whether it was not lawful
to kill the king, was not ordinarily talked of and disputed among Jesuits;
answered, that he has oftentimes heard them say, that it was lawful to kill
the king, for that he was out of the Romish church, and that it was not
lawful to obey him, nor hold him for king, until he should be approved by
the pope. He affirmed the same likewise in his second examination: and for
that wicked attempt was executed. Ghineard did not only allow and praise the
execrable murder committed by James Clement a Dominican friar upon Henry the
third, but also affirmed That Henry the fourth if he were not killed in the
wars must be killed otherwise, and in diverse books and papers written by
him, proved, That it was lawful to kill kings, declared by the Pope to be
out of the church. Finally for this wicked doctrine the Jesuits were In the
monument erected in Paris.
banished France, As a pernicious sect teaching, that it was lawful for any to
kill kings, and as it is contained in the arrest against them, As perturbers of
peace, and enemies of kings.

Christ never taught subjects to break their faith given to their princes,
nor to rise in arms against them. nay the ancient Christians, albeit they
neither Tertullian apologet. and ad Scapulam.
wanted means, nor opportunity; yet did they never go about to take away the
crown from either infidels, or apostataes, or heretics, but rather obeyed
them, and prayed for them. But Jesuits they hold, that it is lawful for
subjects to take arms, and to rebel against their princes, and teach, that
the pope has power to loose them from the bond of their allegiance. This
doctrine Parsons and Campian meant to have practiced in England. And Claudius
Matthew anno 1585, did practice in France, being a principal worker of that
rebellion, that was made against Henry the third. The rebels of Paris that
held out against their kings, were principally directed and comforted by
Comolet and other Jesuits. Nay when money and victuals grew scarce in Paris;
yet would not the Jesuits suffer the rebels to give over, but rather came
into the trenches, and brought with them of their own store to give to the
soldiers. By the practices of this seditious sect the cities of Perigueux,
Again, Tholose, Verdun, and diverse others took arms against the king.

In Scotland all late stirs have been raised by the practice of Crichton,
Gourdon, and Haies Jesuits. Neither is any thing done in the rebellion of
Ireland, but by their direction and counsel.

Christ never taught children to show themselves unnatural and unkind to
their parents; or women froward and rebellious to their husbands. But these
steal children from the parents, and convey them, where they are never more
heard of, as is apparent by the example of Airault of Angiers his son and
infinite others. In Friburg they persuaded the women to deal with their
husbands, to entertain a practice against the cantous of contrary religion;
and when they could not otherwise obtain it, by the counsel of Jesuits, they
refused to lie with their husbands.

The first Christians were examples of meekness, bounty, liberality to the
poor, of gentleness and clemency, and all virtue. These counterfeit
Christians, that call themselves Jesuits, are proud hauty, disdainful,
covetous, cruel, vindicatiue. While they persuaded the Duke of Bauier to go on
foot to visit the relics of some saint, these gallantes road in wagons. The
princess of Tyrole built the Jesuits a house hard by hers; but it was not
long before they had gotten into the princes palace, and thrust her into their
own mean house. Likewise did they exclude the bishop of Herbipolis out of a
church, which himself had built for them. They encroch not only upon the
liuinges of secular priests, and take away their tithes and prebendes, but
also upon all other regular orders. They advance themselves and despise others.
those that confess themselves to other priests, they account little better
then Atheistes. In Milan they only bear the sway in hearing women's
confessions, and did the like at Venice, until they were forbidden.

By means of their confessions they have drawn to themselves exceeding great
riches, empouerishing many rich houses, and leaving little to the widows and
orphans. Maldonat a Jesuit of Paris caused the president Monbrum S. Andre,
through his persuasions in confession to give the, Jesuits all his mooueables,
and half his revenues. The president Goudran of Dijon making his testament by
their practices gave only half a crown to his sister, and to the college of
Jesuits seven thousand pound French money in rent. In Bordeaux they have
ruined the house of Bollans, and impaired the state of the house of Large
baston. They have gotten into their society the only brother of the Marquis
of Canillac, lieutenant of the king in Auuergne. In the country of Grisons
they have persuaded a seely old man called Lamberting to sell all he had, and
to take their habit, who gathering twenty thousand ducats, meant to give all
to them from his only daughter.

So cruel they are, that they spare none, that is repugnant to their purposes.
Maffaeus complained that the elder Jesuits managed all matters absolutely: but
he was sent for his labor into Portugal. They brought Harbort, and Glisel
two famous preachers in Vienna in danger, only envying their excellency. How
many they have upon small causes brought into the Inquisition, the records
testify. It is death to speak a word against them. One Lupus a Franciscane in
Milan calling them False prophets escaped hardly with his life. Cardinal
Borrhomeus restreining their encrochments was by them accused before the pope.

Of their forced chastity what fruits ensue, I refer me to the report of
Hazenmyller, and others that have lived amongst them. I hope they do no
otherwise, then other monks before them. And if they had been so chaste as
they pretend, the Venetians would not have dissolved the college of young
gentlemen in Padua, where these fellows were teachers and regents, for
avoiding of public scandale.

Neither has the Noddy our adversary either just exception to avoid this
accusation, or wit to clear his Clients. Gretzerus has long travailed to
purge his companions of this slander, but all in vain. And therefore small
reason has this petit companion to attempt that, wherein his betters have
failed. But seeing he has gone about to face out matters, let us consider of
his allegation. In defense of the Jesuits of Paris charged with the allowance
of the act of John Chastel that attempted to murder king Henry the fourth, he
says, That the said John Chastell examined upon the torture constantly denied,
that any Jesuit living was privy to his intention of killing the king, or had
given him therein counsel, courage, or instruction; and that his father being
examined did likewise deny it. But the records of his examination which are
yet to be seen do affirm flat contrary, as before I have showed. And the
sentence of the court of parliament of Paris does plainly porport, that this
fact was attempted by the Jesuits counsel and instruction; and therefore was
it ordered, That they should depart out of Paris within three days, and out of
France within fifteen days after notice to them given, as corrupters of
youth, perturbers of public peace, and enemies of the king and the state. John
Chastel also himself confessed, That Garet a Jesuit did teach him these
lessons, which made him resolve to kill the king. Yea and that the father and
sisters of the young man with tears and bitter terms detesting the Jesuits
did declare further that it might appear to posterity, that this was the
doctrine of Jesuits, that they taught the said Chastell, a pillar was set up
in the place, where this desperate murderer and parricide dwelt, testifying the
same, and mentioning that this was the cause of their expulsion out of France.
In that Monument the Jesuits are called Mali magistri, and their college
Schola impia, and their religion called Noua and malefica superstitio. Further
the Jesuits in a certain apology published presently upon their expulsion
out of France, do not deny John Chastels attempt to be lawful or contrary to
canons, but rather conformable unto them; and that they endeavor to prove by
Sixtus Quintus his bull against the king, and refute the sentence of the court
against the said Chastel, as unjust.

He proceeds further in clearing the Jesuits and says, That John Garet
Chastels master being tortured denied, that the Jesuits were privy to this
fact, and that thereupon by public testimony of the magistrate he was declared
innocent. Wherein he declares himself very impudent, howsoever the other was
declared innocent. for I have showed before by diverse arguments, that the
Jesuits were both privy to this fact, and did publicly defend the doctrine.
Nay the Of the parliament of Paris.
register, wherein his confession is recorded, and the sentence of the court
does declare, that the said Garet being a Jesuit was the teacher of that
wicked doctrine, which Chastell meant to execute, and therefore by public
sentence Was he banished France, and his goods confiscated. Let it then be
considered, with what conscience this worthy Warder affirms, that Garet was
declared innocent by the magistrate.

He says also, That John Ghineard Jesuit was put to death for that in his
study this question, Whether it be lawful in any case to kill a tyrant, was
found disputed on both sides without resolution. But the In the process
against Ghineard.
register of the court of parliament of Paris does convince his impudent lying.
For there it is testified, that The said Ghineard was found seized of diverse
books composed by him, and written with his own hand containing the
approbation of the inhumane murder of Henry the third. Beside that the court of
Parliament of Paris enioined him to confess, That he had wickedly spoken, and
determined, that if Henry the fourth was not slain in the wars, he must be
slain otherwise. Finally his own hand writing, which he acknowledged upon
his examination does show, that he did not only propound the question in
Thesi, but resolved it in Hypothesi.

Neither does our adversary doubt to accuse the Parliament of Paris of great
injustice for executing the said Ghineard, Seeing he said no more, then
Thomas, Caietan, Sotus, and other scholasticall divines, and Philosophers in
times past. As if scholasticall divinity, and Philosophers fancies were
warrant sufficient for men to kill princes, or for Christians to attempt any
thing. Beside that, the case of the Jesuits, and of ancient writers is diverse.
These only think it lawful to kill such tyrants, as by oppression and force
invade a kingdom. The Jesuits account all tyrants, that resist the popes
tyranny, and are by him excommunicate. Old writers, for the most part, speak
in Thesi against usurpers. But Ghineard the Jesuit spoke in Hypothesi, and
determined, In papers of Ghineard.
That it was lawful to kill Henry the 3. and Henry the 4. which all the world
acknowledges to be lawful kings, the popish faction only excepted. The fact
of James Clement, that murdered Henry the third, this Ghineard calls
Heroical, and a gift of gods spirit. Speaking of king Henry the fourth he
says thus, If he die not in the wars, let him be slain some otherways.

Having done with the Jesuits of France, he goes about to answer for the
Jesuits of Doway and the low countries, that, as Peter Pan confessed
himself, Persuaded and hired, and furnished him with a knife to kill Count
Morice. And this action he calls a fiction, denying that ever the Jesuits
had any such intention. But the matter is all too plain to be faced out with
flearing words. The poor man was taken seized with a strange fashioned knife.
being examined he voluntarily confessed both his own fault, and by whom he
was induced to do that wicked act. He continued in his confession, and was
executed for his treason at Leyden. The magistrates of Leyden do testify so
much, and there is no cause, why any part of this narration should seem
untrue. For no man has reason to accuse himself, or others unjustly,
especially where it goes upon the peril of a man's life. Nor is it likely,
that any should suffer death for matter feined, and supposed, and without
proof. Certes, if any doubted of the matter before, Sica tragica.
Costers and this Noddies defense is so simple, that it may greatly confirm
him in this truth. They allege certificates to disprooue Peter Pannes
confession. But what credit can such writings deserve, that may be forged,
for any thing we know, and being admitted to have been written, yet appear
to have been extorted by the Jesuits, and made by men favoring their
faction? Beside that they seem to be granted without due proof, and
proceeding, and yet neither conclude against Peter Pan, nor his confession.
First it is alleged, That he was no papist at all. But that is a fiction
without all color. For why should not he be reputed a papiste, that was
continually among them, and never had taste of any other religion? Secondly our
adversary says, He was a drunken, vagrant and mad fellow. As if he were not
therefore more likely to enterprise such a made action. He tells us further,
That Peter Pan was a man extremely well affected to Count Morice. But how
can this be proved, seeing it appears by the process made against him,
that he neither knew him, nor ever had seen him before his coming into
Holland? Is it not extreme folly to imagine any such extremity of affection
without cause or proof? Fourthly he would bear us in hand, That the Jesuits
had no cause to desire Count Morice his death. Why then did the Jesuits seek
his fathers death, and persuade men to kill the Queen of England, and the
French king? Do not men of every faction desire those taken out of the way,
that are opposite to their designs? Fifthly he denies, that Peter Pan ever
provided butter for the college of Jesuits, as is contained in Peter Pannes
confession. But what reason had he to confess it, if the matter were not
true? These fellows have reason to deny it for their own credit. He
denies also, That the Jesuits had any servant called Melchior du Val. But
that is not material, seeing there are few Jesuits, but they have two or
three names, and it may be, that this Melchior also going about so wicked a
purpose, changed his name. Further he says, That there was never any speech
had with Peter Pannes wife in Ipres about this matter, and denies that ever
she had any acquaintance with any Jesuit. But he must be very well
acquainted with her, that knew both what she did, and what she said, and
what not. This Noddy, if he had been wise, would have alleged some reason
of his saying. His companion Sica tragica.
Costerus for proof alleges her examination. But how should we believe,
that ever she was duly examined, or that she said, as is alleged? Again
if being induced by Jesuits, she should speak any such thing: yet who
would not rather believe her husband vttring matter against himself, then
such a light huswife speaking untruth without danger, or controlement, and
percase being hired? Lastly whereas Peter Pan confessed, That in the
rogation week next before, he talked with the provincial, and others of the
college of Jesuits at Doway; and told, that they promised him reward in earth
and bliss in heaven for executing that act; this discourser tells us, That
the Provincial that week was 60. miles from Doway, and that there passed no
such conference with Peter Pan. And this he says Is proved by witnesses,
and certified by cacolike magistrates. But he should have understood, that
witnesses examined in the absence of parties, and percase neither sworn, nor
duly examined, prove nothing. Beside that, we have good cause to except
against such judges, and such witnesses, as our professed enemies do choose,
and produce. But suppose all their relation were true; yet such certificates
prove nothing, but that Peter Pan either mistook the names, or qualities of
some persons named in his examinations: and it may be, that the Jesuits made
him believe, he was brought to the provincial and chief of the college, when
he was only before some other base companion of that society. That he
should charge the Jesuits wrongfully being to die presently, it cannot be
presumed. Neither is it strange for Jesuits to work cunningly and underhand
in these cases, that when they come to light, may prove so odious.

This Noddie therefore was not wise to say, What has been found against the
Jesuits? or to wish, that it may be laid open to the world: which words
Apologet. c. 8.
Tertullian used in the defense of Christians in his time. For we have found
matter sufficient against them, and little has he alleged in their defense,
which we have not avoided. Moreover we do not read, that Christians in
Tertullians time taught this omnipotent power of the pope, which the Jesuits
defend; nor believed, that all that would not submit themselves to his
jurisdiction, should be slain. Among them certes there were no assassinors,
and murderers of kings, nor practisers against princes states; nor such proud
and cruel sectaries, as are the Jesuits. And albeit Jesuits eat no
children, which crime was imputed to ancient Christians, yet they have
occasioned the death of millions of men, women, and children, that in the
stirs and tumults raised by them, have perished: and daily more and more
matter we find against them.

Further, he would have such, As have abandoned the society of Jesuits, to
be examined what they have heard, and seen during the time when they abode
among them. Which to gratify him, we have done, and in one Histor. Jesuit.
Hazenmyller and Paul Floren Colloq. Jesuit.
and Simon Lith, we find that they are the corrupters of religion, the
firebrands of sedition, perturbers of Christian commonwealths, and the ruin
of Christendom. In outward semblant they are sheep, but inwardly they are
goats, or rather woolues. They profess poverty and chastity, but abound in
wealth, and live licenciously and wantonly. They take to themselves the name of
Jesuits, but are the only vpholders of antichrists kingdom. And if they will
not believe them which have left them and their society; let them listen a
little, what some of their own friends report of them. One John Cecil a popish
priest in his Discovery of errors committed by William Criton Jesuit, Fol. 14.
says, That his practices made many widows and orphans in Scotland; Fol. 16.
and that he was taken with plats for the invasion of England. He charge
him with Fol. 10.
Machiuilian practices, Fol. 4.
making satirs and pasquinadoes, Fol. 27.
and irreligious and unconscionable calumnies. And finally he calls the
Jesuits Fol. 18.
turbulent spirits. and says they hinder the popes cause with their Libels,
schisms sedition and plots of invasion.

Another priest In his discovery of Dolmans conference, P. 6.
charge Parsons directly with A practice and confederacy against the blood
royal, and says, P. 12.
That his drift is to disinherite true heirs, to alter the common laws, and
to bring in strangers into England: P. 19.
yea to bring in mischiefs on mischiefs, and P. 33.
civil war. Finally he P. 70.
charge him with monstrous absurdities and blasphemies against kings: and P.
43.
says That he calls her Majesty's title in question, and that the Jesuits
have made diverse practices against her. Thus while traitors fall out, true men
come to understand the truth.

This discourser tells us, That the chastity of Jesuits must imitate the
purity of angels. But unless by angels he understand wicked angels and
devils, the Jesuits will come far short of their example, which they propose
to themselves to imitate. The angels of God certes neither burn in lust, nor
abandon themselves to the delites of the world. He says further, That they
should abhor all those things, which the world does love and esteem. But
that is nothing else, but a sentence of condemnation against the whole society
of Jesuits, that so much loves the world, and delights in honors,
pleasures, large palaces, goodly gardens, pleasant fountains, good furniture
of household, abundance of dainty viandes, rich clothes, and such like
worldly vanities. After this he runs into a large discourse of the
martyrdomes, and voluntary suffringes of the Jesuits in the Indies, purposing
percase, if any entend to trace him in his lying, to make him travel a great
journey. But suppose they should suffer death and tortures, yet that is a
matter common to them, and to rebels, traitors, malefactors; yea to such as
fall into the hand of barbarous people, that respect not whom they massacre.
Ghineard in France, and Campian and other Jesuits in England have suffered, but
See the conclusion of the 4. encounters ensuing.
not for the testimony of truth. Evil therefore are those words of Iustine
apolog. 1. concerning the patient suffering of Christians applied to Jesuits,
that are neither martyrs, nor good Christians, nor suffer for other cause, but
their offenses; and that most unwillingly, and impatiently, as by Campian and
by diverse examples may be proved. The comparison likewise betwixt the first
Christians, that were charged to be Syluestres and Syluicolae, and the
Jesuits, is most improper. For Jesuits neither live in woods, nor holes, as
did the first Christians, but in princely palaces, and kings courts, and in
the press of people. Neither are they retired for meditation, but run
disguised over the world, and thrust themselves into all companies, to
practice them wicked treasons, and to execute their holy fathers
desseignements.

He braggeth very much of the Jesuits teaching and of their reading arts,
toongs, and sciences. As if arts, toongs, and sciences were not as well taught
before the name of this sect was heard of, and shall not be so again, when
the whole order of them shall be extinguished. As for their teaching, it should
be much more commendable, if with truth and knowledge they did not mingle
falshoode, heresy, and poison; and their toongs were more to be esteemed, if
they did not teach them to spread lies and slanders. But whatsoever their
teaching is, they enter upon the pastors office, and intrude themselves into it
without commission and authority. Nay they enter by other ways then the door,
and in the fold make havoc of Christ's lambs.

He compares them also to saint 1. Cor. 15.
Paul, that says, Abundantius omnibus laboraui; and to the rest of the most
holy apostles. Nay in the end he doubts not to justify the turbulent
proceedings of the Jesuits, by the example of Christ Jesus, who was charged
with troubling the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, as he
says. but the difference and odds is so great, as may make a man wonder, why
he compared things so unlike together. The apostles were makers of peace, most
humble and meek men, true disciples of Christ, and most painful laborers in
planting true religion, and drawing men to Christ. But these false apostles are
sowers of sedition, trumpets of war, proud braggers and boasters of their
angelical holiness painful labors, and profound learning; conterfect
Christians and true disciples of Satan. Painful laborers, but to overthrow
rather then to build; to draw men to antichrist, and not to Christ; not
seeking to win souls by teaching the means of salvation, but to destroy
souls by teaching false doctrine, vain traditions, and by bringing men into
the thraldom of antichrist. Christ and his apostles were accused most
unjustly. These most justly, as has been verified. Christ made a division in
the world, making good of bad, and separating the good from the bad. But the
Jesuits make of good, bad; and set division where there was peace before, as
appears by their whole proceeding. Yea and our adversary confesses, that of
cold cacolikes, they make hot recusants. Therefore may they be justly called
Rerump. incendiarij, that is burners of commonwealths, and firebrarnds of
Satan, that of good subjects by their reconcilements make seditious leaguers,
desperate murderers, busy practisers and perturbers of states.

But P. 69.
says he, It appears not, that the Jesuits have sought her Majesty's blood;
especially not Parsons, that was never accused by Parry, Savage, Ballard,
Babington, Hesket, Daniel, Polwhele or others. As if any thing could appear
more clear, then the murderous mind of Jesuits, both against al princes
excommunicate by the pope, and namely against her Majesty. Do they not teach,
that the subjects are to rise against their princes, when the pope
commands? Did not Ghineard resolve, that it was lawful to kill princes
excommunicate by the pope? And was not he therefore executed at Paris anno
1594. And have not diverse Jesuits sent men over into England, and persuaded
them to murder her Majesty? And have not diverse witnesses testified so much,
as before has been declared? And has not Ribadineira or rather a ribaldy
lying friar, a Portingale Jesuit by all means This Ribald has set out
Sanders book of schism in Spanish with many additions, and falsification^.
sought to dishonor her Majesty, to stir her subjects, to seek her
overthrow in his most slanderous book of schism? Finally we must not think,
that the Jesuits have had either other purpose, or desire this many years,
then to stir up sedition and wars against her, and to bring the realm
under the pope and Spanyard, whom they serve; which cannot be done without the
destruction of her person, and the desolation of this realm.

Neither may we think, that Parsons the Jesuit, albeit for some purpose,
percase, he has kept himself from open managing of treasons, is better
disposed toward her Majesty, and the state, then the rest of his companions.
For all Jesuits allow the popes power in deposing princes, which cannot be
without their destruction. Yea and Parsons himself has not dealt so closely,
but that there are many great and evident proofs of his disloyalty and
treachery. For not only the book set out under the name of Dolman concerning
the succession to the crown of England is his; but also diverse other Andreas
Philopater: Leycesters common wealth, a confutation of causes. etc.
treasonable books and pamphlets, whereby he goes about, not only to stir
up troubles in England, but also to convey the title of the crown to the
infant of Spain, and to bring in strangers: for which he is reproved by a
certain popish priest not altogether so lewd as himself in a Page 12. and
passim.
treatise printed at Collen anno 1600. and entitled, A discovery of a
counterfeit conference, etc. Published by one Parson, that dare not auow his
name. Yea and so far has he intricated himself in these matters, that the
general of the Jesuits is ashamed of him, and has therefore called him out
of Spain, and made him rector of boy-priests in the English college at Rome;
as being a person blotted with notorious treasons. Secondly in this treatise,
which is either Parsons his devise, or at least allowed by Parsons, not only
the cause of rebels and traitors, that have sought to destroy her Majesty, is
pleaded, but also the fact of Ghineard the Jesuit, that expresty His notes
appear in the registre of the court of parliament of Paris, and in the sixth
recueil of matters of the league.
determined, That Henry the third of France was justly slain, and that
tyrants (in which degree he puts all princes excommunicate by the pope) may
lawfully by any be slain. Thirdly he is a factor for the pope and Spaniard
now professed enemies of her Majesty, and this kingdom. And all the world
knows, that they have nothing more in their vows, then her Majesty's ruin.
Fourthly he is a Jesuit, whose oath and profession is to do whatsoever his
superior commands. If then the pope command, as no doubt, but he has and
will, there is no question, but he must also come together with his consorts,
and with fire and sword oppugn this land, and destroy the prince. Fifthly it
is ridiculous to dispute of his intention, when we may see his hostile and
traytorous mind by his actions. He has abandoned his prince and country, he
adhereth to her Majesty's professed enemies. In times past he and Campian came
into this country with instructions and authority from public enemies, with a
resolution to see the popes pleasure executed, and to make a side for his holy
father. Let him deny any part of this, if he can. Nay let him but answer
first whether he brought not a faculty from the pope giving leave to papists to
obey her Majesty, so long as the state stood in terms, as then it did: and
until the popes bull could be executed: and next, whether the popes sentence
being declared and published, he and all papists were not purposed, and bound
to do their worst against her. Sixthly, he was among the Spanyardes, that in the
year 1588, came in hostile array to cut her Majesty's throat, and to destroy
her people, if they had could. Lastly he allows the doings of Cardinal
Allen, that the same time stirred up all papists to lay hands on her Majesty,
and persuaded them to take arms against her, and to assist the Spaniards. He
also knew a certain Englishman, that came into England, with full resolution
to murder her Majesty, and never revealed so much. If then he take the Queen
for his mother, and the mother of her country, as this discourser signifies,
then must Parsons confess, that he is a parricide, that seeks to lay violent
hands upon his mother. And if he call this an odious and heinous crime; as
indeed it is; then is he guilty of a most odious crime, and is a most odious
rebel. This being his charge, let us see his defense. Let the examinations
says he, of Parry, Savage, and such others be viewed over, and see whether
any of them do accuse father Parsons. As if none were guilty of these
treasons, but such as were named by their consorts. Beside that, suppose
Parsons were no open stickler in these actions; yet it is sufficiently known,
that such subtle practisers do deal by second, and third persons. Furthermore
albeit he could clear himself of Parries, Savages, and Ballards treasons;
yet can he not so easily avoid the suspicion of Heskets practice. For he is
charged by A discovery of a counterfeit conference, etc.
one of his own religion, to be a practiser to set a foot the late Earl of
Darbies title, in which Hesket and others were agents. Neither can he answer
his treasonable purpose in Ibidem.
Dolmans book, Where he endeuoreth to convey the crown to strangers; and his
practices with priests come into England to advance the Infantaes title. Nor
can he clear his hands of the most execrable treasons contained in Andreas
Philopaters discourse either written, or published by him and Creswell his
factor in the court of Spain. Secondly he tells us, How Parsons protests,
that he was never guilty, nor privy to any attempt made against her Majesty.
But his own friends, as himself confesses in a letter to be showed, trust
him not, saying he is a Machiuilian. and In the discovery of a counterf^ct
conference p. 34.
one charge him That he uses dissimulation, doubling and redoubling. And
the faction of priests opposite to Jesuits now in England does utterly
condemn the tricks, equivocations, and colored dissimulation of Jesuits, as
is noted in several notes and letters to be showed against them. If then his
own friends trust not his promises, and oaths, how shall we believe his
protestations? Certes he that will most wickedly practice such wicked actions,
he will also boldly deny them. Yea and this foolish Noddy, where he would
clear him, does clearly convict him. For he denies not, but that Parsons was
acquainted with a gentleman's purpose, that resolutely meant either to take away
the Queens life, or to loose his own. So it appears, that such matters are
consulted upon, which is the thing we say; and that Parsons was acquainted
withal, which is by our adversary denied. Indeed, I confess, that we are
told, that Parsons dissuaded the foresaid murdrer. But that are not we
bound to believe. Nay albeit he had so done, yet that is not sufficient, to
excuse him. For such treasons are to be detected, and not only hindered, by
all honest men. Again it may be, that Parsons either in regard of the
gentleman, that should have executed this murder, or because such executions
would bring damage to their cause, and not for love to her Majesty, did
dissuade this shameful murder, and assassinate. For it appears both by his
dealing with Hesket about the Earl of Darby; and also by his practices with
the young priests, that come over out of Spain, for the preferment of the
Infant of Spain to the crown of England; and by his most scandalous writings
under the false names of Dolman and Philopater, which shall be proved to his
face by witness to be his doings, that he seeks nothing more, then her
Majesty's dishonor and destruction. And that in treason he is not inferior to
Allen the Cardinal, or any traitor these many years executed at Tyborne.

Finally he P. 71.
compares her Majesty to Saul, whom God declared unworthy to reign, and
from whom he gave the kingdom to David. Which shows plainly what a leude
conceit this generation has of her Majesty's title, and government. But that
they would spare her, as David spared Saul, is a matter most unlikely. For it
appears, that the pope, and the Jesuits and priests his agents, and al their
consorts have by secret assasinors and empoisoners, and also by open murdrers,
and cutthrotes sought her death and destruction.

And shall such agents of the pope and Spaniard, as these, be still suffered to
live, and be still maintained in diverse principal places of this land to
practice? Shall not we take a course with Jesuits, and priests and their
consorts, that are thus bloodily minded against the prince, and all that love
her, or stand well affected to true religion? Shall we suffer them through
our remissness, or rather stupiditie to make a head, as they have done in
Ireland, where they are the only original causes of the revolt, albeit other
matters are pretended, and so to bring all in combustion here, as they have
done there already? Consider the sequel of these matters, my dear
countrymen, and look well to your own safety. and if you respect not your
selves, nor your own particular; yet have regard to the church of God, and his
true religion, which you profess, and should defend, if you be truly
religious. Respect the honor of your prince, your nation, your country. Will
you abandone your selves to the spoil of proud enemies, that seek your
destruction? Will you give credence to those, that are by the Italian and
Spaniard hired to speak? Behold your wives and children and dearest friends
that depend upon the valor of your hearts? Will you give them as a pray to the
cruel enemies? Represent to your selves the miserable estate of this land, if
once the foreign enemy gets footing. Your laws shall be abolished, your
young men shall be slain, the rest shall be used as slaves to serve the
conquerors pleasure. Who then will not have care to prevent these dangers? Who
will not beware of those false rinegued English fugitives, that seek to bring
these troubles upon us? Who had not rather die, then either suffer, or see
these calamities to happen to his country and nation? In Iuliers, and the
borders of Germany not long since the Spanish soldiers entered as friends; yet
such barbarous cruelties and outrages they committed, that they exceeded all
enemies. How then do you think they would behave themselves, if they should
set foot and begin to domineere in England, that have so rauaged countries,
that either were friends, or neutrales? The only way is to secure your selves
of false hearted Jesuits, priests and their consorts. These Jesuits are
intolerable in states that profess popery, much more therefore ought they to
be suspect and odious to us. The parliament of Paris by a solemn arrest or
decree did Records of parliam. of Paris.
banish the whole society or rather verminaille of Jesuits out of France, As
corrupters of youth, perturbers of public peace, and enemies to the king, and
to the state. The college of divines in Paris by a solemn act of all the
company did condemn this order, as dangerous both to church and common wealth.
Haec societas say the doctors of Sorbone, videtur in negotio fidei periculosa,
pacis ecclesiae perturbatiua, and magis in destructionem, quam aedificationem.
The reasons why they descended to pronounce this hard sentence against them,
deserve much to be considered. The first reason was, Because they admitted
bastardes (a matter much for Parsons his advantage.) the second, For that they
observed no rules of ancient religions, nor canons of the church. The third,
For that they yielded no obedience to ordinaries; the fourth, For that they
deprived as well ecclesiastical Lords, as temporal of their rightes, and
troubled both ecclesiastical and civil policy. The last, For that they
raised diverse quarrels, contentions and schisms among the people. The senate
also of Venice perceiving their encrochements in Padua, The decree of the
senate of Venice.
Forbad the Jesuits to read publicly, and commanded them only to read to
their own society, and that within the walls of their own colleges.
Monsieur de Matignon perceiving, that the Jesuits upon the rising of the
league, or rather rebels, that conspired against king Henry the third, went
about to stir sedition, and to deliver up Bourdeaux to the leaguers, drove
them like a pack of seditious rebels out of the city. For their seditious
and mutinous behavior they were lately expulsed out of Transyluania, and had
been out of Poland, had their side not been stronger. And yet all these that
thus proceeded against them, were men of the same religion, and acknowledged
the authority of the pope. How seriously then ought we to proceed against
them, and their adherentes, that do know not only their treasons and seditious
practices, but also the manifold corruptions and abominations of their
heretical and false doctrine? Shall their own sort and companions drive them
out of their states, and shall any honest man make question, whether it be
lawful to make laws against them, and to proceed against them? Why do we not
look upon Scotland, and see both the mischievous plots of Jesuits there, and
their condign punishments? If that Jesuits and priests had not been suffered
to range up and down Ireland without punishment, neither had this rebellion
been there raised, nor would it so long have continued. And who doubts, but
that this is their deseignement in England, if they may be suffered to execute
it: This I doubt not, but our superiors see, and consider, and will remedy;
and therefore few words may serve. This I thought good to speak to justify
sir Francis Hastings his accusation: and more shall be said, as occasion
serves. Some private men, percase, think the Jesuits to be no such dangerous
beasts, and some stick not to recount many favors done by Parsons to English
prisoners in Spain. But if we consider, that the Jesuits do not suffer any
man of mean spirit to return, before they have either entangled him in some
treacherous practice, or tainted him with the leven of their heresies, or both;
we shall easily perceive, that this mild course and enlargement of prisoners
was rather to work a correspondence with us, and a remissness in our
soldiers, and mariners, that they should not adventure, as in times past,
knowing that they should be sent for England, and also a maine mischief to
the state; then to do our people any favor, or kindness. And thus much of the
Jesuits cruelty and treachery. Of their false doctrine and heresy this Noddy
shall hear sufficiently in some other place.

CHAP. VI.
What is either to be expected, or feared in Recusants and practicing papists:
and what credit is to be given to the adversaries sixth encounter.

ALthough true Christians find small favor, when they come within the danger
of our professed enemies the papists; yet do we not think it fitting to
follow them in their bloody cruelty. Nay we had rather learn of Matthew. 11.
Christ, that was most meek, and gentle as a lamb, then of these savage men,
that in their cruelty exceed woolues, and show themselves most unlike to
Christ, or catholic Christians. God forbid therefore, that we should persuade,
or like any rigorous course to be taken with such papists as offend only of
simplicity, and never knew any other religion but popery; and neither
practice against her Majesty, nor the state, nor true religion, nor adhere to
those that do it. Howbeit, if any abuse their liberty, and this rare clemency
of the state to maintain a faction, and either seek to stir up sedition, or
to oppress true religion, and those that maintain it, or else adhere, receipt,
and favor such: it should not only not savor of clemency to favor such,
but also work a dissolution both of ecclesiastical and civil government, to
suffer them. For to suffer gods worship to be abrogated, and idolatry and
false religion to be established, and Christ's people to be seduced by false
teachers, is plain impiety: to give way to rebellious and seditious practices
against her Majesty, or the state, or to wink at them, or neglect them, is
plain disloialty, and unnatural treachery: to nourish in our bosoms such, as
either would bring in strangers upon us, or else seek opportunity to cut our
throtes themselves, is brutish stupidity.

For the first point we have these reasons First God commands Deuteronomy. 13.
us strictly, that we shall not suffer either prophet or dreamer of dreams to
live, that shall go about to draw us from God to serve other gods. Neither
may we think, that either this law is abrogated standing upon moral equity;
or that the popish friars and priests, that teach the idolatrous worship of
angels, saints, crosses and images, and of their God of the altar, are without
the compass of this law. Secondly Isai. 49.
God appointed Christian princes to be Foster fathers, and Queens to be
nursing mothers to his church. And therefore may they not see either God
dishonored by false religion and idolatry, or true Christians oppressed with
force, or treachery. They carry not the sword for nothing, and God requires
the maintenance of his truth at their hands. He that honoreth me, says the
1. Sam. 2.
Lord, him will I honor; and he that despises me, shall be despised. No
policy therefore will serve, where Gods religion, and his true honor is
little regarded. Thirdly the apostle Romans 16.
would have those That cause divisions and offenses to be marked and avoided;
and 1. Tim. 1.
gives Timothy charge, not to suffer such, as would teach an other doctrine.
How then may they be suffered, that would teach a contrary doctrine to yt of
Christ? Fourthly it was ever the custom of christian princes to punish false
teachers, as appears L. Quicunque Cod. de haeretic.
by the law of Valentinian and Martian emperors. Vltimo supplicio afficiantur,
say the emperors, qui illicita docere tentauerint. And that Hierome writing
upon the fifth to the Galathians does allow, misliking that Arius escaped so
long unpunished. Lastly the adversaries will not suffer true preachers to teach
truth. Why then should their priests and friars be suffered to teach heresy
and falshoode? Will they give law to others, and not endure themselves to be
ordered by law? Nothing can be devised more unreasonable, or more repugnant to
L. 1. ff. quod quisque iuris.
law. Whatsoever liberty therefore is granted to simple people abuse by false
teachers; that concerns Jesuits, priests, and other false teachers nothing.

The second point is proved by laws of nations, and necessary rules of state.
For all nations do punish such as practice against the princes person, and the
security of the state, as offending in the highest degree of treason: and mere
simplicity it is reputed, to suffer any to live in a state, that entendeth, or
practices the destruction of the state. By the 25. Edw. 3.2.
laws of this realm it is accounted treason To compass, or imagine the death
of the prince, or to adhere to his enemies. By the Romayne ff all Iud. m^ (...)
l. ^. 2 3.
laws it was treason, To run to the enemies, to assist them with arms, or
means, or intelligence; and much more to stir up sedition, or to draw
enemies upon the state, or to practice the destruction of it. All which
several laws do show, that it is not possible to maintain this state,
unless such traitors be punished severely, that either attempt against the
princes sacred person, or seek to stir sedition to alter the government, or
that adhere to the pope or Spanyard; or that endeavor to depose the prince from
her government, and to overthrow this state; or that intertaine intelligence
with foreign enemies; or that are either ayders or abettors, or allowers of
any such acts, or treasons. Neither is it material, that these practisers, be
they Jesuits, priests, or whatsoever else, do pretend a certain kind of
religion, seeing their end is war and rebellion; their means, faction and
division; and their maintayners, and vpholders, public enemies of the prince
and state.

The third point is taught us by the instinct of nature. For even light of
nature shows every living creature, how to provide for his own safety, and
to decline and avoid such things, as may seem hurtful. And reason teaches
man to draw himself into some society, and common wealth, whereby he may be in
safety from his enemies. For this cause every man, that is not transported with
strange passion loves to live under law and government, and to hate those,
that would dissolve laws and lawful government. Howsoever then we favor
seduced papists, yet unless we will show our selves deuoide of natural
reason, we may not show our selves negligent in seeking the safety of our
selves, and the mainteinance of laws, and government, wherein our safety in
part consists. We may not neglect the safety of those, that depend upon us:
but every man according to his place is to resist such, as seek our lives, and
the lives of those, that are committed to us, or do depend upon us.

In these three points or any of them it is not lawful to offend by any law.
The papists, I think, will not say, that any man, that either teaches false
religion, or practices against the prince or state, or by sedition seeks to
hurt his countrymen, and to murder them, is to escape unpunished. Wherefore
then should they mislike any, that teaches, that such offenders are to be
punished? If, I say, all were punished within these cases, yet were it good
justice, and very necessary.

Howbeit such is the clemency of her Majesty's government, that she spares
Jesuits, priests, and such false teachers (as some think) but too much.
Obstinate recusants if they be not taken in some practice of treason, are not
in danger either of life, or lands, or liberty: they are not banished, nor
rigorously punished. Nay their only punishment is a pecuniary mulct, and that
of few exacted. The poorer sort escape almost without punishment: the richer do
avoid the punishment by traversing the enditement. In Spain and Italy our
brethren would account such punishments great favor.

Wherefore seeing this Noddy our adversary knows the rigor of popish
inquisitors against true Christians, and by this may well perceive her
Majesty's great clemency extended, not only to quiet papists, that live
private without scandale, but also to obstinate and factious recusantes, yea
and to notorious traitors; he was not wise either to challenge his adversary
for speaking of Recusants so moderately, or to accuse this state of injustice,
that shows such extraordinary favor toward them, that so little deserve it.

He charge his adversary With playing the Herodian, because he says, that
diverse Recusants under a visor of civil honesty do cover disloyal hearts. But
if he had done him right, he should rather have thanked him for commending
their civil carriage, which is more then their insolency of late much
increased, deserves. That it is true, which sir Francis Hastings affirms, if
his face were not armed with a visor of impudency, he would not have denied.
Both reason and experience does teach it to be most true. For if he be a
true papist, then must he live in subjection to the pope, and acknowledge his
authority. C. vnam. extr. de Mayor. and Obed.
Boniface the eight teaches, That it is a point necessary to salvation, to
be under the pope. De ecclesia militante. c. 2.
Bellarmine holds him out of the church, that is not under the popes
obedience. Nostra sententia est, says he, ecclesiam vnam and veram esse caetum
hominum eiusdem christianae fidei professione, and eorundem sacramentorum
communione colligatum sub regimine legitimorum pastorum, ac praecipue vnius
Christi in terris vicarij Romani Pontificis. This is likewise Turrians, and
Stapletons opinion. If then a papist or cacolik must needs obey the pope, then
must he necessarily both allow his sentence of excommunication against the
Queen, and join with him in deposing her, or else they are no parts of the
Romish church. But if they shall either so think, or do; they can be no true
subjects. Secondly Lib 2. de Pontif. Romans
Bellarmine teaches, that it is a matter of faith, To believe that the pope by
Christ's ordinance has succeeded Peter in the universal government of the
church. But he that believes so much, as all papists are bound to do, cannot
acknowledge the princes royal authority in ecclesiastical causes, nor
exclude the pope from it, and per consequent, must needs be but a sorry
subject to her Majesty. Thirdly all papists are Bellar. lib 4. de Pontif. Romans
bound to believe, That the popes sentence in matters of faith is infallible,
and that, what he judges, is done by Christ's authority, in whose tribunal
seat he pretends to sit. Necessary it is therefore, that all papists allow
the popes sentence of deposition against her Majesty. If they deny it, they
are not of the right touch of papists: if they grant it, they are evil
qualified subjects. But what shall we need arguments to prove this, when as
experience does evidently prove it unto us? Is it not apparent, how little
reason her Majesty has to trust them? In the beginning of her reign the
popish prelates refused to crown her, one only excepted. Afterward the popish
clergy for the most part fled out of the land, and left her. By their
solicitation, the pope began to stir against her. Presently upon his
excommunication the rebellion began in the north. These kind of men stirred up
diverse rebellions in Ireland. Neither have they ceased at any time, to
enterprise either one devise, or other to hurt us here in England. Sir Francis
therefore does greatly diminish their deserts, and spare them where he says
only, They have deceitful hearts. And most favorably does the state deal
with them, for refusing to come to church to serve God, seeing their consorts
do burn and murder godly men, for not coming to their idolatrous service, and
abominable mass.

He calls those, that refuse to go to our churches, The better and more
religious sort of catholics. But he is not of God, that refuses to hear his
word. Neither are they to be termed catholics, that have a private religion
to themselves devised by the pope, nor are they truly religious, that
understand not the principles of Christian faith, nor will receive true
wholesome and apostolic doctrine. Now if any desire to know what they are; by
the marks of Antichrist in their whole life, and profession he may understand
it.

Where it is said, that some papists Show forth a good outward civil
carriage, this Noddy wisely concludes, That sir Francis makes light of good
life, and thereupon takes occasion to run out into a common place of good
works. But here was no place for him to try his skill. For sir Francis does
neither condemn good works, nor good life, but rather the hypocritical show
of both, where indeed neither is to be found. Nay poor souls, the papists
do not so much, as understand, what works are good, what not. They say their
Oraisons, and Credo, and Aue Maria in Latin; and understand not, what they say.
They creep to the cross and kiss it. On fridaies they eat fish, and
abstain from white meats in lent. They cross themselves, confess their
faults in the priests ear, put on hair cloth, and follow such like fancies;
refusing to hear true doctrine, and Gods truth. And Matthew. 15. and 23.
So they make frustrate Gods commandments by their own traditions. Nay
sometime they rebel against their lawful princes, and murder Gods saints, and
blaspheme his truth; and yet think they do God good service, when most
plainly they transgress his laws. As for our selves, albeit we do not
attribute merit or justification to works; yet we exhort all men to show
forth their faith by their works, and to lead a holy life according to their
holy profession. Neither are we so barren of good works, but that we dare
compare either with the glorious Jesuits, or with the most perfect men of the
popish faction: or with their most holy popes.

As for Recusantes I know no works they do, but such, as if they were wise,
they would be ashamed of them. Sir Francis Hastings, as a true and honest
patriote, and like a religious gentleman, notes three points in Recusantes
worthy consideration. The first is The hurt they do, the second is The hurt
they would do, if they were not restrained, the third is, Their deep
dissimulatio^. He might also have noted ye hurts, which already they have
done, and join their lewd opinions with their wicked actions. And vary every
several point with manifold arguments, and examples. But this which he has
already brought is more, then our adversary does well answer. Nay he
answers almost nothing, unless we take gibes and scornful reproaches for
payment. Where sir Francis says, That the yoonger steer learneth of the elder
ox; He says, It is a verse drawn from his plow, and stall of oxen. As if it
were not lawful and usual by natural similitudes to express things moral,
or as if his holy S. Thomas did not sometimes draw similitudes from oxen and
asses. It is written in I^b. 1.
Job, That the oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding by them. That is, as he
2. 2. q. 2. art. 6. and Gregor. moral. 2.
supposes, The ruder and inferior sort of people, which are represented by
asses, must believe as their prelates do, which are signified by oxen. The
similitude used by sir Francis is very fit. For commonly Recusants are as rude
as oxen and steeres, and as the Psalmist says, Understand no more then does
horse or mule. Nay as it is in the first of Esaie, The ox knows his owner,
and the ass his masters cribbe; but these ignorant Recusants know not their
God, but for their gods adore angels, and saints, yea stocks and stones,
understanding no more what they pray, then do oxen and calves. Beside that the
confessors and young priests are so familiar with their wives, that they are
made liker oxen, then lions. But this idle vagabond friar, that lives idly
upon the sweat of other men's brows and disdeineth to labor, scorneth al
husbandry, and honest travail. So strange is their doctrine, that they would
alter not only Christ's religion, but also rules of state, and household.

Where sir Francis tells us, That he knows by experience, what hurt women's
persuasions have done in hardening their husbands hearts in matters of religion,
and says, That the night crows persuasion prevails much. He gibeth at the
term of Night crows, and charge the knight with Playing the part either of
Judas to betray Recusants, or of Pilate to condemn them, or afflict them. But
first there is great odds betwixt the recusants, that have nothing either of
Christ, or of good christians, but the bare name; and Christ Jesus our savior.
He refused not to come into the temple though abused, nor sought to betray his
nation into the hands of high priests, and foreign enemies. These refuse to
come to Gods church, and are the high priests of Romes servants, and many of
them have too great affection to foreign enemies. Secondly evil do our
Justices deserve these reproachful terms of Judas, and Pilate for dealing
against evil affected subjects, Justices and other her Majesty's officers
stirred up to do their duties against priests and recusants, by the reproaches
of the adversary.
and worse affected Christians; and may learn to execute the laws more
exactly, seeing for their remissness they are called carpet knights, and for
doing nothing railed at, as if they were as evil as Judas, or Pilate. In the
mean while we give this Noddy to understand, that his consorts may much
better be termed Pilates, that murder Christ in his members, and condemn
infinite innocent Christians; and therefore in the end they are to look for
the end of Pilate. The Recusants likewise may rightly be resembled to Judas,
that would so willingly betraie their masters brethren, and their own
friends and countrymen. And it is no new thing for sacrificing priests, that
continually betray and kill or immolate Christ, as they say, to be called
Iudasses. 4. Brig. 133. and onus eccles. c. 23.
Bridget says, they are worse then Judas. Corpus meum, says Christ in
Brigits prophesies speaking of priests, amarius crucifigunt, quam Iudaei. And
again, Maledicti sacerdotes ad me simulatorie accedunt quafi proditores.
Thirdly most true it is, that simple men are often misledde by the subtle
persuasions of peevish women. And therefore may they well be resembled to black
night crows, that are still croking in their husbands ears, and entising them
both to opinions and works of darkness. Beside this these nightcrowes are too
familiar oftentimes with night walking priests and Jesuits, that teach them
new fashions of shrift, and draw them into evil opinions, and dangerous
practices. In Venice they encroched so far upon the women's favor, that their
husbands forbad them to come any more near the Jesuits. Like favor have the
Jesuits obtained at the hands of the goodwiues of Milan. By means of the
wives of Friburge the Jesuits attempted to set dissension betwixt the Cantons
of Suizzerland. We may not therefore think it strange, if treacherous priests
work their feats by the means of women.

Where it is said, that by the lewd persuasions of Recusant women many fall
away, our adversary asks, Whether they fall to enormitie of sin, or
wickedness of life. As if the Recusants were such saints, that they could not
fall to sin, or wickedness. Certes the common opinion is otherwise. For
commonly Recusants make lechery and ribaldrie to be no great sin. And their
women make it more nice to go to Gods church, then to go to strangers beds. It
is well known, that papists allow of bordels, and C. at si clerici. De iudi
ijs.
account adultery and fornication small faults, and easily they dispense with
them. Herein England the priests corrupted the Gailors daughter of Wisbich,
and another priest ran away with one of Bellamies maids. Nay there is a
priest in England, that confessed how he shriued few women, but he lay with
them. And yet the simple Recusants neither feel their own shame, nor provide
remedy against these priests of Baal. Beside that, Recusants are often drawn
into strange and disloial practices, as appears by the examples of Arden, and
Someruil, Babington, Tichborne and many others. But to omit filthiness of life
and treachery; it is fall great enough, that simple men often by lewd persuasions
fall into the errors and heresies of popery, so many and so grievous; that
popery, as it contains novelties above the doctrine which we profess, is
nothing but a pack of heresies: as we shall particularly show hereafter.

But says the discourser, They are catholics, and have a scruple to go to the
Protestants churches, because they think their religion is naught. And
thereupon he concludes, That religion and conscience is cause of their
refusal, and not evil will or rebellion. But the poor idiots are much
abused, where they are persuaded that either their own religion is catholic,
or that ours is not catholic. This is a common song, which the popish priests
sing in their ears, but the note is iarring, and the dittie can never be
proved. Catholic religion was that which the apostles taught generally
throughout the world; and that is the religion which we profess in our
Creed, and find written in holy scriptures. All which we hold, and refuse
all doctrine contrary to the same. But the papists in their schoolemens
commentaries and popish decretals, and wicked missals and portuises, and such
like books of Romish devotion, have brought in, not only a faith diverse from
the apostolic, and catholic faith, but also contrary to the same. Much
therefore do we pity the blindness of Recusants, that not only shut their
eyes against the light, and condemn that for heresy, which indeed is truly
catholic, but also embrace falsehood and heresies for true religion,
worshipping angels, saints, and the virgin Marie, yea stocks, rotten bones
and rags, in stead of one true God, and embracing antichrist in stead of
Christ. And all this they do, building themselves and their religion either
upon lying legends, or popish decretals, or uncertain customs never used in
the catholic church. So that herein there is neither one scrpule of true
religion, nor any dram of conscience, but only blindness and wilfulness,
of which afterward ensues unnatural unkindness toward their prince and
country, and wicked practices hurtful to themselves and their dearest friends
and countrymen. Neither can it excuse them, That they are so persuaded in their
conscience. For all conscience ought to be grounded on right reason, and not
upon this, or that fancy. Therefore the Thomas aq. 1. p. q. 79. art. 12. and
Siluest. in verb. conscientia.
schoolmen say, Quod conscientia est actus synteresis. But this synteresis is
nothing, but a faculty of the mind, wherein are principles naturally known
preserved. Saint Lib. 2. de lib. arb. c. 10.
Augustine says Quod in naturali iudicatorio adsunt quaedam regulae, and
semina virtutum, and vera and incommutabilia: which are the grounds whereby
conscience concludes. And this properly is conscience. But there is also
another conscience, when we conclude not from the light of natural reason,
but from the knowledge of Gods word. And this conscience concluding from rules
of true religion is most resolutely to be followed. But if it conclude
otherwise, it is no conscience, but rather an opinion and fancy, and private
humor, and pretense of conscience.

But says this discourser, A man is to follow his conscience, though it do
err, and afterward he tells us, That an erroneous conscience does both
bind, and excuse: and this he goes about to prove, and maintain. But his
dispute of conscience is such, as he shows himself to be ignorant both of
reason, divinity, and conscience; and that he knows neither what is truth,
nor what his own consorts teach. That an erroneous conscience is not to be
followed, it is apparent, for that our conscience is not a rule of our actions,
but the law of God. For that is A lantern to our feet, and a light to our
paths. And In 2. sent. did. 39.
Thomas Aquinas does in express terms determine, Quod conscientia non ligat,
vel obligat virtute propria, sed aliena, id est praecepti diuini. So that it
always tieth us to the law, and not against the law. Secondly it is the law,
that teaches us what is sin, and what is not sin, Ex lege says the
apostle, cognitio peccati And sin is defined by saint John, to be a
transgrestion of the law. So that the law must bind the conscience, and not
conscience dissolve law. Thirdly grant this, that an erroneous conscience is to
be followed, and then it will follow, that idolaters are to worship idols, and
heretics to continue in their errors, and Mahometans to follow the impieties
of Mahomet, for that the conscience of every of these erring, does persuade
them, that they are in the right. Lastly if an erroneous conscience be to be
followed, then were not an erroneous conscience to be changed, but we were
still to continue in error. But contrary to this do schoolmen determine.
Quaeritur, says Sum. Syluest. in verb. Conscientia.
Syluester Prierius, vtrum homo teneatur erreneam conscientiam deponere, and to
this question he answers, quod tenetur.

That an erroneous conscience should excuse any, is yet more absurd. For first
we are not to be judged according to our opinion of matters, but according to
Gods law. Secondly if every man were to be excused upon his own persuasion,
then neither should idolaters, turks, nor heretics be condemned. Thirdly 1.
2. q 19. art. 6.
Thomas Aquinas does determine, that an erring conscience excuses not:
Voluntas says he, Concordans rationi erranti potest esse mala. To conclude
this point, the same is proved by reason. For if a conscience erring excuse,
then if a man should think he might do well to kill his friend, or brother, or
to betray his country; he were to be excused.

That an erroneous conscience binds not us, to believe that which we think
to be true, and is not, nor to do that which we think to be good, and is not;
is proved, for that, if this were granted, diverse inconveniences would ensue.
For then it should follow, that the Turks that are persuaded in their
conscience, that it is not good to believe in Christ, were bound not to believe
in Christ, and that such as in their consciences are persuaded to kill any
body, or to commit any flagitious act, are bound to do it; and finally our
consciences and private opinions should be the rule of our actions, and not the
law of God.

Neither are our adversaries reasons of any force to conclude ye contrary. He
says first, that our conscience is nothing, but the determination of our
reason about matters to be done or not to be done. But his definition is very
imperfect, for conscience as well concerns belief, as action. Beside it
concerns things past, as well as to come, as his own school doctors could
teach him, if he had read them. Thirdly it is not properly the determination of
every man's own reason, but of true reason according to the general rules,
that are kept in Synterest, and (if we understand conscience generally)
according to the rules either of Gods law, or the gospel. Lastly albeit
conscience is the determination of reason, yet are we not bound to follow that
reason, be it right or wrong, as he does thereof infer; but rather we are
bound to change our erroneous conscience, and to learn what the law of God is,
that we may only believe and do that is right, and avoid the contrary. And
this law is such, that every one is bound to take notice of it; so that he
cannot pretend ignorance, or that he has no light, but the light of his own
blind reason.

He says further, That the quality of man's will is measured according to the
object, that moves the will: as for example, says he, He that thinks he
kills his enemy, when he hitteth a beast in a bush, sins. But while he
thinks he speaks like a schooleman, and a great clerk, he speaks, if not
like a beast in a bush, yet like a weak divine. For first there is great
difference betwixt the will and the conscience, and therefore his purpose of
will, fitteth not the matter in hand, that concerns conscience: neither does
the example fit the resolution of conscience, being only concerning the
purpose of a man's will, that binds according to the fact intended, albeit the
effect ensue not. Again if by this example he be able to prove, that a wrong
conscience is to be followed, then might a man lawfully shoot at his enemy in a
bush, like a fox, because his erroneous will, or as this Noddy terms it
conscience leads him unto it. Finally Thomas 1. 2. q. 19. art. 6.
Aquinas does teach direct contrary, viz, That a man's will agreeing with a
false reason or ground may be naught.

Thirdly he alleges out of Saint Paul. Romans 14. and 1. Cor. 8. That to eat
meat sacrificed to idols, simply without enquiring, whether it was such meat or
no, is no sin. But this is nothing to our question, that is about an
erroneous conscience. For he that eats such meats simply, seems to make no
conscience of that matter. And albeit Saint Paul condemns him that eats
such sacrificed meat contrary to conscience; yet does he not speak of a man's
own conscience, but of an other man's conscience. Conscientiam, 1. Cor. 10.
says he, dico non tuam, sed alterius. and Romans 14. he says, it is good not
to eat or to drink any thing, wherein our brother may be offended. Again
there is great difference betwixt him, that makes a conscience to abstain
from things in themselves not simply unlawful, and him that resolves to do
things unlawful, or to leave things commanded undone. The apostle speaks of
the first, our question is of the second kind of conscience, as is evident by
our adversaries words, who teaches, that if our consciences persuade us to do
any thing; that we are bound to do it, although our reason lead us wrong. Which
is contrary not only to the apostle, but also to the schoolmen. The apostle
says, Whatsoever is not of faith, or a good conscience, is sin. And the
schoolmen teach, as I have showed, that an erroneous conscience is not to be
followed, but rather forsaken. So that if we follow the apostles rule, then those
that upon false persuasions abstain from hearing Gods eternal word, and
communicating with us in the sacraments, and that go to idol service, and eat
bread, that is made an idol, do offend grievously; for that this cannot
proceed of conscience, but rather is against good conscience.

Fourthly he assures us, That the conscience of papists, that refuse to go to
the church is grounded upon so sure and evident grounds, as any demonstration
in the world can lay down. And his ground is this, That the religion professed
by papists is true, and that therefore they may not seem to profess any
other. And here he thinks he stands firm and immooueable. But if this be
his ground, his building is founded upon sand, and upon a clear untruth. For
neither shall he ever be able to disprooue that truth, which we profess, nor
to justify those points of popish religion, which we condemn. If he will
promise to do it, I will give him what term he pleases. And to the intent
all deceived papists may see his vanity, I will show him See the 4. encoun^^
following this treatise.
hereafter, what the points are that he cannot prove. In this place it is
sufficient to show, that his popish positions are contradicted in the greatest
part of christendom. But no firm demo^stration can be grounded upon untrue,
or doubtful propositions. Aristotle Analyt, post. 1.
tells us, that demonstrations are syllogismes, That work certain
knowledge. But this demonstration of his is nothing but a mist, or rather
darkness, to deceive ignorant people. Wherefore let all papisticall Recusants
beware, what they believe upon others credit. The Jesuits teach them lies for
truth, heresy for faith, antichrist for Christ, superstition and falsehood for
true religion, and draw from them all means of their salvation.

Fifthly he tells us, That we do greatly discredit our doctrine, which we
were wont to teach, viz. That no man should be forced in matters of his
conscience. But the discredit is rather his, that either understands not our
doctrine through his dullness, or else cauilleth about this matter of forcing
the conscience without just cause; then ours, that teach as we did ever, and
vary not from our doctrine in our practice. We say as we did ever, that the
conscience neither ought to be forced with tortures and terrors of death
neither can be forced. For faith founded upon sure grounds surmounteth all
violence of tyrants, and cruelty of persecutors, which terrifieth and
discourageth none taught rightly in Christ's school. As for the savage and
barbarous cruelty of the popish synagogue, and that purple whore of Rome,
Whose Apocal. 17.
vesture is red with the blood of Saints, and which without difference of age,
sex, or quality tortureth, hangs, burns and kills true Christians, it
is odious not only to those that understand the truth, but also to the milder
sort of the adversaries. Further albeit no man can be forced to religion; yet
all gentle courses are to be used to draw men to religion. For this cause we
exhort the weak and ignorant, and with pecuniarie mulctes we repress those,
that are wilful and obstinate. And this is all the punishment, that her
Majesty uses against recusants: too little certes, if we respect either
their deserts, or the malice of our enemies: neither do we think it either
unlawful to proceed further against heretical teachers, that corrupt Christ's
doctrine with their leven; or sufferable, that notorious blasphemers and
railers at religion should escape unpunished. So then we believe, that
religion is to be taught, and not by terrors, thrust upon the people: and yet
deny not, but that such as be wilful disturbers of the state of the church,
or common-welth ought to be punished. Neither is there any repugnance betwixt
these two courses. Only let papists abstain from practices, and for the rest
they are secured both of life and liberty, lands and goods. We seek them and
not theirs, and only proceed against such, as show open contempt against our
religion; and yet use all c^emencie, unless their intolerable abuses against
church and state urge us to extremity.

Finally he does prefer the orders of the popish synagogue that burns not
only those, yt forsake their religion, The papists cannot dissemble their
bloody cruelty.
but such also as will not come unto their religion. The popes religion he
calls, The faith of all Christendom, and says, That such as think hardly
thereof, ought rather to be barred from coming to the church, then drawn
thither. Wherein he shows first his cruelty and bloody humor, that seems to
rejoice in slaughter, and commends the woluish nature of the Romish
synagogue. Secondly his folly and treachery, that betraying his clients cause,
would have them punished with death. For if all that forsake the faith of
Christ and his apostles be to suffer death, then will it go hard with his
clients the recusantes, who pretending catholic faith, indeed do embrace the
private doctrine and faction of popes. Thirdly his impudency, that dare avouch
the popish religion to be the faith of all Christendom, which notwithstanding
is contradicted by the eastern churches, and forsaken of a great part of the
west church, and is only maintained by fire and sword and cruelty. Lastly his
ignorance in teaching religion, that would have such as do not like all points
of faith, to be barred out of the church. Which course neither by our Savior,
nor by his apostles nor by any true teachers of Christianity was ever
practiced. Nay our Savior inuiteth all to come to him, and when he had made
ready to feast his friends, would have guestes compelled to come in. Likewise
the apostles taught all that came, and opened their arms to embrace all, that
were desirous to learn. The ancient fathers by all means sought to draw
people to the church, and shut the doors against none, that was willing to
come in. What then should we think of the adversaries, but as of enemies of
Christ and true religion, that seek to murder and famish Christ's flock? In
the mean while let us hold on our course, and with our Savior call al men,
and refuse none that are willing to hear. And thus an end of the first
consideration that concerns the hurt that popish Recusants do.

Next we are to consider, What hurt they would do, and that briefly. Now that
is apparent, First by their hatred against religion, and all that profess the
same. And Secondly by their affection toward foreign enemies, and cold
devotion to her Majesty and the present government. Their hatred against
religion is so extreme, that they will not suffer any to live, that profess
the same. Their affection to ye pope is exceeding, when for his sake they
forget their love to their country, and duty to their prince, as appears
evidently by many examples. and as they hate true religion, and the present
government; so they seek the establishment of idolatry and other points of
popery, and the whole alteration of the present state. Of which the first
cannot be done without the subversion of the church, nor the later without the
desolation of this country. Two points so material, that no true Christian
can endure the first, nor true Englishman the latter. Our adversary supposes,
that the mass and the popes government may well stand with her Majesty's
security. But popish religion has many tricks, beside the mass; and the
popes government, if it were received as the Jesuits teach it, admits no
other sovereignty either in ecclesiastical, or political affairs, beside
the popes. Neither mass nor pope can come into England, either with the
safety of her Majesty, or the state. And this we do not speak by guesses at
the wishes of papists, as our adversary supposes; but by experience of former
practices, and reasons deduced out of the grounds of Romish religion, and the
practice of Romish proceedings. Of which we have spoken heretofore, and shall
also have occasion to speak more at large hereafter.

The third point to be considered is, Whether the Recusants do not dissemble
deeply, and in heart stand evil affected to her Majesty, their country, and
all that profess the Gospel. In handling whereof our adversary passes a
little the limits of patience, and gives sir Francis evil language, and P. 80.
charge him, That he has no care, nor conscience in accusing so many
cacolike men of England, and that of such heinous crimes. But high treasons are
not answered with high words. Neither can heinous crimes be dashed out with
flat and bold denials. We find by experience, that all the troubles, that since
the beginning of her Majesty's reign unto this time have happened to this
state, have proceeded wholly from the malice of papists. The rebellion in the
north parts of this realm was raised by Nicholas Morton and other priests,
when as yet there was almost neither act nor law made against papists. When
they could not prevail in England, they raised great broiles in Ireland.
Beside domestical rebellions they have stirred up foreign enemies and wars
against this state. Philip of Spain at the instance of English traitors
determined both by sea and land to make war upon us. By procurement, and
practice of this faction the Duke of Alua, the Duke of Guise, and Don Iuan
d'Austria became our enemies. Likewise if we look into secret practices,
either against her Majesty's life, or against the state; we shall find, that
all the plots were contrived and determined to be executed by papists. William
Parry, Somerfield, Arden, Babington, Ballard, Patrick Ocollen, and all those
murderers, and empoisoners, that of late time have practiced against her
Majesty were papists, and set on by papists. Only Lopez, as is said, was a
Jew. So papists and Jews conspire jointly against this state.

Of their hatred against religion, and the true professors thereof there is no
question to be made. Darkness cannot stand with light, nor can the sons
of Beliall abide Christ's true disciples. No papist will endure to be
excommunicate by the pope; but if he should not persecute Christians upon his
commandment, he should be excommunicate and accursed. Nay albeit they would
be content to live in peace, yet will not the Jesuits and seditious priests
suffer them to rest. These raised the league, or rather the rebellion against
the French king, and wars against the professors of true religion. These are
the agents of antichrist to move princes to war against the lamb, and those
that follow him.

Neither is it to be presupposed, that they can continue in their allegiance
to her Majesty, when they acknowledge the popes authority. Praecipimus says
In bulla Pij 5. aduers. Elizabeth.
Pius Quintus, and interdicimus vniuersis and singulis proceribus, subditis,
populis, and alijs, ne illi eiusue monitis, mandatis and legibus audeant
obedire. How then dare they obey her Majesty, when he commands them not to
obey? The traitor In his letters to the nobility and people of England and
Ireland.
Allen he does not only exhort her subjects to forsake her, but to take arms
against her. If you should either sit still says he, or refuse to help (the
Spaniard) etc. or any of you seek to uphold (which God forbid) the usurper, or
her accomplices being thus cursed, you shall first encurre the angels curse, etc.
and be as deeply excommunicated as she is. Seeing then, that papists of our
times be like to their predecessors, and seeing they cannot choose, but obey
the popes command; what is to be looked for at their hands, but sedition,
rebellion, and cruel execution of the popes commands? They may now temporize.
So do also all rebels, until their matters grow ripe. They may likewise
profess and protest deeply. For so did Parry, Lopez, and the earls of
Westmerland and Northumberland. But why should any think our papists to be of
other nature, then the papists of France, and other countries, that never cared
for promise, nor oath, so they might attain their purpose? Shall not we while
we have means, provide for our safety, and the safety of the state? Our
adversary P. 78. and 80.
talks much of the Conscience of papists, and sets them forth, as
Examples of good life, and modest behavior, and diverse other virtues: and no
marvel, seeing apes seem fair to apes, and serpents to serpents, and
affection makes foul things seem fair, (...), says Eclog. 6.
Theocritus. But he that nourishes up woolues, must look well to his sheep.
We are well acquainted with their conscience, and know they make no
conscience to obey the popes commands, though never so cruel. Their behauior
is such, that we find no men more backewarde in public service. Wherefore as
one said: (...),
(...):
So we may say, the Spaniards are dangerous enemies, the pope and his agents
more, the Recusant and domestical malcontent is most dangerous. Neither are
they hard hearted men, and without piety and conscience, that so think of them;
but these rather, that oppugn true piety and religion, maintain idolatry
and superstition, and prefer strangers before their own countrymen,
hazarding the destruction of their own nation and country, that is like to
ensue, if the popes purposes, which they do favor, and under pain of his
curse must favor, take effect.

And that they are not so honest men, as is pretended, appears in part by our
adversaries discourse, who either betraying his clients, or bewraying his own
treacherous humor, or or a foolish humor of contradiction goes about to
prove, that a man may keep a good conscience to God, and yet not keep faith
and allegiance to his prince; or to use his own words, That a man's conscience
to God may be severed from obedience to his prince: and this he would
justify by the example of Abraham, Lot, the ten tribes that left Roboam, Iehu,
Hieremie, Athanasius, Eusebius Vercellensis, Hilary and others. But as his
position is strange, so his proofs are most weak and simple. Our Savior
Christ commands us to give to Caesar that which is due to Caesar. But no
question, but allegiance and obedience is due to Caesar. The Romans 13.
apostle says, We must be subject, not for wrath only, but also for
conscience sake. And the apostle saint 1. Pet. 2.
Peter commands us, To submit our selves to the king for the Lords sake.
Neither was it ever heard, that any godly bishop did take upon him to release
the oath made to kings, or to dissolve the obligation, that tied subjects to
princes. The examples alleged to prove that conscience and obedience to
princes may be severed, are much mistaken. Abraham and Lot dwelling in Chaldea
were not subject to other princes, but were princes themselves ruling their
own families as kings, for that as yet kingdoms, and common-welthes were not
established. But suppose they had been subject to some king, yet were they not
forbidden to leave their country, or if they were, yet might they depart
seeing God Genesis 12.
commanded Abraham out of his country. But English fugitives fly hence
contrary both to gods ordinance, and the princes commandment. The ten
tribes rebelled against Roboam, and set up a strange king; beside that,
forsaking true religion, they 1. Reg. 12.
set up idols in Bethel; so papists rebel against their princes, and English
fugitives would set up a strange king, and seek by all means to set up their
idols and golden calves, or at least would have men like calves to worship
golden images. But God never allowed rebellion, or idolatry. 2. Reg. 9.
Iehu killed Ioram king of Israel, and his mother Iezabel: but that was by
special commandment of God. But our rinegued English contrary to Gods
ordinance seek the destruction of the prince and mother of their country; and
this unnatural traitor does wickedly compare her to Iezabel. Hieremy did
attempt nothing against the life of his prince, nor did he any thing, but
declare the message of God to his people. Wherefore either let this Noddie
bring forth some message from God, to command us to submit our selves to the
pope and king of Spain, or else his defense is not worth a daisie.

Athanasius, Eusebius Vercellensis and Hilary forsook their country for
safeguard of their lives, and refused to obey their princes commandment, that
sought to establish the Arian heresy. Yet did they not rebel against their
prince, or seek to depose him or murder him, or to give his kingdom into the
hand of strangers. But our fugitive English albeit no man forces them to
embrace heresy, or seeks their life, yet fly they like traitors to foreign
enemies, and there conspire against the prince and state; and al to establish
their popish heresies, and to erect idolatry.

His authorities likewise are impertinent to this purpose. The prophet Psalm.
44. where he says, Obliuiscere populum tuum and domum patris tui, would have
the church and every one of the church to forget his kindred and people, and to
follow Christ. And our Matthew. 17. Luc. 12.
Savior would have us forsake our father and mother for his sake. But where
there is no opposition betwixt Christ, and our country and people, there this
rule takes no place. What do those then deserve, that not only forsake their
country and kindred, but Christ also, and true religion? Again albeit we may
not forsake Christ though we should loose country, kindred, life and all; yet
may not godly Christians seek the destruction of their prince and country,
nor to bring in strangers. This is altogether without the compass of the text;
and English rebels, that fly to the enemy, have no warrant so to do in these
words. As for Wyats enterprise we are not bound to defend it. And yet it is
clear, that he meant no hurt to the Queen, or to the realm, but good rather,
seeking to drive out strangers, whose coming could not choose but be
hurtful to this land, and dangerous. In France and Scotland those of the
religion did only seek to defend themselves against force, and not to hurt
their princes; they repelled those that pretended the princes authority, and
yet went about to disannull the princes act and promise; and sought not to
murder and drive their princes out of their kingdoms, as the factious papists
have done, where they have been stronger.

But says the Warder, The Act. 5.
apostles chose rather to obey God, then man. And holy martyrs are commended,
Quod contempserunt iussa principum. And finally he calls them Herodians,
that obey their princes; and says, They make the princes will the platform of
their consciences, and actions. All which makes nothing to the controversy in
hand. For it is one thing to continue in allegiance and subjection to princes,
and another to obey or execute their wicked commandments. This Christians are
not to do, because they are to obey God, rather then man. Yet may they not
rebel against their princes, nor may they seek to depose them, and murder
them, as the papists teach and practice. Naie they proceed further, and obey
the most wicked commandments of the pope, which like Herod commands many
innocents to be done to death. And therefore are they Herodians, and Christiani
sanguinis hirudines, and most unlike to the apostles and former martyrs. Which
appears in this also, for that apostles and martyrs paid tribute, and sought
not to kill their princes; these fellows upon the popes excommunication, not
only think themselves discharged of tribute, but also of oath and obedience,
and oftentimes take arms against emperors, kings, and lawful princes.

Where sir Francis would teach, That all obedience is due to the sovereign
magistrate, and proves it out of the words of 1. Pet. 2.
Peter, that teaches us, that we must Subject our selves to all manner of
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, our adversary quarrelleth, and takes
diverse exceptions to his dealing. First he takes exception to his
translation, for that he translateth (...), all manner ordinance of man, and
leaves out Sieve ducibus ab eo mistis. Secondly he quarrelleth with his
interpretation, as if sir Francis should teach, that an absolute obedience in
all causes were to be yielded to the temporal magistrate. Lastly he says,
that this place of saint Peter is impertinently alleged to prove that papists
are to obey the magistrate commanding them to go to church. And so gladly
would he find a knot in a rush, and as if he had found out great matters,
he despises his adversary, and calls him Seely man, and simple soul, and
bible-clerke knight, and guilt-spurre doctor, railing at his pleasure, and
according to his fashion; yea and without just cause. For first (...), is
better translated Humane ordinance, then Humane creature. For properly men
neither create, nor are created by men. Moreover if we should translate
humane creature, then should this subjection be not to magistrates ordained by
man, but generally to all men. And therefore the word (...) signifying both
creature, and ordinance or election, we are to choose the fittest
signification. Secondly it is no part of sir Francis his meaning to teach an
absolute obedience to be due to temporal princes. Nay he thinks it neither
due to temporal, nor ecclesiastical magistrates, save only in things lawful.
But this the papists deny to princes in ecclesiastical external government
simply; and in temporal causes too, if the pope do excommunicate them, or
depose them. Thirdly sir Francis did not allege this place to prove that
papists were to go to church upon the princes commandment, but rather to
show, that they ought not to rebel against princes upon the popes warrant, as
they do very often. And thus all this matter, about which the Noddy makes so
great exclamations, is easily cleared, and all his calumniations and
cauillations at his adversaries person, and writings answered. It rests
therefore now, that we consider a little of his brave speak made in the
latter end of this chapter to the Recusants. Perhaps he is better able to teach
them, what they are to do hereafter, then to defend that is done already.

First he tells us, That he can say no more to cacolike Recusants, then
that which follows. Which shows, that he has little to say in their
defense, and less for their instruction. Then he pronounces in his grave
voice, That the course which they have taken is most honorable, and pious
before God and man; and that forsooth in three points: first in showing their
duty toward God by standing constantly, and suffering for their conscience.
Secondly in offering all loyal obedience in temporal causes to their liege
prince; and lastly in edifying their neighbors by their good life, and
behavior. But what if they have neither showed their duty to God, nor
suffered for their conscience; nor offered loyal obedience to their prince,
nor have so taken her; nor have either by their belief or life edified their
neighbors? May we not then conclude, that their course is neither pious nor
honorable; and that albeit they escape the censures of men, yet assuredly they
shall answer before God? Nay what if for religion they maintain superstition,
for loyalty nourish in their bosoms treachery and disloialtie, and ruinate
their neighbors by their evil example; does it not hence follow, that their
course is impious, and disloiall, and odious both in the sight of God, and of
man, and that not in three points, but in many points, resulting partly of
their impieties and errors in religion, and partly of their malcontent humors
in civil actions? It is most apparent. For this Warder their good friend has
laid those grounds, whereof this conclusion arises.

First then I say, that no papist since her Majesty's reign has suffered
death, or loss of lands, or liberty merely for his conscience, unless he
make it conscience, not to commit treason. Let the records be sought, and
their causes be examined, and this will easily appear. And albeit some have
been imprisoned, yet was the same not directly for not coming to church, but
for refusing to pay the mulct.

Secondly compare their penalties and sufferinges with the sufferings of true
Christians, whom they imprison, spoil, torture and murder, and that only for
matters of faith; and then they will appear nothing in comparison. But were
they much greater, then they are; yet it is the cause, and not the suffering
that makes their patience commendable. Have they See the conclusion of the 4.
encountres following th^^ treatise.
suffered for their impieties, idolatries, treasons and felonies, and for
adhering to Antichrist? Then is their shame great, and their reward nothing.

Thirdly I deny, that they have showed their duty toward God. Nay in refusing
to hear his word, and to receive the sacraments ordained and instituted by
Christ Jesus, and administered according to his holy institution, and embracing
a fond and false religion standing partly on traditions and popish decretalles,
and partly upon lewd customs and lying legendes, and partly upon wicked
heresies and false positions, they have declared themselves impious toward
God, and aliens from Christ his church. And that they shall well perceive by a
special encounter concerning that point.

Fourthly it is mere impudence, to affirm that the recusantes have offered to
her Majesty all loyal obedience in temporal causes; or that they have
acknowledged her to be their liege prince. For who knows not, that the
rebellions both in the north parts of England, and also in Ireland were raised
by recusants and papists? The same men have diverse times attempted the
destruction of her Majesty and the alteration of government, as appears by
the practices of Parry, Somerfield, Throgmorton, Chapter Paget and others. These
are the men, that Cardinal Allen hoped would join with the Spanyard, and
help to depose her Majesty. And although now they stir not; yet it appears,
that their Those be the words of Campians faculty.
obedience must only continue, Rebus sic stantibus. And call you this yielding
of loyal obedience? Beside that the Bulla Pij Quinti.
pope curses all that will obey her, or repute her as lawful Queen. Whether
is it then more likely, yt they will obey the popes sentences, whom they take
to be their sovereign judge in these cases, or her Majesty's command, which
they respect not? But suppose they would yield loyal obedience in temporal
causes; yet that is not sufficient to make the recusantes seem loyal
subjects. For the princes authority in commanding for true faith, and
abolishing errors and abuses, for establishing external orders, and remoouing
disorders both in the time of the law, and in the ancient Christian church,
has always been esteemed great.

Lastly I would advise these cacolike malecontentes, or recusantes, or what you
will have them called, not to brag too much of their good works, least they
give others just occasion to make their uncharitable dealing, and dishonest
living known. Now I will only say this, that he that favors foreign
enemies, and entertaineth either practice or intelligence with them, or
receives marks of faction from them; whatsoever his pretenses are, cannot
seem much to edify his neighbors. Surely he leaves for himself no place in
the state, that loves not the state. Let them therefore if they will needs
boast of their works give no more ear to these hispaniolized English,
combined with traitors for the destruction of the country. For he can hardly
seem honest, whom such rinegued traitors, so highly do praise.

In the end of this chapter he goes about to teach his disciples the
recusantes, how far they are to yield obedience to their prince. But if his
teaching be no better in schools, then in these encounters, I doubt, he will
make but few good scholars. First he does not show us, whom he takes for a
lawful prince, which for determination of this controversy would certainly be
known. For if he do not believe that a prince excommunicate by the pope, and
by him deposed, is to be reputed lawful, and to be obeyed, notwithstanding the
popes spite, then whatsoever he talks here of obedience to princes,
concerns her Majesty nothing.

P. 88.
Secondly he would have recusantes to serve their prince With body, goods, and
life. Where we are to note, that he neither mentions the heart nor the inward
affection. Do we not then think, that the recusantes will do her Majesty good
service, that are delivered unto her without soul, heart, or hearty affection?

Thirdly least upon his promise they might perhaps be too forward in service,
he draws them back with a limitation, and teaches, that their service and
obedience is to stretch no further, Then to just causes, of which he makes
either the recusantes themselves, or the pope their holy father to be judge. So
that her Majesty, if the pope proceed against her, is to look for no service
at the recusantes hands. Nay Allen in his traytorous exhortation to the
nobility and people of England and Ireland hops to draw them to assiste
foreign enemies against her. Behold I pray you this goodly doctrine. Fourthly
he teaches, That Christian princes have no more command, nor authority in
ecclesiastical causes, then heathen magistrates; for that Christ altered
nothing at all in temporal government. But that is a position contrary to the
law of God, to the practice of Gods church, and most absurd, and senseless.
The law of God refers ambiguous matters as well to the judge or prince, as to
the priests or levites. For in the Sanedrin, of which that law is the
foundation, the sovereign magistrate was chief; Deuteronomy. 17.
and the king was commanded To read in the law, that he might keep it, by his
authority restraining offenders. In ancient time under the law the kings and
sovereign magistrates gave laws to priests and levites, and not contrariwise.
In the church of Christ for a thousand years or more there were no laws
observed, but those of princes. Bellarmine would fetch it higher, but his
proofs fail him. In their Bullary which contains a sum of the popes
laws, they begin with Gregory the seventh. but in truth Gregory the ninth
was the first, that gave authority of law to the popes constitutions, and
gathered them into the book of decretals. Before this time bishops, priests,
deacons, and the whole church was Cod. de sum. trin. and fid. ^ath and tit.
sequentib.
governed by the laws of Christian princes, as appears by the laws of
Constantinus Magnus, Valentinia^, Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius, Ansegisus de
leg ib. Caroli and Ludouic.
Charles the great, Ludouicus Pius and diverse others. And certes very absurd it
were, if heathen princes, that are strangers from Gods church should have as
much authority, as Christian magistrates, that are principal parts thereof,
and to whom the execution of Gods law is committed. Neither is it material,
that Christ altered nothing in the office of magistrates. for it did always
belong to the magistrate, that was of the church, to govern the church in
external matters, and to see true doctrine published, and the sacraments
sincerely administered by those, to whose office it appertained. So we see, that
by this false position he would exclude her Majesty from all government in
ecclesiastical causes, and that notwithstanding his pretense of teaching
obedience, he teaches flat disobedience to princes ecclesiastical laws, and
their commandments.

Fifthly he P. 88.
teaches, That ecclesiastical and temporal government is so distinguished,
that he that rules in the one ought not to rule in the other. The which does
utterly overthrow the popes temporal kingdom, which our adversary would so
willingly maintain. For why should he govern a kingdom, pretending to be a
bishop, rather then a king govern a particular church of one nation, in
external causes especially? Secondly we do deny this distinction of authority,
upon which our adversaries fancies are founded. And our reason is, for that in
Christian common wealths, where the same persons are members both of the
church and common-welth, there the chief governors ought to have care both of
church and common-welth: and most absurd it were, if the prince, which is a
principal member of Gods church, should have no government therein; and that
inferior persons should have supreme command over the prince.

Sixthly he does insinuate, that the pope is Christ's vicar, and the apostles
successor in supreme government of the church. And this he teaches is
Recusant scholars, least percase they should fail to obey him. But this is
nothing else, but to draw her Majesty's subjects from their due allegiance, and
to persuade them to listen to the pope, as pretending to be Christ's vicar, and
the apostles successor, and supreme governor and head of the universal church
of Christ: which is quite contrary to his fair pretenses, and purpose in this
place, where he should persuade the Recusants to obedience toward their
prince. Beside that, it is so false, as nothing more. Let this Noddy, if he
can, show forth the popes commission either for his vicegerentship, or for
his pretended apostolic office, and supreme government. let him prove it
unto us, or else forbear impudently to assume it, and to affirm it. we do
show, that bishops are the apostles successors. and yet that is no prejudice to
the princes supreme authority, nor never was. What then is that which he
bableth of the pope, that is neither bishop, nor the apostles successor?

Finally he affirms, That ecclesiastical government stood distinct from
civil 300. years after Christ, and that every emperor, and mortal prince
converted to the faith, and entering into the church submitted themselves to
this ecclesiastical government, and so continued, until certain heretics
confounded all. And so still cunningly he speaks for the popes authority,
and secretly disableth not only her Majesty's power in ecclesiastical
matters, but her title also to the crown, standing as she does excommunicate
by the pope. He does also abuse his reader with the ambiguitie of
ecclesiastical government. For if by ecclesiastical government he means the
power of the keys consisting in the censures of the church, and power of
priestly function, which is properly ecclesiastical, we grant that such
ecclesiastical government belongs not to princes, so that they are to execute
the same in their own persons. But if by ecclesiastical government he mean
power to direct, and command in external matters; and to cause every
ecclesiastical person to do his function; and to see the church, and every part
thereof well ordered, and abuses reformed; it is most apparent, that such
government appertains to princes, and ever did both before Christ's time, and
after, and that no pope of Rome did ever meddle with any such matters before
Gregory the seventh, or Gregory the ninth his time, as before has been
declared; and shall against stronger adversaries, then this seely Noddy be
justified. Lastly they were no heretics, that give to the prince this
authority, but those rather that give power to popes to depose princes and
discharge their subjects from their oaths of allegiance: as Sigebertus
Gemblacensis speaking of the treacherous dealing of Gregory the seventh against
Henry the fourth, in express terms affirms, and the Synod at Brixina
assembled against Gregory the seventh determines,

And thus we see that this Noddy contrary to his intention has intricated
himself and his clients the Recusants in this cause. Before this many men
would have thought, that he and his friends the Recusants had been of a
better mind to her Majesty, and this state. But now all the world may see
their whole purpose and intention verified by their own masters doctrine, and
authority. They serve the prince, but not with hearty affection, nor in all
causes, nor against every enemy. They yield her no authority in
ecclesiastical causes; nay they give it clear away to the pope. Finally they
make her subject, not only to the popes excommunication, but also to his
sentence concerning her crown and kingdom. So it appears by their own
confession, that they are but sorry subjects; and when the pope has once gotten
a side here, apparent enemies. The same does also appear by their rebellions
and practices against her Majesty and the state, and by their infamous libels
set out by the pope, by Sanders, Allen, Ribaldineira, Rishton, and diverse
traitors, which the Recusantes either approve, or do not disallow; and lastly
by the general hatred, that papists bear both against true religion, and also
against all that maintain it, or profess it. Wherefore albeit I do not wish
the punishments of papists aggrauated; yet I say, it is great weakness in us,
either to suffer their insolency, or not to secure our selves against their
hatred and tyranny. But I need not use many words to stir up the magistrates
to vigilancie. They see these things, and I doubt not, will take a course not
still to suffer their right to be disputed, or their actions disgraced and
slandered: and every true patriot, I hope, I will concur with their prince,
and not suffer the bowels of their country any longer by these vipers to be
gnawed. The treacherous intention of this our adversary, I have opened; so that
I hope, the quieter sort of Recusantes will not much trust him; his malice
against true religion is every where apparent, so that, I trust, honest men
will hereafter learn to detest him, and to provide more carefully against
him, and his consorts. And so I dismiss him for this turn, as a false
traitor; you may look to his proceedings, if you please, as a false teacher.

CHAP. VII.
Of the pope of Rome, and his usurped authority: and of N. D. his seventh
encountre.

IN the beginning of this seventh encountre our adversary swells very
big, and degorgeth very great words against sir Francis, charging him With
immodest railing and calumniation, and saying, that he has ouerlauished to the
injury and slander of foreign potentates and nations abroad, and used
opprobrious speeches against the sacred honors of anointed princes, and the
greatest monarkes of Christendom. A man that reads his lofty praeludium
would have imagined, that some great matter had been out of joint, that made
him leap into this rage. But when I saw, that all this fury grew upon some
words vttred partly against the pope of Rome, that is neither lawful prince,
nor potentate, nor honest man; but only a greasy priest or friar, if so much;
and partly against the Spaniard, who to serve the popes pleasure without desert
of ours is become our enemy; then I perceived it was nothing else, but a
lofty trick of jack an apes, that for fear of the whip leaped out of his
little patience. To storm against us for defending our selves against ye
public enemies of religion, of the state, of her Majesty, of our nation, he
had no reason, but that he would show himself enemy of religion, the state,
Queen and country. Certes if he had not declared himself an open enemy,
he would never have pleaded for public enemies, nor been so much offended
with those that speak in defense of his prince and country. But let us hear
what slander it is, that our accuser lays to our charge.

First it greeueth him exceedingly to hear, that the pope should be called The
man of sin, and that Antichrist, of whom ye apostle 2. These. 2 speaks. And
some reason he has, in regard of his own particular, to be offended. For if
the pope be Antichrist, then is our adversary a marked slave of Antichrist, a
false prophet, and an instrument of satan. But how heinously the matter is
taken, it is not greatly material; that the pope is very Antichrist, we make
no question: neither should any doubt, if they would well consider his
proceedings. For first the name of Antichrist imports, that taking the
authority and place of Christ he should notwithstanding set him self against
Christ. Secondly the office of Antichrist is to set himself against Christ his
kingdom. Thirdly he shall excel in pride and arrogance, and take to himself
divine honors. Fourthly notwithstanding his pretense of holiness, yet shall he
excel in all impiety and wickedness. Fifthly he shall have a face of brass,
and pretend understanding of all doubts of religion. Sixthly he shall appear
upon the decay of the Romayne empire. Seventhly he shall rise out of the ruins
of that state.

8. He shall cause a great apostacy from the Christian faith, and in his
reign there shall be a general corruption of men's manners. 9. Although his
kingdom shall be opposite to Christ's kingdom, yet shall he sit in Gods
church, and take on him the authority of the church. 10. The seat of his
empire shall be in Rome. 11. His kingdom is represented by the purple whore
Apocalip. 17. and by Babylon Apocalip. 18. 12. Antichrist his impiety shall
be hidden and mystical. 13. He shall most grievously afflicte Christ his
church. 14. He shall rule in men's consciences.

15. He shall make merchandise of men's souls.

16. He shall be like a lamb, and yet speak like the Dragon. 17. He shall
take to himself the power of the Romayne Empire. 18. He shall bring in a new
form of Religion. 19. He shall be an author and cause of many impieties,
and great corruption in manners.

20. He shall in effect deny Christ Jesus.

21. He shall pretend to work wonders, and the world shall believe his
signs and wonders. 22. He shall prescribe a certain form of ceremonies and
laws to all his folowers. Finally he shall rise obscurely, receive power of
princes, increase by force, be followed with all wicked traitors, heretics,
atheistes, and shall be destroyed with the breath of Gods spirit. All which
conditions, as they are proper and well agree to the pope of Rome, and his
kingdom; so the adversaries themselves cannot show any other, unto whom these
qualities can agree. He calls himself Christ's vicar, and yet opposes
himself against Christ and his kingdom. He declares himself a plain
adversary in suppressing Gods word, and extolling his own constitutions, and
advancing himself above all, that is called God. He takes to himself the
name, power and honor, that is proper to God, excelling all mortal creatures
in pride and arrogance. His life is full of all abominations. He takes no
shame, albeit his doings be most shameful, nay albeit his ignorance in
religion be exceeding great, yet does he vant himself, that he cannot err in
decyding of matters of faith. Presently upon the decay of the Romayne empire,
his kingdom began to show it self. Neither did he rise, but upon the ruins
of that state. Having gotten credit among Christians, he brought in infinite
novelties into religion, and by his evil example, and facility in granting
pardons wrought a great dissolution in men's manners. At Rome he now reigns
and none but he. Nay he is reputed to be head of the church although head of
the society of wicked and feined Christians. His kingdom is plainly described
in the figure of the purple whore and of Babylon. Finally his mystical
impieties, persecutions of Christians, merchandising of men's souls, and all
those properties of antichrist, which before I described, appeering in him, and
in no other, declare him to be antichrist.

Neither can any medicine, which the papists have devised, help this grief.
As for the Noddy our adversary, he does not understand those reasons which
he draws out of Bellarmine. Much less is he able to enforce them. First
he tells us That antichrist shall be one singular man. But that cannot
stand with the apostles words, that teaches us that the mystery of
iniquity began to work in his time. Again the kingdom of Antichrist could
not be erected, and attain to such greatness by one man only; nor is one
only man opposite to Christ. Further the state of antichrists kingdom is
called an apostacy, but the term of apostacy cannot fit one man. Finally
Saint 1. Joan. 2.
John says, that that antichrist that was prophesied of, was in the world in
his time. And Tract. 30. in Matthaeum.
Origene makes antichrist a state or succession of men. Generaliter says he,
vnus antichristus est, species autem eius multae. Neither have the Scriptures
or fathers any thing, whereof the contrary may directly be concluded. Only
the scriptures by the figure of one beast do set out a state, and the fathers
do firmly adhere to the manner of speech used in Scripture, which by one
particular man understand diverse men succeeding in one state. Nay the
adversaries themselves believe, that Christ by the rock Mat. 16. whereupon he
said he would build his church, understood not only Peter, but all the bishops
of Rome.

Secondly he says, That the Jews shall receive Antichrist for their Mes^ias.
And therefore that it is not likely, that the pope should be Antichrist, whom
they can never admit for their Messiah. But the antecedent is a mere fancy
taken up without ground. For albeit our savior ^an. 5.
says, that the Jews Will receive another, if he come in his own name; yet
can it not be gathered, that he speaks there of Antichrist. For he speaks
indefinitely and says, if any come in his own name, that him they will
receive. And so does In Joan. 5.
Nonnus expound it. And if we should otherwise take it, then would it follow,
that Antichrist should come in the apostles times, that he might be received of
those, to whom our savior then spoke.

Thirdly he reasons out of Matthew. 24. and 2. These. 2. That the gospel of
Christ must first be preached to all nations, before the coming of Antichrist:
which says he, is not yet fulfilled. But in the 2. These. 2. there is no
mention made of preaching the Gospel to all nations. In the 24. of Matthew we
find, that the preaching of the Gospel to all nations shall be fulfilled
before Christ's second coming, and not before the coming of Antichrist. But
were this a sign of the coming of antichrist, yet it is long, since the sound
of the Gospel has passed throughout the world.

Fourthly, That antichrist should be a Jew, and of the tribe of Dan; is but a
mere conceit of some few, upon false understanding of scripture: for how
shall a Jew, that establishes the ceremonial law of Moses be received among
Christians? Wherefore this notwithstanding, the pope may be antichrist.

Fifthly it is a Jewish fancy That antichrist shall reign in Jerusalem, and
restore Salomons Temple. Neither is any such matter gathered out of the
eleventh chapter of the Apocalypse, where it is said, not that the bodies of
Henoch and Helias, as this falsarie has, but That the bodies of the two
prophets shall lie in the streets of the great city. For he speaks not of
the persecution by antichrist, but by the Gentiles, and understands all godly
men, that shall bear witness of the truth of Christ Jesus. Lib. 18. in Isai.
and ad Algas. q. 11.
Hierome says, that all these imaginations of restoring the city, and temple
and ceremonies proceed from the heresy of Cerinthus. And truly very strange
it were, if antichrists reign continuing but three years and a half, as our
adversaries hold, he should reedifie the city and the temple, and found so
large a kingdom, as that of antichrist shall be.

Sixthly it cannot be proved, That antichrist shall expressly deny Jesus, and
utterly abolish the sacraments instituted by Christ, and openly profess, that
either he is Messiah, or God himself. Neither in ye 1. of Ioh. 2. v. 22. nor
Ioh. 5. nor 2. These. 2. which places are cited to this purpose, is any such
thing to be found. Nay his doings they shall be mystical, and he shall
deceive many. But if he should plainly deny Christ, and abolish his
Sacraments, he could not deceive any Christian. Saint In Joan. Tract. 3.
Augustine therefore calls them antichrists, That by their works deny
Christ. And cunningly shall antichrist pervert the Sacraments, and take to
himself divine worship. All which we see verified by the pope: and therefore
rightly take him to be antichrist.

Seventhly, that antichrist shall work lying miracles, it is not denied. For
it is very apparent, that popish religion does much stand upon miracles; and
the legendes red in churches are full of them. But that he shall make fire
come really and visiblie down from heaven, or make a dumb image speak it is
no where declared or proved. Neither is it a miracle for a man to feine
himself dead, and to rise again. For that every sacrificing priest is able to
do that, albeit his power to work miracles be not great. By fire therefore,
which antichrist shall make to come from heaven, we are to understand
antichrists thundering excommunications and other sentences, and the wrath of
the court of heaven, that he seems to have at his disposition. By the image
of the beast Apocal. 13. we are to understand new Rome, which now gives out
her imperial edicts; by the beast that had a mortal wound and yet was after
a sort cured we understand the Roman empire after a sort restored in the
papacy. And so all agrees with the pope and his kingdom, and shows him to
be antichrist.

We do also read, That antichrist shall reign two times, one time, and a
half. But that this number is to be taken precisely for three years and a
half, and no more, we do not read, nor believe. For as this time is applied
to antichrists reign, so likewise is the time of 42. months, and 1290.
days, neither of which numbers does precisely make three years and a half.
Moreover it is a vain imagination to think, that such an alteration, as
antichrist will make, can be wrought in three years and a half.

Further the doctrine of napistes concerning the coming again of Helias, is
nothing but a Jewish fable, as appears by the words of the apostles, Matthew.
17. Why do the Scribes say, say they, that Helias must first come? Our Savior
also declares, that John Baptist was figured by Helias after a sort. Their
opinion concerning Henochs return is also a mere fiction. for neither in the
Apocalypse chap. 11. nor in the 48. chap. of Ecclesiasticus, which is all the
ground our adversaries have to prove these matters, is there any appearance,
that he shall come again, and be slain of antichrist. So that if the
papists look not for antichrists coming before they hear of Henoch and
Helias, they are like to be much abused. And as well may the old Britons look
for the return of king Arthur; as they for Henoch and Helias.

Lastly our adversary dreameth, when he believes, that within five and forty
days after Antichrists death, Christ shall make an end of the world, and come
to judgment. For if that were true, then should not the end of the world come
upon such a sudden, as Matthew. 24.
Christ tells, nor should the same be kept from men's knowledge, as he
likewise teaches, that it shall. Wherefore if the Noddy have no better means
to shift off the name of Antichrist from the pope, then by determining the
precise time of Christ's second coming; then the pope will assuredly prove
Antichrist. For that time no mortal man knows, or can certainly know.

Now if the pope be Antichrist, it is to no purpose to dispute, whether he be
one of Antichrists forerunners. Yet because this Noddy will needs for his
own pleasure dispute that question, it will not be amiss, for a fuller view
of the man's folly, to consider likewise of this his foolish dispute. First to
prove that Antichrist has his forerunners, he alleges a place out of 1.
Job. 2.
John, where he says, You have heard how Antichrist comes, and how many are
become antichrists. But this proves, that antichrist was rather then come.
and so directly Saint John affirms saying, That he was then in the world.
Which overthrows the Noddies conceit of forerunners, and shows that he is
run out of breath, and out of his wit; and yet helps him nothing to show,
that the pope of Rome is not antichrist. for albeit the bishops of Rome were
not antichrists in Saint John's time: yet later popes of Rome furthering the
mystery of iniquity, that began covertly to work in Saint John's time,
appeered plainly to be antichrist, and in them antichrist, that before did
work closely, and in diverse men, and diverse places, became openly to be
known, and revealed. He says further, that Turks, Mores, tyrants,
persecuters and other wicked people, and especially heretics and sectaries are
forerunners of antichrist. But if this were so, then might the pope also be a
forerunner of antichrist, for any thing this proctor of antichrist can allege
to the contrary, surpassing all others in wickedness, and being the father
and author of diverse heresies, of which we shall have occasion to speak more
hereafter. And indeed seeing antichrist was long in the world, before he
obtained his kingdom; and that those, that laid the foundation of his state,
went before the popes, that openly reigned; it is not strange to say, that some
popes were, as it were, pages and forerunners, and workers of antichrists
apostacy; and that at the length other popes began to show themselves
manifestly in his seat^. Do then we see this by-question helps him but
little. And yet to help himself, our P. 93
adversary for (...) writes (...), committing two faults in one Greek word.

Afterward he mooneth this question, Whether Rome be Babylon, or no: and yet
like a wise fellow he says, it is not material, whether it be, or no. Which
shows him to be an idle discourser, that moves questions, that be not to
purpose. Beside, he is deceived much in his opinion. For if new Rome figured
by the whore of Babylon Apocal. 17. be the seat of antichrist, and if his
kingdom be the western Babylon; then does the apostle plainly declare, that
the pope is antichrist. For none has reigned there of long time, but the pope
of Rome. But that the state of new Rome, as it is the seat of the pope, is
figured by the purple whore Apocal. 17 and by Babylon, it is proved Matthew.
Sutl. de pontif. Romans lib. 5.
already by reasons unanswerable. First the holy Ghost did signify the
destruction of old Rome, or the Roman empire in the 13. of the Revel. by the
head wounded to death. And therefore no reason, that we should suppose he
declared the flourishing estate of the same empire in the 17. chap. which were
nothing but to go back, and forth.

Secondly immediately after the destruction of Babylon and the purple whore,
the holy Ghost speaks of the marriage of the lamb, and of the last judgment,
which must ensue after the destruction of Babylon, and the purple whore
immediately. Of which we may gather, that the popes kingdom, and not the
Roman empire, that is long since destroyed is understood by the purple
whore, and by Babylon.

Thirdly Saint John tells us, that the beast whereupon the purple whore did
sit, was to ascend out of the bottomless pit, and was not yet in the world.
Necessarily therefore must we understand the papacy of Rome, and not the Empire
of Rome, by that beast that had seven heads, seeing the Empire was then most
flourishing, and the papacy not yet established.

Fourthly after the decay of the Roman empire for a while Christian religion
began to flourish in Rome, and that city of a wicked city became the church
of God. But after the desolation of Babylon or new Rome, it shall be made The
habitation of devils, and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of unclean
and hateful birds. Which must needs be understood of the destruction of
Rome under the pope.

Diverse other reasons also are alleged in a late treatise Lib. 5. de pontif.
Romans sieve eius apost. c. 11.
De apostasia Pontificis Romans that most apparently show, that Rome as it is
the seat of the pope, is that Babylon, and that beast with seven heads, of
which Saint John speaks in his Revelation.

Having talked his pleasure of Rome and Babylon, P. 94.
the Warder with many idle words returns back to talk of his dear father
the pope: which shows that Babylon and antichrist are of near affinity, and
cannot well be sundred. But what has he to say of the pope? Forsooth it
greeueth him much, that he should be called The proud priest, and
arch-prelate of Rome. And yet sir Francis has therein done him great favor.
For if we will rightly esteem, he neither deserves the name of priest, nor
arch-prelate, nor bishop having given over all priestly and bishoplike
function, and occupying himself about worldly affairs, and his terrestrial
kingdom; which to erect, he overthrew the empire, and the whole strength of
Christendom, and gave leisure to the Turk, to rauage so many christian
provinces; and to maintain it, he has caused the destruction of infinite
Christian people. And calling him Proud and Ambitious, yet he does him no
wrong. For he takes to himself divine power and authority in his
commandments and judgments, and aduanceth himself above all, that is called
God. He takes on him also power to canonize saints, and to give divine honors
to others, and bears himself, as lord of the Calendar of saints. He is
borne high on men's shoulders, and makes great princes to attend on him, like
squires or pages, giving his toe to kiss, for a special favor. Neither does
he content himself to be called lord of lords and Christ's Vicar, but will
needs be called C. satis. did. 96.
God at the least honored as God on the earth. He aduanceth himself high
above all earthly princes, and presumes to depose them and take away their
kingdoms at his pleasure. Oh that Christian princes would open their eyes,
and consider, how by his pride he has abused the honor of kings, and trodden
the majesty of the emperor, and other christian magistrates under feet.

He is also greatly offended, that the pope is called Bloody monster; and in
great sadness tells us, That we must not speak evil of the prince of the
people: and alleges the law, that condemns him to death, that spoke evil
of his father. But the ^eely fellow should have remembered, that we have
showed him to be neither the prince of Gods people, nor a friend of Gods
people. And he himself has declared, how unworthy he is of the name of
father, that seeks to murder and ruinate his children. Nay he is the father
of lies, heresies, wicked practices, and of all that either by wicked doctrine,
or treacherous practice seek the destruction either of the church, or of this
state. When William the conqueror came against England, the pope Matthew. Paris.
in W^llelm. conquest.
blessed his banners. Another pope sent his blessing to the French, that in
king John's time invaded this country. Paul the third by all means he could,
sought the overthrow of our nation in king Henry the eights days, stirring up
foreign enemies abroad, and wicked rebels at home to hurt us, and to destroy
our country. Of late time Pius Quintus, Gregory the thirteenth, and Sixtus
Quintus have not only brought the Spaniards upon us, but also wrought diverse
rebellions in England, seeking, if they could, utterly to ruinate this state.
And as they have done in England, so have they proceeded in France, and in the
Low countries; and by their rebellions and practices have brought to
destruction diverse millions of Christians. In sum, if we please to read
histories; we shall find, that the popes are the only firebrands and
enflamers of all the wars of Christendom, which Machiauel in his Lib. 1.
Florentine history does in plain terms confess. And have not we then
reason to call the pope bloody monster? In Gregorio 6.
Platina calls three popes for their cruelties showed one to another, and for
their wickedness, Tria teterrima monstra. And shall not we, that have far
greater cause to do so, call them by their names? But says he, More blood
has been shed in London for religion in one year, then in all the popes
territories this twenty. It is also marvel that he says not, that lambs
are more cruel then woolues. For he is ashamed of nothing. This which he
here writes, is a most shameless and impudent slander. For he cannot show,
that for popish religion any at all has been executed to death. Papists I
confess, to the number of some fifty or threescore have been executed, but
they were such, as either practiced treasons at home, or came from foreign
enemies abroad to the intent to work mischief against the state. Who albeit
they were woorthily put to death for their offenses; yet the pope that sent
them, and set them on, is to answer for their blood. Compare then the number
of those that have been massacred in France, and executed in Flaunders, and
that have by the cruelty of Inquisitors been done to death in diverse places
of Christendom: and you shall see, that the pope and papacy is that bloody
purple whore, whose vestures are red with the blood of saints, and whose
cruelties have far surmounted all other tyrants.

Now least he should seem to speak without book, he lays on his adversary
with textes of scriptures, and says, That every soul should be subject to
higher powers, and that there is no power, but of God: and how he that
resists power, resists Gods ordinance. And of this he would infer, that
those stand in bad terms, That resist and revile the pope. But all this
makes much against the pope, that has shaken off his princes yoke, and
stirs up rebels to resist lawful princes, promising them his blessing for
their wicked, and cursed treasons. For the pope this allegation is most fond
and senseless. For it can never be proved, that the popes tyrannical
government both in church and common wealth is of God. Let any learned papist
(for our adversary is but a seely Noddy) show, that the popes government and
fullness of power, which he claims over all churches, is of God. Let him also
prove, that God has given him an earthly kingdom, and authority to depose
princes, to translate kingdoms, to raise wars and rebellions and to cut the
throat of Christians, and murder Christ's lambs. Our adversary he passes this
over without touch, and only tells us, That the popes power has been
acknowledged in all Christendom for many years and ages. But he lies and
forgeth in this also. For the eastern churches never acknowledged this power,
nor could the pope ever sell his commodities in those countries for any money.
The churches of Afric likewise resisted the popes usurpations, and forbad
their people to run to Rome either for favor, or justice. The Frenchmen
never would receive the sixth book of decretalles. His provisions the kings of
England would never admit. his pilling legates were odious generally to all
Christendom. Finally albeit his tyranny prevailed much in latter times, yet
have Petr. de Alliac. de refor. eccl. Conci^. Basil. and grauam. G^^man.
honest men declared the discontentement, which they have received by his
burdensome laws, injurious excommunications, and most shameful exactions and
pillages.

He tells us moreover, How Christ said to his Apostles Luke 10. He that
hears you, hears me; and he that contemns you, contemns me. But first
he is mistaken in the persons to whom these words were spoken. For these
words were delivered to the seventy disciples, and not to the twelve. Beside,
were these words to be understood of the apostles, and their successors, yet
they concern the pope nothing. For he is no apostle, being neither called
immediately of God, nor sent into all the world, nor led into all truth, nor
being able to make his decretals of authentical credit. He is not the
apostles successor: for he feeds not, nor preaches, nor does any part of
apostolical function. Nay he does contrary to the apostles fashion, murder
Gods saints, trouble Christian people, and resist Christ's doctrine. The
apostles taught such things, as Christ gave the^ in instructions. The popes
publish nothing, but fond decretals, and strange doctrine not only diverse, but
also in many points contrary to Christ's Gospel and holy Scriptures.

But says N. D. The bishops of Rome be successors in the apostle Saint Peter's
seat. Which I do not altogether deny, if he mean the first bishops of Rome,
which were indeed true bishops, and succeeded Peter and other apostles
teaching apostolical doctrine. So all other true and godly bishops also were
successors of Peter: albeit they claymed not this universality and fullness of
power, which the pope pretends to belong to him. But whatsoever the first
bishops of Rome were, yet this concerns the pope nothing, for he is no
bishop, nor teacher, nor successor in Peter's chair, but rather Simon Magus his
successor buing and selling not only sacraments, and benefices, but also men's
souls. He succeeds also the Angelicks in worshipping angels, the
Carpocratians in dissoluteness and worshipping images, the Collyridians in
worshipping the virgin Mary, the Manichees in his half communions, and
forbidding of marriage to priests, the Pelagians in extolling the force of
nature and merit of works, and infinite other heretics in several points of
lewd doctrine. He succeeds also Nero in the Empire of Rome, rather then
Peter, that was subject to Neroes government.

He alleges also the example of the scribes and pharisees, and says That
Christ commanded his disciples to observe and do, whatsoever the scribes and
pharisees, that sat in Moses chair, said to them. And to speak truth, he
has more reason to compare the pope to scribes and pharisers corrupters of the
law, then to the successors of Christ's Apostles. But yet will not this serve
his purpose: for our Sauiors meaning was to show, that such as sat in Moses
seat, and taught his law were to be heard, albeit otherwise bad men. But the
popes do not sit in Peter's seat, nor in Moses chair, nor teach apostolical or
true doctrine.

He tells us further, That railers shall not inherit Christ's kingdom,
especially such, as rail against Magistrates. All which we admit. For it is
a sentence condemnatorie against the pope of Rome, and his faction, that of
late time have taken to themselves infinite liberty in all their writings to
rail against christian princes, and others not sparing any, yt is contrary to
their proceedings. For witness and proof hereof I refer my self to the
railing bulls of Paul the third against Henry the 8. of Pius quintus and
Sixtus 5. against Elizabeth his daughter; of Sixtus 5. and Gregory the 14.
against Henry the third and fourth of France, and of Sixtus 5. against the
prince of Condey: To Sanders, Ribadineiraes, Rishtons, Anniball Scotus, the
author of the commentary of the popes late constitutions, and other most
slanderous and railing libels against Queen Elizabeth. The wise fellow does
also condemn his own scurrilous railing against sir Francis Hastings. Against
us it makes nothing, that only in plain terms declare our adversaries lewd
dealings sparing all evil terms, as much as we can. Neither does this
concern the pope, that is neither Magistrate, nor good Christian. For that
which this Noddy writes, How the pope is a spiritual Magistrate, and has a
higher degree of authority then temporal magistrates, and that he does
represent immediately the person of Christ Jesus: is nothing but a piece of his
frierlike folly, and ignorance in spiritual and temporal matters. For if such
high authority had been given him, no doubt, but we should long ere this
have seen authentical writings of this donation, and have heard of the
particulars. Now we must take these words, as proceeding from a writer of
antichrists mark, that for Christ would commend unto us antichrist.

He tells us, That all ancient divines and doctors for above a thousand
years together have taught, that it is blasphemy to rail at the bishop of
Rome appointed by Christ to govern in his place, and damnation not to
acknowledge his authority. And yet he is not able to show either one sound
divine or doctor that has so taught. Nay he is not able to name many
canonistes, no nor schoolmen, that have so written or spoken. Thomas Aquinas
2.2. q. 13.
teaches him, That blasphemy is against God. Syluester Prierius Summa in
verb. blasphemia.
says, Blasphemy is a sin against God properly, which he proves by the
authority of Saint Ambrose, and improperly against saints. But the pope is
neither God, nor saint. Nay if it be blasphemy to attribute to man that which
is proper to God, as the foresaid schoolmen teach, then do the papists
blaspheme, that give to the pope Christ's power to remit sins, and stick not to
call him a god on earth. All ancient fathers of the church had the bishop of
Rome in no other esteem, then they had other godly bishops; neither did ever
any one suppose, that it was damnation not to acknowledge his authority. Nay
his universal authority over all the church, and infinite power in deposing
princes, not Calvin and Luther, but all ancient writers do gainsay and deny.
So that unless the Reader have great patience in this place, he will hardly
endure to read so shameless and notorious lies. I cannot choose but wonder,
that he is so lavish in talking of the popes authority without offering his
Reader any proof or reason of his sayings.

Because Luther and Calvin have spoken against the popes authority, therefore
does our adversary in a furious rage of railing call the first A loose
apostate friar, and the second, A searbackt priest for Sodomie. As if it were
lawful to rail and revel against any, but the pope and his darlings; and as
if his declamation against railers did not touch himself. I answer therefore,
that as it is lawful to reprove public offenders publicly, and to publish
the abominations of the whore of Babylon to the world; so none but such, as
have whoorish foreheads, think it lawful to publish notorious slanders
against innocent men. As for Luther, his innocence was such, that he gave the
adversary no just cause of evil speaking. And therefore they call him loose,
because he was matched in honest marriage, themselves being given to all
viciousness of living and looseness. Nay albeit themselves be friars, yet
they are still railing at him, for that once he had been a friar. Calvin was
never mass priest, and yet the priests of Baal object priesthood to him. He
lived without suspicion of incontinencie, and yet are they not ashamed to
charge him with most unnatural and abominable filthiness, and say he was
punished for it. But the author of this slander Bolsecus in an open synod did
confess with tears, that without ground he had slandred him, and the very
narration it self is so improbable, that any man may see it was devised by a
sot, suborned to rail upon Calvin, and most absurdly forged against so
innocent a man. Let it be proved, that such a punishment is due for such an
offense, and that Calvin at Noyon was so punished; and then we will confess,
that they have reason to rail against him. In the mean while, they have no
reason to object to Calvin their own faults, which are to be proved against
them by authentical witnesses. Visiones Vguetini.
Vguetinus a monk, in his visions does note the abominable Sodomitrie of
monks and priests. Novel. 2.
Boccace testifies that the Romish clergy offended most abominablie Both in
natural, and unnatural lust. John the 23. was condemned in the Council of
Constance for Sodomitrie. Sixtus quartus was generally noted for his villainous
affection to Petrus Riarius. Julius the second for his unnatural love of two
young French gentlemen was taxed by the masters of Paris. All Rome did well
know, that Julius the third kept Innocentius de Monte for his Ganymedes, and
made him Cardinal without desert. In the visitation of the monasteries in
England in king Henry the eightes days, it was found, that they were nothing
but sinkes of Sodom. John Casa for his virtue highly preferred by the pope
wrote verses in commendation of this sin. Hist. Jesuit c. 6.
Hazenmiller does in a large discourse show the filthiness of the Jesuits
lives. Lechery and filthiness of life among the priests of the whoorish
synagogue of Rome, is accounted but a small fault. The author of the book
called C. 21. 22. 23.
Onus Ecclesiae does testify this to be true, and brings suffcient proofs
against the infinite abominations of the Romish clergy. Nay it is not long
since the Jesuits contending with the priests and scholars of the English
college at Rome about the government thereof, charged them to be a pack of
Sodomites; and Harward one of their faction said, that he could directly
charge seven of the company with that abominable filthiness. And even Parsons
himself, has been under the hand of Surgeons, and cut and seared, which
shows that he is not altogether so clear, that he can without blushing
accuse others of uncleanness. May they not then be ashamed to charge Luther
and Calvin with those sins of which they were most clear, and the Romish
clergy most guilty? Beside this, in this place this crimination of Luther and
Calvin was very impertinent.

But says the wise Warder, If an herb should be presented to sir Francis to
eat, that for a thousand years has been held for poison by all Physicians,
one or two only excepted, that without actual experience hold the contrary,
would he eat it? And so the wise man by a similitude drawn from an herb
would prove the popes supremacy. ^or that the supremacy is no more to be
refused, being so long holden, then poison to be received for medicine contrary
to experience, and consent of Physicions. Where it is worthy to be noted how
the adversary compares the popes authority to a poisoned herb. But
howsoever he makes his comparison good, the argument certes which he brings
is not worth a rush. For in disallowing the popes tyrannical government, we
do not depend on two or three new doctors, no nor on two thousand, but upon the
authority of the apostles and apostolic church, and all ancient fathers of
the church. We find it contrary to the government of the church under the
law, to apostolic rules, to the ancient canons of Christ's church. If then we
will rightly judge, popish doctrine is better compared to this poisoned herb,
then ours: and the popish schoolmen and canonistes are the new physicions, of
which this Noddy speaks. Upon whose credit he that will eat poison, is
guilty of his own blood, and proceeds contrary to the rules both of
divinity and reason.

We say further, that all those reasons which this Noddy brings to prove
this noble and famous kingdom of the pope, upon which the papists do build
all their hope, as the Jews do upon the expectation of the terrestrial
kingdom of their Messiah, be nothing else but idle fancies of an addle head
distempered with affection to the pope, and hatred to his prince.

First P. 97,
says he, It cannot be imagined, but that Christ instituted a church to
continue, and to be governed to the worlds end. Which is a very grave
consideration, and very deep, continuing from Christ's time to the end of the
world. But it makes nothing for the popes government, nor for his universal
monarchy. For God had his church from Adam: yet did he not institute one
universal head and governor like the pope, nor approve any such like
government, wherein one had all power, and bought and sold men's souls for
money. But if Christ appointed, that his church should continue, then is it not
likely, that the papacy which tends to the destruction of the church, and of
all religion, came in by his appointment.

Secondly he tells us, That this government was to be under bishops and
prelates ordained by the holy ghost by imposition of hands of the apostles,
whose successors they were; and that this succession is to endure to the
worlds end. But he had said better, if he had determined that bishops should
be under government, rather then government under bishops. For that is best
government where governors are subject to laws, and not laws to men's
fancies, as it is in the popes government, where all matters are referred to
his determination. Further he had dealt more wisely, if he had passed over in
silence this ordination by the holy ghost, and succession from the apostles.
For if bishops appointed by the holy ghost, and that have right of succession
from the apostles be to govern the church of God: then must the popes of Rome
lay hands off, of this government. For neither can they show commission from
the holy ghost, nor right of succession, and truth of doctrine from the
apostles. Nay it appears they are rather wolves, then true bishops and
pastors, and succeed Nero rather in killing and murdering, then Peter in
feeding and cherishing Christ's lambs. Neither is it sufficient for them to
allege, that they sit at Rome. For the Turkish priests sit at Jerusalem,
Antioche, and Cesarea, yet are they neither successors of James, nor Peter,
that sometime taught in those places.

His third reason, as he says, is drawn from the light of nature. For because
among the prelates of the church, Christ would have some subordination for
avoiding schism and confusion, and because all philosophers held without
controversy, that the monarchy was the best among all regiments, he says it
is very probable, even by reason it self, that Christ instituted a
monarchical government in his church. But first it is no small error in
matters of spiritual government to draw a pattern from humane reason, that
in spiritual matters is so blind, and from philosophers, that understood
nothing; and to ground faith upon probabilities, and likelyhoods. Lib 2. de
pontif. R^m.
Bellarmine has hitherto borne us in hand, that Christ instituted the papacy.
But this wise Noddy lays the foundation of it upon probability, and humane
reason. Secondly it is absurd to think, that the same government is best both
for church, and common wealth. For the church is Christ's mystical body, and
has her head in heaven, and is governed by divine laws. The common wealth is
a political body, and has her governors present with her here in earth, and
is governed by laws of men. There all command comes from heaven, here the
most part comes from men. Thirdly albeit Christ would have a subordination of
officers in church government, yet makes that nothing for the popes
extrauagant power, but rather against it. For when Christ made his
subordination, and Ephesians 4. and 1. Cor. 12.
set out the list of the officers of the church, he gave apostles, prophets,
evangelists, pastors and doctors, not so much as mentioning the popes
holiness, which could not have been done, if the pope had bin constituted
chief governor of Christ his church. Lastly it is a bold and impudent untruth
to say, that all philosophers held a monarchy to be the best form of
government. This simple hoddy Noddie has neither read all, nor many: and
therefore cannot tell. But his fellows could have told him, and their writings
declare, that Plato, Cicero, Philo, Josephus, and diverse others condemn
monarchical government: and that Aristotle prefers an aristocratical
government before a monarchical. Nay Bellarmine himself above all governments
commends a form mixed of diverse states, and forms of common-welthes.

His fourth reason is very celestial. for Because God made Lucifer first head
of the angels, and afterward head of all devils; he believes That one pope
must necessarily be head of the catholic church. So his first reason for the
papacy was from man and humane reason, the second is from the devil of hell,
and his authority. Is it not likely to prove a brave government, that has so
strange a precedent? Beside it is very uncertain, whether God established any
such government among angels, as is supposed. Nay it is not likely, seeing
Christ Jesus is head of angels, and present with them, that they have any head,
but him. In the 40. of Job, and 14. of Isay there is no such matter to be
found, as our adversary pretends: nor does Saint Austin, or any other father
teach any such doctrine. Mention is made of Michael and his angels Apocal. 12.
But that he is head of all angels, cannot out of those words be proved. As
for our adversaries themselves, it is very unlikely they should know the
economy and government of angels in heaven, that will not see, what God has
ordained concerning his church on earth.

Fifthly he affirms, That God established a monarchical government in the
church of the Jews giving them a high priest to direct all other priests, and
al synagogues in the world. Wherein he bewraieth his great ignorance in matters
of the people of God. For in that state the chief authority for matters both
ecclesiastical and civil was in the council of state, which they called
Sanedrin, which was appointed by God himself Deuteronomy. 17. and judged all causes,
and persons, yea the high priest himself. Afterward the chief command was in
princes both concerning priests, and other church matters. Solomon deposed one
high priest and placed another: all which makes against the supposed
government of the chief priest. They that list to see these matters proved
out of Scriptures, and writers of the histories of that people, let them read
M. Sutcliffes treatise De Pontifice Romans lib. 1. c. 5. 6. 7. 8.

His sixth reason is drawn from the similitude of rivers, trees and all
creatures. But he is much deceived, if he think all creatures to have liked of
monarchical government. All birds have not one head, no nor all beasts, nor
all trees. Could he show me who is the head governor of all owls or
woodcockes, he should work a wondrous feat for the establishing of his holy
fathers monarchy. If not, then his similitudes will show him to be a Noddy and
a woodcocke. Which also appears in this, that there is great difference in
things natural and political, and that the papal government is not like to
those natural things, which he mentions.

His seventh reason stands upon this ground, That without a monarchy in the
church, schism and division cannot be avoided. But that is but a point of his
folly and ignorance. For no doubt, but God provided against schism, when he
gave chief authority to the council of state Deuteronomy. 17. And Christ provided
for the same likewise, when he chose not one, but twelve apostles, and sent
them abroad into the world with one and the same commission. As for the humane
devises of popes, they were never so sufficient remedies against this supposed
mischief of schism, but that there has fallen out among the popes some 22.
or more schisms, and infinite sects, and divisions among the members of the
Romish synagogue.

Last of all he says, The church is compared to a well ordered army, that must
necessarily have a known general: likewise to a house, a sheepefould, a ship,
the ark of Noah; all which things have one head governor. But nothing is more
prejudicial to so great a government, then that it should rest upon so weak
similitudes, which prove nothing, further then they have confirmation out of
the holy Scriptures, from whence they are taken. For example out of these
similitudes we may with better reason overthrow the papacy, then establish
it. For if every household, and ship, and sheepefold have several heads, and
are not under one chief master of household, or one principal shipmaster, or
shepherd; then is not this general monarchy proved by so weak similitudes.
We may therefore very well conclude out of the premises, that all the
arguments, which the Warder with his multiplicity of words has brought to
prove, that the government of the church universal ought to be monarchical,
are misshapen, evil featured, weak timbred, and utterly insufficient. Beside
all that we have yet alleged, we are to understand, that Christ is so the
monarke of the church universal, that no other can be admitted in his place
without injury to him. There is but one head of one body, one husband of one
wife, one chief governor of one state. As for the pope he being no bishop
deserves no place in the government of the church; and the first bishops of
Rome were but fellows first with other bishops, and afterward with other
patriarchs.

So then it appears not, that the external government of the church was
monarchical. Neither do I think, that this Noddy will prove, that Peter was
the monarke or head of the church under Christ. His reasons do hang together
like ropes of sand. Christ's proceeding with Peter, says he, declares his
meaning. But it appears not, that his meaning was to make him the monarke of
the church. For albeit he did that to Peter, that he did to none of the rest
of the apostles, yet does it not follow thereof, that he meant to give him any
such privilege or authority, as is pretended. For he did that to Judas and to
the sons of Zebedei, that he did not to any other apostle. Judas was made
treasurer; yet was he not made a monarke of the world, although the purse does
work much in such cases. He says further, That Christ first reueiled to Peter
the hidden mystery of the incarnation, and of the blessed Trinity, and that he
said only to him, Rogaui prote, ne deficiat fides tua. And, That he promised
to him, that the gates of hell should never prevail against his seat. And
shows, How Christ paid tribute only for Peter, and for himself, and
changed Peter's name, and did miracles in Peter's ship, and how Peter walked on
the waters, and Christ told Peter what death he should die, and washed Peter's
feet first, and would have his resurrection declared first to Peter, and such
like other singularities. But it is most ridiculous to conclude that Peter was
made monarke of the church, because either Christ revealed to him the hidden
mysteries of the faith, or praide for him, or changed his name, or paid
tribute for him, or made him walk on the sea, or foretold his death, or
washed his feet or did any such like matter. For if every of these actions
should bring with it a monarchy, there would be more monarkes, then
monarchies. Moreover the Noddy does affirm diverse things most falsely, and
impudently, which he shall never be able to prove. For what can be more
absurd, then to think, that none ever understood the mystery of Christ's
incarnation, and the holy Trinity, before Peter? Again what was revealed to
Peter, that was not likewise revealed to other apostles? Moreover it is
manifest, that Christ John 17.
prayed as well for the rest of the apostles, as for Peter, and changed both
Matthew the apostles name, and the names of the sons of Zebedei, and told
them, what death they should die, as well as Peter. Finally it is most untrue
that Christ prayed, that the gates of hell should not prevail against the
popes seat, whom they take to be Peter's successor, or that he paid tribute
for Peter alone. Why then does he avouch these matters so confidently, and
leaves them without proofs so nakedly?

To supply his former weak argument, he proceeds further and tells us,
That Peter first called a council, and caused Matthias to be chosen in the
place of Judas, and first after the coming of the holy ghost published the
gospel. He tells us also, That Peter wrought the first miracle, and as high
judge condemned Ananias and Sapphira to death, and that he first saw by a
vision, that the gentiles were to be admitted to Christianity. Likewise, That
he passed through all, and that Paul went up to Ierrusalem to see Peter, and
finally, That Peter by Christ's special order left Antioche and went to Rome.
But if these be the grounds of Peter's monarchy, and of the Romish faith, it
must needs fall out, that the faith of papists is built not only upon sand,
but upon mere conjectures and fancies so weak, that they cannot bring forth
any strong conclusion. For what is more vain and ridiculous, then to conclude
that Peter was chief and universal monarke of the church, because he wrought
the first miracle, and was visited of Paul, and went to Antioche? Besides, it
stands on false positions. First it is no where written, That Peter called
the first council. Nay it is apparent, that returning from the mount of
olives, they all came together of their own accord, without commandment from
Peter. Secondly Matthias was not chosen by the apostles, but by God himself.
Thirdly Peter wrought not the first miracle. For what greater miracle, then
that the apostles spoke with tongues, which they had not learned: which was
common to them all? Fourthly he condemned not Ananias and Sapphira, as high
judge, no nor by way of iudciall proceeding, but rather by miracle wrought
their death. Fifthly it is most absurd to think, that the other apostles did
not understand, that the gentiles were to be called to the faith, when sending
them into the world our savior bad them, Go teach all nations. Lastly it is no
where to be showed, that Christ gave any special commandment, that Peter
should remove his seat from Antioche to Rome. If this hoddy Noddy think
otherwise, let him if he can, bring forth his proofs, and show where this
commandment is to be seen. And if he mean to prove Peter to have been
constituted head monarch of the church by these grounds, he may do well to
frame his arguments, and to prove his positions soundly. If not, then we do
him to understand, that all that monarchy, which the papists so much stand
upon, is built upon fancies, and dreams, and mere foolerie without firm
foundation.

To strengthen his weak building, he does in the end take upon him a great
matter. For he P. 100.
vaunteth, That he will show forth a plain commission for the monarchical
government of Peter, given him by Christ, in two places recorded, beside others
not recorded. The first says he, is in these words Matthew. 16. Thou art Peter
or a Rock. The second in these John 21. Feed my lambs, feed my sheep. In
the words written by Matthew, he tells us, That the principality of the
church is promised to Peter, as the words themselves do show, and the consent
of ancient fathers both Greek and Latin does expound. In the latter he
says, Peter was made pastor general of all Christ's flock, as both the words
themselves do import, and all antiquity with one consent has ever taken the
sense to be. And this is the commission, these are the records, these the
proofs, which he vanteth of. But if he acquit not himself the better, he
will be taken and convicted for a forger of false patents and commissions, for
a falsifier of records, and for a corrupter of fathers, and a vain pretender
of antiquity. And all that read his vain writings with judgment, will
condemn him worthy, if not to have his ears clipped, because our proceeding
is not before the tribunal of judges, yet to have his coxcombe pared for
crowing, and crying so loud, and so proudly upon so little cause. For first
the words of Christ are not, Thou art Peter, or a Rock? As he forgeth
changing a proper name into a noune appellatiue; but simply Thou art Peter.
Secondly he confesses himself, that Christ in the first place gives nothing,
but only promises. Now it is no warrant for any to allege a promise of a
commission, unless he can prove an act passed, or else exhibit the
commission it self. Thirdly nothing is here promised to Peter, but the keys
of the church. But those keys are common not only to the apostles, but also
to all true pastors, and successors of the apostles, and therefore cannot
signify any sole, monarchical, or supreme government of the whole church.
Fourthly suppose that Peter were in this place promised to be made the rock
and foundation of the church, which as the fathers expound it, was only in
respect of his confession, or of Christ the rock which he confessed; yet that
is no privilege, nor matter properly belonging to Peter, but a common grant
made to all the apostles, who in respect of their doctrine, and after a sort,
may be termed the Ephesians. 2. and Apoc. 21.
foundation of the church. Fifthly it cannot be showed, that any greek, or
latin fathers do so expound the words Matthew. 16. as if Christ meant to give to
Peter the sole monarchical government of the church. Let them speak in their
own words, and he shall perceive it to be, as I say. Nay it appears by
Bellarmine himself, that no such matter can be proved by the fathers.
Sixthly Christ saying to Peter, feed my sheep, and redoubling his charge three
times, gave him not any new authority, but rather stirred him up to the
execution of his office, and sought to draw from him a threefould confession,
to answer his former threefould denial. And so says Nazianzen in Orat. in
sanct epiph. lumina, and Cyrill upon John, Lib. 12. c. 44. and Augustine. tract.
123. in Joan. and de vtilit. poenit. c. 1. and sermon. 149. de tempore. Seventhly
the charge of feeding was as well committed to all the apostles Matthew 28. as to
Peter. John 21. Lastly not one of the fathers does by these words prove, that
Peter was ordained the monarchical, and sole supreme governor of the church.
Saint In c. vlt. Luc.
Ambrose says, That Peter was preferred before all the apostles, but he
speaks not of his office or function, but of love and affection. For speaking
of all the apostles, he says, Ibidem.
Similiter praedicandi his per totum orbem mandat officium. Saint In c. Joan.
vlt.
Augustine says only, That Christ committed his sheep to be fed of Peter.
But so he did also commit them to be fed of the rest of the apostles, when
he gave them authority to teach all nations. In c. 21. Joan.
Chrysostom says, That Christ committed to Peter the care of his brethren:
but we may not imagine, that other apostles were careless, or had no care
committed to them; neither may we imagine, that all are supreme and sole
governors, that have care committed to them. Epiphanius does In Anchirat.
testify, That Christ committed his sheepefold to Peter. So do the holy
scriptures testify, that the apostles had all commission to feed Christ's
sheep, and to govern his fold. But says our wise adversary, P. 101.
These words, Pasce ouesmeas, were spoken to Peter in preeminence, and highest
degree. But Saint De simplic. Praelat.
Cyprian, and C. In nouo. did. 21.
Anacletus, that were wiser then he, make all the apostles equal in power and
apostolical dignity: and the common commission given to all does prove them
equal. And least any might surmise, that the apostles received any power from
Peter the apostle, Gal. 1. and 2.
Saint Paul says, he had his authority from God and not from man, and
Received nothing from the rest of the apostles. Most vain therefore and
foolish is all this our adversaries discourse concerning the supposed monarchy
of Peter. But whatsoever is to be supposed of Peter, yet that concerns the
pope of Rome, that is more like to Nero and Heliogabalus, then Peter, just
nothing. For he is not the Rock, of which Christ speaks, he has not the
keys of heaven delivered unto him, he feeds not Christ's sheep, nor lives
in poor estate and contempt, nor suffers persecution, as did the holy
apostle saint Peter.

But says the woordy Warder our adversary, All the christian world has made
ever this most certain and infallible deduction; that Christ gave not Saint
Peter these eminent prerogatives for himself alone, but for his posterity and
successors also, that should ensue him in his seat to the worlds end. As if
whatsoever Saint Peter had, must necessarily descend to his counterfect
successors the popes of Rome. Beside that, the vanity of this brag of all
the christian world, and of the infallibility of this collection may appear
in diverse particulars. First it is clear, that diverse of Peter's prerogatives
were personal, as to have his name changed, to be called Cephas, to work
miracles, to speak with toongs, to confess Christ three times, and such other
like. And therefore strange it is, that this ignorant fellow durst either talk
of all the christian world, wherein he is but a stranger, or would say, that
all the christian world believed these prerogatives of Peter to belong to the
popes of Rome. Secondly it can never be proved, that Peter had, or that the
world believed, that he had power to depose kings, to translate kingdoms, to
dispense with oaths, to grant pardons, to release out of purgatory, to hear
appeals out of all the world, and such like points of the popes power.
Thirdly, admit Peter had apostolical power over the whole world, yet neither
was that proper to Peter, nor did any sound doctor of the church, or true
Christian imagine, that whatsoever belonged to Peter, descended to the pope of
Rome. Fourthly the adversaries themselves cannot prove this succession by any
such infallible and certain deduction, as is pretended. Wherefore unless this
Noddy can show, first that the pope has succeeded Peter in the general charge
of apostolical government, and teaching throughout the world; and secondly,
that the pope is a true bishop, pastor, and successor of Peter: and thirdly,
that neither the bishops of Antioch, nor Caesarea, nor Ioppe, nor Lydda where
Peter taught, nor any, save the bishops of Rome, succeeded in Peter's seat: and
fourthly that the popes authority in giving laws, in censures, exactions,
dispensations, judgments was generally allowed and never contradicted: and
finally that he still holds the apostolic doctrine and faith entirely, and
admits no heresies, nor false opinions in religion: unless I say he prove
all this, he is at the end of his reckoning for the popes authority, and
shows himself to be but a vain babbler, and a foolish challenger, that even
in the midst of danger conueieth himself out of the steccato. And I do much
wonder, that all true Christians do not suspect this manner of proceeding, and
detest the pride and vanity of this discourser, that leaves his miserable
disciples more perplexed, then before. For he teaches, that upon pain of
damnation they must subject themselves to the popes authority, and yet when it
comes to the iumpe, he is neither able to justify the popes authority in
making and dissoluing laws, nor in ordering bishops throughout the world, nor
in judging of controversies, nor authorizing the scriptures, nor in dispensing
in cases reserved, nor in deposing princes, nor in raising wars, and handling
both the swords, and such like matters. Nay he is not able to prove, that he
is Peter's true successor, or a lawful bishop. He teaches subjects to rebel,
and sets princes to murder Christians, and blind papists blindely obey; and
yet no warrant can the popes proctor bring, to justify the popes strange
desseines, and doings.

Only he endeavors in the last end of his pleading for the pope, to show
That this land ought especially to respect the sea of Rome for being twice
converted from paganism to Christian religion: and that first by Eleutherius;
then by Gregory the first, which were both bishops of Rome. And here he
triumpeth, and thinking that he has satisfied his reader with an exquisite and
delicate dish at the ending of his papal banquet; he takes away the table,
and bids all his guests Proface, and a dieu. But if his readers be not more
wary, while they think to be fed with wholesome meat, they are like to be
gulled which googeons. This gull certes in this his catastrophe seems to have
no other purpose. For first it is a mere fable to say, that this land was
converted from paganism either by the one, or by the other of these two. For
Christianity was in England long before Eleutherius time, and stories say, he
did only, and that by his deputies, christen king Lucius. And when Augustine
the monk came to the Saxons, the Britons long before that were Christians.
Secondly neither did Eleutherius, nor Gregory preach the faith here, nor give
much aid to the conversion of the people of this land. Only Eleutherius sent
Eluanus and Meduinus two Britons otherwise called Fugatius and Damianus to king
Lucius, and Gregory sent Austin the monk hither. But the Saxons were converted
by certain Britons and French, that could speak the Saxon language, and not
by Austin, that could do nothing, but hold ye cross like a crosier-clerke,
whiles others preached. Thirdly albeit this land had been converted by
Eleutherius and Gregory, yet this is but a personal favor, rather making us
beholding to those two, then to those, that succeeded them. To prove that we
owe any obedience to the sea of Rome for that cause, this argument is all too
weak. For the church of Rome was first converted by those that came from
Jerusalem: yet does not Rome yield any obedience to the bishops of Jerusalem.
Nay they have forgotten Saint Paul, whom we are assured, preached at Rome, and
do all depend of Peter. Likewise the Phrysons and Germans were converted by
Saxons out of England; yet do they not subject themselves to the church of
England. Fourthly the late popes of Rome have been always beholding to the
kings and people of this country. One king gave the tribute of peter pence:
others gave them great privileges and authority; by which means they drew out
infinite treasure out of England. Bonner In praefat. in lib. de ver. obed.
says, that the revenues of the pope out of England were equal to the kings
revenues. In requital whereof the popes have Matthew. Paris.
sent to our princes either glasses, or feathers, or rotten bones, or paper and
lead, and such like toies. Adrian the fourth gave to our princes a title to
Ireland, which he had no power to give. Innocent the fourth to king Henry the
thirdes son gave a bare title to the kingdom of Naples, which cost infinite
treasure, and in the end proved a mere mockery. Other popes have showed
themselves always opposite to the English nation, and to the kings of this
realm. No sooner had the pope intelligence, that William of Normandy was
purposed to come with a puissant army to conquer this land (which could not
be done without great waste, wrack and slaughter) but he Matthew. Paris.
caused his standard and ensigns to be hallowed and blessed. So much did it
please him, to hear of an invasion of our country, and so holy a thing did
war and waste of this kingdom seem unto him. Another pope did uphold
Thomas Becket and his rebellious consorts against king Henry the second,
favored his professed enemies, and in the end forced him to a most shameful
penance. Matthew. Paris in Ioanne.
Innocent the third thundered out his excommunications against king John, and
stirred up foreign enemies against him. Neither did he ever cease to pursue
him, until such time as he had made both the king himself, and as much as in
him lay, all his people tributarie to forreiners. At which when the Nobility
and people of England repined, the furious pope in great choler Ibidem.
sent out his interdictions, excommunications and curses against them, and
never ceased to pursue them, as long as he had means to hurt them. In the
wars, which the kings of England made in France, for the obteining of their
right in that kingdom, the popes crossed them by all means possible, and
declared themselves utter enemies to our nation, being glad of any calamity
that happened to us, and sorrowful for our good success. But never did any
declare more malice against any of our kings, then Paul the third against
king Henry the eight the Queens most noble father, as appears by his most
execrable D. Sanders de sch^sm. lib. 1.
bull, which he published against him. For therein he does not only curse the
king, and stirs up both his subjects, and foreign enemies against him; but
also curses and banneth all his friends, subjects, and partakers. Their goods
he gives away for a spoil; their persons he will have sold for slaves; and
the waste of the whole land he would have remain, as a monument of his
holinesses great displeasure. Neither did it content him to prosecute the
living only, unless the dead also were thrown out into the fields, as
unworthy of christian burial. Such is the charity of his holiness toward
christians, and his loving affection toward the English nation. Neither was
Paul the thirdes fact singular. For in our times Pius quintus, and Sixtus
quintus have published no less odious, and scandalous excommunications against
her most gracious Majesty, most bitterly cursing her, and all her loving
subjects, then their predecessor did against Henry the eight and his people.

Further they have not only gone about to trouble this state by rebellions,
but also to subvert it by foreign The plots were taken upon Criton a Jesuit,
Throgmorton and others.
invasions. Have we not then great cause to honor and love the popes
holiness, that has showed himself so friendly to our princes, and nation?
We may do well also to entertain such priests and friars, as come from him,
seeing they wish us no more harm, then the destruction of the prince, the
overthrow of religion and the state, and the slaughter of our people. Neither
have they any thing in their vows, but that all our throtes were cut by the
Spaniard. Nay when neither by open hostility, nor secret treasons and practice
they could prevail against us, they have encouraged certain railing and
scurrilous companions by infamous libels to defame her Majesty, to rail on
her chief Counselors, and to dishonor all our nation, and those especially
that have showed themselves most forward in doing God and their country
service. This prating companion shows himself very spiteful, albeit he
would dissemble it. Sanders, Rishton, Allen, Ribadineira and others have
published cart-lodes of slanders and lies against the Prince, the Nobility,
and diverse other honest men.

Finally beside these wrongs and disgraces, which concern matters temporal,
the popes of Rome have gone about to wrong us in matters spiritual, which
concern the salvation of our souls. For they have not only sought to deprive
us of the word of God in our mothers language, of true faith and doctrine, of
the sincere administration of the Sacraments, and of a true ministry
according to Christ his institution: but also in lieu thereof to establish the
idolatrous worship to stock and stones, of angels, of saints departed; and to
bring into the church the abomination of the mass, together with manifold
superstitions, impieties and heresies. And for this cause they have secretly
sent into this land diverse It is thought, that above 400. of them, are
dispersed in diverse corners in England.
troops of massing priests and friars all marked with antichrists brand, to
seduce simple people, and to draw them to superstition, idolatry, and heresy.
Wherefore let all true christians, and true hearted Englishmen open their eyes
and beware, that they be not oppressed both with spiritual and temporal
bondage and slavery. This is it which the popes of Rome entend, and have by so
many practices labored: this is also the drift of this glauering parasites
discourse. This the merchants of Babylon, and slaves of antichrist, which
secretly lurk in diverse corners of this land watching their opportunity, do
wholly purpose. But remember that you have fair warning.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Spanish nation, and king Philip the second, and his practices against
England; wherein also the eight encountre of our adversary N. D. is examined.

Loath I am and very unwilling, where the different betwixt us and the Spaniard
has been so long in deciding by blows, to begin any long contention about
words and terms. It is a common saying, words are light as wind, and men of
action, in words commonly use least ostentation. Beside that, I hold it no
good course to set out inuectiues against princes, and especially such, as are
now departed this life, and have received their guerdon, whether they have done
good or evil. The popes and their parasites take to themselves liberty in
infinite slanderous pamphlets to disgrace all men opposite to their faction,
neither sparing prince nor private person, living nor dead: but all honest men
detest this frierlike fashion. I think it also a vain thing, to recount
matters formerly past, that concern us little or nothing.

But yet seeing this prattling and busy fellow our adversary will needs have
the Spaniards and their late king the subject of this encounter, and like a
fugitive traitor sticks not to advance them above his own nation, and to
plead their cause against his own prince and country; I am content thus far
to reason of them, as that men may learn how far to trust them, and
understand, that we have no reason either to fear their force, or to yield
them any superiority, or to think better of the Spanyard, then of our own
nation. Lastly least any might suppose our adversary to have spoken wisely and
learnedly, I will briefly run over his discourse, and note the lewdness,
and insufficiency of his pleading. His unnatural and unkind dealing against
his prince and nation, before which he takes on him to prefer the Spaniard,
I need not to note, for it is too too apparent, and sufficiently known to
any, that will take pains to read over his idle discourse.

The time has been, when the English and Spaniardes did well agree, as
appeared not only by mutual trade and conversation of both nations one with
another, but also by diverse public contractes and leagues made betwixt them.
Sometime the kings of England matched with the house of Spain, and sometime
the Spanish kings have had their wives out of England; and both of them
esteemed much of the amity each of other: albeit the Spaniard has been more
happy to receive more profit of this conjunction with England, then our nation
by our matches and linking with the house of Spain. For by the aid of our
archery the Spaniardes diverse times have obtained victory against ye Mores: and
Don Pedro king of Castile being expulsed by his subjects; by the black
prince, and the English forces was restored to his kingdom. Neither could
Ferdinand king of Spain so easily have possessed the kingdom of Navarre, had
not the forces of English sent for his aid by king Henry the seventh
distracted the French so, that they could not come in time to succor their
friends distressed. Contrariwise king Edward the first matching with ye house
of Castile received small advancement, as is declared in the chronicle of In
Henric. 3.
Matthew of Paris: and king Henry the seventh matching with Catherine of
Spain, presently lost his son and heir. The same woman also being married
afterward to king Henry the eight, was like to have caused great trouble both
to the king, and this realm, upon the dissolution of that unlawful contract;
if the kings vigilancie and magnanimity had not surmounted the same.

Great friendship likewise has been between our kings, and the dukes of
Burgundy, of whom the late kings of Spain are lineally descended: betwixt the
English nation, and the people of the low countries depending on the house of
Burgundy. The nations by mutual trade reaped great profit each of other. The
princes by the aid and countenance each of other were much strengthened
against their common enemies. Charles the fifth in his time much esteemed for
his wisdom, did make so great account of our nation, that he chose Mary
Queen of England, as a fit match for his son Philip, to whom he left all
his dominions; and dying, gave his son this special charge, that he should
never break with England, nor loose the favor of our nation. He did wisely
consider our strength by sea, and what aid we were able to afford him being
friend; and what hurt we might do unto him, if we conjoined our forces with his
enemies.

Much it were to be wished, that the friendship of the Spaniard had been as
profitable to the English nation, as the friendship of the English was to the
Spanyard. But then we should not have lost Guines and Caleis by this
conjunction, nor been spoiled of the remainder of the ancient conquest of our
ancestors in France by his means; neither then should the English for his
pleasure have been intricated with the wars with France. Howsoever the same
ought to have been profitable unto us; yet for our goodwill a man would never
have thought, that we should have reaped displeasure and wrong.

Yet we see, what is come to pass. This league of friendship is broken, and
all ancient good offices done by our nation to the Spaniard quite forgotten.
King Philip when her Majesty came first to the crown, forgot not only the
bond of alliance with her sister, but also his fathers charge. In the treaty of
peace between France and Spain, he Guicciardin de paesi bassi.
forsook his sister and left her to shift for her self; and that also in a
war, which himself had begun. Not long after, at the solicitation of pope Pius
the fifth, he became our professed enemy, and sought the destruction of her
Majesty. Girol. Catenae in vita Pij Quinti.
one says, that to secure his dominions in the low countries, he determined to
aid the rebels in the north, and to overthrow the Queen. This record of
Pius his negotiation with king Philip, does overthrow all Philopaters
calumniation.
Non potendo assicurare i suoi stati di Fiandra con miglior mezzo, che con
l'abbatimento de quella reina. Both Pius the fifth and he conjoined their forces
and counsels together to do us hurt, determining under the conduct of Chiapin
Vitelli to send over aid to the rebels in England. Hauendo commandato says
Ibidem.
Catena, Il re catholico, che dalla part di Fiandra si mandasse in Inghilterra
vna quantita di gente armata sotto la scorta di Chiapin Vitelli, and Pio quinto
rimessa grossa prouisione di denari, etc. When the Duke of Alua made some stay
of the execution of the kings commandment, the king again sent him express
word, that notwithstanding any difficulties, or considerations whatsoever, he
should Ibidem.
aid the rebels of England, which he termed, His friends. Nuouamente il re
gli comando, che non ostante qual si volesse difficulta, o consideratione,
seguisse l'impresa d'aiutar gli amici d'Inghilterra, and gli mando appresso la
persona di Ridolphi, and denari per l'esse quutione. Yea and with such
affection did he prosequute this matter, that when he saw his purpose took no
effect, he wept for sorrow. E'lre Catholico says Ibidem.
Catena, ne pianse alla presenza del Cardinal Alessandrino. By this therefore
it appears, that all love of that king to her Majesty, which this
philippicall parasite so much pretends, was altogether extinguished, and al
bonds of alliance and friendship utterly broken: and that by king Philips
Andreas Philopater his slanderous report to the contrary is refuted by Pius
Quintus his letters.
default first.

When secret practices of rebels prevailed not, the king provided a navy
which his flatterers called invincible, and a great force and army of land
soldiers, determining with fire and sword to invade this realm, and by fine
force to dispossess her Majesty of her crown. What success his enterprise
had, the world knows, and therefore we need not here report. His invincible
navy was well beaten and scattered; his soldiers and mariners for the most
part either were slain, or taken, or dyed of want and misery; and the mighty
monarke of whose Potent force our adversary makes such crakes, was overcome by
a woman. But whatsoever the succsse was, it appears, that this was no
brotherly part, thus to invade her Majesty; nor any point of a catholic and
Christian king, to oppugn peacible Christians for the profession of true
catholic religion.

Nay albeit this great loss and shame, might have forced him to acknowledge
Gods justice and powerful working against him, and caused him to surcease his
cruel persecution against Christians; yet did the same work nothing in his
hard heart; nor could he be induced to give over his former desseignements so
long as breath lasted. anno 1594. being very weak, and for some days
speechless, the This was written out of Spain.
first words which he uttered after he came to himself were these, Is the
adelantado gone for England? So much was his head troubled about that voyage.
His friends also report, that he should say, that he would sell his silver
candlestickes, and the rest of the furniture of his chapel, before he would
give over the wars against England. And I believe it to be true, seeing
notwithstanding diverse repulses and infinite losses anno 1588. 1594. 1595. and
1599. he never gave over until such time, as he gave up his spirit, and
yielded to nature.

The papists do exceedingly commend his zeal in popish religion, or rather
his great hatred against the professors of true religion. So earnest he was in
this cause, that he spared not his own only dear son, for that he was
thought to favor that truth which we profess. E cosa molto notabile, says In
vita Pij 5.
Gierome Catena, Ch' el re facesse sacrificio della sua carne, and del suo
sangue a dio. Et Pio publicamente commendo la Christiana and catholica mente
and religione di lui dicendo; quia proprio filio non pepercit. Albeit his son
Charles was a prince for his years of great excellency, and then the only
son of his father, and the hope of his succession; yet did not that move the
fathers hard heart to pity, but he made him a sacrifice for the good of the
Romish clergy: and pope Pius did highly extol this fact comparing king Philip
most impiously and blasphemously to God almighty, that gave his son to be
sacrificed for the redemption of mankind. But to forbear now to speak of the
popes blasphemy, and to speak of the Spaniards malice, it is very apparent,
that king Philip, while he lived, professed himself an enemy unto all that
professed true and catholic religion; and especially to her Majesty, that
has always according to her style declared her self to be a defender of the
faith, and a principal maintainer of the professors of true religion, and all
true catholics.

He has also showed himself an enemy to our whole nation, entending with
force to subdue us, and by all means to trouble us. He has taken many In the
embarguo anno 1586.
honest men of our nation prisoners, and confiscated their ships and goods
without any lawful proclamation of wars. He has suffered diverse of Her
Majesty's subjects to be murdered by the bloody Inquisitors, contrary to all
justice. Neither have the rebels attempted any thing against the state either
in England or Iacobo Geraldino Cantabrorum ac Gallecorum manum concessit.
Andreas Philopater p. 134.
Ireland, but by his knowledge, abettement and procurement.

The whole Spanish nation also has drunk very deep of that cup of hatred,
which the pope has filled to their king. Don Iuan de Austria, while he was
governor of the low countries, did never cease to This was a part of Escouedoes
negotiation, at his going into Spain.
persuade his brother, to transport an army into England, and here to make
wars. The duke of Alua before that was likewise desirous, that his son might
pass with forces into England for the aid of the northren rebels. And that
of long time has been a common argument for priests and friars to handle in
their sermons. They have also These pardons were found upon diverse Spaniards
ann. 1588.
preached indulgences and remission of sins, and offered the same to all, that
would fight against us, accompting it percase meritorious to kill any of our
nation. If their journey 1588. had succeeded, either they had killed our
people, or made slaves of them to work in their Indian mines, or to row in
their galleys, or else to do other base and servile work* our goods they had
already swallowed in their hope, and meant to have divided the land amongst
them, and to have reigned here like great conquerors. And albeit at that time
they had no good success, yet have they not given over their hope, nor ceased
to take all opportunities to work us either dishonor, or damage.

I omit to speak of the wrongs they have done to particulers, albeit many and
grievous; for that our dispute is about the disposition of the Spaniardes to
our whole nation. And yet many particular wrongs, and acts of injustice and
cruelty do argue a great hatred to the English in general. But to forbear
to speak of particular actions, and of general attempts formerly passed, it
appears they mean not thus to give us over. For out of Spain there come
priests and others daily to practice treason against her Majesty and the
state. It is not long, since Squire was executed for a most horrible treason
plotted in Seuile. Neither can the shameless and impudent denials and cauils
of Jesuits and priests which they make at the process against him, either
make that undone which is done, or qualify so foul a fact. Nay admit the
poor fellow should err in some circumstance, yet no reason can be alleged
why he should accuse and charge himself in a matter that concerned his life,
wrongfully. And to the intent there may be a succession of traitors and
conspirators which may make the way more ready for their intended invasions
and conquestes; at common costs they maintain two Seminaries of English
fugitives and traitors. I know they pretend planting of popish religion: but if
that were their only mark they aim at, why does Testified against him by
priests in their memorials.
Parsons cause every one of them that come for England to take an oath, that
they shall to their uttermost power prefer the Infantaes of Spaines title to
the crown of England? Is this no point of treason? And does not this flow
from some purpose of the Spaniard against our country and nation?

To make our nation hateful, Ribadineira a certain ribaldly friar has
published a most odious discourse of schism in Spanish, wherein he omitteth
nothing that may procure us dishonor or hinderance.

And yet these are the men, whom our adversary commends and defends, and
unto whom Cardinal Allen, Robert Parsons, and other Jesuits and priests, that
lurk among us, have vowed their service.

Great reason therefore has our nation, where so violent enemies seek to hurt
us, and so malicious traitors endeavor to ensnare us, to watch and look about.
Our adversary cries peace, peace, but war is in his heart. he may tell us as
long as he lists, that the Spaniards are our good friends, and mean us no
hurt at all. But if we list to arm our selves, and prevent their malice; we
may assure our selves, if God be pleased, that they neither dare fight with us,
nor can be able to hurt us. These double toonged traitors pretend good
dealing, and use many kind words, as if they loved their country. but who
can trust them, that are so near linked by oath, friendship, and opinion to
public enemies? Finally now the Spaniardes and other public enemies seem to
have laid aside their arms: but yet it is not safe to trust them. After great
calmes oft-times arise great storms. We must remember that king Philip the
second was always ready to execute the popes command, and was still set on by
the Jesuits, Acosta in his book of the new world calls it, Praeclarum Zelum
in expugnandis and debellandis fidei (Romanae) hostibus. in praefa. ad Philip.
and commended for his zeal in oppugning the enemies of the Romish faith. The
whole Spanish nation is also much devoted to popish religion, and very ready to
execute the popes commandments.

We must also consider that it is no argument of a disposition to peace, that
such great forces of men are continually levied throughout most of the parts of
Spain and Portugal; and that such numbers of ships of war are either made
of late, or in making, as we have not heard of many years before; and that
such care is had of provisions of corn, wine, munitions, and other things
necessary for the wars, as is not usual. I confess, that by reason of the
kings large dominions, and great occasions and affairs, these provisions are
necessary: yet unless he had some extraordinary purpose, neither would his
provisions be so great, nor should his men march toward Lisbone and Coronna,
nor his Magazins be dressed in those parts, that look hitherward.

Further it would not be forgotten, how much it greeueth the Spanish nation,
that they have been disturbed by us in their trade to the Indies, and pursued
by our ships even to their own doors. The enterprises also of Portugal and
Caliz are no small corrosiue to their hautie hearts. And no doubt they see, how
that to secure their Indies, and their own countries both of Spain, and
Flaunders, and the parts adioining, they have no means, but by making wars
upon us.

But suppose the Spaniards should neither respect their profit, honor, nor
safety, or that they would by conclusions of peace provide for themselves,
and their own indemnitie: yet what assurance can we have, either that any
peace will be concluded, or that it will certainly be performed, when the
Spaniards Pope Pius 5. and Sixtus 5. excommunications take hold of them, if
they should.
dare not once treat of peace with us, being excommunicated by the pope,
without express license; nor may perform their grants further, then shall
please the The canonists give him power to dispense with oaths and dissolve
contracts, and he chalengeth that power, as may appear by Paulus 3. his bull
against k. Henry the eight.
pope? Is it likely, that the pope will suffer the very foundations of his
authority to be shaken to gratify us? Or will he revoke so many sentences of
excommunication and decretals, as have been made against her Majesty and her
subjects, that we may now enjoy a firm peace? When was ever any such thing
done? Nay the popes authority standing in many places, how can any such matter
be done? If then the pope cause his Iubiley and indulgences to be preached
and published in Spain against us; and if he offer full remission of sins
to all, that will take arms, or send forth soldiers against England, do we
not think, that there will be a great stir in Spain? Do we not know how
much the Spaniardes are addicted to these opinions, and how they believe that
the pope has Saint Peter's keys and power either to send men to heaven or to
hell? Great reason therefore had our good knight, hearing of great preparations
made in Spain, and combinations of There are troops of them sent over into
England daily.
popish priests dispersed every where in England, and considering the state of
both nations, to give the alarm to his countrymen, and to exhort them to
prepare themselves to resist so great and violent an enemy, as meant the utter
subversion of the state, and the destruction of our most dear country.
Neither had our adversary any reason to take this in dudgeon, or to mislike
their forwardness that armed themselves upon their princes commandment, and
resolved themselves to fight for their prince, their country, their religion,
their liberty, their laws, their wife, their children, their friends, their
goods, and whatsoever they now enioie by this government; but that he
declares himself a traitor to his prince and country, and an utter enemy to
true religion, and that he has renounced all affection toward his nation, to
join himself to Spaniardes, Italians, Mores and barbarous people culled out
of diverse countries, and thought fit to be employed in this service against us.
Neither would he have declared so much to the world, had he not well
answered his name, and showed himself a Noddy, not knowing how evil it
beseems him that ioineth with public enemies, to pretend love and
friendship to his own nation. And therefore, albeit peace be a gladsome
matter, and much to be desired; yet we have no reason either to harken to
this treacherous friars tale, or over far to trust to parlies or offers of
peace made by the Spaniardes. Oftentimes swords may be covered under branches
of laurel. But this our superiors will look unto, whom it specially
concerns; unto whose care I report me. This is sufficient to show, how little
we are to trust the Spaniard, whom our adversary so much aduanceth.

Now it follows, that I show briefly, that we have less cause to fear him,
then to trust him: which may evidently appear by these particulars. First our
soldiers give no place to the Spaniards, if they may meet them upon equal
terms: as experience and trial in diverse encounters does plainly declare. It
is not long since our troops encountering them hand to hand betwixt Ostend and
Newport gave them a greater foil, then they have received within our memory.
The effects do plainly show it, seeing they have been quiet ever since. Our
mariners are without comparison better men at the sea, then theirs, and more
able and skillful in managing of their ships, and better do they understand the
nature of these seas, and the situation of Islands, ports and harbors in these
parts, then the Spaniards.

Our ships are better of sail, and better accommodated for shot and great
ordonance, then those of the Spaniards. And being assisted with the fleet of
our associates of the Low countries, far superior to any fleet in the world.

If the Spaniards come into these seas, we have both the seas, the harbors and
ports favorable, and may have present supply of any thing we want; which they
being far from home, cannot look nor hope for.

If the Spaniard come into these seas, he cannot long continue here without
encounter, nor depart at pleasure, the winds being commonly southerly and
westerly. But if our fleet should go into the Indies with any strength, they
might either take any Island or port, or sail along the coast, and return
with more commodity.

They can win little by us, but blows, for that our riches are not great,
nor easy to be come by. But if in the Indies or in Spain we overcome them,
our spoil cannot choose but be great, their trade being for gold, and silver,
and things of great value.

If any suppose the Spaniard to be invincible, considering our want, and his
abounda^ce of treasure; he must think first, that as his revenues are great,
so his employments are many; and that he wants oftentimes money to pay his
soldiers, and set his ships to sea. Nay he wants money to pay his debts, and
defray necessary charges: insomuch as king Philip the second was co^streined to
play Anno Dom. 1575. and 1597. as appears by the record of his proclamations.
bankeroupt twice or thrice in his time; and his soldiers for want of pay have
been forced to rauage the country, and to mutine against their commanders.

Secondly albeit we want the Indian mines; yet we want not means both to pay
our soldiers and mariners; nor to furnish them both by sea and land; nor can
want sufficient provisions of all sorts, if we list to establish a certain
course of proceeding for the continuance and maintenance of the wars.

Thirdly it is not money that fights, nor has principal use in wars, but
men, iron, munition and necessary provisions. Neither do monyed men spoil the
poor; but the poor armed soldier, makes a spoil of him, that is rich in
money. Lastly as princes and states, that have great store of treasure have
means by their hired soldiers to make wars abroad, and hardly can be
overcome that way; so are they weak, and unable to resist, if they be strongly
affronted and set upon at home, where their treasure lies, and their hired
soldiers cannot be found. Which appeared by the example of the Carthaginians;
and may appear by the Spanyardes, if we please.

Now, our cause is far more just and honest, then the Spaniards. In primis
spectat, vt pacate tantum and suauiter viuat. Andreas Philopater p. 14.
Her Majesty and her people never desired any thing more then peace: they
desire nothing more then wars. We, if ye Spaniard shall come against us, shall
fight for our country, our liberty, our laws, our religion and conscience:
they come to spoil us of al these, and fight for the popes pleasure, and for
that religion, of which they have no Stapleton praefat. in princip. doctrine.
relect.
further assurance, then the popes word. Her Majesty never wronged the
Spaniard: nay she has not taken that, which laws of war, and all nations
did give her. When the ships, that carried money to pay the soldiers in the
low countries, that were prepared against her, and her country, were brought
into her ports, and gave her good means to help her self against her enemy;
yet was she content to restore the money to the king. When the Islands of Azores
were offered into her hands, yet did she refuse them. Nay she would not accept
of Antwerp and a great part of the low countries, that offered to submit
themselves unto her, being always unwilling to intricate herself with
unnecessary wars. Yet was she assured, that this was most lawful, and would
be a certain means, both to bring the Spaniard to any conditions, and to make
the wars far from home, and upon other men's charges. Nor in assisting them of
Holland and Zeland has she done any thing, but after she had attempted all
other means, and was forced to take this course by necessity for her own
safety. But the Spaniards have sought matter of quarrel against her, and
offered her and her people infinite wrongs. First king Philip having
intricated our nation with the French about his quarrel, lost Caleis, and
abandoned the English in his treaty of peace. Anno 1567. when we thought he
had continued our friend, at the solicitation of the pope, he Girol. Catena in
vita Pij 5. It may also be gathered out of the adversaries discourse in
Andreas Philopater.
determined to make war upon us. Afterward he encouraged and help the rebels
of the North: and determined to aid the earl of Desmond in Ireland. Anno
1588. he made open wars upon us, and never since has ceased to molest us.
Nay when he could do her Majesty and her people no other harm, he has
suffered Sanders book of schism, and diverse other most railing libells to be
published by Ribadineira and others to the dishonor of our nation, our princes,
and governors. Finally Lopez, that was executed for attempting to poison her
Majesty, See his confession and the acts of the process against him.
confessed that he was hired by Ibarra, the Count of Fuentes, and diverse of the
kings agentes, not without the kings priuity, as was proved by the deposition
of Manoel Lois, and Stephen Ferreira, and diverse other circumstances. Seeing
then we have such means to make wars, and so just a cause to undertake them;
why should any either doubt, or fear to encounter the Spanyardes, especially
if they will needs be quarrelling?

But to surcease to discourse of the valor of the Spaniard in the wars, and
of his puissance, or rather weakness both by sea and land; let us a little
consider him in his other parts and qualities, and see whether he deserves
such extrauagant commendations, as N. D does heap upon him, and what reason he
has to advance the Spanyard so highly, and to debase his own nation. Our
adversary P. 106.
commends the Spaniardes For their religion, their labor in preaching and
winning souls in the Indies, their learning, their moral virtues; and
forgets not to praise them for their country, which he calls Rich,
fertile, and potent. But if these be the points, that he means to stand upon;
he will hardly persuade his Reader to afford him any assent or credit. For the
religion of the Spaniard is not catholic, as we shall easily prove, when we
come to speak of catholic religion. Nay few of that nation know any religion,
but are led by the noses by the pope and his priests and friars, receiving
for truth whatsoever they teach, though never so false, and not knowing the
very grounds of Christian faith, though never so true. Our adversary knows,
that the Spaniard is said to account it but a Peccadillo or little fault, not
to believe in Christ, and every man may see, they have no right faith, that
receive all the popes decretalles for true religion.

In the Indies their disorders have been so great, that the barbarous people
do believe rather any religion, then that of the Spanyard. Bartholomew a Casas
a friar, and Hierome Benzo show, that where in Hispaniola there were three
millions of people at the first arrival of the Spanyardes there, they shortly
by their pious and virtuous government, brought them to the number of 300. So
great was their slaughter and cruelty. Histor. Indiar.
Hierome Benzo says, that all the religion the Indians have, is to make the
sign of the cross, and to hear a latin mass, which they understand not; and
to perform such like ceremonies.

And if he will not believe me, yet he may not with any reason refuse the
testimony of Joseph a Costa a Jesuit, who of purpose writes a story of the
new world, and declares how the Indians have profited in religion He shows
that the Indians are so unwilling to be baptized, De procuranda Indorum salute
lib. 6. c. 3.
That the Spaniards have baptized many against theit wills: whereby baptism Is
made a mock among them. Speaking of Christian religion in the Indies, he
says their knowledge is small, and so offered to them, that it is either
refused easily, or easily lost. Ibid. lib. 1. c. 2.
Notitia quaedam vel ten uis offertur, vel ita offertur, vt facile repudietur,
vel ita recipitur, vt mox perniciosius deseratur. He Lib. 1. c. 14.
says, They are like the Samaritanes, that worship god and idols both
together. And again, Ibidem.
Simulatoriam Christianitatis speciem praeferunt, non colunt (deum) serio, nec
credunt ad iustitiam. A costa lib. 4. c. 15.
Their priests and teachers he charge to be given to covetousness, dicing,
hunting, concubinage and luxuriousness. And this is that goodly conversion of
millions of souls of which this personate N. D. so much braggeth: and of which
the pope does seem so studious and desirous. But if he were indeed desirous
to win souls to Christ, and not gain and glory to himself; why does he
not seek to convert the Grecians, Asians, and Mores that are hard by him, and
which through his ambitious quarrels about his superiority have been
oppressed by the Turks, and abandoned by the princes of the west empire? Does
it not appear, that where Christian princes rule with their sword, he enters
there into the peoples closets with his counterfeit keys or rather picklockes;
and that he neither can do any thing in countries oppressed by infidels, nor
is so willing to win souls, as to establish his authority, and to seek
gain?

To return to our purpose: In school divinity diverse friars I confess seem
well studied: neither are the Spaniardes ignorant of other humane arts and
learning. Yet neither is the number of learned men great, nor their learning
singular. Their priests for the most part are ignorant both of tongues and of
the grounds of religion. Their common people know almost nothing, and scarce
can say their Credo, pater noster and aue maria. but admit they can say
the words; yet are they ignorant of the sense. Their moral virtues we will
examine, when we come to speak of particulars. It should seem they are not
many, when their advocate mentions none.

Finally it is but a simple praise to dwell in a rich and fertile country. For
so the Indians, and Cananites should deserve to be preferred before the
Spaniardes. For no country is richer in gold, then the Indiaes. And in time
past the land of Canaan flowed with milk and honey; and that is clearly
testyfied of it in holy scripture.

But were it, that the Spaniardes deserved commendation for their religion, and
their zeal in preaching the truth and other virtues; yet has our adversary
no reason to despise his own nation, or to prefer the Spaniards before us.
For here true religion without mixtures of popery is embraced, and the same
so generally taught, that none can be ignorant, but such as like the adder,
that stops his ears, refuse to hear Gods word, and to understand the
truth. The number of learned men among us is greater, then among the Spaniards,
proportion for proportion; neither to abridge this idle dispute, shall N. D.
find, that our nation either in moral virtues, or natural endowments, or
supernatural graces is inferior to the Spaniard, or ought to yield to him in
any thing; save in this, that he has better hap to encounter with English
traitors to flatter the Spanish nation, and we no Spaniards, or few, that will
take on them to set forth our due praises.

It rests now that we examine the particulars, of our adversaries pleading,
according to the course which before we have proposed to our selves. Not that
any great matter does result of the whole sum, but that we may at the least,
gather a sum of our adversaries fooleries and treacherous purposes.

In the beginning of this last encounter he P. 103.
tells us That there remains yet another bickering about the Spanish king
and nation. He should also have told us, against whom this bickering, made as
it should seem by the shade That is, of a glass of wine.
d'vn bicchier di vino, is intended. but that is apparent by the discourse
ensuing. for it is wholly against his country and nation. So then, this
champion comes out in his Spanish ierkin, to fight for Spaniards, and against
his own nation. May we therefore (think you) safely trust him, that takes on
him to speak for public enemies against the safety and state of his country
and country people? Well let us see what this champion has to say for his
clients.

First he Ibidem.
says, That a man must speak moderately of his enemy, and that we must not
lie, nor feign reproaches, no not of the devil himself. So he makes a fair
entrance into his matter, comparing the Spaniardes to the devil: then which
course nothing can be more reproachful to his clients. He may be glad that the
Spaniards understand him not. Otherwise they would make him know, that they
are not to be compared to devils. But to let that pass, and to grant, that a
man must speak moderately of his enemy, yea of the devil; yet has not he
observed that moderation in speaking either of friends or enemies. For he
flattereth his friends grossly, and raileth against his enemy most odiously
and despitefully. Nay he raileth against his liege prince, and such as have
showed themselves to be her most faithful subjects, and praises her greatest
enemies, albeit if he were a true man, he would have done neither. In the
libell against her Majesty's proclamation of the year 1591. published by him
and Creswell under the name of Andreas Philopater, under the title he places
this sentence, Vidi mulierem ebriam de sanguine sanctorum: as if she were
drunk with the blood of saints. He Scelus sceler nectit. p 6.
says She added wickedness to wickedness, and uses words not to be
vttred against so gracious a prince, P. 11. libr. Romae excus.
comparing her to Maxentius, Julian, Costantius, Decius, and Nero. He
disgraceth her in her parents and stock, and says what his malice can devise
against her.

The like course he takes against her principal Counselors, In praefat. ac
edictum.
accusing them of fraud, cruelty, rapines, impiety, and most heinous crimes.
Against the earl of Leicester and the Lord Treasurer that dead is, he has
published whole volumes of reproaches in two several libels, entituling the
first Leycesters commonwealth; and setting out the second under the name of,
Causes of supposed fears, etc. Neither has any railing libell of late come
forth but he has had some finger in it. Furthermore as the former books are
full of railing and reproaches, so they want no provision of lies, and
untruths. He says in Andr. Philop. p. 121.
Philopater, that King Philip did thrice deliver the Lady Elizabeth out of
trouble; and cannot prove once. And that king Philip denied the rebels aid,
which Pius quintus the pope his grand master controlleth. He repeateth diverse
slanders out of Sanders and Genebrard, and can write nothing without lies.

In this treatise, which we have now in hand, albeit he seem to profess
Warding and fensing; yet has he no fence to keep his tongue from lying. And
yet they say he lies very closely; yea and falsely too. Such is his
excellency in both faculties, that a great question may be made, whether he
raileth or lies more impudently and starkely. Do you not then take him to be
a fit man to give precepts of modesty and true dealing to others, that has
nor modesty, nor truth, nor reason in his own dealing? And may he take upon
him to censure others for railing, libelling, raging, lying and facing, that in
lying and libelling has surmounted, not only Lucian and Rabelays, but also
all his own companions of the society of his fiery father Ignatius?

As for his adversary, he has not spoken any thing, that in equal judgment
can be thought to savor of immodestie. For albeit he seems to charge the
Spaniards with Oppression and tyranny, and says, that they are Proud,
ambitious, bloody, ravening, and cursed of God: yet his intention was not to
touch the whole nation, in which no doubt there are many civil, religious and
honest men, and of great worth, especially when they come to the knowledge of
the truth; but diverse of them indefinitely, and such especially, as came in the
popes service, to execute his wrath and displeasure against innocent
Christians. For against these does he direct his discourse, and against them
does he animate his countrymen to fight, seeing their purpose is to destroy
our country, and with cruelty to establish both a false religion, and an
absolute tyranny. Neither could he use more gentle terms, considering the
insolences of the Spanish forces in these cases, and the tyranny of their
government. The ambassadors of the city of Siena Natal. Comes ^istor. lib. 6.
say, That the government of the Spaniard in the kingdom of Naples, and other
places of Italy is so rigorous, that the country people desire to live rather
under the Turk, then under the Spaniard. And this by infinite insolences, and
acts full of injustice, and cruelty, for many years exercised by the
Spaniards in the Bartholomeus casas.
Indies, in the Belgica hist. Meterani.
Low countries, and lately in the countries of Iuliers, Wesell, Monsterland and
places adjoining, may be verified. Our ancestors were wont to say they were
crabbe faced, and worse natured. Vultu despicabiles, moribus detestabiles, as
Matthew. Parts testifies. And if antichrist, and these that receive his mark,
and worship him, be cursed and miserable; then are the Spaniards, that are so
willing to execute the popes most irreligious and unjust commandes, most
miserable, and have a great curse hanging over their heads.

But faith our fencing warder and bickerer, The Spaniards are hated for their
catholic religion especially, and next for their virtue and valor. He says
also, that the like happened to the English, when they were Lords of France for
the most part; and to the Romans, when they ruled a great part of the world.
But why should he seek for new supposed causes, when the true causes and
reasons are so well known, and so violent and all sufficient? Beside that it
is well known, that the Neapolitanes, Milaneses and Portingals do not hate the
Spaniards for their religion, but for the causes formerly declared. Neither do
we malign the Spaniards for their catholic religion (for we know that their
religion is not catholic) nay we do not hate them in regard of their false
religion, which they hold, but rather pray for them, and pity the^: but we
have great reason to suspect their encrochements, and to detest their ambition,
injustice, rapines and tyranny. How they may be called Fortes, or valiant, I
report me, seeing as Philosophers hold, Fortitudo est virtus pugnans pro
iustitia.
Fortitude is a virtue striving for justice. Lastly he offers great wrong not
only to the Romans, but also to the ancient English, to compare the
Castilians unto them. For never was the Roman or English government like to
the Spanish, nor can these two famous nations well be compared to the
inhabitants of Casttle, Granada, Valentia and Arragon, that until of late
were a poor Matthew. Paris in Henr.
base people, and for the most part now consists of Goths, Vandales, Mores,
Maranes and Jews, which have surmounted and devoured the ancient inhabitants
of Spain.

He tells us also, That it is no reason, albeit some Spaniardes be found to
have those vices, which Sir Francis imputes to them, that all the nation
should be charged with them. As if either he, or any other did suppose all
Spaniards to be of like vicious humor. No, Sir Francis does only charge
Spaniardes indefinitely, and those principally, that are the popes vassals, and
agentes, and are so willingly employed in his service. And in effect says no
more, then our adversary willingly confesses.

He P. 105.
says further, That no nation in Europe has more cause to glory and give God
thanks for his gifts abundantly powered on them both natural, moral and
divine, then the Spanish, who have a country potent, rich and fertile praised
in scripture. 1. Machab. 8. a people able in wit and body, as appeared by
Traian, and Theodosius emperors; by Seneca, Lucan, Martial, Poets; by Hosius,
Damasus, Leander, Isidorus, Orosius renowned Christians; by famous martyrs,
Christian kings, famous soldiers, that have conquered great countries by the
sword, and finally by excellent preachers, that have gained many millions of
souls to Christ by preaching. And thus with big words, and many great
bragges he thinks to put his adversary down. But he is confident without
cause, and triumphs before the victory, nay before he sees his enemy. To
answer him in his own terms, I think there is no nation in Europe more
behoulding to this base lying companion, then the Spanish. For renouncing all
love to his country, and duty to his prince, he has sold himself to public
enemies, to flatter them, and to set out their praises. Beside that he
forgets all plain and honest dealing, and delights himself with vain
reports and lies. The world knows that Spain for the most part is a bare
and barreine country, and that the common sort is poor and miserable.
Portingall that is accounted the more fruitful, notwithstanding is but
barreine.

Ieiuna miserae Buchanan.
says one, tesqua Lusitaniae
Valete longum, vosque glebae tantum
Fertiles penuriae.
How potent the country is, it may appear by this, that it has been so often
conquered by the Cathaginians, Romans, Goths and Vandales, and lastly by the
Mores of Barbary. Theodosius and Traian albeit borne in Spain, were of Roman
blood, and brought up in Italy and Rome. Seneca also and Lucan and Martial had
their learning and skill at Rome, albeit Martial for his filthy and obscene
writing sauoureth of the humor of some Spaniards.

It is also a matter of mere impudency, to compare the battles and conquestes
of Spaniardes in the Indiaes, where they had to do only with naked men, and
people unskillful in feats of arms, to the actions of the Romans, that have
subdued the most warlike people of the world. Neither can we account of his
relation of winning of souls to Christ in the Indies by friars otherwise, then
as of a lying legend, and vain brag, that has no ground. For Hierom. Benzo.
and Barth. Cas.
diverse report, that they have destroyed millions of souls, and speak sparely
of winning of souls. But were all this true, that is here reported, yet
makes the same nothing so much for the Spaniard, as the Noddie imagines. For
what avails it to possess a fertile and good country, and which is praised
in scriptures, unless the inhabitants be good and virtuous? Spain, I trow,
is not better then the land of Canaan, that flowed with milk and honey, yet
were the people exceeding wicked. What commendation is it, to be descended of
a nation, that has had many religious Christians, constant martyrs, just and
wise princes, valiant soldiers and captains, unless the Spaniards continue in
the steps of their ancestors? But that now the Spaniards are like their
ancestors, this declamer durst not say. Nay it may very well be said, that
the inhabitants of Spain now are not descended of the Spaniards that were
either in Traians and Theodosius his time, or in the days of Isidorus and
Leander. Nor have they the religion, or zeal of the ancient Spaniards. But
says the Ward-worder, God in regard and recompense of other rare virtues, will
pardon other infirmities and defects. He avouches also that God has advanced
the Spaniards above other nations of Europe for the defense of Catholic
religion. So it appears by his own confession, that the Spaniards his
clients want not sins and faults (he calls them only infirmities
Peccadillos, and defects) but all their enormous sins, as he supposes, are
covered by their zeal in the popes service. A very excellent piece of
doctrine. If the Spaniard commit most heinous murders, and rauage whole
countries, and live most filthily, and blaspheme Gods holy word never so
execrablie; yet by this man's divinity they need not fear, if they maintain
the popes cacolike religion, and murder all that are studious of peace and
Christ's truth. Let them go to father Parsons, and he will absolve them, and
set them toll free, that they shall not pay any thing to the pope. But what if
they oppugn catholic religion and murder Gods saints? Then the case is
altered, and the Warder has no fence for them, nor for such offenses. Nay he
cannot deny, but as their faith is heretical and superstitious; so their sins
are great and enormous. The Spaniards therefore would be advised not to trust
this false friar too far. Zeal is commendable: but then it must be joined
with knowledge. It is no Christian zeal that induces men to kill poor
christians. Our Savior Christ sent his disciples to teach the Gentiles, and
not to kill them. Neither did Peter kill the Gentiles and sinners, that were
ignorant of the truth, albeit in a vision he was Act. 10. macta and manduca.
commanded to kill and eat: but sought by preaching to convert them from
their wicked lives, to the truth of Christ Jesus. But the pope and his
adherents the Spaniards auert many from the truth, convert none to the truth;
kill the body with the sword, and destroy the soul with corrupt doctrine,
run into the Indies upon pretense of winning souls, and yet neglect the
Turks, Mores, and Jews, that are hard at their doors. And all this is
commended in them by our adversary. Nay he seems to teach, that sinners,
that are out of the state of grace can merit remission of sins, and that the
Spaniards for murdring of Christians, shall be pardoned for other sins,
which they commit. But be it he should only say, that a man, that should
zealously adhere to the truth, should thereby purchase remission of other
sins; yet is not this justifiable. For we being out of grace are dead in
trespasses and sinnnes, and Christ only can purchase remission of sins,
which without faith cannot be applied to us.

Finally he is not ashamed to confess, That in times past our ancesters were
near linked to the Spaniard in love, leagues and alliance betwixt the princes
of both the nations: and that at this time the Spaniardes show great kindness
to papists fled beyond the seas. But little does this make to the purpose, and
less for the commendation of the Spaniard. For it is not here called in
question, what has passed betwixt the nations, but whether the Spaniard has
so rare parts in him, that he is to be preferred before all other nations, and
before the English especially: which is no way to be deduced or decided by this
discourse concerning leagues and allyances. Again if we were so near linked
and conjoined together, as our adversary talks, and that to the profit and
honor of both the nations; what reason had the Spaniardes at the solicitation
of that bald friar Pius Quintus to fall out with their old friends, and to
treat with our most malicious enemies? What can they allege, why without all
just cause, they should both by force and practices oppugn our nation, that
never offered them wrong? Had they not thereby hazarded the loss of the low
countries, if her Majesty would have accepted them being offered unto her? And
have they not opened a way for the possessing some part of the Indiaes as often,
as it shall please the princes of this land to establish a course for the
mainteinance of the trade into those countries? And albeit we have omitted to
take the advantage of either of these two courses; yet there is no time past,
but her Majesty may always take the one, and percase have opportunity to make
benefit of the other. Finally if the Spaniardes had remembered the old
friendship, that has passed betwixt both nations, they would not have abetted
traitors to rebel, nor receited rebels, that are fled out of the realm for
fear of laws, albeit they pretend religion.

After the defense of the Spanish nation in general our warder with his guard
of loose words descends to speak of king Philip the second in particular. A
man now dead and buried, and therefore the rather to be spared, although while
he lived he was a heavy enemy to our whole nation. Yet for as much as our
adversary hired percase to pronounce a funeral discourse in his praise, does
so commend him, as he sticks not to touch the honor of our nation someway
entangled with his cross dealings; I thought it not amiss to consider what
this exorbitant friar has to say either for king Philip, whom he rayseth out
of his grave, purposing percase to enshrine him for a saint, or against the
English nation, which he hates more deadly, then does the Spaniard.

First he is offended that king Philip should be termed Proud, ambitious,
false, cruel, treacherous, tyrannical, and such like: and says that If any of
the kings subjects were to answer sir Francis, he would give him the lie and
challenge him into the field. As if the kings subjects were such dangerous men,
as none durst maintain an honest quarrel against them; or as if they were
more terrible Rodomontes among the Spaniardes, then otherwhere. Well seeing
these challengers come not forth, we shall easily justify Sir Francis his
charge against this frierlike combatants rude and uncivil cauils and
wrangling. For it was no part of Sir Francis his meaning simply to charge king
Philip with any matter further then concerned the cause in hand, and further
then the king, taking upon him to be the Popes champion, persecuted poor
Christians with great injustice and cruelty. And using the pretense of popish
religion sought both by force of arms, and fraudulent practice to usurp the
dominions of other princes, and to establish a tyranny among such people, as by
arms he had oppressed. Hereupon let the world judge, whether Sir Francis had
not reason to exhort all true English to oppose themselves against such
ambition, pride, usurpation, treacherous practice, injustice, cruelty and
tyranny, and whether any man in such a case could have said less. But if he
had said more, yet the kings strange proceedinges against his son Charles,
testyfied by pope Vita Pij 5. Girol. Cat.
Pius himself: against his wives; complained of by the French: against the
prince of Orange, and the people of the low countries recorded in the acts of
the Duke of Alua, and testyfied by diverse apologies of the prince of Orange and
the states, and known to many yet living: against his subjects of Naples and
Milan, reported in Natalis Comes, and diverse histories: against the Portingals
witnessed by the history of the conquest of Portugal, by Don Antonio the king
wrongfully dispossessed of his country and best known to the Portingals:
against the Queen of England known to the world, and recorded in the process
against Lopez the physicion, and partly testyfied by Gierome Catena in the life
of Pius Quintus; against the secretary Escouedo, and Antonio Perez, and the
state of Arragon published to the world in a treatise for that purpose: these
proceedings (I say) and his whole life recorded in histories, would
sufficiently justify the same. Against which records, and testifications the
idle talk of this addleheaded Noddy Concerning his catholic majesty's
opposite virtues, of his sweet nature and condition, of his princely behavior
and pious government, deserves neither credit, nor consideration. He was of
so sweet a nature, that for certain months before his death, neither his
physicians nor surgeo^s, nor others without good preservatives could endure to
come near him, albeit his clothes and lodging were never so sweetly perfumed.
So excellent a thing it is to be sweet natured. He says also, That by the
witness of envy king Philip is cleared. Percase he himself in this frierlike
declamation degorged in the kings praise takes on him the person of envy, and
so cleereth him. Otherwise all the water in the baie of Alcasson would neither
wash him, nor clear him.

Where sir Francis does object to king Philip certain dangerous practices
here in England, during his marriage with Queen Marie: this idle discourser
not remembering his title of Warde-word, leaves his guard, and runs into a
needless discourse Of the state of things in Queen Mary's time, while the
Spaniards were in England. As if it were in question, what was then done in
England, and not how king Philip carried himself in Spain, and all other
places; or else, as if the state of things in England concerned king Philips
humors and qualities any thing at all. Well let us notwithstanding see, what
this idle iangler has to say for the state of matters in England.

He says first, That king Philip paid the expenses and for the furniture of
the marriage with Queen Marie: and how the two Spanish and English nauies, that
accompanied the king, when he came into England were at his cost, until they
came to Portesmouth, and the whole train from thence to Winchester, and that
the marriage was celebrated at his charges. But what is this to the discharge of
his promise concerning the relation of the state of England? Besides that, this
narration is full of vanity and falshoode. For what is more vain, then to
brag that the king defraid the charges of his servants, and attendants, or
that he paid the charges of his own marriage? What more consonant, then that
the husband and goodman of the house should be at the charge of his wife and
household? What a ridiculous thing is it to vaunt, that the king paid all
charges between Portesmouth and Winchester, when either little or nothing was
spent in the journey? The falsehood of his narration may be controlled by the
accounts, that are yet to be seen in the auditor generals office, and in the
Eschequer. For thereby it is apparent, that the Queen not only defraied the
charge of her own fleet, but also spent infinitlie about the furniture and
preparations for her marriage. Money certes evil bestowed. For never was
marriage more unhappy either to ye prince her self, or her state.

Secondly he tells, That the Spanish nobles and gentlemen came furnished
with necessities and money. It is marvel he sets not down also, how they
came furnished with Moriscoes and Negroes, and horseboies, and such Canalliary.
All which pertain as much to the purpose, as that which he sets down of
the nobles and gentlemen. But be it they came well furnished, yet that
deserves no great commendation. As for their expenses they could not be great,
seeing most did eat upon the Queens charge, and the rest ate bread by the
ounce, and drunk water by the quart: and yet all of them could not avoid to
come in merchants books.

Thirdly he says, That the privy council was not altered by the king. As if
that were not a point following upon the conditions of the marriage. Beside
that, albeit he altered nothing, yet through the subtlety of Winchester, the
Council was at his devotion: and should no doubt have been altered, but that
he was prevented by the Queens death.

Fourthly he vaunteth much That he honored the English Nobility, and gave many
of them great pensions. But he should do well to name those, that were so
honored, and enriched by king Philip. For it is more then I can learn. Howbeit
it is no strange matter, if for to effect his purposes, he was at some expense.
For fishers when they angle for fish must be at the charge of the bait; and
fowlers, that seek to catch birds, must draw them to their nets by casting
them meat. Like vanity he uses where he shows, That the king honored
highly English captains and soldiers, and made them equal in all points of
service with the Spaniard. As if it were a high point of honor for English to
be made equal with Spaniards. Beside that, all the honor the king did them,
was to suffer their throtes to be cut in the sack of Saint Quintin, and the
service ended, to send them home poor, bare, and naked. He affirms also,
That the king made our merchants free to enjoy all privileges throughout all
his kingdom. Which is a plain and most notorious untruth. For neither were
they suffered to trade into the Indies, nor had any more privilege in Spain
and the Low countries, then mere strangers, as is evident by the merchants
books now to be showed, if need be. It is also a mere fable, That the king
in all quarrels betwixt English and Spaniards should favor the English, and
that this should cost the Queen many a bitter tear. Let ye quarrels be
specified, and witnesses produced to prove ye Queens tenderness more to
Spaniards, then her own people.

Fifthly he tells a very pitiful case, viz. That no Spaniard could walk in
the night without danger of his life, nor at other times without injurious
words; and that they paid dear for all things, especially if they were taken
talking with a man's wife, daughter, or servant: and, as a certain Viceroy
told him, that some English would send their wives and daughters of purpose
into the fields, where Spaniards walked, to allure them to talk with them,
and thereby to entrappe them, and get money from them: and that diverse of the
Spaniardes had their purses taken from them, and that the Count Fuensalida was
robbed, as he was at supper with diverse of his countrymen. All which long
discourse is as far from the purpose, as Spain from England. For what does
this concern king Philips virtues, or the state of England, which are the
points which here he takes on him to handle? Must the state of England
consist now in the brabbles betwixt the scum of the kings train and a few
bands and base fellows, about their Sen^oras? Further the same does rather
show the insolency of the Spaniards, then deserve any commiseration for the
losses or knockes they privily received. For why should they be suffered to
abuse honest women, or to attempt maidens chastity? Will N. D. our Warder play
the baud to make matches betwixt knaves and whoores, and mislike that there was
not a guard set, while such lend fellows went about their base affairs?
Again it may be, that it was not a Viceroy (for what has such a Noddy or
vice, as this, to do with Viceroies, or viceroies to do with such petite
matters) but some vice that purposed to delude him, that told him the tale of
these walking women, or walking knaves. For how could he know, that they were
men's wives or daughters, if he were a stranger; or else yt they were sent for
that purpose that he speaks, into the fields? how knew he, but yt it was a
quarrel betwixt knaves and bauds? how knew he, that ye Spaniards did not
willingly bestow their money upon baggages, being men that frequent the bordell,
as often as the church? As for the robbery of the Count Fuensalida, if any such
thing were, it no more concerns the honor of our nation, then the robberies
by Fuorusciti in Italy and Naples ye honor of the king of Spain. Robberies and
disorders will every where be committed: but we praise them not, we allow the^
not. Neither did Queen Marie then allow this foresaid robbery. And rather
then the old Count should weep for his plate, he shall have a collection in
part of recompense for his losses. All this great matter therefore being well
considered is nothing: neither has our adversary any reason to exclaim and
say, That these were the fine fruits of our new Gospel, then freshly planted
among us. For those that did these feats were papists, and not men of our
religion, and these disorders were committed in Queen Mary's time, when popery
was publicly professed in England, and not in the time of the Gospel. Again,
the Spaniards, and not any of our profession, used to haunt bordels, and to
make these baudy matches. And if in states, that profess the Gospel there be
diverse outrages committed; they cannot be imputed to our profession, but to
the lewdness of those, that will not be reformed; and that live among us, and
are not of us. Which kind of people are both reproved by their teachers, and
punished by the magistrates.

Having thus for his pleasure ranged far from the matter, in an idle
discourse concerning certain brabbles betwixt the English and Spanish in
Queen Mary's days, he comes to his purpose concerning king Philip: and
gladly would he purge him from all suspicion of evil meaning toward our
nation, contrary to a letter mentioned by Sir Francis, and written out of
Spain, when king Philip was yet in England. The letter purported, that
notwithstanding the kings fair pretenses, his purpose was to win the favor
of the nobility, and so to make himself absolute king, and possessing the
principal places with his own soldiers, to alter the laws, and to impose
taxes, and rule the country at his pleasure. And this the warder by all means
seeks to shift off, and to discredit: and that first, Because these plots
and practices were never heard of before, as he says. But he must needs be
deaf, that lived in Queen Mary's days in any eminent place in the state,
that heard not often of these practices; and very dull and senseless, if he
suspected them not. Neither is it likely, that such a prince would desire to
come hither, if he should still be tied with conditions.

Secondly he says, That the name of the writer and receiver of the letter
would have been set down. But that might have bred danger, the letter being
written against Spaniardes, that then ruled in England. Neither is it the
fashion for intelligencers to declare either their own names, or the names of
such as they write unto.

Thirdly he would avoid it by this shift, That it was some flying report,
without ground, and taken up in some port-towne or tavern, by some factor, or
other wandering companion. But the probability of the plot, and proceeding of
the Spanyard, and the event of things did show the contrary.

Fourthly he would bear us in hand, That it was some devise to make the
Spaniards odious, and perhaps to vphould the faction of the earl of
Devonshire, that missing the marriage of Queen Mary began to practice. But the
ambition, and malicious purpose of the Spaniardes against all that professed
the truth, and his proceedings in the government did plainly declare, that it
was a truth, and no fiction. As for the earl of Devonshire he never desired to
marry the Queen. For if he had, he might. Such was her affection toward him.
Neither did he ever take any grief for not marrying her. for his affection was
no way inclined that way. Neither could he poor gentleman entertain any
practice, being destitute of friends and means, and watched by his enemies,
and of no subtle reach to compass any such matter. I wonder the Noddy was
not ashamed once to name this young earl, who albeit innocent and harmless,
yet was poisoned at Padua to content some men's humors. But our adversary, as
if he were a smith and of Vulcans generation, as his supposed father was, can
forge twenty such devises: and shift off wicked practices, with a number of
loose words. He says, It is a grievous and heinous slander against a mighty,
munificent, and bountiful monarke, to say, that he meant to make himself
king. As if mighty and munificent monarkes do not in their ambitious humors
seek to enlarge their dominions. That this was no fiction, it may appear by
the drift of Charles the fifth entending this marriage; by the popes demandes to
the king, that could not be effected without greater authority; by the
propositions made by king Philip to the counsel to enlarge his power, and
release the rigor of the conditions, whereto he was tied; by the kings secret
working to draw over Spanish soldiers, and his practices to possess himself
of the navy, and the principal ports and fortresses of this kingdom; by
words commonly given out; by the testimony of Sir Francis Englefeld, if he
were alive and would say truth, and also of diverse others of the nobility; by
the ambitious humors of the Spaniard; and finally for that otherwise his
advancement by this marriage would have amounted to nothing. And if in the low
countries, where he is but duke, or earl, he has sought to be an absolute
king; we may not doubt of his purpose in England, where he had the title of
king, and possessed the Queen.

Where the letter says, That king Philip meant to have altered the counsel,
to possess the havens, to make new fortes, to furnish them with his own men,
to change the common laws, to bring in the Spanish inquisition and Spanish
laws, and to impose strange taxes upon us, after the fashion of Spain: he
thinks it sufficient to answer first, That no such thing was attempted by
him; and secondly That all this was provided for in the conditions of his
marriage with the Queen. But his slender surmises are all too weak to cross
such violent purposes. For albeit being prevented by the hand of God, that
took away the Queen, he could not put matters in execution; yet does it not
follow, that he never had any such purpose or intention. Again, it is a fond
thing to imagine that the king could be tied with words and conditions, when
experience teaches us, that neither promises, nor oaths, nor laws of God, nor
laws of nations could bridle his ambition. He was Guicciardin. de paesi bassi.
precisely sworn, to observe the privileges, and laws of the low countries.
Yet did he observe none; but contrary to all order change the council of
estate, bring in the inquisition, and enlarge the authority of the
ecclesiastical state, erect citadelles place garrisons, and impose strange
taxes upon the people. And if the Duke of Alua did this by his direction in the
low countries; no doubt, but he would have done the same himself in England,
if he had atteined his purpose, and had not been crossed by the Queens death.
And that this was his full intention, we have already showed by diverse
arguments beside the testimony of the letter. These therefore are no bugges,
nor imaginations; but true collections grounded upon principles of state, and
the kings actions. Hereby also we may gather, that we were happily delivered
from the thraldom of the Spaniard, more grievous then the thraldom of Egypt,
as their rigorous dealing with them of the low countries may plainly inform
us.

Where among strange taxes imposed by the Spaniards, one is mentioned most
strange, That the subject pays for every chimney; and others are noted as not
common, that some pay by the poll; and all pay for their victuals, so that a
man cannot eat but the king must be paid, as if he were a common host (as
indeed he keeps a common tavern in his court after a base fashion, that a
man cannot drink, but the king will gain somewhat) our adversary wondreth,
That any should publish such childish toys. But the Spaniardes and the kings
subjects in other places do find, that the burdens are so heavy, that neither
children, nor yet men are able to bear them. And albeit there is (percase)
some error in the particulars, yet the sum is not much mistaken. For throughout
the kings dominions a tribute or tax is paid for all things bought and sold
in the market. Neither is any merchandise exported, or brought into the
country, or passed from place to place, but there is a custom paid. Of late
there is a tribute exacted not only for every Hanega of corn ground at the
mill, but also for salt. Neither are the countries of Biscay, Arragon, Navarre,
Catalonia, or Valentia so free, as our adversary pretends. In Flanders
according to the Spanish style, the duke of Alua imposed a tenth and twentieth
part upon all the kings subjects: a tribute never exacted in the Turkish
dominions. Now then if the king exact such payments upon his own free
subjects; in what case are they like to be, that he shall vanquish with his
sword?

Where it is declared in the letter, That the king purposed to root out the
nobility of England, and to bring the commons to beggary; and to sell all not
above twenty years old for slaves: our adversary does term this narration
sottish and impudent; and asks, How this being contrived in England could be
discovered by one in Spain. But whatsoever terms the relation does deserve,
certain it is, that this manner of proceeding is most inhumane and barbarous;
and not so improbable, as the warder would make it. For first we may not
think, that the haughty mind of the Spaniard could either be content with a
simple revenge of wrongs, or contained within the bounds of common laws and
customs. Secondly we know, that the popes malice is so great against such as
spurn at his authority, that he stirs up all the world against them, and
Gives them for slaves to those, that can take them, as Sander. de schism.
lib. 1.
Paul the third did give the English in Henry the eight his days. Thirdly it
is most notorious, that in the Indiaes they have practiced all these barbarous
cruelties, so that they have almost dispeopled diverse countries, that were very
full of people at their first coming thither. Fourthly the example of our
neighbors of the low countries, that live under the Spanish yoke, and have
their nobility either extinct or debased, and their liberties abolished, and
live in great slavery, may show us some part of their purposes, and as it were
the plot of their government. Lastly in their fleet that came against us
anno. 1588. beside store of halters and fetters provided to bind our poor
countrymen, that should be taken prisoners, and were already taken in conceit,
there were found in Don Pedro de valdez his ship diverse engines and irons to
mark such, as should be taken, for slaves. Add heereunto the testimony of him
that wrote the letter out of Spain mentioned by Sir Francis, and did
understand by good intelligence the resolution of the Spaniards in this point,
and we shall not need to make question, but that this was indeed intended,
and resolved against our nation. Neither could he reveal this secret,
unless it had come to his notice: which might by diverse means come to pass.
For albeit the king hatched this purpose first within his own breast; yet was
the same communicated to others, and so made known in Spain to those, that
should concur in the execution of it. Such abominable treasons God would not
have kept secret.

Lastly where it is said, That the king had laid a plot for the destruction
of the Lady Elizabeth now Queen of England: he answers, That the world
knows, that the king at that day was her chief stay and defense; and that
for the reasons before alleged, and that finding her when he came into England
in prison, and hardly pressed about Wyats insurrection, he delivered her, and
brought her to the court, and yielded her most careful protection. In the end
he concludes, That it is barbarous ingratitude, not to acknowledge his favor
toward her. But if this were a matter known to the world, it were a great
wonder, if it should never be known in England, where men have greatest
reason to know the same. No, no: he abuses his Reader very much, that,
imputes the cause of her safety to king Philip. For albeit for some causes
he had reason to respect her then, when he hoped to have issue by Queen Mary;
yet afterward, no doubt, he consulted (and that for many and potent
considerations) to be rid of her. Yea albeit her innocence in Wyats cause
was sufficiently known; yet if God almighty had not been her chief
protector, and stirred up means for her safety, never thought of by man; it
was not the kings favor, that could have defended or delivered her. But
suppose God should use the king likewise for an instrument of her deliverance;
yet did he never any thing in regard of the Ladies innocence, but rather in
regard of his own profit, as the Noddy unawares confesses in his third
encounter, and as is very apparent by the proceedinges of the king in that
action. But what if the king should do a favor to any person, is it
barbarousnesse for all others, not to acknowledge the same? In ancient time
those that received a benefit, were deemed unthankful, if they did not
acknowledge the same, and endeavor to requite it; but our barbarous Warder will
have all condemned for barbarous and ungrateful, that either know not, or
acknowledge not the kings favor extended to others. Other points of his
answer, I have before touched and refuted.

The premises considered he does wonder, How sir Francis his book (which he
terms a libell) could be suffered to pass to the print, especially
containing so reproachful calumniations against so great and potent a prince,
as the king of Spain is. But rather it is to be woondred, that Parsons, or
any Jesuit should once open their mouth to speak of calumniations and
libels, when their common course is by libels and slandrous writings to
denigrate all such as oppose themselves to their factious courses. Parsons is
not only a practitioner, but also has passed master in this faculty. Against
my Lord of Leycester he Leycesters common-welth
began to play his masters prises; yet was not that his first libell, as his
friends of Oxford know. The book, which he published under the name of
Andreas Philopater, touches her Majesty, and all her chief Counselors very
rudely* beside that he set out a book against the old Lord Treasurer, and his
whole house. After that followed Dolmans book, which he will not deny to be
both calumnious and injurious, and to have been written by him. He is also
charged by a friend of his to be a principal actor in the infamous libell,
set out anno 1588. by Allen against the Queen, at the least he ouersawe the
presses, and diuulged certain copies thereof. Now he has set out this
fencing Ward-word comparable to the rest of his satyricall writings for the
bitterness thereof. A certain A discovery of a counterfeit conference p. 6.
priest of his own religion does call his book of succession set out by
Dolman, An infamous babbling cartell or libell. John Discovery of the errors of
William Criton Jesuit.
Cecil a popish priest does not only tax Criton a Scottish Jesuit for
setting out a Satyr, pasquinado, and libell against himself and others, but
condemns all these pestilent courses, of libelling and killing practiced by
the Jesuits. Neither do I think that any can allow Ribadineiraes book of
schism. As for sir Francis Hastings Watchword, it is a discourse of another
nature, containing neither satyricall inuectiue, nor injurious calumniation,
but a just accusation and declaration of our enemies most wicked and malicious
purposes against us: which none can mislike, but such, as profess themselves
either enemies to our nation, or traitors to their prince.

In the end of this discourse he goes about to clear king Philip the second
Of all supicion of hiring Lopez to poison her Majesty, yea of being privy and
consenting to that execrable fact. But he does his client no pleasure in
mentioning that, wherewith he is not charged, and refuting the charge so
loosely, as if he were hired to betray the kings cause; as he has
heretofore long gone about to betray his prince and country. We, I say, do
not charge the king with any such matter, but only refer our selves to Lopez
his confession, and to Manoel Lois, and Stephen Ferreiraes depositions, and to
the bil of exchange for fifty thousand crowns to be paid to Lopez. The
witnesses and parties do all blot the king, and his principal agents in the
Low countries, the Count of Fuentes and Ibarra. Such a great sum could not
be paid without the kings notice: heereto may be added a certain token or
jewel sent from Christopher Moro the kings counselor, and a message from the
king brought to Lopez by one Andrada. But nothing does breed more suspicion,
then this Noddies defense for the king. He says, That this matter could
never probably be known to the king. And why not? Could neither Lopez
himself by letters, nor Andrada by message, nor secretary Ibarra tell him of
the purpose? It is no question. Nay it is confessed and deposed that they did.
Secondly he says, That Lopez never gave any signification of any such matter.
But his confession in writing testifies the contrary. And many heard him say
more then his confession imports. Thirdly he alleges, That the king was
not to have correspondence with Lopez being a Jew. As if the Spaniards use not
to have correspondence both with Jews and Turks to serve their own turns;
or if any could be more fit to execute such horrible factes, then Jews and
Infidels. Lastly he asks, If the king had no agents near to plot such
matters, but he must be made privy himself. But it may be answered, that no
warrant could be granted for so great a sum, but by the king, that would
not let fifty thousand crowns go for nothing: and that Lopez would do
nothing, unless he had the kings warrant both for the money and his further
preferment. It is therefore no Turkish impiety, to talk of such matters, but
a course Turkish and heathenish or worse to do, or consent to such execrable
empoisonments. Neither would Parsons have taken upon him the defense of the
king in this foul fact, if he had not been of a Turkish humor. Which also
appears by a letter signed with his own hand, where he confesses that one
of his own consorts does charge him With tyrannical, Turkish, and Machiuilian
practices. And another priest in a letter resembles Dolmans book of
succession to Machiauels prince, making Machiauelisme, and Dolmanisme or
Iesuitisme words of one signification, and saying that Both signify Turkied
Atheism.

But says the Warder, It may be doubted, whether any such thing was intended
by Lopez. It may be also, that he will doubt whether Lopez and his consorts
were publicly convicted, and executed for that treason. For he is an infidel,
as it should seem, and will believe nothing, but that which the pope
delivers him to be believed, and that makes for the popes advantage. And
yet if he had been in Lopez his case, he should have felt and touched with
his finger, that all that was true, which now he will not believe.

Wherefore if he have no further Ward to make for the Spaniardes and their
late king; his fence will prove worth nothing. If he have no better argument
to prove the excellency and renown of the Spaniardes, then is contained in
this encounter, his clients will never thank him; nor will any man take the
old king for Catholic, pious, wise and potent, as he often terms him, unless
his proctor answer better for his faults, and bring better ground for his
exorbitant praises. Only thus much he has gained, that men may see how with
drinking good sack, he is become Spanish. What good then may we look for at
the hands of a professed enemy, and rinegate friar the popes sworn slave?

In the end of his discourse for a farewell he puts us in some hope of
peace between both nations: but we will then believe it, when we see the
conditions equal on both sides, and sufficient security that they shall not
break their promise upon the popes warrant. In the mean while we will take the
Spaniards as we find them; and make ready to receive those, that shall offer
us violence: and trust such, as use to keep promise.

CHAP. IX.
Containing an answer to N. D. his conclusion and petition to the Lords of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, to whom the determination of all this
controversy is referred.

ALthough, my good Lords, your leisure is not such, as that well you can attend,
to read every frivolous discourse set out by Parsons the Jesuit, or other his
consorts; nor can take pleasure to see their vain and wrangling pamphlets,
which they write daily in defense of public enemies, notorious traitors, and
dangerous malcontentes against religion, state, law, prince, country, and
those that show themselves most forward in defense thereof: yet if any of you
chance to light upon a petition made by them of late, but, I think, not
exhibited to your Lordships; I would also most humbly beseech you, to take the
pains to read and consider of this my answer. Not that I dare commend the
work as excellent, or perfect, but for that I thought it might be a matter
not unprofitable for you to know, unto what boldness the Jesuits and popish
priests are come, and how necessary it is to repress their notorious
insolency, that with painted glosses, and glorious terms have defended the
actions, not only of public enemies, but also of most disloyal traitors; and
not only encourage mal-contents, and stubborn subjects in their
disobedience, but also endeavor to disgrace all those, that shall dare to
enterprise the defense of religion, of her Majesty, and the present
government. Nay albeit they take to themselves liberty to oppugn religion,
and the state, and uphold the cause of those, that seek the ruin of both; yet
are they greatly offended, that any should touch public enemies, or mislike
these treacherous and disloiall courses. Yea such is their impudency, that they
have presumed to address their pamphlets to your Honors, and to complain to
you, as if we offered them great wrong, when we defend our selves against
public enemies, and traitors, and evil disposed subjects; whereas themselves
wrong her Majesty and the state, and wrangle against all honest men, that are
studious of truth and peace, and loyal to their prince and country. But this
you shall perceive the better, if as in the rest of his encounters, so in this
his conclusion and petition I note, not only the perverseness and
presumption of this petitioner, but also the vanity and absurdity of his
petition.

In his first entrance he offers his discourse To your view and judgment.
But presently he excepteth against you, as if you were not equal, nor
indifferent judges. I cannot P. 119.
says he, expect to have you equal judges. Which is a course most absurd. For
if he thought you not indifferent, why did he come before you? If he presented
his cause in good earnest, why does he refuse you before hearing? Is this law
among Jesuits, to refuse and appeal from arbitrators chosen by themselves,
and that before the cause be entered? Is not this notorious insolency thus to
scorn your Lorshippes? Beside that he is plain contrary to himself. For in
the title of this conclusion, he remitteth The whole answer to the judgment,
and arbitrament of your Lordeships. Here he draws back, and refuses you for
his judges. And yet, as if he had not refused you for judges, he proceeds in
his pleading before you. Perhaps he means to make you readers in stead of
judges, or such judges, as all readers are, which judge what they like or
dislike themselves, but give no rule to others.

Well albeit he will not make you judges Of the controversy it self; yet he
is content you should judge of the manner of the prosequution thereof. So he
will not have you judges, whether the pope and Spaniards are public enemies,
nor whether Jesuits and priests fled out of England are traitors; nor whether
papists are dangerous subjects; nor finally whether we are to arm our selves
against foreign enemies, and beware of traitors and suspected subjects; which
is the controversy betwixt him and Sir Francis Hastings, but in what terms we
are to deal against enemies, and traitors, and their consortes. Belike he
means to make your Lordships grammarians, for such are fittest to judge of
words and phrases: the controversy he tells you plainly, you are not to
meddle withal. I believe you have not seen many such suppliantes come before
you: neither do I think, that a form can readily be found of such a
petition.

He says, If the watchword had been presented to your Lordships, before it
was printed, that it should, as he thinks, have been stopped or moderated.
So he does not only bestow on your Lordships an office of judicature, but also
of watching of presses and correcting of books set out against Jesuits: and
albeit a base companion, yet is he bold to abuse your Lordships and to make you
ministers of his pleasures and purposes, that nothing may pass but formally,
and to the Jesuits good liking. For he is much offended, that any should
speak either for truth, or state against public enemies and traitors, and
would most earnestly pray you, that you would be pleased to suffer him and his
consortes to undermine the state, and to stir up rebellion, and cut honest
men's throtes without any noise, or question made about the matter. And because
Sir Francis has exhorted his countrymen courageously to withstand the
Spaniards and other public enemies, and speaks plainly, what we are to
think of him and his consortes; he calls him A troublesome stickler, and
says, He is transported with violent rage against potent and anointed
princes, and in diverse places charge him with railing and slandering, and
here imputes to him Base detractions and contumelious fictions, and gives
him many other very big words degorged out of his wicked and impotent malice
against good men. As if it were not lawful for us, to defend our selves, or
touch our enemies, but in such manner and form, as this critical Aristarchus,
and new teacher of forms of speech shall like. So ridiculous and absurd a
Noddy we do encounter, and such unreasonable requests we are to answer: as may
further appear by the sequel of his discourse.

My first petition P. 120.
says he, Should be. Note I pray you, that he says, Should be, and not, Is.
Whereby we may understand, that this proud companion disdeineth to make
petition to your Lordships. Signifying only, that if he might abase himself
so low, as to make petition to such, as he accounts heretics, That then his
petition should be to restrain such turbulent spirits as those are, which more
of a mad and malicious kind of wantonness, then of wit, do loose their
tongues with overmuch liberty against the honor of mighty catholic princes
abroad. So his complaint is, that we loose our tongues to speak without wit,
thinking (percase) because he and his consortes do rail against Christian
princes wittily, or rather saucily, that they may do it freely and lawfully.
His desire is, That turbulent spirits may be restrained. But he does not
consider, that this concerns him and his consortes the Jesuits and popish
faction very near. For they are the turbulent spirits stirred up by satan to
trouble kingdoms and inflame wars throughout the world as before has been
in part declared. Discovery of William Critons errors.
Criton was taken with diverse plats for the invasion of England. He help to
stir wars in Scotland. They are therefore Turbulent spirits, and condemned
by their own consorts and all the world for such. As for us it touches us
nothing. And therefore we willingly subscribe this petition, and would wish
that all Christian princes would take a course with such as publish libels and
slanderous calumniations to the disgrace of princes and states. For none have
more cause to complain then we. Paul the third published a slanderous bull,
or libell against Henry the eight. Which was seconded with a bitter inuectiue
written by cardinal Poole. Pius 5. and Sixtus 5. In bulla Pij 5. and Sixti 5.
have d spoken their pleasure against her Majesty, Sanders and Ribad. de schism.
and this kingdom. Sanders, Ribadineira and Rishton have e written books full
of most impudent calumniations against diverse catholic princes. f Cardinal
Allen has passed all that went before him in bitterness and malice. In his
letters to the nobility and people of England and Ireland.
The like course have they taken against Henry the third and fourth of France,
and diverse noble princes of that kingdom. Parsons the Jesuit himself alone
has published cart lodes of libelles. Time therefore it is to stop the
mouths of such barking curres, and to tie them up for barking.

But why would he have such turbulent Spirits restreined? He says, That the
furious hatred of Sylla and Marius, of Pompey and Caesar was kindled by
certain opprobrious speeches uttered by some of their followers. But he should
do well to show his author and prove his words true, least he be taken for a
false forger of examples. I could yet never understand any such matter. And
therefore let him take heed, least for want of good handling, he mar the
fashion of his first petition.

His second petition is, That your honors would resolve to be mediators unto
her Majesty for some more gentle, mild, and merciful course to be taken with
papists. Wherein First he does greatly wrong her Majesty, charging her with
rough, unmerciful and cruel dealing against papists, who has so much spared
them, that to many it is thought, that she has neither had sufficient regard
of her own safety, nor of the peace and security of her subjects. Secondly he
does covertly charge your Lordships, That you have borne a hard hand over them,
and assisted her Majesty in her unmerciful dealing. Thirdly he is so saucy as
to make you his factors, and mediators in a cause most irreligious and impious;
most dangerous to her Majesty and the state; most odious to her most loyal
subjects; and most unreasonable in regard of the petitioner and his consortes.
and this I will briefly show, leaving the consideration and provision for the
rest, to your honors.

Most impious it is to persuade a toleration of popish religion, being a
doctrine full of heresies, and not clear of Idolatry, as is notorious to all
that know it, and shall God willing be fully proved hereafter. And if it be
impious to persuade it, we must think that piety will not suffer us to yield
it. Our Matthew 4.
Savior says, It is written we must worship the Lord our God, and serve him
only: and that is the brief of the first Exodus 20.
commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods, but me. Now how is God only
served, where the idol of the altar, and every crucifixe is worshipped with
divine honor? How do they serve God alone, that make angels and saints their
mediators, and communicate gods honor to them? Besides that, it is nothing but
idolatry and Worshipping of strange Gods, as says Aduers. haeres.
Vincentius Lirinensis, to embrace and stiffly to maintain heresies. For
heretics no less reverence their opinions, then the Gentiles their gods. Nay
Saint De vera relig. c. 38.
Augustine says, That it is the vilest kind of idolatry, for men to worship
their own fancies, and observe that for a religion, which their deceived and
swelling minds imagine. The apostle forbids the Corinthians to have any
society with them, that 1. Cor. 5.
worship and serve idols. And shows, that there is no fellowship betwixt
light and darkness, nor company to be kept with Infidels. Nolite says he,
2. Cor. 6.
iugum ducere cum infidelibus. quae enim participatio iustitiae cum iniquitate?
Aut quae societas luci ad tenebras? Quae autem conuentio Christi ad Belial? Aut
quae pars fideli cum infideli? Qui autem consensus templo Dei cum idolis? God
was much offended with the bishop of Pergamus for winking at false teachers,
and their lewd doctrine. Habeo says Apocalypse. 2.
he, aduersus te pauca, quia habes illic tenentes doctrinam Balaam, qui
docebat Balac mittere scandalum coram filijs Israel, edere, and fornicari. Ita
habes and tu tenentes doctrinam Nicolaitarum. And shall we endure the
Balamiticall priests of antichrists synagogue, and more damnable heretics,
then the Nicoloitans? The Apolalyps. 2.
bishop also of ye church of Thyatira was sharply reproved for permitting
one, that pretended to be a prophet, to teach and seduce gods servants. Habeo
says he, aduersus te pauca, quia permittis mulierem Iezabel, quae se dicit
prophetem, docere, and seducere seruos meos, fornicari and manducare de
idolothytis.

The prophet David would not suffer any strange worship of God within his
kingdom, neither could he endure, so much as once to mention the names of
idolaters. Their offerings of blood says he, Psalm. 16.
I will not offer, nor make me^tio^ of their names within my lips. That was
likewise the zeal of godly emperors. Omnes vetitae legibus diuinis and
imperialibus constitutionibus haereses perpetuo quiescant, say the L. omnes.
Cod. de haereticis.
Emperors Gratianus, Valentinianus, and Theodosius. Now to suffer contrary
religions was ever condemned. Solomon greatly offended in suffering his wives
to erect idolatry, yet were they his wives. And when the Israelites served God
and Baal, Elias greatly reproved them. How long 1. Reg. 18.
says he, halt you on both sides? If God be God, follow him; if Baal be god,
follow him. Nay it is punishable in matters of religion, to wink at idolaters,
as appears by the example of Solomon before rehearsed, and of those kings,
that did not cut down groves, and destroy hill altars. He that serves God,
says Lib. 5. ep. 30.
Ambrose, must bring no dissimulation, no conniuence, but faithful zeal and
devotion: he must give no consent to the worship of idols, and other profane
ceremonies* for God will not be deceived, which searches all things, even the
secrets of men's hearts. Now besides these reasons, that make against all false
worshippers, and abused Christians, there are special laws against teachers
of heresies, such as the Jesuits, and other friars, and priests are. Deuteronomy. 13.
God commands False prophets, that would turn us away to worship other gods,
to be slain. God Apocal. 16.
he powers out his wrath against those, That have received antichrists mark,
or worship his image. Helias caused Baals priests to be slain. L. Cuncti.
Cod. de haeret. and Manich.
Arcadius and Honorius took away all churches from heretics, least they
should teach, or do the exercises of their false religion in them. Such as
have been zealous in remoouing all monuments of idolatry, and advancing Gods
true worship, have received manifold blessings at gods hands, and are well
reported of in holy Scriptures, and their memorial and name is blessed. Such
were Hezekiah, Josiah, Iosaphat and others mentioned in holy Scriptures:
Constantine, Theodosius, Martian and other famous princes in the church of God,
mentioned in Ecclesiastical histories. Contrariwise not only open idolaters,
but such as showed themselves cold in promoting Gods service have been
punished by God, and accounted infamous among godly men. The 4. Reg. 17.
Samaritanes were content to serve God, but they would worship idols too.
Fuerunt gentes timentes dominum, sed nihilominus and idolis suis seruientes.
Therefore were they hateful to gods Church. Nicet. Choniat. lib. hist. 7.
Manuel Comnenus removed out of the church certain tables containing both the
articles of Christian faith, and certain anathematismes of Turkish impieties
and Mahomets false gods, and substituted in their places other tables and
articles of doctrine not so directly contrary to Turcisme: and this he did for
fear to offend the Saracens. But his fact neither pleased God nor men. Neither
did he satisfy those, whom he sought to please. Let all those therefore that
seek to mingle contrary religions, or fear to maintain true faith,
diligently look to the examples of the 4. Reg. 17.
Samaritanes, and of Nicet. Choniat. lib. 7.
Manuel Comnenus.

This course would be dangerous to her Majesty, and the state. Now the pope
being publicly hence excluded, has not those means to work her Majesty
displeasure, as he has to work against princes in countries of his obedience,
and should have here, if popery might be tolerated. And this to be true,
Sixtus Quintus in his bull published against her Majesty anno 1588. and
translated by Cardinal Allen, does himself in plain words testify. Not
having says he, in these parts the ordinary means, which by the assistance of
Christian princes we have in other countries to remedy disorders, and keep the
people in obedience, for that Henry the eight late king of England did of late
years revolt from the sea apostolic. Likewise it appears by the Vita di Pio
5. Girol. Catena.
example of the pope Pius the fiftes Nuntio Vincentio Lauro, who not daring to
pass into Scotland to practice, but staying at Paris, was deprived of means
to effect his wicked purpose. Likewise the Jesuits and priests not daring now
publicly to show themselves, nor to deal with all persons publicly and
without danger, loose many opportunities to set forward the popes cause. The
recusantes also, though they come not to the church; yet having no liberty to
converse with Jesuits, nor to learn their seditious doctrine, keep
themselves in better terms, then otherwise they would do, if it were lawful
for them to profess their religion openly. But admit once Jesuits and
seminary priests to reenter into the land, or to live among us; the pope first
will have more opportunity and means to work his purposes. Neither is it
likely, that he will ever desist from prosequuting her Majesty, having by so
many sentences disabled her, excommunicated her, and deposed her. Secondly the
Jesuits and priests would have better means both to pervert the simple, and
to work their treasons against the prince, and her most loyal subjects. And
if they do much hurt now, when they are restreined, because they are suffered
to live in prisons; what would they do, if such woolues were let loose amongst
Christ's lambs? That they will always be ready to execute the popes
commandments against her Majesty, there is no question, seeing they hold it
damnation, not to obey him. Thirdly, the Recusants having such teachers, what
would they not do, when Hall could persuade Somerfield; and Ballard,
Babington and so many gentlemen desperately to adventure to kill the Queen?

How dangerous this may be to good subjects we may consider, if we do but
look into their wooluish practices in France, and Flanders, and other where.
Did not the papists of Orleans being admitted thither according to the edict
after the first wars, murder those of the true religion, and shut out the
rest? Did they not in all other places, as often as they were the stronger, seek
to murder them? The matter is apparent, and recorded in many histories. Neither
may we think, we shall better agree with them here, then others have done
in other places. Light and darkness, sheep and woolues cannot agree
together. And albeit our doctrine will not suffer us to persecute papists, yet
their doctrine teaches them to kill us. And that is their continual practice.

Finally this petition is most unreasonable, in respect of the petitioners
themselves. They will not grant or procure our brethren liberty in Spain and
Italy; and yet they are so shameless to ask that, which they will not grant
us, or procure for us otherwhere. Again they desire to live under her
Majesty, and yet they will not renounce her sworn enemy, and his usurped
authority, nor acknowledge her to be lawful Queen; although the pope do
depose her. Nay they give her enemy power over her, which by laws of state is
not sufferable.

Thirdly they have heretofore showed themselves rebellious and factious. How
should we then secure our selves, that they will behave themselves more
loyally hereafter? Why should we think, that they will do otherwise, then
the Irish rebels, that have shaken off her Majesty's government? They say they
will behave themselves peaciblie: nay, percase they will not stick to swear
it. But how should we believe either oaths, or promises, when they depend
upon the pope, that will suffer them to keep neither?

I conclude therefore, that to ask a toleration of the mass and of popish
religion, is a matter impious, unsafe for her Majesty and her people, and most
unreasonable. For it is contrary to the Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 13.
law of God, that forbids all idolatry; to the doctrine of Christ, Matthew.
15.
That excludes all humane devises in gods worship: to the doctrine of the
Ephesians. 4.
apostle, that teaches us, That there is but one Lord, one faith, and one
baptism: to the practice of ancient Christians, Joan. epist. 2.
That would not receive those into their house, or bid them god speed, that
brought not with them Christ's true doctrine: to the authority of fathers, and
holy emperors and princes, that by no means could endure any idolatrous
worship, or heretical doctrine: to the custom of the Romish synagogue, and
the traditions of the pope and his Posseuini bibliotheca selecta lib. 1. c. 26.
Iebusites and Cananites, and finally to the laws of the church and kingdom
of England, which without great consideration are not to be dissolved or
suspended. Neither can the same be allowed by any good Christian or loyal
subject, seeing it brings with it first an uncertainty of faith and
religion. secondly a confusion in Gods worship. thirdly a dissolution of
ecclesiastical government and discipline. fourthly an overthrow of laws and
civil policy. fifthly an entrance for seditious priests and Jesuits not
tolerated every where among the papists. sixthly an easy means to practice
against the prince and state. seventhly a coldness in religion, eighthly
sedition, trouble and rebellion. Lastly the wrath of God, and most speedy
destruction. And that this is true, the very Ibidem.
adversaries will not deny within the sphere of their actiuitie, and in their
own government. Why then should they look for that at our hands, which they
will not yield unto themselves? Or with what face can they desire things so
impious and unlawful?

First says our adversary, Great princes and monarchies round about us that
had greater difficulties and differences, then we have. He should have said
Monarkes, and Near unto us. For not monarchies but monarkes do treat of
peace. And the kings of France and Spain dwell not round about us but near
unto us. But we must bear with our great adversary if talking of princes and
states, he forgot to use fit words or make good sense. Beside that, he is much
deceived where he says, That they had greater differences and difficulties in
concluding of a peace, then we have. For all civil causes may be compounded.
But no composition can be made with false religion or idolatry. Again kings
may agree concerning temporal titles, but we cannot agree with the pope or his
faction, unless we mean to forsake God and the true Christian faith. Well let
us see notwithstanding what These great princes and monarchies round about us
have done. They have says he, concluded a most honorable peace and
friendship. And I will not deny, but it may be so, albeit diverse small
accidents may much alter the case. But what makes that for this purpose,
where it is debated, whether the idolatrous mass is to be tolerated, or any
other course to be taken with English fugitives, and homebred papists? If we
might have an honorable, profitable and most assured peace, it is the thing
that we do much affect and desire, never prosequuting wars but for our own
defense and safety. But what is this peace here spoken of to the toleration of
seditious priests, and Jesuits and such rebels and traitors? Can we have no
peace, but by suffering of exiled and banished rebels and traitors to return?
Why, that is the extremest calamity, that a ruined common wealth can suffer.
Perditae civitates, says Lib. 5. in Verrem.
Tully, desperatis omnibus rebus, hos solent exitus exitiales habere, vt
damnati in integrum restituantur, vincti soluantur, exules reducantur. Again
we are not at war with recusantes, or papists. Why then should he talk of
peace and friendship here? Therefore he tells further, How the French king
is returned to the sea of Rome, and that her Majesty is courteously invited to
the same. And is this the only means of peace? Sure then any war is better,
then such a peace. For if we respect only temporal matters, yet to yield to
a tyrant, is the last, and most extreme calamity, that happens to a nation
vanquished and subdued: and no prince can put himself under another, but he
gives over his sovereignty. Beside that, suppose her Majesty should yield to
the pope, which without indignation cannot be spoken, nor yielded unto by any
true English man; how is she sure, that she shall either retain, or recover
her crown, he having disabled her, and dispossessed her of it? Shall she beg
a crown at his hands? Shall she do penance at his pleasure? Will she abandon
her self and her subjects to such a base fellow? Fie fie, that any should be
suffered once to motion such a shameful and an abominable matter. But if we
respect religion, truth, and conscience: we cannot submit our selves unto
him; we cannot acknowledge his authority: we may not embrace his abominable
doctrine and heresies, whatsoever may ensue of it. He is the head of
antichrists kingdom, and the synagogue of Rome is the purple whore mentioned
in the seventeenth of the Revelation of saint John. His whoorish allurements to
idolatry and heresy we value not. And if this be means of peace, and no
other; then welcome wars, nay welcome rather death. For who had not rather
endure ten thousand deaths, then die the second death, and kill his own
soul? Our adversary says that her Majesty has been invited courteously to
come to the pope. But we think it strange courtesy to stir up rebels against
her; to curse her; to hire desperate cutthrotes to murder her and empoison her.
But were she invited courteously, yet simple are the birds that suffer
themselves to be taken at the foulers call. Ulysses heard the Sirenes songs,
but he would not come near them. As for the French kings example, it is not
to purpose. He to win a kingdom might do as it pleased him* but if her
Majesty should so do; she should hazard that kingdom, which she
possesses already quietly, rather then win one poor town or hamlet. Nay
she should hazard her soul. Beside that, her Majesty is rather to follow
the examples of godly kings, that abolished idolatry; of godly emperors,
that would not admit heresies in their states, of her noble father, that
overthrew the popes usurped tyranny in this land, and her own former noble
actions, then others. Of the French kings act we dispute not. Only we desire
God to open his eyes, that he may see how he stands.

Secondly he tells us of the qualities of Clement the eight, and the king of
Spain, and reports him to be A meek, mild, sweet, and holy man, and
calls king Philip Solomon the peacible. And certes evil should he deserve
his hire, if he did not set out these his two old masters with extrauagant
praises. But as in the fairest monuments and most glorious sepulchers there is
ofttimes nothing but rotten bones; so I think while men think in these two to
find treasure, they shall find nothing, but rotten bones, and corruption.
Clement the eight is a severe persecutor of Christians, and not very gentle to
cacolykes, as appears by the excommunication of Don Cesare Duke of Ferrara,
against whom he thundered with fire and sword, and many foul words.
Outwardly he pretends to be a sheep, but inwardly he is a ravening
woolfe; a saint in show, but indeed of a filthy and When he was in
Minoribus, he was known to be a great hanter of bordels.
unclean life. A bishop in name, but indeed antichrist. King Philip is now
dead, and loath I am to rake into his ashes further then I needs must,
especially having said much of him already. But the name of Solomon no man
can deserve worse, then he, being neither extraordinarily wise, nor very
studious of peace: of which two his best friends do testify the first, and
the latter is proved by his troublesome reign, that never was without wars
either with French, Dutch, Italians, Portugals, or English. But were the first
never so mild, yet his office is wicked, his doctrine heretical, his practices
detestable; and were he not so, yet what peace can be honorable, that
brings with it slavery; or composition firm with him, that keeps no faith
nor promise? Neither can we look either for honorable or sound dealing with
the Spaniard, so long as he depends on the pope. He may percase desire
favor for his faction, but will yield no exemption from inquisitors to true
Christians. He will desire to trade with us; we shall not I think trade into
the Indies. Finally he will not yield us and our associates either reasonable
and equal conditions, or firm assurance. If he please to do it, and can do
it, I know none, but is most desirous of peace.

Thirdly he says, There is no cause of doubt of dutiful behavior of English
cacolykes at home and abroad. But his saying shows, that he has neither
shame, nor honesty in auouching things so false. What? Is there no cause for
us to doubt, when we see how they are linked to the greatest enemies this
kingdom has, and take themselves neither bound by oath nor affection
further, then the pope gives them leave? Do we look for more loialtie at
their hands, then we have already found at the hands of their predecessors
and consorts? Do we think that suddenly these serpents will cast off their
skins, or loose their stinges? Do we not see how undutifully the papists have
behaved themselves in Ireland, and how they have revolted from their liege
sovereign, and that these wars were stirred by priests and Jesuits? Have
we not heard what massacres they have committed in France, and how they have
leagued and confederated themselves against their kings? Do we not know how
in England they have rebelled against their Sovereign Lady, and sought to
murder her, and empoison her, and betray her, and her country into the hands
of Spaniards and foreign enemies? What impudency then, or rather fury does
possess this Noddy, that he should say, that There is no fear of their
dutiful behavior? He answers that Their first and highest desire is, that
her Majesty would return to the sea of Rome, and that by this act all
difficulties and iealousies would be ended and taken away. But he may as well
say, that by yielding to the Spaniards all controversies would be ended.
Certes as well may the one be done, as the other, and yet neither without
manifest impiety against religion, without perpetual dishonor to our nation,
and utter destruction of the country. This is the woorst that can happen to a
nation shamed, spoiled, beaten, vanquished; and yet with these execrable
rinegates it is the first and highest point, that they desire, as themselves
confess, seeking nothing more, then our hurt, dishonor and destruction. They
study to ruinate religion, to bring her Majesty and their country into
slavery. Nay, and when they have their desire, they are nothing nearer. For
they may not think that all English men are so base, that ever they will
endure either the idolatrous mass, or the tyranny of the pope, or the command
of strangers. Neither can any true English endure to receive conditions either
from pope or Spaniard, much less, that they shall have power to dispose of
this crown and government. If then this be their desire, we are come to a full
stop. this as long as we live neither will, nor can with honor, or safety,
or conscience be yielded.

Their second desire is as their proctor tells us, That they may have the
same liberty for their consciences in England, that our brethren have in
France and Germany. But we have answered already, that it were impious,
dishonorable, dangerous, and unprofitable to grant any such matter. Neither is
the case of France and Germany like to this country. There religion was
always openly professed, and that by grant of princes and consent of the
people. Here popery since her Majesty's government was never permitted. But
if our adversary could assure us, that our brethren in Spain and Italy might
without danger profess the Gospel, and that we might hear the king of Spain
and princes of Italy secure us as much; then should he receive an other
answer. In the mean while both he and others must have patience, if we bridle
those, that would run a course to the hazard of this kingdom. Neither
because we stand against this proposition, Do we therefore cry fire, and
sword, and blood against the papists, nor do we cry out Crucifige, crucifige,
as this desperate Jew, and fugitive friar charge us. For we utterly
renounce all such bloody massacres, and fiery executions, as the papists
practice against our brethren; but only we tie up these popish woolues, that
would devour Christ's flock; and stop their furious rage against their
countrymen. We may not suffer them to come with fire and sword to the
destruction and desolation of their country. We know that in Queen Mary's
times they persecuted Christ in his members, and made us bear his cross: but
we are not so simple to put sword and fire into their hands again. Now if
they will needs rebel against laws; they shall find us ready in the field
to defend our religion, prince, and country; and not burn us at a stake, as
most cruelly they have done diverse of our brethren. If the papists yet will
quietly live amongst us, we neither mean to endanger their lives, nor take
away their lands, goods, and liberties. If they begin to stir, whatsoever
shall happen, they must impute it to their own deseruings.

He tells us further, That there has been blood enough spent in this
realm, and that above a hundred and thirty priests have lost their lives
within these twenty years for religion, men of peace, learned, virtuous, well
descended, and martyrs. But if he had named the men, it would easily have
appeared, that they were no martyrs of Christ, but traytorous agentes of the
pope and Spaniard sent hither out of Italy, Spain and other countries by
foreign enemies. It would likewise have appeared, that most of them were
simple and ignorant youths, that for need were driven to seek adventures,
blindly led, furiously bent, fautors and raysers of faction, and such as no
common wealth could endure. And yet too many of this sort have been spared, to
the great hazard of the country; I pray God, that they do not first feel the
harm, that are cause of fostering such young woolues. The last lord Treasurer
knowing their natures, kept them short. And time I hope will make us see hidden
truth. It is known what Ballard practiced with Babington, and his
confederates. Bisley otherwise called The green priest, professed, and set it
down under his hand, that it was lawful to kill the Queen, and that himself
would have done it, if he had could.

The rest were all linked in intelligence with foreign enemies. He therefore
that desires liberty for such men, does not only profess himself an open
enemy of his prince and country, but also impudently desires that such may
come amongst us, as may sow sedition, bring in strangers, and cut our throtes.
If this be a reasonable request, let him be heard. If we be weary of our lives,
then let us entertain this butcherly race. They have skill to cut men's throtes
artificially and closely. And finally if we be content to hear her Majesty
closely charged to be an extreme persequutor, and her judges and justice
calumniated, as if they had done to death peacible quiet men; then let us open
our ears to such impudent petitions, as this is. I think no honest man can
read it without indignation, and therefore few words serve to refute it.

After he has told us his pleasure of popish traitors, and called them
martyrs, he joins recusantes with them, who no doubt he esteems as
confessors. Such confessors, such martyrs, as never Christ's church knew: all
either dying for treasons, or suffering for heresies, and disorders, and set on
by Antichrist. Of these recusants he prophesies, That they must win in the
end. That all shall be paid us; that fear is an evil means to make things
continue; that her Majesty will not live always; that if exasperated minds
come to wreake their wrathes, great extremities will ensue; that we have many
enemies abroad. All which discourse does show, that the recusants, whatsoever
they pretend, do nothing else but grind their teeth, and whet their swords to
take revenge upon us; that they desire her Majesty's death, whom God long
preserve; that they mean to join with strangers, and to work the destruction
of their adversaries by all means whatsoever. Our wise adversary does plainly
confess it, and threaten it, and by that means would strike a terror into us.
Which as it may make himself, and his consortes odious; so it may teach us
first, to serve God as being threatened with this danger; next to take a course
to strangle such vipers blood, as seek the destruction of their prince and
country. As for the fears he obiecteth, they may rather stir us up to watch,
then to fear. For the only way to be without fear, is to remove the causes
of fear. He that has mad dogs must tie them sure up, if he will not fear
their biting. He that will not fear thieves, must ride well armed. If we arm
resolutely, I see no cause, as I have said already, but that the Spaniardes
should rather fear us, then we them. To yield to conditions unequal with
papists, were not, as this senseless sophister surmiseth, a way to clear us
of fear, but to redouble both fear, and danger. For it is an easy matter to
thrust him down to the bottom of the stairs, that is content to go down one
step. But he that stands upon equal terms, and yields not to any
dishonorable conditions, nor fears to meet his enemy upon the way, may with
more probability defend himself against him.

He alleges also the examples of Augustus, Henry the fourth, Edward the
fourth, and Henry the seventh, which disposed themselves to clemency toward
their latter days, and would persuade her Majesty To use the same clemency and
sweetness to the exhilerating of all her people. But first the case is so
unlike, as nothing can be more. For those princes contended not about religion,
but matters of state. Now matters of state may be compounded by remitting of a
man's right. But religion may not be abandoned, for that it is the cause of God.
Her Majesty she did not possess her kingdom by violence, as those princes
did. And therefore if papists were true and loyal men; they should not seek
to deprive her of her right. She never offered violence to papists, but only
sought to live in peace; and put to death none, but such as rebelled and
practiced against her, sparing but too many of this sort: those princes used
clemency toward their subjects, that were not linked with foreign enemies,
nor were factious, and punished those rigorously, that practiced against their
states. How then, if the case were like, can her Majesty not defend her right
against such traitors? Shall she yield her crown to her enemies? And is this
the sweetness that the papists seek? Secondly admit her Majesty should
spare traitors and factious persons, this I confess to priests and Jesuits
would be a joyful day, but there cannot be a greater calamity, that can happen
to good subjects. Nay it would be a dissolution of laws, and confusion of the
kingdom.

Seeing that the former examples fitted not his purpose, he brings in the
example of Henry the eight, Who, as Gardener said, was desirous in his latter
days to return to the union of the Romish church: Likewise he is still
harping upon the French kings submission to the pope. But that king Henry did
ever purpose such a matter, or that such a magnanimous prince could endure to
debase himself so low, as to come under a paltry friar, or a proud pope, is
incredible. Nay the last negotiation with the French kings ambassador, the
king then lying at Hampton court, was to draw him likewise from the popes
obedience. As for Gardener he was neither so near, nor so dear to the king,
as to know any such secret purpose, being long before the kings sickness,
forbidden to come at the king: and his practice about the pope had cost him his
life, if he had not submitted himself to the kings mercy.

Neither is it certain whether Gardener ever vttred any such matter or not. If
he did, yet we are not bound to believe him. Nay we are to believe that he
spoke so much rather to please the popes legate, then of any truth.

But if her Majesty do consider, how her noble father was dishonored by this
generation, she cannot choose but detest them, and follow his steps, that
abolished this tyranny; and not of those, that establish it. Further if
examples may prevail; then is she rather to follow the steps of godly
Emperors, that stopped the mouths of heretics, and would not suffer them to
practice their false religion, and of the godly kings of Judah, that abolished
all monuments of idolatry, and burnt the idolatrous priests bones upon their
altars, then of idolaters. As for the French king, that for a crown altered
his religion, we have little to say. We will rather pray for him, then
dispute of his doings. Her Majesty's case is far unlike his, being with
content of all quiet and honest subjects possessed of her crown, and able by
Gods assistance to defend it, and all her rightes, maugre all enemies, and
traitors, that jointly conspire against her.

He appealeth to your Lordships considerations, what a comfort it would be to
her Majesty, and your selves, to see all sorts of people laugh, and sing
together, and pray to God most heartily for her Majesty's health, wealth, and
prosperous long continuance. All which I do believe, her Majesty being so
gracious a prince, and your selves being so studious of the good of your
country, and her Majesty's safety. But they that desir^ ^is, must take a
far contrary course to this, which our adversary desires. Her Majesty must,
as she does, resolutely defend Gods religion: justice must be executed
severely: wicked members must be rooted out utterly: good men must be cherished
lovingly, and employed respectively. But if we should once admit a pack of
factious traitors, within the bowels of this kingdom, and harken to Parsons
that traytorous and infamous Jesuit; all our singing would be turned into
mourning, and our laughing, into lamenting, as it is in Ireland. The prayers as
well, as the practices of papists would be little for her Majesty's safety, or
continuance; as former experience teaches us. all this joyful state which
these traitors dream of, would be nothing, but a state divided by wars and
sedition, a time of darkness and desolation, and extreme misery. finally he
blusheth not to propose vnt us the example of such, as first professed true
religion after the first establishment of reformation, that desired, that their
conscience might not be forced: which does quite overthrow his cause. For as
in Italy and Spain, and such places, as were subject to popish princes our
brethren could obtain no toleration for the exercise of true religion; so
they cannot with any reason desire the establishment of their mass, where
under Christian princes it is utterly abolished.

Wherefore if nothing be more impious, then to erect idolatry, and to suffer
notorious superstition and heresy to be preached; if nothing be more dangerous
and dissolute, then to receive rebels, traitors, and enemies within the entrals
of our country; if no composition can be made with the pope of Rome and the
whore of Babylon; if nothing be more dishonorable, then to listen to enemies
and traitors threatenings, and promises; I doubt not, but all men of religion
and judgment, and well affected to their country, see that our adversaries
motion is impious, dangerous, dishonorable, and not to be yielded unto, nor
granted without the destruction of the present government, and desolation of
this kingdom. All which I refer to your Lordships consideration, and beseech
God to reveal the truth to the ignorant, and to establish the weak, and to
confound all that are enimes either to his truth, or to their most gracious
Prince and dear country.

A NEW CHALLENGE MADE TO N.D.

Wherein O. E. offers to justify, that popish religion is not catholic or
apostolic; secondly that it is compounded of diverse novelties and haeresies;
thirdly that the church of Rome, is not the true church of Christ Jesus. Lastly
that such as have died in the popes quarrel, were rather false traitors, then
Christian martyrs.

Reuelat. c. 3. They call themselves Jews, and are not, but do lie. Matt. 10.
There is nothing covered, that shall not be disclosed; nor hidden, that shall
not be known. caduceus

Jmprinted at London by Arn. Hatfield. 1600.

The Praeface to the discourse ensuing, directed especially to every moderate,
and sober minded papist.
ALthough sufficient has bin said already, not only to rembarre the malice
of N. D. his encounters, but also to content every man, that is but meanly
affected either to the state, or religion now publicly professed among us:
yet could I not satisfy my self, unless I took a course to satisfy thee
also, whose instruction and salvation I do earnestly affect and thirst after,
beseeching God to touch thy heart, and reveal the truth unto thee, and open thy
eyes, that are now heavy, and oppressed with a slumber and gross darkness
of popery. The principal pillar, and almost sole foundation of al our
adversaries discourse is the pretense, which he makes of ancient apostolic
and catholic religion, and the vain show of the catholic church: and upon
this he builds his inuectiues against us, his defense of public enemies,
notorious traitors, and privy malcontentes, and presumes to press into her
Majesty's presence, and to present his petitions to the Lords of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Council; as by that which has been spoken may easily
be perceived. Take away this color, it must needs appear, that he is a
fauorer of public enemies, a consort of malicious traitors, and an abbettor
and nourisher of men evil affected in their malcontentment. Nay albeit his
color were better cast; yet were his pleading insufficient, seeing true
religion cannot stand with rebellion or disloyalty, nor may true catholics
be suffered to oppugn their prince and country, to practice treachery against
the state, and to nourish malcontent humors among subjects. But if it appear,
that the Romanistes are not the true church, and that their religion is neither
catholic nor ancient, nor true; then must it needs be granted, that N. D. and
his consorts are not only malicious traitors, but also impious heretics. It
is also very plain, that all his wrangling encounters are built upon fancies
and supposals, without ground and foundation: and are no better, then
malicious inuectiues degorged against good men, and idle pretenses to color
the practices of enemies, traitors and heretics. For every traitor can
pretend, that he is a true patriot, and Catiline and his consorts, and all
rebels use to set a gloss of common good upon their private wicked
deseignements and treasons. All societies also of heretics will take upon
them, as true Christians, as says Lib. 4. institut. cap. vlt.
Lactantius, and suppose themselves to be the catholic church. Tertullian
says, Lib. 4. contr. Marcion.
That as waspes make honycombes, so the Marcionites pretend to make churches:
albeit indeed they were no true churches. Nouatian like apes that counterfeit
men, says Epist. 73.
Cyprian, would challenge to himself the authority and truth of the church,
albeit he be not of the church, but a rebel and enemy set up against the
church. Which fitteth our adversary very well, who if he had his yellow ierkin,
were a very ape or an apish Iebusite, entitling himself and his companions
with the name of the church. But if he had been a fox as well as an ape, and
had but had a foxes wiles, he would have made b^tter proof of his maine
grounds: which not being (...) is a maine maime of his whole cause.

Now to the intent that thou may perceive, that all his building is either
without foundation, or upon a marrish ground, that will bear no such great
work, I have thought good for thy satisfaction to challenge him once more into
the field, and to make trial of his manhood in five new encounters which do
much concern his cause and credit. For as before I have showed him and his
consorts to be perfect traitors, and Recusants and malcontent papists to be
very sorry and defective subjects; so now God willing I purpose to show first
That papists are no true catholics: secondly, That their religion, as it
differs from that which we profess, is a pack of novelties: thirdly, That
it is patched up of many old heresies: fourthly, That the Romish church is not
the true church, and lastly that N. D. his consorts whether they were Jesuits
or priests, or their adhaerentes, that have been executed to death according
to the laws of England, are to be esteemed traitors, and not martyrs. And this
in defense of her Majesty's justice, or rather clemency. For if she would do
them justice, then would not she suffer them to live as subjects, that will
not directly acknowledge her to be their Queen, and lawful sovereign,
especially where the pope says contrary. If she did her-selfe right, she
would not tolerate a faction notoriously opposite to her government. If she
did justice, she would not suffer such to enjoy wealth and honors, and life,
that adhere to foreign enemies, that seek the destruction of the
commonwealth, the dishonor of this state, the ruin and blood of all that
stand well affected to religion, and the state. And that Parsons and the
priests, that come out of Spain, and are sworn to maintain the Infantaes
title, and are reconciled or adhering to the pope are all culpable of these
treasons, it is so cleared by the former discourse, and by the last chapter of
this, that I think it may be felt of blind men, and not only discerned by
those, that have eyes to look into the state. The rest makes for defense of
our religion, which no m^n can reprove, but such as have drunk deep of the
cup of the purple harlot spoken of Apocalyp. 17. and are sworn slaves to the
pope, and professed enemies not only of religion and the state, but also of
their own good in this world, and of their eternal salvation in the world
to come.

Beware therefore my good countryman (for so I must account thee, until I see
thee declare thy self open friend to popish traitors, and enemy to thy
counrrey) that harkening to the Sirens songs of Iebusites and priests, enemies
to gods true religion, and not only to their prince and country, thou be not
swallowed up in the gulf of their heresies and treasons. They lead thee not to
the rock Christ Jesus, upon which the church is built, but to the Bellar.
praefat. in lib. de pontif. Romans
rock the pope, and the banks of his sandy inventions, upon which thou must
needs wrack thy self, if thou shun them not quickly. True religion is
grounded upon Christ's word revealed to us in the holy canonical Scriptures,
all which we profess according to the rule of the true catholic church. And
for this truth we doubt not to give our lives: so assured we are of our
profession, where as thou, as long as thou continuest a papist, have no
warrant, but the popes word, which (to say no worse) is ignorant of true
religion, and apostolic faith, and subject to many errors and infirmities.
Read therefore indifferently, and judge syncerely and uprightly, and the God of
truth guide thee into the way of justice and truth*

CHAP. I.
That papists are no true Catholics.

FRuitelesse it is, and almost endless, to contend much about names and
titles, but especially in causes of religion. For as In Apolog.
Justin Martyr says, (...).
true religion Consists in good works, rather then good terms: and the Ad
Tit. 3.
apostle exhorts Titus, and all true teachers, to avoid contentions and
quarrels about words of the law. Yet forasmuch as many simple people are
abused by false teachers taking upon them glorious names and titles, and look
only upon the sheep clothing that is outward, and not on the wooluish nature
of priests and friars that is inward, I thought it not amiss to show what
this name Catholic imports, and to whom the same truly belongs, and how
dangerous it is, to trust every one that takes to himself the name of a
Catholic.

The Jews Joan. 8.
called themselves The children of Abraham, and bragged much of the Hierem. 7.
Temple of God, and of Romans 2.
the law. But the apostle teaches us, that not every one, that in name and
outward show was a Jew, deserved so to be esteemed and taken. Epist. 83.
Leo speaking to certain monks says, Ecclesiae nomine armamini, and contra
ecclesiam dimicatis: and our savior found no greater enemies, then the
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, which stood most upon the succession of Moses,
and title of Gods people. The devil 2. Cor. 11.
Transformeth himself into an angel of light; and brass is often set out
with a glorious luster, as if it were gold. But nothing can be devised more
counterfeit, then the papist, who albeit he maintain a religion full of
novelties, and improbable fantasies; yet takes on him, as if he were the
only catholic christian, and ietteth up and down with a mask of catholic
religion. So apes clad with purple iackets, bear themselves very proudly
among other beasts, and all for their gaie apparel. But as apes by their apish
tricks bewray themselves to be apes, so papists by their apish, popish and
fond devises show themselves to be factious heretics, and no true catholics.

That they are no true catholics, the very name of catholic, and true
signification of this word declares. For Catholic does signify that, which
is universal or general. And the church is called catholic, because it
contains all the people of God and all Christians, whether of time past, or
time to come, or time present; and in what place soever they remain dispersed.
The christian faith likewise is called catholic, for that it is, and ever was,
and ever shall be generally taught and received of faithful christians. In
time past God was peculiarly known of the people of Israel, and to them was
the law given, and prophets were sent. But our Savior Christ sent his apostles
into all the world. Matthew. 28.
Docete, says he, omnes gentes. He also told them, they should witness his
truth to al nations of the earth. Eritis mihi testes, says Act. 1.
he, in Jerusalem and tota^ Iudaeam, and Samariam, and vsque in totam terram.
So yt we are to understand, that there is but one catholic church, into which
al true catholics are to be gathered. This Catholic Church, In Psalm. 56.
says Saint In Psalm. 44.
Augustine, is spread throughout the world, and contains not only those that
are present, but those also that are past, and are yet to come. And Saint In
Psalm. 44.
Hierome says, That this church is one, and is founded by the apostles
doctrine, and conuerteth men to Christ.

We belee also, that there is but one apostolic and catholic faith, which
all true catholics both have holden, do hold, and must hold unto the worlds
end. In this catholic church, says De haeres. c. 3.
Vincentius, Lirinensis, we are to hold, that which always has been
believed of all christians, for that is truly and properly catholic. He
Ibid. c. 34.
teaches us also, That the property of catholics is, to keep the doctrine
committed to them, and left with them by the ancient fathers, and to avoid
profane novelties. Further he Ibid. c. 25.
determines, That those only are truly and rightly called catholics, which
only hold and believe that, which the catholic church in old time did
universally hold. With him also does Leo sometimes bishop of Rome agree. Vna
est vera, singularis, perfecta, inuiolabilis, catholica fides, Epist. 81. ad
M^^na^h. pa^aest. and epist. 95.
says he, cui nihil addi, nihil minui potest. That is, there is one true,
singular, perfect, inviolable, and catholic faith, whereunto nothing can be
added, and from whence nothing is to be diminished.

This ground then being laid, and I think, confessed by the adversaries
themselves, that those only are catholics, that hold the catholic faith
received universally of all true christians, of all times, and all places, and
that the catholic faith is that, which Christ commanded universally to be
taught and which of all the catholic church has been generally received, and
which is most perfect and absolute, and admits no additions, alterations,
nor innouations; it may easily be proved, that the papists are neither
catholics, nor hold the catholic faith of Christ Jesus.

For first they do not believe that, which the catholic church ever believed,
but that which the church of Rome believes. Pius quartus In constit. Pij 4.
ordeineth, that all that are preferred in schools shall openly profess, That
they believe all things contained in that creed, which the church of Rome
uses. The form of their profession is this: Ego N. firma fide credo, and
profiteor omnia, quae continentur in symbolo fidei, quo sancta Romana ecclesia
vtitur. Likewise are they bound to condemn all doctrines, which that church
condemns, and anathematizeth. In the Spanish Manual de oraciones por Hieron.
Campos.
catechism set out under the name of Canisius, he is termed a true Christian,
That holds nothing, but that which the church of Rome holds. Y no tiene
cosa fuera de lo, que tiene la yglesia Romana. Finally the papists C. ad
abolendam de haeret.
condemn all for heretics, That either teach, or think otherwise of the
sacrament of the altar, or of confession of sins, or other Romish
sacraments, then the church of Rome. How then can we esteem them catholics,
that for a general and catholic faith embrace a particular, or peculiar faith
of the church of Rome, and openly profess so much?

Secondly they do not believe the catholic church, but the Romish church, nor
do they make themselves members of the catholic church, but of the church of
Rome subject to the pope whom they believe to be their head. De eccles.
militant. c. 2.
Bellarmine does define That to be the true church, which is united in
confession of faith, and communion of sacraments, and obedience to the pope of
Rome. C. vnam. ext. de mayor. and obed.
Boniface the eight determines That all, that will be saved, must of necessity
be subject to the bishop of Rome. In the Manual de Hieron. Campo^
catechism published under the name of Canisius, the church is defined, A
congregation governed upon earth by the pope the only head of the same. Vna
congregation regida en la tierra por el papa vnica cabeza de toda ella. Finally
the Confessio Burdegalens.
Jesuits of Bourdeaux do profess, That to be the church only, which has
communion with the church of Rome, whereof the pope is the chief governor. But
the ancient fathers teach us, that the catholic church is not tied to one
city, or one country, or one pope or bishop, but universally spredde over the
whole earth, as has in part been declared. Si dei est (ecclesia) says a
Chrysostom, In homil. 1. in epist. 1. ad Corinth.
vna est, non Corinthi solum, sed vniuersi orbis. So I may say, if the
Romanists were the catholic church, then should not their universal church be
termed by the name of the church of Rome, but of Gods universal church. Saint
Lib. 4. de Symbol. c. 10.
Augustine says, that Every congregation, that is gathered in one corner, is a
concubine, and not the spouse of Christ. How then can the papists be
catholics, that are gathered out of the society of the universal church, into
the communion of the church of Rome? Writing to Vincentius the Donatist he
Epist. 48.
concludes, that the Donatistes and Rogatians were not the catholic church,
for that they took their names of others, then of the christian church.

Thirdly the faith of catholics is Ephesians. 2.
built Upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ being
the chief corner stone. And this foundation is no where to be found, but in
the writings of the apostles and prophets, which show unto us the doctrine of
Christ Jesus. The apostle saint Romans 10.
Paul does teach us, That faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God. Which we may not seek in decretales, nor legendes, but in the most holy
scriptures, endited by the holy ghost. And so the fathers teach us. Lib. 3.
aduers. haeres. c. 1.
Irenaeus does say, that the apostles First preached, and afterward delivered
the gospel in Scriptures, that they might be a foundation, and pillar of our
faith. Per apostolos euangelium peruenit ad nos, says he, Quod quidem tunc
praeconiauerunt, postea vero per Dei voluntatem in scripturis tradiderunt,
fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum. Athanasius in Synopsi, does
call The canonical Scriptures, the anchor, and stay of our faith. He would
not have any thing spoken or heard of christians in matters of faith and
religion, beside the holy Scriptures. Si diuersa a scripturis fabulari vultis,
De incarr ^t. verb.
says he, cur nobiscum concertatis, qui nec loqui, nec andire sustine^^s, quod
extraneum sit ab illis? The church says Homil. 6. in Matthaeum.
Chrys^stome, is Jerusalem, whose foundations are placed upon the mountains
of the Scriptures. Hierome calls the Scriptures the limits or bounds of the
catholic church. Non est egressa de fin^l us suis says In Mich. ^^.
he, id est, de Scriptu^^ fanc^^. Finally the ^rir. Aquin. 2. 2 q. 1. art. ^.
papists themselves confess, that the object or ground of faith is The f^^st
truth, or God himself. And we doubt not, but that al certain knowledge of God
is to be found in his written word, which therefore is called the rule of our
faith. But the papists speak evil of scriptures, and either will not have
them to be the proper foundation of our faith, or sorge to themselves diverse
other foundations, whereupon they build their church, and their faith* in the
In c. 3. epist. 2. ad Corinth.
annotations upon the Rhemish testament, they call them A killing letter, as if
God had delivered his will in writing, to the end to kill the Readers. They
write Annot. Rh. in c. 5. Joan.
also, That they are hard to be understood, and would bring them in disgrace by
Ibid. in c. 4. Matthew.
saying, That the devil and heretics allege scriptures. Some call them A
nose of wax, without any certain sense, as the Jesuits of Collen in their
censure; others call them Inken divinity, and account them no better then
Matter of strife, and contention. Generally they Censur. Colon f.
esteem the canon of scripture to be a rule imperfect, and a maimed and lame
piece of doctrine; and condemn the reeding of scriptures, As pernicious and
hurtful.

Stapleton In praefat. ante relect. princip. doct.
plainly denies the scriptures to be the foundation of religion. Aliud hodie,
says he, Christianae religionis fundamentum habemus; and afterward, Ab ipsis
literis euangelicis and apostolicis aliud. The same man speaking of diverse
principles and grounds of Christian religion, In analysi. ante r^lect. p
incip. doct.
does leave the scriptures quite out of the reckoning. Others also make small
reckoning of scriptures, but where they can by forced interpretations draw
them to their purpose: and such, as deny not the scriptures to be a foundation
of religion, do notwithstanding adioyne diverse other foundations to the
scriptures, and build their faith upon them as well, as upon the Scriptures.

Unto the canon of the scriptures of the old testament consisting of two and
twenty books l they add first the books of Tobias, Judith, Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Synod. Trideni^s^ss 4.
and the story of the Machabees, and secondly certain additions found in the
latin translation over and above the original books: and this contrary to
the judgment of most ancient and catholic fathers. Neither is it material,
that saint Lib. 2. doct. Christ. c. 8.
Augustine, and a certain council of Carthage, and two or three more
following them do number these books among canonical Scriptures. For they by
Canonical understand such books, as by order of the church were read
publicly, and commonly bound together, and were rather a rule for manners,
then for faith. Legi voluerunt in ecclesijs, says In exposit. Symbol.
Ruffin, non tamen proferri ad authoritatem fidei ex his confirmandam. The same
is also the judgment of In Synopsi.
Athanasius, In prolog. galeato.
Hierome, De ponder. and mensur.
Epiphanius, and of the most sound, and ancient fathers of the church. And if
we should otherwise interpret the words of those, that reckon these books
among canonical Scriptures; we should also put the 3. and 4. of Esdras among
the books canonical. For they are also by saint Augustine, and Sixtus
Senensis biblioth. sanct. lib. 1.
others after a sort judged canonical; and Athanasius in Synopsi does
attribute no less authority to the third book of Esdras, then to the books
of Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees. The Greeks
also place the third book of Esdras first: although the assembly at Trent
excluded the third and fourth book of Esdras out of the canon, and Sixtus
quintus in his new edition of the Latin Bible, has excluded them out of their
ancient place.

They add also unwritten traditions to the Scriptures, and build their faith
equally on them two, giving unto them both equal authority. Libros veteris
and noui testamenti, says Sess. 4.
the assembly at Trent, nec non traditiones ipsas etc. pari pietatis affectu
ac reuerentia suscipit ac veneratur synodus ista. Lib. 3. de verbo dei.
Bellarmine accounts of these traditions, as of the most certain word of
God, and calls them The word of God not written. De fid. and Symb. q. 22.
op. Catech.
Canisius would have us to believe these traditions Most firmly, as revealed
by the holy Ghost. The which is not only derogatory to the sufficiency of
Scriptures, but also utterly overthrows the certainty of faith. For if
traditions be not certainly known of the adversaries, and if diverse ancient
traditions be now grown out of use, how can the faith, that is built on
traditions be certain? Further the ancient fathers do not only testify the
Scriptures to be sufficient, but also condemn unwritten and uncertain
traditions. Electa sunt quae scriberentur, says Saint Tractat. 49. in Joan.
Augustine, quae saluti credentium sufficere vide bantur. Aduer. gentes.
Athanasius says, That the holy and divine Scriptures are sufficient to
instruct us in all truth. And diverse others testify the same. What, says
Regul. 80.
Basil, is the property of a faithful man? Forsooth to believe with certain
fullness of mind, whatsoever is contained in Scripture, and neither to reject
any part thereof, nor to add any new thing unto them. Saint Lib. de parad. c.
12.
Ambrose says, We may no more add to Gods commandments, then take from
them. And although the fathers talk ofttimes in commendation of traditions;
yet either they mean such things, as are now contained in Scriptures, and from
them to be derived and deduced by firm conclusions; or else such matters, as
concern order and decency: and yet do they not account of these, as of divine
precepts. Si aut in euangelio praecipitur, aut in apostolorum epistolis, says
In Epist. ad Pompe^um.
Cyprian, aut in actibus continetur, obseruetur diuina haec and sancta
traditio. Whereby it appears, that other traditions which were not written,
were not had in like reuence: and that the faith of papists, that rests on
these uncertainties, is most uncertain.

Further the papists do build their faith upon most fabul^us martyrologies,
and lying legendes. For upon these narrations does stand the holiness of
those saints, whom they canonize and worship. In these legends we read of the
moving, yea and speaking of stocks and stones; of restoring not only dead
men, but also dead beasts to life: of apparitions of Christ, of the blessed
virgin, and of saints, and infinite more miracles and prophecies, then are
contained in holy Scriptures. All which, notwithstanding any absurdity
ensuing, our masters of Romish traditions must needs receive, if they believe
either traditions to be the word of God, or else give credence to C. Sancta.
did. 15.
Gelasius. for he says, That the histories of martyrs, and their sufferings
are to be received. Gesta sanctorum martyrum says Gelasius, recipimus. Let it
therefore be considered, whether this faith can be catholic, that is builte
upon such fabulous vanities; which not only the strangeness makes suspected
of us, but also even of papists themselves. Ibid.
Gelasius condemns the legend of George, of Cyricus and Iulitta, of Abgarus,
of the invention of the cross, and of Saint John Baptistes head. Contra donat.
Constant.
Laurentius Valla laugheth at the folly of these legendes. Canto 29.
Dante calls them fooleries, and vain fables. In his history to Clement the
7.
Machiauel says, That these new miracles are repugnant to old christian
religion. The Germans among other greeuances account the vanity of these
fabulous legendes.

They do also take themselves bound to believe the doctrine of the church of
Rome. For this to In praefat. and analys. ante relect. princip. doctrine.
Thomas Stapleton seems a very firm foundation of his popish faith. And, as
he suppose^h, the voice and testimony of this church is most certain, and
infallible. This sure we find by experience, that they C. ad abolendam. de
haereticis.
condemn for heretics, and most cruelly murder all, that dissent from the
church of Rome in matter of sacraments.

Nay they do ground their religion upon the popes decretalles. Decretales
epistolae says C. Sancta. did. 15.
Gelasius, quas beatissimi papae diuersis temporibus ab vrbe Romana pro
diuersorum patrum consultatione dederunt, venerabiliter recipiendae sunt. The
popes they honor, as their supreme judges, and say they cannot err. Unto them
they have recourse in all difficulties, as unto a rock immooueable. Stapleton
does Princip. doctrine. lib. 6.
teach, That the pope is the principal subject of ecclesiastical authority,
and is not ashamed to write, that his authority is the foundation of religion.
In hac docentis hominis authoritate, says In praefat. ante rel^ct. princip.
doct^.
he, in qua deum loquentem audimus, religionis nostrae cognoscendae fundamentum
necessario poni cernimus. O noble religion, that is founded upon so firm and
holy a foundation, as is the popes holy authority! But, sure, catholic it
cannot be. For neither the ancient church in times past, nor the eastern and
Africane churches did ever acknowledge any such foundation.

Neither do they account the popes authority only to be the foundation of
their faith, but also for Christ the corner stone substitute the pope, and make
him the rock of the church, and of their faith. For at his hands they receive
the scriptures, and all the principles and points of their faith, and account
his determination more certain, then the letter of Scriptures. Bellarmine
calls the pope, The foundation, and corner stone of the church; In praes.
ante lib. de Pontif. Romans
and commonly by the rock Matthew. 16. they understand not Peter only, but the
popes of Rome; which they imagine to be his successors. Matters strange, new,
absurd; and most contrary to catholic faith.

To the vulgar latin translation they give more authority, then to the
original books of the old testament in Hebrew, and of the new testament in
Greek. For that translation they make authentical, and do not give like
authority to the original books. That translation they will not have any to
reject: but the original books themselves calumniate, and reject. Which
course is neither catholic, nor reasonable. Saint In epist. ad S^niam and
Fretel. and ad Damasum.
Hierome says, That in the old testament in matters of doubt concerning the
translation, we must have recourse to the Hebrew, as to the fountein; in the
new to the Greek. Ad exemplaria Hebraea and Graeca a latinis recurratur, Lib.
2. de doctr. Christ. c. 10.
says Augustine. Hilary writing upon the 118. psalm, conf^sseth, That the
latin translation cannot sati^fie the reader.

They hold also The doctrine and determination of priests, and Jesuits, and
others sent by the pope, to be no less the foundation of Christian religion,
then Christ and his doctrine. For so does In praef. ante relect. princip. doctr.
Stapleton in express terms determine: and generally they C. ad abolendam. de
haeret.
condemn such for heretics, As the prelates and bishops do adiudge to be
such. Which is nothing else, but to make the determination of popish prelates
the foundation of the popish church. But Christ sending forth his disciples to
preach, commanded them to teach all nations, and withal Matthew. 28.
gave them in charge, To teach what he had commanded them. The Gal. 1.
apostle pronounces him Accursed, that should teach otherwise, then the
Galatians had received. By the law of Moses the Sanedrin, or chief tribunal in
Jerusalem had sovereign authority in judgment, yet might not those judges
pronounce sentence, Deuteronomy. 17.
But according to the law of God. The which does argue, that popish religion is
built upon grounds most absurd, and contrary to religion.

Finally some do stand much upon ancient fathers, and councelles, and the first
churches practice, and have not doubted to attribute much unto them. But now
finding by experience, that these do not much make for them, and that the
fathers themselves do wholly rely upon the scriptures; they fly wholly to the
authority of the pope, and to the late church of Rome; and perceive, that
unless they may sit judges in their own cause, the same cannot stand. But
herein it may plainly appear, that they are no catholics. For ancient
catholics attributed most to scriptures, and used the testimony of fathers,
and of the ancient church, to declare the true sense, and meaning of
scriptures. But S^ss. 4. conci^. Tr^d.
these admit no sense, But that of holy church, as they call it; which is
nothing, but the private fancy of so^e foolish pope.

Fourthly, as in the foundations of Christian religion, so likewise in diverse
points of faith the papists do plainly declare themselves to be no catholics.
For first in the object of faith they mainly differ: true catholics believe in
God only. Faith, says the Romans 10.
apostle, is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. De divine. nomin. c. 7.
Dionyse says, That faith has for his object the most pure and always being
truth, that is God. And every Christian rehearsing his faith, confesses, That
he believes in God the father, the son, and the holy ghost, and in no
creature. But the papists believe in angels, and in saints, and call upon them.
For as the Romans 10.
apostle says, How shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? To
them also they make confession of their sins, and from them they look for
help, and all things necessary, as may be showed by infinite particulars.

Further they believe the determinations of the pope to be true, and trust in
him, as in the rock of the church. In opusc. contra error. Graecor.
Thomas Aquinas says, that it is a matter of faith to believe the
determination of the pope. Ad fidem pertinet, says he, inhaerere
determinationi pontificis summi in his, quae sunt fidei, imo and in his, quae
spectant ad bonos mores. And this is also the opinion of Summa Siluest. in
verb. fides.
Siluester Prierius. They believe also whatsoever is taught by the church of
Rome. Ad fidem pertinent omnia, quae sunt in doctrina ecclesiae, says Ibidem.
Siluester Prierius; and he gathers the same out of 2.2. q. 5. art. 3.
Thomas Aquinas: and that is their common opinion, holding the traditions of
the church in equal estimation with the word of God: all which can never be
proved to have been believed by true catholics. For neither can it be
showed, that in public liturgies they have called on saints, and on angels, as
the church of Rome teaches, or confessed their sins to them, or believed in
the pope or church of Rome.

Again, true catholics believe, that Christ Jesus was true man, and had a
body like to ours in height, breadth, thickness; and that he filled the place
where he was, as do our bodies. We must believe, says De essentia diuinitatis.
Augustine, that the son of God according to his deity is invisible,
incorporeall, and incircumscriptible, but according to his humane nature, that
he is visible, corporeal, and local. Contra Eutych. lib. 4. c. 4.
Vigilius says, That Christ is contained in a place according to his humane
nature, and that this is the catholic faith. Illud corpus, says Dialog. 2.
Theodoret, habet priorem forma^, and figuram and circumscriptione^, and vt
semel dicam, corporis substantiam. So likewise says Ad Thrasimund. li. 2. c. 5.
Fulgentius, Siveru^ est corpus Christi, loco potest vtique contineri. But the
papists do assign him a body invisible, impalpable, and such a one, as is
incircum scriptible, and without the dimensions of height, breadth, and depth. A
body that may be contained in infinite places at once, and yet not continued
to it self, as is the nature of Continua quantitas. Finally a man's whole body,
that is without all qualities of a body, and may be contained in every little
part of a consecrate host, increasing and diminishing at the priests pleasure.

Further every catholic Christian believes, that our Savior Christ's true
body is ascended into heaven, and there remains. Joan. 16.
He told his disciples before his passion, That he must leave the world, and
go to the father. And in another place, John 12.
That they should not always have him with the^. In the first of the Acts we
learn, That he is taken up from us into heaven. And the apostle S. Act. 3.
Peter does plainly declare, That the heavens must contain him, until the
time, that all things be restored. And this also the fathers plainly teach us,
According to his divine nature, says In Matthew. tractat. 33.
Origin, he is not absent from us, but he is absent according to the
dispensatio^ of his body, which he took. Lib. 10. super Luc. 24.
S. Ambrose says, That neither on the earth, nor in the earth, nor after the
flesh we ought to seek Christ, if we will find him. Saint Augustine says,
Tractat. 50. in Joan.
He has carried his body into heaven, although he has not withdawne his
majesty from the world. Homil. 21. in euangel.
Gregory the first does plainly affirm, That Christ is not here by the
presence of his flesh. The flesh of Christ, says Vigilius writing against
Eutyches, lib. 4. c. 4. when it was in earth, surely was not in heaven, and now
because it is in heaven, certainly it is not in earth. Neither did ever any
ancient father teach otherwise. But the papists do teach, that Christ's true
body and flesh is both in heaven and earth, and upon every altar at one time,
and that he is touched and received not of men only, but also of mise and
dogs, and other beasts, which to true catholics seems not only absurd, but
also abominable.

All true catholics firmly believe, that th^^r sins are forgiven them for
Christ his sake, and that they shall atteine eternal life: according to these
two articles of the creed, which every one professes saying, Credo remissionem
peccatorum, and vitam aeternam. God he Has promised and sworn, as the Heb. 6.
apostle says, That we should have firm comfort. And saint 1. John 5.
John says, These things write I unto you that believe in the name of God,
that you may know, that you have eternal life. And whosoever believes not
this; as he Ibid.
testifies, Makes God a liar. The apostle saint Romans 5.
Paul says, That he that is justified by faith has peace with God. But that
cannot be, unless we believe, that our sins are remitted, and that we shall
assuredly obtain eternal life. The sacraments that are delivered to every
christian are seals of remission of sins, and of the promise of life. For by
baptism We put on Christ, that is, we are made members of his body, and
partakers of his merits. And in the Lords supper we hear, that the cup is
the new testament, and that Christ his body was delivered, for every true
receiver. Of Abraham it is said, Romans 4.
That he doubted not of the promise of God, and that the Same was imputed to
him for righteousness. The apostle saint Romans 8.
Paul says, that he was persuaded That nothing should separate him from the
love of God. Si iustus es, and fide viuis, says Sermon. 4. de mortalit.
Cyprian, si vere in Christum credis, cur non cum Christo futurus, and de
domini pollicitatione securus, amplecteris. Again he says, Ibid.
We are not to waver or doubt, for that God has promised us immortality.
Sermon. 28. de verbis dom.
Saint Augustine writing upon these words, Thy sins are forgiven thee:
says, It is faith, and not pride, to acknowledge what we have received. Sermon.
2. de annunt.
Bernard says, That we have no promise but by Gods favor, and that the
spirit of God works this in us, that we do believe remission of sins.
Neither do any teach contrary but Nouatians, Pharisees, and such like
heretics. But the papists will have men only to hope for remission of sins,
and eternal life, and that not without doubting. The doctors of Sess. 6.
Trent pronounce them Anathema, That shall say that a man must certainly
believe, that his sins are forgiven. And Pighius, Andradius, and others
teach, that Christians must doubt of eternal life, and of their salvation; as
if faith were only conversant about general promises, and were not appliable
to him, that rehearses his faith, and truly believes.

Finally all true catholics believe, that the faithful presently upon their
departure out of this life are happy, and enter into ioies, that never shall
have end, as the wicked and unbelievers are presently thrown into everlasting
fire, and begin to suffer endless pains. These shall go into everlasting
pain, as our Matthew. 25.
Savior says, and the righteous into life eternal. The Romans 8.
apostle plainly testifies, That there is no condemnation to those that are in
Christ Jesus. And the Apoc. 14.
spirit of God pronounces them Blessed that die in the Lord; and says, that
they rest from their labors. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7.
Dionyse commonly called Areopagite says, That the godly shall test in
Abraham's bosom, when they come to the end of their lives, and that there shall
be no grief, sadness, nor sighing. Justin Martyr Quaest. 75.
says, That the souls of good men shall presently be carried into paradise.
Both Lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 2.
Ireney and Sermon. de mortalit.
Cyprian make only two sorts of souls departed: whereof the first are in
bliss, the second in pains. And that is the common opinion of the fathers.
Only Augustine in this point stands doubtful, and Gregory affirms that
certain small sins are remitted in purgatory. But the papists teach, that
all that have not satisfied for their sins in this life, must be plunged in
purgatory, and there suffer pains not to be told, contrary to the opinion
of all the fathers. They also grant Stationi di Roma.
indulgences for many thousands of years, as if the pains of purgatory were
so long to continue. In Saint Marie mayor and other churches of Rome there are
many thousand years of pardon granted by diverse popes. Pope Siluester when he
consecrated Saint John of Laterans church, as is said, Gave as many years of
pardon, as fell drops of rain that day, when it was consecrated; which were
innumerable, for that it rained all that day. And when he doubted, least he
had been too lavish in his grant, he heard a voice from heaven, as it is said
in the book Of the pardons of Rome, that he had power enough to grant what
he would. They believe also, that out of purgatory souls are delivered by
indulgences and pardons: all which is contrary to catholic faith, and never
believed of any true catholic.

Fifthly they have diversely corrupted the law of God, which is contrary to the
practice of ancient catholics. The second commandment, or as they reckon,
that part of the first commandment, that concerns the worship of images,
they have either razed out, or left out of their short catechismes. Nay albeit
Canisius in his catechism, where he rehearses the ten Commandments, does
mention graven images: yet Hieronymo Campos in his Spanish translation of the
same does leave it out. Full well they know, how much their idolatrous worship
of images is contrary to Gods commandments.

The Jesuits teach, Censur. Colon. fol. 46.
That all is not sin, that is repugnant to the law of God. As if it were
lawful to transgress any part of Gods law, when man's laws may not be broken
without offense. The Deuteronomy. 27. and Gal. 3.
law does pronounce a curse upon him, That abides not in all things, that are
written in the book of the law, to do them. And saint 1. John. 5.
John says expressly, That all unrighteousness is sin. And if the
transgression of the law were not sin; then were the law of God a most
imperfect, and uncertain rule, which no catholic will affirm.

The doctors assembled in the conuenticle at Trent Sess. 5.
determined, That concupiscence in the regenerate is no sin, and pronounce
them accursed, that say, or think otherwise. Yet the law of God says
directly, Thou shall not covet. Which law binds as well the regenerate, as the
unregenerate, and the apostle does expressly call it sin in the regenerate,
Romans 7. and necessarily must it be so, seeing we are by the law of God bound,
Deuteronomy. 6.
To love him with all our heart, al our soul, all our strength Saint In Amos 1.
Hierome says, That it is sin to think things that are evil. And saint
Lib. 2. contr. Faust. Manich. c. 27.
Augustine says, That whatsoever is desired, or coueted against the law, is
sin. So that it appears, that papists in this point are no catholics.

The Censur. Colon. f. 309.
Jesuits do teach, that there are certain sins which are not convinced by
Gods law, and yet are more grievous, then diverse transgressions and sins
committed against the law: as namely the breaches of the laws of the pope, and
precepts of the church. For to break the law of God in some points, they
make it either no sin, as has been said, or else a venial sin. But to
condemn the popes anathematismes, and to break the commandments of the
church, they make it mortal sin. Nay they make it sin to mislike the
abominable worship of images, and invocation of saints. But the apostle does
teach us, That the knowledge of sin does come by the law. And it is
flagitious to think, that the law of God is not perfect, and that man's
traditions are of equal value with the law of God. Finally the James 4.
apostle James teaches us, That we have but one law giver and one judge, viz.
that can bind our consciences. Which does further convince them to be no
true catholics.

They teach and hold, that the regenerate cannot only perform the law of God
perfectly, but also do works of supererogation, and more then is commanded.
But the apostle James teaches us, That we do sin all, and that in many
things: and our Savior Christ taught his most holy apostles to pray for
remission of sins. Yea when we have done what we can, yet we are taught to
say, That we are unprofitable servants. Saint John says, That they that say,
they have no sin, deceive themselves. Saint Lib. 1. aduers. Pelag.
Hierome therefore says, That then we are just, when we confess our sins.
Saint De spiritu and litera.
Augustine says, that We shall then perform the law of God with all our
soul and all our heart, and love our neighbor as our self, when we shall see
God face to face: that is, in the life to come.

They teach us, that we are justified by the works of the law, and that All
our life and salvation does Ce^sur. Col^n. f. 22.
consist therein. The council of Sess. 6. c. 10.
Trent condemns those that say, We are justified formally by Christ's
justice. All hold that charity is the formal cause of our justification. But
the catholic church teaches us far otherwise. Non iustificatur ex operibus
legis vlla caro. No flesh, says the apostle, Galat. 2.
is justified by the works of the law. He says also, Galat. 3.
That as many as are of the works of the law, are subject to the curse: and
denies, that the law has power to give life. Nay he Romans 4.
denies, That Abraham was justified by the works of the law. Iustitia nostra
non ex proprio merito, sed ex dei consistit misericordia. Our justice, says
Aduers. P^lag. lib. 1.
Hierome, does not consist in our merits, but in the mercy of God. And Aduers.
hares. lib. 3. c. 20.
Irenaeus teaches us, That the law being spiritual does only manifest
(...), and not kill it. Neither is it likely, the law should ius^^t us, when it
pronounces us accursed, and shows we are all sinners. For none are
justified by the law, but those that perform the law. But how can we
acquit our selves, seeing as saint D^ interpelat David.
Ambrose says, David does acknowledge his sin, and Paul does confess
himself guilty? Saint De lib. ach. c. 16.
Augustine says, That we are therefore commanded to do things, which we
cannot, that we may understand, what we are to desire of God.

To conclude this point, they have not only changed the catholic doctrine of
the law, mingling the same with Pelagianisme, but also brought in a new law
giver. Because ye Heb. 7.
apostle says, That the priesthood being changed, the law must needs be
changed; the De constitution. 6. translato.
canonistes gather, That Christ's vicar has authority to make laws. And these
laws, say they, bind men's consciences. So the pope is now forsooth become a
lawgiuer, and a new Lycurgus in the Romish church. But the James 4.
apostle Saint James tells us, That there is but one lawgiuer, that is able
to save and destroy. And for a thousand years after Christ the catholic
church of Christ did never see any pope, that durst take upon him authority to
give laws to the whole church. Of which we have proof even by the books of
popish decretals, that began first by Gregory the ninth to be brought in
form, and were never authorized before his time.

Sixthly the papists hold doctrine both concerning original and actual sin
diverse from the doctrine of the catholic church. For first they deny that
original sin passed over all men, and Decretal. Sixti 4. and synod. Trid.
sess. 5.
exempt the holy virgin Mary: and some say, that saint John Baptist, and the
prophet Hieremy were sanctified from this sin in their mothers womb, and so
not borne in original sin: which is contrary to the doctrine of the apostle,
that Romans 5.
teaches, That through the offense of one all men were subject to
condemnation: and to the words of the blessed virgin, that calls Christ Her
Savior.

Again they say, that original sin is the least of all sins having so
little force of our will. As if that deserved to be accounted little, which
brings with it death and damnation, and which without Christ's death could not
be purged and forgiven.

They Thom. Aq. and ^d. in 2. sent. did. 33.
teach, that children departing without baptism, and with original sin
only, shall not be punished with hell fire, nor with any sensible pain. As if
at the last judgment all that stand on the left hand, as it is written in the
25 of Matthew. shall not depart into everlasting fire: or as if that sin, Romans
5.
That brought condemnation upon all, should not be punished with sensible
pains: or as if there might be a place in hell, without sensible pain. Saint
Lib. 1. de Orig. anim. c. 9.
Augustine says, There is no middle place between the kingdom of heaven, and
damnation. Lib de fide ad Petr. c. 3.
Fulgentius does plainly affirm, That children dying without baptism shall
sustain endless punishments. And Gregory in his Lib. 8. c. 16.
morals says, That they shall endure perpetual torments of hell.

They Bellar. de purgat. lib. 1.
hold, that all Christians can satisfy for the penalty of all actual sins,
though never so grievous: and yet for original sin, which they account the
smallest of sins, they say no satisfaction could be made by any, but by
Christ Jesus. But saint 1. John 1.
John says, That the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sins. And absurd
it were, if man could satisfy for most grievous sins, and could not satisfy
for the least sin.

Of their false and erroneous doctrine concerning concupiscence, and concerning
the transgressions of the popes laws, which they account mortal sin, I have
already spoken. Enchir. Nauar. de 1. praecept. c. 11.
Martin ab Aspilcueta says, That it is mortal sin for a lay man to dispute
of matters of faith. And others devise a multitude of strange mortal sins.

The Censur. Colon. f. 40.
Jesuits teach, that the regenerate after baptism have no sin. But saint
John says, That they deceive themselves, if they say they have no sin. For
as it is 1. Reg. 8.
written, There is none, but sins. And who can say, Prou. 20.
My heart is pure, and I am clean from sin? And this is proved by the most
holy men that ever lived. The most just man, says Lib. 2. aduers. Pelag.
Hierome, in some things stands in need of Gods mercy. And Epist. 29. ad
Hieron.
Augustine says, That no man lives here without sin: albeit some offend
more, some less, and the best least of all.

Generally they believe, that certain sins are so venial and small, that it
is not necessary to repent us of them; and that they do not exclude men from
the kingdom of God, albeit they die without repentance. Which doctrine all
catholics abhor: for the law does pronounce him accursed, whatsoever he is,
Deuteronomy. 27. and Gal. 3.
That abides not in all the things, that are written in the book of the law.
And S. James 2.
James says, That he that does offend against one law, is guilty of all.
Neither can any thing impure, or unclean enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Quaest. breuit. ^xplicat. 4.
Basil says, That no sin is to be called light: Quodcunque enim peccatum,
esse stimulum mortis. Saint In Isai. c. vlt.
Hierome says, That those that have built wood, haie, or straw upon the
foundation, are the nourishment of everlasting fire.

Finally where they affirm, that the transgression of the law is not always
sin, and that it is a more heinous sin to transgress the decretals of the
pope and precepts of the Romish church, then the Moral law; they show, that
they understand not well what is sin, and differ far from true catholics
in their doctrine of sin.

Seventhly they Censur. Colon. f. 204.
teach, that this is the proper doctrine of the Gospel, If thou will enter
into life, keep the commandments. But the Romans 1.
apostle teaches us, That the gospel is the power of salvation to every one
that believes. And Act. 16.
Paul and Silas, when the Gailer asked them, What he should do to be saved;
answered, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Again the law
does justify none, but those that fulfill it: but by the grace of the gospel
all are justified, that believe in Christ Jesus. And this is the belief of all
true catholics.

Further, as if the Gospel contained no certain rule for to attain to
Christian perfection, they have devised diverse other rules under the name of
Benet of Nursia, Francis, Dominicke, Ignatius Loiola, and diverse other monks
and friars, supposing by them to attain more speedily to perfection, then by
the rule of the holy Gospel.

8. Of faith the papists think very basely, as if it were nothing but a bare
assent, and that not only to things revealed in holy Scriptures, but also to
such unwritten traditions, as the church of Rome, or the pope delivers. So
that the ground of the popish faith is laid as well upon the popes
decretales, and lousie, lying legendes, and such trash, as upon the holy
canonical Scriptures. They believe also, that not only wicked men, but also
the devils of hell may have true faith. But the scriptures teach us, that the
chief object of faith that justifies, is Christ Jesus, and those promises
which are made unto the faithful through him. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, says John 3.
saint John, that whosoever should believe in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. They Heb. 11.
show also, that of faith proceeds obedience, patience, hope, sure trust,
victories, and such like effects. Being justified by faith, says the Romans 5.
apostle, We have peace with God. Now that faith does only rest upon Gods word
revealed in scriptures, we have declared heretofore. That wicked men and
devils have not faith, it may appear, for that they cannot believe remission
of sins and eternal life: and this is the faith of true catholics.

They teach, that charity is the form of faith, which is most ridiculous. For
how can one virtue be the form of another, seeing matter and form are the
parts of a natural body? It is also most false. For if charity were the form
of faith, then could faith work nothing of it self. But Romans ^.
the apostle says, That the just shall live by faith. And Ephesians. 2.
again, You are sa^ed by grace through faith. And that not of your selves; it
is the gift of god: no^ of works, least any should boast. Ex nullo legis opere
says Lib. 3. ad Romans
Origin, sed pro sola fide, ait ad illam mulierem, remittuntur tibi peccata
tua. Whosoever, says Lib. 2. epist. 3.
Cyprian, does believe in God, and live by faith, he is found to be just. And
Hierome In^. 10. ad Romans
says, That God does justify by faith only. And infinite allegations may be
brought to this purpose, to show that where faith and other virtues concur,
yet it is faith only, that apprehends Christ Jesus, and works our
reconciliation and justice with God; and that the works of charity and other
virtues are effects of faith. And this is most catholic doctrine, as the
doctrine of papists is most erroneous and sophistical.

To conclude this matter of faith, they attribute to faith, only the first
beginning of justice, or first justice. But our second, and more perfect
justice they ascribe to charity and works of the law. Which is a plain way to
overthrow man's justice, and not to establish it. For who can say, that he has
that measure of charity, that the law requires? Who can say, yt his heart is
so clean, that his conscience does not accuse him of any transgression against
the law? Who can say, he is without sin? Certes no true catholic will
either challenge to himself that singular holiness and purity; or affirm,
that he is without sin.

9. The papists do teach, that there are seven sacraments of the new law: and
neither more, nor less. And that all these seven were instituted by Christ
Jesus, and contain grace, and work justification. For so much the venerable
friars assembled at Sess. 7.
Trent have declared and determined: and it is the popes pleasure, that all his
adherents should believe their determination. But this doctrine is neither
true, nor catholic. Apolog. 2.
Justin Martyr, where he has occasion to describe the rites of the church,
does only mention two sacraments: to wit, Baptism and the Lords supper. Lib.
1. and 4. contr. Marcion* and de coron mil^t.
Tertullian, where he handles the same argument, does mention no more, then
two. Cyrill likewise of Jerusalem Catech. Myst^g.
speaking of the mysteries of Christian religion, does only discourse of
Baptism and the Lords supper. Dionysius whom they suppose to be Dionyse the
Areopagite, albeit he do fully set out the rites of the church of his time,
does neither make penance, nor matrimony, nor unction of the dead a Sacrament.
He that wrote the books of Sacraments, that bear the name of Ambrose, and
Augustine, and Paschasius only mention two sacraments. Now who does not see,
that ordination of priests, and penance and matrimony were instituted either
in the law of nature, or under the law of Moses? And certes if these things
did justify, then should the Sacraments of the old law justify; and
justification were a very easy matter. No catholic writer does imagine any
such matter to be in marriage or order, and neither was extreme unction, nor
popish confirmation known unto antiquity.

10. In the Sacrament of Baptism they use exorcismes, blowings, salt, spittle,
hallowed water, annointings, light, and diverse ceremonies, neither used by the
apostles, nor practiced by the ancient church. And yet S^ss. 7. Trident.
Council. c. 13.
they say, That none of their ceremonies may be omitted without sin. Finally
they denounce them accursed, that shall not hold Baptism to be necessary to
salvation: which ceremonies and doctrine do not appear to be catholic.

11. They dissolve marriage contracted, by entering into religion, as they term
it; and albeit it be consummated, yet they hold, that by mutual consent the
married couple may depart a sunder, and that it shall not be lawful for them
afterward to company together. They separate also marriage for spiritual
kindred, and force all that will be priests, monks or friars to forswear
marriage. Matters not only strange in the catholic church, during the apostles
and t^eir successors times for many hundred years, but also contrary to
Christ's doctrine. For what man can separate them, whom God has joined? And
what reason has man to command any to forswear marriage, which the Heb. 13.
spirit of God pronounces to be Honorable?

12. They believe, that penance stands upon contrition, confession and
satisfaction, and that t^ese are the three parts of penance. And yet themselves
say, that absolution is the form of penance, and that confession is not
always necessary. Further Council. Trid. Sess. 14.
they pronounce him anathema, That believes not, that penance is properly a
sacrament, and that denies confession in the priests ears to be instituted
by Christ. Wherein they digress both from the catholic church, and catholic
doctrine.

13. The sacrament of ye lords supper they have most shamefully altered and
abused, teaching first, that Christ is present with his body corporally and
carnally in the sacrament, and that he is there also really with his soul, and
that not only wicked and faithless persons, but also brute beasts swallow
down Christ quick into their bodies. Next, that the substance of bread and
wine is abolished, and that the accidents thereof remain without subject, and
the substance of Christ's body without the qualities of a body. Thirdly, that
the sacrament is to be worshipped as God, which is plain idolatry. Fourthly
they take the cup from the co^municantes, and for a communion make a private
action of one priest, called the mass. Fifthly they make of this sacrament, or
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, a sacrifice external and propitiatory
both for quick and dead. And by this sacrifice they hope to obtain remission
of sins, health, wealth, victory, and whatsoever the b^ter desires. Finally
they do not distribute the sacrament, as Christ commanded, but reserve it in
pixes, or carry it about in procession, or as it pleases the priests. All
which do show them to be no catholics. For catholics do believe that these
words, This is my body: are figurative. Lib. 4. contr. Marc.
Tertullia^ says, That Christ made the bread, which was given to his
disciples, his body, by saying, this is my body, that is, the figure of my
body. De vnct.
Cyprian says, That Christ at his last supper gave bread and wine with his
own hands, and that things signified and signifying were called by the same
names. In c. 15. Matthew.
Origin does call the sacrament Christ's figurative and typical body. De ijs
qui initiantur mysterijs c. 9.
Ambrose says, That Christ's true flesh was sacrificed, but that the eucharist
is the sacrament of that true flesh. The Lord did not stick to say, this is my
body, says saint Contr. Adimant. c. 12.
Augustine, when he gave the sign of his body.

They believe not, that the bread is abolished. Aduers. Iudaeos.
Tertullian says, That Christ called bread his body. Saint Hierome writing to
Hedibia says, That the bread which the Lord brake, and gave to his disciples
is the Lords body. The bread, says saint De consecrat. did. 2. c. qui
manducant.
Augustine, is the body of the Lord, and the cup his blood. In the giving of
the mysteries, says Dial. 1.
Theodoret, he called bread his body. But what need testimonies of fathers,
when the apostle rehearsing the words of the institution, calls bread
Christ's body, and names bread after consecration, and when the pronoune Hoc,
can be referred to no other thing, but bread?

True catholics believe, that the holy communion of the Lords supper is a
commemoration, and a memorial of the sacrifice made by Christ Jesus upon the
cross, rather then any actual and external sacrifice. Our Matthew. 26. and
Luc. 22.
Savior says, This do in remembrance of me. The 1. Cor. 11.
apostle says, that in this Sacrament We show forth the Lords death, and
celebrate a memorial of it. In dialog. cum Tryphon.
Justin Martyr says, That in the sacrifice of bread and the cup, which Christ
instituted, for a memorial of his passion, Christians give thanks to God.
Saint De fide ad Petr. c. 19.
Augustine says, That in the sacrifice of bread and wine there is a
commemoration of the flesh and blood of Christ, that were offered for us. Saint
In epist. ad Hebr.
Chrysostom says, That our sacrifice is a remembrance of Christ's sacrifice.

Finally all true catholics did distribute and receive the holy Sacrament,
when they came to the Lords supper, and observed his holy institution without
mixtures of their inventions, or other alterations.

14. The papists have either abolished Christ's priesthood, or else much
debased the same: and have brought in a new order of priesthood never
instituted by Christ, nor practiced by the catholic church. For in stead of
Christ they run to angels, to our Lady and saints, and believe, that these
can reconcile them to God. They believe also, that their priests are after the
order of Melchizedeck, and do offer sacrifices propitiatory for quick and
dead. But the apostle teaches us, that Christ is only able to reconcile us,
and that he is our only Mediator and Redeemer, and is Hebr. 7.
A priest after the order of Melchizedeck, and has offered up one most perfect
sacrifice, which is no more to be renewed. Saint Lib. 10. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 20.
Augustine says, That Christ is a priest, that is both the sacrificer, and the
sacrifice it self, of which the sacrifice of the church is but a Sacramen^.
Such a priest never was any, but he. And this is that, which catholics
believe of Christ's priesthood: and which papists believe not.

15. The papists have altered the form of prayer used in the catholic church.
Christ taught us to pray to the father in his name; and so did all true
catholics. But they pray to Christ in the name of our Lady* and of saints,
and pray to angels, to our Lady and saints; and of these prayers they have
infinite forms neither practiced, nor allowed by true catholics. They In
Hortul. animae, and breuiar.
begin their confession thus, I confess to God almighty, to the blessed virgin
Mary, to the blessed Archangell Michael, to saint John Baptist etc. That I have
offended in thought, word, and work. To the virgin Mary Jn the office of our
Lady.
They commend their souls and bodies. And fly to her in all their need. In
their Litanies they call her, The gate of heaven, the refuge of sinners, the
Queen of Angels, the comforter of the afflicted, the arc of the covenant. And
as every one does fancy, so he chooses to himself a peculiar saint,
believing to obtain things more easily by the intercession of saints, then of
Christ Jesus. Further they say masses and prayers for the souls departed, and
for the dead have appointed special offices, which our adversary shall never
prove to have been frequented, or used by true catholics. Neither shall he
be able to show where catholics had any rosaries consisting of 63. Aue
Mariaes, nor where they prayed in languages, which they understood not. Nay the
1. Cor. 14.
apostle says, That such prayers are without fruit; and that we Romans 10.
cannot call, but upon those upon Whom we believe. How shall they call on him,
says the apostle, on whom they have not believed?

16. The papists have corrupted the true worship of God. For not only have
they published new worships according to their own devises, which our Matthew.
15.
savior condemns as vain, but also have devised forms of worship contrary
to Gods commandment. Contrary to the second commandment they make the images
of God, and worship the same with divine worship. They do likewise worship the
cross and crucifixe. They worship saints departed, their images and relics.
And of late time have devised masses and offices in honor of the cross, of the
virgin Mary, of saint Francis, Dominike and other saints. Unto these images
they burn incense, they offer their prayers, and devotions. Nay they, I say,
fall down before stocks and stones, they kiss them and worship them; and yet
will be accounted the only catholics. But our adversary will be much
puzzeled, when he goes about to prove, that true catholics have done the
like. Nay be shall find, that true catholics have condemned this manner of
popish devotion for plain idolatry. Helena crucem Christi inuenit says De
obitu Theodosij.
Ambrose, Et Christum adorauit, non crucem: is enim est error gentills, and
impiorum. He says, that it is heathenish to worship the cross. In the first
commandment says Epist. 119.
Augustine, the image of God is forbidden to be worshipped with men's devises.
Lib. 2. in Joan. c. 92.
Cyrill says, That God is not to be worshipped with any corruptible matter. In
ancient liturgies of the church there are no offices for the dead, nor any
prayers to angels and saints to be found.

17. The missales, and breuiaries, and offices and psalters of our Lady, and
all the rituall books, which now by order of the Council of Trent they use,
are nothing catholic. Nay they contain matters erroneous and blasphemous,
which all catholics abhor. They detort the Scriptures to the honor of our
Lady, saint Francis, saint Dominike, saint Clare and other Romish saints. They
contain many fabulous and lying narrations. Diverse of their masses and offices
are devised in the honor of saints: and savor of novelty.

18 True catholics do serve one God with spirit and truth. The papists have
as many gods, as saints: and worship God with their lips, for the most part,
not knowing what they say. They read Scriptures, and pray in toongs unknown,
which not only by the apostle, but also by the practice of all ancient
churc^es is condemned.

19. Among catholics antichrist has no place. For albeit he shall sit in the
temple of God; yet after he has once begun to sit and reign there; he shall
make it of the house of God, the house of vanity; of Gods church the synagogue
of satan. Likewise they shall not worship the man of sin, nor kiss his
feet, nor admit his laws. But the papists acknowledge the pope to be their
head; they kiss his feet; they fall down before him; Potestatem suam bestiae
trad^nt. Apoc. 17.
Kings give their power unto him; they acknowledge him to be their sovereign
judge and law giver, and take it to be mortal sin to break his laws.

20. Among true catholics the chief government in matters Ecclesiastical is
in general Councels. Until general Councels have decided such controversies
as arise, provincial councels, and christian magistrates have principal
authority in settling and determining of matters. They make laws, determine
controversies, establish governors according to apostolical orders. And this
by acts of councels and laws of princes is s^fficiently testified. But the
papists acknowledge no other head beside the pope, to whom they give power to
make laws, to appoint bishops and ecclesiastical officers, and to determine
all controversies throughout the whole world.

21. Among catholics the government of the church was committed to apostles,
prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers: and bishops and pastors every one
taught the stock committed to him. There were no glorious cardinals, nor idle
and dumb bishops, nor prattling and busy friars among them. But among the
papists the whole government depends on the pope and his agentes. The
cardinals counsel him, the prelates and inquisitors are made his
executioners, to murder all that repugne against his laws; the bishops are
dumb and feed not; the friars enter without calling, and like locustes crept
out of the bottomless pit, devour the blossoms of true doctrine. Illi
mendicantes peruersi, says a certain Onus eccles. c. 22.
popish bishop, designantur per locustas de puteo abyssi exeuntes, quia ipsi
sunt scurriles, leaves, volatiles, rodentes sacras literas virides, paganicae
philosophiae sequaces, quasi equi currentes, sic illi in vanam disputationem.

22. True catholics have always showed themselves obedient to their princes,
and performed their oaths of allegiance. They neither sought to murder them,
nor to deprive them of their crowns. David albeit he was grievously and
unjustly persecuted by Saul; yet did he not lay his hands upon his prince,
albeit God had taken away the kingdom from Saul, and given it to him. The
Israelites rebelled not against their kings; although they were wicked. But
papists rebel against princes, and neglect all promises and oaths made to
them, as often as the pope shall excommunicate them. Nay the pope and his
adherents excommunicate lawful princes, and pronounce sentence of deposition
against them; their associates make wars upon them: popish subjects are
encouraged to rebel, and are promised great rewards and eternal
blessedness, if they can kill the Lords anointed; as has been sufficiently
already declared by diverse examples. In the rules or Apud Joseph Vestan. de
oscul. ped. pontif.
dictates of Gregory the seventh, the twelft is, That the pope has power to
depose the emperor. The eight, That he may lawfully use the ensigns of the
emperor. The 27. That he has power to absolve subjects from their
allegiance. And this diverse late popes have attempted and practiced. The
which, as it shows them to be no catholics; so it proves them to be
worse then Turks and Infidels, which always have had a reverend regard of
their princes and superiors.

23. True catholics believed only to have remission of sins from Christ
Jesus, and neither trusted in indulgences, nor Iubilies, nor in pilgrimages to
Rome, or to other places. But the Romanists without the popes pardons think
themselves in no security, and presuming of his favor commit murders, and
marie incestuously, and do many outrages and villainies.

24. True catholics embrace all that doctrine, which our Savior Christ
commanded his apostles to preach to all nations throughout the world; and
refuse to hear those that preach otherwise, and teach another kind of
doctrine. But the papists have not only embraced diverse novelties, of which
Christ's apostles knew nothing, but false heresi^s contrary to the doctrine of
Christ and his apostles. Which for that it is a principal argument to convince
them to be no catholics, shall particularly God willing be demonstrated in
the two chapters following. Heretofore we have showed them to be no
catholics, for that their doctrine was neither generally taught, nor received
of al true catholics; now they shall be proved to be no catholics, for
that diverse points of their religion are either new devises and fantasies, not
taught by the apostles, nor received of the apostolical and catholic church,
or else old heresies condemned for such by the catholic church of ancient
time.

CHAP. II.
That diverse positions and principles of popish religion, are mere novelties,
and new devises, unknown to the most ancient and true catholic church of
Christ.

IT may percase seem strange, especially to such papists, as are but
yoonglings and nouices in the Jesuits school, that the religion of popes,
which is commonly called The old religion, should now be charged with
novelty, and condemned by testimony of antiquity. Yet if we please not only
to consider these later ages, but also to look back to the apostles times,
and the ages next succeeding: we shall assuredly find by enumeration of many
particulars, that popish religion, as it differs from the religion now
generally received and professed in the church of England, is a new vpstart
religion, and full of novelties, and late received fancies. For in religion
that is only to be accounted ancient, that is derived from Christ, and from
his apostles. Antiquitas mea says In epist. ad Philadelph.
Ignatius, Christus est. That is, Christ is the original, from whence we
fetch our antiquity. Lib. 4. contr. Marcion.
Tertullian says, that the religion taught by the apostles is most ancient,
and from the beginning, and most true, Id vertus, quod prius says he, id
prius, quod ab initio; id ab initio, quod ab apostolis. Saint Epist. 65. ad
Pammach. and Ocean.
Hierome rejects all for new, that was not taught by the apostles. Cur
profers in medium, says he, quod Petrus and Paulus edere noluerunt? Contra
haeres. c. 25.
Vincentius Lirinensis calls him a true catholic, That does only believe
and hold, whatsoever the ancient catholic church did universally believe. Qui
quicquid vniuersaliter antiquitus ecclesiam catholicam tenuisse cognouerit, id
solum sibi tenendum, credendumque decernit. But the ancient church is not this
late Romish church within this five or six hundred years, but the apostolic
and primitive church.

Now whatsoever comes from late popes, albeit the same has had some hundreds
of years continuance; yet is the same new, and no part of the ancient
catholic religion, for that it has no beginning from Christ, nor from the
apostles, nor was universally received of the most ancient church of Christ.
That corruption I say of popery is new, which the church of England refuses,
as appears by diverse particular points.

First the very chief grounds and principles of popish religion, and the
laws whereby they stand, have no greater antiquity, then from John the 22.
Clement the fifth, Boniface the eight, Gregory the ninth; or to go to the
highest, from Hildebrand, otherwise called Gregory the seventh, for from him
does Bullarium.
he that made a collection of all the popes bulls, and laws, fetch their first
original. Before that, it may be, diverse bishops and popes wrote decretall
epistles, but until this time they had no force of law. Nay before this time
all histories do teach us, that the church was governed partly by the laws of
Emperors, and partly by the canons of councels. Now that the decretals of the
popes being received and authorized for laws, are the foundation of popish
religion, it is apparent. For therein all the novelties of the Romish church
are confirmed, and established. And In praefat. ante relect. princip. doctr.
Stapleton does in plain terms affirm so much. In hac docentis hominis
authoritate, says he, in qua deum loquentem audimus, religionis nostrae
cognoscendae fundamentum necessario poni credimus. And generally all papists
confess, that the pope is the sovereign judge in matters of religion.
Whereupon it follows, that his determinations and decretals are the chief
grounds of popish religion.

Secondly the apocryphal Scriptures of Toby, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
the two books of the Machabees, and the additions extant in the Latin
translation, and not in the original books, which are as second grounds of
popery, were not declared of equal authority with other canonical
scriptures, before the council of Trent.

At that time also was the Latin vulgar translation made authentical, and
preferred before the original books of the old testament in Hebrew, and of
the new testament in Greek: a matter very new, and most unreasonable, and
plainly contradictory to the ancient fathers. In the same Sess. 4.
council, because they would be sure of their grounds, the doctors of the
Romish Babylon decreed first, that none should interpret Scriptures against
that sense, that the church of Rome holds; and secondly, that unwritten
traditions kept in the church by succession should be of equal value with
canonical Scriptures.

After this diverse friars and priests, taking upon them to plead the popes
cause, have determined unwritten traditions and customs of the church, and the
popes determinations and decretalles, to be the foundations, and principles of
their popish faith. Loc. Theolog.
Melchior Canus speaking of theological arguments, and Thomas Stapleton
taking upon him to declare, which be undoubted principles of popish doctrine,
do both principally rely upon these two. They talk also of the church, of
councels, fathers, the latin translation, and of rules of faith. But when it
comes to the trial; then whatsoever is not consonant to the popes doctrine
and decretales, that is rejected as of no value. Now gladly would I have any
Jesuit, that takes himself to be learned (for our adversary is but a babbler)
to prove these grounds to be ancient. Let him show what those traditions are,
that are with equal reverence to the canonical scriptures to be received. Let
him justify by testimony of antiquity, that the popes decretalles are
infallible rules of faith.

The apostle says, that the church is well and strongly built upon the
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ being the corner stone,
and this foundation do all ancient fathers allow. The testimony of Irenei and
Athanasius I have before alleged. Saluianus says, the church is best founded
on scripture. Videtur nostra ecclesia, says he, Lib. de prouid. Dei. 5.
ex vna scriptura felicius instituta. Aliae habent illam aut debilem, aut
conuulneratam. Habent veterem magistrorum traditionem corruptam, and per hoc
traditionem potius, quam scripturam habent. Let him show the like, if he can,
of his decretals and traditions, unless he will have his grounds to be
condemned for new and naught.

Thirdly scriptures were never generally forbidden to be publicly read in
vulgar toongs before the council of Trent, neither was it ever thought
unlawful before that time for lay men to talk of matters of faith, or to read
scriptures privately without the ordinaries license. Chrysostom and other
ancient fathers were wont to exhort Christians to read scriptures, and Christ
our savior willed his hearers to search them: and the apostle does declare
them to be very profitable: which shows the practice of the Romish church in
fraying men from scriptures, to be of a late humor and invention.

Fourthly the definition of the Romish church is new, and of force made new, to
fit their new popish fancies. De eccles. milit. c. 2.
Bellarmine defines the church to be A company of men conjoined in one
profession of faith, and communion of sacraments under the government of
lawful pastors and especially of the pope of Rome. Which is neither to be
showed, nor proved out of any ancient authentical writer. For the eastern
and Africane churches did never acknowledge this souereine authority of the
pope. Nor did our savior or his apostles teach us any such obedience. Nay they
show rather, that the bishops of Rome are not to be obeyed. For suppose Peter
had been bishop of Rome, and the bishops of Rome his successors, which will
never be proved in that sense, as the adversaries take it; yet Paul resisted
Peter, and received no Ibid. c. 9.
authority nor grace from him: which shows that other bishops have no
dependence or authority from the bishop of Rome, albeit this proportion were
granted.

Fifthly they make not the catholic church A communion of saints, as we
profess in our creed: but h^ld, that all wicked men, and Ibid. c. 10.
heretics, so they outwardly communicate with the church of Rome in faith and
sacraments, are true members of the church. Ibid. c. 2.
Bellarmine says, That to make a man a part of the true church, neither faith,
nor charity, nor any inward virtue is required. Which is a mere new fancy,
and therefore received, least they should grant, that the church in some
respect should be invisible.

Sixthly the confession of faith made by Pius quartus, wherein all that take
degrees in school profess, Conf^t. 28.
That they firmly admit all ecclesiastical traditions and constitutions, and
the Scriptures according to the Romish sense, and believe that there are seven
sacraments, and receive the doctrine of the council of Trent concerning
original sin, and believe the sacrifice of the mass, and
transubstantiation, and the popes sovereign authority, and other points of
doctrine therein contained; is new, and absurd. This we shall other where
declare: that appears, for that the papists cannot produce any precedent of
this confession, or prove the several points of it by good argument.

7. Where in our creed we believe the catholic church, of late time the
papists have added a word, and made it, Confess. ^urdega^ens.
The catholic Roman church: and in Canisius catechism translated into
Spanish by Hieronymo Campos, they define him to be no catholic, that believes
any thing beside that, which the church of Rome believes.

8. They confess their sins not to God almighty, as do the ancient fathers,
but to the a Virgin Mary, Hortulus animae.
and to angels and saints.

9. They have of late b put out that commandment, Officium beatae Maria in
catech.
that concerns the making of graven images like to God, and worshipping them:
wherein they have the word of God, and all antiquity against them.

10. In the doctrine of the law all those points, wherein they show themselves
no catholics, of which we have spoken in ye former chap. are mere novelties,
as namely, That all that is repugnant to the law of God is not sin; that it
is mortal sin to break the popes laws or commandments, either concerning
rites of the church, or other matter, which he does under his curse will men to
observe: that concupiscence in the regenerate is no sin, and yet that it is
sin not to fast the ember days: that the regenerate may be without sin,
and that Christians may be justified by the law of Moses: that the popes
laws bind in conscience, and that he has authority to make laws: and
lastly, that the law of God is not perfect, but that we are to observe all the
traditions of the church, and the popes decretals.

11. It is not long since they began to teach, that oaths do not so bind men,
but that the pope can dispense with them: and that he is able to discharge
children from obedience to parents, and subjects from obedience to princes.
Lib. 2. regest. f. 109. and apud Joseph. Vestan. de oscul. p^d. pontif.
Gregory the seventh in his dictates began first to broch these fancies, and to
declare, Quod papa a fidelitate subiectos possit absoluere. The canonistes
continued and increased this wicked doctrine. And now the Jesuits defend it;
and themselves draw children to forsake their godly and Christian parents, to
creep into a Sodomiticall cloister of monks.

12, We do now lately learn, that under the commandment of sanctifying the
Sabbath is contained the observation of all the feasts of saints canonized by
the popes of Rome. For so does Op. catech. de 3. prae^^p. c. 11.
Canisius teach, and that is now a common doctrine: but certes very new.

13. The precepts of the Romish church, as they are called, are but new
devises. For if we seek all antiquity, we shall not find, where ye church
of Christ has commanded us to keep this popes day, and that popes day, and to
abstain from work on saint Francis, and saint Dominikes, and other canonized
friars days: or where the same has enioined Christians to hear mass, or to
fast Lent, and imber days, and vigiles of saints, and other tides according
to the fashion of the church of Rome; or to confess our sins to Romish
friars, and priests; or not to solemnise marriage on days forbidden; which now
the Short Catechism, and Canisius.
church of Rome does keep more devoutly, then the laws of God. For these are
those humane doctrines, and voluntary worships devised by men's own fancies,
which our Matthew. 15.
Savior Christ, and the Coloss. 2.
apostle condemns. The D^ut. 4.
law of God also forbids any such additions.

14. It is not long, since the Franciscane friars began to dispute, That the
virgin Mary was conceived without original sin; which if they had affirmed of
other saints, they had run into flat Pelagianisme. Lately also have papists
begun to diminish the guilt of original sin. In the council of Florence
under Eugenius the fourth, they first determined, albeit covertly, that it
deserved not Poenam sensus, but only Poenam damni, and that is now their
common opinion.

15. They have of late devised a multitude of new sins, as appears by the
enchiridion of Nauarrus: which are nothing but transgressions of their new
laws. And yet they doubt not to affirm, that the regenerate may live without
sin, albeit contrary to all antiquity. Nay they make it sin ofttimes to
obey the laws of God: condemning those that will not worship saints, stocks
and stones, and rotten bones and rags; and which obey lawful princes,
unlawfully excommunicate by the pope.

16. It is but a late fantasy, that all men are to satisfy for the guilt of
actual sins, for which they have not satisfied in this life, in purgatory.
For Gregory the Dialogist albeit he allow purgatory for venial sins, yet
he has not one word of these satisfactions. Neither were the same determined
before the council of Florence under Eugenius the fourth.

17. The rules of monks and friars, whereby they pretend, that they follow
euangelical counsels, are also very new. He that first brought in the orders
of monks into the western church was Benet of Nursia. The friars were founded
by Francis and Dominike. The Jesuits had their patron Ignatius his rule
allowed first by Paul the third. And he is their founder, and the ground of
their antiquity.

18. The scholasticall divinity, which is a mixture of fathers authorities,
philosophical subtilties, and papal decretals began from Peter Lombard some
eleven hundred years after Christ. The canon law began from the time of
Gregory the ninth, and this is the original of their late divinity and law.

19. De verbo Dei Lib. 1. c. 3.
Bellarmine says, That the new testament is nothing else, but the love of God
shed in our hearts by the holy ghost. Which shows that the gospel and new
testament of papists, is a new gospel differing from that of Christ Jesus.
For Christ's testament was Matthew. 26.
established by his blood, and is a covenant concerning remission of sins
most especially: but charity is wrought by the holy ghost in those, that are
already reconciled by the blood of the testament. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and
others writing upon the second to the Corinthians. chap. 3 Say, That the
spirit quickening is the grace of God, that remitteth our sins. And if
charity were the new testament, then Christ died in vain. For charity might
then have satisfied for all, and established this new testament, albeit Christ
had not died: which is most untrue, and blasphemous. The perfection of the
gospel they place In Bellar. de monach. c. 7. 8. 9.
voluntary poverty, abstinence from marriage, and obedience to monastical
rules. But this is a new perfection, and a new gospel. For Christ's gospel
neither commands, nor counsels any to live under monastical vows, nor
wilfully to make himself poor, nor to forswear marriage. Neither did Christ
ever account widowers, or unmarried men, or wastefull giuers of their goods to
monasteries, or monks, more perfect, then his apostles, or other Christians.

20. The holy apostle does Romans 3.
teach us, that we are justified by grace and faith in Christ without works,
and this he Romans 4.
proves by the example of Abraham, who, albeit he was faithful, and the
father of the faithful; yet was he not justified by works. But the Jesuits
and papists speak of philosophical justice, and say, that none is justified,
nor obteineth eternal life, but by his works, and by charity.

21. The distinction and doctrine of our First justice, and Second justice, and
of Explicit and Implicit faith, and likewise of Faith formed, and Informed, is
all new, and borrowed rather from Philosophers, then divines. Nay a great part
of their faith standing upon new decretals, and the determinations of their
Romish church is new, and scarce yet settled, seeing they are bound to believe
the future determinations of the church, as well as those that are already
passed. Lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 12.
Bellarmine says, It is a matter of faith to believe, that the pope has
succeeded Peter in the government of the universal church. The which the
church never received, albeit the popes flatterers have gone much about to
persuade it.

22. That by congruitie a man may deserve grace, and that men unregenerate may
dispose themselves to receive grace by force of their free will, is both new,
and false, if we look back to Christ's true religion. The apostle says,
that Without faith it is impossible to please God. And Saint De vocat. gent.
lib. 1. c. 3.
Ambrose says, That without true religion, that which seems to be virtue, is
sin. Saint De vera innocentia. c. 56.
Augustine says, That the whole life of Infidels is sin. And the council of
Can. 6.
Arausicane condemns all those, that say, That grace or mercy is conferred on
those, that will, seek and endeavor; and not by Gods spirit conferred on us,
and which so does cause us to will, seek, and endeavor. And certes strange it
were, if men dead in trespasses and sins could work, or that a man could
live the life of grace without faith.

23 The doctrine of doubting of remission of sins, of Gods favor, and of our
salvation was first established by the late S^ss. 6.
council of Trent, and is contrary to the Scriptures, and faith of ancient
fathers, and the nature of faith, that works in us, not a doubting, but a
sure persuasion; and finally it makes faith a doctrine of universal
propositions without application. Nay it does not only frustrate the truth of
Gods promises, and effect of the sacraments, and powrefull working of the holy
Ghost, but does take away all comfort from Christians.

24. That there are just seven Sacraments, and neither more nor less, was
first In instruct. Armen.
delivered by the council of Florence under Eugenius the fourth, and afterward
confirmed by the S^ss. 7.
council of Trent about 40. years agone* then also was it Ibid.
determined, that All these seven sacraments were instituted by Christ Jesus,
and those pronounced accursed, that should say contrary. How falsely, I have
before showed: how newly, it may appear by the a^uersaries silence, that being
urged to show testimony of antiquity, rest mute.

25. That the form of confirmation now used by the Romanistes is new, the
decree of the In Instruct. Armen.
Florentine council about the year 1423. that then established it, may
ascertaine us. The papists themselves being urged ad exhibendum, cannot prove
this form, Signo te signo crucis, and confirmo te chrismate salutis, to be
more ancient.

26. That spiritual gossips might not entermarrie, and that such marriages
being contracted should not be of force; and that marriages contracted may be
dissolved by entering into religion, or that by consent the husband and wife may
sunder themselves, proceeds only from the new forge of popish invention.

27 From thence also proceed diverse greasings, saltings, spittings, and other
ceremonies in baptism. From the apostles certes, or their next successors they
cannot be derived.

28. The doctrine of transubstantiation was first C. firmiter. de summa. Trin.
and fid. Cath.
established by Innocent the third, about the year 1212. and after that
renewed in the council of Florence and Trent. Before that council it was
scarce named any where. But were it by any named; yet can it not either by
scriptures, or fathers be proved, as Scotus, and Petrus de Alliaco and others
writing upon the sentences do seem to confess.

29. Vrbane the fourth upon a revelation of a certain Anachorete called Eve
did first institute ye feast of Corpus Christi; and the same was reordeined by
Clement the fifth in the council of Vienna about the year of our Lord 1311.
Honorius the third about the year of our Lord 1220. did first ordeine, that
the sacrament should be worshipped. But this idolatrous adoration of the
sacrament, and the carrying of it about in procession, and keeping it in pyxes
sauoureth of novelty.

30. In ancient time it was never heard, that dogs, and mise, and other brute
beasts did receive Christ's glorified body. Nay the schools themselves are
divided about this question, although the more blasphemous opinion be now
approved, and the woorst side has gotten the victory.

31. In ancient time the Lords supper, or eucharist was never received of one
alone. The ancient Can. apost. 9.
canons of the church excommunicate all those, which are present at the
oblation, and do not communicate. Our Savior Christ did institute it to be
delivered and distributed to others, and not to be devoured by the priest
alone. But in the mass the priest eats and drinks all alone.

32. Among ancient Christians, it was never taught nor believed, that either
the accidents of bread and wine did subsist without dependence on their
substance, or that Christ's body was in the sacrament without all dimensions
or properties of a natural body; which all authority of fathers
notwithstanding, of late time the schoolmen have taught, and the popes of Rome
have established, and confirmed by their decretals.

33. In the ancient fathers of the church Species sacramentales, do never
signify accidents, as the deceived papists take it. Speciem pro veritate
accipiendam legimus, says de ijs qui initiantur mysterijs c. 4.
Ambrose, Ibid. c. 9.
Et, ante benedictionem alia species nominatur: where species does signify a
substance. Idem cibus illorum, qui and noster, says In Psalm. 77.
Augustine, sed significatione idem, non specie. Apud Bedam in 1. Cor. 11.
Again, Vt sit visibilis species panis, multa grana in vnum consperguntur. And
that is the signification of the Latin word species.

34. That the sacrament of the Lords supper is also an external, and
propitiatory sacrifice available for quick and dead, and to so many
purposes, as the papists pretend, is also a late fantasy of priests devised
for their own gain, and received of the people of mere ignorance of Christ's
institution.

35. Our Savior Christ did ordeine, that as many as received the Sacrament of
the Lords body, should also received the sacrament of his blood; and that
this was the true institution, it appears by the 1. Cor. 11.
apostles doctrine, that diligently sets down the words of the
institution. The same also was Ignat. ad Philadelph. Dionys. eccles. hierarch.
Chrysostom. hom. 18. in 2. Corinthians.
continued in the church of Christ for many ages. Neither was the contrary
established before the late councels of Constance and Trent.

36. The parts of the mass were first formed by one scholasticus, and
increased and altered by diverse popes, and in diverse hundred years could not
be brought to any perfection.

37. In ancient time Scriptures were publicly read, and prayers said in
toongs commonly understood of the people. If I pray in a strange tongue says
the 1. Cor. 14.
apostle, my spirit prays, but my understanding is without fruit. Neither
was there ever act made to the contrary, but by the Conc. Trent. sess. 22. and
Constit. Thom. Arundel.
Romish synagogue of late time.

38. In the apostolic churches neither were there masses nor prayers made in
honor of angels, of the blessed virgin and other saints. Nor had the blessed
Virgin a peculiar Psalter, and office dedicated unto her. If we search all
antiquity, we shall not find, where after the Lords prayer, the salutation
of the blessed virgin with a prayer to her is placed. Nor are there special
Litanies to her and to saints in old liturgies to be found.

39. The apostles and their successors neither taught us to make the images of
God, and of the holy Trinity, nor to worship the cross with divine worship,
or the images and relics of saints with all devotion and service. Nay this
worship is contrary to the second commandment, and condemned by the council
of Eliberis, by Epiphanius, and all ancient fathers.

40. The Romish missals, breuiaries, offices and psalters of our Lady, primers
and other rituall books, wherein the whole worship of the Romish church is
contained, receive all their authority from Pius quintus. Gregory the 13.
corrected the Calendar, and published the same after his own fashion, neither
agreeing with truth, nor with antiquity.

41. It is not long, since the popes of Rome took upon them to De reliq. and
venerat. sanct. c. 1. and 2. in gloss.
canonise saints, and after a heathen fashion to put them in the calendar of
popish demi Gods. Neither the apostles, nor the ancient fathers did ever know
any such thing.

42. The Manual di Geronymo Campos.
rosaries and beads of our Lady containing 63. Aue mariaes, and.7. Pater
nosters, which are now much reckoned of in Spain and Italy, are but a new
trick of some late pope to get money.

43. The manner of the sanctifying of the paschall lamb, as it is prescribed
in the Romish missall is very strange in the church of Christ. All ancient
fathers condemn it, as an odd trick of Iudaisme.

44. Ancient Christians had no mediators, but Christ Jesus; neither did they
pray to our lady, or to saints, or to angels, but to God in the name of Christ
Jesus.

45. Neither had they any priests consecrated to sacrifice for quick and dead,
as have the papists. Nay as the apostle says, they believed that Christ was a
priest after the order of Melchizedech without succession, and that the
sacrifice which he made, was not to be reiterated.

46. The doctrine of penance, which the schoolmen first began to talk of, was
not settled before the council of Florence and Trent. If our adversaries will
needs maintain the contrary, let them show first where the ancient fathers
teach that private penance consists of three parts, to wit Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction, and how these are nothing without Absolution,
which they account to be the form of penance. Secondly let them show, that
auriculer confession was received in the Western church before the C. omnis
vtriusque sexus. de Poenit. and remiss.
constitution of Innocent the third, that first established that order. Thirdly
that certain cases were specially reserved to the bishop of Romes absolution
in time of the ancient fathers. Fourthly that all Christians did make
satisfaction to God for their actual sins. Lastly that in times past either
contrition differed from satisfaction, or absolution went before satisfaction,
or that no^e were reconciled to God, but such as were confessed to priests, and
did satisfy according to their pleasures.

47. The council of Trent did likewise innouate diverse things i^ the
ordination of bishops and priests. For the friars there determined, that there
were 7. orders, and every of these a sacrament, and yet but all one sacrament:
which seems very enigmaticall. They decreed, That priests should be shaven
and greazed, and that by the act of ordination there was a print made in their
souls, which they call, An invisible character: matters very new and strange.

48. In ancient time neither were monks permitted to execute the office of
priests, nor were any ordained bishops but such as did feed their flocks. The
dumb bishops, and boy-cardinalles and prelates of the Romish synagogue are but
new creatures of the pope: brought in only to confirm and establish his new
tyranny.

49. Purgatory was not established before the late councels of Florence and
Trent. Neither was any part of it known in ancient time. Saint Augustine began
first to talk of purgatory for venial sins, and after his time Gregory,
that made the dialogues, believed, that venial sins were indeed remitted in
purgatory. The schoolmen added, that satisfactions for penance enjoined, and
not accomplished in this life, were there to be performed. They also have of
late begun to talk much of the popes power, and of the merits of masses in
purgatory: but as yet they are not agreed about the same, nor about many other
such like matters.

50. The year of Iubiley was Constit. Pauli. 2.
ordained first by Boniface the eight, and afterward altered by Clement the
fifth, and last of all brought to twenty five years by Paul the second. But
not borrowed from Christians, but either from the heathen that every hundred
year had Lu^os seculares; or from the Jews, that every 50. years celebrated
a Iubiley; and now agreeing neither with Jews, Gentiles, nor christians.

51. That the popes indulgences depend upon the late popes authority, without
proof out of Scriptures or fathers, the patrons of them, that are ingenuous do
confess. Art^. 18. aduers. assert. Luther^.
Fisher sometime bishop of Rochester said, That before purgatory was feared,
no man sought for indulgences: and that in the beginning of the church there
was no use of them. Quamdiu says he, nulla fuerat de purgatorio cura, nemo
quaesiuit indulgentias. And afterward, In initio nascentis ecclesiae nullus
fuerat earum vsus. Such indulgences, as are mentioned in the book of Pardons
of Rome, are mere forgeries and fooleries. In the church of Saint Paul at
Rome, says the book, Ye have 48. thousand years of pardon; on the day of
his conversion a hundred years of pardon; on Childermasse day four thousand
year of pardon. For kissing two iron crosses at S. Peter's church door five
hundred years of pardon. On the feast day of Saint Peter 1000. years of
pardon. And for looking on one of the pence for which our Savior was sold,
1400. years of pardon. In the church of Saint Marie mayor ye have fowerteene
thousand years of pardon. And Blessed be the mother, says our author, that
bears the child, that hears mass on Saturday at Saint John of Lateran.
For he delivers al them, that he desires, out of purgatory, to the number of
77. souls. He says further, That on the tower of the church stands a
double cross, that was made of the sword, that Saint John was beheaded with,
and that at every time that a man beholds that cross, he has 14000. years
of pardon, and as many karines of all penance. And infinite such indulgences
are granted by popes in that book. Pope Gregory the 13. In Constit. Gregor.
per Petr. Matthew.
sent over his indulgence of Iubiley into England: and no doubt, but that this
pope either has or will do the like. O simple creatures that buie such trash,
and suffer themselves to be abused with such novelties and fooleries, as
beseem neither christian religion, nor common reason!

52. The popes penitentiaries tax, which contains the rates of absolutions
For murders, Parricides, Rapines, Periuries, Adulteries, Incests, Sodomitry,
yea and Apostasy and Turkish blasphemies, I think, our adversaries will not
deny, but that it is most new.

53. Gregory the first albeit he would not have images of saints broken down,
yet condemned the worship of them: and Epiphanius utterly misliked the using
them and setting them up in churches; which shows the antiquity or rather
novelty of imagery, or to say better, idolatry in churches. The second Nicene
council celebrated about the 774 year of our Lord, and the fathers there,
were the first, that went about to establish the worship of images, but that
idolatrous synod was oppugned by the council of Francford, and of long time
after could not generally be received.

54. In times past Christians were wont reverently to entombe holy Martyrs, and
to call upon God at their monuments. But now the miserable papists of late
time have begun to dig them out of their graves, and to kiss rotten bones, and
rags, and to worship them, and to pray to the martyrs: nay to worship those,
that are no martyrs. And every day (as there is no end of man's curiosity) they
make more saints, and institute more pilgrimages and masses in their honor. Of
late time they have begun to frequent the Lady of Loreto, of Monserrat, of
lames of Compostella, and infinite other such like saints and places.

55. By a late decree of the council of Florence about the year of our Lord
1434. The pope was declared to be head of the universal church, and Christ's
true vicar, and Peter's successor in the government of the universal church:
which declares the novelty of the papacy.

56. That the pope was above the council, was decreed in our fathers time, by
Leo the tenth, in the Council of Laterane. Which shows, that till then, it
was commonly holden, that the government of the universal church was
aristocraticall, and not monarchical, and that the council was reputed
supreme judge of controversies of faith, and all ecclesiastical matters, and
not the pope.

57. In ancient time the pope neither was borne upon men's shoulders, nor had
his feet kissed of great princes; nor wore the cross in his slippers, to show
that he treads down religion with his feet. Nor had he a triple crown on
his head, nor was he guarded with bands of soldiers, nor attended on by
princes and cardinals, nor had he swarms of friars and monks to defend all
his pretenses and claims. Quod solius papae pedes principes de osculentur, we
read first in Gregory the seventh his dictates: the rest we find in later
records of the popes ceremonies.

58. It is not long since, that the pope has usurped power over general
councels, and taken upon him sole power to call them, dissolve them, and
confirm their acts. For in ancient time the council judged the pope, as
appears by diverse councels of Rome, and by the late council of Pisa, where
Alexander the fifth was chosen pope, and by the council of Constance, where
three popes were deposed; and by the council of Basilea, that deposed Eugenius
the fourth.

59. Of late time the pope has taken on him power to make laws to bind the
whole church, and to place and displace bishops and prelates at his pleasure.
Lately also has he begun to bear himself as supreme doctor and judge in
matters of religion, in hearing of appeals out of all provinces, and in
excommunicating of princes and emperors, throughout the world.

60. Until Boniface the 9. his time he was not Lord of Rome, nor did he bear
himself, as a temporal prince, for that is testified by Theodorie of Niem,
and diverse other writers of histories.

61. Gregory the seventh was the first, that took on him to depose emperors,
as appears by his dictates, and by his bloody wars. Before his time it was
a rare matter, to see a pope intermeddle with wars or government of
kingdoms. After the time of Gregory, these, that pretend to be Peter's
successors, proved the only firebrandes of all the wars and troubles in
christendom.

62. Before Innocent the third his time it was never adjudged a matter capital,
to think otherwise of religion, or the sacraments of the church, then the pope
of Rome believed and taught. He first persequuted Christians with all
extremities: and now it is the popes common practice, to kill all religious
Christians, that shall contradict his usurpations.

63. In ancient time the popes were confirmed by emperors, and never durst
pretend a right to depose princes. Now they deny any to be emperor, but such,
as is sacred by the pope; and do take to themselves power to depose princes,
and to cause subjects to rebel against them.

64. The first Christians, albeit not tied to emperors by oath, yet never
rebelled against wicked emperors. But now the pope causes Christians to break
their oaths, and they are made to believe, that it is meritorious to rebel
against princes excommunicate by the pope, and to murder them. Neither may we
think, it was want of means, that made them to be obedient. For Ad Scapulam.
Tertullian says, that where they were the stronger, yet they never took on
them to fight against their princes.

65. The first Christians served God in spirit and truth, and were known by
their modesty and virtue. But the religion of papists consists all in eating
red herrings and fish, in fasting, knocking, kneeling, greasing, shauing,
crossing, ringing, and outward ceremonies. At Rome, and in Spain, and Italy,
are common bordels, and banks of usury, and such dissolution, that the very
heathens might not compare with them. Swearing, whooring, killing, are small
faults among them, so they meddle not with the popes authority and religion.

Finally, for that it is not possible to rehearse all particulars, I say, and
by Gods grace shall prove, that the whole religion of papists which we
reject, is nothing but a pack of novelties, and heresies, and the corruption
of true catholic and Christian religion. Wherefore as in this chapter we have
noted their novelties, so in the chapter ensuing we purpose to make good our
challenge concerning their heresies; which being performed, I hope it will
largely appear, that they are no catholics.

CHAP. III.
That the papists do publicly profess and teach diverse erroneous points of
doctrine, by the ancient catholic church condemned for heresies.

AS in deceitful language, so in erroneous judgment the Jesuits and Romish
priests are not unlike to the women called Philostrat. in Apollonio. and
Horat. carm. Lib. 1.
Lamiae. For as the flattring Lamiae by their external shows and fair words
deceived and spoiled many young men: so these flattering and fawning favorites
of the whore of Babylon abuse many simple youths with their fair glosses,
and allure them to like the errors and heresies of popery to their utter
ruin, and destruction. And as the Lamiae were very quick sighted, when they
came abroad, and pierced far into other men's matters, yet were altogether
blind at home, and ignorant in their own affairs: so these good fellows,
although they are always prying into other men's matters, and pretend, that
they can look through millstones; yet are they altogether blind, and see
nothing in their own causes. They do very well verify that, which Sophocles
said long since, (...). Their eyes are as sharp as eagles, when they look a
far off and they see small motes in other men's eyes, but see nothing at home,
nor feel the beam that is in their own eyes. If any of us offend never so
little, nay ofttimes when we maintain true doctrine, they presently exclaim
that we are heretics, and with their cries stir up the world against us:
but they do little consider their domestical matters, and see not how many
heresies themselves maintain. Nay when we show it plainly unto them, they
will not open their eyes, nor acknowledge any. But howsoever their impudence
makes them confident in their denials; yet shall it appear to all men of
discourse and judgment, that no sect did ever maintain so many, and so diverse
heresies, as the papists do. Neither when I charge them with heresy, do I
impute unto them Peter Lombardes, Thomas Aquinas, Caietanes, Eckius, Gregorius
de Valentia, Bellarmines, or other their private doctors particular opinions
(for then should we make no end in rehearsing their heresies) but only such
matters as papists commonly and publicly do maintain, and the popes of Rome
authorize, and our adversaries (I think) will not deny.

First as the Romans 2. and 3.
Jews, and especially the scribes and Luke 18.
pharisees rested in the law, and gloried in their works, and Romans 2. and
Galat. 3.
sought to be justified by their works, and by the law: so the papists do
define justice to be nothing else, but charity and the observance of the law,
and by this justice they hope to merit eternal life; and this the assembly of
doctors at Sess. 6.
Trent does determine, and all papists hold. Neither may we think, that the
apostle condemns those only, that sought justice by the works of the
ceremonial law, or of free will before regeneration: for he Romans 4.
says, That Abraham was not justified by works of the law. And speaking of
himself, he 1. Cor. 4.
says, That although he was not conscious to himself of any thing, yet he was
not thereby justified.

Secondly the sect of the pharisees was condemned, for that They Marc. 7.
made void the law of God by their own traditions. Reprobastis mandatum dei
per seniorum vestrorum traditionem, says our Savior speaking to the
pharisees. They were likewise reproved for their diligence in making
proselytes. Circuitis mare and aridam, says our Matthew. 23.
Savior, vt faciatis vnum proselytum and accessoriu^, and cum factus fuerit,
facitis illum filiu^ Gehennae duplo plus, quam vos estis. The pharisees also
stood much upon external ceremonies, but devoured widows houses. They loved
pre-eminence in meetinges, and to be called Rabbi. Dicebantur pharisaei says
Haeres. 16. ante Christum.
Epiphanius, eo quod separati essent ab alijs propter spontaneam superfluam
religionem apud ipsos receptam. He does also mislike in them their vows of
co^tinency, and their sleeping on thorns and boords, and their superstitious
fashions in praying, and lastly condemns them for that they allow fatum or
destinye. All which notwithstanding, the papists make special reckoning of
their traditions, and Sess. 4. Council. Trid.
account them equal to Gods written word, and yet they are in diverse points
repugnant to Gods laws, and holy scriptures: as for example the tradition of
making images of the holy trinity, and worshipping of stocks, and stones, and
saints departed is contrary to the first and second commandment. The
Jesuits and priests travel land and sea to reconcile men to the pope, and to
make recusants, and proselytes to the synagogue of Rome: and when they have
inueigled simple people, they go about to make them as unnatural traitors, as
themselves: they devour widows houses, and impouerish poor orphans by
seeking means and revenues to maintain their own faction and colleges. They
strive much for external ceremonies, and are called Fathers and Rabbi, and are
now the ringleaders of all the popish faction. They say they are more perfect
then others, and sever themselves from other Christians. They lie upon the
ground, and lash themselves sometimes, and in their manner of superfluous
religion are very singular. Finally both they and the Thom. Aqu. 1. p. q. 116.
art. 2. 3. and 4.
schoolmen do allow of fatum, and subject all second causes unto it: and in
diverse of their opinions and fashions are very pharisaicall.

The scribes were likewise Epiphan. in haeres. 15. ante Christ.
reputed sectaries and heretics, for that They brought in a superfluous and
sophistical exposition of the law. Epiphanius does call it Supersophisticam
expositionem. They were likewise Ibidem.
condemned For their often washings and purifyings, and for that they accounted
themselves more holy then others. Why then should not the popish schoolmen and
other doctors be likewise reputed heretics and sectaries for their vain and
sophistical expositions, whereby they have forced the scriptures to contrary,
and not only to diverse purposes, from that of the holy ghost? Do they not also
use often puryfyings and halowings of altars, churches, vestementes, and diverse
instruments of their profane priesthood? Do they not wash themselves with holy
water, and account their sects of monks and friars in the state of
perfection, and far more holy, then the vulgar sort of Christians? It cannot be
denied.

The papists do likewise daily sprinkle themselves with holy water, thinking
thereby themselves to be purged and cleansed from venial sins. Yet as In
haeres. 17. ante Christum.
Epiphanius says, Neither can drops, nor rivers of waters, nor the whole
ocean wash away sins. The Hemerobaptistes for these continual washings, and
for that they imagined that they were thereby cleansed from their sins, are by
Ibidem.
Epiphanius numbered in the catalogue of Jewish heretics.

Epiphan. haeres. 13. ante Christum.
The Dositheans were a sect of heretics among the Jews, and so reputed for
their affectate virginity, and abstinence from the use of marriage, being
married. Likewise for their voluntary fastings, and for the diverse voluntary
afflictions of their bodies. What then is to be thought of the papists, that
allow these voluntary whippings, and afflictions, and extraordinary fastings
and think to merit heaven by them? Among them likewise diverse account it
great holiness for married couples to live a sunder, and to creep into
monasteries: for which they do well deserve to creep into the catalogue of
heretics.

Among the heretics that rose after the first planting of Christian religion
Simon Magus and his followers are commonly reputed the ringleaders. Of them the
papists have learned to buy and sell benefices, churches, masses, and all
spiritual things. Nay these Apocal. 18.
merchantes of Babylon sell men's souls.

Venalia nobis says Lib. calam. 3.
Mantuan,
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, caelum est venale, deusque.
They do also sell Christ, and therefore by Brigit are pronounced to be worse
then Judas. Deteriores sunt Judah, says Brig. 132. and onus eccles. c. 23.
Christ in Brigittes revelations, qui pro solis denarijs me vendidit, illi
autem pro omni mercimonio. The pope he Taxa poenitent.
sells pardons, and Iubleies, making most gain of foulest sins. Of the
scholars of Simon Magus the friars have learned to worship the images of their
founders. For as they August. de baeres. c. 1.
worshipped the images of Simon and Helena, so do the papists worship the
images of Francis, and Dominike, and Clare, and Brigit, and other founders of
the diverse sects of monks and friars.

The Iren. aduers. haeres. li. 1. c. 23.
Basilidians were reputed heretics, For that they worshipped images, and used
enchantements, and superstitious adiurations. How then can the papists excuse
themselves, that worship images, and fill every corner of their churches full
of them, and conjure and enchant water, candels, herbs, flowers and such
like, making exorcistes and coniurers a holy order, and that order a sacrament
of the church?

Carpocrates Irenaus lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 24.
used to worship images, and Marcellina one of his followers, as saint
Augustine. de haeres. c. 7.
Augustine says, adored the images of Jesus and Paul, and burnt incense unto
them. If then this were heresy in the^, why should it not be heresy in
papists to worship the image of Jesus, with divine worship, and to burn incense
not only before that image, but also before the images of other saints?

The Iren. lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 23. and Epiph. haeres. 24.
Carpocratians and Basilidians Did conceal and hide the mysteries of their
religion, least holy things should be cast to dogs. So likewise the papists
keep the mysteries of their religion secret, and will not have lay men to
dispute of them. They read scriptures and prayers in toongues unknown, and
say the words of consecration, and diverse other prayers secretly, that the
people hear not, and all this, as they stick not to say, Least holy things
should be cast to dogs. For no better do heretics esteem of Christians, then
of dogs.

The Marcosians did Iren. lib. 1. c. 18.
baptize in an unknown language, and anoint those whom they baptized with
chrisme, or Opobalsamum. They anoint also their dead, and give them extreme
unction. Ibid. c. 9. and Epiph. haeres. 34.
Marcus their founder went about to make his followers believe, That he did
transubstantiate wine into blood in the sacrament. Ibidem.
They accounted themselves perfect: but as Ibidem c. 15.
Irenaeus says, Perfectus nemo, nisi qui maxima mendacia apud eos
fructificauerit. Finally they Ibidem c. 17. and Epiphan. haeris. 34.
allege A multitude of apocryphal scriptures, which themselves have forged.
All which heresies the papists have translated into their religion. For they
also baptize in a language not understood of the people, and use greasing and
anointing in baptism and confirmation. They do also anoint men, when they
lie a dying, and believe, that the wine in the Lords cup is transubstantiate
into blood. Their orders of religion do account themselves to be in state of
perfection, but the most perfect of them which are employed by the pope in
defense of the popish faction and religion do fructify in telling of greatest
lies. Finally for proof of their traditions and doctrine, they forge diverse
writings, and write new devised legendes; and now lately for a cardinals hat
have they hired one Caesar Baronius to corrupt the history of the church with
innumerable fables and lies.

The Nazarites were condemned for heretics, first for that they Angustin. de
haeres. c. 9. and Epiph. de haeres. Nazaraeor. 29.
mingled Judicial ceremonies with the doctrine of Christianity; and secondly,
for that they boasted much of their revelations and miracles. The like sentence
is therefore to be pronounced against the papists, which In missali Rom in
fine.
consecrate every year A paschall lamb, and observe the Jewish Iubiley, and
Jewish feasts, and have translated the ceremonies of the leuiticall priesthood
into their synagogue; and brag much of their revelations and miracles, and
Bellar. de not. eccles.
make them a mark of the church.

The Augustine. de haeres. c. 16. and Epiph. haeres. 36.
Heracleonites did anoint their followers departing out of this life, and gave
them their extreme unction. Likewise they did say prayers over the dead. For
which they are numbered among heretics. So it seems, that the papists have
borrowed their extreme unction, their dirges and masses for the dead from
heretics.

The followers of Helzai as Haeres. 19. ante Christ.
Epiphanius reports, and the Osseni likewise Swear by salt, and bread, and
other creatures: and worship the spittle and relics of two of their saints.
This Ibidem.
Helzai did also teach his disciples to pray in a tongue not understood by them.
Nemo quaerat interpretationem says he, sed solum haec dicat: and then he
adds a prayer in a strange tongue. These heresies the papists also embrace.
For they swear commonly by creatures, yea by bread and salt, and by saints, as
ye Helzaites did. They keep the ashes, and excrements, and relics of their
saints, and worship them. Finally they pray in unknown toongs, and say it is
not material, albeit a man understand not, what he prays.

Damascen. de haeres.
Marcion gave women power to baptize, and albeit he had corrupted a maiden, yet
did he much extol virginity. a Marcione says Haeres. 42.
Epiphanius, virginitas praedicatur. He also stood much upon fasting. Lib. 1.
c. 30. aduers. haeres.
Irenaeus says, that he and Saturninus began to teach abstinence from living
creatures. He did also Epiph. haeres. 42.
teach, that By Christ's descending into hell diverse men's souls were thence
delivered: and Tertul. aduers. Marcion.
separated marriages for religion. Of which heresies the papists do savor very
strongly. For they do also C. adijcimus. 16. q. 1. etc. mulier. de consecrat.
did. 4.
authorize women to baptize: and extol virginity and fasting highly, and yet
observe neither. Their monks should abstain from flesh. They separate
marriages upon pretense of religion, and teach that the fathers were delivered
by Christ's descension into hell out of that place, which they call Limbum
Patrum.

The Messalians believed, that baptism was only available to cut away former
sins. So likewise the papists believe, that baptism does purge sins past,
and that sins committed after baptism are to be done away by penance.
Against them both Diuinor. decret. c. de baptismo.
Theodoret teaches, That baptism is the earnest of future graces, and the
communication of Christ his passion. Again he says, Non vt dicunt amentes
Messaliani baptismus nouaculam imitatur, quae praecesserunt peccata auferens.
hoc enim ex superabundanti largitur. Likewise ye Messalians did mumble over
their prayers with their lips, having their heart otherwhere, and believed, that
they were heard, for their much babbling. Which custom the papists do so well
like, that they rehearse infinite Aue Mariaes, Pater nosters and Creedes; and
the popes give great indulgences to those, that say the Ladies rosary, and pray
upon blessed beads, albeit the poor souls understand nothing, what they
pray, or rather prattle.

The Caians were reputed heretics, for worshipping angels, and praying to
them. Vnusquisque eorum, says Epiph. haeres. 38.
Epiphanius, vniuscuiusque angeli nomen inuocat. For the same cause the
Angelickes were condemned both by the Epiph. de angelic. and Augustine de
haeres. c. 39. and Isid. lib. 8. Orig.
fathers, and by councels. Non oportet Christianos, say the Can. 35.
fathers of the council of In 3. ^. epist. ad Coloss.
Laodicea, derelicta ecclesia abire, and ad angelos idololatriae abominandae
congregationes facere. What then are we to think of papists, that pray to
angels, and say masses in honor of angels? To avoid this blemish, in that
canon of the council, they have turned Angelos into Angulos. But d Theodoret
does plainly convince them both of heresy, and falsehood. Synodus says he,
quae conuenit Laodiceae lege prohibuit, ne precarentur angelos. That this
worship of angels is superstitious, Chrysostom commenting upon the Epistle to
the Colossians declares, and especially in his ninth homily upon that Epistle.

The Seuerians were noted as heretics for their miracles, either vainly
forged, Augustine de haeres. c. 24.
or by the devils help effected. Their prophetess e Philumena through a
narrow mouthed glass would put in a pretty big lofe, and draw it out again,
without breaking the glass. The Mirabiliaries were likewise condemned, for
that by miracles, and prophecies, they sought to confirm their religion. And
what do the papists? Do not they likewise confirm all their superstition,
idolatry, and false religion with counterfeit miracles? It cannot be denied:
and if it were; yet are the lying legends of the Romish church sufficient to
convince them.

The Tatians and other heretics Epiph. hares. 46.
absteined from marriage, as a state of life impure, and imperfect. Which
heresy the popish monks have embraced, esteeming wedlock contrary to
perfection. C. proposuisti. did. 82.
Syricius calls marriage Fleshly pollutions. In Capgraues legend Romish saints
no otherwise talk of marriage, then as if it were uncleanness, sin, and
abomination. Diverse of our adversaries have written, that it is less sin for
priests to commit fornication, then to marry. Nay as if marriage were contrary
to the cleanness and holiness of priesthood, they admit none to priesthood
but such as abjure marriage.

The papists also agree with the Manichees in diverse points of heresies. For as
the Augustine. epist. 74.
Manichees condemned marriage in their priests, which for their excellency they
called Electos; so likewise do the papists in their monks, and greater orders
of the clergy. The Manichees in the sacrament of the Lords supper, Leo sermon.
4. de quadrag. etc. relatum, etc. comperimus. did. 2. de consecrat.
used to minister in one kind, as do the papists. Both of them destroy
Christ's humanity, the Manichees giving him no true flesh nor solid body; and
the papists giving him a body neither visible, nor palpable, nor endued with
the dimensions, and qualities of a body. Nay they say, that his one body may
be in infinite places at once. The Augustine. de morib* eccles. and Manich.
lib. 2. c. 31. and de morib. Manich. c. 13.
Manichees in their fastes, albeit they abstained from flesh, yet used diverse
other exquisite, and dainty meats. And this also is the rigorous fast of
most papists, which the rest also allow.

Montanus did first establish laws of fasting, as is recorded in the history
of Hist. eccles. lib. 5. c. 17.
Eusebius, and appears also by the practice of the church, that had no law
concerning that matter in his time. The same man began first to give credit to
unwritten traditions, and to Epiphan. in haeres. 48.
dispute, that the scriptures were not perfect, and that they were to be
supplied by his new Paracletus, that, as he said, was to teach all things
necessary. His Augustine. de haeres. c. 26.
followers had the prophecies of Prisca and Maximilla in great reverence. Both
he and his disciples did believe Limbum Patrum, to be in hell, and that
sins were to be purged after this life. They also first ordained that the
birth days, or suffering days of Martyrs should be kept holy, and that
offerings should be made for men departed, and all this Lib. de corona milit.
and de anima.
Tertullian now pleading for Montanus his heresies, does prove by the
testimony of his Paracletus, and of unwritten traditions. So likewise has the
synagogue of Rome of late established many new fastes, and new laws of
fasting. The Synod. Trid. sess. 4.
same does also place traditions in equal rank with Scriptures, and say, that
Scriptures teach not all things necessary for salvation. The doctors of that
school affirm likewise, that Limbus of the fathers is in hell, and that
sins may be remitted after this life, and for this cause offer for the dead.
Both papists and Montanistes boast much of the sufferings of their martyrs; and
no less do they esteem the prophecies of Brigit, Hildegardis, and Mechtildis,
then do the Montanistes of their Prisca and Maximilla.

As the h Pepuzians did honor their town Pepuza, Augustine. de haeres. c. 27.
as the mother church of all Christendom; so do the papists honor Rome. Both
papists and Pepuzians suffer women to minister baptism. Should not then the
papists have wrong, if they were not made equal to the Pepuzians? Herein they
also far surpass them, for that among the papists a Martin. Polon. Plat.
chronic. chronicor. Marian. Scotus in Joan. 8.
woman was once pope and chief president of their church, which I doubt,
whether the Pepuzians can show in their sect.

The Catharistes do boast much of their merits. Mundiores se caeteris
praedicant, says C. de haeres. lib. Orig. 8.
Isidorus. They do also deny absolution in some cases to the repentant, and
rebaptize those that are already baptized. Which is also the case of papists.
For among them the monks and friars count themselves more perfect and clean,
then others; and all of them do hope to be saved by their merits. The
inquisitors punish with death all that relapse into heresy, as they call it,
without remission; and in France and Flanders our adversaries have baptized
many most Christianlike baptized. Nay they believe, that as many as are
regenerate, are without sin, and albeit examined by the law, yet are to be
reputed just.

The Iacobites and Armenians were condemned for heretics, For that they made
the images of God the father, and God the holy ghost* imagines, says Lib.
hist. 18. c. 52.
Nicephorus, patris and spiritus sancti effigiant, quod est perquam absurdum.
Yet this absurdity is a high point of popish religion.

The worshippers of the cross, which were called Chazinzartj, and Staurolatrae
were therefore esteemed heretics. Crucem, says Ibid. c. 54.
Nicephorus, adorare, and colere dicuntur. Which is a plain conviction of the
heresies of papists, who worship the cross with divine worship, which percase
those heretics did never.

The Collyridian heretics were condemned for worshipping the virgin Mary, and
that worthily. For, as says Haeres. 78.
Epiphanius, she was a virgin, and honorable, but not to be adored. Non
dominabitur nobis antiquus error, says Ibidem.
he, vt relinquamus viuentem, and adoremus ea, quae ab ipso facta sunt. But the
papists not only adore her, but also give unto her (...), that is an honor
above the common sort. Nay they devise masses, and offices in her honor, and
Bonauenture has shamefully falsified the psalms of David, to draw them to her
honor, and superlatiue worship.

The worshippers of images of saints by a certain Hist. Miscell. Pauli diac.
lib. 21.
council of Constantinople, whose acts are inserted in the sixth action of the
second Nicene council were noted as idolators, and condemned by the fathers,
as heretics, or worse. The synod of In lib. Caroli magni contra synod. in
partib. Graeciae pro imaginib. adorand.
Francford did condemn the second Nicene council, that allowed the worship of
images. Non nos imagines in basilicis positas, say they, idola nuncupamus, sed
ne idola nuncupentur, adorare and colere eas recusamus. Haeres. 79.
Epiphanius says, That by worishipping images, the mind is turned from one
only God, to commit fornication with images. All which notwithstanding the
papists kiss them, bow to them, worship them, and burn incense to them.

The bare footed brethren Augustine. de haeres. c. 68.
were condemned for their heretical singularity in going barefoote. Yet the
papists account this a part of their frierlike perfection, and believe, that it
is meritorious to go barefoote in pilgrimages, and processions.

The Apostolikes, notwithstanding their arrogant presumption in taking on them
the name and profession of the apostles followers, were condemned of heresy,
for that they received none into their communion, that used wives, or possessed
any thing in private. Apostolici, qui se isto nomine arrogantissime vocauerunt,
says saint De haeres. c. 40.
Augustine, eo quod non reciperent in suam communionem vtentes coniugibus, and
res proprias possidentes, quales habet ecclesia catholica, and monachos and
clericos plurimos. Where note that Augustine says that monks and clergy men
had wives, and goods in property. The papists do notwithstanding receive this
heresy, condemning all monks and friars, that possess any goods in property,
and both monks and priests, that match themselves in marriage.

The Heraclites, as says Orig. lib. 8. c. de haeres.
Isidorus, were heretics, that received only monks, and condemned married
folks. Monachos tantum recipient, says f he, coniugia respuunt. They also do
not believe, that children dying young shall possess the kingdom of heaven.
So the papists do believe, that only monks and friars are in the state of
perfection, and do not suffer either them, or priests to marry. They believe
not also, that any child dying before baptism can be saved, albeit the
parents be christians, and use all means to have their child baptized. But
such children they place between heaven and hell in Limbo puerorum, or at
least in hell without sensible pain.

The Priscillianists disioyne married folks for religion sake. Coniuges, says
Augustine. haeres. 70.
Saint Augustine speaking of Priscillian, quibus hoc malum potuerit persuadere,
disiungens. For hiding their wickedness and filthiness, they Ibidem.
made no account to forswear themselves. Propter occultandas contaminationes,
and turpitudines suas habe^t in suis dogmatibus and haec verba. Iura, periura,
secretum prodere noli. The papists likewise separate married folks, that vow
religion; and before marriage consummate they hold, that either party may
enter into a monastical religion. They seem also to make small reckoning of
oaths. If thou be put to an oath say the In annot. in act. 23. and resolut.
quorundam casuum nationis Anglicanae.
Rhemistes, to accuse catholics for serving God, as they ought to do, or to
utter any man to Gods enemies and his, thou ought first to refuse such
unlawful oaths; but if thou have not constancy and courage so to do; yet know
thou, that such oaths bind not in conscience, and law of God, but may and
must be broken under pain of damnation. Now by catholics these good fellows
understand such, as come with an intention to murder their dread sovereign,
and to raise rebellion, or at least such as embrace all popish heresies; which
are no less damnable, then the wicked opinions of the Priscillianistes.

The Helcesaites make Christ in heaven to differ from Christ in earth.
Christum, says Haeret. fabul. lib. 2. de Helcesaeis.
Theodoret, non vnum dicunt, sed hunc quidem inferne, illum vero superne, and
eum olim in multis habitasse. One Christ they make dwelling in heaven, and
another in earth. So likewise the papists believe and teach, that Christ in
heaven is visible, and palpable, and has the dimensions and just proportion of
a man's body: but their Christ on the altar, and in the Sacrament, they believe
and teach to be neither visible, nor palpable, nor that he has any just
proportion, or dimensions of a true, natural, and humane body.

The Eutychianistes deny, that Christ after the union of the two natures had a
true body, but as De ieiunio 7. mensis ser. 6.
Leo signifies A body without shape, dimensions, or circumscription. They
said also, that Christ was whole both in heaven and earth, against whom Lib.
4. cont. Eutych. c. 4.
Vigilius disputing says, That the flesh of Christ, when it was in earth, was
not in heaven, and now being in heaven, is not on earth. And their chief
ground, as appears by Dialog. 2.
Theodoret, was, That Christ's humane nature was abolished, even as in the
sacrament after consecration the signs are changed into an other nature. Who
then does not plainly see, that the papists by their transubstantiation do
bring in Eutychianisme, holding that Christ's body in the sacrament is without
shape and true dimensions, and that his body is both in heaven, and in earth,
and as many several places, and altars, as the sacrament is? Who does not
perceive, that Christ's humanity was abolished, if as the fathers hold, the
union of the natures was like to the union of Christ's body in the sacrament,
especially if the substance of bread and wine be quite abolished? This is most
certain that both Vbi supra.
Theodoret, and Contra Eutychen.
Gelasius do confute Eutyches by this reason, for That the substance of the
bread remains in the Sacrament: which being denied by the papists, it is
plain, that they bring in Eutychianisme.

The papists also in many points conspire with the enemies of the grace of God
the Pelagians. First both Pelagians and papists define sin to be, not
whatsoever is repugnant to gods law, but that is committed of free will, and by
him, that understands what he does. Proprie vocatur peccatum, say the
Pelagians, quod libera voluntate, and a sciente committitur. This is the
ground of Pelagius going about to overthrow the traduction of original sin
in the posterity of Adam, as appears by Saint Augustines disputations
against him concerning this point. And that also the Censur. Colon. fol. 44.
Jesuits of Collein expressly do hold. The Pelagians do teach, that a just
man in this life may be without sin. Hoc Pelagiani audent dicere, hominem
iustum in hac vita omnino nullum habere peccatum, says Saint De bono
perseuerant. lib. 2. c. 5.
Augustine. The papists likewise believe, that the regenerate are clear of
mortal sin, and not only that, but also may live without sin.

The Pelagians teach, That concupiscence by baptism is sanctified, and being
before evil, afterward begins not to be evil: which doctrine Saint Contra
Julian. lib. 6. c. 6.
Augustine calls very absurd: yet is that the doctrine of the council of
Trent, and of all papists. Both papists and Pelagians do build upon one
foundation, and say, that therefore concupiscence after baptism is no sin,
for that the guilt is remitted in baptism.

The Pelagians would not grant, that the Gentiles and Infidels sinned in all
their actions, nor that their actions were sin, as done without faith, as
Saint Contra Julian. lib. 4. c. 3.
Augustine shows, proouing the contrary. The same doctrine the papists
receive for catholic.

The Pelagians sometimes were Augustine. contra. 2. epist. Pelag. c 19.
wont to say, In omni bono opere homine^ semper adiuuari a gratia: Ibidem.
lib. 4. c. 6.
and gratiam adiuuare bonum euiusque propositum. But their meaning was, that
God gave his grace to them that disposed themselves, and whose free will was
ready to receive grace. Which is also the doctrine of preparations and
dispositions commonly taught by papists: so that notwithstanding their fair
pretenses of grace, they yield a great part of the glory of our conversion, to
our own free will.

The papists say, That sin is subject to our will; so likewise the Pelagians
say, Augustine. lib. 1. de gratia Christi. c. 28.
Nos forte and firmum habere ad non peccandum liberum arbitrium. And saint Lib.
2. de baptis.
Augustine teaches us, that this doctrine is Pelagianisme.

The papists say, that God is ready with his grace, if he see a man's soul
ready and prepared to receive it. They also believe, that a natural man may
desire his own conversion. But Saint Contr. epist. Pelag. lib. 4. c. 6. and
lib. 2. c. 5. and 8. and de Gratia lib. 1. c. 14.
Augustine teaches us, that these were the propositions of the Pelagians.

They also both do use the same reasons to prove the strength of free will: as
first, that we are commanded to choose: secondly that God would not command
us things impossible. Magnum aliquid se scire putant Pelagiani, quando dicunt,
non iuberet Deus, quod sciret ab homine non posse perfici, as Saint De Great. c.
16. and cont. epist. Pelag. lib. 2. c. 10.
Augustine testifies. Therefore Thomas Brandwardine doubts not to call the
popish schoolmen Pelagians. Totus pene mundus Lib. 1. de Great. aduers. Pelag.
says he, post Pelagium in errorem abijt. exurge Deus, iudica causam tuam.
He wrote about three hundred years agone.

The Donatistes, as Saint De haeres. c. 69.
Augustine writes, believed, that the church was only contained in Afrike,
and in the obedience or part of Donatus: quod ecclesia Christ in Africa, and
Donati part remanserit, as he says. They did also rebaptize catholic
Christians. So likewise the papists believe that to be the church, that
continues in the obedience of the pope, and reteineth communion with the
church of Rome, and of late time have not doubted in France and Flanders to
rebaptize children before baptized.

The Circumcellions thought it meritorious to kill those, that were contrary
to their sect, Immania facinora perpetrando, as S. De haeres. c. 69.
Augustine says. Nay that holy man had much a do to escape their hands. So
likewise the papists teach, that it is meritorious to kill princes opposite to
the popish faction. Sixtus quintus, that shameless friar did highly commend La
fulmiminante.
James Clement, that killed Henry the third of France. John Ghineard a Jesuit
did maintain this doctrine, and was therefore, by arrest of the parliament of
Paris, executed. By these desperate assassins the papists have diverse ways
sought to murder the Queens Majesty, and have most shamefully murdered the
Prince of Orange, James the Regent of Scotland, and diverse other christian
princes. Alphonsus Diazius did most wickedly murder his own brother,
travailing as far as from Rome into Germany to commit that act, and for the
same was by the pope not only defended, but commended.

The Au^^ans or Anthropomorphites did imagine God to have a humane shape, and
parts like a mortal man. Cogitatione carnali, says De haeres. c. ^0.
Augustine, Deum fingebant in similitudinem hominis corruptibilis. And likewise
do the papists imagine, when they make the images of God the father and the
holy ghost, and the whole Trinity. The Sess. 25.
council of Trent does permit the divinity to be figured: Diuinitatem ex
primi and figurari. But how can this be done, unless they believe either
their god to be like their images, or their images like their god?

Origin believed, that sins might be purged and done away after this life,
and therefore Augustine. de haeres. c. 43.
imagined, That even the wicked after a long time should be saved. And certes
if sins may be purged by fire, why should not mortal sins as well be
washed away, as venial? And if man be able to satisfy for the guilt of
mortal sin after this life, and so be quited from them; why should not
every one satisfy in hell for his sins? And why should a debt be exacted,
when satisfaction is made? In this heresy therefore concerning the purgation
of sins after this life, and the satisfaction for the penalty of mortal
sins, the papists savor of Origens heresy. They favor his heresy also in
this, that they do say, there is four senses of Scriptures, and draw the same
by their allegorical interpretations to their own most perverse purposes.

Eunomius taught, that so a man were of his religion, it skilled not greatly
what sins he committed. Asseuerebat says Augustine. de haeres. c. 54.
Augustine, quod nihil cuiquam obesset quorumlibet perpetratio, ac
perseuerantia peccatorum, si huius, quae ab ipso docebatur, fidei particeps
esset. Unto which heresy the papists come very near. For so a man profess
the Romish faith, and communicate with the Romanists in their sacraments, and
be obedient to the pope, they Bellar. de eccles. milit. c. 2.
say he is a good catholic, and a true member of the church, although he have
no inward virtue. And so facile they are in this point, that they absolve
murderers, and incestuous persons, and most wicked rebels, yea Marans and
apostataes, so they will profess their Romish religion. In Ireland the White
knight and Piers Lacy have had children by their own daughters, and others
that I could name, by their sisters, and near kinsewomen. And infinite
outrages have they committed, not one^^ against their lawful prince, but also
against their own people and kindred, and so continue living almost without
law; yet do the priests and friars, and popes agents absolve them, and count
them good catholics. Nay these are the pillars of the Romish church, and the
chief maintainers of the popish sect there.

The papists also where they by their laws forbid priests and monks to marry,
and to abstain from certain meats, do plainly embrace the heresy of the
Tatians, Seuerians, and Manichees, and are of the number of 1. Tim. 4.
those, That teach the doctrine of devils, forbidding to marry, and willing men
to abstain from meats, which God has created. Recte posuit illud, says In
1. Tim. 4.
Theodoret, prohibentium contrahere matrimonium. Neque enim caelibatum, aut
continentiam vituperat, sed eos accusat qui lege lata ea sequi compellunt. He
notes those, says Theodoret, that by their laws compel men to abstain from
marriage, and certain meats. So that by his censure the papists are within
the compass of these false teachers, of whom the apostle speaks.

The heretics called Ano^ni either corrupted, or contemned the law of God:
which heresy is also by right of enheritance descended to the papists. For
first they deny the law of God to be perfect, and therefore add unto it their
own traditions, and the customs and precepts of the Romish church. Secondly
they have In offic. beat. Mariae. and Manual de Geronymo Campos.
cut out the commandment of worshipping of images, as directly opposite to
their idolatry. Thirdly they deny concupiscence after baptism to be sin,
contrary to the tenth commandment. Lastly they have chosen to themselves a
new C. translato. de constitutionibus.
lawgiuer, that takes on him to give law to men's consciences, and received a
new decretaline law, wherein they walk more curiously, then in the law of God.
Nay for the true and ever living God, they worship this their Terrestrial God,
as In epist. dedic. ante princip. doctrine.
Stapleton does call him, and diligently harken to the popes statutes and
commandments.

Irenaeus and Tertullian does range those among heretics, that fly from the
scriptures and accuse them, and affirm that the apostles did not commit all
things necessary to writing. Cum ex scripturis arguuntur, says Aduers.
haeres. lib. 3. c. 2.
Irenaeus, in accusationem co^uertuntur scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant,
neque sint ex authoritate, and quia vary sunt dictae, and quia non possit ex
his inueniri veritas ab his, qui nesciant traditionem. Non enim per literas
traditam illam, sed per v^uam vocem, ob quam causam and Paulum dixisse,
sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos. He Aduers. haeres. lib. 3. c. 1.
says also, That the apostles first preached the gospel, and afterward by the
will of God brought the same into writing, that it might be a pillar and
foundation of our faith. Alius manu scripturas, says De praescrip. aduers.
haerec.
Tertullian, alius sensu expositiones interuertit. That is, some heretics
plainly blot and corrupt the scriptures, others pervert them by false
expositions. But he makes the catholic to say thus; Ego sum haeres
apostoloru^, sicut cauerunt testamento, sicut fidei commiserunt, sicut
adiurauerunt, ita teneo. He says, they are true catholics, and successors of
the apostles, that continue in the doctrine delivered in their testament. And
afterward, speaking of scriptures he Ibidem.
says, Quod sumus, hoc sunt. That is, that we believe and teach, that is there
to be found. But speaking of heretics, he De resurrect. carnis.
says, Aufer haereticis, quaecunque ethnici sapiunt, vt de scripturis solis
quaestiones suas sistant, and stare non poterunt. That is, bring heretics from
that opinion, that is common to them with ethnikes, and cause them to be judged
in these questions by scriptures, and they cannot stand. In describing the
qualities of these heretics, these two ancient fathers seem to have
prophesied of the conditions of the papists. For they will not allow, as says
Irenaeus, that the apostles have comprehended all their doctrine necessary to
salvation in the scriptures. Neither will they confess, that out of holy writ,
we can learn the truth without tradition. But contrariwise being convinced by
Scriptures, they accuse the Scriptures, and speak evil of them: and say that
they in respect of us receive authority from the pope: they affirm, that they
Are subject to diverse understandings. Aduers. Sadeel. lib. 1. p. 99.
Turrian calls them Delphicum gladium, others A nose of wax. they stand
upon the lively teaching of their priests and friars, and Censur. Colon.
say, That the wisdom of the church is apparent in unwritten traditions. They
pervert the Scriptures by their wicked interpretations, Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
allowing no sense, but that which the pope and church of Rome gives. They
fly from the judgment of apostolical writings, and will not have the
Scriptures to be the rule, whereby all controversies are to be ended: and
therefore plainly declare themselves to be descended from heretics, and to
be very well like their parents.

Lib. 8. Orig. c. de haeresibus.
Isidore does declare them to be heretics, that do otherwise understand the
Scriptures, then the meaning of the holy Ghost requires. Quicunque says he,
aliter Scripturam sacram intelligit, quam sensus Spiritus sancti flagitat, a
quo conscripta est, licet de ecclesia non recesserit, tamen haereticus potest
appellari. But whosoever lists to read either ye popes decretals, or the
popish factions writings, shall find that they do interpret Scriptures not
only otherwise then the holy Ghost meant, but quite contrary to his meaning.
Which is evident by many particulars: but we will content our selves with some
few for a taste. The Isai. c. 28. and 8.
prophets and Romans 9. and 1. Pet. 2.
apostles, by the corner stone placed in the foundation of the church, and
stone of offense, do understand Christ Jesus: but In praef. in lib. de Pontif.
Romans
Bellarmine will have the pope to be understood by these words. He will
also z have the words of Christ, Super hanc Petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam;
to be meant of the pope. Where our Saui^ur says, Ibidem.
Pasce oues meas, these words the papists do appropriate to the pope. These
words, Drink ye all of this; they interpret, as if Christ had said, drink
not all of this. Where the apostle says, Marriage is honorable among al men,
and understands it of such, as may marry by the laws of God: they say
marriage is not honorable for priests or monks. Where our Savior Christ says,
Scruta mini scripturas; they say Search not the Scriptures. Where he says,
that Those do in vain worship him, that teach doctrines of men; these teach
quite contrary, and place the special worship of God in humane traditions.
Where the spirit of God commands, That prayers be made for princes, and
wills subjects to obey the Magistrate, these antichristian papists curse
princes, and teach subjects to rebel, and say that it is meritorious to kill
them. Ecce duo gladij hic: ergo, says pope Boniface, the pope has two
swords, and with these swords, de facto, the popes do destroy men's souls,
and kill their bodies. It were infinite to rehearse all their wicked and false
interpretations of Scriptures, and in this place it is not necessary, seeing
by these, which we have already alleged, it may sufficiently appear, that
the papists are heretics: at least, if Isidorus say true.

As the Damascen. de haeres.
Herodians gave the name and honor of Christ to Herod, so the papists do give
the names of Christ to the pope, allowing these words of Bernard to Eugenius,
unction Christus es. They call him the foundation and rock of the church, the
head and spouse of the church, and such like. They teach that he and Christ
make but one seat of judgment, and Lib. caerem.
say, That all power is given to the pope in heaven and earth. If then the
Herodians deserve, for honoring Herod with Christ his titles, to be reputed
heretics, why should not the papists likewise be reputed heretics, that do as
impudently and wickedly give Christ's honor to the pope.

De haeresib. c. Heicetae.
Damascene numbreth those monks and nuns among heretics, that meeting used
to dance together in the praise of God: yet do not the popish fort leave their
piping and dancing processions, nor do monks and nuns cease to celebrate
their comedicall dancing masses, skipping and hopping about the altar like
apes, that are taught to leap for their masters advantage.

Ibidem. c. Gnosimachi.
Gnosimachi were certain heretics, that would not, that vulgar Christians
should study the scriptures. Omni christianorum cognitioni, ac scientiae ita
aduersantur, says Damascene, vt vanum and minus necessarium laborem esse
dicant eorum, qui in diuinis scripturis aliquam exquirunt scientiam. Neque enim
deum aliud a Christiano postulare, quam bonas praeclarasque actiones. Itaque
aliquem simplici rudique animo institutu^ suum perse qui melius est, vt aiont,
quam multam curam in cognoscendis de cretis and sententijs ponere.

The which now is just the opinion of the papists, that hold it to be mortal
sin for lay men to dispute of matters of religion, and think the colliars
faith to be sufficient, albeit he knows nothing, but only answers, That he
believes, as the church believes. De le^^t indi^^. lib. ^.
Hosius writing against Brentius does commend ignorance, and does greatly allow
this saying, Fides te saluum fecit, non exercitatio scripturarum. Lib. 3. de
auth. scriptur.
He says also, That nothing is more pernicious, then with scriptures to enter
combat with satan. Generally they allow an implicit faith in the rude sort, and
dehort them from knowledge of scriptures, which is the flat heresy of the
Gnosimachians.

The Damascen. d^ haeres. c. ^thnop^ronis.
Ethnophronians were condemned for observing diverse heathenish customs, and
holy days. Which notwithstanding, pope Boniface the eight instituted the
Iubiley every hundred years in imitation of the plays called by the Romans
Ludi seculares. The papists also have their censinges and expiations with holy
water, like the Gentiles. They keep the Carneuall, as the Romans did their
Lupercalia. They canonize saints, as the heathen did canonize their
benefactors for Gods. They offer sacrifices for the souls of the departed, as
did the Gentiles. They use their lots and coniurations, and lash themselves
before their idols, and have diverse other fashions of the Gentiles.

d As the Montanistes, De haeres. c. christiano-categori.
so likewise do papists mislike second marriages, denying to bless them, and
not accounting those marriages so holy a sacrament as the first.

Damascene accounts them also heretics, That worshipped the images of our
Savior, of the blessed virgin, and the saints, as the Gentiles did their
Gods. Which is just the case of papists. For both of them bow to them, pray to
them, burn incense to them, offer sacrifice before them. And both of them
deny, that they worship stocks or stones, but rather those persons, that are
represented by them.

Finally the very nature and properties of heretics, do argue and convince the
papists to be such. The apostle when he had warned the Romans to beware of
those, that caused divisions and scandales, Romans 16.
he e adds also Against that doctrine, which they had received: so that by
the apostles judgment those seem to be heretics that cause sects,
divisions, and scandales contrary to apostolical doctrine. He also is an
heretic, That 1. Tim. 6.
teaches other doctrine, and rests not in the wholesome words of our Lord
Jesus Christ. The apostle Peter where he says, 2. Pet. 2.
that There shall rise up false teachers, which shall privily bring in
heresies, and damnable sects: does show them to be heretics, that teach false
doctrine, overthrowing the mystery of our redemption through Christ. De
praescrip. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian does oppose heretics to the apostles, and their doctrine to
apostolical doctrine. Vnde extranei, and inimici apostolis haeretici, says
he, nisi ex diuersitate doctrinae, quam vnusquisque de suo arbitrio aduersus
apostolos, aut protulit, aut recepit? Haeresis says Lib. 2. paert. 1.
Occham, est dogma falsum fidei contrarium orthodoxae. Apud Matthew. Paris in
Hen. 3.
Robert Grosthed says, That heresy is an opinion chosen of humane
understanding, contrary to Scripture, and either openly taught or defended.
Apud Dionys. Carth. in 3. sent. did 31.
Durande signifies, That heresy is only an opinion contrary to canonical
Scripture. Opinio ista Aen. Sylu. de gest. council. Basil. lib. 1.
says he, non est haeretica, quia non est contra canonicam scripturam. The h
council of Basil does determine him to be an heretic, That does reject the
catholic faith deduced out of canonical scriptures, and proved by fathers.
Seeing then the papists have caused a great division from the apostlike and
ancient church, and have taught other doctrine contrary to that of Christ
Jesus, and have corrupted the very deepest mysteries of Christian religion,
and have digressed from apostolical rules, and taught doctrine contrary to
Christian faith, to the catholic church of former times, and finally to
canonical scriptures, as may appear by their grounds of faith, by their
legends and decretals, by their Tridentine doctrine concerning the Gospel and
the law, by their idolatrous mass, by their worshipping of saints, nay of
stocks and stones, rags, and rotten bones, by their rebellion against
princes, and their allowance of the government of the pope; there is no
question to be made, but that papists are clearly heretics.

CHAP. IIII.
That the church of Rome is not the true church of Christ.

NOw if the pope and his faction the papists be heretics, then does it
necessarily follow thereof, that they are not the true church. For the true
church keeps the faith sound and entire. But these 1. Tim. 1.
Have made shipwreck of faith. Heretics are gone out from us, because they
are not of us, as saint 1. John 2.
John says. Those of the true church, are of the household of faith, and the
apostles heirs. But heretics are strangers, as De praescrip. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian says, and maintain doctrine contrary to the apostles. Heretics,
as In dialog. contr. Lucifer.
Hierome says, Are not the church of Christ, but the synagogue of antichrist.

Again if the church of Rome have altered, and innouated Christ's religion;
then can it not be the true church, for That 1. Tim. 6.
does faithfully keep the faith committed to her in deposte, and auoideth all
profane novelties: she Ibidem.
keeps Gods commandments without addition, or blemish. Catholica ecclesia
sedula and cauta depositorum apud se dogmatu^ custos nihil in ijs vnquam
permutat, nihil minuit, nihil addit, as says Contra haeres. c. 32.
Vincentius Lirinensis. Contrariwise Ibidem c. 36.
Heretics not content with the ancient rule of faith, are daily seeking out
novelties, and are desirous to add, to change, to take away.

Further if the faith of the church of Rome be not catholic, and general,
and that which our Savior commanded his apostles to teach all nations; then is
not that the true church. For as we believe the church to be catholic, so we
believe that the faith thereof is catholic, and universal. We may not follow
the pope of Rome, nor the bishop of Jerusalem, or Alexandria, but the catholic
church, and that we shall do, if we embrace that faith, which the whole
church throughout the world confesses. Sequemur vniuersitatem, says Aduers.
haeres. c. 3.
Vincentius Lirinensis, si hanc vnam fidem veram esse fateamur, quam tota per
orbem terraru^ confitetur ecclesia. If any have a singular faith, beside that
which always, and in all places has been taught by the apostles, and their
true successors, we are not to harken to them. No Deuteronomy. 13.
Although a Prophet, or great learned man rise up among us, yet are we not to
listen to him.

This may be sufficient to teach us, that the synagogue of Rome is not that
church, whereto we are to resort, and adioine our selves. But for so much as
heretics, as apes imitate men, so counterfeit to be the true church, as
Epist. ad Iubatan.
Cyprian tells us; and every society and company of heretics do think
themselves to be christians, and bear themselves bold on the name of the
catholic church, as Lib. 4. instit. c. 30.
Lactantius writes, and considering that the church of Rome has long abused
the world with the mask of the true church: I thought it very requisite in
this chapter briefly to set down such arguments, as may clearly demonstrate,
what she is, and so much the rather, for that many simple souls have
heretofore been seduced, and persuaded, that Rome is the city of God, and
that chaste spouse of Christ, which loves and serves none, but him. If our
adversary will needs call the same the catholic church, yet let him first
peruse and answer our arguments, as they are here laid down in order.

First then we both confess, that the church of Christ is built upon Christ
Jesus. No man, says the 1. Cor. 3.
apostle, can lay any other foundation beside that, which already is laid,
which is Christ Jesus. He is Isai. 28.
that Corner stone, that is Isai. 28.
placed in the foundation of Sion. He is that Matthew. 16.
Rock, upon which the church is built. Super hanc petram, quam confessus es,
says saint Ser. 13. de verb. Dom.
Augustine, super hanc petram, quam cognouisti dicens, tu es Christus filius
dei, aedificabo ecclesiam meam, id est super meipsum filium dei viui aedificabo
ecclesiam meam. Other fathers Ambros. in c. 9. Luc. and Cyrill. lib. 4. de
Trinit.
that say the church is built, either upon The confession, or faith of Peter,
or else upon Peter himself, do understand indirectlie Christ Jesus whom he
confessed, and on whom he believed, and on whom Peter was built. But the
church of Rome is built upon the pope, and upon the papacy. Est Petri fedes,
says In praefat. in lib. de pontif. Romans
Bellarmine, lapis probatus, angularis, pretiosus, in fundamento fundatus. He
Lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 3.
says also, That the pope is the foundation of the building of the church, and
goes about to prove it by certain words of Hierome, who never thought any
such matter. Sanders his rock of the church.
Sanders does endeavor to prove, That the popes are the immooueable rock of
the church. Contr. Sa^eel^^.
Turrian, because Christ says, Aedificabo ecclesiam meam, and non aedifico
ecclesia^ meam, concludes that the popes of future times are understood: and
this is the common opinion of all papists. How then can that be the true
church, that is built upon a diverse foundation, and either neglecting, or not
greatly caring for Christ Jesus the principal rock, does wholly rely upon the
popes of Rome, men neither like to Christ, nor like to Peter, nor like to a
rock? Unless it be in that they deny Christ, and are as hard hearted against
Christians, as if they were rocks.

Secondly the faith of the true catholic church is built upon the foundation
of the apostles and prophets, and their canonical doctrine. The apostle Ephesians.
2.
says, That the household of God, and citizens of saints are built upon the
foundations of the apostles and prophets. S. Apocal. 25.
John shows, That the wall of the city of God has twelve foundations, and in
them the names of the twelve apostles. The church is built not upon Peter
only, as saint Lib. aduers. ^^in.
Hierome says, but upon all the apostles. At dicis super Petrum fundatur
ecclesia, licet id ipsum in alio loco super omnes apostolos, and cuncti claues
regni caelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur.
The church of God says In Ephesians. 2.
Theophylact, is built upon the apostles and prophets. And all this is
therefore affirmed of them, because they preached not themselves, but Christ
Jesus, and wrote ye canonical scriptures, that they might be, as Lib. 3.
aduers. haeres. c. 1.
Irenaeus says, The foundation of our faith. Unto this foundation the ancient
fathers do all give testimony. But the faith of the Romish synagogue is built
upon the determinations and decretals of popes. They count their determinations
to be infallible, and make them souereine judges of all controversies in
Christ's stead. Alij nunc a Christo missi, says In praefat in relect. in
prin^ip. doct.
Stapleton, eorumue doctrina, praedicatio, determinatio fundamenti apud me
locum habebunt. He plainly Ibidem.
confesses, that the papists have another foundation of their faith besides
the scriptures. Christianae religionis fundamentum habemus says he, ab ipsis
literis euangelicis and apostolicis aliud. And Lib. 4. de verb. Dei. c. 4.
Bellarmine disputing of traditions calls them the word of God not written,
and says, That the scriptures are neither necessary, nor sufficient without
them. Demonstrare conabimur, says he, scripturas sine traditionibus nec
fuisse simpliciter necessarias, nec sufficientes. Now if they cannot show,
that the church of God in times past did build their faith upon the popes
decretals and traditions; they must needs confess, that they are not the true
church.

Thirdly never did the church of Christ speak evil of Scriptures. Lib. 3.
aduers. haeres. c. 2.
Irenaeus says, It is the property of heretics, when they are convinced by
Scriptures, to fall into dislike of them, and to accuse them. The children of
God certes cannot calumniate their heavenly fathers testament, or refuse to
hear his voice. My sheep says our John 10.
Savior, hear my voice. But the papists say, they are neither necessary, nor
sufficient, as does Bellarmine: or no sufficient foundation of the church, as
does Stapleton, in the places above mentioned; and speak evil of them, as if
they were Annot. Rhem. in 2. Cor. 3.
A killing letter, and most pernicious; or as if they were a nose of ware,
Ce^sur. Colon.
or a matter of contention: and will not suffer them to be publicly read in a
tongue, that is understood of the vulgar fort.

4. The church of God does keep the doctrine of the apostles, without addition
and alteration, avoiding all profane novelties. The Gal. 1.
apostle pronounces him accursed, That teaches any other Gospel, then that
which he taught. So Aduers. haeres. c. 34.
Vincentius L^rinensis says, Catholicorum hoc fere proprium, deposita
sanctorum patrum and commissa seruare, damnare prophanas nouitates, and sicut
dixit, and iterum dixit apostolus, si quis annuntiauerit praeterquam quod
acceptum est, anathematizare. But the synagogue of Rome has added unto the
doctrine of the apostles infinite novelties, as has been declared above in
the second chapter. Their doctrine concerning the grounds of faith, concerning
the law, the Gospel and diverse points of Christian faith* their worship of
God, their massing service, and popish government is new, as their new
decretals, and late Tridentine doctrine, and the decrees of other late
councels, whereupon all their popish faith depends, do plainly testify.

5. The true church cannot abide heretics that teach doctrine contrary to that
of the apostles. Christ Jesus speaking of his sheep John 10*
says, They will not follow a stranger, but fly from him, for that they know
not the voice of strangers, that the apostles gave the faithful Christians in
charge. If there come any unto you, says 2. John.
saint John, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither
salute him. Tantum apostoli and horum discipuli, says Lib. 3. aduers. haeres.
c. 3.
Irenaeus, habuerunt timorem, vt neque verbotenus communicarent alicui eorum,
qui adulterauerant veritatem. Let us separate our selves, says Lib. 1. ep. 3.
Cyprian, as far from them, as they separate themselves from the church.
Neither can the true church embrace erroneous doctrine. For true Christians
will not hear the voice of strangers. Si haeretici sunt, says Tertullian, De
praescrip. aduers. haeret.
Christiani esse non possunt. But it is apparent, that the popes of Rome are
heretics which are the great masters and Rabbines of the Romish synagogue, as
may appear by the examples of Liberius, Felix, Vigilius, Honorius the first,
John the two and twentieth, Eugenius the 4. and diverse others. We have also
showed, that the synagogue of Rome has embraced diverse heresies, and does
wholly addict her self to embrace heretics, and to persecute true teachers.

6. The church of God is the mistress and teacher of truth, and admits no
falsehood nor untruth. The 1. Tim. 3.
apostle does call her The pillar and ground of truth. Est fons veritatis faith
Instit. divine. lib. 4. c. vlt.
Lactantius, hoc est domicilium fidei. She is the fontaine of truth, that is to
say, The house where true faith dwells. but the synagogue of Rome, is not
only a receptacle of lewd opinions, but also the mother and mistress of lies,
and vanities. She not only receives false traditions, but also teaches them.
She embraces lying legends, and old wives fables, and apocryphal devises. And
this is the word of God not written, which they so much commend, and make
equal to holy scriptures. That church In breuiar. in festo Cathar.
believes, That saint Catharine was a maiden of Alexandria so well learned,
that at eighteen years of age she passed the most learned, and overcame
fifty philosophers, and converted Faustina the empress and Porphyrius a
captain of his to the faith, and broke the tormenting wheel with her
oraysons. They say also, that her body was buried by angels in mount Sinah.
Matters incredible and no where to be found.

In festo Clementis.
They believe also That Clement the successor of Peter was by Traian sent into
the wilderness of Cersona (we know not where) and that there he saw a lamb
making a well to sally out of the top of the mountain, and that being cast
into the sea with a millstone about his neck, the sea fled three miles from
the shore, and there was found a little chapel built in the sea, where his
body was bestowed.

They tell how In festo Gregor. Thaumaturg.
Gregory of Neocesaria caused the river of Lycus to keep within his bounds by
planting his staff on the bank, And that his staff grew presently into a
great tree.

Peter Martyr one of Dominickes order, as they In festo Petr. Martyr.
believe, did keep his virginity, both in body and mind, in that sort, That he
never felt himself defiled with any mortal sin, and did so long fast, that
scarce he could open his mouth to eat, as they tell.

They tell us also like wonders of Nicolas, Valerian, Tiburtius, Cecilia, and
diverse others. In the legend of Del volto santo.
Iacobus de voragine, translated into Italian, and comm^nly read to the women
and vulgar people we read, How an image representing our Savior, did lift up
his foot, and cast off his silver slipper to a certain pilgrim that devoutly
stood before it, and would have offered somewhat, and had nothing. Di santa
Catharina.
Catharine of Si^na is there reported to be betrothed to our Savior Christ,
and to have done strange things. They generally say, that Christ imprinted in
Saint Francis his five wounds; and therefore they call him I^sum Typicum: and
diverse popes do by their decretals confirm the same to be true. To abridge
this point, they have infinite such like fabulous narrations, in their
breuiaries, and legendaries. Now gladly would I have our adversary to show us,
whether these histories and legends are not received of the church of Rome, and
esteemed as holy traditions; nay as the word of God revealed by the church, or
by the pope; and how these that build their faith on such lies, can be the
church of God.

7. The faith of Gods true church cannot be builte upon any untruth, as Thomas
Aquinas himself confesses. Nihil 2. 2. q. 1 art. 3
says he, cadere potest sub fide, nisi inquantum stat sub v^ritate prima, sub
qua nullum falsum stare potest. And afterward he says, Fidei non potest
subesse aliquod falsum. Christ Jesus he is truth it self. How then can the
church, that is built on this rock, admit any falshoode? But the synagogue
of Rome believes all the traditions of the church wherein infinite lies are
contained. They as well believe the wounds of Saint Francis, as Christ's
wounds. They believe that stocks have walked, that dumb images have spoken,
that saints and angels have appeered, and spoken and done, as is contained in
the legends of the church. Nay they are bound to believe the tales of Tecla,
Christopher, George, Cyric and Iulitta and such other apocryphal legends; or
else they must deny their traditions to be the word of God not written.

The church of Christ is bounded within the limits of the Scriptures. Habet
vrbes legis, prophetarum, and euangelij, as Saint In Mich. lib. 1. c. 1.
Hierome says, non est egressa de finibus suis, id est, de scripturis sanctis.
He Ibid^m c. 7.
says also, That it is the property of heretics to fly to men's
commandments, and the leaven of Pharisees. Saint Lib. 19. de ciuit. Dei. c. 18.
Augustine says, That the city of God believes the holy Scriptures, that are
called canonical, but of other reports doubts. But the church of Rome does
not keep within these bounds, nor believes only things contained in holy
Scriptures. For The same receives the Trid. conc. sess. 4.
traditions of the church with equal reverence to the scriptures, and mingleth
much of the leaven of pharisees, and other heretics with their doctrine. It
believes also all that is delivered in the missales and breuiaries, and
whatsoever the popes of Rome either have determined, or shall hereafter
determine to be a matter of faith.

9. The church of Christ does worship but one God, and serves him only,
according to this Exodus 20.
commandment, Thou shall have no other gods but me. Our Savior Christ also
shows, Matthew. 4.
That God only is to be worshipped and served. The catholic church only,
says Institut. lib. 4. c. vlt.
Lactantius, does retain the true worship of God. But the synagogue of Rome
has utterly corrupted Gods true worship, and gives divine worship to stocks
and stones. Cum Christus, says P. 3. q. 25. art. 3.
Thomas Aquinas, adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est, quod eius imago
sit adoratione latriae adoranda. In lib. 3. sent. did. 9. q. 2.
Bonauenture proves, that images are to be retained in churches, and
worshipped with a verse of Horace, de art Poetica.

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, says he,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus, and quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator.
They worship and serve saints; they offer sacrifices in their honor, they
burn incense to their images, they light candels before them, they carry them
about, which the catholic church never did, nor allowed.

10. The church of God never burned the Scriptures. No, albeit there were
errors in the old vulgar Latin translation, and in the translation of
Theodotion, Symachus, and the 70. interpreters, yet did not the church
therefore burn them. Neither did ever the true church prohibit the Scriptures
to be publicly read in the vulgar toongs, or burn those for heretics that
read the^ privately without license. Nay rather they searched their heavenly
fathers will in his most holy testament, and exhorted men to search the
Scriptures, according to our Savior Christ's commandment. Saint In Psalm. 86.
Hierome says, that these scriptures are not belonging only to priests, but
to the people. Non scripserunt says he, speaking of the apostles, paucis, sed
vniuerso populo. but the church of Rome not unlike to the barbarous heathen
persecutors, has diverse times caused the scriptures to be burnt, and has
burnt diverse for reading of them, as appears by the Registers of London and
Lincoln. In the council of Trent they forbad them to be read publicly. And
privately they will not have them read without license. Lar^us, says In
Manual. cap. 11. in 1. praecept.
Nauarrus, disputans de fide peccat mortaliter. They cannot abide them, no more
then those that do evil, can abide the light.

11. The true church does acknowledge no head of the universal church, but
Christ only, which is also the Savior of his body. Christ says the Ephesians. 2.
apostle, Is the head of the church, and he is the savior of his body.
Neither can any thing be devised more deformed and prodigious, then one body
with two heads. Lib. 4. epist. 38. ad Joan. Constant.
Gregory the first could not endure, that Peter should be called the head of
the whole church. Peter the apostle, says he, is the first member of the holy
catholic church, and Paul, Andrew, and John what are they but heads of diverse
parishes, and yet all are members of the church under one head? Neither could
he suffer any to be called the universal bishop of the church. Saint De
agon. Christ. and in Psalm. 9.
Augustine says, that Christ Jesus, that is the mediator betwixt God and man,
is the head of the church. But the Romish church does allow and acknowledge the
pope to be her head. And the canonist In gloss in c. vnam. ^xtr. de mayor. and
obed.
Bertrand blasphemously says, That Christ had not bin discreet, if he had not
left a vicar general behind him. And this does In praefat. in lib. de p^ntif.
R m. and lib. 2. de pont^f. R^m. c. 31.
Bellarmine teach, and all papists believe and profess; or else they are not
perfect papists. Oh strange church, that lives under such a head! oh miserable
people, that endure this Babilonish slavery!

12. The true church is Christ's faithful spouse. Sponsabo te mihi, Oseae 2.
says God to his church, in fide. De vnitate eccles.
Cyprian says, that she cannot be drawn to like of an adulterer, being
incorrupt and chaste. Adulterari non potest Christi sponsa: incorrupta est, and
pudica. She harkeneth only to the voice of her spouse. En dilectus meus,
says the church, Cantic. c. 2.
loquitur mihi, surge, propera amica mea, columba mea, formosa mea, and veni.
But the church of Rome does Turr^^rem. sum. lib. 2. c. 28. and Thom. Aq. in 4.
sent. d^st. 3. 8.
acknowledge the pope to be her spouse. And Lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 31.
Bellarmine does defend, that the pope is justly entitled the spouse of the
church. Nay the pope Canter corsoralia. de tra^st. episc. etc. qu^niam. de
imm^nitate eccles.
does so call himself: and therefore the papists must take heed, that they do
not henceforth deny him to be the spouse of their c^colike church. Who then
is so blind, as not to see, that she is rather that purple harlot, of whom
mention is made Apoc. 17. of whose cup the nations of the earth have drunken so
many abominations, then Christ's undefiled spouse?

13. The true church is a communion of saints. For so we profess, when we
say we believe The holy catholic church, the communion of Saints. The 1. Cor.
1.
apostle does describe the church of Corinth To be a society of saints
calling on the name of the Lord Jesus. So that to be a true member of this
church, it is requisite, that a man have faith in Christ, and that he show his
faith by his works. But the Romish church is a society of such as profess
the faith, and receive the sacraments of the Romish church. And Lib. de eccles.
milit. c. 2. and 3.
Bellarmine confesses, That to be a member of the Romish church there is
neither inward faith, nor charity, nor any inward virtue required. Nay Ibid.
c. 10. and 11.
he says, That such as be inwardly atheistes and heretics, and most heinous
sinners, may be true members of that church: which is a most evident argument,
that they are not the true church.

14. The true church is not necessarily tied to the obedience of the bishop of
Rome, nor never was. The spiritual Jerusalem, Which is the mother of Galath. 4.
us all, is free; and acknowledges no Lord but one, which is Lord of all. For
so the apostle Ephesians. 4.
says, There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism. But the church of Rome
beside this Lord, does acknowledge herself subject to the pope her Lord and
God in earth. C. vnam. ext. de ma. and obed.
Boniface the 8. determines, that none can be saved in the Romish arc, but
they that are subject to the pope. And De eccles. milit. c. 2.
Bellarmine does exclude all from the church of Rome, that live not under the
obedience of the pope. Finally this is the common opinion of the Ibidem c. 5.
adversaries, that exclude out of their church al schismatikes, and account all
to be so, that are not subject to the pope.

15. The true church does profess the catholic faith, Which unless a man
keep intier, and inuiolate, he shall perish everlastingly, as In symbolo.
Athanasius teaches us, and we publicly profess. Now the catholic faith
concerning Jesus Christ's incarnation and ascension Ibidem.
is this, That Jesus Christ is perfect man, as he is perfect God, and that he
took man's flesh, and yet is but one Christ, and that in his humanity he is
ascended into heaven. We believe also, That we are Romans 4.
justified by faith in Christ Jesus, and not by the works of the law, as the
apostle teaches us; and that Being Romans 5.
justified by faith, we have peace with God.

We believe also Romans 6.
That the reward of sin is death, and that eternal life is the gift of God.
We believe that Christ's institution is to be observed in the sacraments, and
that in baptism we are to use clean water: and that in the supper of the Lord
all that are present are to communicate, and to receive the cup, as well as the
sacrament of the Lords body, according to Matthew. 26.
Christ's words, Take eat; and Drink ye all of this. We believe also, that
Christ is to be worshipped as he has appointed, and not according to the
inventions of men. Finally we believe, That Ephesians. 4.
Christ ascending to his father gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers: and that these are sufficient for the
building of the church, and the bringing together of the saints. And this all
belongs to the catholic faith.

But this false and adulterous synagogue of Rome has violated these points of
catholic faith. For it believes not that Christ is perfect man, but that he
has a body neither visible, nor palpable, that is contained under the forms
of bread no bigger then a counter. It believes not, that he took other flesh,
then that which may be in heaven, and in earth, and in as many places, as the
sacrament is, at one time. But Contr. Eutychen lib. 4. c. 4.
Vigilius says, That the flesh of Christ, that is in heaven, is not in earth.
Fulgentius writing to Thrasimundus says, That the body of Christ now has the
properties of a true body. It believes also, that Christ is not so ascended,
but that we are to seek his body here on earth, and to touch him with our
mouths, and teeth. But saint Lib. 10. in c. 24. Luc.
Ambrose says, That we touch not Christ with corporal handling, but by faith,
and are not to seek him on the earth, nor after the flesh, if we will find
him. De resur. carn.
Tertullian says, That his body is in the palace of heaven. The papists also
believe, that there is one Christ in heaven visible, and palpable, and another
in the sacrament invisible, and vnpalpable. They Council. Trid. s^ss.
teach, that we are justified by the works of the law, and that faith is
nothing, but a preparation to justification. They teach men to doubt, and
distrust of their salvation, and after justification send them to be tormented
in purgatory, they cannot tell how long: but diverse thousands of years, if
their indulgences and bulls concerning the same contain truth. They believe,
that there be certain venial sins, whose wages and reward is not death; and
that eternal life is no free gift, but the wages of men's good works and
merits. The institution of Christ both in baptism, and in the Lords supper
they have violated, adding many other things beside water in baptism, and
turning the communion in the Lords supper into a private action, and taking
the cup from all the communicantes, save the priest, that says mass. In the
worship of God they have devised infinite matters, which God never required at
their hands. Nay something they have instituted in the worship of God contrary
to his commandment, as the worshipping of God in graven images, contrary to
his commandment concerning images; and the calling upon angels and saints,
contrary to the commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods but me. Finally
they have in liew of Christ established Antichrist with a guard of Cardinals,
and an army of priests, and certain swarms of vermin called monks and
friars to the dissipation of Christ's body, and the subversion of the faith.

16. The true church never made public confession of their sins to the
virgin Mary, to the archangell Michaell, to saint John Baptist, or to the
apostles Peter and Paul, and to all the saints. Saint Augustines confessions
are comprised in diverse books: yet has he none of this fashion. In the
ancient liturgies, albeit they have passed through the hands of falsaryes, yet
can no such precedent be found. But they in their daily liturgies In breuiario
and officio beata Mariae.
teach men to say in this sort, Confite or deo omnipotenti, beatae Mariae
semper virgini, beato Ioanni Baptistae, sanctis apostolis Petro and Paulo,
beato N. and omnibus sanctis, and vobis fratres.

17. Christ's true church has no sacraments, but such as Christ has
instituted, as may appear by Iustines apology, by that book of sacraments
that passes under the name of Ambrose, by Dionysius his description of
ecclesiastical mysteries, and all ancient liturgies of the Christian church,
save such as are falsified. But the popish synagogue have made evangelical
sacraments of matrimony, order, and penance. Of which the first two were
instituted in the old testament, and the third is an act always used in the
church of God, but never accounted a sacrament, as wanting both certain
signs, and sacramental institution and form. They have also made sacraments
of confirmation, and extreme unction, and given them both signs and forms,
that were never known in the ancient church of Christ.

18. The true church never shunned to receive the cup, as well as the Lords
body in the sacrament. Sermon. 4. de quadrages.
Leo says they were Manichees, That receiving the sacraments, took the body
of Christ, but in any wise shunned to drink the blood of our redemption: and
he calls this act Sacrilegious. De consecrat. did. 2. c. comperimus.
Gelasius also says, That it is plain sacrilege, to part the one and the
same mystery, and to receive a portion of the sanctified body, and to abstain
from the cup of the sacred blood. But now the synagogue of Rome does count this
ministration of Sacraments in one kind to be good religion, and straightly
commands all, save the priest, to abstain from the cup.

19. The ancient catholic Apost. can. 9. and council. Antioch. c. 2.
church did excommunicate such, As entered the church and heard the Scriptures
read, and staide not out prayers, nor received the holy communion. And the
Romanists themselves, under the name of Calixtus, have C. peracta. de
consecrat. did. 2.
published this decree, That all should be excommunicate, that would not
communicate. And that this was the order of the christian church, that all,
that were present at the oblation should communicate, it appears both by
Iustines second apology, and by Dionysius the Areopagites description of these
ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies. But the church of Rome after
consecration, sends all away, for the most part, without communion, and
thinks it not necessary.

20. The ancient catholic church had but one sacrifice, one altar, one
priest. The priest and sacrifice was Christ Jesus once offered for the sins of
all: the altar was the cross of Christ. Christ, says De demonstr. euang. l.
1. c. 10.
Euse^i^s, offered a most excellent sacrifice for the ^aluation of us all, and
gave us a memorial (or sacrament) thereof, insteade of a sacrifice. Saint In
c. 10. epist. ad Hebr.
Ambrose says, That our sacrifice is but a samplar of that, which our Savior
offered on the cross. Saint Contr. Faust. lib. 20. c. 21.
Augustine says, That the flesh and blood of this sacrifice was yielded in
very truth, when Christ was put to death, and that after his ascension it is
now solemnized by the sacrament of remembrance of that sacrifice. Eccles.
Hierarch. c. 3.
Dionysius calls it A figurative sacrifice. That which is offered and
consecrated by the priest, is called a sacrifice and oblation, because it is a
memorial and representation of the true sacrifice, and holy oblation, made on
the altar of the cross, as says Sentent. 4. did. 12.
Peter Lombard: and so their glosses Did. 2. de consecrat. c. semel. etc. in
Christo. etc. iteratur.
confess, that this sacrifice is but a memorial, or sacrament, or
representation of Christ his passion, and sacrifice. Epist. 25. plebi vniuersae.
Cyprian denies, that we can institute a new altar, or new priesthood. Aliud
altar constitui, aut sacerdotium nouum fieri, praeter vnum altar, and vnum
sacerdotium, non potest. But the papists have forged of late time a new
external sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead, and devised a new altar
of stone, and instituted a new priesthood, not to celebrate a memorial of
Christ's death and passion, but to offer indeed Christ himself in a true
sacrifice, after a gross and carnal sort.

21. The true catholic church never taught, nor thought so basely of the most
holy body of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, that they imagined that a
mouse, a dog, a hog or other brute beast did eat it, and press it with
teeth, and swallow it down. For they believed, as we believe, that Christ is
in heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, and is far from those
pressures, and contumelies. But the synagogue of Rome believes, that a brute
beast may eat Christ's body. If a dog or hog says Part. 4. q. 45.
Alexander Hales, should eat the whole consecrated host, I see no cause, but
the Lords body should go therewithal into that dogs, or hogs belly. Some
have said, as it is in Part. 3. q. 8. art. 3.
Thomas Aquinas his sum, that As Soon as the sacrament is taken of a mouse,
or a dog, straightway the body and blood of Christ cease to be there: but
this is a derogation to the truth of this sacrament. And where the master of
Lib. 4. did. 13.
sentences abhors from this position, saying that it may be well said,
that the body of Christ is not received of brute beasts; the masters of Paris
put this in the margent that Hic Magister non tenetur.
Here the master is not believed.

22. The true catholic church did never sell the holy sacrament, nor believe
that it was a means to satisfy for sins both of quick and dead. Nor did
the same promise health to the sick, sig^t to the blind gain to merchants,
husbands to maidens being present at the sacrament. But the Romish synagogue
does sell Christ. Deteriores sunt Judah, C. 23.
says the author, that made Onus ecclesiae, alleging the authority of saint
B^git, Qui pro solis denarijs me vendidit, illi autem pro omni mercimonio. And
no traffike is more common in the Romish church, then the traffike for masses.
They make men believe, that this sacrifice of the mass is expiatorie both for
the sins of quick and dead. Hoc sacrificium, says De valor missae. parad. 12.
Guernerus, est exp^atiuum debitae poenae tam hic, quam in futuro exoluendae.
He Ibid. parad. 9.
shows also, that It has miraculous effects against thunder, danger of
enemies, and all other dangers, and that he that frequenteth the mass, shall
be directed in all things. Neither can any man desire any thing, that
priests by their masses will not promise to obtain for him.

23. The true catholic church did never use to make holy water, nor to
consecrate paschal lambs, nor oil, nor candles, nor such like things. Nor
did the same believe, that by holy water venial sins were remitted, or that
it was good to drive away mise, or make barren women conceive, or that the
other hallowed things have such effects, as the schoolmen teach. But the
Romish church does Missal. Romans in fin.
consecrate holy water, and paschall lambs, oil, candels, and other
creatures, and has a great opinion of these consecrate things. Non mane
institut^^^n est, says In lib. Numer. c. 19.
Augustine Ste^chus, quod aquas sale and orationibus sanctificamus, vt ad ^orum
aspersum delicta nostra deleantur. In dialog.
Alane Copus tells us, that holy water is good to drive away mise, and to
make barreine women to conceive.

25. The true church stands not much upon external ceremonies, as in the
time of Moses law. The Coloss. 2.
apostle writing to the Colossians would not have men condemned In respect of
meat, or drink, or of holy days. Nor would have them burdened with
traditions, As touch not, taste not, handle not. And John 4.
Christ says, that in his church True worshippers should worship God in spirit
and truth. But the service of the Romish church for the most part consists in
external obseruances; as for example in absteining from certain meats and
drinks, and widowhoode, and abstinence from marriage, in singing, ringing,
going on pilgrimage, painting, knocking, greasing, keeping feasts and holy
days, and worshipping the sacrament, and external signs.

26. The true church of God neither made the image of the godhead, nor set up
images in churches to be worshipped, knowing that the same is directly contrary
to the commandment of God. Aduers. Gentes. lib. 8.
Arnobius says, That the first Christians had no altars, nor temples, nor
images worshipped in open show. Ne simulachra quidem veneramur, says Contra.
Celsum lib. 7.
Origin, quippe qui dei, vt inuisibilis, ita and incorporei formam nullam
effigiamus. Lib. 2. Divine. instit. c. 19.
Lactantius says, There is no religion, where there is an image. The council
of C. 36.
Eliberis forbad pictures in churches. Arnobius says, that Christians do not
worship the cross. Cruces says he, nec colimus, nec optamus. lib. 8. aduers.
gentes. Lib. 9. ep. 9.
Gregory himself would not have images worshipped, albeit he would not have
them broken down. De cultu imag. lib. 1.
Jonas Aurelianensis writing for images condemns the popish manner of
worshipping them. Creaturam adorari, eique aliquid diuinae seruitutis impendi,
proh, nefas ducimus, huiusque sceleris patratorem detestandum and
anathematizandum libera voce proclamamus. But the popish church does make the
images of God the father and the holy Ghost, and worshippeth them with divine
worship. Likewise do the papists worship the crucifixe, and cross: and with
service, kissing, and crouching do they worship the images of Saints.

27. The ancient church did always serve God in a tongue understood of ye
people. The Greeks had their Liturgy in the Greek tongue, the Italians in the
Italian tongue, the Syrians in the Syriake, the Armenians in the Armenian
language, the Slauonians in the Slauon tongue. Lib. 8. contr. Celsum.
Origin says, That God that is Lord of all toongs, hears those, that pray
in any tongue: and that every one prays in his native and mother tongue. In
Epitaph. Paulae ad Eustochium.
Hierome says, that Psalms were song at the burial of Paula not only in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, But in the Syrian tongue. In an other Epistle of his
written to Epist. 17.
Marcella he shows, That every nation that came to Bethlehem, had their
several languages in their church service. For as the apostle says, 1. Cor.
14.
He that prays in a tongue not understood, profits nothing. But the papists
and church of Rome will have no other tongue used in the common Liturgy of the
Western churches, but the Latin, of which the vulgar people scarce understand
one word.

28. The true church is the kingdom of Christ, and there he only reigns by
the scepter of his word. Transtulit nos, says the Coloss. 2.
apostle, in regnum filij Dei. The apostle Saint James says, that he alone is
our lawgiver, and our judge. There is one lawgiver, James 4.
says he, that is able to save, and to destroy. But in the church of Rome the
pope bears himself, as a sovereign monarke, and he takes on him power to
bind and loose in heaven, earth, and purgatory. And his agents say, That his
laws bind in conscience, and that he has power to save and destroy. The
Romish church is governed by his laws, and acknowledges him to be the
supreme judge of controversies.

29. The true church of Christ contenteth herself with the religion first
taught by the apostles. For as Lib. 4. contr. Marcion.
Tertullian says, Id verius quod prius; id prius, quod ab apostolis. And as
Aduers. haeres. c. 26.
Vincentius Lirinens^^ says, it is the property of heretics, Not to content
themselves with the ancient rule of faith, but to seek novelties from day to
day, and to desire to add, to change, to take away. But the church of Rome
does not content herself with the doctrine of the apostles, nor with the
ancient rule of faith, but is still adding, changing, taking away, as may
appear by the popes decretals.

30. The true church is dispersed every where. For our Savior f commanded his
apostles To teach all nations. Matthew. 28.
And we believe not a particular church, but The catholic church, that is,
the society of Christians of all times, and places. but the Romish church
neither contains the Greeks, nor Africans, nor men of Asia, that have for
many ages been divided from that church. Nor does it reach to the people
before Christ, but only Bellar. de eccles. milit. c. 2.
contains such, as live in obedience to the pope. How then can the church of
Rome be the catholic church? Shall the church of that city be as great, as
the church of the whole world?

31. The true church of Christ contains neither lions, nor tygres, nor
woolues, but consists only of sheep and lambs. Nay it makes mild
Christians of savage and wild atheistes and miscreantes; and as Paul of a
fierce persecutor by christianity was made a constant professor, so the
mildness of this our christian mother the church changes men's cruel
natures. They shall not hurt nor kill, says Isai. 11.
God by his prophet, in all my holy mountain. The wolf shall dwell with the
lamb, and the Pard shall ly with the Kid. De incarnat. verbi.
Athanasius says, that nothing but Christ's faith caused barbarous nations to
become peaceable. Quis coegit barbaros, gentesque alias in suis sedibus, says
he, immanitatem deponere, pacifica meditari, nisi Christi fides, and crucis
signaculum? Lib. 2. contr. Parmen.
Optatus speaking of catholics: Which of us, says he, has persequuted any
man? Can you show or prove, that any of you has been persequuted by us? But
the church of Rome has of late years and yet does murder infinite numbers of
men, that would not adhere to her Romish faith. Their Extr. de haeret. per tot.
laws are bloody and cruel, their executions are more cruel. In the time of
Charles the emperor the fifth of that name it is found in Meteran. de Belgicis
tumultibus.
record, That above fifty thousand persons were by sentence of judges executed
to death for the profession of their faith in the low countries. In France, as
their own stories report, at one Anno 1572.
time three score thousand Christians without order of law were most shamefully
massacred. Circiter sexaginta hominum millia, says Lib. 23. p. 508.
Natalis Comes speaking of the massacre, varijs in locis per illud tempus
trucidata fuisse dicta sunt in Gallia. And so extraordinary was the fury of
papists, that they spared neither age, sex, nor quality. Vel puberes, vel
impuberes, says Ibid. p. 507.
he, trucidati sunt, neque vllius sexus, vel aetatis, vel dignitatis habita est
ratio. Neither may we think, that they have showed less cruelty against
Christians in Spain, Italy, Germany, England and other nations. The Romish
church has died her garments in the blood of saints, and the prelates have
showed themselves leaders to the people in these barbarous executions. Well
therefore may that be applied to them, which Lib. 2. con. Parmen.
Optatus spoke of the cruel Donatistes. Lacerati sunt viri, tractatae sunt
matronae, infantes necati, abacti partus: ecce vestra ecclesia episcopis
ducibus, cruentis morsibus pasta est. Men have been tormented, women have
been abused, infants have been murdered, women forced to loose their children:
behold your church is fed with cruelty, and your prelates have been
captains to the vulgar sort, in their cruel executions.

32. The catholic church never showed more favor to the Jews and Infidels,
then to Christians that disliked the bishops of Rome. The Christian emperors L.
hac valitura. Cod. de Iudaeis and Caelieolis.
excluded the Jews from all government, and authority in the commonwealth,
and Ibidem.
restreined their insolences with diverse sharp laws. The like course they
Cod. de Paganis, sacrif. and templ.
took also with Pagans and Infidels, shutting their temples, and forbidding
their sacrifices and Idolatries. But the Romish synagogue does endure the
impieties of Jews in the midst of Rome, albeit they deny and blaspheme Christ
Jesus, tormenting and killing christians, that shall but once offer to speak
against the pope. Likewise Onuphr. in Alexandro 6.
Alexander the sixth received Turks and Maranes into Rome being erpelled out of
Spain; and the popes are content, that their subjects shall trade with Turks,
albeit they cannot endure any christian, that shall mislike the popes
authority.

33. The true church of God never sought by forging and falsifying of men's
writings, and by lying and slandering to advance Christ's religion. For truth
is strong enough of it self, and needs not to be supported with falsehood;
Proverb. 12.
and a Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord. False witnesses and
slanderers in ancient time were so far from being esteemed in the church,
that they were b excluded out of the church. Council. Agath. c. 27. and Council.
El^bert c. 73. and 74.
But the church of Rome perceiving, that she cannot otherwise prevail, goes
to work by plain forging and falsifying, leaving nothing sound, that once
passes her fingers. Canones apostolor. and constiutione^.
Somewhat she commends under the name of the a apostles, and many things
under the name of ancient fathers. There is no ancient father, but she has
ascribed unto him many children, which were never begotten by him, as the
works of Cyprian, Origin, Athanasius, Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostom, Gregory
and others do plainly testify. For who sees not how many unlearned and
unsound treatises are daily published under the names of ancient fathers? Nay
the Romanistes are much offended with Erasmus and other learned men's censures,
that have gone about to make a distinction betwixt truth and falsehood, between
books counterfeited, and that are truly belonging to the authors whose name
they carry. The church of Rome under the names of Clement, Anacletus, Alexander
and other ancient bishops of that city has published diverse vain and
insolent letters containing plain and evident notes of falsehood. The same has
not only corrupted diverse acts and canons of councels, but has supposed
diverse counterfeit councels, of which in ancient records there is neither
evident proof, nor any probable conjecture. Of late time she has caused a
formulary to be drawn, in what places the records of stories and fathers are
to be corrupted. It is entitled Index expurgatorius. And daily do the Jesuits
devise more and more, what is to be cut out, added or altered, to shape ancient
writers fit for their shameless and abominable practice and superstition. I
will only give you a taste in one, that you may esteem of the boldness of
the rest. Select. bibliothec. lib. 1. c. 19.
Posseuin a shameless Iebusite censuring the fathers says, Ex libro 2.
Hermetis col. 16. deleatur, recte audisti. Et paulo post, qui enim crediderunt,
aut credituri sunt. In transitu sanctae Mariae quifalso ascribitur B. Melitoni
deleantur illa verba, in solatium ferendum angustijs, quae superuenturae sunt
mihi. Deleatur etiam a capite octauo, vsque in finem tractatus. Ex libro
Nicolai Cabasilae deleantur capita 29. and 30. In quaestionibus Anastasij qu.
87. scribatur in margin, haec intelligenda sunt de gloria corporis. Out of the
tract of Antonius Abbas he takes what he pleases: and the like he does in
diverse authors works. And this authority being given to Jesuits by a bull of
Gregory the thirteenth, it is not unlike that they will corrupt all antiquity,
if order be not taken. In late writers they take liberty to put in, and put out
at pleasure. Out of Guicciardins Italian history they have taken out,
whatsoever he wrote concerning the popes primacy and universal authority, and
the original and proceeding thereof. I have by me Didacus Stellaes
commentaries upon Luke, taken out of the Jesuits library in the sack of
Cadiz, wherein not only diverse sentences, but also whole pages are blotted
out. The like practice they use in all late writers. Caesar Baronius of late
has most impudently set out Legendes and lies for true stories, and gone about
to corrupt the history of the church, with most fabulous toies, for which he
can vouch no author, but Simeon Metaphrastes, Iacobus de Voragine, and such
legendaries. Others to help, where forgerie will not prevail, do bring a
large supply of prodigious lies, and most ridiculous and notorious fables.
Select. bibliothec. lib. 8.
Posseuin is not ashamed to write, that we deny the articles of the faith. Of
Beza some gave out, he had recanted his religion, and was turned papist.
Eccles. Anglic. trophaea.
Others tell how in England certain priests or papists were bayted in bears
skins; and make long discourses of crosses, that were seen in Cop. dialog.
Wales, and at Ciacon de cruce.
Norwiche; and A certain popish pamphlet.
how the countess of Arundell dyed for grief, to see her husbands hard
usage: matters deuoide of all truth. They have also published infinite slanders
not only against Calvin, Luther, Peter Martyr, Iuel, and such like worthy
men, but also against Christian princes; and shame not to say any thing against
us, that may bring our cause into hatred, albeit never so untrue. And of this
the writings of Sanders, Genebrard, Surius, Cochlaeus, Stapleton, Allen,
Ribadineira, Bellarmine, Posseuin, Caesar Baronius and others of that side,
give sufficient testimony.

34 That cannot be the true Church, that offers sacrifice to other gods, then
the true God, or that co^municateth Gods honor to creatures. Qui Exodus 22.
sacrificat dijs eradicabitur, praeterquam Domino soli. That is, he that
offers to other gods, save to the Lord alone, shall be destroyed. Saint Lib
10. de ciuit. dei. c. 4.
Augustine says, that God only is to be served with sacrifices of praises, and
thanksgiving, and to have the worship, which he calls latriam, done to him:
and most apparent it is, that Angels do not suffer such worship to be done to
them. But the papists do offer the sacrifices of incense, of prayers, and
praises to Angels, to the virgin Marie, and to saints. They also erect churches
and altars unto them; which shows, that they mean there to honor them. And
albeit they say, that the masses made in honor of angels, saints, and of our
Lady, are directed to God; yet in all these masses they call upon saints, and
offer to them incense, and the sacrifice of their lips. Of their Agnus Dei,
they Caerem. lib. 1. it. 7.
say, Peccatum frangit, vt Christi sanguis, and angit. When they consecrate a
cross, they pray, That as the world was delivered from the guilt of sin by
the cross of Christ, so those that offer to the new made cross, by the merit
of the same may be acquitted from all sin. They offer Latrian to the images of
God the father, of the son, and the holy ghost; nay to crosses of metal, or
stone, or other matter. Finally they call the virgin Mary the Queen of heaven.

35. The true church never used the mediation of other, then of the Lord Christ
Jesus redeemer of mankind. The 1. Tim. 2.
apostle teaches us, That there is but one mediator betwixt God and man, the
man Christ Jesus. And him he Heb. 9. and 12.
calls The mediator of the new testament. Saint Lib. 2. contr. Parm. c. 8.
Augustine says, that Christ is the true and only mediator. Hic vnus verusque
mediator est. Neither did the primitive church believe, that any other mediator
was necessary. To obtain Gods favor, says saint In Romans 1.
Ambrose, we need no spokesman, but a devout mind. De paenit. homil. 4.
Homines, says Chrysostom, vtuntur atriensibus: in deo nihil est tale. Sine
mediatore exorabilis est. Again he De profectu euangelij.
says. Nihil tibi patronis opus est apud deum. Neque enim tam facile deus
audit, si alij pro nobis orent, quam si ipsi oremus, etsi pleni simus omnibus
malis. But the papists beside Christ Jesus, have infinite mediators. First
they call the blessed virgin the mediatrix betwixt God and man: and, Histor. p.
3. tit. 23. c. 3.
Antoninus says, that on a time Christ sitting at the right hand of his father
rose up in fury, purposing to destroy all sinners from the earth; but that he
was entreated by his mother to stay, until such time, as she had sent forth
Dominike and Francis to preach in the world. Secondly they beseech all angels
to pray for them. Thirdly they fly to all saints. Nay sometimes they fly to
their images and relics. Neither can the distinction of mediators of
intercession help them. For the true church in her liturgyes never used to
call upon any mediator, or intercessor beside Christ Jesus. Beside that the
Romish church craving of saints all things necessary, and attributing to
saints the merit of remission of sins, do make them more, then mediators of
intercession.

36. In the church of Christ we never heard, nor read, that christians did use
to scourge themselves before crucifixes, and other images. But the priests of
Baal were wont to lance themselves before their idols. And the priests of
Cybele in honor of their goddess were wont to cut themselves. So likewise
the papists do scourge themselves, and punish their bodies, and are thereby
declared to more be like to Pagans and heathen, then to the people of God.

37. The true church is a society of faithful people under lawful pastors.
For Ephesians. 4.
Christ Jesus has given them for The work of the ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ, until we all meet together in the unity
of faith, and acknowledging of the son of God, unto a perfect man. Lib. 4.
epist. 9.
Cyprian says, That the church is a people united to their bishop, and a
flock adhering to their pastor. Est ecclesia, says he, plebs episcopo
adunata, and pastori suo grex adhaerens. So likewise says In Dial. aduers.
Lucifer.
Hierome, Ecclesia non est, quae non habet sacerdotes. That is, there is not
the church, where there are no priests or bishops. But the church of Rome has
long wanted true priests and bishops. For the Romish bishops have no
authority nor mission, but from the pope, to whom they also C. ego N. de
ureiurando.
swear fealty. But he has no authority to send them, or ordeine them being
himself no bishop. Secondly the Romish bishops neither teach, nor feed, nor
do the work of a bishop. Neither do the priests of that synagogue observe
their commission in teaching that, which Christ has commanded. Thirdly in
ordination of bishops and priests they neither keep the apostles rules 1.
Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. nor the ancient canons; but ordeine boys, and men
unlearned and infamous, and unable to teach, and neither duly examine them, nor
orderly choose them, nor canonically ordain them. Fourthly they do not ordain
priests to teach and govern their flocks, but Machab. in lib. de missis
episcopor. pro ordinib. confe. rendis.
To offer sacrifices and to say masses for quick and dead. Which form neither
did either Christ, or his apostles prescribe, or the ancient church ever
practice or know. Fifthly they are ordained simoniacally, and by excommunicate
persons, and by apostataes from Christ's true faith. Lastly they are all C. ego
N. de iureiurando.
sworn to antichrist, and therefore no ministers of Christ Jesus, nor true
pastors. That the pope has no authority to send forth pastors to feed
Christ's flock, it is appa^ent, for that he is a hireling, or rather a
woolfe, and no successor of Peter, or of the apostles, varying so much from
their doctrine and living; nor true bishop doing not the function of a bishop,
nor teaching of Christ's flock. That he is antichrist, and of the temple of
God has made a den of idolatry and theeuery, is proved in the former
discourse. Most apparent therefore it is, that the bishops of the Romish
synagogue are no true bishops, nor pastors. Which is also proved by their
manners, and doctrine. For they murder Christ's lambs, and feed them not: if
they teach at all, or if their priests and friars teach, it is not Christ
faith, but heresy, which they teach.

38 The true church of Christ cannot adhere to antichrist. Our savior Christ
speaking of his sheep Joan. 10.
says, they will not follow a stranger, but will fly from him. But the church
of Rome does manifestly adhere to antichrist, yt exalts himself above all
that is called God, and that sits in men's consciences, that persecuteth all
true Christians, and yet pretends, that he is Christ's vicar. That the Papists
adhere to the pope, they will not deny: for they C. Vnam. ext. de ma. and obed.
make it a matter necessary to salvation, to be subject to him. That the pope
is antichrist; his pride, his cruelty, his doctrine, the time of his rising,
the place of his kingdom, and many arguments declare, which we have touched in
the former discourse.

39 As the true Church is figured by Jerusalem, which was the holy city of
God; so the malignant church is signified partly by Babylon, Apocal. 18. and
partly by the purple whore, Apocal. 17. that had a cup of gold in her hand full
of abomination and filthiness. If then the state of Rome under the popes be
represented by this purple harlot, then must it necessarily follow, that the
Church of Rome is not the city of God, but rather the city of Babylon, and
synagogue of Satan adhering to antichrist. But that the state of new Rome, as
it is subject to the pope, and is the fountain and metropolitan church of all
idolatry, and heresy, is meant by the purple whore, and by Babylon, Apocal.
17. and 18. diverse arguments do teach us. First, the order of Saint John's
history does show it. For after that in the 12. chapter, and in the beginning
of the thirteenth he had described the state of old Rome under the emperors,
and the decay of that empire; it is not likely that he should return again to
describe the flourishing state of the empire in the seventeenth chapter, and so
to relate the same things confusedly. Secondly he represents unto us the
rising of antichrist out of the earth, and upon the decay of the Roman empire,
in the end of the thirteenth chapter: and therefore whatsoever follows may
seem better to belong to antichrists kingdom, and new Rome, than old Rome.
Thirdly, after the destruction of the purple whore and of Babylon, the Apostle
describes the end of the world, and last judgment, as if the one were to
follow the other. But the end of the world does not follow presently upon the
destruction of the empire, but rather after the overthrow of Antichrists
kingdom. Fourthly, the beast which John saw, and upon which the purple whore
did sit was not then, as she should be. Non adhuc erat, a says Saint John, and
ex abysso ascensura erat. Apoc. 17.
But the empire then did most flourish. And therefore that beast must signify
another empire, which in Rome was to be erected after the Roman empires decay.
Fifthly, those ten kings which were signified by ten horns, did not arise
during the time of the old empire, but upon the rising of antichrist; neidid
they give their power to the Roman empire, but to the pope; and therefore this
must needs be a figure of the papacy, and not of the old empire. Sixthly, the
kings of the earth committed fornication with the purple whore, and received
abominable doctrine from her. But they did not love nor honor the Roman
empire, nor received any idolatrous worship from Rome. But from the pope they
have, and with this purple whore they have committed fornication. Seventhly,
the kings of the earth lamented not the destruction of the Roman empire, but
rather rejoiced at it, dividing the same among themselves. But diverse help the
pope, and are sorry to see his goodly kingdom ruinated. Eighthly, this whore is
called the mother of fornication or idolatry, which shows, that this
belongs to popish idolatry, rather then unto the emperors civil
government. Ninthly, after the empire began to decay, religion began to
flourish in Rome, and therefore this description cannot belong to old Rome, but
to new Rome. Which indeed is now become the habitation of devils, and unclean
spirits. Tenthly, this Rome, which is here described, shall persecute the
saints to the end of the world. Eleuenthly, the description of this woman, and
of Babylon, does best fit the state of Rome under the pope. For he rules by
fraud, perjury, cunning, and his religion is full of mysteries: he persecuteth
the saints of God, and to him the kings of ye earth give their power, being
ready to execute his excommunications, and commandments. And after his
destruction it is not likely that Rome shall be restored and reedified, which
cannot be said of the Roman empire. Lastly, In Apocalypse.
Arethas and Ambrosius Ansbertus affirm, that new Rome may be understood by
this Babylon: and the bishop of Auentin. lib. 7.
Salisburg, Cant. 106. and epist. 19. sine nomine.
Petrarch, and Michael Cesenas. P^trus Blesensis. Joan Huss.
diverse learned men doubt not in plain terms so to call her.

40 The church of Christ did never wo^ship Peter, or any of the apostles, nor
did Cant. 106. and epist. 19. sine nomine.
Peter suffer himself to be worshipped of Cornelius. Michael Cesenas. Petrus
Blesensis. Joan Huss.
Nay the Church did not fall down and worship angels. The same did not kiss
any bishops slipper, nor bear him high upon men's shoulders. Nay Valentinian
and Theodosius forbad any cross to be Apocal. 19.
graue^ or painted on the ground. Act. 10.
But the Romish Church does fall down upon the ground, and worship the pope.
Cod. Nemini licere signum. etc.
The bishop of Modrusa in the council of Lateran cried out to Leo the tenth, Te
beatissime Leo saluatorem expectauimus. They say to the pope, Have mercy upon
us. They kiss his feet, and he has a cross upon his slipper. They bear him
on men's shoulders, and worship him as an earthly god.

41 The true Church did always reverently think of the mysteries of Christian
religion. But the Romish Church, albeit they believe that the consecrate Host
is God, and worship saints and crosses, yet use them often times but homely. For
they believe that dogs and other brute beasts may eat their corpus Domini. The
pope when he goes abroad, does send his corpus Domini before, accompanied with
the baggage, and Monluc. de la religion, a la roine mere.
basest servants of his house. The conspirators suborned by Sixtus quartus to
kill Laurence and Julian de Medicis, were commanded to do it in the church, and
at the elevation of the sacrament. Dato signo, cum eucharistia tolleretur,
says Lib. geograph. 5.
Volaterran. In vita Hi^debrand. seu Gregorij 7.
Gregory the seventh cast the corpus Domini into the fire. Hildebrandus, says
Beno the cardinal, sacramentum corporis Domini responsa diuina contra
imperatorem quaerens iniecit igni. Oftentimes they cast their images into the
water, to stop the fl^wings of water. Girol. Catena in vita Pij 5.
Pius quintus cast one Agnus Dei into the water of Tiber, and another into the
fire. Cresciuto il Teuere Pio vi gitto vn' Agnus Dei, and il fuoco appreso in
vna casa piena di fieno, vi si gitto vn' altero. And this is the honor, that
they bear to their religion.

42 The true church did always reverence magistrates* The Romans 13.
Apostle Paul commands every soul to be subject to higher powers. S. 1. Pet.
2.
Peter exhorts Christians to submit themselves to kings, and governors. The
ancient 1. Tim. 2.
Church did pray to God for kings, and for all in authority: and punished such
as should use reproachful words to emperors or magistrates. In the C. 83.
Canons of the apostles it is thus decreed, Quisquis imperatorem, aut
magistratum contumelia affecerit, supplicium luito. Neither, if we search all
antiquity, shall we find, where the Church of Christ did discharge subjects
from their oaths to princes, or taught rebellion, or murder of princes or
signified, that it was lawful either to murder princes excommunicate, or to
rebel against them. But the church of Rome has taken upon her to dispense
with oaths of allegiance, and to discharge subjects from their due obedience.
The same also has published most slanderous and railing bulls, or rather
libels against princes, as appears by the bull of Paul the third against
Henry the 8. and Pius the fifth, and Sixtus quintus against Queen Elizabeth,
Sixtus quintus against the French king now reigning, then king of Navarre, and
against Henry the third, and of Gregory the seventh, and of Alexander the
third, and Gregory the ninth against ancient emperors. They have also
commanded subjects to rebel against their princes, and taught that it is
meritorious to murder them, or depose the^: matters quite contrary to
Christian religion, and the custom of Christ's Church.

43 The marks of the Church brought by Lib. de notis ecclesiae.
Bellarmine, do also plainly show, that the Romanists are not the true Church.
For neither are they catholics, nor are they so called of others then
themselves, unless it be of such as scorn their presumption, that take on
them that name. Nor is their doctrine ancient, as we have by many particulars
proved. Nor has it always continued in one and the same state. For they have
in their late conuenticles of Constance, Florence, and Trent, altered the whole
frame and form of their faith. And Epist. 2. ad Bohem.
Nicholas of Cusa says, that scriptures are to be fitted to the time, and to
be diversely understood: and, that God does alter his judgment, according to
the judgment of the church. Fourthly, their doctrine was never universally
received, as shall appear when our adversary shall dare to answer us in these
encounters. Fifthly, they have no succession of bishops certain. For neither
are the Popes bishops, nor do they succeed the apostles, nor have they any
certainty in their succession. Sixthly, the doctrine of that church has been
proved to be dissonant and contrary in diverse maine points to the doctrine of
the apostles. Seventhly, they do neither retain union with Christ Jesus, nor
with the ancient Church, nor among themselves. Eighthly, their decretaline
doctrine is neither sound, nor holy, nor has any efficacy in it, nor has
other fountain, then the popes fancy. Ninthly, their legendary miracles and
prophecies, whereupon a great part of the credit of the Romish faith depends,
are nothing but lies and forgerie, and those ofttimes very ridiculous. Tenthly
their strange novelties and heresies have been by many both old and late
writers reproved and condemned. Lastly, as the authors of it have lived
unhappily, and died miserably for the most part; so those that have gone about
to restore true religion, and to root out Romish idolatry and heresy, have
for this only cause felt Gods great favor toward them both in their lives,
and ends.

44 The Church of Rome is also convicted not to be the true Church by the
confession of Relect. doct. princip. cont. 1. q. 5.
Stapleton. For if the true Church began at Jerusalem, and is universally
dispersed, and has continued in all ages, and has a true succession of
bishops from the apostles, and disagreeth not about matters of faith, nor
dissenteth from the head of the church, and which has planted christian
religion and preserved the same throughout the world, and has kept the
apostolic form of government, and prevailed against all heresies and
temptations, keeping the rule of faith sound and entire, and which also shows
the true way of salvation, and keeps the scriptures sound and pure from
corruption, and finally which holds the decrees of all general councels, as
blundering Stapleton not only confesses, but after his most odious and tedious
fashion with multitude of words goes about to prove: then is not the church of
Rome, yt now is, the true church of christ Jesus. For to say, that the church
of Rome began at Jerusalem, is as absurd, as to say, that Rome is Jerusalem,
or to affirm that Rome now is like to old Rome. Our adversary should do us
great favor to show that the glory and fullness of power that the pope
challenges, together with his cardinals, dumb bishops, mass priests, idle
monks, lying friars and all the popes decretals and ceremonies are come from
Jerusalem. He may do also well to prove, that the latter scholasticall and
decretaline doctrine was universally received throughout the world either in
the apostles times, or in the times of the ancient Fathers of the Church. The
rock of succession, upon which they build so huge conclusions, we have showed
to be nothing, but a bank of sand. We have showed also, that their doctrine is
not only diverse, but contrary to the doctrine of Christ the head of the
Church, and of his apostles. And how great contentions have been in the Romish
church, not only the schisms, and wars betwixt popes and princes, but also
the differences about all points of religion, which is apparent both in the
disputes of schoolmen, and also in the writings of Bellarmine, and his
consorts, do declare. That the Romanists have corrupted the faith, not only
with novelties, but also with diverse heresies, and have changed both the
ancient form of apostolic government, and also the principles and grounds of
faith established both by Fathers and councels, and by the apostles themselves,
and have yielded to heresies, and been overcome of the gates of hell, I
think, no man can doubt, that reads this discourse, and compares the late
proceedings of the Romish church, to the rule delivered unto us by Christ Jesus.

45 Finally, the testimony of In his motives.
Bristow does utterly overthrow the Church of Rome, and declares it not to be
the true church. For he commends that for the true church, that is catholic
and apostolic, and which abhors all novelties and heresies, and idolatry,
and whose doctrine is confirmed by scriptures, most certain traditions,
councels, fathers, and practice of the ancient church, and which teaches the
narrow way and makes subjects obedient, and has infallible judges, and is
sure to continue. But the Romish church is neither catholic nor apostolic,
neither does it abhor either heresy or idolatry, nor shun profane
novelties. The doctrine of that church has neither ground of scripture,
ancient councels, nor fathers; neither can the Romish doctors bring any
certain proof of their traditions. It teaches a broad way, and makes
rebellious subjects. In judgment it has no other certainty, then the popes
determination. Finally, already that tower of Babel, which is built so high,
does begin to totter, and as we trust, cannot long stand. Further he says,
that every church that is risen after the first planting of religion, and gone
out of the catholic church, and from the apostolic doctrine, and is not the
communion of saints, nor ever visible; and lastly, that is not the teacher of
all divine truth, and the undoubted mother of Christ's children, is not the true
church of Christ. But the Church of Rome, as it is now visible in the pope and
cardinals, and officers of the popes chamber, in popish prelates, sacrificing
priests, monks, friars and nuns, and their officers and adherents rose out
of the earth long after the apostles times, and went out of the catholic and
apostolic church, and has for the popes quarrel opposed it self against
Christ and his true doctrine. The same is also departed from the ancient faith,
and is no more to be termed Christ's Church, which is a communion of saints,
linked together in the profession of Christ's true faith, but rather the
combination of antichrist, and the synagogue of Satan. Such a church as is now
to be seen at Rome, and in the provinces adhering to it, was not visible many
ages after Christ, neither was any such church for a long time extant in the
world: neither when the same began to show her self in great ruff, did she
either teach all truth, or refuse all heresy and false doctrine, or bear or
bring forth children to Christ, but to antichrist. And therefore we may safely
conclude, that the Romish church of these times is the synagogue of Satan, and
not the true church of Christ Jesus. The nature and property of the true and
unspotted spouse of Christ, the inseparable qualities of true faith, and such
as truly profess the same, and finally the confession and doctrine of the
adversaries themselves, when they speak of the true church, and true faith,
and true professors, and matters incident unto them in general, do declare it
to be so.

CHAP. V.
That no papists have been executed in England since her Majesty's coming to
the crown for mere matter of religion, but for their treasons, or other
capital offenses.

HItherto we have spoken in the defense of our religion; and Christian
profession. It rests therefore now, seeing our adversary does not only
calumniate our religion, but our laws also, and government, that we speak
somewhat in defense of justice; especially so far forth, as it concerns the
popish faction, that pretends thereby to be greatly wronged. Our In his first
encounter.
adversary says, That many honorable and worshipful gentlemen have endured
continual, and intolerable affliction for perseuering in their fathers faith:
and that above a 100. priests have bin tortured, hanged, and quartered for the
same cause. These men he cleereth In the conclusion of his encounters.
from treason, and celebrateth their martyrdom. Likewise Cardinal Ad
persequutores Anglos.
Allen in his treatise against the execution done upon popish priests and their
consorts, does greatly complain of Persecution, injustice, tyranny, and
extreme cruelty, and bears the world in hand, That they were very
innocents, and without just cause died for matters of their conscience only,
and not (as the sentence of their condemnation ran) for their treasons and
wicked practices against the state: and finally That they are to be esteemed as
holy martyrs, and not as leude traitors. And because few of late time have
opposed themselves against these fellows exclamations, and accusations; not
only diverse abroad have had a heard conceit of our doings, but also some
even among us have doubted of the matter, and of late time either stayed or
moderated the execution of laws against them. I have therefore thought it a
very necessary point, to resolve you, that the popes agents and adherents, that
have within this realm been executed about his quarrels, have died for
treason and not religion, and are to be esteemed as traitors, and not as
martyrs, and that the rest of their consorts are to praise God for her
Majesty's great clemency and moderation, that suffers them to enjoy their
ease and pleasures, whom neither religion, nor laws nor rules of state, nor
reason will suffer to live among us, believing, speaking, and practicing as
they do.

First the law of God is very direct against false prophets and teachers, that
shall go about to draw us to serve other gods. Propheta ille, says Deuteronomy. 13.
Moses, aut fictor somniorum interficietur. Afterward he says, That if our
brother or son, or friend, yea or wife, that lies in our bosom, shall go
about to induce us to idolatry, our eye must not spare them, nor have mercy
on them to hide them. Neque parcat ei oculus tuus, vt miserearis, and occultes
eum, sed statim interficies. Neither is it to be doubted, but that popish
priests are within the compass of false prophets and teachers, that would
draw us to worship the idol of the mass, angels and saints departed, the
images of the Trinity, and cross, and stocks and stones, and ashes and bones,
we know not of whom: nay to worship our own fancies and opinions, which is a
gross point of idolatry.

The Apocal. 2.
Bishop of Pergamus is sharply reproved, for that he suffered certain false
teachers, that spread and held the doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans. The
prophet Helias caused Baals priests to be slain. The Tit. 2.
apostle commands us, To reject and avoid heretics. And saint John John 2.
forbids us, either to receive them into our houses, or to salute them. You,
that are the children of light, says Epist. ad Philadelph.
Ignatius, fly the division of unity, and the evil doctrine of heretics.
Homil. 2. in genes.
Chrysostom exhorts Christians To fly from an heretic, as from a mad
man. The emperors Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius Cod. de haeret. and
Manich. l. omnes haereses.
decreed, That all heresies forbidden either by Gods laws, or imperial
constitutions should for ever be silenced. Omnes vetitae legibus diuinis, and
imperialibus constitutionibus haereses, say they, perpetuo quiescant. They
forbid also heretical prelates to teach, or to ordeine inferior ministers. The
emperors Ibidem l. cuncti haeretici.
Arcadius and Honorius took from heretics all places of meeting, and forbad
the exercise of their religion under a grievous penalty. They also confiscated
all their goods, and deprived them of ability to buy or sell, or to make a
testament or last will. Finally Ariani.
Theodosius and Valentinian adjudged certain heretics worthy of death. To
conclude this point, saint Augustine, albeit sometime he taught, that heretics
were not to be forced with penalties and punishments to embrace religion, yet
retracted his opinion; and highly commended these imperial laws against
heretics. In hoc says Epist. 48.
he, seruiunt reges Christo ferendo leges pro Christo. And again, Quis me^tis
sobrius regibus dicat, nolite curare in regno vestro, a quo defendatur, aut
oppugnetur ecclesia domini vestri: Non ad vos pertineat in regno vestro, quis
velit esse religiosus, quis sacrilegus. Neither need we use many words in
this case, seeing our adversaries not only yield, but also contend, that all
extremity is to be used against false prophets, and false heretics: and their
practice is, not only to confiscate their goods, and to banish such, but also
to kill them, and torture them with all rigor. But no man can doubt, whether
papists be heretics and their teachers false prophets and seducers, but such
as either are not resolved in religion, or are utter enemies of true religion.

First then we are to understand, that religion cannot be maintained, unless
heresies be suppressed. Secondly religion does require at the hands of
magistrates, that they defend themselves, their state and people against all
reb^ls, and traitors, and practisers against the state. For the magistrate Romans
13.
Carries not the sword in vain: and is gods minister for our good; and a
revenger of wickedness. The principal end and scope of princes is, to protect
their subjects against all violence and seditious practices. 1. Tim. 2.
Obsecro says the apostle, primum omnium fieri obsecrationes, orationes,
postulationes, gratiarum actiones pro omnibus hominibus, pro regibus, and
omnibus qui in sublimitate sunt, vt quietam and tranquillam vitam agamus in
omni pietate and castitate. Isai. 49.
Kings they are foster fathers and Queens foster mothers of the church, and
therefore may not such suffer the church either by force, or practice of
Iebusites and Cananites to be oppressed. How do Kings better serve the Lord
says Saint Epist. 50.
Augustine, then by forbidding things contrary to Gods commandments, and
punishing severely such as offend? Quomodo reges domino seruimus in timore,
nisi ea quae contra iussa Domini fiunt religiosa seueritate prohibendo, atque
plectendo? And the Romans 13.
apostle signifies, That we pay tribute, for that they are gods ministers, and
do him in this point service. And subjects as the Tit. 3.
apostle teaches, are to Yield obedience to princes, viz. that all may
concur to this end, that the state may be preserved in tranquillity. If
then our Iebusites, and priests, and their consorts the recusants and
Cananites do practice against the prince and state, and the tranquillity of
the country; Christian religion does not only allow, but also inioine princes
and magistrates to punish them, and root them out. And that even the law of
nature does teach every man, planting in every creature an instinct leading to
his own preservation; and allowing such things, as are done for defense of our
lives; and such means, as serve to that end.

Secondly the laws of all nations do punish such as either consort themselves
with foreign enemies, or practice or imagine the death of the prince, or seek
the destruction of the state. By the laws of 25. Edward. 3.2.
Edward the third, long since framed, and always executed in this kingdom, it
is adjudged high treason, To compass or imagine the death of the kings or
Queens of this realm, or to levy war against them, or to be adherent to
their enemies: by which it is evident, that those are to be reputed traitors,
that commit any one of these four points of treason viz. either That compass,
or That imagine the Princes destruction, or that Levy war against him, or
that Adhere to his enemies. Which I would pray the Romish faction to observe,
for that which shall be said and proved against them hereafter. Within the
compass of these points also do they fall, that shall either deny the prince
to be lawfully possessed of his crown, or else make him subject to others,
being a sovereign prince. For it cannot be imagined, but that every prince
will defend his right; and that he cannot be deprived thereof, without loss
of his life, or force of arms. L. 16. qui opem. ff. de furto. and ibidd.
Neither is it material, whether in cases of this nature, and practice of
treason a man be principal or accessarie or adherent. For our laws punish
all alike as principals, and deem al adherents in treason to be traitors.
Which is also allowed both by the laws of the r Romans, and the 11. q. 3. c.
qui consentit. and extra de homicidio. c. sicut dignum.
Canons of the Romish synagogue.

Ad L. Iuliam may. l. 1.
Neither may we think, that these laws are proper and peculiar to our nation.
t The laws of the Romans do hold him culpable of high treason, That shall
attempt against the state, or against him that has souereign authority; or
that shall raise sedition, or stir up enemies against the state: or that shall
give counsel, or send letters, or messengers to public enemies. Likewise do
they judge of Ibid. l. quiue.
him, That shall run to the enemy; or Ibid. l. cuiusque.
Shall take an oath against the state; or assist public enemies with any
means: or make enemies of friends; or enter into any faction against the
state: or receive or give an oath or note of faction. The words of this last L.
Quisquis. Cod. ad leg. Iuliau^ maiestatis.
law are; Qui scelestam in^erit factionem, aut factionis ipsius susceperit
sacramentum, vel dederit. In ancient times those that fled to enemies, being
taken again, L. is qui. ff. de re milit.
Were thrown to wild beasts to be torn in pieces. Those, that revealed the
secrets of the state, were likewise executed, as traitors. Transfugae ad hosts
says the L. si quis.. transfugae. ff. de poenis.
law, Aut secretorum nostrorum renuntiatores, aut viui exurantur, aut furca
suspendantur. Qui malo consilio says L. postliminium.. transfugae. ff. de cap.
and postlimi.
Paulus the lawyer, and proditoris animo patriam dereliquit, hostium numero
habendus est. Where note I pray you, that he accounts them not only bad
subjects, but also public enemies. The later Roman emperors do declare
them, Extr. feud. qui sunt rebels.
To be rebels and disloyal traitors, which either openly or covertly do the
works of rebels, or practice against the prosperity of the state. And that is
the common opinion of all lawyers. They commit treason as says Lib. 3. consil.
105.
Socinus the younger, and Consil. 456.
Alciat, Qui faciunt tractatum contra personam domini: or, Qui tractatum
faciunt contra statum principis, vel reip. as says Bald. consil. 58. and seq.
lib. 1. and Alexand. consil. 13. lib. 6. and Jason consil 86. lib. 3. Or, Qui
cum hostibus principis pacem and amicitiam contraxerunt, as says De cius
consil. 604. and 605. Or, Qui reuelarunt secreta principis, as is determined by
Mars. cons. 1. All which points I must likewise pray our factious papists, and
popish proctors to remember. And how it is a vain matter to pretend their
cacolike religion, if they have made any pack against the prince or state, or
had intelligence of any such matter, or have plotted with the pope or Spaniard
for to make wars against the prince or state, or have had any deseigne to
alienate the subjects minds from the prince, or to stir rebellion; or else
have given counsel or assistance in any such plot, or confederated or adjoined
themselves to such practisers, or adhered to them, or relieved them, or have
themselves fled and contracted friendship, or received pension or mainteinance
from foreign enemies, or bound themselves by oath or signal to the^, or
impugned the princes title, or right, or refused to assist her right, or have
made any compact, pack, conspiracy, or tractation to any such purpose, or have
attempted any action tending that way.

The Spanish laws likewise are very severe against such, as attempt against
the king or state; or consent thereunto by deed, word, or counsel; or make
any insurrection against the king or state, and that either within Spain, or
without; or that shall join themselves with the kings enemies, or aid the^ in
any sort. All such king Alfonsus the 9. adjudged traitors, and unworthy to
live, or see the country, against which they practice. Que ninguno no sea
osado says El fuero real. tit. de la guarda del rey.
he, por fecho, ni por dicho, ni por consejo de yr contra el rey, ni contra
susen^orio, ni hazer allevamiento, ni bollicio contra el, ni contra su reyno,
en su tierra, ni fuera su tierra: ni de pararse contra sus enemigos ni dar les
armas, ni otra ayuda ninguna por ninguna manera. e qualquier persona, que estas
cosas, o alguna dellas fiziere, o ensayare de las fazer muera por ello, e no
sea dexado bivir. The Spanish Ibidem. tit. 2. and 4.
laws also inflict great penalties upon such, as shall either speak evil of
the prince, or refuse to assist him, or to obey his commandments. If then they
take exceptions against our laws, yet may not the popes adherents refuse to be
judged by the laws of them, to whom they seem to run for succor.

Neither does the pope, whose slaves those are, of whom we speak, wink at any
plot tending to sedition, or hurt to his state or person, whatsoever religion
or pretense they make, that are found to deal against him: as Julius Clarus
lib. senten. 5.. Laesae may.
appears both by his laws, and practice. Innocent the seventh having but
newly usurped the temporal dominion in the city of Rome, caused diverse Romans,
that sought to defend their liberty, without all order of law to be stabbed,
and thrown out of a high window to the ground. Vndecim ciues, says In
Innocentio. 7.
Platina, reipub. suae labenti in negligentia pontificis consulturi, statim
necantur, e fenestrisque deijciuntur: quod diceret eo modo tolli seditiones and
schisma; non alio quidem posse. Theod. a Niem. lib. 2. de schismat. c. 36.
Urban the sixth upon pretense of co^spiracie against himself put diverse of his
cardinals to death: and used great cruelty against all, that were but a little
suspected of any course taken against him. Neither did his adversary Clement
take a milder course against those, that wauered, or stood evil affected to
him: although both Vrbane and he had their title called in question. John the
22. caused the bishop of Cahors to be skinned alive, and to be slain with
great torments. Omnibus cruciatibus, says In Joan. 23.
Platina, coegit vitam cum morte commutare, quod in pontificem coniurasset.
Clement the fifth upon pretense of a conspiracy, dissolved the whole order of
Templars, and caused diverse of them to be put to death. Platina in Paulo 2.
Paul the second upon suspicion of some practice against him apprehended diverse
principal men of his court, and put them to exquisite torments. Iouius in vita
Leon. 10.
Leo the tenth c spared not Cardinal Petrucci, but put him to death for
speaking words tending to the alteration of state in Siena, albeit the same was
only recommended to the pope, and none of his proper dominions. Alexander the
sixth used most cruelly to put men to death for every word spoken against him,
as In vita Alexandri 6.
Onuphrius testifies. And of late time the whole order of friars called
Humiliati, upon pretense of some pack against the Romish state, or rather
against cardinal Borrhomey was overthrown and dissolved, and diverse of them
executed. No reason therefore have the papists to except against the actions of
their holy father, or such as have care of their states, as well as he has of
his usurpations.

In France also they use the same laws and proceedings against traitors, as
their customarie laws, and the arrests and judgments of their courts of
parliament do declare. Lib. de la rep. 2. c. 5.
Bodin shows that a certain Gentleman was executed for a certain intention
against the king, albeit he repented himself for it, and never told it to any
but his confessor. Peter Barriere was likewise condemned of treason, and
executed at Melun for that he intended to murder Henry the fourth of France,
albeit Varade a Jesuit, and others persuaded him it was an act meritorious.
Neither did the French king doubt to proceed against any of the league or
combination made against him by the pope. Ghineard was executed for impugning
the title of kings excommunicate, and all the order of Iebusites expulsed by
the kings edict for allowing and teaching that seditious doctrine.

I need not to bring any more testimonies in a cause so clear, seeing (I
think) the adversaries will not deny, but that the laws of all nations do
provide for the indemnitie of the magistrates and state against rebels and
traitors. If then the popish faction prove a pack of traitors, they must needs
confess, that they are condemned traitors by public laws and acts of all
nations. In this country also there are laws specially made against fugitives
over sea, against such as bring in medals, Agnus Deies, grains, or other notes
of faction, against such as draw men from obedience to the prince to obey the
pope, and such like: which are nothing but special declarations against such,
as adhere to foreign enemies, or practice against the prince or state. Whereby
it appears, that all laws condemn practisers against the prince or state.

Thirdly it is directly contrary to rules of state to suffer such as are linked
with foreign enemies, and secretly combined against the prince or state, or
that condemn the princes right, or intertaine intelligence against the prince
or commonwelth. The safety of the people and state is principally recommended
to the magistrates and officers of state. Salus populi says De legib. l. 3.
Tully, speaking of the chief commanders of a city, illis suprema lex. And
that ought to be every private man's principal desire and endeavor. (...).
says Polit. lib. 3. c. 3.
Aristotle. Neither can any state stand, where either men well affected are
disgraced, or seditious and malcontent humors escape unpunished, and
uncontrolled. Reward and punishment, as a wise politic says, are the two
bonds, that keep the parts of the commonwealth firmly together. And as good
it were to have no laws against secret traitors and practisers, as not to see
them executed. For law is a restraint of offenses either voluntarily, or
ignorantly committed. Lex etc. est dilectorum, quae sponte vel ignorantia
contrahuntur, coercitio, as says L. lex ff. de legibus.
Papinian. Take away punishment and execution, and you frustrate the law: and
take away law, and you dissolve the sinews of a commonwealth. Ibidem l. legis
virtus.
Legis virtus haec est, says Modestinus, imperare, vetare, permittere, punire.
Neither have any more interest in the execution of the laws, then such as have
chief command, and reap greatest benefit by the state. If then we respect
the saftetie of the state, or of her Majesty, or our superiors, or our selves;
or esteem the honors, lands, and commodities, which we enjoy; or regard our
wives and children, and dearest friends, which all laws of state do recommend
unto us, according to our several places; then may we not suffer those to rest
or roust among us, that threaten the destruction of us all, and are still
working to undermine the foundation of our state and safety. And if the popes
agents and their consorts be such, and so many, as is reported, every where
dispersed in this land; then are they not to be longer harbored, nor suffered
among us.

Finally natural reason may stir us up, to look narrowly into the
proceedings of these fellows. We may not suffer such as lie digging at the
foundation of the state, and plainly oppose themselves against it. Neither
has the prince any reason to protect them as subjects, that will not
acknowledge her to be their lawful Queen; nor to suffer them to live, that
attempt against her life; nor to grant safety and security to those, that
seek the destruction of her people, and the advancement of strangers; nor to
defend them by law, that oppugn her laws, and would bring in Spanish and
Italian laws.

Her Majesty's chief officers and the nobility have no reason to bear with
them, that seek by alteration of state to deprive them of their honors, and to
dispose of their lands, and substance at their pleasure. Nor to suffer
themselves to be disgraced and commanded by strangers, that were wont to
command others.

All those that love true religion have no reason to suffer such to live
without controlment, that would overthrow religion, and erect a false worship,
and gross idolatry; and that also by all fraud and violence. All true English
men are to oppose themselves against such, as seek to bring in strangers, to
set a fire in the midst of their country, to destroy their wives, children,
friends, countrymen and most dear country.

The reverend Judges and learned lawyers have no reason to bear with such, as
seek the subversion of laws and justice, putting arms in the hands of
strangers, and malcontents, to rule all by violence, and according to the popes
and Spaniardes pleasure.

Nay the papists, that have any thing, albeit they desire an alteration of
religion, yet have no reason to work their feats by violence. They may see by
Ireland, that wars bring with them most lamentable calamities to both
parties, and that many that thought to win by the false shuffling of cards,
have lost both the wager, and their living, and lives also.

Finally treason is a most execrable and odious thing, and therefore for this
most grievous offense the law has ordained extraordinary punishments. In hoc
atrocistimo delicto says Sentent. lib. 5.. laesae may.
Julius Clarus, lex non nulla specialia introduxit. And all true patriotes
ought to have the same in exceeding detestation. No enemy is more dangerous,
then a traitor. Omnium communis est hostis, says Lib. 1. accusat. in Verrem.
Tully, qui hostis est suorum. To hate traitors says In Prometheo in fine.
Aeschylus, I have learned, neither is any villainy more hateful to me then
treason.

(...),
(...).
So much more dangerous, says Rerum Gracar. lib. 2.
Xenophon, is treason, by how much it is more difficult to take heed of
traitors, then enemies. With our enemies we may be reconciled, but traitors are
never to be trusted. Nay, by laws and all lawful means they are to be
discovered, punished and avoided, seeing they seek to bring this land into
subjection of the pope and Spaniard, to overthrow the laws, to destroy her
Majesty, and her people, and to make this land a spectacle to all the world of
extreme miseries.

Neither do I think that the papists will deny this to be true, or that
Parsons the common proctour for traitors dare avouch the contrary. Nay
cardinal Allen in his Treatise against the justice of England, in executing of
certain priests and their consorts, does dissemble his clients treasons, and
colors their practices, as much as he can. And N.D. sticks not to auow,
that papists are good subjects. And I doubt not but all papists will deny
themselves to be either idolaters or heretics, or enemies to her Majesty, or
their country; or that they have committed treason, or transgressed any
ancient law made against treason. I know also, that they will plead, that they
have not attempted against her Majesty's life or the state, or sought to stir
rebellion, or bring in strangers, or to do any thing, but that which belongs
to a good conscience, either in priestly function, or otherwise. In sum, they
stick not to affirm, that they are apostolical men, and seek only by
teaching and saying of masses to win men's souls, and not to meddel with state
matters.

Let us therefore particularly consider, whether all that has been spoken in
general, may not properly be charged upon the popes agents and adherents, that
either have been executed as traitors, or else wander up and down disguised,
as false teachers. I say it may, and that therefore they are guilty of those
crimes, that I have named, and have diversely transgressed all those laws,
which have been mentioned, and deserve to be reputed as wicked enemies of
religion, and disloyal traitors to their prince and country. That they are
idolaters it is too too apparent. For idolatry is nothing, but false worship,
that attributes that which is due to God, to creatures, as 2. 2. q. 93.
Thomas Aquinas and other schoolmen confess. And it cannot be denied to be
true. For seeing idolatry is contrary to Gods true worship; that worship must
needs be idolatry, that ascribes Gods honor to creatures, contrary to the
first and second commandment. But all papists give the worship of God to
creatures, turning their prayers and spiritual sacrifices to our Lady, to
angels, saints and mortal creatures. They have also masses made not only in
honor of angels, but in honor of Dominicke, Francis, and other pety saints of
late standing. They burn incense, kiss and fall down before saints and
idols. They give that which they call Latriam, and which is confessed of all
hands, to be a kind of worship due to God only, to the cross, and to the
images of Christ, and of the Trinity. Cum Christus, says Part. 3. q. 25. art.
3.
Thomas Aquinas, adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est, quod eius imago
sit adoratione latriae adoranda. Their own conscience also testifies against
them, that they are idolaters, which makes them to suppress the second
commandment against graven images, and in all their Sums of divinity
positive, to say little or nothing against idolatry. It may be proved also by
the propriety of the word Idolum, that is nothing else but parua imago, or a
diminutiue of (...), and also by the word simulachrum. For seeing they worship
images and simulachra, which is forbidden as idolatry, they must needs be
idolaters. And so the Greek Church takes them, which albeit it reteineth
painted images, yet it condemns the worship of graven images, or sculptilia.

Secondly, that popish priests and friars are false prophets, false teachers
and damnable heretics, I have demonstrated by authority of the ancient Church,
that condemned long since diverse of their doctrines for heresies. Supra c. 3.
It is proved also by diverse novelties, which they hold contrary to the form
of words and doctrine delivered by Christ's apostles, of which I have brought
diverse particulars in the second chapter of this Treatise. It appears also by
Bellarmines, and his fellows disputations; wherein they teach diverse points
contrary to scriptures, and not long since heard of in the catholic church,
as is justified by the writings of our teachers against them. the same may also
be verified by their counterfeit traditions and lying legends, of which the
first they make equal to scriptures, the second they believe as delivered by
the Romish church. Yet are their traditions most false, and their legends most
fabulous. If friar Parsons will maintain the contrary, let him prove to us
the ceremonies and parts of the mass to have come from Christ Jesus: that the
legends of Dominike and Francis are true; That Legenda de Catharina di Siena
Italic.
Catharine of Siena had her face transformed like to Christ's face, and that
she was lifted up into the air, and married to Christ: that Saint Francis was
likewise made conformable to Christ, and had his five wounds printed in his
body; and that all those miracles reported in the legendes are true. Likewise
he must prove, that all the shameless writings, which the popes and their
agents have published of late time are true: or else all the world will
condemn them for false teachers, and wicked heretics.

Thirdly their whole course of life, and all their actions have sufficiently
declared them to be a faction opposite both to true religion now professed in
England, and also to her Majesty and the estate. And that they are opposite to
our religion, themselves profess, albeit they deny it true: which
notwithstanding in diverse treatises we have justified, and shall always be
ready to justify the same both in public disputation and writing, as often as
occasion shall serve. The rest we shall now declare. I have heretofore
brought proofs, that the papists opposed themselves to her Majesty both
since, and before her entrance into the kingdom. This moreover you shall
understand of Sanders, or Rishton, or both, men hired to speak villainy of
their prince and country. Saepe conata est Maria, say Sanders de schism. lib. 3.
they, illam (nempe Elizabetham) ab omni successionis sort etc. excludere. And
no doubt whatsoever Queen Mary's meaning was; it is certain the popish
faction had that intention. And when it pleased God to frustrate their purposes
and intentions; yet would they not yield her any hearty obedience. The popish
prelates refused to consecrate her, and hardly could one be got amongst many,
to accomplish that ceremony. but rather they incited the French king Henry the
second to proclaim Marie Queen of Scots Queen. An impudent companion L.
Innocence de la Roine d'escoss.
does (I confess) impudently deny it. But Sanders his own consort does
convince him of lying. Mortua Maria Lib. 3. de schism.
says he, Henricus Galliarum rex, etc. nurum suam Scotorum reginam Henrici
octaui proneptim Parisijs pro concione Angliae and Hiberniae Reginam
declarandam curauit. Neither did this claim cease, until the French by force
being constrained to depart Scotland, in the capitulation betwixt them and us
at Leeth, it was agreed, that the Scottish Queen should no more entitle
herself Queen of England, nor bear the arms of England. That this trouble
was procured by papists, it is no question. They also Ibidem.
determined to excommunicate the Queen, and when that seemed dangerous, they
complained to the pope, and stirred up foreign princes against the Queen and
state: all which be points of high treason, for which if they had been
called in question, law would have adjudged them traitors. That they were not
so clear as is pretended, it appears, for that their conscience accusing
them, some fled beyond the seas, others began to plot a rebellion, which
afterward broke out anno 1569. And to make the side the stronger, Thomas
Harding about the year 1567, was sent with faculties into England, to
reconcile the people to the pope, and to draw them from the prince. Not long
after pope Pius the fifth at the solicitation of diverse of them published his
excommunication against her Majesty, depriving her of her kingdom, assoiling
her subjects from their obedience, and by the means of Nicholas Morton a
factious priest causing the earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, and
diverse other papists to take arms against her. Being overthrown in that
rebellion, and considering, that all was for want of number and force, they
erect one Seminary at Doway ann. 1569. and another at Rome ann. 1579. which by
the year 1584. did Sanders de schism. lib. 3.
send some 300. priests into England. anno 1579. they sent Sanders and diverse
priests into Ireland, where finding the people ready, they presently enflamed
a rebellion, the which though suppressed for a time, yet by the persuasions of
Archer and other Jesuits, and Owen Mac Teag and other seditious priests, has
since flamed very bright, and brought all that country into trouble and
combustion. Anno 1580. Parsons and Campian and their consorts came into England
with large authority to make way for the execution of the popes bull. Of which
company Campian refused directly to acknowledge her Majesty to be his lawful
Queen, and would not disallow the treacherous writings of Sanders and Bristow,
as appears under his own hand writing. The rest applied their business in
working coffeehouse in the common sort, and setting on Somerfield, Parry,
and diverse others to kill the Queen. Ballard a seditious priest was set on to
draw Babington, Tichborne and their consorts to attempt that, which other
could not perform. And that has been the continual labor of Parsons,
Holt, Creswell, Walpoole, Worthington, Gifford and other Iebusites and priests.
Anno 1588. they brought upon their country the Spanish navy. Neither have they
ceased at any time either to attempt against her Majesty's life, or by
rebellion or wars to oppugn the state. But it cannot be denied, but such
attempts by all laws are treason.

And if they say they were neither privy nor consenting unto them, they declare
themselves to be very shameless. For it is notorious to ye world that
Nicholas Morton, Woodhouse, and Plumtree, and diverse other priests were actors
in the Northren rebellion. So likewise Sanders and diverse other priests were
actors in the Irish rebellions. Cardinal Allen and diverse English priests came
in person with the Spanish forces intended against their country. Parsons and
diverse other his consorts were also ready to come with the Spanish forces anno
1588. and to loose no time, while matters were in preparing, he help to make
and print a treacherous and damnable libell against the Queen and state.
Ballard was the principal in Babingtons conspiracy. Again, those that were
not actors either in the execution of the popes bull, or in the rebellions and
conspiracies dressed by their consorts in England and Ireland, did
notwithstanding allow them. None of them dare open their mouths once to
mislike pope Pius his bull, that utterly disableth her Majesty, and depriueth
her of her crown. They all do well like of Morton, Sanders, Allen, Bristow,
and such like trumpets of sedition, and allow their writings, and that, to go
no further, appears by the seditious Ward-word. Nay albeit diverse of the^
might have had favor, if they would have condemned them, and their writings;
yet could they not be induced thereunto: as appears by the answers of
Campian, Sherwin, Briant, Kirby, Filby and diverse other priests. But Lib. 7.
de visib. Monarch.
Sanders says, that the purpose of the rebels was to be praised, albeit they
had no success. Nobilium iliorum laudanda consilia erant etc. and he Ibidem.
calls the rebellion Pium institutum, and fidei confessionem: a pious or
devout resolution, and a confession of their faith. He Ibidem.
accounts those, that died in that rebellion, no worse then martyrs. Motive
15.
Bristow likewise puts the earl of Northumberland, the two Nortons,
Woodhouse, Plomptree and others that died for rebellion, in the catalogue of
martyrs. Both he and the rest allow pope Pius his bull, and make Felton a
martyr, that was executed for setting the same upon the bishop of Londons
gates. Cardinal Allen not without the help of Parsons, and consent of other
priests, published the declaration of Sixtus quintus his bull, and exhorts
all her subjects To take arms against her Majesty, and to lay hold upon her
person, and to deliver her into the hands of her enemies. And with Allen and
Pa^sons all the Seminary priests and friars, that come over are consorted. So
then it appears, that the papists generally, and especially those that come
from beyond the seas, and are by the pope and his agents employed in England,
are a traitorous faction opposite to the state, and her Majesty's government.

Fourthly it appears, that they adhere to foreign enemies: and namely to the
Spaniard, and pope. That they are our enemies, it cannot be denied. The law is
clear. Ho^^es ij sunt, says ff. de Verbor. signific. l. hosts.
Pomponius, qui nobis, aut quibus nos publi^e bellum decreuimus. They are
enemies, with whom we have wars. That is also declared by the word (...): which
shows them to be properly enemies, that make wars upon us. They are also
enemies, that either by force, or practice seek the overthrow of a Prince or
state, if they be forreyners; as subjects intending the same are rebels and
traitors. But the Spaniard has made diverse hostile attempts against her
majesty and the state. As namely first in comforting and abetting the northren
rebels, and promising them aid anno 1569. as appears plainly by testimony
of Gierome Catena in Pius Quintus his life; and by the negotiation of Ridolphi
with the Duke of Alua. Girol. Catena in vita Pij Quinti.
Nay at the r solicitation of Pius Quintus about the year of our Lord 1567. he
resolved to become our enemy, and to employ all his forces against us. Parsons
also testifies, that at the popes agents request he sent succor to the rebels
in Ireland. Alexandro Sega Nuntio apostolico supplicante Cantabrorum and
Gallecorum manum subsidio Hibernis and Desmondano misit, says Andreas
Philopater. p. 134.
he, or at least his secretary, and agent Creswell.

In the year 1588. he prepared great forces both by sea and land to execute
the popes Bull, and to conquer England forsooth; as both the Sixti 5. sent.
declarat.
pope himself in his declaratorie sentence against her maistie, and Cardinal
Allen, and Parsons that wicked traitor in their letters to the nobility, and
people of England and Ireland, do plainly confess. Neither did king Philip
the second ever cease to prosecute his purpose against us; as appears by
diverse attempts, and by the A^elantadoes proclamation published at his last
setting out from the Groyne, wherein he plainly tells us, that he came to
conquer England, and to kill us all, if he could. And yet some will not believe
either his own words, or other proofs.

Likewise, no question is to be made, but that the pope is a public and
professed enemy of this state, and so has been ever since her majesty came
first to the crown. Pope Pius anno 1569. at the first chop published a most
execrable Bull against her, declaring her to be deprived of her crown, and her
right before to have been pretended, assoyling her subjects from their
obedience, and forbidding them under pain of excommunication to obey her any
more. Declaramus, says he, de apostolicae plenitudinis potestate, praedictam
Elizabetham haereticam, and haereticorum fautricem, eique adhaerentes
anathematis sententiam incurrisse, etc. Quinetiam ipsam praetenso regni
praedicti iure, ne^non omni and quocunque dominio, dignitate, priuilegioque
priuatam. Item proceres, subditos, and populos dicti regni, ac caeteros omnes,
qui ei quomodocunque iurauerunt, a iuramento huiusmodi, and omni prorsus
dominij, fidelitatis, and obsequij debito perpetuo absolutos, etc.
Praecipimusque and interdicimus vniuersis and singulis proceribus, subditis
populis, and alijs praedictis, ne illi, eiusue monitis, mandatis and legibus
audea^t obedire. Qui secus egerint, eos simili anathematis sententia innodamus.
With his hostile sentence he joined also hostile actions. For he sent Sanders
de visib. monarch. lib. 7.
Nicholas Morton into the north, to stir up a rebellion in those parts.
Nicholaum Mor tonum says Sanders, in Angliam misit, vt certis illustribus and
catholicis viris authoritate apostolica denuntiaret, etc. The same is also
testified in foreign Comes Natalis hist. lib. 20.
Histories. When the rebels in the north were suppressed, he encouraged the
Duke of Norfolk to rebel, promising him aid of soldiers and money.
Pontifex, says In historiae Manolessae.
Aemilius Manolessa, post quam Ducis Norfol^iensis animum ad rebellionem
incitatum intellexisset, promisit se december millia nulitum in Angliam missurum,
atque interim duodecim millia aureorum ad eum transmissurum. He confesses
also, that the rebellion in the north was stirred by Pius, or rather the
impious pope. Robertum Ridolphum says he, misit (Pius Quintus) vt animos
nobilium tentaret, subditosque aduersus reginam Elizabetham armaret. He Girol.
Caten. in vita Pij Quinti.
dealth also both with the old Queen mother of France, and with king Philip of
Spain most earnestly, to aid and comfort the rebels, as appears by his
letters, and the negotiation of the Cardinal of Alexandria in Spain. He sent
also Vincent Lauro into Scotland to work trouble that way. Gregory the 13.
stirred up the rebellion in Ireland, as appeered by the authority given to
Sanders, and other priests: and to make the business the hotter, sent them
some little relief of men and money. Further, as if this had not been
sufficent, In declarat. Sixti 5. contra Elizabeth.
Sixtus Quintus did again declare her majesty excommunicate, and as himself
confesses, persuaded and enjoined the king of Spain to execute his sentence,
and by force to expel her out of her kingdom. To this end also he sent both
soldiers and money, and by all means possible concurred with the Spanish
forces: and this deseignement also the popes succeeding have to their uttermost
power prosecuted.

If then any English borne do concur with them, and adhere unto them; I think
Parsons cannot well deny, that they are traitors. But that is notorious, and
by infinite proofs may be demonstrated. Sanders speaking of the erection of
the English seminary at Doway, De schis. lib. 3.
says they were sustained, protected and maintained by king Philip. Exilium,
vitam, studia eorum, protegente and fouente Philippo Hispaniarum rege, nonnulli
Duaci Ibidem.
coierunt. He had said better, if he had said, coniurarunt.

Likewise he says, that another College was erected at Rome by pope Gregory
the thirteenth, and that the English scholars were there maintained at his
charges. In Spain also of late king Philip the second erected two or three
Seminaries of English scholars, but to say right, I should say English
traitors. For so they are, taking an oath to the king, as they do also to the
pope and their superiors, as appears by the testimony of Consil. lib. 3. de
regular, consil. 1.
Nauarrus and De schism. part. 3. c. 21.
Ribadineira two popish writers, and diverse witnesses. Neither would the
Spanish king ever have been at the charge of finding so many fugitive
rascalles, but that he hops to receive profit by them. Parsons persuaded the
king, that these should set on foot his daughters the Infantaes title: and to
do the same, they take an express oath, as a certain priest does directly
charge them, writing against Parsons his tyrannical and Machiauelian
practices, as he calls them.

Further, the Jesuits are all linked in affection to the Spaniard, and for
that, among other causes, were expulsed out of France. Especially our English
Jesuits and priests do favor him. And all of them do think it a matter
necessary to salvation to be subject to the pope. From him also they receive
their faculties and directions, and doubt not to execute whatsoever he
commands.

Neither do they only obey him, as having, I know not what, power over their
souls, but also run into rebellion, and other treacherous practices against
their prince and country, as having temporal superiority over princes.
Diverse priests were actors in the rebellion of England and Ireland: Cardinal
Allen and not so little as an hundred priests came with the Spanish army. And
to give way to this invasion, both Campian and all his consorts came into
England, as appears plainly by Campians and Parsons his faculty. Petatur,
say they, a Note, I pray you, how they call the pope their sovereign Lord, and
deny our Queen to be Queen.
summo Domino nostro explicatio Bullae declaratoriae contra Elizabetham, and ei
adhaerentes, quam catholici cupiunt intelligi hoc modo, vt obliget semper illam
and haereticos, catholicos vero nullo modo obliget rebus sic stantibus, sed tum
demum quando publica eiusdem bullae executio fieri poterit. So it appears
they accounted the pope for their Lord, and the Queen as no Queen, and
intended the execution of the Bull, as soon as it might be effected. Finally,
there is no popish priest in England, that will absolutely acknowledge the
Queen, or renounce the pope or king of Spain. of them they receive
directions, and to them they address themselves in all their affairs. Most
notorious it is therefore, that all these popish priests and their adherents,
adhere also to foreign enemies, and renounce their allegiance to the Queen.

Fifthly, there is no question, but they have imagined, and to their uttermost
power compassed her Majesty's death, and destruction, and that both by public
force, and secret practice. For first, diverse of them have taken arms against
her, as cardinal Allen, that wicked enemy of his country, and those English,
that joined themselves to the Spanish forces Anno 1588. or to rebels either in
England or Ireland. Secondly, it cannot be showed, that any popish priest has
either condemned the popes Bull, which cannot be executed without her
destruction, or the taking of arms to depose her. Thirdly, all attempts
against her Majesty's safety and person have been made by these companions,
and their consorts. by diverse confessions it is apparent, that Holt, Gifford,
Worthington, Walpoole, and other friars and priests have persuaded diverse to
kill the Queen. Of Parsons his treasons in this kind we have heretofore spoken
This also I have learned further, that in a letter of his written 1598. he
confesses he was acquainted with Parr^es treason, and that he kept back one
that was determined to reueile it to the Queen. Neither do I find any among
them al, that dislike these courses, when the pope lists to command them.
Finally, if the pope command any to kill the Queen, or promise reward to any
that shall do that wicked fact, as Gregory the thirteenth did to William
Parrie, as appears by cardinal Como his letters to Parry beginning thus:
Monsignor, la santita di N. S. ha vedute le lettere di vostra signoria: I would
know what one of this antichristian rabble dare either contradict him, or
discommend his purpose. Nay is it not apparent, that they all refuse her, and
follow him?

6. Neither can it be well denied, that most of those, that have been
executed for the popes cause, have contrary to her Majesty's express
commandment fled to her enemies, and refused to return, when they were called
back; and finally have exchanged the love of their country, into love of
their countries enemies. Nay being interrogated of their country, they are
taught to deny their own country, and by a pretty equivocation to account
that to be their contrary, where they have long lived: Resolut. casuum nation.
Anglic c. 1. casus 1. and cap. 3. casus 5.
or else to say they are de patria coelesti* that is, of the heavenly country.
The rest are consorted with these fugitives and traitors. How then can this
country suffer such to be protected, which deny their country, or at the least
prefer enemies before their liege sovereign?

7. It is also manifest, that the priests that come from Rome and Spain
intertaine intelligence with foreign enemies; and if they should deny it, the
same will be proved by letters both sent to them, and from them to foreign
enemies. The 20. of December last Blackwell the archpresbyter of cacolikes in
England answered an appeal made to Rome by diverse priests opposite to the
Jesuits faction. Neither does any week almost pass, but they either receive
or send letters to Rome and Spain. Whereby it comes to pass, that all our
deseins and purposes are descried to our enemies, and nothing passes in court,
or country, but they give present notice thereof unto them.

8. Further, they have by all means sought to stir her Majesty's subjects to
rebel, and take arms against her, and her friends. Which albeit they do
deny in words, yet is evidently to be proved by their actions, and secret
designements, and other circumstances. First, the pope he discharges the
subjects from their oath of obedience, and forbids his adherents any longer
to obey her. And I think no papists dare refuse to obey him, if he urge them*
and command them under pain of his curse. Secondly, Campians and Parsons
faculties do show, that whenever the popes Bull can be put in execution, then
all papists are bound to concur in the execution of it. Thirdly, Morton was
sent to stir a rebellion in England, and effected his purpose. The like was
done in Ireland, first by Nicholas Saunders, and lately by Archer and other
Priests. Which shows that they will do the like in England, whenever
occasion and means shall be offered. Nay they apparently profess in a
treatise called aduertisment des catholics Anglois, that they committed a
great fault in submitting themselves to her Majesty: pour s'estre soubs^^is a
vne princess heretic: and in that they did not take arms against her.
Fourthly, Cardinal Allen, as the Spaniards came by force, so went about with
his wicked letters and persuasions to work a rebellion, in which act Parsons,
Holt and other priests also co^curred. Fifthly, Parson by setting forth first
the Scottish title, then entitling the Earl of Darbie last deceased, and
lastly in his Treatise set out in Dol^^ans name for the Infantaes right
endeavors nothing else, but to work sedition and rebellion, as a A discovery
of a counterfeit conference.
priest of his own side does charge him, calling his work, a bloody devise;
and as his dealing with the young priests, that come over into England* does
plainly declare. And albeit they be not acquainted with the particulars, yet
can they not be ignorant, that some general mischief is intended against the
state, being commanded so often in their devotions to say, pater noster and aue
Maria; for the furthering of some good intention (or rather treason) of the
rec^or of the Romish college. Nay The discovery of Campian and his fellows.
Monday does directly charge Parsons for preaching openly in the college
seditiously against the Queen, and says that their common argument is, how
mischief may be wrought against the state. Sixthly, the doctrine of Jesuits is
notoriously known, viz that it is lawful for the Pope to depose princes, and
for subjects to rebel against them. Lastly, the rebellion of Leaguers in
France, much sharpened and furthered by English papists, does sufficiently
teach us, Aduertisme^t des catholics Anglois. A treatise tending to persuade
the French to embrace the league.
what Jesuits and priests will do here, if order be not taken. Cardinal
^olet, that well knew their purposes, and was sometime a Jesuit, said, that
Jesuits would set all Christendom in co^bustion if they were not prevented.
But his liberty of speech cost him his life, as some popish priests stick not
to In their discourses against the Jesuits.
affirm.

9 It is also most notorious, that they have stirred up foreign enemies
against the prince and state. Sixtus quintus in his declaration published
against her Majesty, does openly profess, that at the earnest solicitation of
certain principal cacolike Englishmen, he proceeded against her majesty, and
had enjoined the Spanish king to execute his Bull, and to come with great
forces against England. Allen also in his most traitorous letters to the
Nobility and people of England and Ireland, does confess so much. Neither did
the Spanish king any thing, but at the motion of Englefeld, Allen, and Parsons,
and upon the exclamations of their consorts. To draw him on the rather,
Testified by his own consorts.
Parsons put him in mind, that he was called Philip Norwey, and how that
according to a prophecy Betwixt Bostons bay, and the pile of Foudray, the
black navy of Norwey should come, and do wonders. He confesses also in a
letter of his to a Nobleman in Scotland, that he had been with most princes in
Europe to stir them against us. The Emperor likewise upon their
informations, and solicitations has showed himself enemy to her Majesty and
our nation. Anno 1586. and the year following Cardinal Allen and his consorts
were very busy with the Duke of Guise and other Frenchmen, to induce them to
concur with the Pope and Spaniards, in the war against England. And so
seditiously did Morgan behave himself, that the king commanded him to be
committed to the Bastil of Paris. The English Aduertissement des catholics
Anglois aux Francois catholics.
papists that then were in France, do plainly tell the French, that they were
justly plagued, because they did not oppose themselves against the Queen.

Le crime d'endurer Iezabel ta voysine, say they,
Plonger au sang Chrestien, te destruit peu a peu.
And of themselves they give out, that they are scorned of all nations for that
they Ibidem. p. 89.
suffered an heretical Queen to reign, Nous sommes, See here a plain
testimony of the loyalty of papists.
say they, esclaues sous vne Izabel, pire cent fois, que Iezabel, and bref pour
auoir souffert vne royne heretic, nous sommes auiourdhuy le mespris, la
fable, and le iouet des heretics. Ad hereunto D. Stories practice with the D.
of Alua; ye oration of Allen, not yet Cardinal to Gregory the 13. Saunders
his persuasions to the same pope; Parsons his negotiation with certain princes
near adjoining to us; William Critons plots for invasion; and their clamorous
and lying discourses dispersed throughout the Christian world: and consider the
sum of their practices with foreign nations, and then thou need not
doubt, but that their principal deseignment was to stir up foreign nations
to make war upon us,

10. Finally the whole scope of Seminary priests and their consorts is, First
to make a number in England, to put the popes Bull in execution; next to bring
in the pope and Spaniardes; which cannot be done without the utter desolation
of the land. The first is proved by experience. For that their consortes
began to attempt in England, and have in part effected in Ireland: and for this
purpose have they erected Seminaries, and sent into England and Ireland whole
troops of priests, and deal both with foreign princes and domestical
malcontents. Neither may we doubt, but that al these seditious fellows come
with one purpose and resolution, not daring to attempt any thing beyond their
commission. Secondly the faculty granted to Parsons and Campian does plainly
show, that when the Bull can be executed, then all the Romanistes are bound
to do it. Thirdly the popes words are plain. He Bulla Pij 5. and Sixti 5.
commands all his adherents To execute his sentence under pain of
excommunication. Fourthly the doctrine of Jesuits does plainly allow the popes
power to depose princes; and all that faction holds that his sentences are to
be obeyed under pain of excommunication.

Fifthly neither would the pope nor Spaniard bestow such charge in maintaining
these fugitives, but that they hope, again to be requited. Finally the same
appears by their own confessions, actions, and proceedings. Campian and his
consorts being demanded, Whether they took the Queen to be lawful Queen,
notwithstanding the popes sentence of excommunication, and per consequent,
whether Sanders and Bristow and such as teach otherwise, taught soundly; they
refused to answer directly, and would neither acknowledge her to be their
lawful Queen, the popes sentence being in force, nor condemn that traitorous
doctrine. Nor would they directly say, That they would take the Queens part,
if any by the popes commandment and authority should come to fight against
her. Nay contrariwise they seemed to like and allow the popes proceeding, and
condemn her Majesty's title. If then such as by law refuse contumaciously to
answer, are to be condemned as confessing the article* and that both by the
Laetate.. qui tacent. ff. de interrog. actio. and l. 2.. quod obseruari. Cod.
de Iuram. Calum. and ibidd.
civil law, and by the C. si post praestitu^. de confess. in. 6. and gloss.
ibid.
canons; then are these fellows to be reputed as traitors and enemies to her
Majesty. Beside that they have brought with them certain Resolut. casuum
nationis Anglicanae.
cases of conscience, in which all priests are instructed, and which they
generally hold. And therein first it is resolved, Cap. 1. cas. 1.
That she is an heretic, and no lawful Queen, and that her Judges and
officers are not lawful Judges to interrogate them. Further being Cap. 3. cas.
vlt.
demanded, Whether they take her to be their lawful Queen, and whether the
pope has authority to depose her, and whether she be a schismatike or
heretic: they are taught to answer, That she is lawful Queen, for that the
Bull of Pius the fifth might percase not be pronounced with all formalities
requisite, and to elude the other questions, but not to speak directly.
Further in a certain search of a house, where David Engleby a priest was
taken, these They are recorded in the memorials of the council of York.
resolutions were found, first That the Queen before the popes Bull was not
lawful Queen. That cacolikes are not to defend her, or fight for her, if any
come to execute the popes bull. That It is lawful to take arms against her, yea
to do what they please with her, if they be sure to obtain victory. And shall
such vipers be suffered in a state, that thus treasonably talk of the prince?
Assuredly if all do not speak so grossly, yet all these conclusions flow of
the popes doctrine in this case of deposing of princes. In the foresaid
resolutions it is flatly resolved, that it is lawful to kill the Queen: but
say the priests, Rebus vt nunc constitutis multo satius esset ne loqui quidem
ea de re.

The second is proved by their earnest solicitations from time to time to
bring in the Spaniard: and themselves I think will not deny, but that they
seek, that the pope may have sovereign government, in all ecclesiastical
causes at the least. The erection of the English Seminaries in Spain, and
other places was made for no other end. Neither has Parsons and the Jesuits
busied themselves of long time about any other purpose more, then to prefer
the Spanish title. His commendation also of Spaniardes and his mediation for
peace with them in his former treatise, does flow from no other cause. This is
the cause also why the Seminary men that come out of Spain into England do
distribute certain grains and tokens of faction, as a certain In his
allegations against Jesuits.
priest charge them.

Now then if we will but consider the premises, which not only by histories,
experience, and our own knowledge, but also by the adversaries confessions to
be showed under their hands (for the most part) may be verified; we may
well wonder, how it comes to pass, that such traitors are suffered; but we
cannot by any means doubt, but that they are traitors, and that in the highest
degree.

Neither can any excuse himself and say, That it is no treason to bring in
grains, or medals, or to be a priest made by the popes faction, or to
reconcile men to the church, and to commit such like matters, as later laws
have made treason. For albeit these things, howsoever they are to be
censured, simply of themselves are not treason: yet if grains and beads, and
such like toys be notes of a faction opposite to the state; then is it
treason by all laws to have them, that condemn notes of faction. That they
are notes of faction it is apparent by those, that are brought out of Spain to
distribute to such as like the Infantaes title. It is also apparent by the
words of a Cap. 1. cas. 2. resolut. cas. nation. Anglic.
resolution in a case of conscience among them. Haec grana and metalla
benedicta multum confer possunt, ad afficiendo^ populos erga apostolicam
sedem: say the resoluers, that is Allen and Parsons.

Again to be a priest or false prophet, simply in it self; is not treason:
but by priesthood to unite himself to a public enemy, and to make himself
thereby of a faction against the state, is and always was to be condemned as
treason.

Thirdly to be reconciled to the church, is no treason; but to be reconciled
to the pope, and to take his side, that by arms and practices seeks to
overthrow the state, cannot be esteemed otherwise then as treason: as may also
appear by the arrest given by the Court of Parliament of Paris against the
Jesuits. For albeit the same misliked not the order simply; yet because it
was judged a faction opposite against the prince and state, the whole order of
Jesuits was expulsed out of France.

Some also may pretend, that it is a point of religion to obey the pope: which
notwithstanding is a matter utterly false. For in ancient time neither did
Bishops attempt to depose Princes, nor did Christians believe they had any such
power. Nay, as Sigebertus Gemblacensis testifies, it was holden flat heresy,
which now the Jesuits hold and teach as a point of their religion. But were it
religion to obey the pope; yet can it not be religion to rebel against
Princes, to depose them, to murder them, to adhere to foreign enemies, that
seek the trouble of the state, as does the popish faction. For Breuiar.
Liberatij.
Syluerius a pope of Rome was condemned himself for packing with the Goths
against the Emperor: and Abiathar and his consorts, that 3. Reg. c. 1.
would have made Adoniah king contrary to David's intention, were therefore 3.
Reg. 2.
punished, and he deposed from his priesthood. Finally, to say Pater noster,
and to make crosses, is not simply evil: but to say Pater noster, to work a
coniuration, or to make a cross to that purpose, is an act of superstition. So
to obey a good Bishop in it self, is not evil; but to do it to work sedition
or rebellion, is treason: much more to obey wicked popes, to wicked purposes.
All those therefore that adhere to this faction, let them beware their actions
come not to examination, least they engage themselves too far, and be found
guilty of high treason, seeing the priests and others, that work in the popes
business, by many laws are declared to be plain traitors.

Martyrs certes they cannot be esteemed, unless treason be religion; and
falsehood truth, and Antichrist be to be received for Christ Jesus. For the
Church of God holds them for Martyrs, that died for the profession and
testimony of Christ Jesus. But such of the popish faction, as have been
executed in England, died for mayntenance of the popes faction, and his
tyranny, taking on him to take away the crown from lawful Princes, and
seeking by arms and treason to murder them, and all loyally affected to them.
And this is most apparently approved by the enditements framed against them, by
the depositions of witnesses, and the whole form of their trial, judgment
and execution. As for points of faith, they were not once mentioned in all the
process made against them; neither was ever any papist among us troubled for
his leude opinion concerning the mass, or any other point of Romish
superstition.

True Martyrs suffered for the truth wrongfully, and therefore deserved
commendation. That is thanke-woorthy, says saint 1. Pet. 2.
Peter, if a man for conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. These suffer not for their conscience, unless they make the popes
will the rule of their conscience. Neither are they punished wrongfully. And
therefore if any esteem them Martyrs, they do them great wrong. For as
Epist. 68.
Augustine says of the Donatistes, viuebant vt latrones, honorabantur, vt
Martyrs: so may we say of these popish Martyrs: they are called Martyrs, but
are very rebels and traitors. They are also like Alexander the heretic, of
whom Eusebius Lib. 5. eccles. hist. c. 17.
says, he lived by robbery, and was executed for villainy, and yet was
honored by those of his sect, as a Martyr.

True Martyrs have charity For without it furious, and Iebusitical zeal to
promote the popes cause avails nothing. If I give my body to be burned says
the 1 Cor. 13.
apostle, and have not love, it profits nothing. Now what charity had they,
that were employed by public enemies to the hurt and destruction of their
liege Lady, and most dear country? Charity says the Ibidem.
apostle, is patient, gentle, humble. But these in their exile had no patience,
but by force and destruction of their country sought to return: they like
fierce lions sought by conquest to subdue men to their opinions: and dream of
nothing more then honor, profit, and authority. Some of their own company
tell, that in ^nno 1588. they much contended about the lands and livings of the
nobility and clergy, and that the Iebusites looked to rule all according to
an old prophecy found out forsooth by Parsons, of rulers in long gowns and
Jesuitical bonnets. But since it has been told them, that it is not good to
fell the bears skin, before he be killed, and that Parsons is nothing but a
false prophet. It is said, that Cottam an English Jesuit being condemned to
die, and seeing a great multitude of people round about him desirous to see,
what strange beast a Iebusite might be, broke out into many bitter curses, and
A discovery of Campian and his consorts.
prayed God, that he would send down fire from heaven, and consume them all.
And this is the gentleness and charity of the Jesuits.

When Sixtus Quintus told the Jesuits, that he wondered that none of their
order was canonized for saints, some A discourse of a certain priest.
answered, that they sought honors in the Church triumphant, and not in the
militant: meaning percase not to be beholding unto him.

True Martyrs are men of a peaceable disposition, and no way desirous of
tumults or troubles. Si supra memoratos, says Lib. 3. contr. Parmen.
Optatus, videri martyrs vultis, probate illos amasse pacem, in qua prima sunt
fundamenta martyrij: aut dilexisse Deo placitam vnitatem; aut habuisse cum
fratribus vnitatem, sine qua nullum vel nomine potest, vel re esse martyrium.
He speaks of the Donatistes, but it fitteth well our popish pretended
Martyrs, and their consorts, that neither agree with us, nor among themselves,
and are given to contention, and seem desirous of wars and hurlyburlyes, and
are the fire-brandes to raise flames of contention in all the corners of
Christendom: as appears by their actions in England, France, Ireland,
Germany, the Low countries, Swethland, Poland, Scotland, and other places.

The Martyrs of Christ Jesus, die for the true faith, and abide firm in his
truth: but the popish mastiues die for the popes pleasure, and for defense of
his most unjust and tyrannical usurpations, and fight against Christ his
Church. Who then does not marvel, they should be accounted Martyrs? Cum Deo
manner non possunt (says De simplic. pralat.
Cyprian) qui esse in ecclesia Dei vnanimes noluerunt: ardeant licet flammis,
and ignibus traditi, and obiecti bestijs animas suas ponant, non erit illa
fidei corona, sed poena perfidiae. Occidi talis potest, coronari non potest. If
then these good fellows have forsaken the Church, and linked themselves with
enemies and traitors; die they may for their treasons, but as Martyrs they
cannot be crowned: nay, they cannot be esteemed Martyrs.

No true martyr ever seemed more desirous of the applause and praise of men,
then of the good of Christ's people. Si ita martyrium fecerimus says In epist.
ad Galat. lib. 3. c. 5.
Hierome, vt nostras velimus ab hominibus reliquias venerari; si opinionem
vulgi sectantes intrepidi sanguinem fuderimus, and substantiam nostram vsque ad
mendicitatem propriam dederimus; huic operi non tam praemium, quam poena
debetur, and perfidiae magis tormenta sunt, quam corona victoriae. But the
popish Martyrs sought nothing more, then their own glory and praise, little
caring for the good of Gods Church. Nay while they sought to prefer the popes
authority; they sought to draw upon us foreign enemies, and to raise sedition
within the country.

It was not the fashion of Martyrs in ancient time, to renounce their kings
and governors, and not to acknowledge their authority. Nay, well they knew that
Saint Romans 13.
Paul taught them contrary. Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita
sit, says he. Neither did they use to set out most slandrous libels against
men in authority, or allow any such course. Finally, we do not read, that
ever any godly Martyr did take arms against his prince, or go about to depose
him, or murder him upon any bishops, or other man's commandment. But Campian
and his consorts did disclaim her Majesty's authority, and all priests that
come from Rome in their cases of conscience, which they cannot deny, Resolutio
casuum nationis Anglicanae.
hold her not for lawful Queen. They also themselves have set out scandalous
libels against men in authority, and do well like the sclandrous writings of
Sanders, Harpesfield, Ribadineira, Rishton, Parsons, Bristow, and others. When
the army of the king of Spain was ready to come for England, then was
Parsons very busy in printing pope Sixtus his scandalous declaration against
the Queen, and Allens letters to the nobility and people of England and
Ireland. A In an answer to a libel set out by Parsons.
friend of his does also charge him, that his finger was in the making and
dispersing of it. And yet diverse traitors, that have been executed allowed
this libell, and other his scurrilous writings. Nay, I do not find, that any
of them misliked any thing, that might disgrace her Majesty, or their
country. Finally, the Earl of Northumberland, and the two Nortons, and diverse
priests, whom they Bristowes motives.
celebrate for Martyrs, took up arms against their Prince and country: and
I think none of them either heretofore did, or hereafter will mislike their
doing therein. Wherefore albeit the pope put them in his calendar for Martyrs;
yet he must not be offended albeit the hangman put them in his books for
rebels and traitors.

No Martyr of Christ Jesus did ever think it lawful to break his oath of
allegiance to his Prince, upon any bishops warrant. In Chronic. and Auentin.
annal. 7.
Sigisbertus Gemblacensis says, It is a pernicious heresy, to believe, that
the pope can discharge subjects from the bond of their oath, and from their
allegiance. But these Martyrs, or rather churlish mastiues, did not only take
themselves ^o be discharged from their allegiance, and joined with foreign
enemies, but also persuaded as many, as they could to join with them.

No true Martyr of Christ Jesus did ever deny his name, quality, country,
kindred, and prince altogether; nor did martyrs dissemble their religion, and
go apparelled like Spadacins and ruffians* but these popish martyrs do all this
together* nay they are resolved by their Resolutiones quorundam casuum nationis
Anglicanae.
superiors, that it is very lawful for the^ so to do. A.P. that is Allen and
Parsons, as I take it, the case being put, vtrum sacerdos possit habitum
mutare, coma^ nutrire, nomen, and patriam, and parents negare, do Cap. 1.
casus 1.
answer thus: potest: nec videtur in ea re dubium. Potest enim quis veritatem
tacere, Ibidem in resolutione casus 1. c. 1.
vel dissimulare, etc. The same good fellows Resolutiones quorundam casuum
nationis Anglicanae.
determine, quod simulatio est licita, and that it is pious, to use simulation,
and prove it, for that it is lawful to lay ambuscadoes for enemies: whereby it
appears, they take us for enemies, and would, if they could, entrap us by
their ambuscadoes: and this, if we look not to it, they have fully purposed
and resolved. Concerning the Queen they Ibidem.
say, she is no lawful Queen. Regina haeretica, say they, non est legitime
regina; and again; non gerit se vt reginam, sed exercet tyrannidem. Finally,
they are commanded to account their country for no country, and not to respect
their parents, if they be not of the Romish religion.

It was not the fashion of the martyrs of Christ his Church to use
equivocations, and to forswear themselves both in judgment, and elsewhere:
but the Schoolemaisters of our popish priests, and pretended martyrs teach them
to do both. Sciant, say Ibidem. c. 3. cas. 3.
they, se vti posse aequiuocationibus, and iurare sine peccato. Now by
equivocations, they mean promises and oaths made, not according to the meaning
of the judge, but according to a hidden meaning of the party, that takes the
oath. They Ididem.
teach also that a priest is no more to regard an oath to the Queens officers,
then if he should swear to pirates or robbers for safeguard of his life.

Finally, no heretics, nor miscreants can justly be reputed martyrs, as diverse
examples, and testimonies of fathers teach us. The Donatists suffered death
courageously; and so likewise did the heretics called Euphemitae, which for
the multitude of their supposed martyrs, Epiphan. haeres. 80.
would needs be called Martyriani. Yet did not the church otherwise account of
them, then lewd heretics, and not martyrs, as appears by the testimony of
Eusebius, Augustine, and other fathers before alleged. We read also in
histories, that Turks, Tartars, and Mores both fight, and die most resolutely
for the blasphemous opinions of Mahomet: and how the Assassins that were a sect
of desperate cutthrotes, like the Iebusites, that desperately would adventure
to dispatch whomsoever their General would command them to murder, died
oftentimes most constantly: and this they accounted a special point of
religion. Yet in truth no man can esteem them martyrs. Why then should the
rebels, traitors and Assassins, which have been employed in the Popes
business, and for his cause have been drawn into treason, be accounted
martyrs? If because they are put in the popes calendar: it may be answered,
that it is Christ and not the pope; the cause of religion, and not of faction,
that makes martyrs.

Neither is it material, that grace has been offered to some that have been
executed for treason, if they would have renounced the pope and his treacherous
doctrine and faction. For we do not desire the death of all, that through
simplicity have been drawn into treason. Nor may the adversaries think,
that these fellows were therefore only punished for religion: but rather that
they were obstinate traitors, that like the Assassins, made it a point of
religion upon the popes warrant, to take arms, and to practice against lawful
Magistrates, and to murder them, which indeed is treason. To offer them life
therefore, if they would renounce the popes faction, was thought a means fit
to try them, whether they were settled in their treacherous resolutions, or else
would become honest men, as diverse of them renouncing the pope, have done; and
not to examine them, or punish them for religion, which was never called in
question, in all the proceeding against them.

The Conclusion of the former Treatise.
IF then papists hold singular opinions, and not the true catholic faith; then
are they deceivers, and cacolykes, and woluish teachers, and no true Catholics
or Christians: and thou art carefully to beware of them, and to embrace that
faith, which is truly Catholic, which unless thou believe firmly, thou can
not be saved, as says In symbolo.
Athanasius. It is impossible for Christians, says In Numer. homil. 26.
Origin, to be saved without faith, whether they seem perfect or weak. now
there is but one faith, as there is but one baptism, and one God, as the
Ephesians. 4.
apostle teaches us. And this is the faith, which the apostles and prophets
have taught, and which we in the church of England do profess. Remember I
say, that true faith is Christ's faith and apostolic faith. It is not the
popes faith, nor his determinations, nor uncertain traditions. It has no
other foundation, but the doctrine of Christ and his apostles and holy
prophets. Beware therefore of the pretended cacolike Romish faith, that has no
ground, but in the popes determinations: nor support, but lies, fraud and
violence.

If the doctrine and traditions of popish priests come not from Christ Jesus,
which is the foundation of our religion, but is drawn out of uncertain
legendes, and rests on the popes determination; remember what the apostle
teaches in this point. If any man says Galat. 1.
he, preach unto you otherwise, then that you have received, let him be
accursed. Believe not every spirit. For many deceivers are gone out into the
world. If any bring any doctrine not deduced out of holy Scripture, suspect
him, and examine him; and thou shall find him faulty. And above all things
beware of new doctrines. For we have but one faith, which has his original
from Christ the fountain of truth and life. Profanas vocum nouitates, says
the 1. Tim. 6.
apostle, deuita. And if we may not use new terms, or words in matters of
faith; then may we not receive any new articles of religion. It is the part of
true catholics to adhere to holy fathers, and to avoid novelties, as says
Aduers. haeres. c. 36.
Vincentius Lirinensis. Now what fathers more holy, then the prophets and
apostles, that are the fathers of fathers, and the foundation of the church?

If the doctrine of popery be for the most part a pack of old and new
heresies, as has bin showed thee; why should thou be abused by false
teachers? Why should thou be desirous, as distempered stomachs are, to feed
upon unwholesome doctrine? Graves sunt haereticorum morsus says Saint In
Euangel. Luc. lib. 7. c. 10.
Ambrose, qui ipsis grauiores and rapaciores bestijs nullum abaritiae finem
impietatisque nouerunt. They look fair upon thee, but bite deeply. They
promise true religion, and catholic faith, but teach heresies and damnable
opinions. They come unto thee with sheep clothing, and pretend saving of
souls; but inwardly they are ravening woolues, and seek to destroy both thy
body and soul. They give thee honey, but it is delivered thee upon a swords
point, that when thou think to lick honey, thy heart may be pierced, with a
sharp pointed sword.

If the synagogue of Romanistes be not the true church, why take thou
delight to hear her teachers, or to embrace her erroneous doctrine? Why do
thou not come out of Babylon? Will thou remain in her confusion, and be
partaker of her plagues? Why should thou go up to Bethauen, or delight in
the congregation of wicked idolaters? Hoseae 4.
Go not up, I say, to Bethauen; 1. Cor. 10.
fly Idolatry. Apocal. 18.
Come out of Babylon. It is not I only, but Christ Jesus, that calls thee
out of this confusion. If thou will not hear him, nor know him; be assured
he will not know thee, nor hear thee. It is not the pope that can save thee,
nor his decretals, that can warrant thee. Leave therefore the synagogue of
satan, and resort to Gods true church. Forsake antichrist, and adhere to
Christ. Quisquis, says Saint Epist. 152.
Augustine, ab ecclesia catholica abfuerit, quantumuis laudabiliter se viuere
existimet, hoc solo scelere, quod a Christi vnitate disiunctus est, non habebit
vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum. As without Noah's ark in time past all flesh
was drowned, so there is no safety out of Christ's church. And be not lightly
deceived with the name of the church. For antichrist, as the 2. These. 2.
apostle tells us, shall sit in Christ's church. And with his followers, as
Saint Augustine teaches us, shall be accounted to be the true church: viz.
by such as are abused. The synagogue of satan in time past did take on them the
name of Jews: and falsehood is often set out with a fair luster and show of
truth.

All Christians have an interest in true religion. Why then should any suffer
the damnable doctrine of popery, that is so full of heresies, and erroneous
opinions? Why should any suffer the Scriptures to be taken from the people of
God, so that they shall no more be suffered to read them, and in lieu thereof
receive the popes determinations, and the synagogues of Romes traditions? Can
any true Christian endure the abominable idol of the mass, where the bread
and cup is adored for God, or the idolatrous worship of Romish Babylon? Those
that honor God, those he will honor, and such as are lukewarm, and care
not what religion they have; those God will cast out of his mouth, as a
loathsome race of atheistes, and wicked men. If religion move not every man;
yet if he remember the slavery of popish government, and how prejudicial it
is to princes, to the nobility, to the commons and all sorts of people; he
will not much be enamored of it.

The magistrate may not suffer either his authority to be disputed of, or
doubted of, or denied. And yet the Jesuits and priests and their adherents
are suffered to teach, and to do all this, as appears by their answers to the
six Interrogatories, by their cases of conscience, and by their doctrine and
actions. Nay most boldly, albeit secretly they practice against the life and
state of her Majesty, as many particulars do show. Happy are they, that they
have encountered with such a prince; and yet let them beware they abuse not her
clemency too far. For no state can stand, where such contumacious and
rebellious mates live in open contempt of authority, and laws.

It behooves also all them, that carry the sword to look, that not only
Christ his sheep be defended from woolues, but also that the state be
defended and maintained against professed traitors and rebels, that lurk in
all corners. They have not a sword committed to them for naught. But to the
end they may defend the quiet and peaceable subject, and root out the wicked
and rebellious traitor. Treason and notorious co^tumacie against laws cannot
long be endured in any commonwealth. Neither can magistrates in this case be
too watchful. God has detected many secret conspiracies and attempts against
her Majesty and the state; yet let us not presume too far upon his
goodness. The way to settle peace, to confirm the state, and to prevent all
such treacherous attempts, is to stop the head of rebellion and treason, and to
root out all seditious priests and Iebusites; from whence all our troubles
for this 43. years have wholly and almost soly proceeded. If we look not to
them, assuredly they will not spare us.

All true Englishmen are to defend their country, their wives, and children
from foreign enemies; which these unnatural rinegate Iebusites, and priests
have sought to bring upon us, as the practices of Allen, Parsons, Englefield,
and others do declare, and some priests more honester then the rest confess,
and seem to mislike. But seeing they like the popes authority and doctrine,
they do but dissemble, when they seem to mislike that, which follows
necessarily of it, as a conclusion upon premises.

All that possess lands or goods have reason to look, that they be not
divided as spoils either by public enemies, or seditious and mutinous
mal-contents. Let them therefore have an eye to those whose coming is to
maintain an opposite faction, and whose end is to execute the popes bull, and
to overthrow the government: which brings with it division, spoil, and
confusion.

The reverend Bishops and clergy especially are to oppose themselves, not
only against their doctrine, which through some men's security, and the
diligence and watchfulness of the enemy begins to take more root, and in
more places, then in times past; but also against their treacherous practices.
The overthrow of religion, and their death above all others is resolved, as
appears by the testimony of a certain In a treatise of causes, why he did
not submit himself to the Jesuits.
priest speaking of the determinations of the rebels, and enemies anno 1588, if
God had not crossed their deseignes. He shows also, that a certain special
note is made by one of their adherentes of all abbey lands and church livings,
and in whose hands they are: which is the spoil, that our Jesuits gape and
thirst after.

It is also a dangerous matter for lawyers, when matters come to be divided by
force, and not ordered by law; and would quite overthrow all their practice. It
behooves therefore the honorable Judges and learned lawyers diligently to
look to these fellows proceedings, and to provide that matters be not brought
from the bar in Westminster hall, to a trial in open field; from pleading
of laws, to violence and blows.

Neither have you papists, that favor your holy father, whom you know not, and
blindly condemn true religion, which you understand not, cause to trust your
Jesuits and priests too far. For they for truth deliver you heresy, and
superstition for religion, and if you take not better heed, will engage you so
far in practice and treason, that you shall not be able to wind out of
their labyrinthes and plots. Their persuasions are like Pontike honey, of which
Natural. hist. lib. 21.
Pliny speaks, which albeit it be fair in show, yet by reason it is gathered
upon noisome and unwholesome herbs and flowers, proves rank poison. So these
false teachers with a smooth countenance do give you very sweet, and honey
words, and make you believe, that the Spaniardes are your sweet friends, and
that it will be honey moon with you, if once you may get up your masses, your
roodes, your images, your beads, holy water, and other trash. But beware that
your honey be not mixed with gall and poison, and that it prove not Pontike, or
rather pontifical and papal honey: and remember that I have told you, that to
seek by foreign force or domestical sedition, or practice against the prince
or state, to bring in your intended devises, is a matter of high treason, and a
matter most dangerous to your selves, your houses, associates and followers.

If then you will not give over your overthwart course, for the love that every
natural Englishman bears to his Prince and country, nor for the inward
detestation, that every man ought to have of treason and disturbation of laws
and government; yet may the danger that hangs over your own heads, as well
as ours, move you to consider better of matters, before you run headlong
into those attempts, into which the popes agents would draw you. If you be
taken packing, the state standing as it does, you know you stand in bad terms.
And if you should prove so strong, that law cannot be executed against you,
yet may you not suppose to run away with the spoil without contradiction.
You must imagine that other men's swords will cut, as well as yours, and that
the sway of authority, and countenance of the magistrate commanding for
truth, and justice will always be able to daunt the pride of rebels, or
malcontents. The effects of civil dissension are always lamentable to both
sides, and never has rebellion yet had good success. Of your selves you may
not think to prevail, being the weaker and worst side; and if you bring in
strangers, first, you shall make your selves odious to your own nation; next,
you shall be made the first spoil both to friends and foes, and in the end
must submit your self to those that obtain the victory: and receive that at
the hands of others, which now you possess quietly by the benefit of her
Majesty's government. Content your self therefore if you be wise, with the
favor you enjoy, and intricate not your selves with those, that seek to
trouble the peace of this state, and to make you the instruments of their
wicked and treacherous intentions.

Finally this generation of rebellious malcontents, that seek by foreign force
to establish their authority, and Romish religion, ought generally to be hated
of all true christians, and true hearted patriots, and subjects. Of Christians,
for their factious courses against religion contrary to the practice of all
truly religious and catholic Christians. For neither did Christ establish his
doctrine by force, nor did Christians ever use force, or seek to take crowns
from Princes. Of all true patriots, for that they seek to destroy their
country, and to give it as a spoil to the Spaniards, as the practices of
Allen and Pa^sons, and all their consorts do declare. Of all true subjects,
for that they seek to deprive us of so gracious a Princess, and to subject
the crown to the pope, that is a most wicked and cruel tyrant, and the
public enemy of our religion and this state.

Parsons will percase deny this to be true, and great reason he has so to
do; but we have convicted him and all his consorts, and all the scholars of
the traiterous seminaries combined with him, and with the pope and Spaniard, of
so many treasons, as no words, nor protestations, nor oaths will clear them.

I doubt not therefore, but the magistrate will muzzell the mouths of these
wolves, and provide, that these traitors, that are continually working
mischief to the state, be not any longer let loose to do hurt. It behooves
also all true Christians and loyal subjects to open their eyes, that they be
not taken sleeping. In time past men did not imagine that Allen, Parsons,
Campian, Holt, Englefield, and other Iebusites and priests, and their consorts
and adherents had any other intention, then to plant their popish and cacolike
religion. This Ad persequut. Anglos.
Allen told us in a long discourse to that purpose. This Campian and the
priests, that came from Rome protested. And this is the ground of all their
declarations, supplications and petitions made for moderation in executing the
laws against priests and recusants. And so credulous and simple were some of
us poor souls, that we believed their fair words and glosses, and determined
to show them all possible favor. But now we see they seek the destruction of
her Majesty, the bringing in of strangers, the trouble of the kingdom by
rebellion, and the utter desolation of their native country: as we have
proved by many particulars. Parsons in his Ward-word takes upon him the
defense of public enemies and traitors, seeking by all means to disgrace his
own nation, and this state. Being acquainted with Parries intention for the
murthring of her Majesty, he revealed it not, nay he dissuaded one that went
about to reveal it, as he confesses in a letter of his, which will be
proved, and I hope showed, if he will deny it. By him and his consorts Holt,
Worthington, Gifford, Allen, Walpoole, and others, diverse other assassinors
have been persuaded, hired and suborned to kill or empoyson the Queen, as will
be proved, not only by the confessions of the parties, that were employed, but
also by the depositions and writings of certain popish priests, that charge
the Jesuitical faction with this intended assassinat.

It is plain that they have by all means sought to stir up rebellion at
home, and to bring upon us foreign enemies from abroad. The rebellions in
England and Ireland, the practices of D. Story, Throkmorton, Charles Paget,
Babington, and Ballard, and diverse do prove the first. The second is proved
by the testimony of Pius Quintus, and Sixtus Quintus, by Cardinal Allens, and
Parsons negotiation with the king of Spain, the pope, the Duke of Guise, the
Prince of Parma, and diverse others, testified in their own actions, and
writings, and to be proved by infinite letters and writings of their own
consorts: which as occasion shall serve, shall be produced against the^, and in
part has been already touched in the former discourse.

And I do not think, that any priest will either directly condemn the popes
hostile actions against us, or acknowledge the Queens right to her kingdom,
notwithstanding the popes declaratorie sentence, or any thing he can do
against her.

Most apparent it is therefore that they seek the destruction and desolation
of this state, and are all combined with those that profess themselves our
enemies. Anno 1571. there was a plot laid by them to bring in the Duke of
Guise with the French to surprise London: and no doubt but they have laid many
other plots, which are not come to our notice.

Neither were they ever more busy or in better hope then at this instant,
albeit we take our selves for the most part to be in a state most assured. For
first they make no question, but they shall bring with them all the force, that
the pope and Spaniard can make, who are also interessed in this cause in regard
of their several pretenses. Secondly, the faction of the Jesuits have
attempted to cause all their adherents in England to make several associations
in every shire, and moved them to choose a head in every division, as shall
be proved by their letters. Now what is this, but the beginning of a
rebellion? Thirdly, they have gone about to fortify themselves by diverse
pretended titles, which Parsons would have presently to be set on foot.
Fourthly, every several priest has his several flock and charge. Let it
then be esteemed what numbers 3. or 400. pastoral charges may afford. Fifthly,
of late they have made a Provincial of Jesuits, called Walley, alias Garnet,
which shows that there are some numbers and colleges of Jesuits in England.
Neither do such gulles come upon the shore, but when gerat storms are toward.
Sixthly, the pope has lately made one Blackwell archpresbyter or governor of
all the papists in England, to whom he has adjoined 12. counselors and
assistants. It is no small faction therefore, that needs such an authority,
and so many assistants. Seventhly, these fellows do at the least monthly, and
sometimes oftener receive from Rome letters and directions, and accordingly
make collections of money, give rules and orders, distribute faculties,
grains. and medalles, and such like notes of faction. Of one man I have showed
that they received two thousand pounds, that scarce ever bestowed 20. pounds in
the Queens service. Here also they lay their plots, and set men on work not
only to corrupt her Majesty's subjects with false religion, but also with
disloyal affection. Eighthly, they do monthly, if not oftener, advertise into
Spain and Rome, what is done in England, and disclose all the secrets both of
court and country, and from thence upon any occasion they hope to draw aid of
men and money. Ninthly, as if there were in England no magistrates, nor laws,
but such as the pope and Spaniard does give them, they are wholly ruled by
their officers, directions, and laws. Nay they contemn her Majesty's laws
and authority, as if there were no Queen nor law in England. From sorrainers
they do, I say, receive law, and to them they appeal, when they have wrong,
as appears by appellations, letters, instructions, and orders of theirs,
which we have to show. Tenthly, in their cases of conscience they forbid their
consorts to give any thing to our universities, or to pay their due to the
ministers, further then law enforces them; which argues, that they work
closely against the ministry and the universities. And yet you my masters of
the clergy and the universities oppose not your selves against this vermin,
that seeks to overthrow both the Church and university, and is daily
intending and working your ruin. Eleuenthly, they stick not to declare, how
nothing stands in their way but the Queens life. It is not therefore to be
doubted but that they are still working against her, as the treasons of Parsons
and other Jesuits do manifestly declare, and some of their letters do
testify. Finally they do perceive so little opposition made against them, and
make all matters so sure on their own side, that now the dispute is betwixt
the Jesuits and priests, who shall have the glory of the conversion of
England, and how they shall dispose of our livings and lands, and in what sort
our throats must be cut, and what form of government shall be established in
England. No doubt it will be a brave country and government, where the
Spaniards shall enter by conquest, and the Jesuits be lawgiuers and chief
governors.

Wherefore let us, my dear countrymen, awake out of that dead sleep of
security, into which the pleasant songs of peace, and flattering tales of
false traitors have cast us. Let us open our eyes, and look into the depth of
these dangerous devises, plotted by a faction plainly professed to be opposite
to religion and the state. Let us seize these whelps of wolves, that if they
be suffered to grow strong and multiply, will devour us. Let us strangle this
brood of vipers, that seek to destroy their mother, that gave them life. I
have, as you see, given every one of you warning. Now he that hears the
sound of the trumpet, and has no care of himself, when the sword comes and
takes him away, that man's blood shall be upon his own head, as the prophet
Ezech. c. 33.
Ezechiel says. I have discharged my conscience: it is your part to look to
the rest. And I hope you will give your selves no rest, until such time as
order be taken with those, that if they may have their wills, will trouble the
rest and peace both of Church and state.

Laus Deo.
A BRIEF REFVTATION OF A CERTAIN CALVMNIOVS relation of the conference passed
betwixt the Lord of PLESSIS MARLI, and I. PERON, calling himself bishop of
Eureux, the fourth of May last, sent from Rome into England, and devised by
some idle Jesuit to the slander of that noble and virtuous Gentleman, and of
true religion, which he professes.

Therein also the relators cogging glosses and commentaries are examined, and
his petition is answered.

Proverb. 27. The wounds of a lover are better, then the fraudulent kisses of
an enemy. Matthew. 7. Hypocrita, eijce primum trahem de oculo tuo, and tunc
videbis eijcere festucam de oculo fratris tui. Imprinted at London, by Arn.
Hatfield. 1600.

The Preface to the Reader.
SCarcely had I finished the former discourses in answer of N. D. his
Ward-word, but there came to my hands a pamphlet of the same Author, and
entitled, A relation of the trial made before the king of France, about some
matters of religion, etc. made in disgrace not only of the Lord of Plessis, my
honorable friend whom I love, but also of true religion, which jointly with
him I do profess. In his former treatise N. D. plays the fencer, here his
maship plays the scribe, in Dolmans dialogue he professes himself a
statist. His own friends charge him with Turkeied machiauelisme: whereby it
appears, that among other parts he plays now and then Machiauel or Mahomet.
In his discourses against the Lord of Leicester, and the L. Treasurer late
deceased, and others, he plays the libeller. And as one says of Pasquin, he
is put to play all parts. For as Pasquin takes upon him diverse persons, and
speaks now like an Angel, now like a devil; now like a king, and presently
like a beggar; now like a pope, and eftsoons like a poor parasite; now like a
merchant, and by and by like a man of war; yea and abhors not to play the
part of a poet, a curtisan, or a Iebusite: so our friend Robert Parsons
transformeth himself into all shapes, and plays all parts, save the part of
an honest man. As Plato in Jove.
Plato says in like case of one, he turns himself like to Proteus into all
forms, turning up and down without order. (...). He is also like to Empusa,
whom In ranis.
Aristophanes does thus describe: (...).
(...),
(...), etc.
He says that Empusa shows her self sometime like a great beast, sometime
like an ox, sometime like a mule, sometime like a dog. So likewise our
adversary sometime barketh and fauneth like a dog, sometime pusheth like an
ox, sometime he has no more understanding, then a mule. But men of judgment
suppose, that he is of nearest alliance to Pasquin, and not unlike him both in
shape, manners, and language, as his great practice and skill in Pasquinadoes do
declare. Wherefore as before I have encountered this furious fencer in his
challenge made to Sir Fr. Hastings in the Wardword: so here I purpose to meet
with his turning devises in this Relation sent from Rome to his consorts in
England, with a purpose to disgrace us. neither do I mean to leave him, into
what form soever he shall turn himself. Horace.
Effugiet nunquam haec sceleratus vincula Proteus. Unless it would please God
to give him grace to turn from his wicked ways, and treasons, and to return
to himself, and to a due consideration of his duty.

You may think him a strange and variable fellow, that takes pains, to
signify as far as from Rome into England, what had passed hard by our doors,
and whereof we cannot choose, but have more certain and speedy intelligence,
then himself, or others residing at Rome. But such is his noble pleasure. From
a fencer, and a Jesuit, and a great Rabbin of the Romish synagogue, he is now
turned into a base scribe, and relator of Romish news: and believes that his
report will be the rather received, especially coming thus turned and disguised
from Rome; which is the fountain from whence the popish sect receive all their
traditions. It may be also that he hops to draw a great hand upon us by his
triu^phing relation concerning the trial passed betwixt the L. of Plessis, and
the pretended B. of Eureux, which in Rome was heard with great applause, and
well liked by his holy father. But if he had better considered of the matter,
and could have imagined, that his relation should have received opposition, and
his collections, answer; I believe he would have spared his labor, or rather
spent it in some other libelling discourse; wherein his skill is greater, then in
disputing of religion. For first no man can have less reason to exclaim upon
falsifications, and corruptions of ancient authors, then the popish sect.
Neither can it prove, but a matter very dangerous to the pope, to have this
point well examined: whose authority and doctrine does for the most part depend
upon false legends, forged acts of councels, counterfeit writings set out under
the name of fathers, and notorious falsifications. It will also be a means to
detect the falsehood of the Romish synagogue, that long since by Petrarch was
called Fucina d'inganni, or the mint of falsehood and iugling tricks, and of the
whore of Babylon, that is most famous for her illusions, deceits, and false
dealings: and finally the kingdom of antichrist, that is so powerful in
prodigious 2 Thessalonians. ^.
lies, and all deceiueablenesse of iniquity.

Secondly, it will appear by examination of particulars, that the L. of Plessis
was most unjustly charged with falsifications in his book published against
the mass: and that James Peron pretended bishop of Eureux, notwithstanding all
his advantages, which the kings favor, and partiality of the auditorie, and
other circumstances could afford him, was not able to justify his challenge.

Thirdly, we will plainly prove, that the popish sect have gained nothing by
this conference but shame and confusion. For if a Gentleman that makes not
profession of divinity, were able in so unequal terms to stand against so
proud an adversary, so mightily supported by the princes favor; what might be
done, if the chief teachers of our side were upon good conditions to dispute
before indifferent judges and auditors? All this by Gods grace we mean to
justify in this brief discourse ensuing. Therein also for thy further
satisfaction we purpose both to examine his relation, and to answer his
observations and petitions: and to remove this reproach (as 1. Reg. c. 17.
David offering to go against the Philistim said) from Gods people. For what is
this incircumcised Philistim, that he should dare to speak evil of the army
of the living God, or of his Church? If Parsons mean to reply, let him pull off
his visor, and come barefaced into the field, and he shall not want those that
will encounter him.

This small Treatise, together with the rest that go before, I commend to thy
reading, to let thee understand the great poverty of the adversary, (...).
Plutarch. lib. de auscultando.
that upon so small causes makes so great brags and triumphs, and with brave
words b sets out his musty mustard pots. The principal points have been
sufficiently handled both in French and English before; yet shall it not be
amiss to remove all their cauils, and to encounter such winding serpents in all
their turning devises. If the matter answer not thy expectation, thou must
impute it to the baseness of the subject, and the vanity of the relators
narration. The discourse will not be long, and therefore much labor it cannot
cost thee to read it. Read therefore and judge who they are, that are to be
charged with false and fraudulent allegations, which is now the different
betwixt Parsons and us.

A brief refutation of a certain calumnious relation of the trial betwixt
the Lord PLESSIS MARLI, and the pretended bishop of Eureux, the 4. of May last,
with an answer to the relators observations and petitions.
CHAP. I.
That the popish faction has no reason to charge others with falsification.

IT is an old custom among our adversaries, when they cannot answer directly
to our arguments, to cavil at our allegations, as if all were untrue or
defective, because some errors are pretended in some authorities or quotations.
This course did Harding and his consortes take against bishop Jewel of
reverend memory, and others against that painful and zealous servant of God
master John Fox, and diverse others, eluding with scorn, that which in earnest
they are not able to answer. Now James Peron calling himself the bishop of
Eureux in France, and this relator by his scornful letters, sent into
England, attempt the same way against the painful labors of the Lord of
Plessis in his most learned treatise against the idolatrous mass, most
ridiculously supposing, if he have mistaken Scotus, or Durandus, or Bernard,
or some homily of Chrysostom, or some other author, that all his other
allegations and arguments, wherein no error can be found or justly pretended,
are weak and of no moment.

But while they charge others, they seem utterly to forget themselves, and
their own notorious corruptions and falsifications. They put them all into
that part of Aesops wallet, that hangs at their backs, and remove both
faults and wallet out of their sight. Catull. in Scazonte.
Non vident manticae, quod in tergo est. They, as the hypocrites, of whom our
Matthew. 7.
Savior speaks, Epsy a mote in their brothers eye, and see not the beam in
their own eyes. Nay being blind themselves, they are much offended and
exclaim at every blemish, which they epsy in other men's eyes. For never did
any sect either of heretics or philosophers use such fraud and falsification
in maintaining their errors, as the papists have done to make good their most
abominable doctrine and practice. To relate all were a matter of great time and
labor. We will therefore only touch so much, as may serve to prove them to
be most culpable in that, whereof they accuse others.

First then we say, and against Parsons and the whole route of Iebusites and
Cananites, God willing, shall prove, that they have falsified and corrupted
the most holy word of God and his holy Testament. For if those which have
hidden, or kept away the Testament or last will of a mortal man, or have taken
away the same by force, or abolished it, or torn it, or made a new, or
written a false Testament, or used it, signed it, or procured it to be done;
then much more the papists that have falsified Gods eternal word, are to be
condemned as guilty of falsehood. But that is confirmed by the words of ye
law. Committitur falsum says the ff. de falsis. and Hostiens. de crim. falls..
qualiter committatur. and ad l. Cor. de falls.
law, si quis testamentum celauerit, amouerit, rapuerit, deleuerit,
interleuerit, subiecerit, vel falsum testamentum scripserit, signauerit,
recitauerit, doloue malo ea fieri procurauerit. The consequent is proved by
the practice of the papists. For first they have of a long time hidden Gods
word, as it were a candle under a bushel, and covered it over with the
plaster of their traditions and popish interpretations. Secondly they have
removed the scriptures from the eyes of the multitude, and kept the same from
them in a tongue unknown, not suffering any to read them, but such as they are
assured will not profit by them. Thirdly such as by any means have gotten
them, they have taken and punished severely taking the testament of God
violently out of their hands. Fourthly they have Index librorum prohibit.
abolished not only all vulgar, but also all Latin translations, except such
as they made themselves. Fifthly they have burnt, and torn and abused Gods holy
Testament. Sixthly for Gods word they have given unto us a most corrupt
translation, and made that more authentical, then the original. Seventhly
they have made a false testament contained in their unwritten traditions.
Eighthly they will have no other testament exhibited or used, or alleged in
schools, but their old Latin vulgar translation. Lastly they have taken away
that Sacrament from the people, wherein the new testament is established, and
made frustrate Christ his institution and last will, omitting no means that
could be devised for the corrupting, falsifying and abolishing of Gods
eternal testament, and the seals thereof. Nay certain Matthew. Paris.
Carmelites about 300. years agone having made a testament of their own
devise, were not afeard to teach, that Christ's Gospel should cease, and that
their Gospel should for ever after be received. Bonauenture likewise
falsifying the Psalms of David turned the praises of God to the praises of our
Lady.

Secondly they have falsified the canons of the Apostles. In epistola ad
Siculos.
Zepherinus allows 60. Contra epist. Nicet. Abbatis.
Leo the ninth receives only fifty; others 85. C. Sancta. etc. canones.
did. 15.
others condemn them, as apocryphal writings forged by heretics. They have
also put forth the constitutions of the apostles under the name of Clement,
which savor nothing of the apostles divine spirit, and are likely to be the
devises of heretics.

Thirdly they have most shamefully corrupted the councels, and have not only
forged diverse new acts, and pieces of acts, but also new councels. In the
sixth council of Carthage the popes agents exhibited a counterfeit canon of the
council of Nice, and were convicted Acta synodi Carth. 6.
of that falshoode by authentical copies sent from other churches. Pius
Quintu^ when the emperor repined for that he had made Cosmus of Florence duke
of Tuscane, alleged for himself a forged canon of the council of Nice. E
sentenza says he, Girol. Caten. in literis Pij quinti.
di tutti theologi e canonisti, and determinatione di concilij, massimamente
del Niceno, che 'l successor di San Pietro sia signore and rettore di tutti i
principi del nome Christiano, de tutte le prouincie and tutte le genti,
anathematizando, chiunque cio ardisse contradire. Parsons may do well to
exhibit this canon, where the pope is made Lord of all princes and provinces,
and all excommunicated that dare say contrary: unless he will have his holy
father condemned of impious forgerie. Ruffine and other authors say there were
but twenty canons made in that council. But these good fellows by a
counterfeit letter of Athanasius, would bring in a great number more. Carranza
says, many more canons were there established.

Where the second council of Constantinople C. 36.
decreed, yt the sea of Constantinople should be equal to the sea of old
Rome, as appears by the acts both in Greek and Latin; in their C.
Renouantes did. 22. etc. antiqua extr. de priuileg.
decrees, the popes have turned this canon quite contrary, as if that council
had decreed, that the sea of Constantinople should not be equal to old Rome.

The council of Carthag. 6. c. 105.
Carthage decreed against the church of Rome, Vt qui ad transmarma putauerit
appellandum, a nullo ad communionem intra Africam reciperetur. But Gratian in
the chap. Placuit. 2. q. 6. adds these words, Nisi forte Romanam sedem
appellauerit. out of a certain council of Carthage that would have priests
to abstain from their wives, in proprijs terminis, in the chap. Placuit. did.
32. they have put out, proprijs terminis.

In the Can. 35.
council of Laodicea, where the worship of angels is forbidden, they have
turned angelos, into angulos, and so marred the whole sense. To end this point,
under the name of Syluester, Syricius, Gelasius, and other popes they have
forged whole councels, whereof in authentical writings there is neither
proo^e, nor memorial to be found.

Fourthly their manifold corruptions of the writings of the fathers, cannot in
few words be described. First under the names of fathers they have published
most childish toies, vain fables, and unlearned patcheries, as by their
additions to the works of Cyprian, Origin, Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose,
Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostom, Gregory, and diverse others, is evidently
testified. For Caesar Baronius, Bellarmine and others do in part confess so
much; and if they should not, yet would the style, and doctrine diverse from
that of the fathers, to whom they are ascribed, convince these treatises to be
misbegotten, and not to belong to the fathers, whose name they bear: yet are
they offended with those, that censure these counterfeit sermons, orations, and
treatises, and cease not to use them.

Next they have taken diverse words, lines, and sometimes whole chapters out of
the fathers writings, and under color of correcting, have quite corrupted the
fathers. As appears by their Rubarbatif, or as they call them expurgatorie
indexes, that are daily increased; and may be proved further by comparing the
old books with the new editions approved by the Cananites and Iebusites,
that cannot endure either truth, or the professors thereof.

Another practice also they have, to abuse and disgrace the fathers of the
church, that they add words now and then, and alter the text of their true
writings; as also comparison of books will ^asily show.

Fifthly under the names of the ancient bishops of Rome they have published
mere fooleries, and false constitutions refuted plainly by the stories of the
times wherein they lived, by the estate of that church in time of persecution,
and by the barbarousnesse of the Gothike language, wherein they are written,
savoring of otherages and authors, then those whose names they bear. Of this
stamp are the epistles that carry the names of Clement, Anacletus, Euaristus,
Alexander, Telesphorus, Hyginius, Pius, and such like.

Sixthly for the enlarging of their dominion and authority, the popes have set
out C. Constantinus did. 96.
first a false donation surmised to be made by Constantine, and therein they
say he gave them Rome, Italy, France, Germany, and all the west empire, and
also most ample privileges and authority. A matter so false and vain, as it
may be woondred, with what sa^e the popes can allege so manifest a forgery,
being contradicted by the Socrat. hist. lib. 3. c. vlt. and S^xt. Aurel.
Victor. and Zosimus.
emperor Constantines testament, and by ancient histories; by the state of the
Roman bishops for many years after, and by the brutish and barbarous fashion
and frame of the instrument, and therefore disallowed even by the Antonin. 1.
part. hist. tit. 8. c. 1. and Cusanus de concord. cathol. 3.
adversaries themselves, that have either modesty or learning. They have also
set out another donation under the name of Ego Ludouicus. did.
Ludouicus, almost to the same purpose, but yet not so large as the other. That
the same is forged it may appear both for that it contradicts Constantines
donation, and for that the two diverse copies, that are Volater. Geograph. lib.
3.
extant do contradict one another. For writings that are diverse, and
derogatorie one to another make no strong proof. Scripturae diuersae, and
fidem sibi inuicem derogantes nihil habere firmitatis possunt, as says the L.
scripturae Cod. de fid. instrument.
emperor. Neither can two contrary propositions be taken for true, as
lawyers hold l. s^is qui.. vtrum. ff. de reb. dub. and l. vbi pugnantia. ff.
de regulis iuris.

To give color also to the counterfect claim made by the popes of Rome for
their universal power ever the whole Church, they have Cod. de sum. trinit.
and fide cath. l. inter claras.
thrust a counterfect epistle of Justinian the Emperor, and an epistle of John
bishop of Rome among the imperial laws of the Code: whereby they would
prove, that the Emperor here did subject himself, and the church of
Constantinople to the bishop of Rome, and made him head of the church. That
these letters are forged it may appear First, for that they are not found in
ancient Manuscript books, which is also testified by Parerg. lib. 5. c. 23.
Alciat. Secondly, for that it is an old fashion for the popes of Rome to foyst
in false canons, false acts, and false laws for establishing their authority.
Thirdly, for that it contains diverse points repugnant to the L. cognoscere.
Cod. de sum. Trinit. and fid. cath.
epistle and law next precedent. For here the emperor is made to signify,
that now he first published this confession, and sent it to be allowed or
disallowed by John bishop of Rome, where it is notoriously apparent, that he
had published the same confession and sent it to Epiphanius bishop of
Constantinople a year before, and diverse other churches, as may appear by the
dates of both epistles, and by his L. cum saluatorem. Cod. eod.
edicts sent to the Churches of Constantinople, Ephesus, Cesarea, Trapezuntium,
Cyzicus, Amida, Apamea, and others. Fourthly, this epistle does here constitute
the bishop of Rome head of the church, whereas Ado of Vienna in his Chronicle,
and Iuo in his Chronicle, and Platina in the life of Boniface the third do
testify, that this title was first given to Boniface the third, almost
seventy years after. Fifthly, the same is confuted by Gregory the first his
epistles, that always disalloweth this universal power in a bishop, and
condemns him, that would be accounted universal bishop, and acknowledges
the Emperors power over him. Sixthly, this epistle is refuted by two imperial
constitutions l. 24. Cod. de sacrosanctis ecclesijs. Et l. decernimus. eod.
tit. that give superiority to the church of Constantinople, and make her
(...). and call her matrem pietatis, and Christianorum orthodoxae religionis
omnium. Seventhly, it is also con^radicted by diverse other laws of the
emperor. For here he promises, that he will do nothing in matters of
religion, but first he will make the bishop of Rome acquainted withal, to have
his judgment; and yet after that, of his absolute authority he made many
ecclesiastical laws Nouel. 6.11. and 123.
concerning the creation and consecration of Bishops, the number of patriarchs
and archbishops, their jurisdictions, and privileges, Nouel. 3.
concerning the remoouing of clerks from one church to another, and their
ordination, Nouel. 16.
concerning supplying the number of the clergy, concerning the Nouel. 5.
marriage of clerks, and not marying of monks, Nouel. 5. and 133.
concerning monks and nuns, Nouel. 58.
concerning the holy communion, Nouel. 137.
concerning the form of divine service, and diverse such like matters. Nay he
made laws, that bound the bishop of Rome, as well as other bishops, as may
evidently be gathered out of the Nouel. constit. 123. Iubemus, says he,
Archiepiscopes and patriarchas veteris Romae, and Constantinopolis, and
Alexandr^ae, and Theopolis, etc. And out of the seventh Nouel constitution,
where it is by him ordained, vt nulla ecclesia quae sub Romana est ditione,
sicentiam habeat alienand^res immobiles. Finally, there is a more flattering
and indecent form of assentation used in this epistle, then ever Justinian
used: and here he terms the bishop of Romes See, Apostolicam sedem, which
style is no less due to other churches, and uses a style different from other
his epistles. Semper says he, nobis in voto fuit, and est, vt decet, honorare
vt patrem, vestram beatitudinem. And again, petimus vestrum paternum affectum,
vt vestras ad nos destinetis literas. And, suscipit vestra sanctitas. And
afterward, petimus vestram beatitudinem Dei nobis acquirere prouidentiam.
Properamus omnes sacerdotes orie^tis vestrae subijcere sedi. Properamus per
omnia honorem crescere vestrae sedis. Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus festinat
in omnibus sequisedem apostolicam beatitudinis vestrae. And in the end, Deitas
te conseruet per multos annos, sancte ac religiosistime pater. Which style as
it is monkish and soppish; so it is far from Justinians vein. And to think
that Justinian wrote in Greek to the Romain bishop is absurd, albeit to color
the matter some hungry Greek has translated this epistle out of Latin into
Greek.

To come nearer to matters of our times, there is no christian kingdom, but
the popes have forged writings to prove the some either f^udatarie, or
tributarie to the Sea of Rome. In the Augustine. Steuch. de donat. Constant. and
in registro Alexandr. 3.
register of Alexander the third, challenge is made to the kingdom of England.
Nouit prouidentia tua, says Alexander the third, Anglorum regnum, ex quo
Christi nomen ibi glorificatum est, sub apostolorum principis manu and tutela
extitisse. Vbi supra.
Augustine Steuchus does also tell us, that there are instruments in the popes
archiues to be exhibited to prove the kingdoms of Aragon, Croatia, Dalmatia,
Denmark, Spain, Hungary, Poland, Ruscia, yea and the empire of Rome it self
to be subject to the Sea of Rome. Bonifacius the eight, Nicolas Gillius Annal.
Gal.
writing to the king of France says, scire te volumus, quod in spiritualibus
and temporalibus nobis subes. Pius the fifth to prove his right to inuest
Cosmus with the title of great Duke of Tuscane, ex certa scientia says In vita
Cosmi edit. an. 1569. apud Aldum Ma^ut.
he, maturaque deliberatione nostris, ac de supremae nostrae apostolicae
potestatis plenitudine, tam dictorum praedecessorum, quam etiam Alexandri
tertij, and Innocentij pariter tertij, ac Pauli quarti similiter praedecessorum
nostrorum, qui Portugalliae, ac Bulgarorum, ac Blachorum, necnon Hiberniae
reges, and vt tunc Dux Bohemiae rex in suis literis nominari possit, respective
crearunt, constituerunt, and concesserunt, etc. whereby it appears, that of
certain knowledge and full deliberation he alleges false instruments, and is
a most notorious falsarie, and that for no less matters, then for whole
kingdoms.

7. they have with their martyrologies, and impudent lying legends, and false
and forged traditions corrupted, not only the history of the church, but also
a great part of their religion. And to make these forgeries more pleasing, they
have suborned and hired Caesar Baronius with his lying Annals, to allege
proofs for them.

8. they have also set the babbling Jesuits and their consorts on work to
justify all the corruptions of the Romish synagogue, and to make good the
popes decretales. Whose writings who list to peruse, he shall find millions of
falsifications, as the writings of Friar Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, and
Suares, and their consorts; of Harding, Stapleton, Allen, and others do
testify. And this the treatises of diverse learned men daily set out against
their falsifications and corruptions do plainly demonstrate. The same also, if
friar Parsons will continue his challenge, shall be justified by infinite
particulars.

Finally, they have neither left scriptures, fathers, councels, stories, old
nor new writers sound: neither have they omitted any one trick of
falsification, that any falsarie could devise, which they have not practiced.

First, falsehood is committed in writings. Neither is it material, whether
they be public, or private; whether testamentarie, or belonging to any other
contract. And as well is forgerie committed by concealing a true writing, as by
forging or using false writings. Falsum committitur, says De crimine falsi.
Hostiensis, aliquando cum scriptura, sieve scribat quis falsum, sieve deleat
verum, vt res, id est, rei veritas non appareat. Nec discrepat, vtrum fit
testamentum, instrumentumue publicum vel priuatum, etc.

Secondly, it is committed by using and producing of false instruments and
writings. Vtens falso instrumento dicitur falsum committere. l. maiorem. Cod.
de falsis. Especially if they be used wittingly, Barbat. lib. 3. consil. 54.
Numer. 16. and seq.

Thirdly, that Gloss. in l. ex cautione. ff. de pactis.
notarie, that shall in a true instrument write any material point false; or
in a testament set down a legacy to his own advantage, is taken and adjudged
a falsarie. l. 1.. fin. ad l. Corn. de falsis. Et l. senatusconsulto. Cod. de
his qui sibi ascrib.

Fourthly, falsehood is committed, either by witnesses deposing falsely. l. 1.
ff. de falsis. etc. 1. de crim. falsi. or else by suborning, or producing false
witnesses, or using the depositions of false witnesses, as is the common
opinion of lawyers, in l. 1. de falsis, etc. 1. de crim. falsi.

Fifthly, it may be committed in delivering counterfect money, or counterfect
measure, or in supposing or fathering children upon parents, to whom they
belong not; or in professing himself to be a soldier, or a clerk that is
not, and by diverse other means, as the Doctors teach in gloss. in c. in
memoriam. did. 19. and in c. vera iustitia. did. 41. and in other places. All
which falshoodes and forging devises our adversaries do most cunningly and
frequently practice. They conceal the Scriptures from Gods people, and hide
from us the originalles of Origin, Basil, Chrysostom, and other Greek fathers.

They make their traditions equal to the written word of God, and take away
the cup from the communicants, which is a seal of Gods eternal testament,
defacing and corrupting both the divine Scriptures with Apocryphal writings,
wicked interpretations, perverse translations, and diverse other devises of
their forging wits: and as much as in them lies, falsifying the seals of Gods
promises.

In the name of Basil, Amphilochius, Abdias, Clement, and diverse fathers, they
have forged diverse false treatises; and albeit we continually call upon them to
leave these conterfect writings; yet cease they not to use them.

By forged donations published under the name of Emperors and Princes, and by
diverse decretall epistles falsely ascribed to the ancient bishops of Rome, they
challenge to themselves large kingdoms, and an universal authority over the
world.

Not only themselves speak and write most shameful untruths, and that both
in matters of faith and policy; but also they use the counterfect writings of
others set out under the names of their predecessors, as their whole disputes
with us do witness.

They do also deliver to us counterfect doctrine of another stamp, and alley,
then that of the apostles and ancient fathers; and a false rule of faith,
adding their traditions and the popes determinations to the true rule, and
conioyning them to the canonical Scriptures: of which unruly rule antiquity
never had notice.

Neither are they ashamed to father their own bastards, and bastardly devises
upon Origin, Cyprian, Athanasius, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Gregory, and other ancient holy men; who if they were alive, would wonder how
these misbegotten devises came to be ascribed to them: and would utterly
renounce them.

In their relations, narrations, histories, and testifications published of
late time they neither use religion, nor truth, nor common honesty. Caesar
Baronius does smoothly tell infinite lies and fables. Staphilus, Cochleus,
Lindanus, Surius, Genebrard, Bolsecus, and such like lying mates care not what
lies, or false tales they write, so they may publish any thing, that may
redound to the sclander of the professors of the truth. The like shameless
course has Sanders, Rishton, Ribadineira, Parsons, Allen, and other traitors
and enemies of this state, taken, to disgrace her majesty, and her noble
progenitors, and all that stand well affected to religion and their country.
Parsons has set out false titles to pervert the right of succession to the
crown, in his damnable discourse of titles. Such witnesses as these, the popes
of Rome and their adherents have both suborned and hired to speak all manner
of sclandrous untruths against honest men. And these are the witnesses which
our adversaries ordinarily produce, and whose false depositions they use,
supplying the rest with false and lying fables set out by themselves. Are not
they then notorious falsaries?

Finally, our adversaries take on them to be bishops, and priests, and every
begging and base friar is bold to usurp pastoral function. Nay, the popes of
Rome usurp, not only the authority of bishops, having nothing but the bare
name of bishops; but also the authority and prerogatives of Christ Jesus,
falsely appropriating that to themselves, that is only due to Christ Jesus.

The popes of Rome therefore and their agents, consorts, and adherents are
notorious falsificators, and have surpassed all the world in fraud, forgerie
and falsehood* and that shall Parsons the relator, or rather delator and false
accuser of his brethren well perceive, if he dare encounter these objections.

As for his objections either against the Lord of Plessis, or against the
reverend fathers bishop Jewel. Peter Martyr, master Fox, master Fulke, they
are most vain and frivolous: and the falsifications imputed unto them most
falsely charged upon them: as first shall be showed in the first, which is the
principal subject of our adversaries relation, and consequently, as occasion
serves, in the rest.

Chap. II.
That the Lord of Plessis has been most unjustly charged with false
allegations in his book published against the Mass.

I Am not ignorant, that the Lord of Plessis has not only acquitted himself
of the calumnious imputations of his adversaries, but also has been
sufficiently justified against al their objections by other learned men in
discourses published both in French and English. Neither needs he any further
defense of mine. Yet seeing this relator would needs be scribbling into England
such vain objections, as have been already answered: I thought it not amiss
to advertise thee briefly, what has passed in this cause, of which either our
relator is ignorant, or else dissembleth, after his Machiauelian fashion.

The first place, which Peron his adversary in the conference at Fontainbleau
pretended to be falsified by the Lord of Ples^is in his treatise against the
mass, was drawn out of Scotus, and therefore was he charged with falsehood,
for that he says, that Scotus durst call into question, whether Christ's body
be really contained under the forms, and disputes, that he is not. But Perons
foundation was too weak to bear so great a charge. For albeit Scotus had not
so done, or spoken; yet could not the Lord of Plessis be charged with
falsification, seeing he does not quote his words, but set down his own
collection. The most that could be said was, that he had mistaken the meaning
of Scotus. And yet if he had charged him only with mistaking, himself had
been mistaken, and greatly had he wronged his adversary. For it cannot be
denied, but that Scotus does indeed call into question, whether Christ's body be
really by transubstantiation contained under the forms of bread and wine, and
disputes that it is not: which is all that the Lord of Plessis does say of
Scotus, for which he is challenged by his wrangling adversary. Neither is it
material, that this is the use of schools, first to object against the truth,
and afterward to resolve what is true, and to answer the objections. For that
does not disprove M. Plessis his assertion, seeing Scotus does not only in his
objections, but also in his resolution of that question say as much, as M.
Plessis collected out of him. Nay he seems rather to dislike
transubstantiation then otherwise. Magis, says In 4. sentent. did. 10. q. 1.
he, repraesentat (panis cum suis accidentibus) corpus Christi in ratione
nutrimenti spiritualis. And again he In 4. sentent. did. 11. q. 3.
says: If another interpretation were admitted for Christ's presence in the
sacrament, that fewer miracles should need Pauciora ponuntur miracula:
Plainly disliking that interpretation, that without diverse miracles cannot be
maintained. He does also argue strongly against transubstantiation out of
scriptures, and answers his own arguments very weakly and coldly, and in
the end affirms, that the determination of the Church of Rome did principally
move him to believe the doctrine of transubstantiation. Of which it follows
very necessarily, albeit he was content to subscribe to the Popes
determination, and durst not do otherwise, yet that he himself thought
otherwise for the reasons by him alleged, and so not we only, but Dominicke a
Soto takes it: against whom Josephus Angles a Scotist labors much to defend
Scotus, as not dissenting from the church of Rome; and yet satisfies no man
soundly.

The second place was taken out of Durand who says, that it is rashness to
affirm, that the body of Christ may not by the power of God be in the
sacrament by other manner, then by the conuer^^on of bread into his body.
Neither can it be denied but that Durand has these words, as they were
alleged by M. de Plessis. Why then is he charged with falsification? Forsooth
because, they say, he took the opposition for the resolution. But he that
looks on Durands book shall find these words not in the oppositions only, but
also in his resolution; and that he does much insist upon this point, and
says, that it is durum and temerarium, that is, a point of impudency and
temeritie to hold the contrary, seeing it brings with it so many
inconveniences. It may also plainly be gathered of his words, that the
determination only of the council of Lateran, and the Romish church moved him
to hold transubstantiation* which not we only, but also De sacram. eucharist.
lib. 3. c. 11.
Bellarmine does note in him, taring him for hard belief of
transubstantiation, and saying, that the material part of the bread is not by
consecration converted into the body of Christ.

The third place objected against M. Plessis, was drawn out of Chrysostom
homil. 1. in 1 Thessalonians. 1. but neither can his adversary prove this place to be
falsified by him, nor impertinently alleged. Not the first, for that he does
not allege Chrysostoms words, but makes a collection upon them. Not the
second for that as M. Plessis affirms it may evidently be gathered out of his
words, that we must not rely upon the prayers of the Saints, but work our
salvation with fear and trembling. Neither is it material, that these words,
If we be negligent, are omitted: for they are not to purpose, seeing
Chrysostom would not have us rely upon the intercession of saints, albeit we
be diligent, to do our endeavor our selves. Again, seeing he concludes of the
words, and does not rehearse them precisely, he had no reason to write all
down that came in his way. It is also objected, that Chrysostom allows
intercession of saints. But be it he did so, yet does not this convince, that
he is falsely alleged by M. Plessis, seeing that which he gathered may be true,
albeit this were granted. How much then is it more unlikely, that he shall be
convicted, seeing Chrysostom in that place has nothing, which does not
appertain rather to the prayers of holy men living, then of holy men departed?

The fourth place was taken out of a certain Homily of Chrysostom upon
Matthew, where, as the L. of Plessis alleges, he says we have much more
assurance through our own prayers, then through the prayers of others, and
that God saves us, not so soon at others requests, as at our own. And this
the adversary himself could not deny to be truly alleged. How then came it
to pass, that dealing thus justly and truly, he should notwithstanding be
charged with falsification? Forsooth says his adversary, because he left out
the words following, viz. Et haec non dicimus, vt supplicandum sanctis negemus:
and for that he applied Chrysostoms words against prayers to saints departed.
As if it were so heinous a matter, not to set down words altogether
impertinent: or as if it did not follow, that we are not to rely upon saints
prayers, and that therefore we are not so continually to pray to saints, and so
to trust to their intercession, as the church of Rome does, that makes prayers
to saints a great piece of their Church-seruice. But were it that the argument
were not good, yet the adversary will not grant, that Bellarmine and his
consorts do commit falsifications, as often as they bring weak, or euil-shapen
arguments. It was also further answered, that Chrysostom had nothing, that
might force us to believe that he taught or believed prayers to Saints
departed; which may serve fully to answer all the adversaries vain
cauillations.

The fifth objection was, for that citing these words out of Hieroms
commentaries upon Ezechiel lib. 4. in cap. 14. Bonum est confidere in Domino,
etc. he left out these words, si negligentes fuerint. But Falsum non
committitur sine dolo.
no falsification can be committed without fraud. Now what fraud could be
imagined in omitting words that make nothing for his adversary, or against
himself? Beside that the ordinary gloss does rehearse these words no
otherwise, then the Lord of Plessis quoteth them, whom I think the Malheureux
Bishop of Eureux will not charge with falsification. It was also here objected,
that Hieroms words in Ezech. cap. 4. make nothing against prayers to saints.
But it must be remembered, that the controversy here was not, whether M.
Plessis had well concluded out of that ^lace, but whether he had rightly
alleged it. Beside that, we answer, that it is no weak argument to conclude
thus, we must not trust in the prayers of men, and therefore are not to rely
upon the prayers of men departed this life. Finally, writing upon the epistle
to the Galathians c Hierome does flatly condemn prayers made to Saints
departed, and for dead men. Lib. 2. in epist. ad Galat.
Obscure licet docemur, says he, per hanc sententiam nouum dogma quod latitat.
(...) praesenti seculo sumus, sieve orationibus sieve consilijs inui^ posse nos
coadiuuare. Cum autem ante tribunal Christi venerimus, non Job, non Daniel, nec
Noe rogare posse pro quoquam; sed vnumquemque portare onus suum. He says, when
we are here, we may help one another, signifying that men departed this world,
can neither help others, nor be helped by prayers of others.

The sixth place, which the Lord of Plessis was charged, to have corrupted, was
drawn out of Cyril contra Iulianum lib. 6. And why was he charged think you?
Forsooth because he alleged him to prove, that adoration was not to be
yielded to the sign of the cross. But herein there could not be any
falsification used; and that first, for that he did not allege the authors
words: and secondly, for that he does well conclude according to Cyrils
meaning. For where Julian objected to Christians, that they worshipped the
cross: Cyril answers, that these words proceeded of bad thoughts, and
extreme ignorance. So likewise says Minutius Felix in his apology; cruces nec
adoramus nec optamus. That is, we neither worship, nor desire crosses.

The seventh place was out of Petrus Crinitus; where the L. of Plessis is
charged to leave out the word humi, alleging the law of Theodosius and Valens
against the making of the sign of the cross. But his accusers should have
remembered, that he did allege not the words, as now they are found in books
falsified by idolaters, and crosse-worshippers, but out of Petrus Crinitus,
which cites the law out of authentical records. Our wise relator here, to
make the matter seem more heinous, says he falsified the law of Theodosius,
Valens, and Justinian; as if they had been joint authors of that law, when as
Justinian was not yet in the world, when that law was made. Neither is it much
material, if Tribonian in the Emperors name had put in the word humi. For we
are rather to rely upon the originals, then upon Tribonians honesty, that put
words in and out, and altered laws at pleasure. Neither was the law of
Theodosius and Valens to be reputed new, albeit the word Humi had been left
out, seeing both Epiphanius and the council of Eliberis in Spain, and diverse
other fathers had condemned paintings of images.

The eight place was taken out of S. Bernard, Epist. 174. she needs no false
honors, says Bernard, speaking of the virgin Mary, being as she is, at the
fullness thereof. Again he says that it was no honor, but a taking away of
honor, and, that the feast of her conception was never well instituted. Here
his accuser charged the Lord of Plessis to have omitted these words, Magnifica
gratiae inuentricem, mediatricem salutis, restauratricem seculorum. As if it
were necessary, where diverse places are alleged out of one author, to write
out all that comes betwixt one and other. This is a new trick of Eureux, who
albeit he He has set out a treatise to prove this position.
hold the scriptures to be insufficient, and therein has tried his poor
talent of writing; yet would have more then is sufficient alleged out of
fathers and other authors. Beside that the Lord of Plessis alleging the
authority of Bernard does not dissemble in what esteem he held the holy
virgin Mary. Finally, he alleged Bernard, not as an authentical witness, but
as a man favoring his adverse party, whose confession is strong against the
papists, but not for them, being nourished in monastical errors, and
superstitions. Nay the papists themselves do not allow all Bernards opinions.
for they celebrate our Ladies co^ception, which he disallowed, and do not hold
our Lady to be mediatricem salutis, as he terms her, but rather mediatricem
intercessionis: and yet give her such extrauagant honor, as both he, and
Epiphanius writing against the heretics called Collyridians, much misliked.

The last place was taken out of Theodoret. God does what he pleases, says In
Psalm. 113.
he, But images are made as pleases men; they have the places of senses, but
they have no sense. Here M. Plessis was charged first for translating
Simulachra or (...), images: and next for leaving out these words, a gentibus
culta. As if every one, that did translate amiss, were to be charged with
falsification, or as if all bad translations in the old Latin interpreter of ye
bible were so many falsifications. Beside that, he offered to prove, and most
true it is, that every image having idolatrous or heathenish worship done to
it, is idolum. Isai. 40. where the old Latin interpretor has Simulachrum, the
Greek word is, (...): and Deuter. 4. that word which the Latin interpreter
translateth Simulachrum, the Greek interpreter translateth (...). Neither do
either Greek or Latin authors of any antiquity put such a difference betwixt
the words Simulachrum, (...), and imago, as our papists do. To the second it
was answered, that the words a gentibus culta being set down in the
allegation, do rather hurt, then help the papists, that worship images with
kissing, crouching, censing, praying, as the Gentiles did their idols. Those
reasons therefore, that are forcible against the idols of the Gentiles, are
also most forcible against the popish worship of images: which is more gross
idolatry in some points, then that of the heathens. For they never did give
that worship, that is due to the original, to the image. But the idolatrous
papists with one worship honor the holy Trinity, and the image of the
Trinity made by a painter: our Savior Christ, and a wooden crucifixe. And
yet this wooden relator is bound to defend this wooden cause.

If then the adversary could not get any ground of M. Plessis in these
places, which were chosen as principal, and placed first, as places of most
advantage; we may well suppose, if the trial had proceeded, that he would
have received far more disgrace in the rest.

CHAP. III.
That our adversaries have no such great cause, as they imagine, to boast of
their victory in the conference passed betwixt the Lord of Plessis, and Eureux.

BY this which has been spoken it may sufficiently appear, that the papists
had no great reason to make Parsons the Iebusite their trumpet to blow out
their victory throughout England, as they have already done it at Rome, and in
other places. For what victory can be pretended, when as yet not one corruption
or falsification could be justified against Monsieur Plessis, and when we
are able to charge not only Bellarmine, Caesar Baronius, Gregory de Valentia,
Sanders, Harding, Stapleton and their consorts, whose forgeries and
falsifications are innumerable, but also their holy fathers, whose
determinations they hold to be infallible, with infinite wilful
falsifications? And least any think we fable, of many we have begun to note
some few.

The vanity of their triumph may also appear by diverse other arguments. First
our cause depends not upon the testimony of Scotus, nor Durand, nor Petrus
Crinitus. No, nor upon two or three testimonies of this or that father. But
upon the evidence of Canonical Scriptures, and testimony of the catholic
church of all times, which we doubt not to prove both by the scriptures
themselves, and also by the interpretation and consent of the most ancient and
sound fathers. As for the writings of other fathers, we examine them by the
rule of Gods word, and receive them as far, as they agree with the rule and
foundation of faith. The testimony of later writers and schoolmen we
produce, as a confession of our adversaries against themselves, and not as a
foundation or necessary defense of the truth, which they in so many points
oppugn. They are therefore put in, to fill up the ranks of our squadrons,
rather then to do us any great service: and rather because our adversaries
esteem them; then because we think them worthy to be esteemed. If then
these authorities had been overthrown, which is not granted, yet all our
other squadrons standing firm, the adversaries cannot think they have woonne
the field.

Secondly admit one learned man of our society and communion had mistaken some
few places; yet is not every mistaking a falsification, unless it be wilful
and fraudulent; nor is every particular man's error to be ascribed to the whole
church. Nay albeit Bellarmine and Baronius be now Cardinals and men of note
among the papists; yet will not Parsons, I trow, take on him to defend,
whatsoever they have written. And albeit such a shameless mate should not
doubt to undertake any impossibility; yet the popes of Rome will not abide by
all they have written. Why then should they urge us to that, which themselves
mislike in their own cause?

Thirdly the place and form of trial and proceeding was all in favor of the
adversary, and disfavor of the Lord of Plessis. For neither had he
sufficient time to consider of matters objected, and to provide himself of
books to justify his assertions, nor so indifferent judges as was to be
desired, the king still interrupting him, and disputing against him, and leading
the judges which way it pleased himself. Nor was the auditorie indifferent,
being for the most part of contrary opinion. Nor could he by any humble
request obtain, that either his adversary might precisely be tied to his
challenge, or that his book might be examined orderly, or any thing else, that
is requisite in an indifferent trial.

Fourthly if a gentleman and no professed divine upon such unequal terms was
able to make head against his adversaries; much better, I hope, should we be
able to resist, if professed Divines, might procure an indifferent trial
allowed by both sides; and more hardly would the adversaries be able to make
good their challenges against us. Certes if Eureux could not so well acquit
himself before judges determined to judge for him, he would never be able to
appear in a free general council, or before equal judges.

Fifthly it is most ridiculous to think, that this Thrasonicall challenger was
able to make good that cause, which neither with lying, forging, facing, nor
any wit or policy, the greatest clerks of that faction are able to maintain.

Finally the very words of Eureux his challenge, do plainly convict him to
have performed nothing. I do bind my self In his answer and offer made to
Monsieur Plessis.
says he, to show, that neither in this book of his against the mass, nor
in his treatise of the church, nor in his common wealth of traditions, is there
to be found so much, as one place among them all, which is not either falsely
cited, or impertinent to the matter, or unprofitably alleged. Again He
protests and binds himself to show five hundred enormous and open
falsifications, without any amplification or exaggeration, and all these
contained in M. Plessis his only late book against the mass. And this he
said he would prove by Greek and Latin copies. But he spoke these
words, as it should seem, more of bravery, then out of judgment. for in
the first part he has utterly failed, and I think means never to perform
it. If he would be pleased, we would be glad to see his Latin and Greek
allegations, and all that performed, which he promised in writing. But many
doubt of his ability, and himself too no less then others. For being
desired, To examine M. Plessis his book leaf by leaf, and in order, he
utterly refused that course. The second part he began to handle, but has no
way accomplished his promise. For promising to show 500. enormous
falsifications, he only quoted 60. places, whereof only nine were examined,
and yet no falsification proved, but only in Eureux his challenge. If then
the defendant is to be acquitted, where the plaintiff proves nothing, or not
so much as he affirms; then is Eureux to be condemned, that in his
challenge braggeth much, alleges little, and proves nothing.

In the mean while our relator may do well to cease his vain facing and
vanting. For unless he triumph to cover his own shame and loss; there will
be no cause of triumph for him found in this trial. It is not the vain
boasting, nor the false report of this relator, that can turn truth into
falsehood, and falsehood into truth. When Eureux or any other of his consorts
shall go about to perform his challenge in writing, which well cannot be denied
nor altered; he shall find that the Lord of Plessis will be both able and
most ready to defend himself against all the calumniations of his
adversaries; and for the truth of his cause he shall never want assistance, as
long as God shall enable us to speak or write. The Kings pleasure in
censuring M. Plessis we will not examine. Neither do I think the adversaries
will allow him to be judge in their cause. The papists therefore must devise
some better matter to grace their Romish cause, then this. For neither the
trial of matters at Fontainebleau, nor this relation can help them any thing.

CHAP. IIII.
That Peter Martyr, bishop Ridley, bishop Jewel, master John Fox, master D.
Fulke, and other famous men of our communion are unjustly charged with
falsifications, and wilful corruptions, by the relator.

WE will not examine how unfitly and absurdly the accusation of these reverend
fathers above mentioned does fall within the compass of this relators
argument, that only took on him to report matters lately passed in France,
and betwixt other parties. For without further examination every man may
perceive, that this accusation was very impertinently thrust into this idle
pamphlet. But seeing our adversary thinks by traducing the memory of most
learned men, to disgrace the cause which they defended, while they lived, I
could not suffer so infamous a calumniation to pass unanswered, when they are
dead, and cannot answer for themselves. Neither may that false Iebusite, that
here takes on him the person of a relator and an accuser, think to escape
our fingers; who of all other is a most unfit man to accuse others of
falsification, being not only a false writer, but also a false traitor, and
one that has neither truth nor honesty in his dealinges, as appears in part
by that, which before has been said against him in the tormer treatise, and
shall God willing be made more apparent hereafter. But to forbear to charge
him now, let us see how we can discharge his accusation against our selves.

First, he charge Fol. 22. A
Peter Martyr for alleging ten several fathers in his disputation at Oxford
anno 1549. and yet not any one of them truly. But he is but a ridiculous
disputer, that lays ten falsifications to a man's charge, and proves not
one. Nay, he does not so much as cite one place, and note the point, wherein
this outrage is committed. Only he tells us, that he has examined their
diligently. As if that pertained any thing to the purpose. He says also, that
if any list to examine the places, and confer them with the authors books, he
shall find his saying most true. But all the falsehood, we can find, is in our
adversaries relation. He may therefore do well, to take himself leisure, and to
come better armed, or else to forbear to charge honest men with his own
faults. He says further, that this falsification may chance to appear upon
some other occasion hereafter. Unto which we answer, that we will attend his
maships leisure, and when we can hear what he will object, then he shall hear
our defense. In the mean while we tell him, that Parsons cannot face out that
with words, which with force of argument he cannot obtain: and that he must
be a simple divine, that fears to encounter so vain a bragger.

Secondly, he affirms, that bishop Fol. 22. B
Ridley in a disputation about the real presence, wherein he was president
(Martin Bucer refusing to deal in that matter) said he had five sure grounds
for the opinion of Zuinglius, viz. Scripture, fathers, etc. Whereas the truth
is, that both Scriptures and fathers make evidently against him. Which manner
of obiecting if it were sufficient to convince him of falsehood; then might all
Bellarmines works in three lines be refuted and convicted of falsehood. For
albeit he make great show of Scriptures and fathers; yet neither the one nor
the other make for him. Nay, we doubt not, but if we may have indifferent
judges, to turn them both against him. Wherefore if this brabling relator will
effect his purpose; he must note the places falsified, and prove it to his
readers. In the mean while in this narration he shows himself to be, not
only a forger of lies, but also a simple fellow to undertake this challenge
against us concerning falsifications. The first is proved first, for that the
disputation was not against the real presence, but against transubstantiation
And I doubt not but Parsons does well understand, that diverse do hold the
real presence, and that but too really and materially, and yet impugn
transubstantiation: or else in these matters he is but a very nouice.
Secondly, for that B. Ridley did not once mention Zuinglius nor his opinion,
but only determined against transubstantiation. Thirdly, for that Bucer refused
not to deal in that matter. For it appears, that others were appointed to
dispute in that question, and that he was neither appointed, nor requested to
dispute. The second may be proved, for that this ignorant fellow does not well
understand, what falsification means, albeit he be cunning in the practice*
for he imagines them to be falsaries, that allege places, that make either
not for them, or against them. But such are rather weak disputers, then
falsaries, if they do not corrupt, or curtall the words, and sentences of
authors. Again, obiecting against so reverend a man falsification of
Scriptures and fathers, he brings not so much as one word of proof, but
only his bare word, which weyeth not the weight of one fether with any man of
credit.

Thirdly, he inueigheth against bishop Jewel, as if he had so falsified all
authors by him cited in his books, that all that red them with indifferency,
albeit protestants before, turned papists. And for proof he alleges the
examples of Copley, Steuens, and Reynoldes. But he is too too much abused, if
he suppose these fellows, either ever to have been grounded in true religion,
or that they did read B. Jewels books with indifferency, or that no man red
them with indifferency, but these three, or such others, as turned papists.
Nay I cannot learn, but that Copley (whom here, to grace his witness, he
dubbeth a Baron with his quill; yet a Baron without a Baronrie) and that
Reinoldes and Stephens were in heart papists, albeit, percase, for worldly
respects they might dissemble it. But were they, or were they not, it is not
greatly material. Howbeit this is most apparent, that Bishop Jewels books
have too long passed for current, to be convinced of falsehood by such a simple
disputer as Parsons, and by such simple grounds, as he alleges. The books
are lately translated into Latin. If he think he can say any thing more
against them; let us know his pleasure in his next Pamphlet. And let him not
doubt, but he shall find diverse, that will defend that learned bishop, and
painful labourer in Gods church against the barking of all the helhounds of
the Romish synagogue, and prove him an honester man in his allegations, then
either Bellarmine, or Greg. de Valentia, or Caesar Baronius, or any of their
consorts. And finally that all the objections of the adversaries against him,
are either lies or mere fooleries.

Fourthly, he barketh lowdly against master Fox now dead, against whom while
he lived, greater dogs then he durst not once grinne with their teeth. Against
him he alleges, that there is no whole story in his book, but it is
falsified or perverted. But what a shameless fellow is this, that affirms
all the book to he full of falsifications, when he does neither allege one
story, nor convince him of one falsehood? Only he says, that a certain
learned scholar brought to him of late 30. places taken out of two only
leaves of master Fox his book, to wit from the 12. to the 14. leaf all
falsified; and that himself found so many more, as might double the foresaid
number, and does offer to prove them one by one to any friend of master
Foxes: and so falling to multiplication, he says, that if 60. be multiplied by
a thousand and more according to the number of leaves of the book there will
fall out the number of 30000. falsehoods, and that master Foxes book will
exceed John Sleidans, in number of lies. But all this amounts to nothing,
but vain words. When he comes to his trial, he shall find, that neither
the scholar, nor the Rector is able to convince master Fox of falsehood. Which
also may appear by view of those leaves, which he quoteth. For therein master
Fox scarce quoteth any allegations, but only briefly notes certain absurd
opinions held by papists: in which when Parsons shall come forth and speak de
tracta persona, he shall find, that master Fox has said truly, and that
those absurdities, which he notes, follow indeed of popish doctrine. If then
those leaves, where our adversary supposes most falsehood, will be justified
against the calumniations of the rector of the English seminary of traitors,
and all his disciples, I believe his reckonings and accounts of falshoodes will
fall short at the time of the audit, and that there will be twice so many found
in Caesar Baronius, and infinite more in the lying legends, the stink whereof
is odious to al men of sound judgment.

He takes also exception against master Foxes calender, as if he meant to
canonize all there mentioned; and charge him with other tricks and shifts.
But the calender was only placed there to note the day of every man's trial
and suffering: and so far was he from shifting and tricking, that no man could
deal more plainly, as shall be justified against this Bragadoccio and his
consorts, come he forth when he dare. Nay the trickings and delusions of the
whore of Babylon together with her bloody cruelties, which master Fox has
laid open to the world, shall yet be made more manifest, if once they begin to
quarrel. Likewise we will bring forth so many lies out of papisticall writers,
as shall make our adversaries weary of this argument. Of Sleidan I need not
say much, seeing he has answered sufficiently for himself, and ouerturned the
cart loaded with lies by his accusers against him.

Against master D. Fulke our accuser obiecteth nothing, so that by rules of law
this accuser is to be condemned of calumniation, and D. Fulke to be discharged
from further molestation. And thus much may serve to show the vanity of our
adversaries crackes and bragges of the great mischief he means to us, in
conuincing us, as he hops, of falsification. For what should many words need
to answer so vain a babbler, that albeit he accuse many, and lays to their
charge a most heinous crime, yet neither notes, nor proves any one point
against them? Beside that, noting certain places in master Fox, most
ridiculously he would have us to answer, before he object any thing, or show
the points of falsehood. Which is a more abiurd course, then that of Eureux
against M. Plessis, who of many places noted some, and laid down his reasons.
But this relator has not his arguments yet framed. So busy he is about
plotting some mischievous devise or treason.

CHAP. V.
A brief examination of the relators calumnious, and vain narration.

THe foundation of our answer being thus laid, and the maine point of the
adversaries accusation concerning falsifications being cleared and made firm
against him; I thought it not amiss, to join with him, yet more closely, and
to examine the particulars of his narration. For albeit the justice of our
cause, and the vain brags, false dealing, and ridiculous cauillations of
papists may sufficiently be discovered by that, which already has been
answered; yet shall the same more exactly be proved and discerned, if we do
but lightly touch every point of his pamphlet in order as it lies, and as our
lying adversary has couched it in his letters from Rome.

In the beginning of his aduertisements he yields two reasons, that moved him
to send the report of the conference passed in France so far as from Rome
into England. The first was, for that every man understood not the French
tongue; and few durst translate and diuulge such matters in English. The second
is, that men might understand the manner of the combat, and true issue
thereof, and such things as passed therein, from authentical parties. But
these pretended reasons seem to be full of ridiculous vanity, and void of
reason. For albeit every man understood not French, yet might he either learn
of others, or himself read the treatises published in English concerning that
matter some time before the coming of this relation. Again, it is a very
ridiculous point to think, that French matters are better understood at Rome,
then in France, or that we are like to have better intelligence from Rome,
that, as Petrarch called her, is Fucina d'inganni, e schola d'errori, that is,
a forge of lies and treacherous frauds, and a school of errors, and heresies,
and falsehood, then out of the place where these matters were executed, which
are here reported. Finally, nothing can be devised more absurd, then to
account James Peron his letters in his own cause, or the Popes Nuntioes
letters in a matter, that so near touched the Pope, to be authentical, or of
any credit. It is a common rule, that no man is a sufficient witness in his
own cause. And just exceptions may be taken to al partial witnesses. Wherefore
to write from Rome into England of French matters, was a trick of foolerie* to
send the parties letters for authentical testimonies, was a ridiculous
absurdity. No it was no part of the relators intention, either to have truth
known, or authentical narrations diuulged, but rather with vain reports and
lies sent from Rome, that is now become a mistress of lies, to cross and
blemish truth, and those that profess the same. For which cause I have also
thought convenient to entertain the relator with this answer, which I doubt
not but Blackwel the archpresbyter or archtraitor, and Walley the provincial
of Iebusites in this country will send him.

Fol. 2. and. 3.
Afterward he goes about to declare the qualities of the actors in this
conference. But it needed not greatly. For we know the men far better then
he: and that as the Lord of Plessis is a man of great worth and learning, so
Eureux is an apostate from religion, and a vainglorious man. He wrote once a
book of the insufficiency of the scriptures, by which his learning was
sufficiently tried, and his ambitious humors discovered. If he would write a
little three half penny pamphlet of the sufficiency of the popes decretals, he
should highly deserve the popes favor.

As for the relator, he seems not well to know either of the parties, where
he says, that M. Plessis did write more cunningly and coue^tly then others;
and is one of the head pillars of our religion, and sets out Eureux as a
singular rare fellow, a Hercules new come from hell, a patriarch of the popes
side, ^scourse of ^^rence ^e^
and one, that has endeavored to convert others. For Eureux is no other, then
I have before declared. Neither has he converted any to religion, but rather
perverted them, seeking like Cacus to draw beasts backward into his den of
popery, and there to hide them in darkness. Contrariwise the Lord of Plessis
has used all plain and honest dealing in his writings, and is therefore (we
confess) much prised among us. And yet not so, as we make him a pillar of our
religion; which is not built upon humane means and writings, but upon the word
of God. Neither do we make such reckoning of his book written against the
Mass, as if our cause did stand upon that book, or any other man's work.
Howbeit such are the grounds of his book, that as yet neither Italian nor
French Iebusite, nor other could overthrow it. Many curres have long barked
against it, and diverse priests and friars i^ their chaires, and in
wine-tauernes have spoken their pleasure against it. But yet it stands firm
against the malice of many adversaries, and with sound argument cannot be
overthrown, nor shaken.

Having talked his pleasure of the parties, our relator descends to discourse
of the occasions of the conference: but he should much dissent from himself,
if he should tell truth. For where he says, that after that diverse examining
the book of the Lord of Plessis had found many most egregious falsifications,
and had cried out against them in pulpit, the king and diverse noble men that
were protestants, as namely the duke of Bullion, Rosni, Desguieres, and others
began to call upon the trial of M. Plessis his book, for that it seemed to
touch all their honors, and of their religion especially: There is scarce any
shadow of truth, or honest dealing. For first the charge of egregious
falsifications, and of thousands of falsehoods, shall never be proved against
M. Plessis his writings. But if we list to examine the lying decretals of
popes, the fabulous legends of the synagogue of Rome, the cogging commentaries
of Caesar Baronius, and the iangling disputes of Bellarmine and his consorts,
we shall easily find here that number of falsifications, which the adversaries
seek other where. Secondly, it is a most shameless untruth to say, that either
the king or any other, save the Lord of Plessis himself, and the Duke of
Bullion, that exhibited his supplication to the king, did desire any such
trial. For if the king had called upon this trial, what should M. Plessis
have needed to employ all his friends, to procure, that he might have an
hearing? And what reason had either Rosni or Desguieres to deal in a matter
that pertained not to the^? Thirdly it is a ridiculous conceit to think, that
al these noblemens honors stood upon the credit of a book, that was written
by another, or that our religion could not stand without the support of this
treatise, though otherwise never so excellent. But this is but a trick of
Parsons cunning, to advance the fame of his supposed victory. It is also a
most manifest untruth, that the king did show great indifferency in judgment
betwixt both parties. For the world knows this conference was nothing but a
pack with the popes Nuntio for the advancing of the popes credit, and the
disgrace of the Lord of Plessis; and that the king made him self party in the
disputation against him, and showed all grace ^o Eureux, denying all means of
indifferent trial to the Lord of Plessis.

Neither does he observe more religion in relating the manner and issue of the
trial, where he says, that the day being appointed for the conference, M.
Plessis seemed to shrink and use delays, and that at the length he appeared
with four or five ministers on his side. The same may be answered to Eureux
his vainglorious letters, who writes that the victory of the combat betwixt
the Lord of Plessis and him, remained to the cacolyke church after many
tergiuersations of M. Plessis, and that sentence was prononced against him upon
every place, and that those that came to assist him, with one voice condemned
him. Most falsely also does the Popes Nuntio and another odd fellow write, that
M. Plessis was confounded in this combat, and that those of the religion were
more dismayed by the evil success of this conference, then if they had lost a
battle of forty thousand men. Matters certes untrue, and very improbable. For
if M. Plessis had either shrunk, or used any tergiuersatio^, he would not so
earnestly have solicited this trial. Nay albeit he perceived the king to be
made against him very plainly, and that the conditions of the conference were
so unequal for him, that scarce any would have yielded to the^; yet did he
resolve to proceed, and shut his eyes against all difficulties, bearing
himself bold upon his own innocence, and refusing to hear those, that
willed him either to desist, or to obtain more equal conditions of trial. A
discourse of the conference at Fontainebleau.
But whatsoever M. Plessis did, true it is that the Sorbonistes hearing of this
quarrel, advised the popes Nuntio to take a course, that it might proceed no
further. The popes Nuntio also dealt with the king for the hindering of the
conference; neither would he be satisfied, until he was resolved, that it
should so proceed, that the disgrace should fall on M. Plessis his side.
Finally, Eureux being challenged privately made a public matter of it, as being
unable to deal hand to hand with his adversary: and could never be drawn to
perform his challenge, either in refuting the whole book, or showing 500.
falsifications to be contained in the book. All that were present also can
witness, that M. Plessis had neither four nor five, nor any one to speak in
his cause being still urged, not only by his adversary, whose arguments he
weyed not, but also by the king, against whom his purpose was not to make
himself party. Finally, to whom the victory belonged, may appear by that
which has been said* that he was condemned both by his own friends, and by
the judges, and that our side was so dismaide, as is reported, is utterly
untrue: as both the events and effects show, and those that were present are
ready to testify.

After this our relator takes pains to set down first the challenges on each
side, and M. Plessis his reply. Next the kings letters, James Perons own
report, and the Nuntioes and an others letter sent to Rome. Out of which I
marvel what he is able to gather for his own advantage; or not rather to his
disadua^tage. For by Perons offer made to M. Plessis in his answer to his
challenge, it appears that he has failed in performing it. By M. Plessis his
reply we gather, that he could not obtain any indifferent trial. The kings
judgment in matters of religion is not allowed by ye adversaries themselves.
The glorious challenger in his letters to Rome compares his king to Hunnericus
an Arian heretic and a persecutor of the church: And says, that as Eugenius
bishop of Carthage would not dispute with the Arians without making the bishop
of Rome acquainted; albeit required by Hunnericus king of Vandals: so he would
do nothing without the consent of the bishop of Rome, before the French king.
In other points, neither his letters, nor the popes Nuntioes letters, nor that
other good fellows letters deserve any credit. To conclude, all this great
stir which Parsons makes about nothing, does show the great poverty of the
adversaries cause, that as men wracked at sea, are glad to lay hold upon every
broken planke to save their lives.

CHAP. VI.
The notorious vanity of the relators observations upon the former narration
is detected.

AFter our relator had trussed up his fardle of fooleries, to make the same
more vendible, he garnisheth his packet with certain painted glosses, which
he terms observations. And to make his eloquence seem more admirable, he
does excorticate certain Latin words according to his Romish fashion,
reflecting, as he says, what occurred to his contemplation. Which reflections,
occurrents, observations and contemplations, to do him pleasure, we are content
particularly to consider, and see whether he were not in a sound sleep, when
he thought himself to be in a profound contemplation. And first very wisely
he observes Gods providence in conservation and continuation of the old
catholic faith delivered first at the ascension of our Savior, unto his
visible Church, as he says. But if he speak of Christ's faith, then this
observation concerns him nothing. For that faith has always continued, and
shall continue, notwithstanding the opposition of the Iebusites and Cananites,
and all their adherents, and needs neither their letters, disputes, nor
practices, to preserve it. If he speak of the Romish faith, as it is no
question but he does; then we must tell him, that we deny that that faith
is either the catholic faith, or was delivered at ye time of Christ his
ascension, or in many ages after, to any Church, or proceeded ever from the
apostles. We do therefore here observe, that he is but a bad obseruer, that
marketh no better, what was delivered by Christ and his apostles. Again we
observe, that it is a strange fashion of speech to say, that the faith began to
be delivered first at Christ his ascension. For then it follows, that not
only the apostles before that time, but also the patriarchs and prophets
should either be deuoide of faith, and saved without faith, which is impious
to say, or that they had faith before it first began. It is also a strange
doctrine to say, that the apostles at the ascension of Christ delivered the
faith to the visible church. For that church is not now visible, neither was
that church, that is now, visible then. Naie to say that the whole catholic
church is visible, is an assertion repugnant as well to reason, as to Christian
faith.

He observes also, That though new fantasies and devises of particular men
have sprung up with fresh and glistering titles, that in the end God brings
the same to confusion. All which we hope will prove true in the glorious
ruffle of the Iebusites and Romish synagogue. For albeit these wicked Cananites
will be termed Jesuits, and do pretend perfection in themselves, and
reformation in others; yet their glory begins to fade, and their treacherous
and Machiauelian practices begin to be discovered not only by us, but by
their own consorts. The synagogue of Rome also, and the kingdom of
antichrist, albeit it has long triumphed, and trodden the truth under foot,
yet begins to decay, and is now oppugned of many, and in the end shall be
overthrown. It rests only, that they look for aeternum opprobrium, of
which himself speaks. Finally the golden idol of the mass is now in most
places abolished and where it remains, is not valued at three-halfepence*
This observation therefore makes much against the obseruer, and against us
nothing: and is very far wide from the matter of this conference, out of
which these observations should be drawn.

The third point that he observes is, That the shame and confusion of
heretics and heresies consists principally in 4. points, as holy fathers do
note, viz. First in division among themselves; secondly in contradiction of
sectaries; thirdly in atheism and coldness of religion; fourthly in open
lying and falsifications of authors to serve their purpose. But he leaves out
the very principal cause of the confusion of heretics. And that is partly for
that they seek their own glory, and not the truth, and partly for that
forsaking the direction of holy Scriptures, they follow lying legendes and
fables, false traditions, vain opinions and determinations of popes, and
humane fancies. Neither is he so well versed in fathers, that he can tell
what they say. These 4. points certes which he alleges, the fathers do not
say always to be proper to heretics. For neither are all heretics divided
into parts, nor do all seem cold in religion, (some pretending superfluous
and superstitious zeal) neither have all heretics used open falsification and
lying. When he comes to exhibit the fathers which he pretends, I believe
he will be driven to falsify them, or else they will not serve his purpose.
But were it granted, that these qualities are incident to heretics, yet does
the same make little for the adversaries advantage, who are divided into diverse
sects and religions, and infinite diverse opinions, and are not only
atheistes, but also the grossest liers and falsificators of authors, that ever
were heard of in any record or history. With their atheism also they join
superstition and idolatry, and defend their matters not only with falshoode
and fraud, but also with fine force and cruelty.

As for those of our communion, they cannot justly be charged either with
contradiction, or division, or impiety or falsificatio^, either by Parsons or
by his two friends Rescius and William Reynoldes: as has been showed in a
treatise called Turcopapismus, wherein the spite of those two dogs that have
long barked against religion, and belched out all the slanders they could
devise, is encountered, and their books entitled Caluinoturcismus, and de
Atheismis and Phalarismis, refuted and beaten back upon the papists, that in
Turkish and tyrannical cruelty and contempt of all religion surpass all
others. If the machiauelian Iebusite Parsons dare oppose himself, and will
say, no: let him answer that book. If he will not answer, let him cease to
brag of books beaten to dust and refuted, to the shame of him and his
consorts. In this place this may be sufficient for avoiding this relators
sla^derous imputatio^: that those two railing companions object other men's
faults to us, and charge us with private men's acts and opinions, which neither
the church, nor we particularly allow: and therefore plead insufficiently. But
we charge them with lewd opinions held by all the papists, and most wicked and
abominable actions allowed by public authority. Further the papists allege
the testimonies of Lindanus, Staphylus, Cochleus, Rescius, Reynoldes and their
own consorts, fellows to be received as witnesses before no indifferent
judge, for their baseness, lewdness and partiality. But we are able to
convince them by their own records, and by witnesses authentical, to be
such, as they would have us to be, and far worse too. And if Parsons
maintain the contrary, he shall soon receive his answer, and perceive his
own inabilitie, and the weakness of his own cause.

Further he observes in Luther, That at the first he contemned the fathers,
and that afterward, when we began to show how the fathers did witness for our
cause, that we alleged them falsely. But neither did ever Luther contemn all
the fathers, but where they spoke contrary to the prophets and apostles, nor
shall this counterfeit relator show, that we have alleged the fathers
untruly: as I will be always ready to justify against him.

He notes also, That we make plain demonstrations of distrust, in
maintaining our cause. And that he proves first, For that diverse books
written in English by papists, were forbidden by proclamation. Secondly For
that by a statute it was made death to reconcile men, or persuade them to the
Romish faith. Thirdly for that Streite orders were set down to restrain the
resort of people to the papists, that are prisoners in Wisbich. But if these
be arguments of distrust, then are the papists most distrustful, and fearful
to have their matters come in scanning. For they forbid all our books to be
sold among them. And if any dissuade from popery or talk against it, it is
present death. Neither may any talk with prisoners in the inquisition. As for
our selves, we are but too confident in these causes. For there is no bald
lousie friars book comes forth, but it is commonly sold in Paul's church
yard, and any learned man may buy any of their books publicly. Yea diverse
simple souls not being able to judge, are often times deceived by them. So
that it were fitting, more care were had in this point. But the true reason why
our superiors have forbidden English books, popish persuasions, and common
repair to popish prisoners, is, for that diverse simple souls not being so
well able to judge, have by such means been drawn not only into lewd
opinions, but also dangerous practices, of which we should not offend, if we
did take more care, then we do.

Finally he notes, that we cannot abide confession, satisfaction, restitution,
or the like: which is true, if by confession he mean auricular confession made
in a priests ear, and by satisfaction scourging a man's self, or walking in
pilgrimage, with hope thereby to satisfy God for his sins, and such like
satisfactions: and by restitution, such sums of money as papists are enjoined
in lieu of true restitution to parties offended, to bestow upon priests,
Iebusites and notorious traitors. It is not long since these companions drew
from a dry fellow a little before his death two thousand pounds, with the
which the Iebusites and their consorts now make merry. But if order be not
taken for such devises to draw money out of the subjects purses, and to take
away these means from traitorous practisers, the same in the end will make this
state very sorrowful. And therefore I doubt not but the magistrates and judges
will look to that very diligently. In the mean while I hope I have taken
order with this Relators lying observations.

CHAP. VII.
An answer to our adversaries two petitions annexed to his former relation.

WHat success our adversary is to hope for in his petition annexed to the
Ward-word, I hope may in part appear by our answer. And yet not expecting an
answer, he has presumed to come to her majesty with a new petition, and to
us with another. So copious and fluent he is in his libels and petitions.

Homer. Iliad. ^.
(...),
(...),
(...).
He is like a fly, or rather, because he speaks so much for Spaniards, a
Spanish mosqueta, that albeit she be beaten off from a man's body, yet is bold
to come again and bite. And Non missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris hirudo.
Horat.
leave, as it seems, he will not, until like the horseleach, he has filled
himself with some man's blood.

First, he desires, that her Majesty would be pleased to admit such a trial
here, as passed in France of late: assuring us, that the same would be
pleasant to her Majesty, and all other assistants, and very brief and easy.
As if Parsons the Iebusite and rector of the English seminary of traitors,
were now very careful to yield satisfaction and contentment to her Majesty
and subjects, that not long Anno. 1588.
since joined himself to the Spanish army, that came against us, and in the
interim that the Spanish fleet was expected, and while our commissioners were
treating of peace, help to make, print, and diuulge, the most infamous A^lens
letters to the nobility and people of England and Ireland.
libell against her Majesty and her faithful subjects, that could be devised,
or ever was set out in this kind. Furthermore, ever since he has been busy
either in stirring up foreign enemies against us, or broching some treasonable
practice against the state, or writing seditious libels against one or other,
as appears by former proofs. Nay when a certain gentleman and one of the
Spanish agents seeming more moderate then the rest, disliked all practices for
the murder of the Prince, by the direction of Parsons and others of his
faction, he had a cuchillada, and dangerous blow with a falchion over the face,
as he was going to the church to hear mass. An unhappy mass might he call
it, if the blow had hit right.

He does also much abuse his reader, where he says, that the trial will be
brief and easy; and makes a vain brag, offering himself to be the
champion, that must perform the challenge. The first is evident, for that they
pretend so many falsificatious against us, and we have so many false
allegations and forgeries to charge our adversaries withal, and that most
justly, that the examination cannot choose but prove long and difficult,
especially if they yield to us, that which they demand themselves. The second
I think we shall find true by experience. For it is not Parsons, I think,
that can perform all that is offered. Nay, little does he understand the
galls of his own cause, that once dare object forgerie or falsification to
others. Beside that, he is fitter to make a clerk to make libels and exhibit
petitions, then to make a good disputer to justify the popes broken cause. In
that he has some pretty faculty: in this we doubt of his ability.

His other petition is, that some one or other would come forth against him,
and defend bishop Jewel, Peter Martyr, and M. Fox, whom he purposes, as he
pretends, to load with many and grievous falsifications: the points whereof
we have already Chap. 4
noted. and this I think, is but a copy of his grimme countenance also, and a
Thrasonicall brag. For I do not think that he will, or dare put his cause
upon this trial. Neither do I think, that his consortes will come to an equal
examination of all falsifications and coruptions passed on both sides, for the
causes, that I have Chap. 1.
alleged.

Unto both his petitions, until further order be taken, let him receive this
answer from me. First, that we very well like of such a trial here, as passed
lately in France. For as the papists found themselves wronged, or at least
pretended to be wronged in M. Plessis his books; so we do say, and offer to
prove, that we are wronged, nay that the whole world is wronged and abused by
millions of forgeries and falsifications committed by Bellarmine, Caesar
Baronius, Greg. de Valentia, Suarez, and their consorts, yea by the popes of
Rome, whose sentences they hold to be infallible* If then this prattling or
rather scribbling relator, or any of his consorts do find himself agrieued with
this assertion and offer, as M. Plessis did in France, being charged publicly
with falsifying and corrupting authors by him alleged: I shall God willing
either in public schools, or else (which is far better) in public writing
justify as much as I have said: and I take this to be the case of papists in
England, if they will obtain that, which M. Plessis desired in France.

Secondly, I do offer my self party, and do accept of Parsons his challenge,
and do offer my self to prove, that those men, whom he challenges, have dealt
more justly the^ Bellarmine and Caesar Baronius, and the rest of that side.
Nay, I dare simply defend them against any crimination which this frapling
friar has to lay to their charge. Let him begin when he dare. In the mean
while he may do well to answer the points deduced in the first chapter of this
treatise, wherein I have charged not only private men, but the whole synagogue
of Rome with plain forging and falsification, and laid down the particulars,
and not as the relator does, who having made a great brag of falsifications,
shuts up his relation, and justifies nothing.

Somewhat I had more to say to Parsons, and to his associates, and the whole
combination of them. But I reserve it to some other time. By this which
already is said, I hope it will appear, that neither James Peron has gained
any thing against the Lord of Plessis, nor Parsons has reason to hope, that he
shall have better success against the Church of England. God which is light
and truth grant all christians the light of his grace, that they may not only
see the truth, but also truly judge what is truth and falsehood. And then I
doubt not, but it will appear to them all, that we are clear of that crime,
which the adversary imputes unto us, and that our adversaries through the
operation of errors, believe lies, and have by all fraud, and false dealing
sought to oppress the truth.

Laus Deo.

