THE THEATER OF THE Popes Monarchy: Wherein is described as well the unclean
Lives of that wicked generation, as also their Antichristian government, and
usurped kingdom: Together with their horrible Superstition, and blasphemous
religion, as it is now used at this present, where Antichrist the Pope and his
members do bear rule.

By Phillip Stubbes.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson. 1585.

To the right Honorable, Robert Lord Ritche, his singular good Lord and
Moecenas, Philippe Stubbes, wishes all prosperity in this life with increase
of Honor and eternal felicity in the heavenly Hyerarchie by Jesus Christ.
IN the Gospel after S. Matthewe (right honorable, and my very good Lord)
our Savior Christ teaches us most notably, how to know and discern false
Prophets, from such as be the true Pastors, and Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ: when he says, They shall come unto you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves, you shall know the^ by their fruits. Then if
the fruits of conversation be the ensigns, the badges, and cognizances to
know false Prophets by (as our savior says they are) the^ surely may we
judge, nay certainly persuade our selves that the Papists are those false
Prophets, Apostataes, and seducers which the word of God speaks of: as in the
further discourse of this book shall manifestly appear: for not only do their
works and fruits convince them hereof, but also their false, seditious
erroneous, and heretical doctrine does argue the same. But they will easilye
wipe away this blot: and say that we are those false Prophets of whom Christ
speaks of. To whom I answer, let their works, and doctrine be compared to
ours, and both peyzed in the equal balance of Gods word (the only
touchstone to try all controversies by) and then shall it easilye appear
whether they or we are the false Prophets. Do not they come unto us in
sheeps clothing, I mean in such habit as portendeth all kind of
austeritie, humility, and holiness of life outwardlye: as namelye, in their
Surplesses, Copes, Tippets, forked Cappes, Miters, Hattes, Crosiers, Hoodes,
Cowles, Tunicles, Sandals, Shirtes of hair, and a thousand other like
playerlike garments? yea and do they not teach that all holiness consists
in these rags? Is not this to come in sheep clothing? But they will
object, if this be so, why do you wear some of these garments? I aunsweare,
we have some of them in deed but that is upon sufferaunce and permission
only, not upon constrainte or necessity as theirs are. Besides, ours is
commanded by a Christian Queen, and therefore lawefull, theirs by
Antichriste, and therefore unlawful. Again we use them as things indifferent
they as things of necessity, we repose no religion in them, they rely holy
upon them.

And for their doctrine, it is so erroneous, so corrupt, so seditious, nay so
blasphemous, and Sacrilegious, that it would grieve a Christian manne to think
of it: As Prayer for the dead, Justification by good works, Purgatory, Limbo
Patrum, Inhere^t Righteousness, Invocation to Saints, Transubstantiation,
Adoration of Images, their seven cou^terfait Sacraments extreme vnctio^,
christening of Bells, hallowing of churches and churchyardes, making of holy
bread, holy water, Auricular confesion, shrift, penance, absolutio^, mass,
matte^s, diriges, Lady Psalters, tapers, candles, bedes censings, ringings,
perfuminges, and legions of like tru^peries, which the word of God knows not:
of al which points of doctrine of theirs I will entreat in a book by it self god
willing very shortly, wherein shall appear whether they or we have ye truth.
This is their godly doctrine which there it com nerer to the word of God, or
ours, let the world judge. And yet notwithstanding they set a fair face on it,
they stamp and stare, and bear the world in hand, that theirs is the truth.
For say they, our doctrine stands upon sure pillars, antiquity,
universality, generality and the like. Our doctrine is proved by descent of
Bishops from time to time, by consent of all nations and so forth, but your
doctrine is new and starte up the last day, etc. But whether theirs or ours
be the newer it shall appear in the discourse following. First we are able
to prove that our doctrine is auncienter then theirs, ye as ancient as God
himself whose truth it is. And first to begin with the divine institution in
Paradise: we read that God the father gave unto Adam his word and
commandment, to wit: Thou shall not eat^ of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, ingrauing, and as it were imprinting, this word and commandment in the
heart of Adam, and in him, in all his posterity. By the which law, of
conscience then lived almost 2000. years without any other law or word
written, being guided and directed by the holy Ghost in all their actions: the
2000. years being ended, and men waxing dissolute, licentious and wicked, ye
Lord (as Theophilactus witnesses) disdayning to speak to them any longer by
his spirit for that they became wicked, gave the^ a Law, (for before they
had no written Law, God appearing to them I mean the fathers and
Patryarches, in visions in apparitions, in dreams, sometime in the form of
angels, and waifaring men, sometime in one shape, sometime in an other,
according as their weakness could bear) written by the finger of God in two
tables of stone, which is the x. commandments. Then Moses at the commandment
of God committing to writing, the x. commandments with his other five books,
as he was taught and directed by the suggestion of the spirit of God, ruled
the Israelites thereby. The old testament being thus written by the servant of
God Moses, and his faithful prophets at the commandment of God* continued in
force til the coming of Christ, which was in effect 2000. years after. The^
our savior Jesus Christ, coming in the flesh, gave in commandment to his
Evangelists, Apostles, and prophets to write the new testament, which they, by
the direction of gods spirit, did most happily perform. These 2. testaments
now, the old and the new God be thanked, we have. Now let the papists disprove
this if they can, or if they have any other Gospel, let the^ bring it forth:
They cannot deny, but we have the same word of god which God the father, our
savior Christ and the holy ghost have given to the woorlde: and this being
granted, it must needs follow, that our doctrine is true, and theirs most false
Now let them derive their antichristian doctrine lineally from such
antiquity, and truth as this, if they can: but that they shall never be able
to do. For their doctrine has bin longer in patching, then Solomon's temple was
in building. Yea within these x or xii. hundred years, there was not a scrap
of their pesteferous doctrine coined: no the egg was not the^ laid that hatched
that poisoned Cocatrice. Then the truth of gods word through the iniquity of
time, beginning by little and little to suffer eclipse, at the last sprang up
such mountains of heresies, and corruptions, cast out of the bottomless pit,
and as it were spewed out of the Devils mouth, that the truth was altogether
obscured.

Then Antichrist the pope sprung up challenging superiority over all the face
of the earth, and he begun the Romish religion, and so every one succeeding him
put to somewhat yea every Friar, Monk, Abbot, Prior, Provost, parson, Vicar,
Cardinal, and even al in general added to it, every one a patch. So that the
papists religi- (if it may be called a Religion) is nothing else than the
shreddes, the pieces and patches, the dross and dregs of corruptible me^: and
ours the doctrine of the holy ghost. But although that it could not be proved
that our doctrine is au^cienter then theirs, yet the truth of the same
depends not upon the antiquity. For Christ says in the Gospel, Ego sum via,
veritas and vita: I am the way, the truth, and the life. He says not, I am
custom, I am antiquity. And therefore I say Antiquitas sine veritate est
vetustas erroris: Antiquity without truth, is the ancient of error. Custom,
nor antiquity ca^ not make that true, which in the beginning was false:
neither can the novelties, or newnes of any thing make that faise, which of it
self is true. Hereby it is manifest, that the papists doctrine is a doctrine
of novelty (I had almost said of diuilry) and ours a doctrine of al
auncientnes the auncientest: and yet would they carry away the truth with a
counterfeit show of antiquity. And whereas also they depend so much upon
universality forsooth, god be thanked, their doctrine is not so universal, as
they make fare of. For if ye number of the^ that have received it be compared
to the number of the^ that have not received it, they shall seem not to be one
for a thousand, nay not one for ten thousand. For all the East church never
received his doctrine, the Greek Church never admitted it. The greatest part
of Italy, of France, of Flanders, Rushia, Muscouia, Denmark, England,
Scotland, Ireland, and many other countries besides, have utterly cast off his
Antichristian yoke and usurped government. And therefore is not his doctrine so
universal as he would persuade the world. But they will say, who shall be judge
of the truth of our and your Doctrine betwixt us, I aunsweare, the word of God
according to this saying of our savior Christ. Verbum quod ego predicaui vobis
iudicabit nouissimo die: The word that I have preached unto you, shall judge
in the last day.

But to leave their doctrine, and to come to their lives* it is objected, they
live well, and are plentifuller in good works then we, therefore their doctrine
and their faith is the truth. I answer there is a non sequitur or rather a
mere Fallax in this argument, for good works before the world is one thing, and
good works before God is another. Those which in the eyes of the world seem
to be good works, may be before god most filthy and abominable: except they
spring out of a lively faith it is impossible they should please God, as Paul
says. The Jews, the Turks, the Paganes, and Infidels do good works
outwardly (as it should seem) but because they are without Faith, they please
not God. And even such are our Papystes good woorks: if they may be called,
Good works, and not rather Ciuilia opera Ciuel works or woorks of office,
which the Diuelles them selves may do. Besides this, if they do any good
works, they are most detestable and loathsome before God, because they seek to
be justified and saved by them, yea to merit heaven, and to make God greatly
indebted and beholden unto them. And therefore I conclude that the papists
although they do never so many good works outwardly, yet are they but
hypocritical, and no true good works indeed. They err in the nature of good
works also: for those whereupon the Lord has set his seal and brande of
curse and malediction for ever, they call good works: as namely the building
and erecting of Abbeies, nunneries, priories monasteries, and other religious
houses, guilding of Images, erecting of Idols and statuaries in churches:
creeping and offering to crosses, giving of money to buy cups chalices, copes,
and other rich ornaments of the church. To bestow largely upon bells, but
specially upon priests and clarks to sing mass for their souls, diriges
tre^talles, Ladies Psalters, suppressing of Gods word, slaying, murdering and
killing of Gods Saints for the maintenance of their kingdom, and a thousand
like, which they call good works, but indeed are ye works of the Devil. But such
as the word of God does commend unto us for good works, as namely, to visit
those that are in prison, to clothe the naked, to feed the hungry, to lodge the
harbourlesse, to relieve the poor and needy, to help poor orphans, widows
and fatherless to their right, and such other good woorks, with them they have
nothing to do, or if they have, they do them in such sort, and with such a
mind, and intention, as they are not to be called good works, in respect of the
end, as I have showed before. Thus we (see right honorable and most
illustrious Lord) how they delude the world with their preten^ed show of good
works and doctrine: neither whereof are agreeable to the word of God. For as
for them, they have not, nor will have any thing in the Church but men's
traditions, human inventions, and vain constitutions of corruptible men,
formed and framed in the forge of their own deceiptfull brayns, whereas the
Lord speaking from heaven, says, Hic est filius meus dilectus ipsum audite.
This is my well-beloved son hear him, hear him. And in the Gospel after S.
Matthew, our savior Christ says: In vain do they worship me, teaching the
doctrines and traditions of men: And yet for all this they will have nothing in
the church, but the vain traditions of men, clean contrary to the word of
God. And, as for their adulterate lives, if any man weigh the^ in the ballau^ce
of impartial judgment, he shall find them worse then the Sodomites, how soever
they blanch them, and set a gloss upon them, to bleare the eyes of the world
withal. And no marvel, that they live most vilely. For when they have done,
they have a trick of Legerdymayn to obsolue them selves a culpa and paena,
that is from the fault be it never so heinous, and from the punishment due for
the fault. Al which abuses because I have laid the^ down more at large in the
further process of this book, I will refer your honor to the same.

And now (my very good Lord) to bend to bend my style toward your honor.
What shall I say? May it not be woondred, with what face I have presumed to
dedicate this work to your Honorable Lordeshippe rather then to many others?
Truly it may so. But two things in especial have moved me thereto: ye one,
the Godly affection and zeal which your Lordship bears in sacred breast to
the truth of God his word and true religion: the other the unfeigned goodwill
and fidelity which I ever have and do bear to that honorable house, the
very diadem and mirroure of true nobility. And to say truth, to whom should
one dedicate the fruits of his labors, but to such as be both learned
themselves, and otherwise famous and illustrious? which thing (if it be so) to
who^ should I present these few blosso^es of my immature studies rather then to
your honorable Lordship? whose worthy fame not only for your incomparable
courtesy, affability, and gentleness toward all men, but also and in
especial for your singular zeal to God his sacred truth, integrity of life,
liberality toward them that have need, valor, prowess, magnanimity, or
else whatsoever may decore or beautify true nobility, is blown through out
all Europe. Which brute through the golden trumpe of fame, sounding in my
ears, excited me the rather to present this my book to your sacred honor,
rather then to any others: most humblye beseechinge the same not only to
pardon my great presumption in this my bold attempt, but also to receive the
same into your honors patronage and protection, defending as well the author
from the open violence of malicious enemies, as also the book from the
slanderous tongues of flouting Momus, and raylinge Zoilus, to whom all good
things are had in contempt, and I shall daily pray to God for your
honorable Lordeshippe long to continue in health, and prosperity both of body
and soul with increase of much honor, reward of laudable virtue, and eternal
felicity in the heavens by Jesus Christ.

Your honors most humble to command Philippe Stubbes.

The Theater of the Popes monarchy, wherein is described as well the unclean
lives of that wicked generation, as also their Antichristian government, and
usurped kingdom: together with their horrible superstition, and blasphemous
religion, as it is now used at this present, where Antichrist the Pope and his
members do bear rule.
The Speakers. Philemon and Stuperius. Philemon. MY friend (Stuperius) seeing
it has pleased God that we be hear met together at this present so
conuenie^tly: let us spend the time in some such godly talk, and
communication, as both may tend to the glory of God (for to that end chiefly
was man ordained: Why manne was created.
) and also to the mutual edification one of another: knowing that at the day of
judgment we must render accounts, What accou^ts we must render at the day of
judgment.
not only for all our thoughts, words, and deeds (whether they be good or bad)
but also for every least moment of time that has been lent us in this life,
how we have spent and bestowed the same.


Stu. I am very glad (brother Philemon) to hear you so well affected. And with
all my heart, I will obey your good advertisement and godly request: assuring
you, that I rejoice not a little of such a good companion. For indeed (as you
say) all our speeches ought to tend to the glory of GOD. All our speeches
ought to be to Gods glory.
And therefore when we speak, we ought to follow the commandment of the
Apostle, who says. Si quis loquitur, vt sermo Dei loquatur. That is, If any
man speak, let him speak as the word of God teaches him. Again, we have an
other commandment given us by God himself in the sixth of Deuteronomie namely
that we talk and commune of the word of God, when we rise up in the morning,
We ought always to talk of the word of God.
when we are at our meat, when we lay us down to sleep, when we walk
abroad by the way, when we are at home in our houses, or whatsoever we do
else, all our communication ought to be of God, and of his wo^derous works. And
the Apostle in another place wills us that our communication be such, as may
give grace to the hearers, and not offense to any. But now adays the cleave
contrary is every where practysed. For if any man talk of the word of GOD
never so little a while, does it not mouere nauseam as it were, that is,
seems it not lothesome, when in the mean time too talk of bawdrye, Filthy
talk counted a creation.
of filthiness and uncleanness, a whole hour, a whole day together, yea
all their lives through seems a recreation (as they call it) and an exercise
most pleasant. But if they would remember what our savior Christ says in the
gospel of S. Matthew 12. chap. Mat. 12.
I think they would take heed what they said. De omni verbo otioso homines
reddituri sunt raetionem nouiss^me die. That is: Men shall give account of every
idle word at the day of judgment. Again he tells them that Exsermonibus
suis iustificabu^tur, and ex sermonibus suis condemnabuntur. A ca^eat for
unclean talkers.
Of their words they shall be justified, and of their words, they shall be
condemned. If they would be mindeful of this, I doubt not, but they would
leave off to interlace their speeches as they do with bawdry, scurrilitie,
wantonness, and blasphemy, with swearing, cursing, and banning, rather
resembling herein the infernal furies then sober wise Christians.


Phile. You have said well. And therefore the Apostle James bids us, if we
be merry, to sing Psalms, and if we be sad or sorrowful to pray: by which
rule of the Apostle is forbid and condemned all filthye talk or communication
contrary to the word of God, All filthy talk condemned.
all unclean words, wanton songues, lascivious sonettes, bawdye ballades,
and all other profane talk whatsoever* For wherefore did the majesty of GOD
give unto manne the use of the tongue above all other creatures, Why God gave
man the use of the tongue.
but to this end? namely, that he might gloryfie his Creator therewith, and
edify his Christian brethren? And therefore that we may discharge our duties,
as well in the one as in the other, let us descend intoo some particular
points, which we may handle to the glory of God, and our mutual edification.


Stupe. I am well contented, proceed in Gods name, and demand what you will.


Phile. I pray you how many churches are there generally?


Stupe. To speak generally there be two Churches. Two Churches.
to wit, the Church of God, and the Church of the Devil: the beloved spouse of
Christ, and the whoorish sinagogue of Satan, the Elect, and the Reprobate,
the vessels of salvation, and the vessels of damnation.


Philem. How many fold is the Church of God?


Stupe. Two fold, militant, and tryumphant. Mili^^nt is that, which being
dispersed every where upon the face of the earth, Militant church what it is.
fights and warreth daily against the Devil, the world and the flesh. And
Triumphant is that, Church triumpha^t what it is.
which being delivered out of this life, rests in eternal glory. Both which
Churches Militant and Triumphant, as they be members of one mystical body
(Christ Jesus) so shall they after the dissolution of this life, be united
together as members of the same body, Church tryumphant and militant all one.
christ Jesus being their head. And albeit that they be distinct in time and
place only, yet make they both, but one true Church of God, as many members
make but one perfect body.


Phile. How many fold is the Church malignant?


Stupe. Two fold, the wicked and reprobate, which live here militant upon the
earth, and the wicked reprobats which are departed hence, which last may be
called the Church infernal.


Phile. Why call you it militant?


Stupe. Because it fights and warreth against God, against Christ Jesus his
word, against his glory and sacred truth in all things, yea, and against all
godliness and virtue in general.


Phile. Why call you it the Church infernal?


Stupe. Because it being dissolved, lives in eternal pains, suffering (in
the justice of God,) the punishment of everlasting damnation. And eue^ as the
mylitant and triumphant Church of God, do make but one body: so these Churches
of the devil, both which do live here, and whiare departed hence do make but
one body also, the Devil being the head thereof,


Philemon. What do you call the Church of God?


Stupe. I call the Church of God, the universal number, What the church of is.
and society of al Christian people, dispearsed throughout the whole world
agreeing together in one truth, one faith, and one hope of eternal life by
Jesus Christ.


Phile. What be the marks and tokens whereby this church is known, and
discerned from the Church malignant, and sinagogue of satan?


Stu. They be many, but especially these. The true preaching of the word of
God, the due administration of the sacraments, The infallible narkes of the
rue Church.
the execution of Ecclesiastical discipline according to the prescript rule of
Gods word, and the like. So that where thou see these things duly and
truly practiced, know thou that there is the undoubted church of God. Upon the
other side where thou see all these things neglected (as it is in the
papacy) nay clean impugned, know thou, that there is not so much as the
face of the true visible Church of God but the cou^terfeit church of Satan
where the Devil makes his continual residence.


Phile. Seeing that the Lord has his Church his beloved spouse, and chosen
congregation in this world, who^ has he constituted the supreme head, and
governor of the same.


Stupe. Christ Jesus whose the body is, must needs be the head of the
Church, Cor. 11.3.
according to the saying of the Apostle. I will that you know that Christ is
the head of every manne. ^e. 1.22.
Again, God has made al things subject under his feet, and has appointed
him over al things to be head over ye church. In another place he says: Ephe.
4.15.
But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up in him, which
is the head, that is Christ. And to the Collossians he says plainly thus:
Colos. 1.18.
And he (meaning Christ) is the head of the body of the Church. Again in
the second chapter following he says: Colos. 2.10.
And ye are complete in him, which is the hear of all principality and power.
And further in the book of Samuel he says: 2. Sam. 22.44.
Thou have delivered me from the contentions of my people, thou have preserved
me to be head over nations, etc. By all which places (besides infinite the
like, Christ the only head of his body the church*
which, fearing least I might seem tedious, I omit) it appears that Christ
Jesus only is the sole, true, and only head of his body the church, and not
any other power or principality upon earth whatsoever. And although that
Christ be the only universal and peremptory head of his Church, yet my
meaning is not to deny Christian Princes that lawefull power and authority
which ye word of god does allow the^: How princes are heads over the church of
God.
that is to be the chief heads over every several Church or congregation, and
over every particular person and member of the same, within their kingdoms and
dominions as his Lieuetenaunts, and Uicegerents under him, to rule and govern
the people of God by the rule and scepter of his word.


Phile. But I have hard that no christian prince can be head over the Church
of God, but the pope only, what is your opinion in that?


Stupe. In deed the Pope (I will not deny) is Supreme head over the
universal Church upon the earth: The pope head over ye church of Satan.
but of what universal Church? Of the Catholic or universal church of satan
(acording to my former division). Of this malignant church I confess he is the
only Supreme head. But over the church of God, The pope no head over the church
of god, nor any member of the same.
the Spouse of Christ Jesus, he is so far from being head, that he is not
so much as a perfect member of the same: For proof whereof, do mark but this
one reason: he that impugneth the word of God, and the doctrine of Christ
Jesus wittyngly and willynglie is no true member of Christ Jesus. But the Pope
(as the world bears witness) in all his Acts, Dooinges, and Proceedings
generally, impugneche the word of GOD both wittinglye and willingly, ergo,
neither he nor any of his Adherents are the true members of the mystical
body of Christ Jesus.

And notwythstandinge, The pope in pudent.
that he is convinced both by the word of GOD, the testimony of his own
conscience, and the common verdict of all the woorlde, that he is so far from
being the supreme head over the Uniuersall Church of Christ upon the earth,
that he is not any true member thereof, The pope d^^ludeth the world.
yet he bears (or would bear) the world in hand, that he is the only
Supreme head over the Church of GOD, that Christ Jesus has made and
constitute him his Uicare, and Lieuetenaunt general, to rule and reign
according too his own corrupt humor. But how falsely he arrogateth this
superioritye to himself, every manne (except wilfully blind) may perceive.
For is not the Church of GOD, The Pope a verlet.
the wife and Spouse of Christ Jesus? Than how dares he challendge to be
head over another man's wife? Is he not a verlet, that will require it? and is
not the wife a harlot that will permit it? And is not that a monstrous body,
which has more heads then one? Therefore co conclude, Christ Jesus is the only
Supreme head of the Church, ^^rist Jesus, and ^^t toe pope is ^^ad over his
^^urch.
and not the Pope. The Pope has his Church (to wit the malignant church, and
Sinagogue of Satan) whereouer he is head. And as for the Church of God, he may
let it alone, for he has no part, nor fellowship therein, except he repent,
and convert in time.


Phile. Who was the first of those lusty bruites, that challendged this
Supremacy before all others?


Stupe. It is said that John Patriarch of Constantinople, began to take upon
him to be called the supreme head, ^ho challen^ed the name ^f universal ^^shop
first.
or universal Bishop over all christendom. Then Bonifacius the third Bishop
of Rome, seeing, that to be called head over all the world was a glorious
title, obtained of Phocas the Emperor to be called head over all the world. in
the year of our Lord.680. The pope ha^^ched of a C^^catrices egg
And thus was the egg laid, that hatched this Cokatrice, with all his filthy
pewling brood.


Phile. There has bin and is great controversy amongst many concerning the
Pope, of whom yet hitherto, I could never hear a perfect description. I pray
you therefore what is the Pope?


Stupe. Are you such a simple fool that you know not what the Pope is? He is
a man as others are, What the pope is.
but in all kind of mischief far surpassing any: who, by blood, murder,
Simonie, money, and a thousand such like indirect means usurps the Sea of
Rome, where he sits as Bishop general, and head over all the world, even
as Lucifer and and Beelzebub do in the kingdom of hell. The pope (...) forth
in hi^ colors.
But if you will have a plainer description of him, he is a blasphemer, a
sacrileger, an impostor, a seducer of the people, a false prophet, an
Apostatae, a teacher of lies and fables, a father of superstition, and
idolatry, an enemy to Christ Jesus, and his word, a cruel Tartarian in
sheadding of innocent blood, a homicide or murderer, a sower of sedition and
dissension among Christian Princes, a perturber of ye whole world, And to be
short, even Antichrist himself, ^he pope An^^christe.
the son of perdition, and first borne of Satan, whom Christ Jesus shall
destroy with the breath of his mouth.


Phile. This is an odd fellow in deed, wherefore does he call himself by the
name of pope?


Stupe. Because he would be thought too be some great and wonderful thing,
and to be had in admiration amongst men. For whereas the Latin word (Papa)
in English (Pope) was at the first a name common too all good Bishops, (...) a
common ^^me to all B. (...) fathers in (...) time.
and fathers throughout the world, he like a greedy ambitious gripe,
challendgeth that name properly to himself. And why? Forsooth because he may
seem the graund captain over all the world. ^hy the pope called Papa.
And therefore he greatly delights to be called Papa, that is Pope, or holy
father, as it were pater patru^, the father of all fathers, and head of all
people. ^hereof papa ^^mmeth.
But some think (and not unlikely) that this word papa Pope, comes of this
interiection pape, which is a word of great wonder, and admiration, for when
we hear any strange and vnquoth thing that greatly amaseth us, we cry out
in admiration of the same (pape) oh Jesus, oh good Lord, what a wonder is this?
So that by arrogating this name to himself he would bear the world in hand
that he is some strange thing, and as it were some divine power sent down
from the heavens.


Phi. Proceed further I pray you to declare unto me the glorious estate, the
princely power, the large dominions, the infinite riches, the magnifice^t
titles, and dignity of this monster, and worlds wonder the pope, as he will be
called, for they say, yt in these things, as in all things else he passes al
others


Stupe. There was never any earthly power, neither Emperor, king, prince, duke,
No power upon earth comparable to the pope.
Lord, nor any other Potentate, no not Alexander ye great co^queror of al ye
world, Hanniball, Cateline, Hector, nor any other that herein might compare
with this gresie prelate: And no maruayle. For whereas their power extended no
further than from East to West, from North to South, and from one end of the
earth to another: his power (or else the beast lies) reaches not only over
all the face of the earth, and from one end of the world to another, but also
from the earth too heaven (yea heaven is his own good, The wonderful power of
the pope.
to bestow on whom he will at his pleasure,) from heaven to hell, from hell to
purgatory, a place which neither God nor the devil ever knew, nor yet once
hard of, till the pope who knows all secrets found it out.

Now is it any marvel though his power be greater then all others upon
earth, whereas he has such absolute power and authority in heaven that the
Angels are at his beck* in hell that the Devils tremble and quake at his
check, The Pope ^reatly feared ^n purgatory.
and in Purgatory that the poor souls broyling in heat, look for release
at his hands, and fear his Majesty a great deal more, than the glorious
Majesty of GOD? These things how absurd soever they be, he blushsheth not
to publish in books and pamphlets to the view of the world.


Phile. What arms gives this mighty Monarch, for seeing that his power is so
great, it must needs be, that his arms are rich, and such as may set
forth the glory and magnificence of his Papal estate?


Stupe. I am very unskillful in blasing of arms, for I was never herald in
all my life: but yet I will tell you the best that I can. The Popes arms which
he gives.
The Pope gives the two cross keys, which he calleeh (falsely) Saint Peter's
keys. These keys he blaseth very richly in gold and silver Scutchins,
thereby the rather to persuade the world, that neither Emperor, None can
enter into heaven without the Popes pasport.
King, Queen, high nor low, rich, nor poor, can enter in^to the kingdom of
heaven without the grant of his pasporte, and commission, and except he open,
and unlock the gates. By force of these keys he persuades the world that it
lies in his power to open heaven gates to whom he will, and too shut them
against whom he will, The force of the Popes keys.
to send to heaven whom he pleases, and to throw down to hell again whom
he thinks good.

This is a worthy knight Marshall, I trow, and such a fellow as is too be
feared. Is it any marvel though Kings and Princes, high and low, rich and
poor, even all in general have trembled at the very name of ye Pope? Thus
plays he both the Iugler in castinge mystes before men's eyes, The pope
plaieth the iugler and the traitor together.
the rather to deceive them with his Devilish deceptions, and illusions: and
also the false Traitor to GOD in stealing away the hearts of the people from
the Lord.


Phile. How came he by these pretensed counterfeit keys, can you tell?


Stupe. I will tell you. As he comes by all things else, that is, by
usurpation, How the pope comes by all things.
by false wresting, and wrything of Scriptures, and a thousand such like
indirect means, which he has coined in the forge of his own brain, And the
better to bring his purpose about, he pleads to have received them from Saint
Peter* who (as he falsely alleges) was Pope of Rome before him. But least
action be commensed against him, his Plee proved naught and him self a liar,
it behooves him first of all, Doubted whe^ther Peter wer^euer at Rome*
to prove whether Peter was ever at Rome, which is doubted of many: nay
clearly proved by as learned and famous men as have writ in all tongues,
that he was never at Rome, much less Bishop or Pope there. And having
proved that he was there (which he can hardly do) it stands him then in
hand to prove that he was Pope there, Peter never pope of Rom^
which neither he, nor all the world too help him with besides, shall never
be able too do. Then having proved that he was there, and that he was Pope
there also, yet helps it him not, except he can prove that Peter gave it
him either by will, Deed of gift, Feaftmente, or some other lawefull grant,
whereby he may with good conscience inioye that, which both Christ Jesus,
the blessed Apostle Saint Peter, and all the rest of the Apostles in general
did always refuse. The Pope pu^ to his shifts.
Or if that he can not do this, let him then show us by what other
hidden means it may come unto him, whether by lineal descent, by hereditarie
possession, or by what other conueiance. And having proved all this, yet helps
it him nothing at all unless he can prove that Peter had such large power
and authority as he pretends by these keys. These things if either he or
a nigh of his whelps can prove unto me, The Popes whelps.
than will I say more unto them: in the mean time I rest persuaded that he is
so far from having any power in or over, The no pope member of the church of
god.
the Church of God upon earth by reason of these keys, or any thing else,
that he is not so much as a member of the same. But notwythstandinge I
confess, The spiritual keys of the kingdom of heaven.
that Peter received the Spiritual Keys of the kingdom of heaven, that is,
the power of bindyng, and loosing of sins, together with the power and gift
of expoundinge, interpretynge, and explaning of the holy Scriptures to the
people. And not only did Peter receive these keys, but also all the rest of
the Apostles with him, and in them, all other faithful Preachers, Pastors,
Doctors, and Ministers of the Gospel as effectually, as fully, and as amply
as the Apostles themselves.


Phile. What is meant by these keys?


Stupe. A key (ye know) is an instrument that men use, to open, and to shut
withal. VVthat is meant by the keys.
Therefore is this Metaphor borrowed thereof: by which keys is meant potestas
soluendi, and ligandi, the power of bynding and loosing: as I told you before
in the Page precedent.


Phile. How is binding, and loocing performed?


Stupe. By preaching of the law, and the Gospel, as for example. When the law
is preached, and the fearful threats, and comminations thereof thundered
forth against any impenitent sinner, then may he be said to be bounden, and
his sins to be retained. And when the glad tidings of the Gospel is preached
too the penitent, and contrite sinner, How binding and loosing is performed.
then may he be said to be loosed and his sins to be remitted.

Again, when any one arises against the Majesty of GOD, and rebelleth against
his laws and commandments without either remorse of conscience, fear of
God, intention of amendment, or repentance at all, this man is bounden, and
his sins retained. But upon the other side, if he sin of frailty, and
afterward truly repents, amendeth, and turns too the Lord wythall his
heart, How we are said to be bound and loosed.
with an intention never to commit the same offense again, and constantly
believing in Jesus Christ trusting too be saved and pardoned by his death,
then is he loosed, and his sins clearly put away and remitted. In this
sort, and in this case has every faithful Pastor and Preacher of the
Gospel, full, absolute, and Plenarie power too bind the impenitent sinner,
How the Ministers of the gospel have power to remit sin.
that is, to pronounce him by the warraunt of Gods word, to be bound, and to
loose him again, that is, to pronounce him by the word of God too be loosed
when he repents, and turns to the Lord with all his heart, as I have
said.

Thus ye see the power of the keys, that is, Binding and loosing restrained
within the compass of Gods word.
of bynding, and loosing, is restrained within the Pale and wall of Gods
word, and not in such a lavish manner, and raunging sort as pleasethe
Magister noster, our great Master the Pope too determine. For if it were true,
or could be proved, that the Pope had this Plenarie power, too bind and
loose whom he would without the warraunt of the word of GOD, then would I
not blame them if all the world went after him, and not only worshypped him
as a man, but as a GOD upon earth. Is it any marvel though he has with
this Sweet Bayte, The popes venomous hook and poysone bayte.
and venomous Hook, drawn unto him self the most Kingdoms and Nations of
the woorlde? But now (GOD be thanked) they being better instructed in the
word of GOD, and seeing his horrible Blasphemy, Superstition, Idolatry,
and even Diuelrie it self, have the most of them made Defection, and shrunk
from him. And daily do they fall from his Antichristian kingdom, The most part
of the popes ^ingdomes are ^alne from him.
and the Lord grant that more and more may fall from him every day and hour,
till there be none left with him, that God may be glorified and they eternally
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.


Phile. Me think that men might easily spy out his doings being so
detestable as they be, and having spied them out, might then eschew them,
might they not?


Stupe. Yes: And God be praised, so they do daily, England has spied out
his knaueries: Kingdoms ^^lne from the ^^pe.
and therefore has spewed him out. Scotland has done the like. France has
abandoned him. Germany has utterly forsaken him: Yea, and part of his own
country of Italy seeing his abominations, have and do daily fall from him,
with infinite other places, Countries, and Nations, which for breuities sake I
omit.


Phil. It cannot otherwise be, but having the word of God amongst them, they
must needs find out his knaueries being so gross, that a man with half an
eye (as they use to say) may easily perceive them.


Stupe. You say the truth. Gods word the overthrow of the Popes kingdom.
But if the word of God should once be set a; broch, and come to light, then
(he knows it very well) his kingdom of ignorance, and darkness would
soon decay and come to naught. And therefore to the end that he may the better
maynteine his kingdom of ignorance, he clappeth up the Bible, The Pope
forbids the reading of the Scriptures.
forbidding all men whatsoever to read it, or once to look one word upon it,
and that upon pain of damnation: saying further that none ought to look upon
it, but he and his rabbynes, or such others as he shall license and authorize
thereto by his bulls of dispensation. This is clean contrary to the doctrine
of our savior Christ, who bids us search the Scriptures saying. The Popes
doctrine contrary to Christ's.
Scrutamini Scripturas eae sunt enim qui testificantur de me. Which is,
Search the scriptures, for those are they that bear witness of me. In an
other place, he says, Scrutamini scripturas, in eis enim speratis vitam
eternam habere. Al men ought to search the Scriptures.
That is, search the scriptures, for in them you hope to have eternal life.
This is contrary to the example of the Birreans in the Acts of the Apostles,
Birreans their notable example.
who searched the scriptures daily to see whether the things preached by the
Apostles were true, or not. Now whether it be better to obey Christ who
commands us to search the scriptures or the Pope, who forbids us the sight
of them, judge you. And to the end that he may be sure to keep the world in
Cymmeriis tenebris, in palpable darkness, and gross ignorance still, (for
ignorance he calls the mother of devotion, Ignorance the mother of damnation
not of devotion.
whereas indeed it may well be called the mother of damnation) he not only
locketh up the bible under strong locks, and keys, but also turns it into a
strange tongue, Bible locked up and in a strange tongue.
contrary to the doctrine both of our savior Christ his blessed Apostle Paul,
who commands that al things be done in the Church to edification, 1. Cor. 14.
and in a known tongue: and also to the example of the Prymitiue and
Apostolical Church, who ever used to have the bible, and other divine books,
in the mother tongue, which they understood. And as though this restraint were
not badde enough, he gives in charge that no man be so bold as to interpret
or expound the scriptures, Scripture to be no otherwise interpreted, then
pleases the Pope.
otherwise then he shall think meet in his commentaries, gloses, and
paraphrases. Thus he would be thought too have all knowledge in his breast
(for so some of his Sorbonisis have written of him, that in scrinto pectoris
Papae co^ditur omnis scientia, that is, In the chest of the popes breast, lies
hid all knowledge whatsoever) and to be only wise, The pope would be thought
only wise.
and all the world besides to be blind as betles, and to see, or know nothing.
Under which gay pretense of wisdom and knowledge, whatsoever he deereeth must
stand for an infallible and an undoubted truth: no man must ask any question of
it, but what soever he commands be it right or wrong, truth or falsehood, it
must be obeyed forthwith upon pain of damnation. And why not? Nether the Pope
nor his Father the Devil can err.
for whatsoever he speaks, yea although he but dreme it, it is truth forsooth,
and so m^st al me^ take it: for he is the only fellow upon ye earth that cannot
err, neither in life, nor doctrine, no more tha^ the devil himself.


Phile. Every man may count him but an Ass in so deeming of himself, for the
holy Ghost teaches us, that Omnis homo mendax, solus Deus verax, that is:
Every man is a lier, and God only is true. Therefore if he be a man (but I
rather think him a Devil incarnate) he must needs err: For hominis est
errare, labi, and decipi: It is naturally given to every man to err, to fall
away, and to be deceived. But notwithstanding they hold (as I hear say) that
he is not a plain or naked man as other men be, The Pope a deyfied creature
and no man.
but a divine creature, deified with the Godhead, and even as it were a God him
self, and therefore cannot err. But Peter of whom he so much braggeth, and
whose successor he boasts himself to be, Peter denied his Master thrice.
when the Lord had taken his grace from him for a time, denied his master, not
once, nor twice, but iii. times. Christ called him an other time bar Satana
the son of the devil, saying come after me satan, thou sauorest not those
things which are of GOD, but of men. By all which reasons (with infinite the
like which might be alleged, if either time would permit me, or the
necessity of the cause required the same) it manifestly appears, that the
pope not only does err simply both in life and doctrine, The Pope erreth in
all things.
but also erreth most grossly, and most shamefully in all things.


Stupe. Nay, but he has provided a cooling card for them that shall so judge of
him. For, be his doings, his whole life, and doctrine never so detestable, yet
may none be so bold, The Popes cooling card.
as to judge of the^. And his reason (or cooling card) is this. Qui omnium
viuentium iudex constitutus est, a nemine est iudicandus, that is, He who is
appointed to be the judge of all men, ought to be judged of none. No although
he draw infinite millions of men, No man may judge of the Pope.
and women to hell, by his wicked example of life, yet may no man judge of
him for it. Thus reigns he upon earth as one, neither fearing God, nor yet
reuerencing man. And why not? For this is a maxim in his law, A maxim i^ the
Popes law
Sic volo, sic iubeo, sic mando, est ratio praeclara, voluntas, that is, so I
will, so I bid, and so I command, my will is the ballaunce of equity, and
the square rule of justice.


Phi. If his will stand for law as in truth it does, then must he neads be of a
wonderful power, and might, yea even as a God in comparison of other men,
is he not taken so to be?


Stupe. Yes truly. And not without great cause, for as they say, he is of such
a wonderful power, The great power of our Master Pope.
that of wrong he can make right, of falsehood truth, of injustice, justice,
of light, darkness, of darkness light, and when his holiness is pleased he
can make the swanne black, and the crow white. He can also divorce those
whom the law of God has joined together, and again whom the law of God has
divorced, he can join together. He can dispe^ce either with the law of God, or
of man, breaking, allowing, or disalowing what pleases his humor. Subjects he
ca^ discharge from their allegiance to their prince. The Pope must have a share
in every thing.
He also licenseth, and dispenses with al kind of the every, robbery, whordom
murder, ma^slaughter, or else what abomination soever, so that his share may
be therein, which you may be sure is not the smallest part.


Phile. This follow seems rather a monster in nature then a man, that thus
dares peruerte all things to serve his own turn.


Stupe. If you knew al, you would say so. For he takes into his hands the
whole power, and state of Caesar, and therefore writes he himself heir
apparent to the Empire. The Pope heir apparent to the Emperor.
And to this purpose he has persuaded emperors, kings, and princes that he
may and ought so to do iure diuino, that is, by force of gods law, which
seems most monstrous. Wherein if any do resist him, then puts he them in
fear, and threatens the^ with his absolute power in heaven, The Popes fray
bugge.
earth and hell, and with excommunication, and other his flashing thunderbolts
of co^mination. Yea to this pass has he brought it, yt neither Emperor,
king, nor Prince is lawfullye crowned, which is not crowned by him: The Pope
crowns emperors with his feet.
and as though his holy hands were too good to set the crown upon their heads,
he crowns the^ (for the most part) with his toes, they laying their heads
down upon the ground. The Pope deposes kings and Emperors when he ly^t.
He also makes and puts down Emperors, kings and princes at his
pleasure. So that if any one dysplease his holiness, he is by and by thrown
down as low as hell, deposed from his regal dignity, his crown plucked of
his head, and scepter out of his hands, excommunicate, and an other put in his
place. And the^ if it fortune that this king so deposed do rise in arms to
defend his people, his country, and his own right, then rayseth he up other
kings, and Princes against him: So that were he otherwise never so mighty of
himself, yet shall he not be able to prevail against them all. Upon the
other side, if he refer his cause to a general Counsel to be decyded there,
No general counsel can be gathered with out the Pope.
it booteth not. For there is no Council that can be gathered without his
consent, and allowance of the same. Neither may they determine, or decree any
thing but what shall sound pleasant in his ears. And then the small end of all
is, The next way for kings to come by their own at the popes hands.
and the next way for the kings and Princes deposed, to come by their
dignities again, to submit themselves, bodies, lands, goods, people,
country, life and all into the Popes hands, to ask forgiveness, and falling
down upon their knees, too prostrate themselves, and kiss his feet in hope
of grace. This done, then peradventure if he will give money enough he shall be
restored to his kingdom again. Mark the conscience of this fellow.
But yet if an other will give more then he for it, he goes without it too,
my life for youres. And notwythstandyng all this submission, if they please him
not well, he will not stick to tread and crample upon them, like dogs. As
we read of a certain Emperor, The proud Pope stampte upon the neck of a
good Emperor like a dog.
whose neck the Pope proudly stamp upon as though he had bin, a beast. There
was also another pope, who used to makkings and Emperors his blocks to stand
upon, when he mounted upon his horse. Some kings must hold his styrrops, Kings
made footstooles to the pope.
other some (on either side one at the least) must lead his horse by the bridle
through thick and thin. Kings holding the popes styrrops.
And thus makes he all men, both Emperors, kings and princes even all in
general subject unto him, in the mean time he himself being subject to
none. And yet notwithstanding, there is now, neither emperor, king, nor
prince, that dares mute against him, but him they obey as sole lord of heaven
and earth. None dares mute against the pope.
Whatsoever he commaundes, they dare not but fulfill. In so much that if he
command them to make war against the country, people, or nation, the^ gather
they their troops and legions of armed men to gether, and forward they go,
sacking, spoiling and burning both cities, towns, and countries. And imbruing
their hands in the blood of poor innocents, The popes mercy in shedding of
blood.
they slaye and kill even all without mercy, man, woman, and child, putting all
too the edge of the swoorde most cruelly too behold. And this they must do.
Why? Because the Pope commands the^ so to do: whose commandment whether it be
wrong or right above all things in the World is to be obeyed in every point
without exception.


Phil. This is an intolerable slavery, and seruilitye, I marvel that ever
christian princes will suffer themselves so to be abused, and that of a greasy
prelate.


Stupe. Nay, he proceeds further, and as though the former abuses were not
sufficyent, he makes the laws, the Courts, Al courts subject too the pope.
and Offices of kings and Princes subject unto him: So that if any man dislyke
of the laws, and Courts of their Princes, he may frankely, and freely make
his appeal to the pope, Appeal to the court of Rome
and Court of Rome. By which means he raketh in money not a little every
year.


Phile. Is it possible that princes will put up this injury at his hands, and
not be revenged? I pray you how does he behave himself toward them, that
they rise not up against him, and pull him out of his kingdom by the ears?


Stu. He feeds their humors he speaks pleasant things unto them, The popes
profession.
he flattereth and fawneth upon them in such sort as he makes them believe the
moon is of green cheese, and so it is indeed, if he say so. But for fear of
the woorst, and for further safegarde of his person, he enters intoo league
with all such kings and princes of every country, The pope enreth League with
kings and princes, and why.
as are of any great force and power, least (happily) they might endanger his
estate, incase they should resist his Majesty's person. And if it happen that
at any time he want money, What shyfte the pope makes when he lackes money.
The popes beagles do hunte for money.
and knows not how to come by any, then sends he forth his Ambassadors,
his Legates, his Suffraganes, and his Cardynals into all lands, through whose
diligent industry he sets kings and princes together by the ears: and being
at bloody wars amongst themselves, then will he be sure to take part with him
that is the stronger: be it wrong or right that makes no matter: for of wrong
he can make right. Always provided that in all spoils, The popes share.
prays, bootyes, and escheates, he have the greatest share, for that is the
thing that he desires, The mark the pope leueleth at.
and the only mark that he shootes at. Thus he feeds himself with the
blood of the poor innocent Lambs, contrary both to the law of God, The pope
thirsts for blood
and his own calling, which is to save blood and not to shed innocent blood.


Phile. Does he ever go to field in his own person?


Stupe. Yea very often, in this sort. First of all he is clothed in his rich
Corselet coat, The pope warreth in his own person.
guilt and behanged with all manner of precious stones, in his shyrte of mayle,
and his head piece all glystering in gold, with his hoare goatishe bearde,
hanging down too his gyrdlesteede. And in this warlyke manner marches he
forward with his ^andes of men, The popes march in the field when h^
fights for Ioanes best cap.
horses, and charettes, like the sands of the Sea in number. All which
beeinge at his beck, when he commands, they enclose mighty towns,
circumuall huge cities, subvert castles and towers, trench in strong holds, and
in fine battering them with great ordinance (for munition want they none) they
lay them level with the ground. The popes le^nity and com^passion.
And like merciless Tartarians, they slaye man, woman, and child, without
respect had either of age, The pope a bloodsucker.
sex, time, place, or person. Which noble stratagem achieved, this bloodye
Villayne with all his cutthroates return again to Rome with no small spoils,
where is such bonefires, such feasting and banqueting, Bonefires at Rome for
slaughter of Gods saints.
such going of procession, such massyng, and mummyng for joy of this great
vyctory, (or rather most bloodye massacre of Gods Saints) as the like has
not been seen of many years before.


Philemon. Me think it is altogether against his calling, as I said
before, that he being a Priest, should show such cruelty.


Stupe. What? Cruelty do you call it? No, it is not cruelty. You may not
flaunder our holy father so. Do you not know that of cruelty, The popes
metamorphosis.
he can make lenity, and of lenity cruelty, changing any thing intoo the nature
of another at his pleasure? And although he rid the^ of their lives in this
world (which of force they must once leave, if he were not) yet ca^ he send
the^ packing into heaven when he will: and so have they made a good change,
have they not? Or if they go to hell, even thither sends he his power down,
with charms and solemn ceremonies, which reach even unto the smoaky pit it
self, The popes power sent into hell.
and unto the burning lake of the same. By means whereof although he can not
peremptorily loose the damned souls from their cheynes, nor free them from
their payns, nor although he he not able to break the turning wheels, to kill
the dreadful snake, to cool ye boiling ledd, nor to quench the flaming fire,
yet ca^ he ease and make lesser their pains by far. And which is more, some
write that, when he will, such is his absolute power) he can bring to pass that
the fire of hell cannot burn, The pope ca^ make the pains of hell to cease.
the wheels turn, the ledd boil, the snakes not sting, nor the woormes gnawe
or byte any more. And if the dyuel anger him much, or it chance too rain a
golden shower, he will empty hell in spite of the Diuelles head, and send
them with a pasporte into Heaven, whether God will or not. And why may he not
do this? For has he not the keys of Heaven gates, and may he not open and
shut them when he will? Now he that can do these things, may he not play the
Rex well enough? And is he not worthy to be made of, The pope pla^eth the Rex.
and accepted amongst men, not as a man, but as a God rather?


Phile Yea truly. And as I remember one of his whelps has thus written of
him. The pope better then God.
Papa deo mayor and praesta^tior est, and quicquid potest deus, ide^ and Papa.
That is the Pope is greater and better tha^ God and look whatsoever god ca^
do, the same can the pope do. Yea and some of them say, that he can do more
the^ God. For say they, God cannot make God, The pope can do that God cannot
do.
but the pope can make God when he will, and therefore must he needs be not
only a god, but also more than a God. I pray you therefore what authority and
power has he elsewhere more than this?


Stupe. Besides his power in heaven, earth, and hell, he has also power in
another place called Purgatory nullibi, Purgatory. Nullibi.
or Purgatory pickepurse choose you whether, a place which neither God nor ye
devil ever knew of, til he of late found it out, and yet for all that cannot
he himself tell where it is, nor in what part it is adiace^t. But in this place
he rules ye roast, he is rector chori, the leder of the dau^ce there, and none
rules but he alone. In this broyling fire must every soul that departs
this life be cleansed and purified (says this master liar) before it can
enter into the kingdom of heaven seven years space, The pope says every soul
must be punished 7. years in purgatory for every sin that ever he committed
in thy^ life.
for every sin that ever he committed in all his life, whether they be small or
great, except they be released by his means. And therefore teaches he the
people to give money to Friars, Monks, The Popes merchandise.
and Priests too say Masses, Diriges, Trentalles, Lady Psalters, Himmes,
Prayers, Orisons, Exorsizations, and the like for the souls in Purgatory:
which as soon as ever they be said, So sone as money rings in the boxes, ye
souls in purgatory feel ease.
the souls feel wonderful great ease thereby: yea of such force are they that
so soon as ever the money ringeth in the box, the souls receive comfort. And
if money come in freely, he will not stick too grant you forth such a
general pardon and indulgence, Money will sweep Purgatory clean.
as shall sweep all Purgatory clean. And being once granted forth (they
carry such meal in mouth as they say) neither Pluto, The popes bandogs.
Cerberus, Lucifer, Beelzebub, nor the greatest Diuelles in Hell cann withstand
his power, nor keep back one soul, although they labor never so fast with
their crooked claws and crabbed fleshooks to stay ye souls there still. No they
dare not mute against him, How the devils ^remble.
his power makes them all too tremble like mountains, and to shake like Oaks:
By this devise of poling purgatory he gayneth more to himself, than the
mightiest prince that lies upon the earth, may dispend in annual revenues
yearly. And therefore I cannot blame him though he make much of such a pad,
Purgatory the popes sow.
and cherish such a sow yt will bring him forth every year such a farrow of
pigges as these.


Phile. I perceive his power is marvelous great, and far surpassing the
power of any earthly wight else. I pray you with what manner of attire and habit
is he clothed? For seeing, that he excels all men in power, and dignity, it
seems incident too his maiesticall estate, that he be richlier clothed then
all other men.


Stupe, In sumptuous robes, and rich attire, there may no earthly creature
compare with him. For when he is desposed to be seen abroad, he is cladde al
over from top to tooe, (as they say) in purple color, The popes attire.
in silks, veluets, sattans, damaskes, and withal, in cloth of gold,
silver, and tinsell, besette about with all kind of precious Stones from
India, and from all the coasts of the world. Than upon his head has he a
Triple crown all of perfect gold, A triple crown
hanged with Diademes, Carbuncles, Smaradges, Sapphires, Pearls, and all kind
of precious Stones glistring like the Sun. The popes crosier.
His crosier then and double cross of gold is carried solemnly before him, he
bring guarded behind and before with swarms of Cardinals, The popes guard.
Monks, Friars, Priests, and an infinite number of harnished men marching in
battle array: besides these things, they have their strange gestures, The
strange gestures of the papists.
as well with hand and foot, as with head and shoulders, and all parts of their
body, which to see and mark would make a man to laugh that has but one laughter
in his belly. All things the pope comes nere are holy.
And in such veneration is this holy father had, that the ground whereupon
he stands or goes, is taken to be holy ground, all things that he handles
or comes near, yea if he but took upon it with his holy eyes, it is
straight way holy.

In this order marches this holy satanist toward the Temple or Church
carried a wonderful height upon men's shoulders, The pope carried on men's
shoulders.
even as the sacred Arc of Aaron was, wherein the hiden Manna lay. Compare
now all things which this great Antichrist the Pope does, with the doings
and actions of our Savior Christ, and thou shall see no analogy,
resemblance, or agreement betwixt them, but rather a plain Antithesis, and
contrariety. The great difference betwixt Christ and the Pope.
Christ Jesus when he was upon the earth, lived in poverty, and mean estate.
The pope lives in wealth, and abundance of all things. Christ Jesus had
neither silver nor gold, and therefore when he should pay tribute was forced
to fly to a miracle to get a penie, The Pope has Millions of gold, and
mountains of silver by him. Christ Jesus commanded his Apostles that they
should not carry money in their purses, nor two coats for their backs: and
that they should preach the word freely. The pope will none of that.
The Pope commands the clean contrary, insomuch that it is grown into a
Proverb, No Penie, no Pater noster. Christ Jesus went on foot long and
tedious iourneies, If the Pope should go on foot, it would hurt him, for he
is so fat, that it would fry and melt his grease within him.
so that he being weary was forced to rest him at the well of Jacob, about the
sixte hour of the day, that is twelve of the clock after the Computation of
the Jews. The Pope he is carried on men's shoulders too too goodly, and rydeth
in sumptuous Wagons, Charets, Quoches, Horselitters and the like, being all
either of pure gold or silver, or else of some other costly thing, behanged
with precious stones, cloth of gold, velvet, silk, damask, Satin, and what
not else seemly to behold. Christ Jesus was glad to wear a crown of thorns
upon his head, But the Pope means not to change his crown of gold for Christ's
crown of thorns.
pricking him to the brain pan. The Pope wears a triple crown all of gold,
and precious stones, betokening his threefolde power in heaven, earth, and
hell, wherein we think the Pope is much deceived. For as he has power in
heaven, in earth, in hell, and in Purgatory, The Pope ought to wear a quadruple
crown.
so he should wear a quadruple crown, too signify his absolute power in
them all. And therefore would I wish some of his Bastardes to tell his holiness
of his great oversight, and to amend it in time. And thus too conclude, thou
see by these few comparisons betwixt Christ and the Pope, what agreement
there is between them, as much as is betwixt light, and darkness, truth and
falsehood, heat, and cold, God, and the Devil, heaven, and hell. And therefore
may thou know that he is that great Antichrist that was forespoken of,
should come toward the end of the world, The pope proved antichrist.
whom the Lord shall destroy with the glory of his coming.


Phile. It is greatly to be wondered at, how he comes by money to maintain
this great cost, and stately port withal?


Stupe. Never wonder at that: for neither emperor, king, nor prince has such
store of Gold in their chestes, as he has. For besides his own inheritance
which is both far and broad, he has from all the parts in Christendom (almost)
taxes, tallages, The popes exactions too maintain his pride.
co^tributio^s, tenths, tithes, Peter pence (as he calls the^) and other
grievous impositions not a few, al which by most intolerable exaction he
usurps: he has also belonging to his pretensed patrimony, both cities,
towns, countries and nations, castles and towers, besides haue^s, ports,
sinques, and creekes, whereby he gains yearly 1000 talents and more to his
cofers, Beyond all this, he gains as much or more, by grau^ting pardons, and
indulgences, by pardoning and remitting sin, Pardons and indulgences.
by giving forth dispensations, qualifications, tot quots, pluralities, non
residentaries, anuates, and like devises infinite. Besides this, by his pelting
palles, The gayn that commes in too the pope by pelting palles.
he may drink 100000. li. a year. And what he gains by selling, by chopping
and changing of bishoprikes, abbeies, nunneries, The popes chaffer.
priories, prebends, personages, vicarages, and the like, let the world judge,
is it any wonder now, how he comes by money enough too support his estate
withal, having so many ways to gain by? Insomuch that Pope John 22. after his
discese left 25. millions, The tresure of Rome infinite.
or 25. times a thousand thousand of crowns in ready money behind him,
besides what he spent upon whores, That was not the least part I warrant you.
bauds, and knaves, in pride, riot, gluttony, and excess during his life.

In the time of Pope Martin 5. there was brought too Rome 9. Millions of gold
at one time out of France, which is 9. times a thousand thousand crowns, Oh
extreme polyng.
for Benefices, and other Ecclesiastical promotions, whereat the Archbishop of
Madenbourgh admiring said, Iudicet timoraius, quae verago haec: Rome a
deuouryng gulphe.
that is, Let a wise man judge, what a devouring gulf the City of Rome is.
Al things as I told you before are sold for money at Rome, and therefore John
Picus writes thus, Al things sold at Rome for money.
Vendit Alexander, cruces altaria Christum, vendere iure potest, emerat ille
prius: that is, Alxander the pope sells crosses, altares, yea, and Christ
himself also, and why not? For, says he, he bought all before with his
money? Whereto agrees Baptista Mantuanus, a Monk writing thus: Venalia nobis
templa, Sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae: ignis, thura, praeces coelum est
venale, Deusque. That is, At Rome Churches, priests, altares, sacrifices,
crowns, fire, frankensence, prayers, heaven, and God himself is is to be sold
for money. And therefore he concludes thus and says, The wickedness and
corruption of Rome described.
Viuire qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma, omnia cum liceant, non licet esse
pium: that is, All that desire to live in the fear of God get you from Rome:
for whereas all other things are lawful there, yet is it not lawefull too be
good there.


Phile. I marueiled not so much before, how he came by money sufficient to
maintain his estate wythal, A thing to b^ maruayled at
but now I marvel a thousand times more how he spends so much as comes
in yearly into his treasury?


Stupe. He has ways enough to spend it I warrant you, and if it were x. times
as much. For rather tha^ to fail he will spend you a hundredth thousand crowns
in a year, upon whores, baudes and harlots, upon strumpets, brothels, and vile
filthy Sodomits. He will spe^de a hundred thousand crowns in a year upon
whoores and harlots, etc.
He will spend you as much, nay ten times as much, in riot, gluttony,
drunkenness, g^urmandize, and all kind of excess. And what he spends in
pride, in erecting of gorgeous houses, in building of Abbeies, Priories
Hospitals, How the pope spends his money.
Seminaries, Monastaries, Churches, casteles, and towers (wherein he will be sure
to place his dear friends kinsmen, and familiars) it is infinite and
unmeasurable. Thus briefly have thou heard what the Pope is, and how
Luciferlike he lives: now judge thou whether he be the same that he would be
thought to be, and not rather Antichrist himself. And therefore I cannot but
marvel greatly at the blindness of the world, The pope unholy.
who either effectionate him so much, or yet think him to be holy, whereas
of himself you see, he is nothing less. But belike he takethe his holiness
of the place and Sea of Rome which if it were true that the place could make an
unholy man, The place cannot make a man good, which before is naught.
holy, or a naughty man good, then should it follow that all that have been at
Rome, should be as holy as the Pope, which were blasphemy to say. The Devil
holier then the pope.
And then why should not the Devil be holy, yea and holier than the Pope, for
that he was in a holier place then Rome is: namelye, the kingdom of heaven.
And thus much concerning the pontifical person, state, and dignity of the
Pope, the great Antichriste of the world. Now to speak a word or two of
Cardinals the chiefest pillars of this antichristian usurped kingdom.


Of Cardinals the pillars of the Popes kingdom, their original, offices,
Pride, and corruption.
Philemon. I Pray you (brother Stuperius) what are the Cardinals, whom you
call the pillars, and supportes of this popish antichristian kingdom?


Stupe. They are such as for the most part, are descended of noble blood, of
honorable Parentage, Cardinals what they are
and of ancient houses, intruded into this office of Cardinalship, by money,
Symonie, and friendship, altogether unlearned, especially in the law of
GOD. These Cardinals have ioynte power with him, in some measure, to govern
his kingdom withal: but the whole power is denied them, as a thing which
rests in the pope alone, as head and prince over all the rest.


Phile. Whereof do they take their names too be called Cardinals?


Stupe. They take their names of this latin word Cardo (as some think) that
is, ^Vherof Car^ynals take their names.
a hook, a hinge, or staple, whereupon a door or a gate does hang. Too this
end (no doubt) that they may be thought and taken to be the very hinges
hooks, staples and charmels, whereupon the whole frame, and building of the
Church does hang and depend. And even as no door nor gate can hang without a
staple or hook, or hynge too rest upon, so no Church can stand without it
be underpropped with the staff of their stay. And so holy a society and
brotherhood is this viperous generation of Cardinals, The holy society of
cardinals.
that even ye Pope himself is hatches of them, The pope chosen by cardinals.
and chosen by them in conclaues, and secret places. And thus they delude the
world with their pretensed shows of feigned holiness.


Phile. When they are created Cardinals by the pope, what oath, and charge do
they undertake, and promise to their idol God the pope?


Stupe. First of all, they swear to be faithful, The oaths tha^ the cardinals
take when they are admitted.
true, and loyal to the popes person: secondly, they promise to maintain and
uphold his kingdom, power, and dignity, and to enlarge S. Peter's patrimony,
as much as lies in their power. Thirdly, to see that al his law^s s^^ctions,
statutes, orders, constitutio^s and ceremonies, be duly kept, and observed in
every point. Fourthly, that they neither do cause, nor consent to be done any
manner of injury, violence, or oppression to the Popes person, nor too conceal
i^ by whomsoever it be intended. And fifthly, Oh cursed oath
that they fight and contend against Christ Jesus and his holy word, to the
maintenance of popery, and extirpation of christianity. These Cardinals thus
sworn, and alleagea^ced to his holiness do in such diligence execu^e their
charge, that they will rather be torn in pieces with wild horses, The
constanc^ of these cardinals to their dad the pope.
than to fail in the least point. And for the great credit that he has in
them, oftentimes he sends them Ambassadors and Legates, to Emperors
kings, and princes, by whose means he easily undermines ye state of every
country, The Pope ma^eth whole ^yngdomes and ^ountries ^ys pray tho^ow
cardinals ^ood help.
knows all the secrets thereof, and in the end as a greedy puttocke makes
the same a pray for his own paunch. By the^ he exciteth kings and princes too
wars, by them he whetteth them against the sincere Professors of the
Gospel, but as he calls them against heretics. Finally by them he works all
mischief in general.


Phile. In what manner be they received, when they come as ambassadors, and
Legates too kings, and princes?


Stupe. Like Gods almost, for going forth, they send before them their
messengers in post, The manner of ^eceiuyng of ^ardinals being ^ent as
ambas^adours into a^y land or ^ountry.
too signify to the king, or prince of their coming, to this end that
preparation may be made for them according to their calling. Then, when as they
come within the territories of the Land or Country whyther they go: noble
men are sense (...) them with great p^mpe, and some^^^s the prince himself is
glad to t^^dge toward them, The concourse of people runnyng to meet cardinals.
or else they will look (...) on him. And as for the great company of Friars,
Monks, Abbots, Priors, C^uents, Priests, Clarks, Scholemasters and the like,
they go not, but run, thick and threefold, al clad in white Surplesses, with
crosses either of gold or silver carried before them. The common people also of
every sex and age, are not beehinde, who coming before their great dads
Legate, down they fall upon their knees, with capping and crowching, bowing and
becking, wonderful to behold. And to the end that this pageant may have all
his perfect members, and right limnies, they are commanded to cry out, Jesus
save your grace (our holy father the cardinal) holy S. Mary, The peoples cry to
the cardinals grace.
and all the holy saints of god, preserve your highness, and send you long life.
Then goes he marching forward guarded with whole armies of men and horses.
And all the way as they go, the mad people kneelyng down before him, desire
their holy fathers blessing. The manner of the the Cardinals blessing.
Then falls he to blessing, and crossing either with the two foremost fingers of
his right hand, or else with all the whole hand, much like the foolish ga^der
that blesses his goslings with his bill.


Phile. These fellows are lusty bruites in deed, and carry a statelye port,
mary sir, tell me what do they else?


Stupe. Their port passes any kings port for seldom or never do they ride
without two or three thousand me^ with them, The stately ^ort of cardi^als.
besides noblemen, gentlemen, and others, with such a sort of horses, mules,
camels, asses, (yea asses the most of them) Wagons, Chariots, Quoches,
horslitters, Cardinals beg ^^rly attire.
carts and other cariages, as is wonderful to see. And as for their apparel,
it is for the most part of crymson silk, velvet, satin, damask, grogram, and
the like. Upon their heads they wear great broad hats of purple color. But
if you will have a plainer description of Cardinals, and what a port they
carry, mark this example following of Cardinal Wolsey sometime Cardinal in
England, Cardinal Wol^^y his example ^t wonderful ^ride.
and by him, may thou learn what all the rest are: first, he had in his
hall continually 3. boords, or tables, kept with three several officers, that is
a shewarde which was always a priest, a treasurer being a knight, and a
co^troler an esquire. His coferer also being a Doctor, 3. marshals: three
yeomen Ushers in the hal, besides two grooms, and almners. Then in the hall
kitchen, two Clearkes of the Kitchen, Mark this gear well.
a Clearke controuler, a Surueyor of the the dresser, a clearke of the spicery.
Also in his hall kitchen, he had of ma^ster Cooks two, and of other inferior
cooks, scullions, and laborers twelve persons, four yeomen of the
scullery, four other yeomen of the silver scullery, Oh famous Cardynal.
two yeomen of the pastrye, with two other pastelers under the yeomen. Then in
his privy Kitchen a master Cook, who went daily in Ueluet or in satin with a
great chayn of gold, and two other yeomen, and a groom. In the scalding house
a yeoman, Oh excelling pride.
and 2. grooms. In the Pantrey two persons. In the buttry two yeomen, 2
grooms, and two ^^ges. In the yeomanry likewise. In the seller three yeomen,
and 3. pages. In his chaundry 2. In the wafary two. In the wardrobe of beds,
the master of the wardrobe and ten other persons. In the Laundrye a yeoman,
a groom, thirty pages, two yeomen purueyers and one groom. In the bake house,
a yeomen and two grooms. In the woodyard a yeoman, Oh surpassyng vanity.
and a grome. In the barn one: in the garden a yeoman and two grooms. Porters
at the gate, 2. yeomen and 2, grooms a yeoma^ of his barge, and a master of
his horse, a cleark of his stable, Here were mo offices then a few.
a yeoman of the same. The Sadler: the farrior: a yeoman of his chariot: a
sumpter manne: a yeoman of his styrroppe, a mu^^ter. Sixteen grooms of his
stable, every of whom kept 4. Geldings. In the almory a yeoman, and a groom. In
his chapel he had a Deane a great divine, The pomp of the Cardinals Chapel.
a Subdeane, a Repeater of the quire: a Gospeller, a Pistler. Of singing
priests ten. A master of the children. Seculars of the chapel: singing men
twelve, singing children ten, with a servant to wait upon them. In the reuestry
a yeoman, and two groom^s besides diverse retayners that came thither at
principal feasts. For the furniture of his chapel it passes ma^s reason to
declare with the number of jewels, vessels and ornaments, which daily were used
there. There has been seen at one procession in his hall forty four rich
copes of one suit wor^, besides rich Crosses, candlestickes, vasons, Ewers,
censors, and the like infinite. Copes 44. in the cardinals hall at one time.
He had 2. Crossebrarers, and two pillar bearers, in his great chamber: And in
his privy chamber, first the chief chamberlain, and vizecha^berlain. Of
gentlemen vshers (besides one in his privy chamber) he had 12. daily waiters:
and of ge^tlemen waiters in his privy chamber, he had six, and of Lords niene
or ten, who had each of them 2. men ape^te allowed the^ to wait upon them, Oh
pontifical Prelate.
except ye earl of Darby who had 5. men allowed him: The^ ^ad he of Gentlemen,
of Cupbearers, Caruers and sewers, both of the privy Chamber, and great
chamber. With Gentlemen daily waiters there forty persons: Of yeomen Ushers 6.
of grooms in his chamber 8. of yeomen in his chamber fortye five daily. Here
is good stuff mark it who will.
There was attendyng on his boord^ of Doctoures, and Chaplaynes sixe^eene
besides them of his chapel: a cleark of his closet: Attendants upon the
cardynals person.
2. secretaries, and 2. clearks of his signer, and four Counselors learned in
the Law, he had diverse Officers of the Chauncery also waiting upon him, yt
is to say, the clearke of the crown: a ryding clearke, a clearke of the hamper:
and a chafer of the ware, then a clearke of the check: he had also four
footme^ garnished in rich running coats: Oh Lucifer-like pride, who ever saw
the like.
when he rode in any journey, he had an herrauld of arms, and a Sergeaunt of
arms: a Physician: an Apothicary: four minstrels, a keeper of his ten^es: an
armorer, an instructor of his wa^des, two pe^^en of the warderobe of his robes:
and a keeper of his chamber continually in the court. He had also the Surueyer
of York and a Clearke of the green^ cloth in his house. All these with others
mo^ were up rising, By S. Cronian he feasts a pretty ordinary* then.
and down lying* at bed, and a^boorde in his house. Besides this, every
Gentleman. Officer; or worthy person, had one dr^wn, or mo allowed them to
attend upon them, which grew to a wonderful company. Thus have thou ^^arde
the stately port* and lusty countenance, that these Cardinals do bear. And
look what a one thou see this Cardinal Wolsey, too have been, even such
are all the rest of the Cardinals at this day. Judge thou now whether they
pass not any, This passes the beggerlyenesse of poor Christ and his Apostles.
either king, prince or Emperor in all kind of excess whatsoever: and whether
there be any thing in them, worthy of commendation, or sauouring of Christ
Jesus, or his Apostles. And thus much briefly concerning Cardinals and their
pride.


Of popish Bishops their office, superstition and pride.
Philemon. What manner of Bishops has the Pope, for I am sure they are not
the least pillars of this his whoorish and Adulterous Church?


Stupe. Such as his Cardinals are, such are his Bishops, The manner of the
Popes Bishops.
saving that they carry not such a great port, and statelye sway as the other
do: else they are like them in all kind of wickedness. First of all, they
take upon them names, and tytles proper to kings, princes and Lords. They be
stowt, The proud humors of the Bishops of Rome.
proud and disdainefull, looking not only for capp and knee of every man, but
even for kneeling and crowchyng down to the ground. They have great
Bishoprics worth by estymation two or three thousand pounds by year, whereto
belong both castles and towers, wy^h cities, countries, and towns. They have
also the rule and government of Abbeys, granges, nunneries, priories,
personages, vicarages, and all other kind of Ecclesiastical benefices and
spiritual promotions whereof they feed themselves (for change of pasture is
good for the^) with the daintiest morsels. The fat morsels of Romish Bishops.
Being thus furnished with abundance of all things, commonly they lie in some
strong castle, sytuat in a solitary place, where they preach as strawberies use
to grow, Where the romish bishops lie.
that is once a year, nay happily not once in 7. years. And to say truth, as
they say, it needs not, Blynking Sir John's,
for they have their blincking Sir John's, their begging Friars, Monks, and
cloysterers that do it for the^. These blind buzzards, Friars etc. the popes
spanyels.
and Assye peisants being sent forth by their Bishops, set abroach with all
their might, the popes decrees, ceremonies, and orders: in the mean time not
forgetting to declaim against heretics, that is against such as put their
confidence and trust in Christ Jesus alone, and his sacred truth. The papystes
take ^ great heed least they preach any truth.
But above all things, they take great care least any of them might at
unawares preach any truth out of the word of God, for that were Heresy to
God, and treason to the Popes person. For if they should preach the truth
(being sworn to maintain the pope against Christ Jesus, Oh damnable oath.
and his word) then might they be attainted of perjury, and besides accused of
heresy. Thus neither Bishop, nor prelate sworn to the pope, None of the
papists dare preach Christ Jesus aryght.
dares preach Christ Jesus aright: for that were too destroy their proud
Antichristian kingdom, which consists only of lies, falsehood, murder,
treason, vsurpatio^, and rebellion. Insomuch that a good bishop of Coleyne
seeing what wickedness under the visard and pretense of of godliness was daily
committed: The example of the bishopp of Coleyn, who rather forsook his
Bishopric the^ to dishonor Christ Jesus, as the papists did.
began to discover and lay open their impieties, blasphemies and trecheries:
but he was resisted of al, every barking friar whetted his pe^ against him, and
like serpe^tine vipers stu^g him eue^ to the death. Well, report hereof coming
to Rome, ye pope assembled a counsel, and cited this good old father to appear
before him. Who seeing their wicked intentions against him, gave over his
bishopric, rather choosing without it, to preach Christ Jesus truly, then
with it to dishonor him every way, as they did. These blockheaded popish
bishops, as blind as blind bayardes, The Papists say preaching is not
necessary.
think, yea and shame not say that preaching is not necessary, and that the
people do learn more by their dumb ceremonies, imageries, and other
bableries, then they do by hearing the word of God preached. And indeed I
think no less, for whereas by the word of God preached they learn the way to
salvation, By hearing the word of God preached men learn the pathwaye too
heaven, by papistry the path way to hell.
and life eternal, by imageries and other popish ceremonies, they learn the
pathway to hell, and everlasting damnation. And therefore they learn more by
the one, than by the other. But more what? more wickedness and sin. But
notwithstanding their seldom preaching, yet when they do preach, it shall be
commonly upon some popish holiday, or festiual day of their own invention,
which is always of greater estimation amongst them, then the Lords day, to
wit, the Sabbath day is. In this their Pope holy day, what Idolatrye is
committed, what superstition is practysed, and what gross blasphemies,
Idolatry committed upon popish holidays.
and filthy absurdities are permitted, and exercised of them, it is almost
unspeakable. Then, even then, is there such censing, and singing, such masking
and rynging, such chaunting, and roaryng, in the quyre, with Orgayns playing,
and music soundyng, that thou would rather think it a Satyricall stage
play of fools consecrated to the Devil, than a sober service of wisemen
instituted to G^d.


Phile How be the bishops attired in these solemn holy days, and how do they
behave themselves amongst the rest in this goodly stately Pageant of theyrs?


Stupe. The Bishops are attyred with 14. sundry fortes of garments upon their
backs at once, The ridiculous attire of Popish bishops upon holidayes.
without the which, they cannot sacrifice, nor (mask) I should say mass well.
And some have fifteen several kinds of garments, besides their pall, which
makes sixteen. First of al, he puts on his sandalles eythes of silk or
velvet, his amias and his albe as white as snow, hanging down to his shoe.
About his loins he gyrdeth himself with a gyrdle of silk. About his neck is
there a stoale, wrought for the greatest part of very good silk: This is dogin.
which having a cross ouerlaid upon it, is ou^vnderneath his gyrdle, and so
buckled to him. The^ he puts on his tunicle of purple color, and* over
that, his Dalmatike, a short sleeued garment: next ^e pulles on his sweet
gloves upon his delicate hands, That is pat.
his fingers being thwacke with rings, precious stones. The over al these, he
puts ^n his cope, with crosses thereon both behind and before: he has also his
brave wrought napkins and ha^dkerchers, bedecked with gold and silver round
about. The^ has he his pall of a wonderful price, That is worth the wearyng
then
co^passing in his porkishe neck. His hood with a strange devised knotte,
hangs behynd his neck in the midst of his back. Next after this comes in
his forked myter, with 2. labels (I had almost said babels) hanging down beset
round about with gold, silver and precious stones. Last of al, he takes his
crosiare staff in his hand, bedecke with gold, silver, and castly i^wels. And
in this playerly manner does this hystrionical bishop play his part amongst the
rest, The popyshe bishops like so players.
making the temple of the Lord a stage or theater, themselves players, and the
people stark fools in beholding their fooleries.


Phil. What does the bishop, when he is thus apparrelled?


Stupe. He marches toward the altar as fast as he can trudge: which is but
very softly, for the burden of cloths, not only almost weigh him to the ground
but also welneere take away his breath. And being come to the high (halter)
altar I should say, mark his strange ^^stures, and thou will wonder. For
first of al, (besides the shuffling of priests, and clearks, The Bishops
gestures at the high altar.
to and fro like swarms of bees) ye his^^^ as^ing up the which of his eyes
toward heaven* as though he would^ saint straight way, mumbleth to himself,
certain charms or exorcisnies (I think) which neither he nor any of the
rest* understand. The bishop coniures.
This done, he puts off his myter from his head, where one is (...) at
hand to receive it, to keep it, and to put it on and off, as occasion shall
serve. Variety is pleasant.
One while he stands, another while he sittes, sometime he trippeth, on this
side of the Altar, sometimes upon that. Now he kysseth the Altar here,
Instead of his lemman.
now there, now the Chalice, now the Paxe, now the Book, now one thing,
then an other. Then having fisked in this sort about the altar enough, at the
last he comes to the myddest or Center of the same, and there he makes an
end of his play. Sometime he stands hanging down the head, The bishop in a
brown study
as though he were in a brown study, mumbling to him self no man knows
what.

Sometime he joins both his hands together upon the Altar, The lifting up of
the byshop^ hands.
sometime he lifts them up toward heaven, sometime he spreaddeth them toward
the North, sometime toward the South, sometime toward the east, and sometime
toward the west. One while he pattereth and blesses, an other while he
crosses and censeth, fearing belike lest any saucy spirit, should come near to
deface his doings. Upon the otherside his ministers are ready to lay cushio^s
of silk, For flesh upon his back he has none and therefore has need of
cushyons.
or cloth of gold under his elbowes to lean upon, under his buttoc as to sit
upon, and under his feet too stand upon. After these things thus set in
order, the bishop calls for frankence^se, censors, sweet odours, candles,
crosses, banners, and the like trumpery, which being brought, then falls he
to kissing and smearing the altar, and altar stone, as a sovereign thing.
Besides one stands behind the bishop to see ye nothing be wanting, holding
up the patin enclosed in silk. Thus al things ended, the bishop eats, and
drynketh up all himself, not giving any part to any present. Which done
the Satyr or Pageant, is perfected and ended. The papists delude the world
with gewgawes.
Now see thou with what gewgawes, these beetle headed papists, do delude
the world, and dazzle the eyes of the simple.

Besides this, there are some of these bishops, that will not blushe too have
a swoorde carried before them, and placed upon the holy Altar, A sword
carried before popish bishops to the high altar, and why.
too the end that men may know their magnyficall power, and so both fear,
and reverence them the more. Thus they will be both kings, and priests
themselves alone, whether God will or not. Othersome there are, that will not
take this pains upon them, but covet rather too be conuersaunt in Kings
Courts, hoping thereby to attain too greater promotion, Bishops conversant in
kings courts.
then by poring upon a book, and preaching of Christ Jesus. Where, by that
time, that they have bin a while, they fead humors so excellently, and are so
skillful in the eight lyberall science (to wit, the noble art of flattery, and
assentation) that in short space, they are admitted to be of the privy council,
Popish bishops skilful in the art of flattery.
without whose knowledge, consent, and agreement, nothing can be set forth, or
established. In parliamentes they give their Councels, and rule all the rowte,
even at their pleasures. Bishops victualers of camp^.
Some others again are victuallers of camps, and captains in the wars now
and then. These Popish Bishops also are justices of peace, justices of
Quorum, of heir determiner, and assyses, yea and Judges of life and death, for
the most part. All which callynges as they be contrary to the word of
GOD* in them, so do they withdraw them from the discharge of their duties
otherwise.


Philemon. That is very true, it must needs be so, for if there were never
any, that could dyscharge the one office suffycientlye, much less shall
there ever be any found able too discharge them both. But I pray you what
officers has every Archbishop under him?


Stuperius. Every Archbishop amongst the Papists has almost as many
officers under him as you heard before, the Cardynall had, and therefore I
will speak but of one of them, which is a Bishop, A bishop suffragane.
but called by the name of a Suffragane.


Of Suffraganes amongst the papists, their horrible blasphemye, pride, and
superstition.
Philemon. Has every bishop a Suffragane under him?


Stupe. Oh: no. None but Archbyshops, and metropolitanes only. For if every
inferior bishop should have another bishop under him, that were a great
inconvenience, and would burden the church of God too much.


Phile. Whereof do they take the names of suffraganes.


Stupe. Truly I could never learn from whence they take them, nor I think
Apollo himself neither.


Phile. What is the office of this suffragane bishop, and what does he in his
office?


Stu. He bishoppeth and confirms children halloweth altars, The office of
suffraganes in the church of Rome.
churches, churchyards and the like, he crosses and blesses the people, he
provides greasy priests in every parish, he halloweth water in the font,
stones, fire, palms, ashes, and many other things: he christneth bells and
gives them proper names with great sole^nity. Many other toys and knacks
belong to this suffragans office, which for tediousnes I omit. Only a few of
his foolish ceremonies, will I show which he uses in hallowing of churches and
chapels, christening of bells, and giving of orders.


Phile. I pray you do so, for they are things which I greatly desire too
know.


The manner of hallowing of Churches, and Churcheyardes, as it is now used
amongst the papists.
Stuperius. FIrst of all, the sexten lurketh secretly in some corner of the
church, The order of the Papists hallowing of churches and church yardes.
all others being thruste forth, and the church doors fast closed, then are
there twelve tapers set burning before the Altar, and as many before ye cross
without. The Bishop or Suffragane all this while stands without the Church
with a wonderful great pomp and pride, having holy water hallowed with salt
enough standing by him. And taking the holy water, Holy water always one.
he goes three times about the Church, casting thereof upon the walls of the
Church as he goes. Than having gone thrice about the Church in this order,
he comes to the Churchdore, and knocking three times on the door with his
staff, says, these words of the Psalm, Oh, blasphemous villainy so to
abuse the words of the psalm to such a lewd purpose as this.
Lift up your gates, etc. as though a whole legion of Diuelles were within the
Church. Then comes me Master clark, and in the name of all the Devils, he
says, what king is he that thus dares knocks at these gates: Mary it is a
proud prelate, whom all the devils in hell cannot resist.
And straight way as though the Devils gave place, the Clarke opens the
doors, and the bishop enters with a few others, who are thought worthy to
behold such mysteries. Being then come into the Church, first of all he
calls upon Saints, and Images, crosses, and blesses every thing that he
sees or comes near. The Church floor also being strowed over with
ashes, or else with sand, ^^e first makes crosses thereon, then letters in
Latin, Greek, and Hebrewe, whereof he nothing understands what they mean,
no more then the manne in the Moon. Holy water purifieth and sanctifies al
things
Then falls he to coniuring of new holy water (for now the old has lost
his force) with wine, Salt, and Ashes intermixed. This done, he proceeds
too hallowe the Altar, and having first made twelve crosses thereon, The manner
of hallowyng the Altar.
he annointeth it with oil, and chrisme round about: after this having set
upon every corner of the Altar, a great many of crosses, he besprynckleth it
all over with his new made holy water, never ceasing but ietting about it 7.
times, and as many times sprinkling it with holy water as before. In the
midst of the Altar is a four square hole, hewed out by great art,
representyng the Sepulcher, this he annoyteth with chrysme, He crosses the
altar so often to fear away devils.
and oil, with a thousand crosses on every side. In this Sepulcher, he
lays his relics, his Frankensence, and his gear.

Thus all things done in order, and anointed with Oil, and Chrisme,
besprynkled with holy water, and crossed on every side, The play is ended.
he ends his Pageant and departs. And thus much concerning the hallowing
of Churches, and churchyards.


Phil. This is a wonderful interlude indeed, the sight of this would make a
Dog too cast his gorge. I pray you what Ceremonies uses this Suffragane in
giving of orders?


The Manner of popish orders giving and what Ceremonies are observed in the
same.
Stuperius. FIrst of all, the Suffragane Bishop being come in place, clothed
in his pontificalibus, The manner of gyuyng of popish orders.
every one that is too be made Priest, is called particularly by name, who
standing all upon a cluster, or heap together, clad in their long albes: the
bishop asks whether they be good and virtuous men, and of sufficienc^e able
to take upon them that high calling. The officer (greased in the fist before)
answers that they are learned, able, and sufficient men, and yet he never
knew them in all his life, nor yet so much as ever saw, Because they are
bnzzardes, and cannot see.
or heard of them before. Then is there a candle, and a candlestick brought from
the high Altar to the Acolouth, with instruction given them that their office
is continually to light candles in the Church, and to bear them about. This
done, than is there an empty cup brought, and put into their hands with
lessons given to them, that their office is too give wine too the Priest at his
mass, which they do not, and yet is their crown shorn for it, These crown^
shorn make (...) many a man to wear a horn.
neither it is lawful for them ever after to wear hair there any more. After
this master Coniurer the Bishop receives the book^, and delivers it to the
new Priests, commaundyng them to learn it by heart: Let the^ learn to read
it first good my lord, before they learn it by heart.
and by power and verity thereof to cast out Devils. Than is the book carried
again to the high altar^, the Priest never reading one word of it, being
delivered him clasped, and yet is he commanded to get it by heart, and to
cast out Devils with the same. Then is delivered him the tastament, The
testament is given him, but to preach truly thereout is forbidden him.
in token that he ought to preach the same truly too the people: which thing
neither he their great grandsire the Pope, nor any of them all do perform.

Next after this, there are delivered unto them, the keys of the Church
doors together with ropes of Hemp, If they must keep out dogs out of the
church then must they shut forth themselves
in token that their office is too shut fast the doors, too drive out the Dogs
out of the Church, and to keep the Church, and all the holy Relics fair
and clean. Then is there oil brought* wherewith every Priest has his head,
Priests anointed.
his fingers, and thumbes oyled and greased. In the doing whereof is great heed
taken, least any of the oil should chance to drop ^owne upon the ground,
for that were a heinous offense. And therefore the Suffragan Bishop, and the
Priests they spounge, they wipt, they rub, and dry their fingers, Oh
greasy hypocrites who streine at a gnat, and swallowe down a camel.
their head and all wonderful to behold. And for fear of the worst, they
scour their fingers and head with ashes, or sand, to the end that all the
holy oil may be dried up and none spilt. For further security whereof,
because they will be sure that (...) shall be spilt, they send for hot bread
from the o^en, Hoa^e bread ^ent to dry up the oil.
which being carried to the ^olye Altar (...) they apply it too their heads and
fingers, that they may be sure the (...) of their farred oil is (...)* Which
(...), the Bishop and Priests depart, and so endethe the play.


Phile. What is the order observed in Christening of Belles, and what
ceremonies does he use therein?


The order and manner of christening of Belles, with the ridiculous ceremonies
used there in by the papists.
Stuperius. WHen the^ (...) disposed to christen any Bell first of all there in
warnyng thereof given in the church, The order and manner of christening of bel^
amongst the papists.
and good while before and the day appointed which day being come* the people
^^ock thick and threefold to see this commedie played. The godfathers and
godmothers also being warned before by the churchwardens are present in all the
best apparel that they have. Besides whom you shall have 2. or 3. (...)
present every one striving and contending who shall be godfathers, They strive
who shall offend god most.
and godmothers to the bell supposing it a wonderful preferment, a marvelous
promotio^, and singular credit so to be.

Thus all things made ready, the bishop in all his masking gear comes
forth like a coniuring iugler, and having made holy water with salt, and other
sibbersause, he sprinkleth all things with the same, as a thing of an
unspeakable force. And although it be at noone days, His tapers why not, to
light him to the devil.
yet must he have his tapers burning round about on every side: and then
kneeling down he very solemnly desires the people to pray, that God would
vouchsafe to grant to this Bell a blessed and happy Christendom: and withal
a lusty sound to drive away devils, and (...) against all kind of peril and
^^^^pe^s whatsoever. The oly^ will make the gentleman bell too look with a
cheareful countenance.
This prayer ended, the Bishop ^^m^yuteth the bell in (...) pla^s with oil,
and chrisme, mumblyng (...) himself certain coniurat^ons and exorcismes,
which no man hears but he alone, and yet do all me^ understand i^ as well
as he. Then commands he the godfathers, and godmothers too give the name to
the Bell which being given, he powers on water three or four several times,
anointing it with oil and chrisme as before, for what cause I know not,
except it be either to make his belly soluble, Why oil is given to the bell.
his joints nimble, or his color fair. This done he puts on the Bell a
white linen Chrisome, commanding the godfathers and godmothers thereof, too
pull it up from the ground by ropes, It were fittes the ropes served to hang
you all in, than to pluck up the bell wythall.
and engines made for that purpose. The^ fall they down before this new
christened bell, all prostrate upon their knees, and offer up to this idol
gifts, gold, silver, frankensence, myrrh, and many other things, every one
striving who shall give most. These Sacrifices, and offeringes too the Devil
ended, the Bell is hanged up in the steeple, with great applause of the
people, every one rejoicing that the bell has received such a happy
christendom. For joy whereof they celebrate a feast to Bacchus, Bacchus feast
celebrate by the papists.
spending all that day, and peradventure 2. or 3. days after in daunsing and
ryotting in feasting and banketting, in swilling, and drinking like filthy
Epicures, till they being as drunken as swine, The papists sobriety and
christianity*
vomit and disgorge their stinking stomachs, worse then any dogs. And thus
ends this satyr, together with the plays Enterludes, Pageants, office, and
ceremonies of this Suffragan bishop.

Now whether there be anythinge here, either proueable by the word of God,
or by the example of the primitive Apostolical church, or any particular
member of the same ever since the beginning of the world, I refer it too the
judgment of the wise and learned.


Phile. What Courts has the pope under him, I pray you for it can not be
that such a mighty monarchy can stand without any?


Of the Popes Consistory Courts, with the abuses thereof.
Stuperius. HE has courts of diverse and sundry kinds, the several abuses
whereof, if I should particularly entreat of, I should rather want time then
matter. And therefore I will speak but only a word or two concerning his
consistory court, the warehouse of al his horrible fraud, cosonage and
deceit. In this court, The discriptio^ of the Popes consistory court.
for money, crooked things ar made straight, rough, smoth, truth, falshoode,
falsehood truth, light darkness, darkness light, as pleases the master of the
fees. Here gold strikes the stroke, silver ways down the balance, and
friendship, bribes, and gifts carry the palm of victory away. Here such
marriages as Gods word knitteth together, are dissolved and broken: and such
marriages as Gods word does separate are united together. In this baudie Court
are such filthy matters handeled, Baudy matters handled in the popes
consistory court.
as chaste ears would blush once to hear spoken of, continent sober minds
would shame once to think of, and shamefast lips would bashe to utter or
speak of. And yet will these Romish Doctors (Doctors of bawdrie) laughe at
them till they chynke again. Doctors of baudry.
Out of this Consistory Court of Faculties the Quauemyre of all abomination
there be granted licenses too marry with whom, What things be granted
forth of this consistory court of the pope.
where, and when thou will, for money, although it be thy own sister, and at
any time of the year, as well at times prohibited, Fruits of the popes court.
as not prohibited, licenses to eat flesh in lent, or any time else, licenses
to stand with thy cap upon thy head in the Church, at time of high mass,
licenses to mary as many wives as thou will, licenses to commit whoredom,
adultery, and incest at thy pleasure, to keep whores, and harlots besides thy
wife, licenses to commit Sodomitrie and buggery, licenses to rob, to steal,
too murder, to slap, and kill, to swear, and blaspheme the sacred name of
god: licenses to have as many benefices as thou can get, licenses to
discontinue from thy Benefices. And to conclude, there is no deed so heinous,
no fact so pernicious, nor any crime so infamous, but for money thou may have
a license in this court safely to commit it, and not only to commit it, but
also to live, and continue in it. Finally, in this court may thou have a
license, All things in the popes courts to be had for money
a tolleration, a quallification, and dispensation for any thing, and when thou
have done, for money thou shall have a fair absolution granted thee under
hand and seal manuel, to be discharged and set free a culpa and poena, Poena
and culpa
that is, both from the Fault or Sin committed, and also from the punishment
or guilte, due for the same. Therefore what need thou to care what thou
do? For if thou have money enough, The pope for money will thruste thee into
heaven whether thou will or no.
fear not, thou shall not only have absolution, and pardon for all thy
sins, but also in the end shalt be chruste intoo heaven whether thou will
or not. Such force has money in this court.


Phile. Be there many officers in this count?


Stupe. Yea a great many: but because I will not be tedious, I will speak but
of one only: namely the official. This Official (I may tell you) is no small
fool in this court, The official, and his office.
but even such a fellow as rules all with a beck. Him must you please (I had
welnigh said grease) with money, bribes, and gifts: if at least you ever
mean too have good of your Suite: he only is the yolke of the egg (as they
say) or as it were the right hand of the Bishop. By him the Bishop casts
forth his flashing thunderboltes of citations, The thunderboltes of the
romish bishop.
suspensio^s, excommunications, and the like, when no cause requires it,
against better men then himself. But howsoever it falls out, if thou be
once cited to appear in this court, I warn thee (above all things) to carry
argent enough with thee, Money will serve thy turn dout thou not.
and then I warraunt thee, thou shall speed better then if the matter were
such, that all laws were on thy side. Then need thou (...) care, Quid non
pecunia potest.
whether thy matter be right or wrong, all is one for that if thou haste money
enough. And thus much concerning the Popes consistory court, the officers,
and abuses of the same.


Philemon. I have heard talk of certain Popysh Cha^ons, I pray you what be
they?


Of Popish Chanons, their offices, and abuses.
Stuperius. THE Chanons are jolly fellows I promise you, being all either
gentlemen at the least, or else descended of some noble blood, Popish chano^s
what they be, and their office.
race, or parentage. In the old time, this room was reserved for the poor,
and such as were godly, learned and vertuons men. But in the end Gentlemen
and other fat cubbes, seeing the great wealth, ease, credit, and promotion
that they were in, and with all their dainty fare and idle life, began to
thrust forth the poor men and to intrude themselves. So that now they are
nothing in effect, Chanons swa^mes of lubberly gentlemen.
but swarms of luberly Gentlemen, and rich chops, living in idleness,
gluttony, and all kind of ryotous excess.


Phile. What is their attire and office?


Stupe. They use too wear about their shoulders fine skins of hair, and rich
furs hanging down to the skirts of their garments, a goodly sight (forsooth)
and well beseemingg such persons. Note the hypocrisy of these deceyuers.
And sometimes they go in black mantles (if it please their humors) as
though they mourned for some notable matter: But Sub vest lugubri latitat ^^r
amoenum. That is to say, Under a mourning weed, lurketh many a pleasant and
merry heart. Their office is, now and then too resort too the church,
attyred in their lynnen white garments, in their cowles, or else in their fox
skin hoods with tails hanging down to the ground. Foxes attyred like Foxes.
Where being assembled, they have naught to do else, but to sing, and chaunte
up their Canonical hours, neither they them selves, nor others,
understanding what they say. And least these porkyshe hogs should take too
much pains or strain their throats over wide, Quire men the chanons lurdens.
they have got a sort of Lurdens, too Sing, Chaunte, and Roll it up for
them, and these they call Quyre men. For money these fellows will ryng it
up in deed, and in short space dyspatch you ye seven hours, and al. And no
maruayle, for from the time they begin till the time they have made an end, they
never cease, but roll it over (like as the waves of the Sea do use to tumble
one over another) as fast as ever they ca^ galloppe. And whilst they be at
their singing, there is such striving who shall go the highest, with such
quauering and shiuering, Hogs striving one too excel another in grunting.
such boing and roaring, that (if thou heardest them) thou would either
think them mad, and ready to go to Bethleem, or else that they strove for some
wager. By means of which quyer men, A great grief for poor chanons to sit so
long.
the Chano^s themselves are discharged from great burdens, and payns: so that
they need to do nothing, but only to sit by, as hearers of this melodious
harmony. And oftentimes they seem weary of that too, and therefore strain they
courtesy, and without saying, much good do it you, they depart before the play
be ended. This is all the toil and travel which these men (poor souls) do
take, Chanons their estimation and reward for doing nothing
and for the which they have great gifts given them, fair houses buylte them,
and are of al men called Rabbi, Sir, Master, worshipful, and I cannot tell
what else. At home they keep great hospitality: but what is he that fares the
better for it: The Devil, and their fat paunches. Gluttony of Chanons.
And thus they live in all kind of pleasure, gluttony, and e^^esse worse then
ever did the heathen. And for their pleasures (least melancholy and study
together, might macera^e their bodies) they keep parrattes, Apes, Munkies,
Hawks, The fooleries and bableries of Chanons.
Hounds, and what not else, to delighte them withal. And thus they delighte in
sin, and take pleasure in iniquity, and I fear me will so continue still,
till their mouths be full of clay, and their breasts full of gravel. Hitherto,
briefly of popish Chanons, their offices and abuses.


Philemon. What other degrees be there? I have heard of a certain sort of
Curtesanes belonging to the popes Church, I pray you what be they?


The manner of the popes Curtesans, with their horrible exactions, and abuses.
Stuperius. THese Curtesans are such fellows, as have ouerru^ their masters,
The description of the popes Curtesans.
or as are for some evil face driven out of their country, who coming to
Rome, creep either into some cardinal, or Bishops stable, and so become their
horsekepers. Then in the end, in recompense of their great pains, and long
service done, they make them priests. And after they have schooled them well,
and made them wise, and fit for their purpose, they send them abroad into the
countries: with bulls, and lycenses, to snatch up prebends, Popish
curtesans benefice catchers.
and benefices for them selves, not when they fall, but before they fall. And
if any man be so bold, as in defense of his ^^ght, too withstand their
proceedings, the^ they threate^ him with ye pope, the pope, The weapons that
papists fight withal.
the court of Rome, the court of Rome: thinking, nay certainly knowing that no
man dare mute against the^, when once they hear the name of the Pope. In this
case the patron like a peisaunt, stands like one nipt in the head, neither
dares he, nor any, for him, resist this cormorant curtesan, nor yet go to Rome
to try his right. By this means his beagles, Curtesans the popes beagles, to
hunte for gain.
and greedy gripes the curtesans, not only ceaze upon fa^ prebendes, and
benefices for them selves, but also for the Pope, and other his whelps at
Rome. Thus they having got benefices enough, sometimes they are resident upon
them. and sometimes not. And being weary of their benefices, sometimes they
sell them, Selling of Benefices.
taking great sums of money for them, which done, they trudge too Rome again,
with all possible speedes where for money they renew their bulls, and lycenses
again. Then run they raunging over the Countries afresh, Oh vile and
insatiable caterpillars never content with enough.
ceazing upon all kind of lyuings, (as before) and when they have got the^
they sell them like filthy Simonists as they be. Thus some of them heap up
mountains of gold and silver with the spoil of poor churches. Other some
come by their prebends, Benefices com by, through a strange manner of cosonage.
and lyuings, by a strange manner of cosonage, as this. After that they have
obtained their warraunts, and their graunts from the count of Rome, (the month
well observed) they cloth themselves either in the habit of some Country mann,
Wolves in sheep clothing.
or else of some poor Beggar, and when they see the Church door ^pen, then
skip they in, and mounting up to the high altar, there t^ei make declaration,
how that they hold the prebend belonging to that Church, and holy altar by the
plenary power, and absolute authority of the pope, commanding both the patron,
and the people that they presume not to molest him, An arraund at Rome will cost
him either his life, or all that he has.
lest they fetch him an arrand at Rome: this done, than coming down from the
altar, he enters into ye house, discharging them that dwell in it, and
commanding them to avoid with bagg and baggage, and to deliver up the keys,
which done, they enter, and take possession of it, and so convert it too their
own proper use.


Phile. Are these fellows learned or not, for being horsekepers, as you say
they were, I cannot see, how they can be learned?


Stupe. They are so well learned, as the best of them all can hardly speak you
4. true words in Latin. The great lea^^ning of popys^ horsekeepers the
Curtesans
They may well be posed in their A. B. C. And yet when they come amongst the
ignorant, and simple people, then sclat they it out like dyrte upon a wall,
and so are they taken to be great learned men. And thus as well they, as the
rest delude the world with vain shadows, and live upon the spoil of the
church. But of Curtizans, and their abuses enough.


Phil. Has the pope any persons and beneficed men in the country? if he have,
I pray you show me their office somewhat, with their manner of living.


The manner of popish persons and beneficed men, with their Idolatrye,
blasphemy and superstition.
Stuperius. The true office of parsons and preachers.
THe pope has great store of them, in every corner. Their office is to preach
the word of GOD truly, to minister the sacraments sincerely, and to govern
their several flocks and congregations according to the word of God. Then
the which they do nothing less, for the pope has commanded them to the
contrary, and therefore they preach (almost) nothing, but lies, dreams, and
fantasies of men, Preaching of dreams.
Idolatrye, blasphemy, superstition, and old wives tales, tending to vanity,
and leading to untruth. And to the end that they may the deepelier root
Idolatry, and superstition in the peoples hearts, they have framed the^ a
book, called the Popish portesse, The popish portesse a book full of all
abhominatio^, blasphemy, and sacriledges.
full of most horrible blasphemye, fables, and ^yes, whereto they are so
nearly tied, that they think it an offense inexpiable too dygresse an ynche
from the same.


Phile. What manner of Sermons do these lustye parsons make adays?


Stupe. Excellent Sermons I warrant you: for some spend the time whilst he is
in the pulpit, What manner of sermons the popish persons preach.
in railing and scolding like queanes, some in showing what wrong they have
done the^, what slanders they have sustained, and what tithes, and duties they
have lost. Some prophecy what shall be dear, what good cheap, what shall be
plenty, what scarce, and what weather shall happen al times and seaso^s of the
year. Good stuff I warrant you.
Othersom fill the peoples ears in showing them of the popes wars, the emperors
wars, the Turks wars, and a thousand such like toys, and noueltyes. These
Robin hoods sermons ended, Robin hoodes sermons.
there is brought a long bederoll of paper, or parchment, wherein are writ the
names of infinite thousands of men, women, and children departed, all which
being openly read with a loud voice, are the^ prayed for, y^ they may escape
the broyling fire of purgatory. This done, too mass go they as round as a
ball, Blasphemies in the mass.
wherein are mo blasphemies, errors, abuses, and corruptions, then there are
sands in the sea, stars in the sky, or grass upon the face of the earth.
But that is no matter, their stomachs are so wranke, that they ca^ brook any
thing. Person Choploches.
To conclude, mass being ended, these Person Choploches galloppe as fast as
they can trudge toward Dinner, where how dayntely they fare, and how well
they fill their paunches all the world knows.


Phile. What exercises do they follow after dinner?


Stupe. Dinner being ended, they go commonly to the alehouse (for recreation,
Exercises after dynner of the Papists.
or else to study, you must imagyne) where they carouse, and drink about, till
they prate like parrats, and that like pies. Good recreation forsooth and sit
for the Devils grace.
And for further recreation to pass the time away withal, the go to cards,
to dice, too chesse, tables, and checquer, where wants neither drinking, nor
swearing, nor any thing else that might offend the majesty of God. And
sometimes being weary of these exercises, they fall to talk of hawdry,
Talking of bawdry.
filthiness, scurrility, and all kind of uncleanness, most shameful to
hear. And least the long winter nights should seem wea^^some, or irksome unto
them, they have 2. or 3. or as many whoores and harlots as they will, Whores
papists bedfellowes.
to lie by their sweet sides, to solace themselves withal, after long study of
good ale and bawdry. Thus have thou heard the lives of the popish priests or
parsons of the country, with their offices, exercises, and abuses. And hereof
hitherto.


Phile. What say you of Monks, and their doings? I would very fain hear
something of them, what fellows they be.


Of Monks, their order, hypocrisy, blasphemy, superstition, and abuses.
Stuperius. THey are such as forsake the world utterly, and betake them selves
to a certain kind of strait, The order and life of Monks described.
and a^stere life, living either in the wilderness or desard, or else in
monasteries, and other relygious houses, situate far from high ways, and
deu^yde of company. Their apparel and habit as it is strange, and monstrous,
nay apish and foolish in fashion, Apyshe attire of monks.
so is it of diverse and sundry colors. They prescribe to themselves certain
very strict rules, and orders to live by, through the observation whereof,
together with these works of merit, and desert, Merits and desert.
they trust to inherit the kingdom of heaven. Which place if merits might
purchase (as they cannot) why should not they have it? for they have such store
of them, that for money they will sell you as many as you list. And sometimes
for these their works of merit (or as they please to call them, Selling of
merits.
works of supererogation) they have benefices, farms, granges, castles, and
towers, yea whole towns, countries, and dukedomes given them, as ye sundry
donatio^s of diverse kings, Gifts for works of supersti^^
dukes, and others in old time can testify. And no marvel, their holiness is
very great, for do they not chaunt up Psalms in the quier like hogs in ye
stal^ do they not rore in the church like the fat ^uls of Basan? do they not
fast and pray, and do many good works? And yet for all that, are they not worth
a straw. For notwithstanding their fast and abstinence from certain meats,
they will be sure to eat twice at the least, Fast of papists how strict it is,
good Lord.
the shortest winters day that is. When at dinner they giu^ up their paunches
withal kind of dainties, so as their bellies swelling like ticks or
horseliches, Fasting in gluttony.
their girdles are fain to be loosed, that their guts may have more scope:
at these fasting meals they will be sure too have all kind of fish, all
kind of spices, and al manner of wines of the best, and yet notwithstanding
these felows fast to, yea and merit greatly thereby* but whether this be a true
fasting, or not, both Bacchus, Milo, and Apitius themselves princes of
drunkenness, and gluttonye. I think, will deny. Thus through their hypocrisy
and counter feit holiness, they have a long time so bewitched the world, ye
even kings themselves, dukes, Lords, and others all in general, have not
only thought them wondrous holy men, but also, have bought good works. Good
works, and Heaven bought for money.
and heaven it self of them for money.


Phile. Why do they separate themselves from other men in that sort, living
in the wilderness and desert?


Stupe. They say, they do it, because the world being corrupt, they would not
be corrupe with the same: Why monks live in the wilderness.
and because it lives in darkness, and they in the light. Because they are
holy, and the world wicked, they good, and the world naught, and therefore
do they fly from it.


Phile. These are vain allegations, and frivolous reasons: for if the world be
corrupt, (as it is) and sick, nay dead in sin, than has it more need of the
physician to heal the same, Yea but Sir, they may do what they list.
and not to fly away: And if the world be in darkness, then has it more need
of the light to shine amongst them. And albeit that the world be wicked, may
not they live godly in the same notwithstanding? Did not Daniel, and many other
Jews in Babylon live very godly, The godly may live godly amongst the wicked.
amongst the wicked? Did not Lot live godly amongst the Sodomites? Did not
Joseph live godly in Egypt, and many others? And therefore their separating of
themselves from the world for these causes, is most superstitious, vain, and
ridiculous.


Stu. You say very well. For although they p^^^e^d, that they forsake the
world, yet is it but meter hypocrisy, The deep hypocrisy of Monks.
and deceit: for there are no men, that live more in the world, nor of the
world, then they. In so much that there is no great thing any where done,
or attempted, but these Monks be at the one end of it. In assemblyes for
matters of policy, ^oncerning the common wealth, they are not only there* but
also publish, and set forth laws, statutes, and decrees of their own
authority. Monks have an oar in every boat, and burn their lyps in every man's
pottage.
If any wars he toward, their council and advise is required, if any wedding
or sole^n feast he any where solemnised, they are there. If any church he
dedicate, they are at hand, or else the Comedy has not all his parts. So that
albeeyt that they pretend to lead spiritual lives, yet may thou find a
worldly life in them, if al others had loss it. To what end therefore serves
their riote, their pomp, their proud array, their shaven crowns shorn down
to the hard ears, or their houses out of high ways, and the like? Are they
any thing else, then counterfei^ shadows, and pretensed shows of sanctity,
Practices too wyn worldly credyt and to lose heaven.
and holiness, to win them credit withal, and too get them estimation in the
world?


Phil. What kind of vows do they make, when they are made Monks?


Stup. They vow first of al to obey ye abbot or prio^, Vows which monks make.
the superintendent, or rege^t of their house. Secondly they swear and vow
single life. Thirdly they vow to live in poverty all the days of their life,
and utterly to forsake the world, then which they do nothing less. Now how
well they keep, and perform their vows all the world sees. Thus they (...)
the world with their hypo^^^sie, Monks their religion wherein it consists.
and feigned Relygion consistyng, in synging, in rules of life, and sundry
other laws, and gestures, quoyned in the crooked forge of their own
deceitful brains.


Phile. How many sorts of monks are there, any more then one?


Stup. There are of diverse sorts, but because I may be short, Two sorts of
Monks.
I will divide the^ into a sorts, into rich monks, and poor beggars, even such
as get their lyuings with plain begging. The welthyer sort are such, as have
been enriched by emperor^, kings, dukes, and noble me^: who willingly have
bestowed upon them great possesio^s, How Monks have been enriched in old
time.
and revenues, yea whole countries, together with pastures, medows, cities,
towns, parks, pur^nes castles tower^, vine yards, orchards, and so^time whole
dukedomes, and earledoms, to this end, and purpose, yt by their prayers,
merits, alms deeds and good works, their souls might escape ye broyling fire
of purgatory, and come to rest: which things they promised them without all
doubt to perform.


Phi. Seeing they have vowed to forsake the world, to fast and pray, and to
mortify their lives, what should they do with these great possessions and
glory of the world? me think this is contrary to their profession, and manner
of living.


Stupe. You say true, but what then? No man may say, Domine cur ita facie, Sir
you do amiss, but al is well yt they do, and al truth that they speak, though
it be stark false. Indeed they fas^ (I cannot deuy) but how? til they be as
lean as a brawn, Popish fastings.
they pray till they be (...) fast on sleep as a Dormoufe, and they embrace
poverty, till they be as rich, as any Emperor, king, or prince upon the
earth. These are they that have forsaken the world, and yet no men more worldly
then they. For mark where any fine valleys were, Monks planted themselves
ever in the best places of the land.
where any pleasant meddowes, or pastures ^ay compassed about with plenty of
woods, and waters, wherein they might keep plenty of fish against fasting
days came upon them: there commonly they planted themselves, these were the
solitarye places, where this Porket fathers punished their stately poor
bodies, Porket fathers.
as you have heard before. And as for the statelines of their houses they
might compare with any King Prince, or Emperor whatsoever. For commonly they
were built either of stone or bri^k, The statelines of monks houses.
or both, moted about, and having draw bridges too draw up when they would
with parkes, forests, and chases adjoining, impaled, and trenched round about,
and well stored with all kind of game. In the midst of their houses, commonly
they had stately towers* furnished with all kind of munition, and bedeckt with
curious furniture, and rich ornaments and hangings to banquet and feast in.
Their c^ndu^ts run most pleasantly in every place, The wilderness wherein
mo^ks do live.
their gardens, and orchardes lie most pleasantly on every ^or, with five
herbs, ^urious knottes, and cloisters made quadrant wise. So that it seems
rather a pleasant* Paradi^e of delights, than a wilderness, or de^are to
punish or afflic^^nes body in. The other sort of monks be they that live (as I
told you) of begging* of poling, Monks living on beggyng, poling and pillyng.
and pilling most miserably. But of monks their h^pocrisie, couetuousnesse,
and several abuses h^therto.


Phile. Is there not a certain other sect in the popes church, which they call
Abbots? If there be, I would feign hear somewhat of them, for I think they be
all whelps of one litter, all pigges of one sow, and al feathers of one nest?


Of Abbots, their office, sodomitrie, superstition, and horrible abuses:
Stuperius. THere are Abbots enough, and more than a good many. Their property
is this. The property of Abbots.
They contemn, and utterly despise both the Monks themselves, their orders,
rules, tytles, lives, and names, contending with tooth and nail (as they say)
to be head over them. And as for their conversation, they are so well given
and virtuously inclined; that neither maid, The chastity of Abbots.
gyrle, nor wife (almost) can escape their hands without defiling. Their time
(for the most part) as well the day as the night, they spend in wanton lewd
daunces, filthy talk, in plays, Enterludes, and the like lascivious sportes
tending unto vice. Their crowns they use too have shaven* as the Monks have,
their beards cut very ill fauouredly, Abbots coules like draf sack
and their coules hanging down to the midst of their backs, like a bag or
Sack to put draffe in. Their superstition, blasphemy, and hypocrisy, is
nothing inferior to the others: and for their most detestable and horrible
vices of Sodomitrie and Buggery, they far excel the ^est. Thus much briefly of
Abbots, and their ab^ses.


Phile. What say you of begging Friars; be there any of them?


Of begging Friars, their filthy Hypocrisy, cosonage, dissimulation,
couetuousnesse, and abuses.
Stuperius. Friars quoth you? Yea I tell you, the Pope has whole Legions of
them, swarmyng like swarms of Bees in every Country and Coaste. And as they
be manne in number, so be they of diverse, and sundry names.


Phil. What be those?


Stupe. Some are called Franciscane Friars, Friars of diverse and sundry sorts
and names.
of S. Frauncis, Dominick friars, of S. Dominick, Benedictin friars, of S.
Benedict. Barnardine friars of S. B^rnard, Augustin^ friars of S. Augustine,
and so of the rest. Othersom are called White friars, Black friars, Gray
friars. Obseruant friars* Friars Mendicats, Smocked friars, and a thousand
others the like, which for tediousness I let pass, for as the saying is:
pauca sapienti, to a wise manne a few things are sufficient. By these you may
conjecture what the rest are* These friars with the rest of that filthy brood
do all of them get their livings by begging. By the practice whereof within few
years they heap up to themselves such mountains of gold and silver (and yet
it is a marvelous thing* Friars never handle money (forsooth) and yet have
whole mountains of gold and silver
for they never handle money neither, but belike it is given them by miracle)
that they build them gorgeous houses, stately edifices, and sumptuous mansions
to dwell in, furnished with all kind of necessaries supelle^^iles, co^parable to
any prince or noble man. How friars get their riches.
And these riches they get with their hypocr^ticall prayers, long service,
selling of merits, and by their other apish ^estures of ^^cking down the head,
and the like, by their dissembling hypocrisy, filed eloquence, Pretty practices
for vices on stages.
severe grau^tie and austeritie of life, by these crossing and blessing, and by
their deep profound flattery, and a thousand such devises, wherein they are so
skillful, that they may seem not practisioners, but masters, not masters but
doctors. Out of these puddles proceeds al their game. Through the exercise and
practice whereof, they are grown so impudent, The impudency of friars.
that there can be no marriage solemnized neither in town, nor country, no
feast, or good cheer any where, but these shameless friars are ready with
boxes in their hands, begging, Begging friars scratching every man on the elbow.
and craving money, meat, drink, and all things else of every one present.
Neither can any man sit quietly either at dinner, or at supper in his house,
but in comme these beging friars, crossing, blessing, and so faring, that they
weary every manne and away will they not, till their bellies be full and their
hackes well laden also. Then when certain holy times of fasting and praying
comes in, that the people must fast pray, and do penance, then, and never
until then, their gains comes tumbling in thick and threefold. Then does
every man hyre the^ too fast, How Friars gains comes tumbling in.
to pray and do penance for them, and pay them well for their labor. Besides
these devises they get abundance of their good dames of the country both of
cheese puddinges, My good dames of the country the friars best friends
porke, bacon, brawns, sowse, corn, hemp, flax, bread, pyes, custards,
flawnes, tarts, and what not; for all is fish that comes to net, and nothing
comes amiss, that carries a penny, or a halfpeny on his back. And because
they may seem to give somewhat again, The pedlary ware of friars.
they carrye about with them tootinge glasses, needles, pinnes, points, laces,
ribbons, and other pedlary trifles, which they bestow upon their good dames of
the country for bussing the^ in the dark: Which thing when they be about least
they should be cumbred with vntrussing of their points, they wear no hosen at
all, but long side gowns to the foot: so that with little ado, they may go to
their business. And if the good man chance to come in, in the mean time and
find him at it, yet must he imagine that he is but in shriuing of her, and then
al is well.


Phile. How many sorts of Friars are there?


Stupe. There be two sorts, Two sorts of friars.
the rich friars, and the pore begging friars. The richer sort the Pope
dispenses withal, giving them leave that after they have got their great
riches together by their begginge through the world, they may build them
gorgeous houses, and stately buildyngs, plant orchardes, Gardens, Uineyardes
and what they will: purchase lands and livings as much as they please. Then are
they called by the names of Lords being ashamed of the names of beggars any
longer. The poor begging friars are such, as by their orders are constrained
to remain in poverty and to beg as long as they live. The poor friars do
better service to the pope then the rich.
By the^ the Pope utters his merchandise, and gets himself into favor of
every one. For the better perfourmaunce whereof they make no conscience to tell
lies, to preach fables, Friars make no conscience of lies.
and to utter Canturbury ^ales for the word of God. They come and raunge all
abroad every where, both by sea and land: they creep intoo the bosoms of
kings, princes, noblemen, gentlemen, subjects, and others, seeking by all
means possible to withdraw them from the way of truth, The practice of friars.
and to establish their dads kingdom. And thus by this means, they uphold the
popes estate, and their own credit and wealth.


Phil. Whatfurther authority have they?


Stup, They have commission granted the^ from yt pope (for fear least their
proud kingdom should catch any s^at^e) to inquire after heretics lollardes and
other schismatiks, Commission to friars to en^uyre after heretics.
which divide themselves from their blaspemous church. By force of which
commission (like bloddy butchers dogs) they trouble good me^, and women, and in
the end, suck their blood, by burning their bodies to ashes, if they will not
forsake the truth, and believe their lies. But if there be any out of their
jurisdiction, who^ they cannot handle so, then fall they the year of our Lord
God. 1523. And coming to the Pope afterward, confirmed the same order of
Jesuits by his Bulls. These holy Jesuits (forsooth) are vowesses as well as
the rest, but whereas the others make but 3. vows, they make four. Jesuits
ma four vows
First, they vow poverty, secondarily, chastity: thirdly, obedience, and
fourthly, that they will trudge over all the world if they be commanded either
by the Pope, or any of their good masters else, to set abroch popery, to abandon
Christianity, The chiefest office of Ies^^ites.
to plaunt superstition, and to root out goodly religion, for this is their
chiefest offce, as far as ever I could perceive. And of such perfection are
they thought to be, that in holiness they are co^parable to ye majesty of god,
The pretense^ holiness of se^dicious Iesuit^^
in godliness excelling the angels and in righteousness far surpassing ye common
nature of mankind. And therefore have they taken to themselves a name derived
very blasphemously from ye name of Jesus. To this end no doubt, that they may
be thought to be the servant of Jesus and none else, and too hold the
truth, and none but they.

These seditious Jesuits, a (...) kind of vipers, run rouing, from place to
place, from country to country, now openly now secretly, sometimes in their
priestly habit, ^h deceitful ^^^elians, ha^ing al shows ^f godliness, and ^et
none at al.
and, sometime in serving man's attire, now like lawiers, then like Courtiers,
now like one sort of men, and then like another, and all to root up (as I
have said) christianity and too plant poperye. And if they perceive that the
prince will not incline to their humors, nor agree to their ydolatrie, and
papistrie, but maintain the true religion of God, then fall they to this
policy. They creep secretly into the minds of the Nobility, ^esuites
creep ^^cretly into ^^e mind^ of ^he nobility.
Gentry, and Communaltie, indeuoring by all means possible to draw their hearts
from their alleageaunce, and obedience too their lawefull Prince, to di^like of
all things and too sow the seeds of Sedition, to move Rebellion,
Insurrection, Commotion, War, Mutunie, Murder, Bloodshed, and all kind of
trouble: to this end, that they and their Accomplices may with more security
make Inuast^^s, and Incursions into that Realm, or mites, Lateranes,
Georgea^s, Ioannians, Trinitaries, Iudians, Ambrosians, Magdalines, or
Lazarines, read Augustines, Helenia^s Sophians, Wincesbaterers, Gregorians,
Co^sta^tinopolitanes, Columbins, crossed brethren, Fratres clauorum, black
friars, brethren of the holy sepulcher, brethren of ye vale of Iosaphat,
brethren of S. Joseph. brethren of S. Rufines, and a thousand others. Also of
women, as Bagghines, Orders of (...) men.
Cloak Nuns, sisters Chanonesses, Ancresses. Next come in their orders of
Heremites, as Heremites of S. Antonie, Orders of H^^remits.
Heremites of S. Hillarie, of S. Macarins, of S. Theon, of S. Frontinean, S.
Horns, S. Helene, S. Apolonia, S. Paul the Heremite, S. Piamotus, S.
Casomianus, and infinite the like members of the same rabble, all which too
recite, were, infinitum fi^ito comprehendere, that is, to comprehend that in
number which is without number. Besides these, they have also knights of the
Rhodes, or of Malta, Dutch knights, the knights of Saint James, our Ladies
knights, S. Georges knights, knights of Herusale^, Calitrauenses. Montenienses,
Gartarienses, Templers, Jesuits, and the like which for breuities sake I omit.


Phile. I pray you what is the order and original of these Jesuits?


Jesuits their order, original, treason, hypocrisy, and sedition.
Stuperius. ^^e order and ^^ginning of ^^suites.
THE order of these dounghill Jesuits was first found out in the year of our
Lord, 1537. by a Spaniarde borne in Biskey, named Don Egnatio Leguiola, who
with twelve of his companions, whom he called his Apostles, went to Rome, from
thence too Uenice, pretending to go too Jerusalem, but finding no shipping at
Uenice ready, returned to Rome again, where he published and set abroche his
holy religion of Iesuitanisme, never heard of before since the beginning of the
world. There was also one John Peter Guarrassa, Bishop of Quietta, a little
before found out a stamp or pattern of the same in they are kings, and
princes over sin, that they have cut of, and divided them selves from the
world, with many other like fanaticall mysteries.


Phile. Are these friars also anointed as others are, at the time of their
initiation?


Stupe. They are all anointed, even from the highest to the lowest, from the
meanest priest to the head ruler, and gouerner of all. Friars all anointed.
But from whence they derive this annoyling, and greasing I cannot tell, except
it be from the ceremonies of Moses law: which if they do, then deny they
Christ to be come, and to have fulfilled the law for us. For all ceremonies of
Moses law ceased, Their ceremonial law of Moses abrog^ by Christ.
and were abrogate by Christ, as being but types and shadows of things to
come, and therefore may they not be used now under the Gospel without great
impiety. And albeit that they grease and annoint themselves at sundry tunes,
yet espeically do they it, at three several times: Friars anointed at three
times especially.
namely, the day of their christendom, the day of their consecration, or
initiation (as they call it) and at ye day of their death. Besides all this, the
church, and church^ walls are anointed, the high altar, the bells, and every
thing else almost: for their holy oil has a wonderful power, and force in it
self, and therefore as without it they can almost co^iure nothing, (...)s holy
oil (...)h appease (...) broyle.
so with it they can (in effect) do any thing.


Phil. What other orders of religion have they besides these that you have
spoken of?


Orders of religion amongst the papists.
Stuperius. THey have infinite orders of religion, and religious men, as orders
of the Basilians, (...) infinite or^^rs of religo^ ^mongest the ^apists.
Augustinians, Benedictines, Dominica^s, Iacobines, Carthusians, Carmelites,
Lady brothers, Seruitors, Obseruants, Conue^tnals, Penitenciaries, Minimers,
Capucines, Mendicants, Cluinares, Camaldule^ses, Valenbrosences, Cisteriences,
Bernardines, Coelestines, Gibertene^ses, Milicenses, Castellenses,
Mountoleuites, Castinenses, Armetes, Regulars, Premonstrate^ses, Whilliamites
to making of filthy books, and raylyng pamphlets against the^, thereby to
discredit both them and the doctrine which they profess. They are also ghostly
fathers, and do shriue as well kings, princes, dukes, and noblemen, as also all
others of what degree soever they be of, and have absolute power (or else they
lie) to absolve them a culpa and poena, (as pleases them to distinguysh) from
their sins, and the punishment due for the same, so soon as ever they have
whispered the^ into their ears. Shrifte a brau^ devise for papists and such as
makes (...) their purpos^.
This is a devise, passing all devises, for by this he knows and
understands the secrets of al both men, and women, of kings and princes, and
if they perceive any thing to be intended against the state of their usurped
kingome, they certify the pope of it, who straight way sends out his
flashing thunderbolts of excommunication, The popes curse is Gods blessing no
doubt.
never ceasing til the authors of that practice be cursed with book bell and
candle, as black as Hell pitch. These friars carry pardons through the world,
shriue and forgive sin, certify ye pope of the secrets, and estate of every
country, and often times return to Rome with their bags, and their caskets
stuf^ full of money like faithful children of such a cursed father.


Phile. Have these poling friars shaven crowns as the other their cousin
germans the monks have?


Stupe. Yea, their crowns are shaven, but after an other manner. For look how
much holier they be then the mo^ks or any others, Friars crowns brother shorn
the^ any others because they are holier then any others.
so much brother are their crowns shorn than any others: and therefore is
there no hair permitted to grow all their head over, save around ring or
circle, compassing their pate like a headlace or band, with these shaven
seo^ses they raunge all abroad, despising all others that have not their heads
so shor^ as theirs is.


Phile. I wonder that they be not ashamed to put off their hats, or to let
their heads be seen bare?


Stupe. They shame at nothing. For know you not, that they have brazen faces,
and therefore cannot blushe. But if they had not, yet would they not blushe
at this: for say they, hereby is signified great things: as namely, that ^



