A SVM OR A BRIEF collection of holy signs, sacrifices and Sacraments, even
since the beginning of the world.

And the true original of the sacrifice of the Mass. Translated out of French
into English by N. Lynge.

MATHEVVE. 15. Every plant which my heavenly father has not planted shall be
plucked up by the roots.



PRINTED AT LONDON by Rouland Hall, dwelling in gutter Lane, at the sign of
the half Egle and the Key.

1563.

THE EPISTLE OF THE Author to the Reader.
COnsidering the controversies stirred up among those that call themselves
christians (some striving to hold the vain superstitions descended unto them,
from their predicessors, some also inuenting nevve sects, scismes, and
heresies, and other in number fewer, desiring utterly to root out the
darkness of ignorance, that the light of the verity might shine) me thinks
that the most dangerous poison that Satan uses to make men mad with all,
has been drawn out of the mine of the Mass, stuffed with good end, and
covered with good intention. And although many have soore travailed to
discover with discriptions, anatomies, and other works of the Mass, this
minable rock yet alvvayes more and more to mine, and contermine this fort,
which seems vnminable (after I had read the Elassopolitains commentaries
treating of the number, dignity, power and co^ditio^s of the high bishops,
chief priests and sacrificers sins the creation of the world) I have dravve^
out a brief sum of the holy signs sacrifices, and sacraments ordened of god
from time to time, the corruptions crept successively into the church of god,
and specially here is described the true original of the Mass, about the
which, presently men are fallen into so great co^tentio^s, and diuisio^s. For
some inuey against it as lately forged, other defend it by long possession. And
by these altrications the church of christ has been merueylously threshen
with the flail of sedition. But if thou (faith full reader) vvilt have
patience of what sect so ever thou be, papist, or protestant (reading this
short discourse, and tariyng til thou have the books of the co^me^taries in
their integrity) thou shall know certainly what the original of the mass
is, partly very ancient and partly new, who were her fou^ders and patrons:
and to thend that thou may beassured of the histories faithfully gathered:
have recourse to the authors coted in the mergent. Our good god inspire thee
with his holy spirit.

THE TRANSLATOVR to the Reader.
AFter I had read this little book set forth (by a certain godly learned man) in
the French language, it lyked me so well, that partly for the worthynes of the
matter, and partly for mine own exercise in that tongue, I applied my self to
bring the same in to our English speech: mynding nothing less than to have it
prynted, till that I was earnestly moved thereunto by diverse godly persons,
whose just request, I could not justly withstand. The book doubtless will
sufficiently commend it self if the envy of such, as are to much delited with
idolatry and superstition, do not let and hinder the same. The things herein
contained may seem to some strange, and perhaps are unknown to the most, and
therefore at the first sight will be merueyled at of many. But thou (good
christian reader) perusing this short discourse, and perceiving that the most
parts of the mass sacrifice, were invented by Numa Pompilius the second king
of the Romans and a great coniurer, 700 years before the incarnation of jesus
Christ, cease marueyling and consider that it is no strange thing, if man
(according to the saying of the Poet) be still sauouring of that which he
first learned, and was brought up in. The bishops of Rome (which were the
greatest corrupters of the holy sacrament and true service of god, with
beggarly and superstitious ceremonies) had long time been noselled in the
religion of Pompilius. Is it then strange, if they (according to the new
fanglenes of man's brain, scarce at any time contented with the simplicity of
gods word) did bring in their wonted ceremonies used in their sacrifices
invented by Numa the coniurer, to adorn and deck (as they thought) the ghospel
of christ jesus, unto the which they were lately converted and turned? In the
time of the apostles, and many years after the Mass was not hard of, and no
ceremonies were used, but such, as were commanded by our Lord and savior
christ, as preaching of the word, and ministering of the holy sacraments. etc.
But afterward when man waxed werye of the heavenly Manna, diligent search was
made to find out pleasant things for him to play withal. Then in place of
preaching, came in massing, in place of sincere ministering the holy sacraments,
came in abominable witchcraft, coniuring, and idolatry, and in place of the
true honoring of god, came in these trumperies and trifles of Numa Pompilius:
namely, the vestments, the aulbe, the tunicle, the holy water coniured to drive
away devils, the altar, the burning of tapers or torches, the trauersings
along the altar with crossyngs, beckyngs, and bowings, and prayers toward the
East, the procession and banners, the relics, and carrying of shrynes by the
priests clad in white surplyces, and their crowns shaven, the Confiteor to he
and she saints, the Orgaines, the canticles, the hymns, and odes, the censor,
and the encense, the offertorie, the eating of little round cakes consecrated in
their sacrifices to their gods, and in the end this pleasant song, Ite missa
est. Be not these abominable additions to the only sufficient word of God?
Peter was justly reproved for causyng the gentilles to observe the ceremonies
of the Jews: And shall they be commended that cause the christians to keep and
observe the vain and superstitious rites and traditions of the idolatours
gentills? Cerrainly I think, if Paull were present to answer them by word he
would affirm that which he has written: They are worthy to be reproved for as
much as they go not simply to the truth of the gospel, but professing
christianite themselves cause other (that do seldom hear any preaching, or if
they do hear it, do hardly understand it) to observe and keep the blind
ceremonies of the infidels, and heathen, wherein the rude and ignorant put
such confidence (by means their senses be continually occupied about the same)
that christ is quit shut out, his gospel not regarded, and his due worship in
spirit and truth unknown. And if any would object that some or the most part
of the ceremonies above mentioned, were first among the jews, and therefore
ought or may be retained by us: I answer, that whatsoever was abolished by the
coming of Jesus christ may not now be observed, without deniyng of him.

Fot in retayning of them, we do seame to dout weather he has fulfilled that
which was figured and shadowed by the same. Wherefore sins the ceremonies of
the Iues, and the superstitious inventions of the Gentiles are by the sciptures
condemned. Let those that be true christians, use such only as may be to
edification, and not to contention, to instruction, and not superstition, to
unity, and not vanity, in such sort that the faithful be not spoiled of
their liberty, and that by necessity they be not compelled unto those things,
from the which they be made free by the gospel of jesus Christ. I will
(faithful reader) hold thee no longer, beseching thee to give god hearty
thanks for purging the church of England from so many blind and dumme
ceremonies, and earnestlye to pray that the rest (which at this day do molest
the godly, and minister occasion to the adversary to sclaunder the true
professors of gods holy gospel with discord and discention) may be also
shortly rooted out. So that god may be freely worshipped, the godly comforted,
the enemy confounded and his people trewelye taught.

N. LYNGE.

A sum or a brief collection of holy signs. Sacrifices and Sacraments
instituted of god even since the beginning of the world. And of the true
original of the Sacrafice of the Mass.
IN THE TIME ordained before of God, by his unsearchable and incomprehensible
wisdom after he had created man to his own Image and lyknes to thend that he
might stir him up to fear and obedience, and give unto him also some
exercise of virtue to acknowledge his God his creator, there were ordained many
signs Sacrifices and Sacraments. First to our first father Adam and to his
successors being bodily men, were ordained corporal signs of god, ye better
to approue^ and make known his obedience. To wit, Trees of life. Gene. 2.3.
Eusebius. Theodor. and Sever.
the trees planted in the midst of the herber and earthly paradise. These trees
although they were of no other quality than the other plants, yet they were
dedicated and consecrated of God to serve for sacraments, (that is to say)
for holy signs, their quality then dedicated and hallowed to serve as a
seal, for a witness attestation and approbation of the godly will. For the
infinite goodness of god willing to make known, the fellowshippe, bond, and
alliance, contracted with man his creature, created to his own likeness, has
from time to time ordained outward and corporal signs, which man might se and
behold with his corporal eyes, to serve for assurance, gage, and pledge, of
the divine covenant: like as to our first and common father were ordained
trees, and corporal fruits, left and given unto him to keep, without wasting,
eating, or consumyng in pain of everlasting death. We must then believe by
faith, that the trees and fruits were not signs or sacraments of vanity, as
a simple pycture, but more that vpo^them did hang both life and death they
containing the sign and the thing signified. Prouer. 1.2.3.
Wherein did consist the knowledge and wisdom to fear god and obey him. This
was the cause wherefore they were called ye fruits of knowledge of good and
evil, and the trees of life. For in keeping these fruits hallowed, in obeying
god everlasting life was promised, contrariwyse in abusyng these Sacraments in
goyinge against the will of god, declared by outward tokens everlasting death
and dampnation was gotten.

For other exercises of man toward god, Sacrifices before the law written.
to the end that he might reverence, honor, and worship him, mani and diverse
sacrifices were celebrated, yea before the law written by Moses. Psalm. 50.
And although the almyghtye God creator of heaven and of earth has no need of
man's works neither is nourished with the blood of beasts, or fruits of the
earth: Yet he has always desired to draw man unto him in fear and outward
obedience by Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments: In such sort that the
sacrifice of the lambs offered by Abell was pleasyng unto god. Gene. 4.
Hebreo. 11. Gene. 6.7.9.
Noe likewise, after ye great floods passed, in sign of knowledge and
obedience toward God did erect an altar, offered and lifted up sacrifice of
sheep without spotte and of birds, wherewith he did make sacrifices sound and
pleasing unto god. By these examples it is easy to know that sacrifices did
not begin in the time of Moses: But the innocent and just lamb represented
by the sacrifice of Abell (the figure of Jesus Christ) was slain and offered
up from the beginning of the world. Apoco. 13.


After the rigor of the flood comen for the punishment of the offenses of the
tyrants of the earth, in sign of reconciliation and covenant renewed,
Raynbowe. Gene. 9.
our good god did ordeyne the sign of the Bow in heaven, for a gage and
assurance of the divine mercifulnes. This sign and heavenly Bow, although
before it did apeare in ye thick clouds, a token of rain to come: Yet before it
had never been a mark dedicated to serve man for a sacrament or holy sign,
until it was ordained of God a sign of the covenant contracted with good
father Noe and his offspring.

Unto the faithful Patriarch Abraham another covenant and alliance was
contracted by the wisdom of God, Circumcision in the year of the world. 2048.
which he gave unto him for a gage and assurance of him and of his posterity,
the outward sign of circumcision to serve for a sacrament and perpetual
mark of the divine will. It was ordained unto him to circumcise his children
males within eight days after their birth, Gene. 17.
in pain of being rejected from the number of those people, which God had
adopted or chosen.

To the same people of Israel was ordained the sacrifice of the unspotted
Lamb, the blood whereof spilt, Pascal lamb.
should preserve the people from the appointed death in Egypt, Exodo. 12.
the flesh also was ordained to be eaten, and in celebrating the feast every
year in the day called Pasque, in sign and commemoration of their deliverance
from Pharaos bondage, Exodo. 12.
with the sign of the communion of the flesh of the pascall Lamb, it was
ordained to eat unleavened bread seven days in pain of death.

Other holy signs were sent of god to his elect people, always to draw them
to his fear and obedience. As the sign of the cloud a token of the way to
guide the people by day, Cloud.
Pillor of fire. Exodo. 13.
the flaming and fiery pillar to conduct them by night out of ye hands of
Pharao ye tyrant. Moreover, the sign of the division of the red sea of Arabie
through ye midst whereof the elect people of god did pass. The division of
the red sea in the year 2453. 1. Corin. 10. Tite. 3.
By the which wonderful signs god would signify tholy sacrament of baptism,
afterward ordained by ye sign of water, which is ye lauer of regeneration and
renewing of ye holy ghost.

During the time that the elect people of god were holden in the wilderness of
Arabia, Manna.
to them was ministered food of heavenly bread, Exodo. 16.
wherewt they were nourished.xl. years. This holy sacrament instituted by the
power of god was in such great admiration, that every of the people said,
Manhu, what is this here? they did see the heavenly Manna given unto them
without travel, 1 Corin. 10. John. 6.
a sign of the living bread descended from heaven and giving life to all the
faithful.

Also another merueylous sign was ordained of god by the rock flowing of
lively water in Horeb to quench ye thirst of thirsty people, Water of the
Rock. Exodo. 17. Number. 20. 1. Corin. 10. John. 19.
a sign and figure of the true rock Jesus Christ, out of whom did issue water
and blood to estaunche the thirst of all sinners for evermore.

The signs and sacraments aforesaid, were not only ordained of God, Diverse
sacrifices ordeyne of god in the year of the world. 245
but also the law of sacrificers was publyshed by Moses as signs, fygures,
and shadows of the Sacrifice performed by Jesus Christ.

The sacrifices are either public or perticulers, Holocausta.
some were heue offeryngs, sacrifices consumed with fire: Division of
sacrifices drawn out of Exdo. Leuiti. and Number.
other were of beasts slain: and offered up to eat, some were of earthly
beasts, other were beasts of the air. Among the earthly beasts were such as
were most obedient as Beaf, and Veale, sheep and Lamb, the Goat and the Kidde:
Beasts for sacrifices.
Among ye birds also the most tame, the Pigion and the Turtle. Of sacrifices
some were publycke, other were particular, the public either were daily,
Days appointed for sacrifices.
or else seven times a day, or in the new moons, or in time of abstinence, or
else in three feasts celebrated in a year: To wit, in the days of sweet
bread, when the Pascall Lamb was offered and eaten without leuened bread,
Exodus 23.
in the time also of harvest of first fruits, and in the feast of Wine and
Olyues toward the end of the year. Search the book of Philo the jew, and
^osophus.
It was commanded every day to offer two Lambs, the one in the morning, the
other at night after that ye altar was perfumed with incens and sweet adours.
Also some of the Sacrifices were ordained for corporal things which were offered
with sheding of blood, other for incorporal things without blood. The sacrifices
called Holocaustes did co^cern only the honor of God, Holocaustes Philo the
jew in his treatise of beasts appointed for sacrifices. josephus. lib. 3. cap.
10. de antiqui. iudai.
because all the sacrifice was consumed with fire, for the which sacrifice
Holocaustes, the male and not the female was received, that is to say, the
Beaf, the Lamb, and the Goat of one year. For the sacrifice for health, it
was indifferent to take male or female, always three parts of the sacrifice
was reserved for the priest. To wit, Leui. 1.2.3.4.
the fat, the two kidneyes and the kall or the fat of the flanckes.
Sacrifice for health.
Another difference there is also betwixt the sacrifice for health, and the
sacrifice celebrated for sin, for in the one was ordained to eat all the
sacrifice in two days, Sacrifice for sin.
and in the other for sin it was enjoined to eat all in one day only. By
reason whereof some sacrifices were called Holocaustes, other for health and
other for sin. The sacrifices for sin, were diverse as well for because of
the persons as for the offerings. For he that sinned by ignorance, Sacrifice
for the sin of ignorance.
was cleansed by offering an Ewe or a she goat: but the clensing of sin done
wittingly was cleansed with a Ram. The sin of the great priest was cleansed
by offering of a calfe: Sacrifice for the sin of the high prist prince,
magistrate and particular person. Leuit. 3.4.5.6. Sacrifice for the man
poluted. For the woman delivered Leuit. 12. Sacrifice for the Leprous. Leui. 14.
of the prince by offering a goat and a bull, that of the magistrate with a
goat, that of any particular, with the offering of a female. The sacrifice for
clensing of sin done against god was done with a Ram. The sacrifice for a
man polluted was with an Ewe or a she goat: for clensing of a woman after her
childbirth was a lamb of one year, a young pygion and a turtle. For the
clensing of Lepre, were two birds a live pure and clean, cedre wood, and
Isope, two whole lambs and one Ewe of a year with flower and oil. Another
sacrifice also was made for ye person poluted by seed shed or menstruous with
ij. turtles, Sacrifice for the poluted menstruall.
and.ij. young pigio^s. If ye great sacrifices did fail, then did they repare
to doves, pigions and turtels, the one for the burnt offering, the other for the
food of the priests. And in all sacrifices there was pure flower without leue^,
salt, incens and oil. Leuyn and honey forbidden in all sacrifices. A sacrifice
for the woman suspected of adulterye Number. 5.
And it was not lawful to offer any thing with leven or honey upon the altar.
Always in the sacrifice ordained for the purging of women suspected of
adultery, there was no incens nor oil as in other sacrifices, but for her was
offered water mixed with dust or ashes gathered on the pauement of the temple.
Again there was another sacrifice celebrated for them which had made the great
vow called Naserius, Sacrifice of the Nazereus Number. 6. Philo the Jew in the
ttearie aforesaid.
when the time of their devotion was done, it was ordained unto the^ to offer
iij. sacrifices, a lamb, an ew and a ram. One (to wit) the lamb for ye
burnt offering, the second (being the ewe) for the salvation, and the third for
health. Moreover, the hears of him which made the sacrifice should be cast
into the fire with the burnt offering to be burned.

I have thought good to discourse the diversity of sacrifices, briefly to
thend to make known the great goodness of our god, who by ye law of sacrifices
published by Moses, would (as with a bridel) restrain the rude people of
Israel, which could not forget the idolatries of Egypt wherein they had been
norished 400 and 30 years under the tyranny of Pharao. But what straight laws,
what ceremonies and sacrifices so ever were ordained for them, ever this people
did fall to Idolatry abusing the law of god, and corrupting the holy
sacraments and sacrifices, as it shall be declared hereafter. If any man desire
to know more of the multitude and diversity of sacrifices, let him read the
books of Philo the Iue, and Josephus of ye Judicial antitiquities, following
that which Moses has plainly written in his books of Leuitick and Numbers.

The arcke of wytnes. Exd. 25 27.28.
Another sign and sacrament instituted of god by the arck of ye covenant
described in Exodus, being a holy sign dedicated to receive the holy and
heavenly answers, to thend to bring the people to ye remembrance, fear, and
obedience of god. To honor and accompanye the arcke of the covenant. Many
other exterior signs were ordained of god, as the ornaments and consecration
of priests, specially the ornament called the Ephod, Ephod.
the which and the sacrifices the Israelites did abuse by their idolatries.

Another holy sign there was of the purging and sprinckling water, Pourging
water consecrated Number. 19.
ordained by god to Moses and Aaron the high priest. This sprinkled water
was consecrated with ashes gathered by a clean person of the sacrifice offered
in Holocausta. To wit, of a Cow all red with out any spot, and which had
never ben labored. The Wood ordained to make the fire for the burntofferyng
was Cedre and Hisope, Purple with Crimsin. With this water were sprinkled
poluted persons for the purging and cleansing of their corporal defylings.

At the enteryng of the temple or tabernacle was a Lauer made of Brass, Exodus
38.
and forged first with thimages of the women of Israel, in this Lauer was put
the sprinckling water, wherewt the sacrificers are spri^kled, before the
celebrating of their sacrifices, to the end they might be purified and obtain
grace and remission of their sins.

After the death of the great priest Aaron, the people of Israel unthankful to
god for the goodness sent them of him, murmuring as anoyed with the heavenly Manna
freely given unto them for their norriture, were punished by ye biting of
venomous serpents. But the merciful god gave unto the^ an holy sign whereby
they should be saved and restored to health (to wit) the brazen serpent, Brazen
serpent.
John. 3.7.
lifted up in ye air a figure of Jesus Christ crucified.

These were in su^me the most part of the signs, sacrifices and sacraments
ordained of god in the first church of the Israelites, figures of the true and
perfect sacrifice performed by Jesus Christ, the true Messiah and everlasting
priest, sitting at the right hand of god the father.

Sacraments broken by Adam. Gene. 3.
Now rests in sum to bring forth, how man by his own proper fault did fall
in oblivion and disobedience of god his creator, abusing gods favor, and
corrupting the holy signs, sacrifices, and sacraments, ordained to him.

What persuaded our first father and his companion to hyde them selves at the
hearing of gods voice, but because they had abused the holy sign, and broken
the law of the fruits to them forbidden? This holy sign which our first and
universal father had abused, was the original of other vices and corruptions
hereafter described, into the which all men are fallen savoring of the
corrupted lump of Adam.

Leaving the particular corruptions of the signs, sacrifices and sacraments,
Corruption of the sacrifice by Aaron. Exodus 32. Deute. 9.
before the law written by Moses, we will begin to bring forth briefly the most
notable errors committed by the most great sacrificers, as kings, priests,
and others having the chief government of the people.

When Moses was abiding in mount Synay to receive the commandments of God,
his brother Aaron the high priest forged a calfe of gold, of the golden earings
given unto him by the people of Israel, he builded an altar offered incens,
and celebrated sacrifice, causing the common people to worship the molten
Image.

Was not this an abusing of the sacrifices ordained of god, and a corrupting of
the true usage of the same, in causing the Calfe to be worshipped in place of
the slain and offered sacrifice, as it was appointed in the law? Corruption
of the sacrifice by Nadab and Abiu. Leui. 10. Number. 11.
His sons also Nadab and Abiu were not they consumed with fire, for abusing the
use of sacrifices in taking unhallowed Wood and corrupting the law? The people
of Israel unthankful for the goodness done unto them in being delivered from
the Pharoanicall captivity, did they not murmour against the holy sacrament of
heavenly Manna, when they did disdeyne and contempne this bread of life, and
demanded flesh to eat? joshua. 7.
Acham the son of Charms did not he violate ye laws of holy signs, when he
committed sacrilege, and kept back the spoils of Hierico vowed and
consecrated to god for sacrifices? If any more curiously desire to see the
continual abuses and corruptions of the people them selves, let him read the
histories of the Judges of Israel, iud. 2.3.6, 8.9.
and in all times he shall find man never to be content with the true
worshipping ordained of God. But in stead of outward signs ordained of god to
draw the people to fear and obedience, they have forged inventions. And in
place of reuere^sing the aulters, and arc of covenant in the name of the
only god being (outward sacred signs): Judge. 10.
The Isrelites infected with the Idolatries of their neighbors, the Sirians,
Sidonians, Moabites, Ammonites and Philistines, did erect alters unto their
strange gods, Baall and Astaroth. Iephtha, judge and captain of the Isralites:
did not he corrupt the law of sacrifices when he sacrificed his own proper
daughter? excusing himself by a vow, which he made, which was not appointed
to him of god? The ungentle sacrifice of Iephtha. iud. 11.
The holy sign ordained of god for the high priest to celebrat sacrifices in
(called Ephod) the uppermost garment, judge. 8.9. idolatrye by the golden EPhod.
Judge. 17.18.
was not it abused by Gedeon captain of the Isralites when as of the spoils
of the Madianites and of their earings he made an Ephod of gold, whereby the
people fell into great idolatrye? How long time was this holy outward sign
Ephod abused, an image being erected by the mother of Michas in Silo, priests
and sacrificers appointed expressly to sacrifice thereunto, an alter builded
and the true use of sacrifices corrupted? So long as the temple continued in
Silo, into what wicked manners did the priests and sacrificers fall, which were
ordained of god for the ministry of sacrifices and holy sacraments, when they
usurped by long possession to have this privilege of the people, that when they
did sacrifice, and the flesh of thoffered sacrifice was seathing, 1. Samuel. 2.
their boy or servant having a three grained fleshoke of iron in his hand,
had liberty to catch out of the pot or cawdron, all that he cold carry with
his hoke? further the leuiticall tirranny was such, that this servant of the
priest had liberty to demand of the sacrifice geuer, flesh to roste for ye
sacrificer, otherwise to take it by force even as he would. Was not this a great
abuse and detestable corruption practiced by the priests and chief
sacrificers, under the pretense of sacrifices? What greater corruption can be
declared, than that of the sons of the chief priest Ely, called Ophni and
Phinees? Ophni, Phinies, corruptera of the sacrifices. 1. Samuel. 4.
Who under pretense of devotion committed shameful whoredom with the covered
weme^ behind the holy Tabernacle instituted of god, for the which wickedness
they were miserably slain, and the arc of covenant taken away by the
Philistines. 1. Samuel. 5.6.
Which they set in the temple of their god dagon, The arcke of the holy
covenant.
but god not suffringe this holy sign thus to be profaned, threw down the
image dagon and sent grievous punshiments to ye Philistines in such sort that
they were constrained to restore the Arc of the covenant of god, This holy
sign was so precious that for as much as the Bethsamites (which were not of
the order of the Levites) had abused it 50000. of the common people, and 70. of
the chief rulers were rooted out and slain by the vengeance of god. Against
corruption of holy signs.
This example might make all those to tremble which enterprise to abuse the
holy signs and sacraments ordained of god.

2. Samuel. 6. Osa.
Osa also for that he abused the same sacred sign (notwithstanding that he did
it of a good intention) for to lift up the Arc of witness hanging to much on
thonside) was he not punished with death? Of others abuses committed by the
Isralites, Osias. 2. Chron 26.
there is many examples, Osias was punished with liprosie for abusing the
sacrifices, Saul. 1. Samuel. 13. Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 4. of the Jews
antiquities.
in taking upon him the ministry of encensing appointed to the priests only.
Saul he first elected king of ye Isralits was slain and his kingdom given
unto another (as was declared before of Samuel) for abusyng the sacrifices,
and suffering his people to commit the like abuses. His successors in the
kingdoms of Judah and Israel have not they always continued in abusing and
corrupting the sacrifices and sacraments ordained of God, when they did offer
sacrifices to the gods, 1. Kings. 8.11.
Astaroth of the Sidonions, to Chanios of the Moabites, and to Melcom or Moloch
of the Ammonites, in so much that they builded temples and oratories, even to
offerencens and to do sacrifices unto them.

Hieroboam king of the Israelites, Hieroboam, 1. Kings. 12.
did not only cause a Golden calfe to be erected, as the high priest Aaron had
abused before, but also did ordeyne two Golden Kyne in the two Temples of
Bethell and Dan, and ordained strange priests corrupting the law of God, and
causing them to do sacrifice after the fashion of Aaron. 1. Kings. 14.
This idolatry and corruption of sacrifices did continue among the Israelites
more than.400. years during the reign of their kings, who had taught them to
corrupt the true use of the sacrifices in chapels and particular oratories
builded in the tops of hills and thick forests consecrated, inviolating the law
of sacrifices ordained by God in the holy temple, 1. Kings. 15.
within the holy city. For particular examples, of the abuses committed
against the true use of sacrifices, the history of Maacha mother of king Asa
is manifest, who erected an image of the god Pan, and did consecrate and
dedicate unto him a thick forest offering sacrifices unto it. Achab. 1. Kings.
16.
Achab another king of the Israelites did erecte an altar and made sacrifices
to the God Mars, otherwise called Baal, unto whom he dedicated a Grove to
satisfy his wicked wife Iesabell.

Joseph. lib. 8. chap. 10.
He caused also another altar and temple to be erected to the God of the
Tyrians, he ordained Priests, Sacrificers, and instituted four hundred false
Prophets. His son and successor Ochosias taught of his father to corrupt
the use of the sacrifices, Ochosias.
did not only offer to Baal (otherwise called Mars) but went forward in
greater abuse, 2. Kings. 1. Joseph. lib. 9. chap. 1.
he builded a temple unto the god of Accoronites called by Josephus Myos and by
the Greeks Priapus, unto the which god he did sacrifice.

To be short, what more abominable corruption can be described, Purgatory.
than the invention of the fire Purgatory? 2. Kings. 16. 2. Kings. 16.23 in
the book Alcoran. Asoar. 29.46. Asoar. 5.
where with ye Israelites did transgres causing their children to pass through
the fire in Tophet, a valley of the sons of Ennon, sacrificing unto the God
Moloch. This corruption of sacrifices, not withstanding that it was in the time
of Moses, igne^ gehe^nae non nisi numero dierum preterminato animas sentire
docet Acorani liber, and ad diem veritatis omnes accedere operum suorum
mercedem accepturas Asoar.
yet the Idol Moloch in the valley of Ennon, was not cast down till the
raygne of good King Josias, more then nine hundred years after Moses.
Nevertheless this abuse does continue among the Arabians and Affricans to this
present, so that the Alcoramists and Mahometists have this belief, that the
souls of the departed must pass through the fire to be purged and purified
from their offenses.

By this brief gathering a man may clearly perceive that from the beginning
of the world, man by his own fault has fallen into the bottom of error and
corruption of holy signs, sacrifices and sacraments, ordened to him of god.
But ye principal abuse, Cause of the corruption of sacraments.
whereof is sprung the original of all idolatry entered by this means, that
fleshly and carnal men did stick more to ye visible signs and outward
ceremonies, then to the things signified by the Sacraments: Apo. 13.
for in place of circumcising their hearts, and cutting away the old skin of
sin, to be regenerated and purified by the blood of the heavenly sacrifice
offered before all worlds, Deuteronomy. 10.30.
they have taken circumcision carnally for the cutting of the carnal skin.
Wherefore did they not follow the interpretation of god, by Moses to
circumcise the foreskynne of their hearts? Wherefore did not the children of
Israel give credit to the good prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 4.
which admonished them of the spiritual circumcision, and to circumcise the
foreskynne of their hearts, in puttinge away the foreskynne of their natural
corruption. The like is come to pass of the sacrifices and holy signs
ordained of god, for figures of the sacrifice fulfilled by Jesus Christ: For
the carnal man rests in the corporal blood of earthly beasts, where he
ought to lift up his spirit to heaven to comprehend and conceive yt which is
figured and signified by the sacrifices of beasts offered up. For this
therefore the justice of God is declared by the Prophets. What need have I
(says the Lord god) of your sacrifices? Esaias. 1.
I am werye of your offerings of sheep. Moreover, I take no pleasure in the
blood of beasts, lambs, and goats offered. Wherefore travel you to address
aulters unto me, I will non of your offerynges and vain sacrifices, I abhor
your incens, I can not suffer your new Moons, your Sabothes your assembles,
and your feasts: all is but vanity. I hate your feasts of new Moons (O
Israelites) and your solemn feasts. I am weary in suffering so much. You have
goodly directed your prayers unto me, I will not hear you any more, for the
abuses which you have committed with your hands embrued with blood. Moreover I
will not receive of the house of Israel any bull, Psalm. 51. Esaias. 66. Ierem. 6.
because your sacrifices are not pleasing unto me. I am as well pleased with
thoffring of a beast as with the murderyng of a man, Eccle. 7.
and with the offering of Incens, as with the worshipping of an Idol.
Wherefore then (says god) do ye take so much pains to seek Incens unto
Sabba, and odours from far countries, to offer and make sacrifices unto me
wherein I delight not? Who has moved you (O Israelites) to erect images unto
the Gods Moloch, and the sterre Rompham during the time that you were in the
Wilderness, where I did nouryshe you with my heavenly Manna? Your feasts be
odious unto me, your offerynges, Amos. 5.
oblations, and sacrifices for the health, I will reject, your offeryngs do
displease me. Mich. 6.
After what manner should one prepare him self to god? Shall it be by
sacrifices of Bullocks of one year? Does God take pleasure in a great number of
sheep offered unto him? Or in a great quantity of holy oils? To him says
the Prophet shall I offer of the first borne, for the remission of sins.

Our good God has very clearelye declared that service which he commands,
follow equity, love, Psalm. 51.
mercy, and of an humble and contrite heart, fall down before him, for
obedience is more worth then sacrifice, or the fat of offered Rams. 1.
Samuel. 15.


What gave an occasion to God to put away those sacrifices and sacraments
which he him self had ordained, but the abuse and corruption which the
Israelites had committed, taking over grosselye the Signs and Ceremonies,
ordained to draw them to fear and obedience?

For in place of conceyuing that which was figured by the signs and corporal
sacrifices they did rest in the flesh of the beasts offered. And in stead of
cutting away the foreskynne of their hearts, they rested in the carnal
circumcision, and in the mean time turned away from ye true worshipping of
god, addressing them selves to creatures. As to stars, to the queen of
heaven, and other strange Gods, offeringe to them incens, buyldyng for them
temples, preparing for them priests, chaplaynes and sacrificers to offer unto
them oblations and sacrifices.

Moreover, to accomplish this corruption, they did sacrifice with the blood of
innocents, offering of them, and causing them to pass through the fire of
purgatory in the valley of Tophet. Wherefore (for the abuse committed by the
children of Israel against the holy sacraments, 4. Esdr. 1.
sacred signs and sacrifices ordained of God) it was said unto them by the
prophets, that god would no more of their feasts, of their new Moons, of
their circumcision, 4. Esdr. 1.
nor of their sacrifices celebrated by people idolatrous and full of blood.

When the unsearchable wisdom of god did perceive the hardness and
infidelity of the people of Israel, which did ever continue to commit
idolatry, by corrupting the holy signs, sacraments, and sacrifices, in place
of acknowledging the infinite goodness of god, which had delivered them from the
Pharaonicall tyrranny, which had nourished them in the Wilderness, which had
brought them into the fruitful land promised unto them. And which so many
times had succored them in the wars against their neighbors, the Cananites,
Moabites, Madianites, Philistines, Ammonites, Sirians, Sidonians, Sicyonians,
and other envious people: Nevertheless this rude people did continue in their
idolatries taught them by their priests, sacrificers, kings, and princes,
without tourning to the true worshipping of one only God.

Wherefore after the great mercy and long tarying of the just Judge, which
by all manner corrections would have brought again his people by divine
vengeance particulerly, as by reasyng up of wars, by captivity and bondage,
by diuidyng of the kingdom parted between Roboam and Hieroboam, the
successors of Salamon plounged in the depth of Idolatrye, by inward wars
among the people divided, and by other scourges accustomed to correct those
whom God does favor, to the end to bring them to his fear and obedience. In
the end this people, to much hardened, and waxed old in their Idolatries,
were taken into miserable bondage, under the tyranny of Infidels Assirians, 4.
King 15 24
and Idolatrous Babilonians, their realms quyte overthrown.

But within a little while after, that, this self same people, by the great
mercy of God was delivered from the hands of unfaithful tyrauntes, was set
again at lybertye, and was restored to their land of promise: they fell
again to their Idolatries more then ever before, Josephus lib. 13. cap. 18. of
the Jews antiquities.
under the government of their Sacrificers and high Priests, which joined
the temporaltye and the spirituality so together, that they were clad with
Scepter Royal and Crown. Then succeeded the heresies of the Phariseis, of the
Saduces, Esseens, Gallileens, Masbutheens, Josephus in the book of the
antiquities of the jews.
Hemerobaptists and Samaritans, corrupted by the diversity of strange
nations, which had inhabited and subdued the country of Samaria near unto
Judea. For the Babilonians did worship for their god Soccobenoth, the Cutheens
and Persians having for their God Mergal or Mergel, the Hematenses called upon
their god Asima, the Ananoys did worship their god Nebahaze and Thartace, the
Sepharuainenses did hold upon their gods Adramelech and Anamelech.

Unto the which gods they sacrificed their children, causyng them to pass
through the fire.

Thus then, when all kind of idolatry was spread among the Israelites, the
sacrifices were altogether corrupted, the priests became buyers and sellers
covetous, tyrants and Idolaters, the people paid tribute to the tyrants of
Rome, their country of Judea made one with the Province joining unto Siria
under the power of the Romans. Josephus lib. 15. cap. 3. Josephus lib. 18.
cap. 3. Eurrop. lib. 1. cap. 12.
The order also, the law and election of the high priests was corrupted, and
their dignity abastarded altogether, in so much that without regard of the
Leuiticall race, the high priests were appointed by Consulls or Lieutenants of
Rome as pleased them. Genes. 49.
And where as before they continued during their lives, now they changed
yearly. And when as the Scepter was taken from the stock of Judah, and her
kingdom quyte overthrown, as before it was prophesied: The incomprehensible
greatness of God did manifest it self by his son begotten before all worlds,
which did so humble himself, that he took human flesh of the Virgins womb
to redeem his people, and restore them to grace before God.

For as in Adam by his breaking and abusing of the holy sign given unto him to
keep, A conferryng of Adam with Jesus christ.
all the lump of mankind was corrupted with the leuaine of sin: Even so by
the second Adam Jesus Christ we are by grace purged from our offenses. To our
first and universal father Adam was given a holy sign to exercise his
obedience, and to his successors was given other holy signs, sacrifices and
sacraments instituted of God, as the tree of life, the fruits of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, the rainebowe, circumcision, the lamb without
blemishe, the bread without leuain, the cloud, the fyrypillour, the red sea
divided, the heavenly Manna, the water of the rock, the immolation and
offering of beasts for sacrifices, the arck of couaunt, the Brazen serpent, the
purging water, the temple builded in the midst of the holy city: All which
sacred signs, sacrifices and sacraments, were figures of that which was
accomplished by Jesus Christ.

Jesus christ the tree of life. Apoca. 2. Romans 11.
For first he was the true tree of life planted in the myddest of the garden of
God, in whom and by whom we which were bastard trees are grafted and set, to
the obteyning of eternal life: he has given us the keepyng of the fruits of
the tree of wisdom by his holy gospel, and commanded us to keep it whole
without abusing, without corrupting, without adding or diminishyng, in pain of
eternal death.

Rainebowe.
He has been as the celestial Bow bended in the air to assure us of the band
and covenant contracted between god and us that we should be no more drowned in
the flood of sin. He was circumcised to accomplish the law in himself,
Circumcision Gala. 4.
that he might cut away the foreskynne of our hearts, to spoil us of our old
corrupted skin in Adam. The burning bushe.
He was the flame in the burning bush, taking flesh in the womb of the virgin
conceived by the grace of the holy ghost, without the seed of man, the holy
virgin as the bushe, remaining nevertheless perfect and incorrupt. He was
sacrificed as the just and innocent Lamb, his blood being shed to preserve us
from the tyrranny of Satan, Pascal lamb. John. 1. Hebr. 13.
and to open unto us the passage into the land of promise the kingdom of
heaven. Bread of life. John. 6.
He is the true bread which came down from heaven, without leuaine, without
corruption, and spotte, whereof we must eat for our spiritual nourishement,
to the end we may celebrate the feast of the Pharaonicall passage in the
land of liberty. He was the cloud, 1. Corin. 5. The cloud, fyry pillour and
red sea.
the f^rye Pyllour, the red Sea divided, which has conducted us, which
has delivered us from the hands of our enemies, out of whose side opened,
1. Cor. 10. John. 19.
came blood and water for our salvation and redemption.

The heavenly Manna, the rock flowing water of life. 1. Corin. 10.
He was the heavenly Manna sent from heaven to nouryshe us for ever, and the
true rock from whence flowed water to quench the thrust of al those for ever
which thrust and believe in him. It was he that made the sacrifice of health for
the defacing of our sins, Sacrifice. Heb. 7.8.9.10
the sacrificer and sacrifice, the offering and offerer abiding for ever, a
sacrificer at the right hand of God his father. He entered into the heavenly
sanctuary, builded not with the hands of men, Heb. 9.
but with the hand of God. He was the true arcke of covenant and appointment,
The arcke of witness.
by the which god did manifest and declare his oracles and in the which he did
rest to accomplish his divine and incomprehensible mysteries. He was as the
brazen serpent fastened to the cross, Brasent serpent. John. 3.
to give health to ye sickennesse of all those which did turn toward him, and
behold him in faith.

temple of god John. 2.
He was the true temple of God wherein the holy ghost does dwell, in whom and by
whom one god in trinity is worshipped. He was the true and holy sacrifice
whereof was made the purging water for the cleansing of all spotts, The host
and holy water.
having by his own ashes, that is by his own body offered up, John. 19.
sprinckeled and watered with water issuing out of his side, all people
believing in him.

The ceremonial law being thus accomplished not by fygures, but really
executed by thincarnation, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, our
savior, our mediator, our everlasting sacrificer, and mercy obteyner, the
infinite goodness of God was yet more manifested by the new band, Hebr. 9.
new covenant and new coming of the son of God incarnate: Romans 8.
For by his new testament confirmed by the death of the testator, he has made
us fellow heirs and inheritours of the kingdom of heaven with God.

For assurance of this heavenly succession gotten to us by grace, after that
he had finished the ceremonial law, and abolished the same (as we have
showed) by the sacrifice perfectly made by the everlasting Sacrificer, there
were left unto us two sacred signs and holy sacraments, S. Augustine in his 3.
book of the christian doctrine. chapter. 9.
wherein God has used more favor and more special grace, than ever he did
before his incarnation, in this that he has delivered us from the servile law
of circumcision, of difference of meats, and of diverse sacrifices ordained in
the first church of the Israelites, and in dischargynge us of this heavy
burden, he has so much the moore comforted us in ordeyning unto us for a
memory and remembrance of our regencration and life everlasting, two holy
sacraments, under two holy signs. Sacraments of the new testament.
To wit, the water of Baptism, and the bread, and wine, for the partakyng of
his body, and that his grace might extend to all nations, God did choose those
tokens and signs which were most common and easy.

For Circumcision was a special mark for Abraham and his posterity, the
which Circumcision other nations were not accustomed to use, although Herodote
a Greek in the history which he writes of the manners of the Egiptians, Herod
lib. 2.
does attribute unto them the custom to circumcise, especially their
Priests. But it is easy to conjecture, that he had heard speaking of the
Jews dwelling in Egypt for the space of four hundred and thirty years
observing the circumcision. A comparing of the circumsion with baptism. Exodus
12.
Moreover the Circumcision was ordained for the men only, and not for the
women: there was also a day set for Circumcision, the eight day after the
nativity: and the cutting of the skin was paynefull and greuouse. Genes 17.
But the grace of God having abolyshed, by his incarnation and perfect
sacrifice, the rigor of the ceremonial law, as well for the difference of
meats as of days, has left unto us by his new will and covenant, the holy
sign of water common to all, as well men as women, Number. 19.
without difference of days, and in this holy sacrament the child baptized
feels no grief, as he did feel in cutting of the skin.

This sign of water, to represent unto us the purging and cleansing of our
sins by the blood of Jesus Christ, was common not only to the Jews, which
were wont to use their cleansing water, but also to the Gentiles and all nations
who had in use the cleansyng and washing with this water called Lustrale and
Expiatorye, as may appear by reading of ancient histories.

To the end then that the grace of god, by Jesus Christ might extend to all
the world generally, to all nations, countries and provinces, as well
circumcised as uncircumcised, Jews as Gentilles, god did choose the sign of
water most common, so much the more applying it to the commodity of man to
draw him to fear and obedience. By the which sign he instituted the holy
sacrament of baptism, for a note and assured mark of our regeneration, and
purifiyng represented sacramentally by the virtue of the holy ghost, Titus. 3.
Galath. 3.
in the which sacrament god does assist and assure us to be borne a new and
made one with Christ Jesus, to be renewed and made members of his members, and
that he will receive us as clad and incorporate into him and by him.

Like reasons might be brought for the other holy sacrament ordained of god by
his new testament, to wit, Sacrament of the holy supper of jesus Christ.
of bread and wine. Which signs, tokens figures and notable forms, all
nations have been accustomed to use in their sacrifices, oblations, and
ceremonies, concerning their religions, as well circumcised as uncircumcised,
as well Jews as Gentiles. Also the two kinds of foodes for the nourishment of
man are contained under bread and wine. For these causes our good god desyring
to draw unto him all nations, to norishe and minister most necessary food unto
them, did institute the communion of the body and blooud of our savor Jesus
Christ under the forms, holy signs, and sacraments of bread and wine. For as
we are assured by the mark and element of water in baptism to be regenerate
and renewed in the body and blood of Jesus Christ represented by ye sacrament
of holy water, by the virtue of the holy ghost. Even so are we nourished by the
communion of his body and blood represented reallye by the bread and Wine
consecrated for spiritual food and nourishment everlasting and quickening by
the power of the holy Ghost. Wherein God favored us much in discharginge us
of bloody sacrifices ordained in the first church of the Israelits, which
were wont to be charged with many and diverse sacrifices celebrated with the
sheding of the blood of earthly beasts, after the diversity of offenses, and
persons offendynge. All which sacrifices were ended, and put away by the
shedynge of the blood of the just and innocent Lamb, Heb. 9,
Jesus Christ, which by his perfect sacrifice has utterly abolysshed all
other sacrifyces reserving unto him self the dignity of the great and
everlasting sacrificer, sittyng at the right hand of God his father. But he
has favored us so much, that in place of the abolyshed sacrifices, he has
instituted the two holy sacraments before mentioned to assure us of our
regeneration, our purgynge, our adoption, our nouryshement, and eternal life
given us by the blood of our savior Jesus Christ.

But as the Israelites to gross, Corruption of the Sacraments.
and carnal, did rest in the exterior signs, corruptynge the true use of the
sacraments and sacrifices given unto them of God. Even so like abuse, yea,
greater corruptions, are come unto our two holy Sacraments left unto us by
the new testament of Jesus Christ, for the sacrament of Baptism succeeded in
the place of Circumcision, man (conceived of corrupted clay) would not be
contented with Gods holy institution: But some have brewed and corrupted the use
of the holy sacrament of baptism with adiurations and coniurings, Sacrament of
Baptism corrupt.
iuggling of salt, of oil, of tapers, cream, blowings, hoodes, or biggyns,
with an infinite number of crosses, on the forehead, on the eyes, on the nose,
on the back, on the breast, Theodor in his book of the fables of heretics.
on the shulders, and on the mouth, to chase away Devils. For the Massalians
heretics authors of coniuring and crossing, do says that the child borne is
accompanied with his spirit or devil, Ca. sine: Ca. postquam de consecratione
distinct. 4.
which can not be chased away but by adiuration and coniuring. And for this
cause this holy sacrament of Baptism has been corrupted so far, that they
have added thereunto strange terms of the Syrian language, Ephetath. per Satyr.
2.
with spittell and purging snyuell.

What greater corruption could there be described then these abominable
inventions? as if the blood of Jesus Christ had not been sufficient for our
regeneration and purgation? Gala. 3. Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 15.
And as if God had not been of power sufficient to perfect and regenerate us by
the holy sign of water representing the blood of Jesus Christ, if there were
not spittel coniured snyuell, oils, salt, biggyns, cream, tourches or tapers,
or milk, or honny invented by other heretics.

Other more subtle Magicians, Tertulian in his book of the crouned soldier.
Pithagorians, instructed in the Massalian doctrine, have added moreover to
pronunce twenty times over the man child presented to Baptism the name of a
Devil (which they say) does accompany him, by that means to adjure and
conjure him away. And at the Baptism of a wenche, to say the same thirty
times. Was there ever such detestable corruption in the sacrament of
circumcision? Wherefore (O Massalians) have you brued your oils, in the holy
sacrament of Baptism? Following the heresye of Marcus and Marcosus, Epipha.
lib. 1. tom. 3. here is. 34.
which commanded to annoint the children that were to be baptized. The holy
sign of water instituted by the hand of God, was it not sufficient to
represent the precious blood of Jesus Christ for our regeneration and
purification, without bruing of greses, of oils, of spittell, and other
minglings invented by ye corruptors of the holy sacraments? The body and blood
of Jesus Christ wherewith we be clade by the holy water of Baptism, was it not
sufficient to preserve us from all tempests without borowing of biggins and
crisomes? And for an other more great corruption and abuse it was permitted
unto women to baptize, Tom. 1. Epipha. lib. 1. here is. 42. and lib. 2. tom. 1.
here is. 49.
folowinge the error of the Marcionists, Quintilians, Cataphriges, Montanistes,
Pepuzians, Priscillians and Artotirites. Was it ever permitted unto women by
the law of god to administer the holy sacraments or sacrifice instituted in
the first church of the Isralites, or in the new testament of Jesus Christ. In
the History of Moises it is resited, Exodus 4.
how that his wife Sephora, moved with a womanly rage, took ye stone or knife
wherewith she circumcised her son, but it is not written that she, or any other
her like, has at any time ben permitted to minister the holy sacraments. By
such corruptions of ye holy sacrament of baptism, Many heresies have spro^g
up by Catabaptists Anabaptists Antipedobaptists and other heritiks, and
scismaticks, which not contented with the pure and sincere institution of god did
more rest in ye outward signs than in that which by the^ was represented in
spirit. He yt desires to know more particulerly the abuses and corruptions
invented at diverse times by diverse humurrs of men, let him read our
ecclesiastical commentaries. It remains presently to come to ye corruptions
of ye other holy sacrament of ye supper and communion of ye body and blood of
Jesus Christ. By this short discourse a man may clearly know how variable and
frail man is, alwais having abused the grace of god. For like as from the
beginning of ye law and instruction given unto the^, the people of Israel did
ever corrupt ye true use of sacrifices, holy signs and sacraments ordained of
god: even so is it come to pass of of the law of god by Jesus christ, having
instituted ye manner to co^municat his body and blood under ye figures and holy
signs of bread and wine. The which holy sacrament was abused in the time of ye
apostles by ye corinthia^s: Against whom the holy apostle did writ epistilles,
Sacrament of the supper corrupted. 1. Cor. 11.
to the end to bring them to the true and sincere obseruacion of this holy
Sacrament. Let no man therefore hereafter think it strange if the successors
of the Apostles from time, to time have corrupted the true use of this holy
Sacrament. And the more they were distaunt from the time of the Apostles of
Jesus Christ, the more they fell into corruption: Yea abominable: turnyng the
use of the Sacrament into a depth of Idolatry. First into what contention, fell
the church yt was next unto the apostles, Ecclesiastical history,
about ye determining of the days wherein the holy sacrament should be
celebrated? Sabatius the heretik did institute the celebration of Easter with
unleavened bread after the manner of the Jews. Histo. tripart. lib. 9 ca. 37.
and lib. 11. cap. 5
Certain of his sect did ordain the use of the holy Sacrament to be
celebrated the.xiiij. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. Histo. tripart. lib. 9. cap. 38
and 39,
Moon, as the Jews did. It is said, there were of this sect Policrates bishop
of the Ephesians, philip Hieropolitain Policarp, Truseas Melite and Narcissus,
bishop of Jerusalem. Of the contrary opinion were, Victor bishop of Rome, and
Eluther his predicessor, with Theophile bishop of Palestine. This contention
continued more than three hundred years after the Apostles. Some celebrated the
feast of Easter after the Equinoxall, when the Sun did enter into the sign
of Aries. Other observed the month Xanthisoe, called by the Romans April.

Some said (to wit) the Quartodecimans, that it was instituted by Saint
John, to celebrate in the xiiij. Moon. Others advanced them selves to be
taught by Saint Peter, whereas yet there was no evident appearaunce of any
thing. The Montanists Phrygians condemned the Quartodecimans obseruers of the
course of the Moon, and that they ought to order them selves by the course of
the Sun, beginning at the Equinoxall in Primtyde: And by this means they
celebrated the eight Ides of April, which is the.xiiij. day of the said
month. Provided that it fell upon Sunday.

There was not only contention for the use of the sacraments in what days it
should be celebrated, Eues. lib. 5. cap. 4.
but also there was great division among the Christians for ceremonies invented
to prepare them selves to receive the same worthily. For some (as the Romans)
did keep the fast three weeks before Easter. The Illyriens and all Greece with
the Alexandrians did ordeyne a Lent to fast six weeks. Others ordained vij.
weeks of fasting, leaving of from five days to five days.

More and more to corrupt the holy sacrament of the supper, there was restored
another Judicial ceremony, Histo. tripart. cap. 8.
by the differencie of meats. For some (during the time of fast) forbad
eating of flesh and fish. Other forbad eating of flesh only, permitting to
eat fish and fowls, which they said (according to Moses) did take part
of the substance of the water. Some also did ordeyne to eat dry bread and
water only. Others fasted till noone without distinction of meats. And to be
short, there was in the beginning an infinite number of customs and
corruptions in the use of ye holy sacrament of ye supper, by ceremonies brought
in by the difference of days and meats, abrogated and put away by the grace
and law of Jesus Christ. But was there ever any holy Apostle of god, Colos. 2.
Galath. 4. Heb. 7.
which ever left in writing any law or co^maudement, for the distinction of
days or meats, to celebrate the holy supper of Jesus Christ? Their intention
was not to institute a religion of feasts and a distinction of days and
meats, but their doctrine did tend only to teach good life, and the true
worship of one god only. Wherefore we must needs conclude that the ceremony
and feast of Easter, to celebrate the supper of our Lord God, Histo. tripart.
lib. 9. cap. 38
is proceeded of mere custom. For none of the Apostles has left any thing
in writing touching the same.

To moderate such dissentions and corruptions many counsels were assembled,
one at Sangaria in Bytine by the which (to avoid al contentions) it was
permitted to every one to celebrate Easter when he would. Eusebius. lib. 5. chap.
23.
Another counsel was holden at Cesaria by Theophile bishop of that place, and
by Narcissus bishop of Jerusalem. Another counsel in Achaye. And another
counsel was holden at Rome, by Victor bishop of that place.

In the year of Christ. 114.
After these little corruptions, there succeeded greater from time to time,
according unto the humors and affections of the bishops of Rome, Platine
Sabellie.
Alexander the first of that name, being come to be superintendant of the
Roman church, the first of the successors of the Apostles of Jesus Christ,
and also the first of the corrupters of the holy sacrament of the supper,
ordained to mix water with the wine before the communion: wherein he meant to
reform the ghospel of Jesus Christ, which had instituted the communion of his
body and blood, to be under two kinds bread and wine, but Alexander added a
third kind (to say) water. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 27. and lib. 6. cap. 14.
He restored also the Judicial ceremony of unleavened bread (called sweet
bread) to celebrate the Easter as the Jews did. Followyng therein the
Ebionites, which taught that the ceremonial law of Moses was necessary for
salvation: as also Symmachus an heretic in Palestine had taught. If Jesus
Christ was circumcised to accomplish the ceremonial law, is it therefore
needful for us to be circumcised? Moreover if it pleased him (to accomplish
the ceremonial law) to use in the days of sweet bread, unleavened bread: Is
it therefore necessary to turn again unto the rigor of this ceremony
abrogated by the sacrifice perfectly ended by Jesus Christ? Cel. lib. 39. cap.
21.
In what place of ye holy gospel cold Alexander ever find to mix water with the
wine? And for to bind Christians to unleavened bread, is it of any more value,
than his invention, to chase away devils with water salted and coniured? And
as touching his coniured water ordained by him, we will show hereafter that
the original thereof came from Neuma Pompilius the great coniurer and Roman
Idolater. But as for the mingling of the water with wine, that should seem to
be taught by ye religion of the ancient Idolaters, which were wont in
celebrating their sacrifices, in one chalyce to consecrate the water with the
bread, specially in the feast dedicated to the Sun, which the Persians did
worship, called of them Mythros. Justin in his apology.
And in the feast also of Nephalies water was used for the sacrifice. According
to this comparison, Justin martyr makes relation of the custom observed
among the Idolators, and Christians, for the bread, wine, and water
consecrated. By the one, yt is to say by the Idolatours, in the name of their
Idolles: and by the Christians in the name of their true God. Always this
first corruption in the usage of the holy sacrament by the minglynge of water
with wine beyond the commandment and ordinannce of God, Inno. lib. 4. cap. 5.
did not continue without controversy: For the Greeks were of a contrary
opinion, that it was not necessary to mix water with wine, and that they
would not follow the corruption of Alexander. Amarcanus was of the same advice
that Alexander was: saying that it was necessary to mingle it with water.

The subtle Sophiste Scot does affirm absolutelye that it is not necesssarye
the water to be myngled with the Wine, because (says he) it cannot be
changed and transsubstanciated into blood if first it be not changed into
Wine.

Other moore ingenious would rather interpretate the institution of Alexander,
saying ye Wine to be converted into blood, but as for the water, it was
transsubstantiated into the water which came out of ye side of Jesus Christ.

S. Augustine in his book of the relikes chapter. 26. and 64.
This first corruption of Alexander did give occation of many other to succeed.
for some invented greater brueyngs to mingle it with blood drawn out of young
infants to mixed with the bread of tholy supper of Jesus Christ, as the
Cataphriges, which began a kind of transubstantion of wine into blood really
and corporally. Epipha. lib. 2. Tom. 1. here is. 49.
Some other adjoined thereunto chease called Artotirites, that is to say,
chease bread. Others also abusing this sacrament, in steed of wine took water,
under pretense of moore greater abstinence. Other ordained to temper the bread
with wine, which the Massalians do yet hold in their missall sacrificers.

For another more detestable corruption of the holy sacrament, some bishops of
Rome have forbidden their Massalian sacrificers to minister unto the christen
people (which they call lay) the body of Jesus Christ under both kinds, but
only under ye holy sign of bread, and not of wine, the which they kept for ye
Priests Massalians sacrificers. Math. 29. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
Is not this corruption directly against ye holy gospel and institution of the
supper of Jesus Christ which has ordained and commanded all faithful to eat
his body and drink his blood. When he took the cup used he not these proper
terms, drink al of this wine in memory and remembrance of my blood shed.
Has he used any other terms for eating of his body by the figure of bread,
than he has done for drynkyng of his blood by the sign of wine? If one
should compare herewith the holy sign ordained of god in the church of ye
Israelites, a figure of the communion of ye body of Jesus christ (which was the
pascal lamb) the flesh whereof was commanded to be eaten of all persons
without exception, for as much as they were circumcised: Was there ever any
difference in the eating of the pascall Lamb, and celebratyng of the Passover
of the Jews among the Levites of the stock of the Priests and the other
common people? For another detestable corruption, the Massalians have
instituted by their missall Idolatries, to sacrifice and offer the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, in reiterating (by that means) the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ perfectly ended, and can not be done again: for that it was not after
the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedech, 1. Cor. 11.
an everlasting sacrificer, who has left no successor. Also the holy apostle
when he admonished the Corinthia^s reverently to celebrate ye supper of Jesus
Christ, did he command them to sacrifice? No, but to communicate and eat
together the body and blood of Jesus Christ. The beginning of the holy supper
was not to kill, offer, and ordeyne a sacrifice, to offer to God: But only to
eat and drink at the holy feast prepared for us by Jesus Christ the
everlasting sacrifice and everlasting sacrificer, which has reserved unto him
self only this eternal priesthode. And yet nevertheless has left his
holy institution a banquet ordained for us of bread and wine representing his
body and blood.

After the corruptions abouesayde, Satan the diligent Babilonicall buylder
employed al his forces and strengthes, to buyld an invincible fortress of
Idolatry: to the end to fight against and utterly throw down the kingdom of
Jesus Christ, when he did enterprise the buildyng of the Mass to be brought
in, in the place of the holy sacrament of the supper, as we will briefly and so
clearly declare, that the most hard hearted Pharisees (made old in their
ancient Idolatries) shall acknowledge by the verity of histories their
errors and abominable heresies.

Before the painting out of this Maze of error (whereinto the Massalians are
plunged) I have thought it necessary, briefly to discover the ancient
religion of the Romans, the reign of the occidental empire, and of the
emperors which have exercised both the temporal office, and the dignity of the
great bishops supertendents of ye religion and church of Romans All other (as
well as I) shall confess that the Roman religion all together for the most
part to have been instituted by Neuma Pompilius the second king of the
Romans, Titenile lib. 1 Decad. 1.
Funestral in his book of magistrates of Rome.
about 700 years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. Then were instituted
the bishops which afterward were brought to a certain number, unto four,
than the number was augmented to eight, and by Sylla to fyftene. In the
college of bishops there was one chief bishop, which was chosen by the
other less bishops of the same order and dignity, like as the little
bishops purple Cardinals have practiced the election of the great Romain
bishop, of their estate order and dignity. This Pompilian religion has been
so well observed by the Romans from the father to the son, that it has
been impossible to destroy and pluck up the same, but has continued to this
day, as every one may easly perceive by this little collectio^.

To confirm this point there is none that can be ignorant, which lusts to
read the Roman histories, that before the incarnation of Jesus Christ there
was not one King, Consul, Dictator, or Roman Emperor instructed in the law
of God. But all were Idolaters, and Infidels, following the religion of Neuma
Pompilius the coniurer. And that more is, after the incarnation of Jesus
Christ, for the space of 300 years or there abouts, there was no Emperor,
Eusebius. in his book of the church historye the years of Christ. 34. 68. 94. 112.
113. 167, 202, 238, 254, 257, 276, and 292.
nor Romain council which would change his religion to embrace the law of
Jesus Christ. But contrariwise they have labored with toothe and nail to
exercise all kind of cruelty against the church of Jesus Christ, as the
ecclesiastical histories do largely declare, painting out great persecutions
under the great Romain bishops, to wit, Claud. Tiber. Nero, Claud. Domitian
Nero, Fla. Domitian, Traian, Elie Hadrian, Antonian Phisopher, Septime Severe,
Iul. Maximus, Max. Quin. Traian, Dece, Licime, Valerian, Valere Aurelian and
Diocletian. Al which were emperors and governed the empire and romain religion
for 300 years after the incarnation of Jesus Christ, and in their moneys,
sepultures, momuments, tytles and autentique letters, did hold the name of
great bishops and high priests, as diligently is gathered in a book of the
antiquities of Rome, wherein be described the Images, moneys, and monumentes,
of the ancient Emperors of Rome, In the book entitled the discourse of the
religion of the ancient Romans by Wylliam de Choul. bay lie of Daulphine.
which were all called great bishops, by these tytles, Iul. Ces. Pontif. max.
Tiber. Nero Pontif. max. Claud. Nero. pontif. max. Vaspasianus Ces. pontif.
max. Traianus Impera. Pontif. max. Marc. Aurel. Antonn. August. Pontif.
Heliogabalus summus sacerdos Aug. Adrianus Imper. Pontif. max. Galerius
Maximinianus Pontif. max. Tit. Ces. Pontif. max. Commod. Impe. pontif. max.
Flauius Constantius Aug. Pontif. max. Which being than Emperous and great
bishops would suffer none other head in the religion and Romain church then
them selves, being always enemies of Jesus Christ. For when the Apostles did
preach Christ to be the sovereign priest, great and everlasting sacrificer
without any successor after the order of Melchisedech, the tyrauntes of Rome
and their Lieutenaunts, did take an occasion to condemn Jesus Christ, fearing
that the authority of the Emperors and great Roman bishops should be
deminished. With what furour were they enraged for the space of 300 years
against the Christians and Christ's religion, In the Catalogg of Emperors, in
the end of the history of Nicephors the year of Christ. 410.
to defend their ancient religion of Pompilius? what answer was given to
Theodose thmperour by the senate and senators of Rome, when it was put forth
unto them to chaung their religion, and to receive the religion of Jesus
Christ. They showed yt they had possessed their Pomlian religion more then 1000
years, and that all changing of religions were the destructions of common
welthes.

Wherefore consisting in their old Roman religion, they remained without
receiving of the law of Jesus Christ. By these histories it is easy to be
resolved that for the space of 400 years and more, the bishops of Rome (which
called themselves Christians) could never obtain of the Senate and Roman
Senators to receive the holy gospel, much less could they convert the
Roman Idolaters, causing them to forsake their inueterate Idolatry. For the
bishops of Rome were to much occupied in restoring the Iudaycall and Pagans
ceremonies for the destinction of meats, In the canon reveled by clement
bishop of rome 21, 22, 62, 95.
ordinance not to fast Sunday and Thursday, to set an order for table clothes,
veales, vessels of gold and silver, sersors and tapestrye, and other ornaments
of the aulters, which consumed with age, were ordained to be burned and the
ashes to be put into the founte. Other were merueylously occupied to restore
the Iudaycall ceremonies, of sweet bread, and trauayled their spirits greatly
to corrupt the true usage of the holy sacraments instituted of god, Alexander
the first of that name bishop of Rome in the year of Christ. 110.
by mingling of water with wine, bruwing of salt with the water to make it
purged and coniured to drive away devils. Other also did travel to institute
Corporasses of five linen to lay up the consecrated hosts, Xistus bishop of
Rome in the year of Christ. 121.
and to ordeyne also albes and other vestiments of ye priests for their
sacrifices of white color without spot. Siluester bishop of Rome
Some did torment their brains, to invent the feasts of dedication and
consecration, with coniuring with salt to drive away devils. Higinus bishop
of Rome in the year of christ. 140.
And some other to invent oils and creames to corrupt the holy sacrament of
baptism. Moreover (during the reygne of these tyrants, Emperors, Fabian
bishop of Rome in the year of christ 240.
and great bishops) the bishops of Rome desiring to make their names continue
for ever, did dream in their spirits to build temples, not unto the honor
of God, Pius bishop of Rome in the year of christ 144.
but in the name of their he and she saints canonized by them at their
pleasure. Other did occupye them selves to ordeyne that the consecrated bread
and wine falling upon the ground, should be left to the sacrificer, and the
rest remaining should be bourned with fire: and the ashes should be laid up
among the relics. Other did travail to set an order among chalises,
Zepherin bishop of Rome in the year of Christ. 200. Calixtus bishop of Rome in
the year of christ. 220. Eutich bishop of Rome in the year of christ 282.
whether they should be of glass or of wood. And by other were instituted
solemn ceremonies four times a year, to bring Christians to the bondage of
distinction of days. Some were occupied merueylouflye to ordeyne the offering
and consecration of fables, to celebrate funerals in purple garments after the
manner of the vestment called Trabea, the which the Idolators did use in
triumphs celebrated in the honor of their Gods. The red robes of Cardinals.


And the like purple garment is used of the Cardynalles to this day. Others
were occupied to invent a confirmation for young children, Siluester bishop of
Rome in the year of Christ 314.
and that the Bishops only should consecrate the cream: To honor also the
Bishop of Hostiense, by whose hands the Bishop of Rome must be consecrated,
with a cloak called Pallium. And to invent an infinite number of other
unnecessary ceremonies, contrary to the liberty of the ghospel given unto us
by Jesus Christ. How was it than possible that the first Bishops of Rome
should draw the princes and Senators Romans unto the law of the Gospel,
during 300 or 400 years after the incarnation of Jesus Christ, seeing they did
not labor but to corrupt the use of the holy sacraments, and to restore the
Judicial ceremonies, and Idolatries of the Heathen the ancient Romans?

But here might one object one Philip which some vau^t to have been converted
to holy baptism (the manners of whom were so wicked that they gave occation to
ye most credible authors, to describe him unworthy the name of a christian.
One might bring in Constantyn the great, Chronicle of John Baptist.
which caused the counsel of Nice to assemble: but his reside^ce was in Grecia
being called the emperor of the East. And yet would he never receive ye sign
of Baptism, Histo. tripart. lib. 3. cap. 12.
to be regenerate by the blood of Jesus Christ, until he was lxv. years old,
at what time he was baptized by a bishop of Nicomede Arian, named Eusebe, the
same Constantine being at point of death. Silver than the bishop of Rome,
must not crake that he converted this Emperor to the faith. For this same
Siluester would not assist the assemble of the counsel holden at Nice in the
year of Jesus Christ 327. How soever it be, it is convenient to have recourse
always to the verity of Histories, wherein is recited the answer of the
Senate and Senators of Rome, to the Emperor Theodoze, more then 60 years after
the death of the said Constantine the great: Which was, that they would not
receive the law of Jesus Christ, but observe their ancient law Pompilian, to
avoid the ruin of their common wealth, which might come by the chaungyng
of religion. Whereby may be well gathered, that than the law of god was not
received nor approved at Rome by the Senate and Senators.

It rests that presently we come nearer to the time following. After the
decease of Theodoze, the Roman Empire of the West began so to bow, that in
short time it was quyte put out by Wandeloys and Alayns, Paul. Emil. lib 1. the
year of christ. 412. 154.
which were the chief that sacked Rome, burnt the most part of it, and ravished
the proper daughter of the Emperor Theodore: whom they married to Ataulphe
king of the Goths. Blond lib. 2. Decad. 1.
A little while after succeeded the Hunnes. Then Attilia king of the Goths,
which usurped Italy.

About this time the Roman Empire of the Weste was spoiled of all Germany,
Acia, Sarmatia, Procop. lib. 3. of the war of the Wandales in the year of
christ 486.
and all the Provinces tributaries, unto Danube: Spaygne also, Aquitania,
Gascoygne, Bourgoyne, and all the Gauls did revolt from the romain tyrany. Then
succeeded ye Ostrogots with their king Valemir, Theodemer, Theodoricke and other
Heathen and Infidels. The year of christ. 550. 554
The Visigothes also, all usurpers successively of Italy. Afterward reigned
Totilas, which forced, robbed and burned Rome, Paul. Emil. lib 1. the year of
christ. 568.
and all Sicile. In the end the Lomberds conducted by their kings Alboin did
raygne, which usurped Italye. These barbarous nations, Idolators, and Infidels
did serve as whippes ordained of God to punish the Idolaters of Rome committed
by them, which had knowledge of the holy Gospel. And yet turned back from
the true worshipping of god: Violating and corrupting the holy sacraments by
the inventions of men: To punish also the infidelity and obstinatie of the
Emperors and Senators of Rome, which first of all caused their Lieutenaunts,
and officers appointed in Judea to crucify Christ and his holy Apostles, to
persecute the Christians, and always to resist the law of the Gospel, to
maintain their religion Pompilian.

Thus we may conclude, that during the space of 400 years, the Romain church
of Emperors and Senators has ever been contrary and enemies to the law of
Jesus Christ. Than afterward (the occidentall Empire being overthrown) Rome
and all Italye was ruled and governed 300 years or there about, by Kings,
Princes, and Dukes, Idolators and Infidels, namely by the Wandales, by the
Goths, by the Hunnes, by the Ostrogothes, by the Visigothes, and by the
Lumbards, in such sort, that during ye space of 700 years or there about,
after the incarnation of Jesus Christ, there was no Emperor, King, nor prince,
of Rome, which would embrace the law of Jesus Christ. The which gladly and
shortly I have declared, to the end that the reader think it not strange,
that I have here showed the sacrifice of the Mass, to have taken his beginning
of the ancient religion instituted by Neuma Pompilius, moore then 700 years
before the incarnation of Christ.

And so afterward also the same sacrifice has been continued by the
Idolatrous Romans inueterate and hardened so in their Pompilian religion, that
they would never put away the same.

But to the end that nothing in the Romayne histories be kept close which
might obscure the clearenes of the verity, during the tyranye and usurping of
the nations aforesaid, In the year of christ. 572.
in Italy was erected a little Lordship at Rauenna, which continued about 183
years, Plantin. Blond. Volatteran.
until it was ravished by a bishop, which invested him self and encroiched
into the chair of S. Peter by the means of a donation and dimission practiced
by Pepin in the year 758, in recompense of a tyranny exercised by Zachary
Grec. bishop of Rome, Paul. Emul. 2. Blond. lib. 10.
who spoiled the true inheritours of the crown of France, namely Chilperic, or
Childeric, whom he shut up in a Cloister, to make the kingdom to fall to the
said Pipin, the son of Charles Martell bastard. This donation of Pipin thus
given to the great Roman bishop, was the first original of the greatness of
the Popes of Rome, who do hold unto this day the Lordship of Rauenna (800
years being past) with a great number of towns a long the Sea Hadriatick,
Blond. lib. 1. Paul. Emul. 2.
committed unto them by Pepin contrary to the express commandments of
Constantin than raignynge Emperor of the East in Grecia.

Whiles this little lordship was continued at Rauenna, The year of christ. 588.
long time before the donation of Pepin, the bishop of that place seeing that
there were no more Emperors of Rome (which was governed and kept under by
barbarous people and Infidels) lift up his horns in such sort that he
preferred himself to be bishop of Rome, Sabellie.
and made himself the head of the Church, and also himself and his
successors bishops of Rauenna, so long as the Lorship has continued. This was
the first little Antichrist which would take upon him a tyranny in the church,
to follow the earthly tyranny of his Lordshippe.

Afterward there rose up another greater Antichrist in Constantinoble, In the
year of christ. 600. Blond. lib. 1.
named John bishop of that place: Who seeing the occidentall Empire of Rome
overthrown, Greg. lib. 4. of his epistles, cap. 26.
and the other of Constantinople highly exalted, he would also follow the
tyrrannye of the world, and stir up a spiritual rule in the church of
Jesus Christ. He caused himself to be declared (by a counsel holden at his
pleasure) bishop Ecumenique, the year of christ 604.
that is to say, general and head of the whole church. Plantin. Sabellie.
But soon after the great Bishops of Rome gave such order, that by treason the
Emperor Maurice in Constantinople was cruelly slain, he, his wife, and
family, by wicked Phocas: who to recompense this detestable murder committed
by the advice of the Church of Rome, always contrary to Jesus Christ, the
year of christ. 612.
he declared Boniface the third of that name the general head of the church
of God, taking upon him the authority of Jesus Christ the great and
everlasting high Priest, the only spouse and head of his church. Who can
better describe an Antichrist, than he that does enterprise a tyrranny in the
church of God, a poligamie in the church the spouse of Jesus Christ
attributynge to himself that power, Marc. 26.
which Jesus Christ has reserved to himself, to be perpetual with his
church, by the virtue of his holy spirit to conducte and govern the same?
May not he rightlye be called Antichriste which does enforce him self
directlye to go against the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, who commanded
his apostles (when he sent them to preach his word) that they should not
institute a Monarchy in the church, as the Princes, Kings, Math. 23. Luc. 11.
Marc. 2.
and tyrraunts of the earth? That none among them should enterprise to call
him self the head or greater then other: but all as brethren were humble
being assured to have one head, and one heavenly father, which will tarry
with them and assist them for ever, to inspire and conduct them to his holy
will. Is not he of good right Antichrist, which will have himself called the
successor of Jesus Christ in the great bishopric, and in the high priesthode
by him exercised? The which dignity he has reserved to himself, abiding a
high sovereign priest for evermore: who has left no successor in his
dignity as Aaron did and his successors in the dignities of the high priests
of ye Jews: But is after the order of Melchidech a king and high priest
without any successor in his dignity. Wherefore then (O Antichrists of Rome)
have you taken upon you the dignity of the highest bishops as the heads of
the church of God, and usurped also the authority of Jesus Christ, causing
your selves to be called most blessed and most reverend fathers and Popes,
having instituted a college of little purple bishops to chose the great
bishop, but only to the end to renew the ancient roman religion of Neuma
Pompilius, the first author of your pontifical dignities.

About the same time that Phocas the cruel murderer did erect an Antichrist
in the roman church, Mahomet was risen in the church of Arabia, instructed
by the Monk Sergius, about the year 620, for this apostate heretyke, seeing
the law of God altogether corrupted by the traditions of men, and the holy
Gospel contemned, sects and diverse heresies sowed, as well by the Jews,
Pharisees, Esseens, Saduces, Masbutheans, Gallileans, Seek the church histories.
Hemerobaptists, and Samaritans: as also by the Christians, Simoniaques,
Nicolaites, Cerinthiens, Memandriens, and Ebronites, Valentinians, Cardonians,
Marcionistes, Montanistes, Cataphryges, Tatians, Eueratites, Seuerians,
Artemonistes, Porpherians, Helchesaites, Nouatians, Sabellians, Chiliastes,
Paulianistes, Manicheans, Automousiastes, Arians, Eunonians, Macedonia^s,
Euuomiotheophroniens, Euuomidentichiens, Aetians, Donatistes, Luciferiens,
Patripassians or Theopathites, Photiniens, Marcellians, Paulosamosetans,
Apolinaristes, Iouinianistes, Pelagians, Acariens, Olimpiens Quaternitaries
Monothelites. And other heritikes having corrupted the true usage of the holy
Sacraments, ordained of god. Seeing also specially the Messalien sect to
prosper in their ceremonies, taken partly out of the Judicial laws, and partly
out of the heathen Idolatry he invented the great Alcoran decree. Wherein he set
many Chapters and articles called Azoares, which are as laws and rules of
the Machomette religion.

This preface and brief discourse of the romayne History, me thought necessary
to recite before I would begin to discribe the original of the sacryfice of
the Mass. Always to bring the reader to understand the veritye of the fact,
How the Empire of Rome has been governed until the decay thereof, about
the year of Christ four hundred and ten, and how the barbarous Idolatours
did usurp the same, for the space of three hundred years, how also the
Antichrists did rise, and in the end, the Empire of Rome was transferred to
the Almaynes, which keep it to this day, five hundred years being passed.

OF THE Mass.
TO begin this our little treatise of the Mass, first of all it is convenient
to interpret this term Mass, The original of the term of the Mass.
of the ancient Romans called Missa. Some have honored this Missal sacrifice
to have taken his beginning of the Hebrews, bringing in the place of Daniell
speaking of Maozin, Daniell. 11.
as if they would signify the Mass by Maozin. But this term is very
strange from Missa, or Mass. And there is other Hebrewe words which are more
nearer, to wit, Messa, which is as much to say as conculcation or treading
down, whereof mention is made in the history of the Kings of Israel. Another
term also is found, 4. Kings. 11. Missa.
very conformable unto this common term Mass, namely Messall, that is to
say, Ios. 19. Messall.
hell or grave. But I am well assured that the high priests of Rome will not
take the original of their sacrifice of the Mass from the Hebrews,
acknowledgynge their Mass and Messall to be a conculcation, grave, or hell.
Messal. Hell.
Further (to speak the truth) the Author of the roman religion Neuma
Pompilius never thought of ye Hebreus when he first instituted ye Mass. Much
less term this Missa or Mass can have his original of the Greeks, seeing
they have no sacrifice of that name, not withstandyng that some have made some
reason to bring in this term of Greek Myzein, that is to say in English, to
whysper, or hyde in secret. As if the Messalian sacrificers had received of
the ancient Greeks Idolatours, to keep secret the chief and principal
words of their Masses, to the end they should not be understand of
thassistance, but have observed to murmour, and blow between their teeth the
Canons, and other special words, which neither they understood them selves,
nor other, which beheld them. Nevertheless, neither the Hebrew terms nor
Greek vocables in no wise can be appropriated to the Missall sacrifice.
Wherefore it behooves to have recourse to the true original of the term
Missa or Mass taken of the ancient Latyns the Romans, Mass taken of the
ancient Latins Romans.
which were accustomed to use these terms, Missus, Missa, Missilis, and
Missio. As we say in English a messenger, a message, and missiues, for
letters sent. For when the ancient Idolaters Romans would give leave unto
the assistaunce at their Sacrifices celebrated to go home, they caused to be
pronounced in the end of the Sacrifice these words. Apud Graecos Sacerdos
functus misterio sic renunciabat: Laois aphesis qua^ populu^ missum faceret.
I, licet, Missa est. Depart it is permitted the assemblye has leave to retire
or depart. And in process of time, for that this song did note unto the
people a license to go home most agreeable and desired, as a song and term
most comfortable and pleasant, it has been kept, Apul. lib. 11. de asin. a^^
and the sacrifice honored with this term Mass or Missa. To confirm this
point, there is two thousand years paste, and the same terms be song yet
unto this present day, Ite Missa est, which does signify a leave given to
the company or assemblye to depart and go home.

In such sort that those which do haunte the temples or churches, as soon
as they do understand this pleasant song, Ite Missa est, a man may see them
ordinarelye to awake, and leap for joy, as being assured to have license to
go to dynner.

The Arabian Machomistes instructed of long time by the monk Sergius, as we
have declared, have this term of the Mass in great commendation, In the book
of the discriptio^ of Afric by Ihon Leon Affricain. Messa of the Turks.
with which vocable they have honored three towns or Cities called Messa
situate upon the mouth of the Ocean, upon the point which does make the
beginning of the mount Atlas.

Nere unto the same towns in the suburbs, there was a temple much re^e^ensed
by the Idolatrous Turks, for that they did believe that in Messa should be borne
the just bishop promised and prophesied by Machomet. They did believe also that
upon the coaste of the said place of Messa, Jonas was cast after he was
swalowed up of the Whale.

Messalamans. In the book of the great turks court by friar Antony Gueffrei
They have also this name Messalamains in as great honor as we have the name of
Christians. As if they would signify by this vocable Messalanian saved.

Moreover, the Mahomatists do honor also their priests with the name of Mass,
in the book above said. Messen. Messit.
calling them Messen, and their temples Messit or Meschit. Those then which are
enforced to bring to light the Anotomy or description of the Mass, the pieces,
the grounds, the patches, and encreasements, ought to describe it with great
reverence, having due respect to the ancient religion Pompilion and Alcoran
of Mahomet.

Now after that we have resolved the name of Mass, and of Missa, in the
Latyne tongue, Pontife. book 1. of commentaries.
to have taken her beginning of the ancient romain Idolatours, and not of the
Greeks or Hebrews. It behooves us to come to the garments of the Messalian
sacrificers. But in passing by we must not omit ye name Bishop, to have his
original also of the Romans as we have declared in our commentaries. Also
the name Papa or Pope had his beginning of the ancient Idolatours, who were
wont to call upon their God Jupiter calling him Papa Jupiter, specially the
Bithinians and Scithes. The which name Pope is taken of the Greek word Papus
that is to say great father. And also the very title written upon all the
requests presented unto the great Romayne Bishop, is most blessed father,
and to the less purple Bishops most reverend father, and to the little
Bishops reverend father. Holding all this word father or Papa, a great
father, which was wont to be a common name for all bishops. But afterward the
great roman bishops did reserve it for them selves only. There is also
another name reserved for the little bishops, called curates, which are
superintendentes in every little parish, 2having borrowed this name Curate of
the ancient Curions of Rome. If one will not deduce the etimologie or
signification of the same from the Greek word Cura, Cura. Curio, sacerdos,
Cure, qui in sua cura, id est in sua parrochia sacris praeerat. Tit Liu. lib. 1
Decad. 1.
that is shauing or polling, for that the ancient Curions and Sacrificers had
their pollings and head shaven after the form of the Babilonians, or of the
Herculians bishops, called for the same cause Stephanophores, as bearing a
crown upon their heads. Wherefore me thinks that all the members of the
missall sacrifice had their beginning of the Pompilion religion, and that one
should do wrong unto the ancient romain Idolators, Tit. Liu. Fenest. Pompo.
Let.
if he should take from the^ the original of the names of Mass, of bishop, and
of curate, as it is justified and evident by ye ancient romain histories.
Touching the vestiments of the Mass sacrificers Neuma ordained yt it should be
white, called by ye Latin word Alba an aulbe. The which name aulbe has
continued to this day for the vestiment of the priest celebrating Mass. Aulbe.
Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Super tunica^ aenea^ pectori tegumen. Tit. lib.
Deca. 1.
Above the aulbe was also ordained for the sacrificer to wear a little Iacket
painted in colors. And above that an ornament for the breast of brass or
copper, afterward changed into gold or silver, which the Massalians called a
Cheasuble, Chasuble.
they used also a veil to cover their head in sacrificing called an ammas
first instituted by Eneas. Virgil. lib. Ene. 3. purpur^o velare comas adoper
tus amictu, fit capite ante aras phrigio velamus amictu.
These be the principal vestiments instituted by Numa, more then 700 years
before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. True it is that afterward many
enrichementes of the Jews were added thereto, as the Stole, the Ephod, the
Zone, or Gyrdle, the meter or Thear, and certain other ornaments, the
goodlyer to garnyshe the great whore of Babylon.

But the Massalians willing to disguyse the original of their vestements of
the mass have imagined the aulbe to figure the conversation of Jesus christ in
his flesh, Titelman in ^racta. de ex^osi. myniste. ^issae. and Ga^e Biel. in
lib. ^e exposi. ^issae.
or the purity of his body incarnate in the womb of the virgyn. Other do
interpret the white color to sygnifye chastity and continence. Others
playing and mocking the passion of Jesus christ do sophisticallye sygnifye by
the aulbe, the white garment presented by Herod unto christ when he was sent
back (as a fool) to Pilate. Philo the Jew a more excellent philosopher, in
his treatise of dreams, does subtelly say the aulbe does sygnifye the
certentie of the most clear light of god, which he calls ens: the linen
also whereof the aulbe is made, they do interpret the subteltie of the
scriptures. And as touching the ammas invented by Eneas, they disguyse it to be
the veil wherewith christ was covered when the Iues in the house of caiphas did
mock him in buffeting him. Titelman one of the most subtel massalians does
sophistically say by the ammas to be sygnifyed the divinity of christ hid
under the humanity. Some other also do co^fes the ammas to be come in, in
place of the Ephod of the Jews. The zone, the manipule and the stole, which
be three kinds, they figure the three cords wherewith christ was bond and led
before the priests, and before the lieutenaunts of the Romans in Iewrye.
Biel another subtell massalian does interpret by zone the rods wherewith
christ was whipped, by the stole laid a cross, to sygnifye the gibber or
gallows that christ carried upon his shulders. The manipule also carried upon
the left arm to figure the bond of love wherewith christ was holden. Another
mummerie by the zone wherewith the aulbe is trussed to sygnifye the bond of
the charity of god. The stole put upon the ammas in the neck of the
massalian in form of the cross to figure the obedience of Jesus christ unto
the death of the cross. The manipule carried upon the left hand to figure
eternal felicity of Jesus christ. Another sophistry by the ammas to figure
faith, by the stole the humility of obedience, by the manipule, the watch and
hartye devotion of the massyng sacrificer. Titelman does surmyse otherwise of
the manipule on the left hand, to be fygured the force and battle of christ
against all powers visible and invisible, as a bockler against all temptations:
and the hemmes of the manipule to figure a fynall perseueraunce. He does
sophist also by the left hand to be understand the humain infirmity of
christ, the which bound with the manipule, does figure christ holden as it
were overcome by the divinity. Brunus another Massalian doctor does imagine by
the manipule the care of the massyng priest to chase away evil affections, or
otherwise to figure the cord wherwyth Christ was bound by the Jews: by the
Stoel, to be figured the yocke of the Lord, the which the Massalian ought to
have garnished with arms of righteousness on the left side and on the right.
The other painted ornament first instituted by Neuma the magician they have
disguysed it with the name of planet as a wavering vestment, others wise called
a cape or a chasuble, which they do sophist to represent the purple to be
presented unto christ in the judgment hal of Pilate, to mock him, calling him
king of the Jews. Another sophistry by such a garment to be figured the nature
of christ, where the deitye was hid. Philo the Iue platonising, does interpret
by this vestment decked with diverse colors, to be figured the stars and
heavenly signs. Then the Massilia^ sacrificer thus rigged with his aulbe,
Ammas, his zone, manipule stars, and with his chasuble or cape of diverse
colors, must stretch out his arms, to play two personags at one, representing
by his chasuble or cape (whereof the part before is less then that behind) the
first church from Abel to christ. And by the part behind more large and also
enriched with the sign of the cross to figure the christian people. This
chasuble must accord with the Ammas which was before upon the bed, to
signify the coniu^ction of christ and his church. The aulbe also must be
agreeable to the chasuble to signify christ to be applied unto our infirmites.
Beside the vestments above said, Philo the Iue does add the mitre to figure
the riall diadem of the massalians which ought to have their heddes anointed
with cream, Philo in lib. de profug.
or with holy oil to signifye the princelines of the priests. The which
ornament of the mytte is now reserved for the great sacryfycers only.

Yt restith to descend to the description of the parts of the Mass, the
original whereof particularly we desire according to the truth. First to the
masses called high celebrated on Sondaies. The Massalian sacryfycers, have
taken of the religion Pompilian to conjure a clensyng water called hollywater,
Apul. lib. 11. of the golden Ass. Proclus in li. de sacrifi. and Gag. Proel.
Platoni ca^u.
consecrated to sprinkle the assystauntes at the sacrifice. The comuration and
enchaunting instituted by Neuma was of sea or salt water, for this cause says
he, that the salt was participant of a fyery nature, or of ^^er very apt to
puryfye.

Eius aquae aspersione, peccata, presertim periuria, mendatiaque dilui
credebant.

Blond. lib. de Romans trium. Ovid lib.

Fast 3. in the law of the discourse the religion by Choul. i. Holy water
stocks of two sorts.

Diis superis sacra facturus corporis ablutione purgabatur: cum vero inferis
litandum erat sola aspersio sufficiebat.

Blond. lib. 2. de. Ro^. trium Macro. lib. 3. Satu. cap. 1. In Delii Apolonis
templo praecipua erat equa sacrificantium vsui accommoda quam ad alios vsus
hausisse magni criminis instar erat. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4 cap. 17.

Platine Si cinis vitula aspersus populum iudaerum mundebat, multo magis aqua
sale conspersa populum sancti ficat and insidias diaboli auertit ca. aquam de
co^secrat. distinct. 1.

Law of god corrupted.


For this cause the aunciaunt Romain Idolatours did sprynckle with this salt
water coniured (as with Mercury water) purging and cleansyng the faults of the
people, specially of perjured and liars. To conserve this water hallowed and
coniured, they had two sorts of holy water vessels. The one great fixed and
made fast at the entry of their temples, where they did worship their
Images: to the end to sprynckle with the same salted water those which did
enter into the said temples. The other holy water vessel was cariable, to
transporte of the same water through their temples or houses: to the end to
water them for their cleansings and purifyings. They which ought to celebrate
the Mass, if it were to the inferior gods, it was sufficient that the
sacrificing priest did sprynckle him self with the same purging water. But if
the sacrificer did celebrate Mass to the superior gods, he must bathe his
whole body, and wash all his members. It was also defended to apply this
purging water to any other use, save for clensings and purginges. Alexander the
first of that name: next successor of the appostles of Jesus christ. And one
of the first corruptours of the holy sacraments ordained of god, following the
same institution of Pompilius continued this Idolatry of coniuring and
consecrating of holy water, to chase away diuills. But the better to color
this Pompilian witchcraft he invented this comparison. If it be so (says
Alexander) that the ashes of a redd cow offered up in sacrifice mingled with
water of the fountain puryfied the people of the Iues. By much greater reason
the water coniured with salt should purify christians and chase away
diuills. Is not this a breakinge and corrupting of the holy law of god, to
accord with the Romans taught in the ancient doctrine and religion of Neuma
Pompilius the coniurer. If Alexander had not been so much given to the use of
salt, instituted by the ancient Idolatours for their clensing water, he would
rather have followed the judicial ceremony, Number. 19.
and have ordained ashes to consecrate the purgynge water. And where he would
think to vyser his doing by the miracle of Elizeus which did puryfie the water
with salt. 4. Kings. 2.
Moses also did the like with the wood showed unto him, when the people of
Israel were in such necessity of sweet water to drink. Exodus 15.
But by these miracles it is not recited that Elizeus nor Moises had instituted
a purgynge water to puryfye the people of the Jews. And it shall not be found,
that there was at any time amongs the judicial ceremonies any other purging
water, but with the ashes of the beast offered up for burnt sacrifyce. Number. 19.
Wherefore Alexander and his like must freelye acknowledge the invention of
their Salt and coniured water for the purginge of sins, to have taken his
original of Neuma Pompilius, more then. 700. years before the incarnation of
Jesus Christ.

This purging water was so well observed of the Romayne Idolatours, Histo.
tripart. lib. 6. cap. 35.
that more than. 360. years after the incarnation of Jesus Christ, it is
recited how the Emperor Valentinian entryng in-into the temple of the
goddess fortune, Valentinian the emperor against holy water sprinkeled.
a sacrifycer watchyng the said Temple did sprinkle him with this blessed
purging salted water, which he had taken out of the holly water stock being
at the entrance of the said temple, wherwyth the Emperor being chauffed
smote the Pryest holdyng the holly water stycke, saying he was rather defiled
then puryfyed. By these true Histories the Massalians may vaunt themselves, the
first part of their Mass sacrifice to be very ancient. And that their
holywater stocks, Holy water very ancient.
and salted clensing and purging water, are of the ancient doctrine of Neuma
pompilius and not of the Evangelical doctrine of Jesus Christ, which they
call new doctrine, and new Testament, as diffring from the ancient Ceremonies
of the Jews and Panyms Idolatours. But again I cannot meruell enough,
wherefore Alexander did enterprise the restoring of the Pompilion Idolatrye,
Against salt holy water of Alexander pope of rome
seeing he had a mean to reinstitute the ceremonial water after the fashion of
the Iues. And this doing to follow rather the law of god then Neuma Pompilius,
for he had easy means to recover ashes to make a purging water after the
manner of the Iues: namely of holy and precious ashes, to say of the ashes kept
in their shrienes, and coming of courtaines Towells and vessels consecrated,
Ca. Omnes de consecrat. destinct. 4. and ca. Altaria. and ca. Vestimenta.
destinct. 1.
which the bishop Cleament predecessor of Alexander had forbidden to be
applied to any profane use. But being worn with oldnes, to be burned in the
fire. And the ashes to be put into the Fount. Were not these holy ashes, to
have moved Alexander to restoore the ashye and purginge water after the manner
of the Iues, if he had not been so denty of salt and found a better taste, to
continue the ancient Romain religion? Other ashes might have been found by the
successors of Alexander: To wit, Ca. Altaria de consecrat. distinct.
of the round hosts unleavened and consecrated, which the great bishop Higinus
ordained to be burned (which falling upon the earth might not be left for the
massing sacrificer) and the ashes of the same hosts to be put into the
shrines. Other ashes also might have been gotten of the rattes, myce, and other
beasts devouring the said consecrated hosts, and ordained to be burned, In
lib. cantel. Miss.
and the ashes to be put into the shrynes.

Seeing then that Alexander would not follow the ceremonial law of God, to
ordeyne a water blessed, salted, consecrated and coniured: Why did he not at
the least put his salt in the host of the Massalian sacrificer, Leuit. 2.^^
which they say is offered to God as a health sacrifice? In doing whereof he
should have followed the ceremony of Moses, by the which he commanded yt
salt should be offered in all sacrifices, and therwt to sprinckle the sacrifice
offered for health. But if Alexander and his successors would have followed
the law of God, they would have invented nothing of their own brains, they
would never have made them selves so renowned to have left the memory of
their institutions. The occation of inuenting new idolatries.
For this occasion they would in nothing follow the law of God, but
contrariwise have forbidden to put salt into the round hosts consecrated to
celebrate the missall sacrifices. They have forbidden also to put ashes into
their holy water, to the end that in all their institutions, men should know,
that they borow nothing of the law of God, nor of ye law of Moses, much less
of the euangelical law of Jesus christ, but only have taken thought to bring in
inventions, notwithstanding that they were invented by thauncient Painims and
Romain Idolators 700 years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. To finishe
this first part of the Mass: it had been more expedient (O Massalians) that
in place of your sacrifices, and coniured salt water, wherewith you sprinkle
the people to have clearly declared the holy gospel, causing the people to
understand, The true holy water of al christians.
that the purifying and washing of their sins, did hang only on the blood
of Jesus Christ, who is strong enough to drive away diuelles, to bring us from
hell, Hebre. 9.
to preserve us from death everlasting, and to deface in us all spots of
sin, without using of adiuration and conjuring with salt, to drive away
Diuelles, according to the Witchecrafte of Pompilius, and the heresy of the
Samaritains, Epipha. lib 1. tom. 1. sec. 9 and 17. conte. haec.
which did believe to be purified by washyng themselves every day with holy
water.

After the Asperges song, 2. part of the mass.
and the holy coniured water sprinkeled upon all the aulters, Images, and
assistaunce at the missall sacrifice, Procession.
followed the Procession, which some would attribute to Agapet Bishop of
Rome. Platine
But it was instituted moore than a thousand years before him: Tit. Liuius in
his decades.
which the ancient Romayne Idolatours did call Supplication.

Supplicationes quas nos processiones vocamus, fiebant circa delubra fanaque
and puluiuaria in quibus honos dijs dabatur, praecedentibus pueris ingenuis ac
sacerdotibus coronatis ac lauream tenentibus manu voce modulata tanentibus
carmen subsequente maximo pontifice vel curione: deinde sequentibus patriciis
ac senatorib. cu^ coniugibus et liberis pleru^que coronatis. Apul. lib. 11. de
asin. aur. Blond. lib. 2. de Ro^. trium. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 27. in the
book of the discourse of the ancient religion of the Romans. Apul. lib. 11.
of the golden Ass. Alex. ab Alex. lib 50. cha. 27.
The manner instituted by Neuma to go in procession, to appeace the wrath of
their gods, or to obtain peace, or to pray to god for the fruits of the
earth, the order was in this sort. First before the procession went young
children, then the priests cled in white surplusses, singing hymns, praises,
and songs, to the honor of their gods. After marched the high Bishop or
Curate, than the ancient Senators of Rome, with their wives and children, and
some time the common people did assist the same also. In this procession was
carried commonly the pagent or shryne of the God Jupiter, or Anubis, by some of
the priests cledde in white surplices, (their heads being shaven) and having a
crown upon their heads. This crown was in such reputation, that the
Emperor Commodus Antonius himself the high bishop caused his head to be
shaven and shorn round, expressly to bear the Pagent of the god Anubis. Before
the Pagent or shryne went a torche bearer carrying a taper light in his hand.
When the procession did pass through the streates, there were restyng places
prepared, to serve for stations for the priests pagenporters to breath
themselves. During the procession, the temples were opened, the aulters and
Images perfumed with encense, and the relics of the gods visited. In the
days appointed for procession, it was kept holy, the shoppes being shut, the
Halles of justice closed and the prisoners vnchayned. Who could better paynt
forth the order of the processions observed unto this day by the massalians,
instructed from the father to the son by the religion of Pompilius? Herodote
in his histories. Ierem. in epi. ad Iudeos in Babilonem abducendos Ne verticem
deraditote neue barbam vellitote.
What other anthour can there be alleged for the ceremonies observed in the
processions but Neuma Pompilius? If the massalians will not run further for
their shaven crowned heads their vestiments, and white surplyces, which the
ancient Idolatrous Egiptians were accustomed to use or to the priests the
goddess Isis, or to the Babilonians sacrificers, which had their their heads
and beards shaven. For as touching the law of god the contrary was observed,
Liuit. 19. nec in gyrum ac rotundu^ attonde bitis comam vestram nec radetis
barbam Ezech. 44.
and the priests were forbidden to clippe round their heads and hears, and
that they should not have shaven beards. And as for the law of the gospel,
there is no like ceremony commanded by Jesus Christ nor by thapostles. They
must then take their course unto thauncient religion of Pompilius. Banner of
procession.
Moreover in the procession there is added a cross and a banner. This banner
was called by the ancient Romain Idolators Labarum, which was a sign reputed
holy and reucrend, as well by the dictators and emperors, as by the soldiers
going on Warfare. Ex libris Messalae ad octanianum Augustum.
In this banner, first Antenor caused this Italian word Truye or Troy (after
ye name of Troia) to be painted, which sigfinieth in English a Sow. The which
banner Antenor vowed and dedicated to the temple of Juno queen of the heavens,
for that, Apul. lib. 11. de asin. aur.
that the Sow was the sacrifice consecrated unto the same goddess. Afterward
the ancient Romans caused to be painted in their banner Mercuries mace. in
the book of the discourse of the ancient religion of the Romans.
In the which was painted the portrature of two Dragons or Serpents
enterlased. Than after was painted an Egle for the arms of the Emperor of
Rome. But Constantine the great, Emperor in Grecia, caused to be graven a
figure in Greek letters of an interlaced with an r, and at the two sides a and
o in this sign Chi Rho and Alpha and Omega meaning to signify this word
(...), Christ. This banner was carried upon a pole of Wood in cross wise,
the banner being four square after the fashion of an ensygne of crimsyn or
violet Say, the bourders enriched with fringe of gold or of silver and precious
stones. After this manner have our Massalians enriched their Pompilious
processions, in ye which were carried banners as they should go to war.

But in place of painting there the name of Jesus Christ they have painted the
Images and liknesses of diverse gods and godesses he saints and she saints
patrons of every parish. This in su^me is the beginning of the Missall
procession, for the second part of the Mass. Was there ever so great Idolatry
emongs the Isralites, when they would celebrate their feasts of sweat bread,
to eat the paschall lamb a figure of the holy sacrament of of the supper,
which ye massalians have disguised by their sacrifices of ye Mass? did they
ever cause to be carried in procession the flesh and blood of the unspotted
lamb? Did they ever lay it up in shriene to be carried in procession throughte
the streates? The brazen serpent (notwythstandinge they abused it) did they
ever cause it to be borne in a shryne upon the shulders of the priests which
had their heads and beards shaven. In the year of Christ. 1264.
As the great bishop Vrbain did ordain to carry in procession the consecrated
host by the massalians. And instituted a solemn feast a thursday every year,
to the end to turn the use of the sacrament into a more detestable idolatry,
then al his predecessors had done before him? After the sprinkling or holy
water, and the procession done Neuma ordained that the Massing sacrificer to
celebrate the sacrifice, 3. part of the mass, are the altar, taper and light.
being clothed with his aulbe, and chasuble or tunicle painted, the head crowned,
and beard shaven should approach to the alter, to the end to make all things
ready for the sacrifice furnished with a Lamp or Taper light which commonly
was of Tede or pinapole tree. Ovid. lib. 4 de fast. Apul. lib. 11. de asin.
aur. Plutar in Neuma.
For without an alter and fire no sacrifice could be celebrated. He ordained
also that the massing priest should turn himself to the alter toward ye East.
Porphier the heretic did not only continue this Pompilius witchrast but also
did ordain the porches and thimmages to be turned toward the East, to the end
ye those that entered into ye temples in bowing themselves before them should
address their prayers toward the East, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17
like as ye Perlians do worship the sun in the east. Be not these
institutions Massalians and Pompilions contrary to the ancient ceremonial
law of the Jews, in the which it was forbidden to address prayers toward
the East, for a difference from the ancient Idolators.

Acknowledge then (O Massalians) that the erection of your aulters toward the
East, Exodus 20. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 5. Esaias. 40.
your lamps and tapers light, your pictures and Images reuerensed in your
missall sacrifices to have taken their beginning of the ancient Romain
religion appointed by you from one to another. For the pictures and images
wherewith your aulters be decked and adorned to celebrate your missall
sacrifices, can not take their original of the law of God, yt which does not
forbid only the sufferynge of any Images in the churches, but also to make
them, and reverence them. Unto whom can God be made like? What Image, picture,
or what portrature can be invented for him? Nevertheless, by a most
detestable and abominable herisie, Abominable idolatry
you (O Massalians) have caused the Image and likeness of the Trinity one God
and three persons to be prynted in your round hoostes which you cause to be
worshipped.

Nevertheless the two doctors Massalians Titelman and Biell interpret the
altar otherwise, when the massyng priest does approach laden with his chalise
of gold to figure Christ carrying the cross unto the mountain of Caluery,
then the priest kyssyng the altar to figure the marriage and weddyng sing of
christ with his church. The right hand of the altar to figure the people of
the Jews, and the left hand the people of the Gentiles. Durand. lib. rubr. de
m^tat.
For this cause Durand a subtel massalian has written, that the missall
memory ought to begin at the right hand of the altar, and on the same
part to end. And yet notwithstanding the principal aperies are celebrated at
the left hand of the altar. Touchi^g the fire and lyghted taper, they figure
christ: as being the fire that consumes the rust of our sins, or otherwise
the fire of charity compassing about the christian people, and the bournyng
taper to sygnifie the light of faith, the joys to come, and the incarnation of
christ.

Be not these detestable sophistries, the which Neuma the Sorcerer never
thought of, when he instituted the altar, the fire, and the burning taper to
sacrifice.

4. part of the Mass.
To continue the order of the missall sacrifice, the Massalian priest approaching
to the altar, the taper burning and cled and adorned with his aulbe and
chasuble tourning his face toward the East, beholding the Images gilt and
carved, before all things must say his Confiteor and confess him self,
Confiteor.
in acknowledging his offenses, Rem diuina^ facturus ad suam leuandam culpam se
inprimis rerum dicere debebat and noxae penitere ac fateri admissum, vultu^que
submittere. Alex. ab Alex, lib. 4. cap. 17 Blond. lib. 1. de Ro^. trium.
and ask pardon of the gods and goddesses, of the he saints and she saints,
requiring just and reasonable things. As Pythagoras does say in his golden
verses, and Orpheus in his hymns, for Neuma the Sorcerer esteemed the
conscience of the Priest massalian to be well purged by his confession. And
that without Confiteor the sacrifice could not be well celebrated.

Behold than, neither Damaze nor Pontiam Bishops of Rome, can not give the
glory to themselves that they first instituted the Confiteor, For the
Massalian sacrificer: for more than a thousand years before them, it was
forged by the ancient Romain Idolaters. And yet is continued to this present
day, that the priests celebratinge their missall sacrifice shall pronounce or
murmour a Confiteor, in a language neither understand of them, nor of the
assistaunts, addressing their prayers and requests unto the gods and
goddesses, to the he saints and she saints, in place of reuerensing,
honoring, praying, and worshipping the true, only and almightye God, creator
of all goodness.

Nevertheless, the Alcoran of Titelman does interpret the Confiteor of the
Massalian to signifye the confession of christ for the sins of the people.
Cap. 9.


After the Confiteor murmured to observe the religion and ceremonies of
Pompilius, 5. part of the mass.
the massyng priest ought to toss and retosse, turn and return, Turnings
and beckings.
along the altar: Liftyng up his hands, than letting them down? Hae sunt
ver^igines in sa^tis a Numa ^nstitutae dex ^eram ad os^ulum far (...) se in
orbe^ ^ircumagere. ^lond. lib. ^le Ro^. trium. Macro. in Sa^urnali.
with prayers and meditations toward the East. For Neuma the sorcerer, had an
opinion of great holiness to be in these tournynges bowings and conuersions of
the priests body. This is the occation (as a man may conjecture) of the adding
to of this pleasant song at the entrance of the Mass, when the sacrifycer
begins to make his noddes, and tournes, I will enter (says he) unto the
Alter of god which makes my youth to rejoice. The entrau^ce of the mass.
Has he not just cause of rejoicing seeing the Table cloth laid, the Table
furnished, the bancket prepared the Music of orgaines, and other instruments
sonding, the odors and encensing, the cup full of wine, the collacion ready,
the pot and offering to fill his purse? Be not al these means to rejoice the
youth of the sacrificer, entringe unto the alter, to mass, turn, and dance
after the manner prescribed unto him by ye Magician Numa Pompilius? Plin. lib.
28.
And not only the Romans, but also the other Idolatours in celebratynge
their sacrifyces were wont to turn, and return, lifting up the right hand
unto their mouth then tournyng all their body, the which turnynges and noddings
were accounted holy.

Titelman in his alcoran does resite that the massing sacrificer in making his
trauersinge a long the altar, does make.7. courtesies or salutations unto the
assystaunce in his sacrifice. To the end to chase away the.7. deadly sins by
the seuenfold grace of the holy ghost. but in making his.7, courtesies in his
Mass dance, he ought to turn himself toward the assistaunce (except before
the preface, and kissing the paxe) what time he is occupied in the breaking of
the round host, to transubstanciat him into an accidence without a substance.

These beckynges bowynges, 6. part of the mass. Organes.
tournynges, and towynges fynished by the Massalian sacryfycer, Numa ordained
the sound of Orgaynes, flutes, and Vyolles, to sing hymns, praises, and
songs, to the honor of their gods in the name of whom, the Myssall
sacryfyce was celebrated.

This part of the Mass has been enryched with diverse songs, by diverse
bishops of Rome. Some as Flaman and Diodore did institute Anthemes
Thelesphore, Antiphones.
Collectes.
yt Collects: Leon or Gelase the Graduels, Graduels.
Gregory or Gelase, the Traictes, Sequences.
Gothgere abbot of Sandall, the Sequenses. Which are diverse songs of music
serving to adorn and enriche the missall sacrifice. But if the commentaries of
the ancient Romans bishops instituted by Neuma were discovered, Hymnorum
plures species erant, hypingos Dianae, Apollini pean and prosoedia Dionisio
dithiranibus, Cereri iulus: Veneri erotichus: praeter quos fuere prosoedion,
hyporchema, and stafimon. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
much greater deuersitie, of songs ballets hymns, odes and cantiles, should be
found dedicated and consecrated to diverse gods and goddesses. even like as the
diversity of diverse songs of music has increased according to the
diversity of diverse Missall sacrifices ordained to diverse gods and goddesses
he saints and she saints. For like as the ancient Idolatours did celebrate
their sacrifices to diverse gods and goddesses. So the Massalians continued the
celebration of their Masses to diverse he and she saints, One in the name of
our lady, another in the name of Saint Sebestian, Diverse masses
other of the holy ghost and other of Requiem, Dry masses.
in so much yt they made a difference betewene dry Masses and other common
Masses, wherein they made the soppe stieped in wine. In such sort that thereof
came an infinite number of Missal sacrifices unto diverse he and she saints.
Unto the which were song diverse songs and sequences. Be not these horrible
and abominable corruptions of the holy sacrament of the supper of Jesus
Christ, thereof having made an Idolatry after the fashion of the ancient
sacrifices instituted by the coniurer Neuma? Wherefore the Bishop Vitalian
ought not to glorify him self that he enriched the sacrifice of the Mass
with the sound of Organs. For more then 1200 years before him this institution
was published by the Magician Neuma.

But to stuff this babilonicall sacrifyce, the massalian Alcoranists have
interpreted the diversity of their musical songs, by a pythagoricall,
philosophy. Touching the collectes, that is to say, the patched prayers they
have commanded, that they shall be song in number odd, to wit, 3, 5, or.7.
the.3. to figure the trinite the.5. to represent the five wounds of christ,
the.7. to figure the.7. words of christ upon the cross, or else the.7.
gifts of the holy ghost. Moreover for a more subtle pithagoricall divinity,
the Massesayer ought not to pass the number of.7. by the ordinance of pope
Innocent the third of that name: the sophist Biel in his alcoran of the
interpretation of the Mass, does add that the number of the collects should be
equal to the prayers of the secrets, that is to say prayers of the Massemonger
murmured in secret to the end they be not contempned of the people. After the
collects is the song of the graduell more sharp and grave a figure of the
confession of the publicans having heard the preaching of John baptist.
Notwythstandyng the song of the graduell was not song in the Missall sacrifices
from Easter unto the feast of penticost, to figure the blessed estate of the
world to come.

Further beside the sound of orgaynes, 7. part of the mass.
and songs of Music the ancient Romans Idolatours were wont to use in
their sacrifices parfume of encens which they caused to be keepte in a little
vessel called Acerra a censour. Perfume of encence.
In this little Frankensens coffer were put the odours which the sacerficer did
take to encence the Altar, the Images, Blond. lib. 1. de Ro^. trium. Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. iliacis temporibus veteres non thu^e, sed cedri, and
citri fumo deos adolebant. Platine
the hoostes or sacrifices specially in the Masses celebrated unto the god
Ianus, and unto the goddess Vesta, which took pleasure in encence and wine
offered unto them. For in the time of the Trojans, in stead of encence, cedre
and Citron were used for parfume. It was not then Leo bishop of Rome that first
instituted the use of encence and encensing in the Missall sacrifice. For more
then.700. years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ ye ancient Romain
Idolatours did use encence in their sacrifices. Tit. Liui. lib. 3 Decades. 3.
And also the Romans did retayn the word in latin. Thus, which signifies
encence, of the ancient word Thyo, that is to say I sacrifice, because the
Idolatours did use in all their sacrifices encence, Tit. Liui. lib. 9. Decad. 3.
they had also a portable encensor to encence wythall. Nevertheless, some
write that the ancient Roman Idolators celebrating their sacrifices unto the
Goddess Ceres used the gum of Pyne called Tede, Ovid. de fast. lib. 3.
instead of encence, for which cause Ceres was called of the Poets Tedifere.

By the Alcoram of Titelman, the encense is interpreted the prayer of the
Massalian, for that it does mount up into heaven in a savor of sweetness,
even as the smoke of encence does rise up on heyght. He does sophist also with
Biel his companion, the censour to figure the grace of the holy ghost. These
subtell Alcoranists allege the place of Tobie, who chased away the devil by
the perfume of the broyled liver. The same Biel interprets otherwise, the
encense to figure Mary Magdalenes annoynting of christ, and because christ was
twyse anointed, the encense must be also offered twyse in the missall
sacrifice.

8. part of the mass. Plin. lib. 1. cap. 3. Offertorie.
For another part of the missall sacrifice celebrated by the ancient
Idolators, was the Offertorie, of the first fruictes offered, to the honor of
the gods in the name of whom the sacrifice was celebrated. This Offertorie was
for the massinge sacrificer, which he might freely carye into his own house,
for the nourishement of him self and his family: notwithstanding there were
other offeryngs distributed to those that were needful. After by ye covetousness
of ye Massalians, this usage was changed into an offertorie or offering of
silver or gold to enriche the coffer, which some would have attributed to Leo
bishop of Rome, Platine
notwithstanding that the Offertorie was practiced moore then a thousand
years before him. And to the end to justify this by the Roman histories:
When Neuma had instituted the Ministers of the religion, as Bishops, Augures,
Sauliens, Feciaux, Curions and others, Blond. lib 2. de Ro^. trium.
he ordained also the means how to nourish and entertayne them, he commanded
to make of the common revenues foundations, for the nourishment and maintenance
of the religions Vestales. Folowinge his example many particular persons did
the like. Sacerdotioru^ sieve beneficiorum duo erant genera, vnum quoru^
collatio ad rep. aut principem aut ad pontificum collegium spectabat: Alterum
quoru^ collatio ad aliquam familiam eiusque successores pertinebat, quae
beneficia vitis patronatus censebantur. Blond. lib. 2. de Ro^ trium. A dispense
for many benefices. Tit. Liuiuius lib. 30. The founding of benefices. Vacations
and setting over Offertorie. Tertia sacerdotioru^ opulenta, a solutionibus
inueniebat, quas inferiores superioribus pontificibus impendebant quale apud
nos est cum pontifici romano fructus primos antistites and his minores
sacerdotes ad obtinuenda beneficia pecuniam dissoluunt. Biond. lib. 2. de Ro^.
trium. Cicero in oratione pro domo sua ad pontifices Blond. lib. 3. de Ro^.
trium.
So that benefices became rich by foundations. The same benefices were of two
sorts. The one at the presentation and bestowing of the prince, or of the
common wealth or of the college of bishops. The other were at the presentation
of some particular patrons of the said benefices, by whom they were founded
and endowed with great riches. Of the which benefices the great bishops of
Rome have usurped authority to give dispensation to have two at once, even as
it is recited in the history of Liuie, of Fabius Maximus, who had by dispense
two benefices than when he was created bishop, more then two hundred years
before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. This was then first reuenewe of the
Massalian sacrificers to have benefices rychely founded. The second reuenewe
was the Offertorie, or offering, the Offertory and oblations. The third
reuenewe was the vocations and the first fruicts, which the Idolatrous Roman
Bishops were accustomed to take, for the vacation of the benefices which
they gave, sold, or dispensed with.

The fourth reuenewe was deaths, annualls, legacies, and bequestes given, to
pray unto their gods for the souls of the departed. The which is verified
this day by the monuments and tombs of the ancient Idolatours.

The first reuenew was amerciaments, condemnations and confications levied by
the bishops of Rome: as the place and house of Cicero (when he was banished)
were co^fiscate to the college of the priests, and dedicated specially to the
sacrifices celebrated in ye temple consecrated to the goddess Liberty.
Passing by I thought good to recite this sum of thauncient romain
sacrificers, to the end that unto all it may be known, that all the abuses
and Idolatries, succeeded in the church of Jesus Christ are not new: But had
their original restored and taken of the ancient roman Idolators: As the
foundations of Masses, Obites, Mounthmindes the dispensing of many benefices,
annalls, vaccantes, translations, offeringes and Mass box, amercementes and
confiscations, adjudged by the sentence of the bishop of Rome, as are also
other ordinances restored by the new Romain Bishops and continued from the one
to the other. The year of our lord. 383. Blond. lib. 2. de Ro^. trium.
To this porpose it is recited in the Romain histories that since the reign of
the Emperor Valentinian the.xii. of yt name, great sedition happened at Rome
between ye christians, and the Idolatours priests which stryued amongs
themselves, whether had more enriched the church by fundations, lagacies,
bequests, offerings and other inventions: in such sort that the heathen
Idolatours and infidels which did usurp again the temple presently called the
church of S. Peter at Lians, did fight against the christians of Rome which
would have dedicated the same to their devotion.

After the offertorie the Aleoran of Titleman does hold that the mass monger
must for a time keep silence, Cap. 35.
to figure the fliyng of christ or fear of the disciples to confess him
before the Jews. Then after the sacrificer does singe on high Per omnia secula
seculorum for this that christ after that he was in secret did shovv himself
openly in the house of Lazarus, Then he syngeth sanctus sanctus sanctus: to
sygnifie the song of the Iues when christ entered into Jerusalem. This musyke
ended the sacrificer must secretly murmur, between his teath, counterfetting
sadness without any tourninges, but yet he must play a domme mommerie by
signs of crosses drawn here awaies and there awaies as we shall hereafter
declare.

After the offertorie we must come to the ix. part of the Mass, 9. part of the
Mass the round host of flower. Plutar in Numa.
the most rich and most dentie for the Massalians. That is the host or
sacryfyce. Wherein does consist the principal end or mark of the mass
sacrifice. Pollux in onom. lib. 6. Mysteriis peractis, qui sacris interera^t,
rotundis panibus, quos in honorem deorum adhib ebant stantes resceban^tur nec
nisi sacrificio perfecto vesci licebat. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17
In the time of the coniurer Numa the Romans had not yet in use to kill and
offer up the blood of beasts But about the end of the Mass sacrifice, it
was ordained to eat and communicate together within the temple little round
Cakes consecrated to the honor of the gods in whose name ye Mass was
celebrated. The little round hosts of fine flower were eaten by the sacrificer
and the assistants standing and not sitting. The flower whereof they were made
was called Mola, whereof comes this word immolare, to offer.

There was diverse hosts, that is to say, diverse little round cakes, dedicated
unto diverse gods like as they had diverse sacrifices of the Mass. With the same
round hosts was offered wine (the aulters seruinge in place of tables.) And
whiles the sacrificer and the assistaunts at the sacrifice did eat and
communicate together the foresaid little round cakes, consecrated to the honor
of their gods, there was song hymns, and pleasant songs. Some playing upon
Orgaynes and Cymbales.

Before the deuouryng of this round host prynted with pictures, the massalian
doctors have ordained that the Sacrificer shall use adiurations and coniuringe
by signs of the cross, first he ought to make three crosses upon the round
host to figure the threfolde doctrine of christ. To wit, by the father, by
himself, and by the holy ghost, in pronouncing these words: Haec dona, haec
munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata. Other doctors Alcoranists and
Massalians interpret the third cross to signify the treason of Judas who
delivered his master into the hands of the Iues. Beside the foresaid three
crosses, does follow five mo, to figure the five days of respit from paulme
sunday to good friday, or otherwise to represent the five wounds of christ, two
in his hands two in his feet and one in his right side. Of the which five
crosses, the three first must be made upon the chalice and upon the round host
to figure the delivering of christ unto the priests, scribes and Pharisees: or
to figure the price that christ was sold for, to wit three times ten which
is.30. pence. The two other crosses are seperatly made: the one (being the
fourth) upon the host, the other upon the chalice alone, to play the two persons
of christ and judas: which the massalian sacrificer does continuing still his
mocks and mummeries, stretching out his arms to figure christ stretched on the
cross. Then he lifts up his round host printed full of pictures to cause it
to be worshipped. And that he begins again to make three other crosses. One
upon the host, another upon the cup, and the third upon himself, to play
the personages of three estates: of those that be in heaven, in purgatory, and
in earth.

He smites afterward upon his breast, to play the personage of the these
hangyng upon the cross, which repented him self.

But the smiting of the stomach must be with the three hyndermost fyngers of the
hand, for the thombe and the next finger be reserved to consecrate and
transubstantiate the round host. Moreover he must smite his breast three times to
figure the threfolde offense of the heart, mouth and deed. In lifting up his
voice to represent the thief or the centurion, which confessed god in the
passion. Six other crosses are made once again, three upon the chalice
covered, to figure the three hours that Christ hanged on the cross on live:
and the three other crosses are made upon the chalice discovered (with the round
host lifted up again) to figure the three hours that christ hanged upon the
cross dead. Then after the massalian has kissed his chalice there are yet two
crosses more, to figure the mystery of the blood and water issuyng out of
christ's side. Beside the dumme mummeries abouesayde, the priest must take the
covering cloth from the chalice, and cover it with the plantyn to figure the
breaking of the veil of the temple in the midst at the death of christ. This
done the round host is put from above the chalice, and is couched under the
corporas to figure the buriyng of christ. The priest thus having played the
person of the hanged thief, of the traitor Judas of christ, and of the
publicans, plays afterward the personage of the centurian, in singing the
Pater noster. But the Alcoran of Durand expounds by the seven petitions of
the Pater noster the seven wepings of the virgin Marye, or the seven virtues,
or the seven gifts of the holy ghost, or the seven Beatitudes, or the seven
deadly sins. This song finished, the Massalian a little while keeps silence,
to figure the silence or rest of christ in the tomb. Re diuina and ceremoniis
celebratis, sacerdos tunc, I, licet succlamabat, qua voce illos qui inter
fuerant, missos faciebat.

Alex ab Alex lib. 4. cap. 17 Parts of the mass ordained by Neuma 700 years
before the incarnation of Jesus christ.


Another aperie or mu^merie does the Massalian play with his round host, the
which he lays upon the paten to figure the unity of the divinity with
the humanitle: but when he plays the secret mystery, then the host is hyd
out of sight.

The sacrifice thus finished and the little round hosts eaten, Numa ordained to
sing these words: I, licet (vel) It^e missa est, that is to say, go it is
granted, ye assemble is suffered to go home. Be not all these parts of the
Mass sacrifice ordained by Numa the coniurer more then 700 years before the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, to wit, the vestments, the aulbe, the chasuble,
the holy purginge water coniured with salt to chase away devils, the altar,
the taper light, the the turnings and trauersings along the altar, with
prayers and meditations toward the East. The processions with shrines and
relikes carried upon the shulders of the priests clothed in white surplices
and crowns upon their heads: the Confiteor made to the he saints and she
saints: the playing on the Organs, the Canticles, Peanes, Hymns, and Odes:
the Censour and the Encens: the communion of little round bread consecrated in
the name of their godds: and in thend this song Ite missa est: Do ye not
acknowledge (O ye Massalians) that ye have borrowed all these parts and members
of your Mass of Pompilians religion? Why do you hold this word Mass, Math,
27. Luke. 20. Mark. 14. 1. Cor. 11.
seeing Jesus Christ did name it a supper, or the partaking of his body? Why
have ye taken up these vestementes, the Aulbe, and painted Chasuble proper to
the ancient romain Idolators, of the which garments Christ ordained nothing?
Why have ye given more credit unto the witchcraft of Pompilius to chase away
devils with salt water coniured, and called holy water, then unto the holy
ghospel of Jesus Christ, the which does assure you in his name to drive away
devils, and not with witchcraft of salt? Mark. 16.
Who but the spirit of Neuma, did inspire you to shave your crown round: and
to deck your selves with white surplices, to bear the shrines and banners in
procession? When Jesus Christ celebrated his holy supper and instructed his
apostles of the communion of his body and blood, did he command the^ to follow
the religion of the ancient romain Idolators, to have their alters enriched with
images, to use turnings and trauersings alonge the alter, to be shorn round,
to have aulbs and chasubles, addressing their prayers and confession to he and
she saints, to pipe with organs, to perfume their alters and images with encence
to, go to the offerings, to carry money to the priests box, to eat little round
hosts consecrated, and last of all to sing Ite missa est?

But I well perceive (O Massalians) your Mass subtelties, whereby you shall
confess to me, that the body and chief parts of the Mass took their
beginning and creation of Numa Pompilius.

Nevertheless the deckinges and enrichings were invented by other bishops of
Rome: specially by a monk called Gregorye the first of that name, that came
to the Popedom. Who was instructed in the Magike and Philosophy of
Pythagoras, and had also studied the laws of Tullius Hostillius, king and
successor of Numa, to the end to make his name everlasting by addinge some
new thing to the missall sacrifice, he ordained to singe nine times these
words in Greek, Platine. Volaterran Kyrie eleyson
Kyrie eleyson. For Gregory did greatly esteem this number nine: even as the
ancient romayn Idolators had recourse unto the nouendiall sacrifice for signs
and monstrous wonders. Quoties prodigium nunciabatur, sacru^ nouendiale per
nouem dies agebatur Tit. Liui. lib. 1 Decades. 1.
He did also ordeine that in the Massesacrifice should be song two words of
Hebrew, to accompanye the two words in Greek. And that at certain times men
should sing these two words Allelu ya: and certain times they should not.

In place of which Allelu ya, is song another song called the tract, with
sharpenes of voice prolixitie of song, and heaviness of notes of music, to
figure the miseries of this world, and he that syngeth Allelu ya, must be
higher then he that houleth the graduel, as the alcoran of Titelman does
recite.

Is there not witchcraft enough in your sacrifice (O Massalians) unless ye put
thereunto Hebrew and Greek words? and mingle together Pithagoricall numbers
and nouendiall songs, and institute a difference of days to singe and not to
sing Hebrew words, and invent crosses and dumme mummeries? Be not these
corruptions of the holy sacrament of the supper ordained of God? Platine.
Sabellie.
Some other have enriched the missall sacrifice, Gloria patri Agnus dei Kis^^g
the Paten ordained.
as Damase bishop of Rome with a Gloria patri, Sergius with an Agnus dei,
song three times (which Titelman expounds to figure the Ascension of Christ)
Innocent the kissing of the priests Paten.

The which paten of gold by the doctrine of the Alcoran does signify the
divinity of christ. cap. 14.
The Gloria in excelcis by Symmachus, the which song pronounced in a voice
sweet and basse, Cap. 56.57.
does signify (as holds the Alcoran of Titelman) the warlike and childishe
voice of Christ, being yet in the cradle. O blasphemye and detestable mommry of
the son of god. Leo the second instituted the kissynge of the paxe: which the
Alcoran of Titelman says does signifye the union of christians. Pax kissing.
And that the kissynge of the paxe came in, in the place of the holy communion
observed in the first church next the Apostles.

This kissing of the Paxe was song of the Massalian saying these words Pax
domini: and making 3. crosses upon the Chalice when the third part of the
host is cast into the wine, to figure the incarnation of Christ: or for the
threefold peace, of the time, of the spirit, and of the euerlastyngnes to come.
Moreover the forging of the Canon of ye mass is attributed to Alexander, The
canon of the mass.
Gelace, Syricie, Leo, and Pelage. These be pieces patched to, according to the
humors of the Bishops of Rome, the authors and restorers, the founders and
augmentours of the mass sacrifice.

The best enrychynge instituted in the Mass sacrifice must not be forgotten to
wit certain places of the old and new testament called the epistles and
Ghospells. Platine. Sabellie.
The epistles and ghospels cut in the mass.
The which the Messalians have cut and mingled with the Pompilian Idolatry and
therein have profaned the law of god, even as did the Apostate Sergius
doctor of the Machomet, the which decked the Alcoran with many places of the
holy bible, and patched a hotchpotch of fables and heresies, wc the holy law of
god.

The massalians have ordained two persons to sing the epistles and ghospelles
to the end to enriche their Massedaunce: to wit, the subdeacon, who marches
before to play the person of the first law of the Jews: and the deacon. which
comes after with more great dignity to represent the law of the gospel:
the which deacon carries upon his breast a quoshon to figure the humblenes of
heart The subdeacon receives not the blessing of the Massing sacrificer as the
deacon does, for this (say the Massalian doctors) that God sent his prophets
invisibly.

But the deacon playinge the personage of the law of the gospel, he receives
blessyng as being sent among wolves, because christ sent his Apostles as men
visibly. It is ordained that the deacon shall wear a stoell crosswise hanging
upon his shulders, one end over the other, to figure force and continence
joined together in the massemonger. The deacon playing his pagen and singing
some piece of the gospel in a language understood neither of him nor of the
assistantes must turn himself toward the north standing upright. Because
(says Titelma^) the north part is cold and malicious. And therefore he must
make a cross to chase away the devils of the north. Be not these sorceries
and conflictes more horrible than all the commentaries of the ancient Romain
bishops idolators?

Against the long possession and prescription of Idolators.
Does not this approve the Alcoran of Machomet, the long possession whereof
Turks presently have had for these.900. ye years past, having conquered
countres Realms, Against Turks
and Empiers, prospered in all their interprises, and still observing the
abominable law set out in the Alcoran? Against the people of Israel offering
to Moloch.
Were the people of Israel excused before God (when they did sacrifice in the
valley of Tophet to Moloch with innoce^ts blood) by alleging the long
possession, and accustomed usage, for the space of.1200. 4. Kings. 16 23
years before this Idolatry was algetother destroyed by the good king Josias?
Against the idolatry of the brazen serpent. Number. 21.
Did the Israelits murmur against the virtuous king Ezechias when he destroyed
the brazen, serpent which was made by the express commandment of god 900.
years before? Were the same people excused of their Idolatries committed in Dan
and Bethell, Against the image set up by Hieroboam. 3. Kings. 12.
wherein were the Images of two heffers of gold instituted by their king
Hieroboam, under pretense of long possession, and that they had continued this
Idolatry for the space of.300. or.400. years. The Iues, Against the
infidelity of the jews.
now vacabo^ds shall they be excused before the majesty of god by showing the
long possession of their ceremonial law instituted yea of god himself.3.
thousand years ago?

Also you (O massalians) can you aledge against god the continuance and long
possession of celebratinge your Pompilian Masses long time, and that you and
your predecessors have used sold and put to usury your Missall sacrifyces? is
this reason sufficient to ground upon long possession, as your predecessors
senators of Rome did allege unto Theodose the Emperor, their Pompilian
religion to have been observed more then a.M. years? This is not an excuse
sufficient to bring in long possession and usage of long time observed, for the
confirmation of your Idolatries. For if god of his mercy and wonderful
patience did suffer the Jews in their unfaithfulness, the Turks in their
Alcoran law, and the christians in their Mass Idolatries: It is not for us to
dispute of the incomprehensible secrets of god, but with all humility to take
again the way of truth, when it shall please him to give it us, after long
and deep darkness, whereunto the people in all ages has fallen and turned
from the true worshippinge and ordinance of god: even so as briefly before we
have declared of the Israelites the chosen people of god, the which
notwithstanding yt they had Moses and the prophets which did admonish the^ by
many miracles and threatenings, how they should honor god and keep the law,
nevertheless they never ceased by men's inventions to commit idolatries. So
that during the reign of the princes Judges of Israel when the people were
governed as in Aristocratia, than after submitted under the yoke of kings as in
a monarchy, and last of all brought under the government of the priests
having gotten both the temporalitie and spiritualitie, the law of god has
been corrupted, the sacrifices and sacraments defaced and defiled, and
idolatry continued more then 1600 years from the law written by Moses, unto
the incarnation of Jesus Christ. What may one hope for then of the people of
Rome instructed in all Idolatry as a dry tree, a heathenishe and bastard
people? But these Massalian heritikes can not vaunt themselves of very long
possession of their Mass sacrifices, except of the ix. pieces before
described, restored and borrowed of Numa Pompilius, for the other parts of ye
Mass were invented at diverse times by diverse antichrists corruptours of the
holy sacraments ordained of God And to understand the times and years of ye
chief builders, Agapet Pope of Rome reigned in the year of christ.533. and
brought in the processio^ after the order prescribed by Numa. The Confiteor,
was restoored by Damase reigning the year.577. The Kyrie eleyson and the
Letanies, by Gregory reigning in the year.593. The graduel the collects and the
Traict by Gelase reigning in the year 493. The Sequences by Gothere abbot of
Sandale. The Gloria in excelcis by Simmach reigning in the year.508. The incens
and the offertorie restored from the ancient doctrine Pompilian by Leo ye
third of that name in the year.800. The kissing of the pax by Innocent ye first
of that name in the year.408. Agnus dei instituted by Sergius in the year.697.
The commemoration of the dead invented by Pelagius in the year. 558. The Canon
forged by Gelase, Siricie, Leo, and Pelagi reigning in the year. 800. The
transubstanciacio^ instituted by the bishops of Rome about the year of christ
1062. Wherefore of what impudency are these Alcoranists Mass doctors to be
condemned, the which faulsely do affirm that the holy Apostles of Jesus
Christ did celebrate their missal sacrifice. Saying yt this sacrifice was not
restored to his integrity after Numa Pompilius but after Christ.800. years? In
what approved histories is there mention made that such Idolatry was committed
by the holy apostles of god? How is it possible to believe or to think it, when
as this great whore of Babilion has not been restored with her deceit and
mask of holiness till long time after the incarnation of Jesus Christ.

But it behooves to return to our history of Rome, more and more to discover
the true original of the mass. Continuing of histories.
We have declared in discovering the parts and chief members of the mass
sacrifice, how the ancient Romans before they were accustomed to sacrifice with
the blood of bests did use little round cakes consecrated in ye honor of their
gods, the which standing they did eat within the temple about the end of the
sacrifice. These little round hosts of wheat flower were taken up of the
massalian sacrificers: but they have enriched the witchcraft and idolatry of
Numa Pompilius in so much as they have decked the little round hosts with
images and pictures printed within the round circle of the said hosts,
Abominable idolatry.
Against the idolatry of the round Hosts.
to thend to make them more holy, even to be worshipped, by thinuention of
Honorius antichrist of Rome, the year 1226, the which Numa ye coniurer never
practiced, ne yet came to this abominable idolatry. What more detestable
heresy can there be discovered then to paint the majesty of god in form and
likeness of a man, as the Antropomorphits imagen? Who taught you (o massalians)
to corrupt the holy sacrament of our lord Jesus christ's supper, in making little
round hosts, if not Numa ye co^iurer? When Jesus christ celebrated his holy
supper with his apostles, did he ordeyne to have little round hosts, and to print
them full of pictures and likenesses of men, to adjure and conjure with crossings
and blessings odd or even, and to make them to be worshipped? Acknowledge then
(o Massalians) your principal part of ye mass to wit, your little round hosts
to have taken their beginning of Numa more then 700 years before ye incarnation
of Jesus christ, who never commanded you this rou^dnes of hosts, nor yt they
should be rather round then square, three cornered, or eight cornered. But so far
was he from choosing ye figure of rou^dnes after the fashion of Numa, that
contrariwise when he instituted the holy sacrament of the communion of his
body, he used breaking of ye bread in morsels, which he distributed to his
disciples for a simbol, sign, and figure, signifiyng really and sacrame^tally
his body by ye virtue of tholy ghost. And ye massalians have not only chosen the
fashion round in their little consecrated hosts printed full of pictures to
cause them to be worshipped after the manner of the ancient Romans, but
further they have exceded al Idolators. For in the time of Neuma Pompilius,
those that assisted at the sacrifice of the Mass did eat together standinge
the said little round hosts consecrated. But since the Massalians have reserved
for them selves the communion of the said little round hosts consecrated,
using no charity toward those that stood by at their missall sacrifice. Is
this to follow the ordinance of Jesus Christ, who brake the bread and gave it
to his Apostles? Jesus Christ the everlasting sacrificer, was he alone at the
altar, eating one little round host graven full of images, when he celebrated
the holy communion of his body? Can you (O Massalians, toto abominable, and
much less charitable Idolators than all the ancient Romans) so much play
the subtell sophisters that you will make men to understand that your mass
sacrifice (wherein the sacrificer alone deuoureth all the little round host
printed full of pictures without geuyng parts to any other) is a communion, and
by a merueylous witchcraft to cause the assistans at ye sacrifice to believe, ye
they have communicated together with the priest, not withstanding that they
neither received nor did eat any portion of the round host.

And beside this for a more extreme idolatry. the massalian doctors
expounders do declare the round host to be divided in three parts, one for those
which are in paradise, another for those which are in purgatory to have
remission of their sins, and the third drenched in wine for those which are
living in this world. But the Alcoran of Durand declares the three parts of
the host broken, to represent the three fashioned body of christ, in the
sepulcher sleping, in the earth lying, and after resing again. The other
subtell doctor Biel, because he would not confess the body of christ in the
round host to be bruised and broken, does subtelly defyne the breaking of the
host to be done in an accidence without a substance. Be not these horrible
heresies to make the souls to communicate which are in heaven, or in
purgatory, instituted by Sergius doctor of the Machomet, by the means of one
round host devoured by the massalian.

But you (O Massalians) may here object unto me the use of the primative
church observed in ye communion of the holy supper, whereas every one of the
assemblye in the temple did take a portion of the broken bread consecrated to
eat and communicate together. A communion of holy bread
The which use has been kept unto this day in your Missal sacrifices
celebrated upon Sondayes, the which you cause to be distributed by morcelles of
holy bread unto thassistaunts within the temple. But in this ancient communion
does abide nothing but an image only. Because the Massalians absing the holy
sacrament, have reserved for them selves only the little round host conscrated
to be devoured, Notable differences between the round host and the holy bread.
without giving any portion unto the assistaunts: unto whom they leave the
bittes of holy bread, which are four square for the most part. The round
host without leaven, and the holy bread is with leaven. The round host is
without salt, and the holy bread with salt. The round host is printed full of
pictures, and the holy bread is without print or picture. The round host is
worshipped, and the holy bread is received with thanks giving. The round host is
devoured of the priest, and the holy bread is divided among thassemble to
communicate and to eat together. The round host is stieped in wine, the holy
bread is eaten without wine. To be short there is as great difference between
these two kynds of communion, as there is between thauncient law of the
Idolators and the law of the gospel. Provided always that they agree in one
poynct, that is, that both in the one and the other there is a corruption of
the holy sacrament of the supper ordained of god. It rests to come down to
the deep Maze of Idolatry. Transubstantiation.
We have recited the history of the people of Israel, which did not content
them selves with the heavenly bread Manna given unto them of God, during the time
that they were in the wilderness: but did murmur against god and Moses their
leader, requiring to eat flesh. The people also of Rome being Heathen and
Infidelles, were not contented with the institution of Pompilian touching the
communion of the little round Cakes; Blond. lib. 1. de Ro^. trium.


But the bishiops of Rome, Idolators, did institute the killing and offering up
of beasts, to the end to eat and communicate the flesh of the offerings in
in their sacrifices, specially the sheep, the Sow, the Goat, and the Beofe,
which first were ordained by Euander king of Arcadie. To the end therefore
that the Massalian should not go out of kind from the Idolatries of their
predecessors, they have followed this communion of flesh, and are not
contented with the little round, unleavened hosts consecrated and prynted full
of pictures: but have in time invented a new witch craft, Hosts of meal are
changed into flesh and wine in to blood.
to change their little hosts of flower into flesh and bone, the bread being
no more bread, but an accidence without substance: and by this means to change
their round host of meal into an host of flesh and blood. The wine also
offered in their Mass challices to be changed into blood: the wine being no
more wine, but an accident without substance. Was there ever any witchcrafte
more abominable and heresy more detestable than this transubstantiation of
the Mass? When the children of Israel were weryed with the eating of Manna,
and the heavenly bread, demanding flesh, was the Manna turned into flesh
bones and blood?

When the Romans the ancient Idolaters did change their round hosts of
meal, and demanded to eat of the flesh in their sacrifices, did they use
this witchcraft of transubstantiation?

Wherefore I do freely affirm that the Massalians have lately instituted this
addicion of the Mass, yea more than 1000 years after the incarnation of Jesus
Christ. In the year of Christ. 1062. in Chrono. log. Fon. Volater.
This heresy began to sprede abroad greatly in the time of the Antichrist
Nicolaite, crept into the Roman bishopric by the conspiratie of Hildebrant,
having chased away by force the other chosen bishop, namely Benedict the.xij.
Lanfranc, de sacr.
of that name in the year of Jesus christ 1062. Afterward it advance it self
by a conspiratie holden in the Lateran at Rome during the ecclesiastical
tyrranny of Innocent the third of ye name: about 200 years after the solemn
recantatio^ of Berengarius deane of S. Maurice of Angiers. Against
transubstantiation.
Against the which abominable witchcraft and herisie, we must briefly bring
in by the way of recapitulation the institutions of ye sacraments ordained of
god.

First the fruits of the knowledge of good and evil, Trees of life
forbidden to our first father Adam, as holy signs and sacraments of fear and
obedience, whereupon did hang life and death, were they changed and converted
into knowledge or death, leaving the nature of trees and fruits, and reduced in
to an accidence without substance? Heavenly Manna, and the rock flowing water.
the Manna from heaven, and the rock flowing with water of life, sacraments
agreing with the holy sacrament of the supper, were they changed into an
accidence without substance? Lambs offered by Abell.
the lambs without spot offered by Abel in sacrifice well pleasing to god, were
they changed into another nature? Circumcision
The little skin cut of for a note and mark of the covenant unto the good
patriarch Abraham, and his posterity, was it changed into an accident without
substance? Pascal lamb.
The blood of the Paschal lamb for thassuraunce of the health of Israel, was
it changed into another substance? The flesh of the unspotted lamb,
ordained to be eaten in the day of the Passover, a true figure of the holy
sacrament of the Supper, was it changed into an accidence without substance?

The brazen Serpente, Brazen Serpent.
by the only sight whereof health was given unto disseases, left it to be a
serpent of brass, was it changed in being ordained a sacrament and holy
sign unto the people of Israel? The oblations offered in sacrifices, The
offered sacrifices.
as well of earthlye beasts as unleavened bread, and other holy signs
ordained of GOD for Sacraments and holy Signs, to cleanse the people of
Israel: Were they changed into an accidence without substance? All the holy
Signs ordained of god in the church of Israel, not withstanding that they did
represent really and sacramentally, that which they did figure, and not as a
simple sign without effect, yet so it is that there was never none so horrible
an heritike that did invent this witchcrafte of transubstantiation. Yet must
you confess (O Massalians) that the good and holy fathers of Israel were
adopted graffed and regerated by faith in Jesus Christ, begotten before all
worlds: A conference of the faith of the ancient fathers of Israel with ours.
and that they were nourished and got everlasting life by Jesus Christ, and
that they and we have but one only God, and one only Jesus christ our mediator
and redemer. And that they through faith did sacramentallye communicate, and
spirituallye partake the blood of Jesus Christ for their salvation and
everlasting life. And there is no difference (as touching God) between them
that were before the incarnation of Jesus Christ, and we that are after the
incarnation. But they and we are the church of God bought with the blood of
the just and unspotted lamb Jesus Christ. S. August. co^tra Faust. lib. 20.
cap. 21. and 14. lib. 19. and con. Petilan. lib. 2. ca. 37. 77
Furthermore that they had faith in the promise to come: and observed the
sacraments and holy signs of the sacrifice which ought to be finished by
Jesus Christ. And that we by the new law do celebrate the memory and
remembrance of the sacrifice already finished by Jesus Christ, having the
fruition of his promise accomplished. 1. Cor. 10. August. in Psalm.
If then the Israelites did eat of the same heavenly bread, and drink of the
same water of life (by faith) that we do in one only Jesus Christ: If they had
holy signs to represent actually and really the death of Jesus Christ to come,
even as we have had holy signs of his death present or past: they for the time
to come, and we for the time past: Wherefore is it then that the Massalians
have invented this new Witchcraft of tourning one holy sacrament ordained of
God into a Witchcraft of transubstantiation, and an accident without a
substance? If god (to make known his power, and to declare the hardness and
stiffeneckednesse of Pharao) pleased to do merueylous things by Moses and
Aaron, Against the miracles alleged by the massalians. Exodus 7.8.14.
in changing a rod into a Serpent, the water of the river into blood, and
into Frogs, the duste of the yearthe into lyce, and further to make the
sayleable sea dry, and to do many other miracles: Is this to bring in a
transubstantiation of little round hosts, unleavened, prynted full of
pictures, into an accidence without substance? In what place of the holy
scripture (when there is mention made of holy Signs, Sacraments, or
Sacrifices, ordained of God) is it said the Sign or Sacrament is changed?

Contrariwise, God wyllyng to accommodate him self to the infirmities of man
has ordained unto him from time to time common Signs, for notes and marks of
the assurance of the thing sygnified. Wherein the might of God is moore
renowned and magnified by geuynge unto us with the holy sign the thing
represented, by the power of faith and the holy Ghost, than if the self sign
were reallye changed by some visible miracle.

For the Sacraments do conteyne in them more spiritualnes then fleshlynes,
for which cause God did always blame his people Israel by his Prophets, for
taking his sacraments over fleshlye, The exposition of Jesus christ of the
communion of his body.
as we have before briefly declared. But tell me (O Massalians) when Jesus
Christ would expound, that he was the true bread of life which came down from
heaven, to give everlasting life, and how these sacramental words ought to be
understand, to eat his flesh and drink his blood, when the Capharnaites your
predecessors were offended, did he teach by his interpretation that to eat his
flesh ought to be understand by a little round host transubstantiated? The
round host of flower, and the wine to be no more bread and Wine, but an
accidence without substance? Is this your abominable Witchecrafte the
doctrine of Jesus Christ?

Nothing less: But Jesus Christ as a true law geuer, John. 6.
unto whom the interpretation of his law appertayned, answered unto the
Doctors Capharnaites, that they were to gross and carnal and that they did
abide in the flesh as ye do (O Massesayers:) Notwithstanding that the flesh
alone profits nothing: saying that these sacramental words were spiritual.
John. 6.
The flesh (says he) profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth.
Moreover (O Massayers) how can ye safelye make to agree your
transubsta^tiatio^ with the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which does promise and
assure to give everlasting life to those which eat his flesh and drink his
blood, if ye take these words carnallye? For you can not be ignorant that
your bodies (notwithstanding that they have devoured the little round hosts
transubstantiated into flesh and bone, and supt and lycked the wine changed
into blood) do dye and are mortal, by the necessity of the law. Wherefore
life everlasting promised by this communion, may not be understand of the body
nor of the mortal flesh. You must then of necessity acknowledge, for a sure
interpretation that to eat the body and drink the blood of Jesus Christ
ought to be referred unto the life spiritual and heavenly, and that the flesh
profits nothing, John. 6.
but the spiritual word and communion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ
by faith and in spirit geuyng everlasting life. This interpretation is often
recited by the holy apostle John in many places when he uses these terms, he
that comes unto me, shall never hunger, he that believes in me shall never
thruste, but shall have everlasting life. Are not these terms sufficient plain
to interpret this holy sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
without running unto your witchcraft of transubstantiation. Conference of
baptism unto the sacrament of the supper.


Another like interpretation of the doctor and author of the sacramental law
is described, when Jesus Christ was asked of Nicodeme the mean how a man
could be regenerate and borne again. Is it possible (says Nicodeme) that
man should enter into his mothers womb and be borne again? Did Jesus Christ
answer unto this demand, yt in the holy sacrament of Baptism the water was
turned into ye body into flesh and into blood, and transubstantiate into a
carnal womb to be thereby again engendered and borne? Is there not as great
reason after your witchchraft here to use this answer as in the holy sacrament
of the supper? for by the one of these two holy sacraments we be regenerate, and
by the other nourished. And ye regeneration is as merueylous unto man's wisdom,
as the norrishement. For after man's carnal judgment it seems impossible,
twice to be engendered. But our good god has used like interpretation for the
regeneration as he did for the comunion of his flesh and his blood namely that
these sacramental terms must be spiritually understand, and not carnally: for
the flesh profyteth nothing but the spirit quickneth. That which is of the
flesh, John. 3.
is fleshly that which of ye spirit is spiritual.

The holy Apostle geuynge unto the Corinthians that which he received at the
hand of God, 1. Cor. 11.
did admonish them of the second coming of Jesus Christ, in loking for the
which he commanded to communicate the body and blood of Jesus Christ by
breaking of bread, and the cup of blessyng called the new Testament and the
new covenant contracted by the blood of Jesus Christ. For as much then as we
are assured of the second coming of Jesus Christ. Being gone up into heaven,
and sytteth on the right hand of god his father, until the day appointed that
he must come again to judge the quick and the dead. How do ye agree (o
Massalians) with this issue, when as by your magic you say that every day
you cause to come down, and make to return the body of Jesus Christ in
flesh and bone, before the time appointed of his second coming, be come?

This witchcrafte was restored by you from the first author of your Mass
sacrifice Numa Pompilius: Tit. Liuius. 1. Decade. 1.
who by his witchcraft gave to understand that he caused his Nymphe and
goddess Acgerie and also his Jupiter Elicius to descend from heaven, Valcai.
Max. lib. 1. cap. 3.
by whose means the heavenly secrets and mysteryes were reveled unto him.
Even so by your withcraft the round host consecrated, is transubstantiated
into the true and real body of Jesus Christ: The bread being no more bread.
How have ye learned this boldenes to bruise and break in pieces the body of
Jesus Christ according to the invention of Sergius the second of that name
your predecessor bishop of Rome? Are not you more detestable hangmen, then
your predecessors lieutenaunts of the church of Rome, john. 19. Exodus 12. Number.
9.
which crucified Jesus Christ, but without brusing and breaking his body in
pieces, as it was prophesied before. Corruption of the holy sacraments.
And that more is, you are not content to break it in three pieces, but in your
Mass sacrifice ye have enterprised to drown or steep one portion of it in
the wine changed into blood to devour it. Against transubstantiation.
To confirm your witchcraft of transubstantiation, have ye not ordained to
preserve your little round prynted hosts, the which you do keep and lay up so
curiouslye in bores and shrynes after they be changed into flesh and bone,
and into the real body of Jesus Christ? Is not this a detestable herisie to
believe that the body of Jesus Christ can receive corruption? Yea, Harman.
co^tt.
and often it is eaten of worms, mytes, rattes and myce. Can you interpret,
Blond. Platine.
that this is an accidence without substance, seeing yt your hosts become often
stinking, and corrupt with in your boxes? Many times also devoured of earthly
brute beasts, yt which you cause to be burned and their ashes to be put into
the place for reliks. When ye bishop of Rome Victor the iij. of ye name,
received poison by your transubstantiated wine, was it an accidence without
substance? Or when the emperor Henry ye 7. of that name, was poisoned in eating
a little round host consecrated, was it an accidence without substance, seeing
it gave him his deaths wound? There is a more manifest appearaunce in the
heavenly Manna given unto the people of Israel, Neem. 1. Psalm. 78.104. John. 6.
Sapi. 16.
the which notwithstanding that it became corrupt (if it were kept) yet being
put in the secret place of the arcke of the covenant, it was preserved without
corruption: was it therefore transubstantiated into flesh and bone, to be
called the heavenly bread, the bread which came down from heaven, the bread of
life, and the bread of angels?

The exposition of the sacrame^tal words.
Now it remains to bring into judgment the subtel reasons of ye Massayers,
which for the whole foundation of their witchcrafte, do carnally abide in this
word Est, saying these words are expressly written. This is my body, this is my
blood, when Jesus christ did institute the communion of his body and of his
blood under ye signs of bread and wine. But I beseech all that are zealous of
the honor of god diligently to consider the holy institution of the sacrament,
by the which god would declare and signify the communion of his body by ye
bread, and the drinking of his blood by the wine and the cup. All will confess
yt the true and principal nourishment of the body of man is contained under ye
kinds of bread and wine: so yt the true bread is often taken in ye holy
scriptures for ye nourishment and life of man. But let us begin to bring in ye
places of the Bible. To ye first man created to the lykenes of god, Genes. 3.
for punishment of his offense was it not said unto him before, ye he must eat
his bread in ye sweat of his body? Genes. 28.
Is there any man so ignorant yt will not confess all ye food and life of man
to be understand by ye bread? when Jacob prayed unto god to give him bread and
clothing, did not he understand by ye bread al yt was necessary for his
nourishment? Exodus 16. Neem. 9. Psalm. 78. Sapi. 15. John. 6. Genes. 14.
when it is recited yt god made it to rain bread upon ye people of Israel in
the wilderness, and that with this heavenly bread ye children of Israel were
filled, was not this term bread understand of the heavenly Manna sent of god
for the nourishing of the people Israel?

This manna is it not called the bread of heaven, and the bread of angels
given unto the people without travel? Genes. 41. Genes. 47. Number. 21. Leuit. 26.
When Melchisedech would releue the hooste of the good Father Abraham did he
not present unto him bread and Wine? When Abraham would gratify and refresh
ye.3. angels apearing to him, did he not offer to the^ Cakes baked in ye ashes.
Gave he not to Agar bread for her norishment? The mother of Isaac fauouringe
her well beloved son, gave him bread. Joseph in Egypt offered bread unto his
brethren for their norrishement. When one will discribe a famine and darth does
he not say, there lacks bread? When god promises any favor unto people
keeping his commandments, john. 4. Psalm. 104. Math, 4. Luke. 4. john. 6.
Math. 4.
does he not give them assurance of sufficient bread? When he commended the
poor, as his members, did he not command to give them bread? It is than the
bread that nourishes and maintains the heart and life of men. Luke. 9. Math.
15.
When Satan took upon him to tempt Jesus Christ, to declare unto us that he was
very man, did he not chose bread, to entyre him to change stones in bread?
Math. 6. Luke. 11.
When Jesus Christ did celebrate his feasts, to give food one time unto 5000
men, the other time unto 4000 persons, did he not show his might under ye sign
of bread? when he taught us to make our prayers unto god did he not ordeyne the
lords prayer, to beseech god to give us our daily bread? And not only in the
holy Bible is there mention made of bread for corporal and common food. But
also in the sacrifices celebrated by the priests of the Hebrews, there was a
law prescribed of the bread ordained of god, Exodus 21. Leuit. 24. Math. 11. 1.
Kings. 21. Esaias. 30. Prouer. 20. Ezech. 4. Mala. 1. Psalm. 23. Ezech. 12, Ozec.
7.
namely sweet bread without leaven. Other bread there was called shewbread,
which the priests did renew every week and eat, which David used being
presented unto him by Achemelech ye high priest. Contrariwise this term bread
is applied unto bread of wickedness, unto bread of lying, unto bread of sorrow,
unto unclean bread of idolatry, unto unclean bread offered at the altar,
^eu. 8. Math. 4. Luke. 4.
unto the bread of trembling and unto the bread of tears. The Ephraimites also
are called the bread of ashes not turned: that is to say in part baked and part
not, circumcised Idolators. Wherefore, O Massayers Capharnaites, ye must not
be so hardened and rooted in your fleshlynes, that you regard not the phrases of
the holy scriptures in yt which the term of bread is sometime taken for the
earthly and bodily bread, Math, 15.
as when it is said, that man lives not by bread only but also by all that
proceeds out of ye mouth of god. Sometime also bread is taken for the word of
god and for doctrine, when Jesus Christ commanded his apostles to take heed
for eating of the leauened bread of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 15. Mark.
7.
are not these terms of bread and leaven taken and interpreted for the
doctrine of the Pharisees heretics? When the woman of Canaan did demand grace
and mercy for the health of her daughter holden with a soore disease. Did not
Jesus Christ answer, that it was not lawefull to take the bread of the
children and give unto dogs? In this answer is not the bread taken for life
and health, and not only for the corporal nourishment? Seeing then that bread
is taken for the life of man, the which hangs chiefly of bread and wine, and
that the goodness of god willing to apply it self unto our infirmities would
choose those two signs, notes and marks notable, to signify his body and
blood, namely bread and wine, being two substaunces common to all nations, is
that an occation to imagine a carnal transubstantiation, as if without the same
god were not able enough to figure and represent really and sacrame^tally life
to be given unto us: yea everlasting life by the communion of the holy bread
and wine consecrated, figures, and signs of his body and blood. Math. 6. Mark.
14. John. 6.
Jesus Christ spoke these words, yt the bread was his body and the wine his
blood, he said also yt he is the living bread, that he is ye bread of life,
that he is the living bread which came down from heaven, he says also yt he yt
eats of this bread shall live forever. Is this to bring in that by this word
(is) Jesus Christ is turned and transubstantiated into bread, and is no more
christ, but an accident without substance? O detestable heresy, O Massalians
have ye more reason to interpret carnally these words (this is my body) to
changed the bread into his body, than when he affirms yt he is the bread, to
change him into bread, considering that it is written that the partaking of
this bred gives life everlasting? Jesus christ said hoc est corpus meum. He
says also: John. 6. Math, 26. john. 6.
Hic est panis qui de celo descendit: In both these places is there not this
word (is) bestowed? Must we therefore bring in a witchcraft of
transubstantiation, in place of sound interpreting of the scriptures, by a
likeness or familier comparison of bread with Jesus christ, causing us to
understand that by him life everlasting is given unto us? And by him our
spiritual nourishment is given us like as by the bread we have our bodily
food. How so ever it be we must always have recourse unto ye true
interpretation of Jesus Christ, the true lawgeuer, and author of the holy
sacrament, who putting forth his institution said in the first place, yt he was
the bread of life, than after yt this bread is his flesh and his body which
must be given for the health of the world. He said that his flesh is true food,
and his blood the true drink he says, that he that eats his flesh and
drinks his blood shall abide in him. How does he interpret this eating? John.
6.
Jesus Christ does interpret it himself by these words. He that comes unto
me shall never hunger, he yt believes in me shall never thrust. Is not this the
true eating and the true drinking, never to have hunger and never to have
thrust? Behooves it to get faith, which consists in spirit: behooves it to
address our selves unto Jesus Christ our heavenly bread, our spiritual drink,
to fill us for ever, to quench everlastingly our thrust of sin, to run unto
a witchcraft of transubstantiation and to forge an accidence without a
substance. Wherefore (O Massalians) have ye invented another interpretation,
than that of Jesus Christ, who witnesses that the flesh profits nothing,
but the spirit quickens? and that his words are not carnal, but spiritual,
giving spirit and life by faith and hope that he is the savior of the world,
incarnate, dead and crucified to give us eternal life, and after rose again,
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of god his father, abiding
an everlasting priest propiciator, mediator and redemer.

Let us return again to this term (is) which tormenteth the brains of ye
Massayers so soore, ^ohn. 15.
to imagine a transubstantiation. If Jesus Christ has said that he is the true
vine, ^ohn. 14.
that god his father is a husband man, and we are the branches. Is this to
bring in this term (is) a Witchcrafte of changing god into a husbandman,
Jesus Christ into a vine, and us into vinebranches? If Jesus christ is said to
be the unspotted lamb yt blotteth out the sins of ye world: is this to bring
in a tra^substantiatio^? if Jesus christ has said that he is the door of the
shepefold, by the which we must enter to salvation, and that he is the
shepehard and we the sheep must we therefore ratch these places of ye holy
scripture so far, that necessarily we must believe a transubstantiation, for as
much as this term (is) is there? When Jesus christ admonished his disciples
saying to them that they were the salt of ye earth, Math. 5.
did he change and transubstantiate them into pillors of salt as he did ye
wife of Loath? Genes. 19.
If Jesus christ has said by his apostles yt we are ye temple of god wherein ye
holy ghost does dwell: is this to imagine yt we are tra^substa^tiat into a piece of
stone? 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6.
If ye apostle have said that christ is ye rock out of yt which did com ye
living water to wash us from our sins: 1. Cor. 10.
is this craftily to devise a changing of Jesus christ into a rock or
material stone? 1. Cor. 12.
If the apostles have witnessed that we are the body of Christ: Is this to
bring in that we are vanished away, and are no moore men, but changed into
an accidence without a substance?

I foresee well (o massayers) moore than hardened, that you will object, that
in all these places before alleged wherein this word (is) is found, that no
mention is made of sacraments, which must be depely considered, for as much as
they be holy mysteries ordained of god, which also is true. And also this word
(is) is not only found in ye holy scriptures before noted, Genes. 17. Exodus 12
13.
but also when there was speaking of the holy sacraments ordained before of god
unto ye people of Israel, was it not written that circumcision is the band and
covenant of god? Genes. 17. Number 10. Psalm. 68.94. Math. 21. john. 2.
In the other holy sacrament of the communion of the paschal lamb, is it not
said yt the lamb is the passover or passage? Is this to bring in a witchcraft
of transubstantiation? will ye not confess (o massalians and chaungers of
substances) that in these places of holy scriptures speaking of the sacraments,
this word (is) can not otherwise be expounded but to signify: and that
circumcision was ye sign and mark of the band and covenant contracted
between god and Abraham: and that the paschal lamb was also the sign of tholy
passage: for remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt. The arck of the
covenant for another sacrament whereof it is written, that it is the true
power of the lord. Is this to say that it was transubstantiated into ye
majesty of god? It behooves to interpret the holy scripture with discretion and
humility, without sophistry and Witchcraft, to understand sou^dly the true
meaning of words, and not to abide in the letter yt kills: but to receive the
word of god in spirit that quickens. If than the holy arcke be named the lord
and called god, for that in it he exercised his might, and showed his wonders
and mysteries, to draw the people of Israel, by an outward sign to remember
god, and to fear and obey him. Also if Jesus christ is called the bread that
came from heaven, the bread of life, that the bread broken is his body, and the
wine is his blood, that the cup is the new testament, that by these outward
signs of bread and wine he might cause us to understand our life and
nourishment of salvation to stai only upon Jesus christ, and that by his death
and bloodsheding we are so assured of everlasting life, as ye bread and wine
are nourishment for ye body, and that it pleased him to ordein these holy
signs, to serve us for sacraments for ye trial and confirmation of our faith:
is this an occasion to play ye Capharnaites or ye Nicodemia^s to dout of ye
power of god. How is it possible to eat the body and drink ye blood of Jesus
christ? how is it possible to be regenerate and borne again? Then seeing we have
a promise given unto us by the word of god, wherefore (o Massalia^s) have ye
imagined a carnal tra^substantiatio^, mistrusting the incomprehensible power of
god? oght it not to suffice you to believe simple that the body and blood of
Jesus christ is offered unto us really and sacramentally to communicate for our
nourishment, and to give us everlasting life by the bread and wine consecrated
with giving of thanks, the bread being truly his body: and the wine his blood,
which ought to be received worthily by faith, and in pureness of conscience, as
holy signs and marks of the godly badge, with out enquiring ever subtly the
means otherwise then Jesus Christ has enterpreted (saying) the flesh
profits nothing it is the spirit that quickneth, and that his words were
spirit and life. Ought we to doubt, that god has not the power to make us
partakers of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, by the holy signs of bread
and wine consecrated, the bread nevertheless remaining bread, and the wine,
wine. If it were otherwise, this should not be called a sacrament but a
miracle, as when Jesus Christ turned the water into wine that he used a
miracle of transubstantiation changing water into wine But he did not then
ordain a sacrament, John. 2.
as he did of the communion of his body and blood, by the holy figures of bread
and wine Was it not as easy for god to make the wine to be changed into blood,
Exodus 4.7.
or the bread into flesh, as for Moises and Aaron to cha^g the water of ye
river into blood to approve ye hardness of pharoo, or when ye clouds were turned
into ye flesh of quals which rained upon the people of Israel, always god did
not ordeyne these miracles to serve for ordinary sacraments, but would apply
himself to our infirmity, giving unto us signs holy and not
tra^substantiated, which are another vain nor fantasies, but are outward
signs, which we can see, touch, eat, and taste, abiding in their substance,
and nevertheless representing sacramentally, yt which is comprised and signified
by them, wherein our trial of faith does stand, to declare us by a sacramental
work to be of the number of them yt are regenerated and nourished by the holy
sacraments of baptism and of the supper. A comparison of the two holy
sacraments.
If it be lawful to use co^parisons of ye.ij. holy sacraments of baptism and
of the supper, notwtstanding yt there is difference between regeneration, which
does not reiterate (for it suffices once to be regenerate and borne again.)
But the nourishment must be often done again according to the order of nature,
and other differences largely discribed by the holy apostles and ministers of
the word of god. Yet the same end, the same god, the same Jesus Christ is
showed and declared as well in baptism, as in the supper. By the blood of Jesus
christ we be regenerat and by the same blood nourished. By the blood of Jesus
christ we are renewed, set, and graffed, and by the same blood we are kept and
preserved from hunger and thrust for evermore By the blood of Jesus christ we
are spoiled of thold corrupt skin, and cled with his body, of ye self same
also we have our nourishment and everlasting life. By the blood of Jesus christ
we have access into the kingdom of heaven. And by the same blood we have the
fruition of the kingdom, for unto the same purpose the holy apostle witnesses,
we are al baptized by the virtue of one holy spirit, and we have all drunk of
one spiritual drink given unto us by Jesus Christ. Be not these comparisons
taken out of the holy scripture, to justify that Jesus Christ is the only
end, unto the which tends as well Baptism as the holy Supper? It follows
then that the signs of the sacrame^tal water for baptism, and bread and wine
for ye supper of Jesus christ, ar holy signs, ernes, gages, paunes, marks,
seals, and sacraments, instituted of god for proof and assurance of our faith.
Well then (o Massalians) seeing ye have invented a witchcraft of
transubstantiation for the sacrament of the supper: Against the Massalians.
why have ye not also subtelly devised the same witchcraft in the sacrament of
baptism? why have ye not ordained the sacramental water (after that it is by
you coniured and bewitched with salt to drive away diuelles) to be changed into
the blood of Jesus christ, the water to be no more water but accidence without
substance, as ye have imagined of the bread and wine? What difference can you
show, but sophistries, sophismes, and mass subtelties. If ye continue your
heresy by this word (is) it is also found in the water of Baptism, which
is called renuynge and regeneration, the same is also named the holy ghost, and
the garment with which, and by which we are clothed, renewed and borne again in
the blood of Jesus christ. Then seeing (o Massalians) that you confess that ye
can not find a second Berengarie, to make a decre of recantation, to thend to
enlarge your witchcraft of transubstantiation unto the holy water of baptism
and by the same mean to change your spittell and salt water, your oil, your
creames, your salt and other drougges, wherewith you have corrupted the holy
sacrament of baptism. Wherefore then are ye so hardened and waxt old in your
Pompilian religion, yt you would pluck Jesus christ from the right hand of god,
to make him to discende in body and blood by your whispering Witchcraft (as
Jupiter Elicius did) before the day appointed of his second coming? Luke. 1.
Malach. 4. A comparison of the sun with Jesus christ, the which S. Iustyne
the martyr used in his treatise of the exposition of faith. chap. 3.
I can bring you in the similitude of the sun called by some apostles the
sun of righteousness Jesus christ, because that light comes from heaven by
this great and bright star. And even so the spiritual light is given unto us by
Jesus christ, who has restored us to light, out of ye night and darkness of
sin.

Well then (o ye Capharnaits carnal and gross) understand now a comparrison
sufficient enough to show you the infinite power of god to be much more
perfect then your abominable invention of transubstanciation. Do ye not
acknowledge (if you have not your eyes blinded and holden in the depth of the
darkness of frowardnes) that the sun does give unto us his light, his beams,
his force, his heat and strength. And yet the body it self of the sun does
rest and abide in heaven? Do not ye say ordinaryly in your common language,
when the window of the house toward the sun is open, yt the sun comes
into the house? Yet the sun remains always in heaven? Behooves it to snatch
and katch ye body of the sun, causing it to come down and be
transubstantiate in this earthly place before it can give his heat, his beams
his light, and nourishement to plants, herbs trees and earthly creatures? Are
ye so brutishe (o Capharnaites) that ye will not confess the true son of
righteousness Jesus christ, to have much more power then this star of the sun
create and mortal? If then the mortal creature have this power to give us ye
virtue, and strength of his body, by his beams, by his light, and by his heat
sent down into ye earth realy, and effectuously ye body notwtsta^ding abiding
in heaven. It behooves to believe that god the everlasting creator has much
more power to give us the true son of righteousness Jesus Christ to give us ye
force and virtue of his body and blood shed for us, by the beams, light, and
heat of his holy spirit, without constraining him by your witchcraft to be
plucked from the rightha^d of god, and to be drawn out of heaven by your
tra^substa^tiatio^ into earth. Wherefore has not Jesus Christ this power to give
us his light, and to offer to us his body and his blood, to enter wtin us, if
by faith and pure conscience we will receive him by the virtue of his holy
spirit, eue^ as well and better than the son enters into our houses by his
might and power, without drawing it out of heaven to change the substance
thereof? The sun is one only body created, abiding in heaven, ye cause of the
growing of plants, trees, and herbs, which gives nourishment by force and
heat unto al things liui^g upon the earth, and in one and the same moment has
power to quicken, heat, and nourish an infinite number of plants, trees, herbs
and earthly creatures, without seperating, dividing or plucking his body from
heaven to tra^substantiat it. The body also of Jesus christ which he has
carried into heaven and set at the right hand of god, has it not more force,
more virtue, and more strength, to regenerate us, to feed and nourish us, to
give his virtue, his light and his beams, to inspire, quicken, sustain,
lighten, and in a moment make us through faith partakers of his body and blood:
to make us members of his members, knit together in him and by him, by his true
promise contained under the bages and holy signs, left unto us till that the
second coming of his humanity be seen upon the earth. Wherefore (o Massayers)
have ye invented this witchcraft of transubstantiation, to blaspheme against
god, to lessen his power, and less to esteem his power and virtue then the
virtue of ye sun his creature? wherefore will ye pluck the body of Jesus
christ from heaven before the time appointed, to change his substance into your
little round hosts unleavened and printed full of pictures, Jesus Christ as god
aydeth all.
which you cause to be worshipped, seeing that Christ as god, does aid his
church everlastingly, and has power to regenerat feed, and nourish us, yea with
everlasting life and food, by his promise witnessed and assured by his holy
sacraments of Baptism, and of his holy supper. For other comparisons (o
Massayers) familier and homely, consider how the earthly and mortal princes
are esteemed reverenced, and honored for the sacred signs ordained by them. I
will only set forth unto you two, that is to say wax and metalles: of the one is
made the seal of the prince wherewith is sealed the graces, pardons, and
forgeuenesses, the letters and privileges granted by the prince. He that
cou^terfeiteth this seal is he not punished for treason, even as if he he had
hurt the very person of the prince. Does not this seal represent ye very
person of the prince as if he himself were there present? yet ye wax
notwtstanding yt it is called ye seal of the prince) is not therefore
tra^substantiat, but remains still wax, yet after that it has received ye
reverend print of ye prince it is no more called wax, but ye princes seal.
The metalls of gold and silver marked for the coin of the prince to serve for
money, although they be called no more gold, nor silver, but have changed their
names at ye will of the prince, be it into the name of ducate, crown, shillings,
pence, or other names, do they leave to be metals and ye same substance they
were before? this only difference there is, yt they are appointed, and stamped with
the print of the prince, which does really represent him, in such sort, yt he
that clippeth or cou^terfeiteth this money, is punished as for ye crime of
treason, and as he had hurt the proper person of the prince. 1. Cor. 11.
By much better reason the bread and wine consecrated and marked to be
sacraments of ye body and blood of Jesus christ, do really represent him, and
not in painting. Wherefore he yt uses it unworthily shall have everlasting
damnation, as a traitor to the majesty of god. If ye (o Massalians,
Nicolaitains, and transubstantiators) are not sufficiently satified with
thinterpretation of Jesus christ and of his apostles, ne yet with similitudes
and familier co^parisons, to bring you to the true way, and certain form
ordained of god, for the celebration of his holy sacraments, in abolishing your
Mass and Pompilian idolatries, casting away also your abominable witchcraft
of transubstantiation, at the lest, yet will ye give no credit unto the
interpretation of thauncient doctors of the church? Hear than yt which S.
Augustine does recite against Adamantin, August. ca. 12. authorities of the
ancient doctors. The exposition of saint Augustine.
even as ye blood in many places of the holy scriptures is called the water and
the rock christ. So is the bread called the body of Jesus christ, the which
three places must be expounded to be figures and signs. When that (says the
same doctor) Jesus christ spoke these words, hoc est corpus meu^, lib. de
doctri. christi. and in prefati. Psalm. 3
this is my body, and gave the^ bred. He gave the^ the sign of his body, for
he thought otherwise yt it was a thing unlawful, and to discourteous, to devour
the flesh and body of Jesus christ, lib. 10. de can. des. cap. 5. sacrificium
de consecr. destinct. 2.
if there were not a figure there namely, ye bread to put us in mind of the
flesh and body of Jesus christ to have been offered up, for our life, and
everlasting food. Moreover the same doctor uses this interpretation, the
visible sacrament, is ye testament, yt is to sai the holy sign of ye invisible
sacrifice. The like interpretations are described by Tertullian against Marcio^
the heritick: Tertul. lib. 1. and 3.4.
wherefore then (o massalia^s) have not you followed ye authority of the holy
doctors of the church, which would not blaspheme against god by a witchcraft of
tra^substanciatio^? Vt quid paras dentem and ve^trem, creed and ma^ducasti. ca.
Vt quid de co^secratione distinct. 2. August. in li. de remedi. poeniten. and
in ioh. tract. 25. cap. 6. S. Hierom in epist. ad Ephesians.
but have freely acknowledged the sacrament to be a sign or holy visible
figure, signifiyng in spirit and by faith, yt which is invisible? wherefore
prepare ye ye mouth and the belly to devour the flesh of christ corporally?
why do ye not offer your souls by lively faith worthily to eat Jesus christ?
why did you not interpret ye eating of ye body of Jesus christ by the notable
distinction of the holy doctor Ierom, saying the flesh of Jesus christ is
vndersta^did fleshly when there is mention made of ye sheding of the blood and
crucifiing of the body of Jesus christ for our salvation. Ca. dupliciter ^ade^
distinct.
But spiritually when it is said, yt the flesh is the true meat which must be
eaten. For another holy doctor I will allege Gelase Bishop of Rome, Saint
Gelase against Eutychius and Nestorius.
who disputing against the heritiks Eutichians and Nestoriens, does affirm yt
the bread and wine consecrated and made sacraments, do not leave in substance
still to bread and wine, but are figures and signs of ye body and blod of
Jesus christ, by the mystery of ye sacrament. S. Ambrose in his book of
sacraments. chap. 11.
Will ye have more large witnesses of s. Ambrose who upon ye epistle to the
Corinthia^s has expounded eating and drinking the bread and the wine, to
signify, the flesh and the blod of Jesus christ offered for us? Origin in
Leui. homil. 7.
Origin also in his homilies has expounded ye sacraments to be figures, which
must be examined spiritually and not carnally: for this (says he) yt the
letter kills, if it be not understand spiritually, S. Chrisostom in homil.
31. ca. 15. com. 1. Psalm. 22.
when it is written to eat the flesh of christ. Wherefore S. Chrisostom warns
to honor this sacrament, in offering the soul unto god, for which christ was
crucified, and that by this holy sacrament of bread and wine, is signified unto
us the likeness of the body and blood of Jesus christ. To make an end, it
behooves to be ruled by the holy interpretation of our doctor Jesus Christ, and
of his apostles, to honor and reverence his holy sacraments ordened of him for
outward signs, to lift up our minds to heaven to take yt which is represented
by the same signs not to esteem the^ as vain paintings or fa^tasies, but
worthily to receive the^ in lively faith by ye virtue of the holy ghost, to the
end to be fed and nourished with heavenly bred, in ye health of our souls, to com
to life ever lasting. Let us then be assured in Jesus Christ as members of his
body: 1. Cor. 10.
Let us all come into unity to communicate one only bread, and to drink one
only wine, made of many grains knit together, to the end yt we may say with the
holy apostle, 1. Cor. 12.
all we the faithful are ye body of Jesus christ, saved and redeemed by his body
crucified, and blod shed for us. Thus dwelling and abiding by faith in Jesus
christ, eating him, and drinking his blood. Let us believe surely yt he was
crucified, dead, and risen again, and his body ascended into heaven, D. August.
in joan. tract. 30. Act. 1.3.
sitting at the right hand of god in a certain place, until yt he return with his
humanity, as he went up. Nevertheless his power and divinity are distributed
unto us, and spread over all ye earth, in all places, specially in ye holy
sacraments, which he has left unto us for gages, and outward trial of our
faith, for a remembrance of the death and passion of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

FINIS.

