Disce Mori.

Learn to Die.

A Religious discourse, moving every Christian man to enter into a serious
remembrance of his end.

Wherein also is contained the mean and manner of disposing himself to God,
before, and at the time of his departure.

In the whole, somewhat happily may be observed, necessary to be thought upon,
while we are alive, and when we are dying, to advise our selves and others.

Put thy house in order, for thou shall not live, but die. Esaias. 38. 1. LONDON
Printed by John Wolse. 1600.

To the Honorable and virtuous his very good Lady, the Lady Elizabeth
Southwell, one of the Ladies of the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy
Chamber.
LAtely entering (Right virtuous Lady) into some more then ordinary
consideration of the graceless attempts, and desperate enterprises, which many
in these days (and the more the more pity) by a cowardly yielding to evil
motions, commit even against their own selves, yea their own safety; I
thought to discharge my duty unto Almighty God, and plain meaning to men,
by setting down only some short advertisement, for discontented and
distressed minds. But after, waying with my self, how much it concerns
every man to be careful of his end, whereupon dependes so great a charge, as
his eternal welfare is worth; I then began to draw that particular
advertisement appertayning unto some, to a more general discourse, appliable
unto all, and every one, in this form, DISCE MORI, Learn to Die: For it
seemed to me a thing most necessary, for every sober Christian to be moved
to enter into a serious remembrance of his end, to know the mean and manner
of disposinge himself to GOD, before, and at the time of his departure: that
so by the assistance of Gods good grace, he might live and die the life and
death of the righteous, and that it may be said of him, which S. Ambrose
sometimes spoke of Abraham, Mortuus est in bona senectute, eo quod in bonitate
propositi permansit; Abraham dyed in a good old age, for why? Abraham
perseuered in his good resolutions, in his old age, yea even unto the end.
Madam, I beseech the God of Abraham, to grant you Abraham's good successiue
course, both in the way, and at the end of the way. Your more then usual
favor, and long continued acceptance, has bound me unto you, whom otherwise
I truly reverence, for that I am fully persuaded, you truly reverence God,
and serve him, whom to serve, is blessed liberty, yea, (as I shall in the
discourse following show) is the most honorable estate of all. To make issue
of my duetifull regard, this small occasion is offered. Were I a mere
stranger, I could not for protection sake, seek any better patroness of a
religious discourse, the^ from a religious disposition: but your particular,
respect toward me many ways, is such, as I shall live and die ungrateful. I
could have wished to have made testimony of my willing intention by some other
means, the^ by publishinge under your Ladyships name, these small labors, to
the view of the world: for I must needs confess. I was very loath;
(respectinge my own weakness) to make that known unto others, which is best
known unto my self; until at last, being over entreated by some special
friends, from the university of Oxford, whose sober, judicious, and very
learned advise, I knew not how to gainesay: I was induced to let this
present tracte go forward in the name of GOD. Wherein I seek not praise,
where none is deserved: but only desire the Christian Reader, where ought is
amiss) to attribute that unto my self: and beseech your Ladyship, that if
there be any thing observed, which may move so much as a good thought, that
it would please you, to give the glory only unto God, to whose heavenly
protection comme^ding you ever in my prayers, I cease for this time to hold
you any longer from the matter it self, which follows.

Your Ladyships in humble duty Christoph. Sutton.

As death s^aueth thee so shall Judgment find thee



The Preface to the godly Reader.
THat Religion is somewhat out of joint, when Christian conversation goes not
even, as it ought with Christian profession, it is so apparent it cannot be
denied, such and so sensible a defect, as that thereby the whole body is not a
little blemished. Those whose hearts desire is, that Israel may be saved, and
whose true charity is wont to beseech God, for the good of all, have not only
lifted up humble hands to heaven, but also endeavored by painful labors, to
seek (as much as in them lies, and so farre-forth as the times may permit and
suffer) the best redress in this case they could: some by substantial
answering, and soberly asswaging the turbulent humors of those men, whose
private fancies have much hindered higher proceedings in matters of faith.
Refuted they may be, and are, quieted they will not be: others by devout and
learned exhortations, in seeking to make a stay of those evils, which Atheism
and want of the fear of God, would in great likehoode bring upon this declining
world, both laboring for their times to keep some remembrance of Jesus
Christ in the minds of men, before all be too far out of square, or come to
unrecoverable ruin. But here may we not demand of the diligent obseruers of
our imperfections abroad, whose manner is so much to strike upon this one
string, and by this defect take occasion to call in question, nay, to bring in
open oblequie our Christian cause, are none fallen at home from the ancient
sincerity, and harmless devotion of former and better ages of the Church?
Some state meddling actions, these uncharitable censures in clean shutting out
from the household of faith, and hope of life, those who have poor souls to
save as well as others, and bear as true a love to Christ crucified as
themselves, may put them in mind, that we may all bear a part together in
that song of mercy; Asper gas nos Domine, Cleanse us O Lord. May we not all b^
think our selves on both sides, whether these be not the days whereof our
Savior Christ spoke, Wherein iniquity should abound? Was ever that old
complaint of Hilary more truly verified? Hilarious ad Constantium
Dum in verbis pugnaest, dum in nouitatibus quaestio est, dum in ambiguis
occasio est, dum in consensu difficultas est, iam nemo Christi est; While there
is strife in words, while there is question in innouations, while there is
occasion in doubts, while there is a waywardness in consent, none is of
Christ. This nipping and galling one of, and at another; this eger pursuit of
the living, and troubling the very ashes of the dead, (who can not answer for
themselves) is far from that charity that hops all things: and the
counsel of that spirit that biddes us pray one for another. To see what wit
and learning is wont to do in tossing the testimonies of ancient record to
and fro: nay, which is more, in wresting the very text of holy writ upon the
tenters of our own dispositions, would so amaze him, that shall read over
with aduisement, the controversies of these times, as he shall think some of
them rather discourses to try masterie, then otherwise sincere travels
employed for Gods glory, and his Churches good. Now God of his mercy grant
that once this froward crossing world may draw to a Christian harmony, that
we may have less fighting and writing for religion, and more indeuouring on
all parts to become as we ought, more religious; that so this little Arc of
Christ's Church may now in the cool of the Evening, with a so^t gale draw
homewarde, and with old Simeon embracing Christ, make ready to depart in
peace. It is the Wisemans advise to every one, Remember thy end, and let
enmity pass. And thus much we beseech at their hands, in whose hardest
judgment our cause is so feeble, that setting aside all private respects, they
would at last considerwhose gracious protection has defended so long his, and
our cause, whose loving and watchful eye has preserved her, who is ( and God
grant long may be) the staff of our peace, calling to mind that of our
Savior, If you will not believe me, yet believe me for my works sake. For
those busy spirits nearer home, who would needs govern before they have well
learned to obey, and that at their first bourding must sit at the helm to
guide all, how raw, how unskillful soever: but experience has long time since
taught the world, and the ruin of the East Church, how dangerous it is to
sail in a ship, where the pilots are of a disposition to be quarrelling
within themselves: these men's new devises in matters of mere conceit, have
long seemed unto themselves, better then all the wisdom of the world. But may
we entreat them at the last to recount with themselves their own folly, in
making it as they have done, a perfection of godliness, to call and reckon
others ungodly. And this cursed scoffing at Noah's nakedness, a sport to
delight their sower austerities. would to God these strange minded men would
listen to the grave counsel of Saint Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in hom. Mat, 43.
Quod si cupiditate iudican di, iudex esse velis, sedem ego tibi o^tendam, quae
magnum quaestum tibi conferet, and nulla animi labe maculabit, sedeat men's and
cogitatio, iudex in animam atque conscientiam tuam, adducas omnia delictatua in
medium, dicastecum quare hoc velillud ausus es, If with a desire of judging
thou would needs be a Judge, I will show thee (says he) the judgment
seat, which shall be gainful unto thee, and no way touch thy conscience, let
thy mind and thought sit down to give sentence, call forth all thy offenses,
and begin to say with thy self, why have thou done this or that? This private
examining of themselves, would soon make these public controllers of all
others, by plausible pretenses of reformation, to look nearer home, and amend
in themselves where much is amiss. 1. Tim. 13.
S. Paul blamed their course Gen 27. 30.
whose manner was to go from house to house. Esau that lost the blessing, was
hunting abr^^d; but Jacob that had the blessing and the inheritance too, kept
at home. The wise man, says Solomon, is the first accuser of himself. And
Judah spoke humbly of an offender, when he said: Gen 38. 36.
She is more righteous then I. Let these men know that obedience is better then
sacrifice, and that he who is wont to give grace unto the humble, is also said
to resist the proud. Be they well assured this slight stuff will shrink
when it comes to the wetting. This counter^et coin will prove dross, when it
shall be put to the great trial. An easier matter is it for deuisers to
reprove others, then to amend them selves. Those who have a blemish in their
eye, think the sky to be ever cloudie. Nothing more common with troublesome
dispositions, which have not known the way of peace, then to be contending,
seldom contented what cause soever there be otherwise, to be thankful unto
God. The Lord by the Prophet Malachie says, I have blessed you: the unthankful
people replied, wherein have thou blessed us? If all be not answerable unto
some men's conceits, all is amiss; no blessing of God acknowledged, no
thankfulness at all remembered. To let these also go, with their childish
proc^edings, men are men, Truth is truth: little need have we, did we bethink
our selves well, in this case to complain: worse we may fear^, better to come
we do not hope for: our rather wanting then enjoying, may make posteritte to
acknowledge our present good, in which case the religious and well disposed may
devoutly say, Psalm. 6^. 28, 29.
O Lord stablish the thing that thou have wrought in us, for thy temples sake
and Jerusalem. A third sort there is, who seeing the world divided into so many
parts, care in effect for neither: of these kind of men the Apostle could not
but with weepinge speak. And sure what more lamentable, then that men, who
bear the name of Christians, should live like Pagans, and Infidels, and say in
their hearts with the fool, There is no God? Is not that of the same Prophet
found true in these men's manners? Man that is in houour may be compared unto
the beasts that perish. I th^nke surely says Saint Bernard, Bernard. in Cant.
if the beasts could speak, they would call godless people beasts. The
^aunger gre^^, the peril imminent, no fear of God, no remembrance of the
state present, for that to come, if ever it were needful, it is now needful,
comparing what men are, with what they should be, to call this world to a
remembrance of it self: Mala. 1. 6
If I am a father (says God) where is my love, if I am a master, where is my
fear? If there be a heaven, where is our ca^e in directing our lives, for the
obtaining of the same? if there be any thing to do these men good, a
remembrance of their mortality, and an applying themselves to learn to die,
should somewhat aua^le. The handwriting once against Baltazar caused his
very heart to shake, and his knees to knock together, Mean, Dan. 5. 25.
mean, tekel peers. The word mean, God has nu^bred thy days, tekel* thou art
weighed in the balance. I me^ take not heed in time, it may be written of
every one whose days are in the numbering and we may fear lest the hand write
peers too which may make al to consider both what they are and what they
shall be* when we see others dead we may consider we shall shortly do the like,
and take part in the same lot that they have done before us. 1 Cor. 15 26.
In the mean season, if death be an enemy, as it is, says the Apostle, the^
let us watch it as an enemy, prevent it as an enemy, and so be a ble to e^dure
the assalts thereof when need requires, and at the hour of our departure
rather rejoice the^ fear. herupon, this present discourse of learning to die,
shall first lay before thee (good Christian reader) how necessary it is for
every one to enter into a serious remembrance of his end. The manifold
reasons that should move him to this remembrance, amongst these reasons,
specially the meditation of his state, and manifold afflictions incident unto
the life present, should move him hereunto. Correction causes the scholar
more painfully to apply himself unto h^s lesson: and so the many
chasticements in this world, cause us the rather to ^ee more industr^ous in
this learning: the means that call us away from so good a labor are
mentioned, and the manner how to avoid these means is with all expressed. To
make an entrance into this so solemn a subject; I was sometime since
occasioned by the treatable visitation and most Christian end of that very
woorshipfull knight sir Robert Southwell, whose approved service in this
Commonwelth, and good reputation in his Country, is well known unto many:
but of whose true heart to God-warde, both in the time of his life, and at the
time of his death, my self can truly relate before others. If there be (as
without doubt there is) a duty which we owe unto the faithful departed, and
a good remembrance to be had of those happy souls; then might I not omit a
reverend mention of him, whose portion I trust assuredly is with God. Look
what a mournful mind during the time of this his so Christian visitation,
could at times consider of, and observe in private, I have been since by
special motives drawn on, to make that poor labor public, as a discourse
proper unto the time. For although a consideration of our departure from this
world be a subject not unfitting all ages, yet seeing we are fallen into those
days, wherein many live as if they should never die* and die, as if with
death al were done; and when they come to depart this world they are so far
to seek in a right disposing themselves to God, as if they seldom or never
entrod into any earnest consideration of the same. Necessary are those many
treatises which tend to the amendment of life, but because upon our last
conflict depends our eternal victory, against the professed enemy of our
souls, the well behauing our selves in this combat, must needs of all other
be most necessary. To guide the ship along the seas, it is no doubt a good
skill, but at the very entrance into the haven, then to avoid the dangerous
rocks, and to cast anchor in a safe road, is the chiefest skill of all. To run
the race in good order is the part of a stout champion; but so to run toward
the end of his race that he may obtain the crown, is the very perfection of
all his pains. Then a good life what more Christian like, but after that
passed to die in the faith and fear of God, what more divine? To order aright
the vpshot of our own time, and farewell from this world, what more behouefull
if we respect our selves? but in these occasions to be also helpful unto
others, what more charitable in respect of the communion of Saints, and that
common joy we receive in the good of all? We are charged to let men live
loselie, and most vnchristianlie to depart this world, to lead their lives,
and to go out of their lives without order: what men do, is one thing, what
we wish were done, is another. God knows, and many can witness how often,
how earnestly we call upon this careless world, to remember that high and
weighty business of the soul men have in hand. Though there be not in use,
Iam. 5. 14.
vnguentes eum oleo, which we find rather appropriate unto the former times of
the Church, and nearest unto the Apostles themselves. Yet we say with Saint
James: Infirmaturquis? inducat presbyte. ros and orent super eum: and to this
end is our Church form set down: An order for the visitation of the sick,
so entitled. We wish as hear^ilie as any Christians can, that once the holy
exercises of fasting and prayer, were more devoutly put in practice then we
see, and sorry to see the^ are. We reverence antiquity, wherein without all
question, God was more carefully worshipped, memorable deeds of devotion and
hospitality, to h^s glory glory more chearefullie performed, what is
consonant to faith, and good manners, we allow and commend even in those, who
seem otherwise in the opinion of many so far different from us, and we
heartily wish that men might see our good works, And so glorify our father
which is in heaven. It is said of Aristides, who perceiving the open scandal
likely to arise, by reason of the contention sprung up betwixt him and
Themistocles, to have besought Themistocles mildly after this manner: Sir, we
both are no mean men in this commonwelth, our dissension will proo^e no small
offense unto many, good Themistocles, let us be at one, and if we will needs
strive, let us strive who shall excel each other in virtue and love. The
Elements though in qualities diverse: yet do they all accord for the
constitution of the body natural, what should Christians but acaccord for the
conservation of the Church, that they be not a shame to Israel which Church is
a body mystical: we are all sheep of that fold whereof Christ is the
shepherd, we are all stones of that building, whereof he was the corner. We
are all branches of that Vine whereof he was the stock. We have but one God
for our father, that created us all, one Christ Jesus to our Savior, that
redeemed us all, one holy Ghost to our sanctifier, that does adorn us all. We
are but pilgrims and strangers, and we shall one day find, that a peaceable
christian life, with a good departure from this world, shall stand us more in
stead then all the world besides, when after bearing our brains in matters of
contradiction, we shall perceive that this charitable Christian life is worth
all. And therefore beseech we God, the author of all good gifts, that Mercy
and truth may meet together, that righteousness and peace may kiss each
other. And his glory dwell in our land, until we come to dwell in the land of
glory.

As thou art, I once was. As I am, thou shall be.



A Copy of a letter sent from Oxford to the Author of this book, and thought
good in his absence to be set down by those to whom the public allowance
hereof did appertain.
MAster Sutton, I have perused your copy, which seems to me in my simple
opinion, very devout, divine and learned: The subject of your book, I greatly
approve, for to teach to die well, is the forciblest perswasiue to live well,
which alas are in these wicked times, both little thought on: for in deed, men
live as though they never made account to die: and they die as if they never
thought on another life. Your several treatises are very Christian and most
necessary in this dying age, to all goodness: your phrase and vain of
penninge sweet and patheticall: your allusions divine and comfortable. I say
at once, and I think, Omnia in illo libro spiritum dininum olent. Wherefore my
counsel unto you is, that you would make this your book live by printing,
which may make many live from sinning. Gods good spirit has not moved you to
take this good pains, now to bury the fruit, so soon as it is borne, and
none profited, but that it should be presented unto the world, to live, when
you are dead: Foelix and formosa proles est: be not then so unnatural now, to
stifle it in the cradle, or cast it with Moses to drowning: it is worthy the
nurcing, and bringing up of a Princes daughter, and your honorable patroness.
The Church looks to have good service of it: the Vniu^rsitie, your College,
your mother, your friends expect credit and commendation by it: your self the
father of it, will no doubt have great joy of it. Go forward then on Gods
name, and christen it to the world. And so I leave with my hartiest
commendations, longing to see that fair printed, which is now so near
written, I could s^a^ce read it. From L. Col. the 6. of August. 1600.

Your assured loving friend. R. K.

The Contents of the Chapters.
I.
An exhortation moouinge every one to apply himself to learn to die.
II.
Wherein is showed the cause, why men so seldom^ in these days, enter into a
serious remembrance of their end.
III.
How behoouefull it is for every Christian man, soberly to meditate of his end.
IIII.
Wherein is showed that the estate and condition of the life present, may
instely move us to this consideration.
V.
That a meditation of the li^e to come, may also move us to the same
remembrance of our end.
VI.
That we need not fear Death, much less to meditate thereof.
VII.
That the afflictions of mind, which are incident in the life of man, may
move him to meditate of his end.
VIII.
That the griefs of body, may also move him to this serious meditation.
IX.
How it concerns every one, in time of health, to prepare himself for the
day of his dissolution.
X.
Wherein is showed, the manner of this preparing, or the estate and condition
of life, wherein the Christian should ever stand prepared for Death.
XI.
How the Christian man should demean himself, when sickness begins to grow
upon him.
XII.
How he should dispose of worldly goods and possessions.
XIII.
How necessary it is for the sick, leaving worldly thoughts, to apply his mind
to prayer and some godly meditation.
XIIII,
How the sick, when sickness more and more increases, may be moved to
constancy and perseverance.
XV.
How they may be advertised who seem unwilling to die.
XVI.
How they may be induced to depart meekly, that seem loath to leave v orldly
goods wife, children, friends or such like.
XVII.
How the impatient may be persuaded to endure the pains of sickness and
death peaceably.
XVIII.
How they are to be comforted, who seem to be troubled in mind, with a
remembrance of their sins, and fear of judgment to come.
XIX.
How the sick in the agonye of death, may be prepared toward his end.
XX.
In what manner the sick should be directed by those, to whom this waightye
business does properly pertain.
XXI.
Wherein is laid down the manner of commending the sick into the hands of
God, at the hour of Death.
XXII.
An exho^tation to comfort those, who lament and (...) for the departure of
others.
XXIII.
How those that undertake any dangerous attempt either by sea or land,
wherein they are in peril of Death, should devoutly, before, make themselves
ready for God.
XXIIII.
A brief direction for such as are suddenly called to depart the world.
XXV.
A Consolatory Admonition for those who are often overmuch grieved at the
crosses of this world.
XXVI.
An admonition to all, while they have time, to make speed in applying them to
this lesson of learning to die.
XXVII.
The great folly of men in neglecting this opportunity or time offered to learn
to die.
XXVIII.
Wherein is showed, that this learning to die, may justly move us to lead a
Christian life, in holy conversation and godliness.
XXIX.
Wherein is showed in the last place, that a consideration of Christ his second
coming to judgment, ought to move every one to live religiously, and also
to apply himself to this lesson, of learning to die.
XXX.
A short Dialogue, between faith and the natural man, concerning man's estate in
the world, and his departure from the world.
XXXI.
A Dialogue between Coffeehouse and Hope.
XXXII.
A Dialogue between Presumption and Fea^e.
XXXIII.
A short discourse, wherein is showed the great commendation of a peaceable
course of life, unto which we are moved by a consideration of our end.
DISCE MORI: Learn to Die.
The First Chapter.
An exhortation moving every one to apply himself to this lesson of learning
to Die.

TRue it is, that our abode here in this world is an ordinance established of
God, and may also be very acceptable to man. To procure the continuance of
life, by means ordained, is allowable. Eccles. 38. 3.
To avoid things hurtful to the preservation thereof, is behoouefull.
Wilfully to hinder our own health, is not only against the cours^ of nature,
but a way to tempt the very God of nature. To wish either to be gonne sooner,
or to stay longer in this earthly station, then it shall seem good unto him, by
whose appointment we all stand, is a part (says one) of great ingratitude.
The time therefore allot^ed us to walk in, we may accept, until God call us
away, with thankful hearts: using that space to serve him, Luc. 2. 72
in holiness and righteousness. To desire with the Prophet, Psalm. 72. 15.
that God, who has taught us from our youth by, would not leave us in age,
when we are grayheaded: until we have showed his power unto them who are yet
to come. With Ezechias to do God yet a little more service in the world. Esa
38. 4
With S. Paul to be content to stay our* dissolution, Phil. 1. 24
to be helpefull unto others. In which respects, we may accept of, and wish
yet some farther continuance of our selves and others. The true Israelites in
desiring so heartily the life and preservation of David their king; 2. Sam. 21
17.
because when he should be taken from them, the light of Israel would be
quenched, and many a good Israelite should (as Jacob said) bring his gray
heirs with sorrow, Genesis 42. 38.
unto the grave, did herein she^, no less dutiful, then godly affection.
Notwithstanding, seeing that man has here only a course to finish, which
being finished, he must away: seeing that life is (...), true as ye saying
has, a debt to Death, who has absolute authority over all, then as the
Prophet Daniell said, Hear acceptable counsel: Nay hear O man, Dan. 4. 24.
counsel by y^ wisest amongst men, from the God of Heaven, Eccles 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: or at the least, before the
days come wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them: That is to wit,
thy approaching end It is sufficient, 1. Pet. 4. 3.
^aith S. Peter, That we have seen the time past after the lusts of the
Gentiles. As if he should have said* for the time past that is gone, and cannot
be recalled. Now for God his sake be careful for the time to come. That we
are not borne Angels we know, and experience does show we are all mortal*
Live well and Die well: If we take heed in time, we may, Live, and not to
Die, we cannot. Neither are we to regard how long we live, but how well we
live. To take then a Religious remembrance of our end, as a potion next the
heart in this miserable world, that begins apace to w^xe sickly in the doctrine
of the Resu^rection, and goes forward so coldly in the exercises of Christian
piety, will with God his help be a warm, and special preservative to the
soul, To Learn to Die, is a lesson worthy our best, and best disposed
attention, being a special preparatiue unto a happy end, wherein consists
the welfare, of all our being. David who was for his learning a Prophet; for
his acceptance (says the Scripture) A man after Gods own heart; 1. Sam. 13.
14.
was the^ very studious in this learning, who after watching, and fasting he
besought God to be instructed, Psalm. 39. 5
concerning the number of his days, and the time he had yet to live: Like the
careful scholar that breaks his sleep, forsakes his meat, is often in
meditation, when he ^eates upon some seriou^ subject. Now therefore this (...),
of all lessons, or learninges, Cor. 1. 20.
this learning to Die, what more weighty? what more divine? where is the
Scribe? where is the Disputer? what is it to have the force of Demosthenes? the
pe^swasiue art of Tully, so great an Orator? What is it by Arithmeticall
account, to divide the least fractions, and with the man of God, never to
think of nombring the time we have yet to live? what is it by Geometry, to
take the longitude of the most spacious prospectes, and not to measure that,
which the Prophet calls, only a span long? what is it to set the Triapason
in a musical concent, and for want of good government, to lead a life all out
of tune? what is it with the Astronomer, to observe the motion of the Heavens,
and to have his heart buried in the earth? With the Naturalist, to search out
the cause of many effects, and let pass a consideration of his own ^railty?
With the Historian to know what others have done, and to neglect the true
knowledge of himself? With the Lawyer to prescribe many laws in particular,
and not to remem^er the common Law of Nature, that all must Die, which is a Law
general? In a word, what is it for the deepest worldlings to be able by
reaching policy, to compass plots of high enterprise, as Doctors in that
faculty, and die God knows, like simple men? Surely all is nothing worth. If
thou art wise, be wise then unto thine own soul. As the rich man, says
Fulgentius, Fulgent. epist. ad ^al.
spoken of in the sixteenth of Luke, was poor in all his pomp, mourning in
all his mirth: so are those who Live and never Learn to Die: ignorant in all
their knowledge. For why? the greatest Rabbines in these professions, may come
with Nicodemus to be catechized in this learning* wherein either as babes they
have not received the first rudiments, or as very trewantes, have a little by
roate, and so soon forget all. Well, the perfection of our knowledge is to
know God, and our selves: our selves we best know, when we acknowledge our
mortal being. As men we die naturally, as Christians we die religiously. In
the school of Christ, first by mortifying the old man, we endeavor to die to
the world, and then by a virtuous disposing of our selves, for the day of our
departure, we learn to die in the world. By our dying to the world, Christ is
said to come and Live in us, and by our dying in the world, we are said to
go to Live with Christ. Gal* 2. 20.
Now therefore seeing to die, is so necessary, and to Die well is so
Christian-like, Phil. 1. 23.
let every one apply himself sov^rly to this learning, as the greatest part
of true wisdom. How many in the world beat their brains about frivolous
matters: some being more busy to know where Hellis, says S. Chrysostom,
Chrisost. in Homil. 31.
then how to avoid the pains thereof: others pleasing themselves, in pelting
and needelesse questions, to seem singular amongst men. When they come to
depart this world, then they perceive they have spunne a fair thread, and
wearied themselves in vain; then they consider how they should rather have
applied themselves as they ought, Wherefore to grow more and more, out of love
and liking, with these transitory delights: to break off by little and little,
from this wearysome world, to his home-warde, disposing himself for the day of
his departure is a course most beseeming every wise Christian. Let the vain
glorious, who with the Camelion, live by the air, and therefore is said to be
ever found gaping: who have with the Moon, but a borrowed light in the world,
not light in themselves, and therefore are still waxing and wayninge, follow
shows, and shadows, all which shall perish, in the twinkling of an eye, but
let the wise Christian man Learn to die the death of the righteous, Psalm. 116.
15.
that so he may live joyfully here and hereafter. That which foolish men
are willing to do in the end, wise men do in the beginning. Wisdom it is with
Noah, Genesis 6. 12 Genesis 41. 48.
to build an Arc while the season is calm: with Joseph to lay up store in
the days of plenty: while y^ weather is fair to bethink our selves of a
tempest: in a word, when opportunity does serve, to follow a thriuing husbandry,
sowing the seed of godly actions, in the field of a repe^ta^t heart, that so at
y^ Antumne, or end of our age, we may reap the fruits of everlasting comfort.
We are for the most part even out of the world, before ever we consider out
condition in the same, and we then begin to direct our course aright, when the
time is come rather to make an end. Would to God we would remember that worthy
saying of one, when he was now drawing toward the period of his time, Seen.
epist. 62.
quando iuuenis curaui been viuere, quando senex been mori, When I was a young
man, my care was how to live well, since age came on, my care has been h^w to
die well. And of an other, who brake out into these words: August. de. mat. Luc.
10.
Nihil suauius in hac vita, qua^ vt quietus fiat exitus ex ^adem, In this life
now nothing more sweet unto me then to prepare for a peaceable passage from
the same. With Martha we are combred about many things. Mary that sat musing,
chose the good part. Vnum est necessariu^, One thing is necessary: Learn, O
learn to Die. The enemy that is often looked for, does least hurt, when he
makes his assault. If this Basiliske Death, first see us, before we it, there
is some danger: but if we first discrie the Basiliske, then the Serpent
dies, we need not fear. The tempest before expected, does less annoy,
when the storm shall arise. He that leaves the world, before the world
leaves him, thinks of the day of his dissolution: as the Sick man hearkeneth
to the clock, shall give Death the hand: like a welcome messenger, Luc. 2. 29
and with Simeon pray to depart in peace. Yet the weather is fair, Genesis 7* 5
we may frame an Arc to save us from the flood. Yet Jonas calls in the
street of Ion. 3. 4
Niniuie. Yet Wisdom cries to all that pass by, Prou. 1. 2.
vsque quo: O how long will you love vanity? Yet the Angels are at the gates
Hos. 6. 4
of Sodom. Yet the Prophet woos; O Judah how shall I entreat thee? Yet the
Apostle beseeches for Christ's sake, 2. Cor. 5 20.
that we would be reconciled unto God. To conclude, yet the Bridegroom
tarries and stays the virgins leisure, Matthew. 25 7.
to have them enter with him unto the marriage solemnity. Lord that they would
make speed, and cast off many mere vanities, seeing the joys of heaven carry
for them. The pleasures of this world, are pleasures in show: but the
pleasures that Christ has laid up for them, that are his, are pleasures in
deed. God almighty increase in our hearts a desire of this learning: that so
we may live in his fear, and die in his love, to live for ever.

The Second Chapter.
Wherein is showed, the cause why men so seldom enter into a serious
remembrance of their end

CAn we sufficiently wonder, that the regenerate manne, whom God has made
by grace, ^ contemplative creature, and by glory, Matt. 22. 30.
equalled unto the state of Angels, should be so delighted in the affairs of
this uncomfortable world: so enchaunted with the harlot-like allurements of
sin: so carried away from himself by the way of sensual security, as
utterly to cast away all remembrance of his end, and to become worse then an
Idol of Canaan, which had eyes, and saw not, that is, to have a Reasonable
Soul, and understand not to induce the sons of men lightly, and loosely to
pass over a religious remembrance of this their end? Is his slight, whose
business was, and is, at, and since the fall of Adam, Genesis 3. 4.
to slay souls: Nequaquam moriemini, Tush you shall not dye at all? As if he
would have the remembrance of death* but a melancholy conceit: and least it
should make in man's heart too deep an Impression of the fear of God, he will
have the Forbidden tree to delght the eye: fair words to please the ear,
and drive all away. Eritis vt Dii: Why? you shall be as Gods: when his drift
was to have had them Devils. By this we see, whose practice it is to make the
world run at random as it does, and so many graceles Libertines by a
careless course to pass over their days in vanity, their years: in folly,
so long, until they be taken by the evil day, when they think not of it,
Eccles. 9 12.
as birds in the snare, and fishes in the nett, says the wise man, and so
become utterly undone for ever. To muse of our End, is none of our thoghts: to
hear S. Paul speak of judgment to come, is too chilling a doctrine for our
delightful dispositions, Act. 24, 26,
and makes us cold at the heart. We cannot abide to stay upon such austerities.
with Felix we are not at leisure, for this ^arring music* which soundes not
a right in the consort of our worldly pleasures, and therefore will hear it
another time, happily not at all. To think of death it is Acheldoma, a field
of blood: but to let the time slide wastfully, and our sins increas^
daungerously: These. 5. 3
to promise unto our selves many days, to hear placentia, and to be told of
Peace, Peace, Iere. 8. 11
though sodeine destruction be never so near, is our pleasing ditty: until
the soul be rock a sleep in sin, and sleep as Sisera (which God forbid)
he slept* Judge. 4. 21.
but never waked again. Merciful Lord! Iere. 5. 31.
what will become of this at the last? If nothing else, yet the daily instances
of death before us, do evidently show, what shall in like manner shortly
betide our selves. The interlude is the same: we^ are but now Actors upon the
stage of this world. They which are gone, have played their parts: and we which
remain, are yet acting ours, only our Epilogue is for to end. It is a
marvel above maruailes, that in a battle, where so many go to the
ground, our remiss hearts can take no warning, to enter into some remembrance
of our state. The neighbors fire cannot but give warninge of approachinge
flames, Mihi heri, tibi hodie: yesterday to me, Ecclesiast. 38. 23.
to day to thee. Whose turn is next, God only knows, who knows all* He
that once thought but to begin to take his ease, Luc. 12. 20.
was feign that very night, whether he would or no, to make his end. If
nothing else, yet so many, so apparent precedentes, should move us toshake
off this strange forgetfulness, unless that complainte of Cyprian be also
verified; Cypr. de vanit. id^.
Nolumus agnoscere quod ignora^e non possumus: We will not know that which we
cannot but know. Good Lord, into what a dangerous Lethargy of the soul are
we fallen, when so many obiectes before our eyes, which are so often sounding
in our dullest ears, can nothing move: or at least so little, as sodeinely all
is gone. Our moving is with Agrippa, in modico tantum, but only somewhat,
which by and by is forgot again. Our consultations are, Volumus, and nolumus,
we will, and we will not: and so with the sluggarde, nothing is done. What
long discourse have we in our greatest meetings, but dead men are partly, if
not chiefly, the subject of the same? How often hear we the solemn ^nell.
when our selves can say, well, some body is gone? Do we not pass by the graves
of many, who for age, and strength might have rather seen us lead the way?
and yet for all this, Pro. 14. 9.
to dream, as if there were no death at all? Go too says Solomon to the
slothful, sleep on. Let fools, as they do, make but a sport of sin, and
say with the old Epicures, (...), B. Re^. in Tertul. de Anima.
Why? what have we to do with death? They shall one day find, that death will
have to d^e with the^, when he shall strip them into a shrowdinge sheet, ^inde
them hand and foot, and make their last bed to be the hard and stony grave. Of
which sort of men, that moan of Moses may justly be renewed: Deu. 32. 29.
O that this people were wise, and would remember the latter things. That they
would cast to mind, the days will come, and God knows how soon too. When
the kepers of the house shall tremble, which are the hands: when the strong
men shall bow themselves, to wit, the legs: when they shall wax dark, that
look out of the windows, that is to say, the eyes: When the ears,
Ecclesiast. 1^. 3. 9.
or daughters of music shall be abased: when grasshoppers on bended shoulders
shall be a burden: when the wheel shall be broken at the Cisterne: that is the
heart, whence the head draws the powers of life: in a word, when dust shall
turn to dust again: the joints stiffed, the senses ben^mmed, the
countenance pale, the blood cold, the eyes closed, the brows hardened, the
whole body all in fainte sweat, Ierem. 22. 29.
wearied. Hear O earth, earth, says the Prophet: Almighty God clothed our
first parents with the shinnes of dead beasts, Genesis 3. 21.
that when they saw what was about the^, they should remember by reason of
sin, what should become of them. When Christ showed at his transfiguration
upon the mount, Peter and James, a part of his glory; he showed them withal
Moses, and Elyas, Mat. 17. 3
two dead men, are de^acted from men: which might be withal a remembrance of
their mortality. When the Prophet David spoke of man's uncertain condition and
certain Psa. 49. 1* 2. 3. 4. 5.
en^e, in the 49. Psalm, because it is so long before; the most glorious
amongst men, in the eye of the world, will remember themselves to be but men.
First, he^ speaks unto all: Hear all ye people. And least any should
think themselves exempted, the^ unto all, of all estates: High and Low, Rich
and Poor, one with an other: and because he would have it known to be a
matter of importance in deed, he says: My mouth shall speak of wisdom,
my heart shall talk of understanding: utter inge the selfsame twice over, as
if we might wonder, what the Prophet had to say, which is indeed his own
wondering. Seeinge that wise men die as well as fools: that death grows upon
them: that their beauty shall consume in the Sepulcher: that they shall carry
nothing away with them: that all their pomp shall leave them, when they go and
follow the generation of their Fathers: yet for all this they think that they
shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places endure from one generation
to another, calling their lands after their own names: this is their
foolishness says he. And surely as in many other things, the wisdom of man
is foolishness with God, so is it in this, 1. Cor. 1. ^. 5.
Joseph of Aramathea, a rich man (as we read in the Gospel) had a Sepulcher in
his garden. Surely in places, Joan. 19. 41.
where we take felicity, we should not but have a mention by some good thought
at least. of our mortal being. In all other affairs we are often vigilant:
but in this so remiss, as if all were but a game. Did we watch death, which in
times of our chiefest delighted most watches us, and often takes us too; then
would we not live as we live, and sin as we sin, but give a thousand
dalliances, a bill of divorce, as if for their baggage dealing we would have no
more to do with them. But so long as we live, we spend our days, as if we
had an estate of Feesimple, or Patent at large to continue as we lift, to
commit sin, as easily as beasts drink wat^r, without remorse, without fear.
One of the greatest evils in the life of man, is a careless neglecte of Gods
woorship. One of the greatest causes of this neglect, is the forgetfullnesse of
his end. Therefore (says Gregory) do so many cast off all care of Christian
piecy, because they never care at all. Greg. mor.
to mind their present condition of humane frailty. When the Prophet Jeremy
would show the state of Jerusalem to have become altogether irreligious:
without mentioning many causes, he expresses the maine cause in brief, as
thus: Non est recordata finis, Lam. 1. 9
She remembered not her end. So by this we see, Satan has no more dangerous
devise to draw men from GOD, like Absalom, who stole away the hearts of the
people, when they were going down to do homage to David their king, 1. Sam.
15. 6.
then by stealing from their hearts this remembrance of their end. The
Panther, as is written of him, knowinge how beasts fly from him by reason of
his oughly head, which frayes the^, thrusts only his head in some secret
corner, whilst they gazing on his goodly spotted hide, nothing suspectinge
their approaching end, suddenly he breaks out, and prays upon them. So
this foul headed Panther Satan, perceiving well, how much delight men take in
worldly pleasures, hides his deformed head, settinge out his fine coulored
skin; that is, the glory and vanity of pleasant, but dangerous delights,
whilst in the mean time they neglecting their enemy, their end; he suddenly
seeks to entrappe and devour them. Wherefore men had need be prepared and
vigilant in this respect, that they may be ever provided against his so subtle
deceites, and Remember their end, before it end them; that is, before it be
said, as unto Ahaziah, 2. ki^. 1. 4.
Thou shall not come down from the bed, unto the which thou art gone up. And
that which is chiefest of all, before the soul by a consumption of sin,
pyne to death. Blessed Lord! who? were he not careless in the superlatiue
degree, would not sometimes retire himself from this combersome world, and
remember that which almost he cannot forgett, That he must one day die? Why
did God leave, says S. Austen, Aug. Ep. ad Diase.
our last day of our life unknown to us; was it not because every day should
be prepared of us? which preparing we may not neglecte upon pain and peril
of loss forever. Wherefore let them take heed in time, Exodus 5 2.
who pass over their days Pharao-like, Eccle. 5. 4.
Atheist like, saying, who is the Lord? We have sinned, and what evil is
happened unto us? be they well assured, that Death like a Sargeant sent from
above, upon an action of Debt, at the suite of Nature her self, will sooner
or later, attache and arrest them all: and make them aunsweare this high
contempt, where God himself is a party, at the Court of Heaven. Let them
know* that all must yield, be they as strong as Sampson, as glorious as
Herod, as mighty as Alexander: this tyrant Time will sweep them all away.
Moses upon the mount Abarim: Deuteronomy. 32. 49.
Aaron upon the mount Hor: Nom. 20. 23.
Methusalath after so many years. Genesis 5. 27
The holiest, the healthiest, where, or when, we know not: all must down when
death comes. We daily see it, and will not stick sometimes our selves to
say as much, and yet remember nothing less, as if it were only some
arbitrable matter, and so we bring our years to an end, as it were a tale
that is told. Of all other we cannot sufficiently maruelle, that old men,
when as now drooping nature puts them in mind, that their continuance is
not long, when bended back makes them look down, whether they will or no,
and biddes them think of their hearse or grave: to see these either addicted
to the insatiable desire of gain, or given unto the lightest behavior of
youth, shows them to be far from this religious remembrance of their end.
Sophocles a heathen man would blush for shame to see the most unseemly matches
and marriages of our time. wherein age and youth are yoaked together; a thing
so contrary in nature, so unseemly in reason, as nothing more: and the
inexcusable folly of age, to be so far from a consideration of that which is
seemly both before God and man Tully could say long ago, of civil
gouernemente amongst men, Cicero de Senect.
Aptissima arma senum exercitationes virtutum: Old men's weapons, what should
they else be, but exercises of virtue? In Christianity, more fitter were it a
great deal for them, to be at their devotions, then to do often as they do.
Isaac thought it time at Genesis 27. 2
these days, to commune of blessing, and of his end: My son let me bless
thee, I am old, and know not the day of my departure.

They do as much labor in effect and more, that sit at the stern, and
govern, as those that toil and toss otherwise: but to move age to this
consideration, the very beholding of others, 2. Kin. 1. 13.
that go before them, is in reason sufficient. When the third governor over
Fifty, of whom mention is made in the second book of Kings, saw but his two
fellow Captains over Fifty devoured before him, it went so nere his heart, that
he came forth, fell down and besought the man of God, that his life might be
precious in his sight. How many Fifties in late years of mortality and war
have we seen, or heard to have been devoured by death? How many of our fellow
Soldiers in this spiritual conflict, in which we all fight, have we seen
die in the field? How many of our dearest friends have taken their leave and
gone before, and yet for all this there is no coming to make humble
supplication (I say) not to the man of God, but to God himself, that our lives
and deaths may be precious in his sight As is, Psalm. 116. 15.
says David, the death of his saints. The Publicans but hearing the Axe to
be laid to the root of the tree, and that every tree, which did not bring
forth fruit, should be hewn down, and cast into the fire, it made them come
to John the Baptist with their Quid faciemus? Luc. 3.
O what shall we do to avoid these things! The men of Nineveh hearing but
once of their imininent end, it wrought such, and so great remorse in them, as
they all out of hand fasted, put on sackecloth, Ion. 3. 8.
and sorrowed for their sins Often has God knocked at the door of our
hearts, to advertise us of our mortality: For when is there that has not
sometime experienced in himself by feeling the infirmity of his declining
nature? by auoidinge the perils of apparent danger, beesides the sundry
warninges to this effect, whether we must? And here we may all wonder at the
mercy and patience of God, who^ by these motives does admonish us of our
approaching end. But yet for all this how little humblinge of our selves is
there before him, whose dominion reaches unto the ends of the earth, whose
power is above all powers, 1. Sam. 2. 6.
from generation to generation, world without end: who brings to the grave,
and rayseth up again. What a dangerous course is it never to awake Christ,
though the ship leake, and be often in perrill of drowninge, never to think
of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4. 16.
until we stand in need of him, Joan. 5. 25
never to begin to live, until we are ready to die, 2. Pet. 3. 10.
never to call to mind that Time of Times, Mat. 16. 27.
until we hear the Trumpe soundinge, Matt. 25. 41.
until we see the graves openinge, Apocal. 6. 16.
the earth flaming, the heavens melting, the judgment hastening, the Judge
with all his Angels coming in the clouds to denounce the last doom upon all
flesh, which will be unto some, woe, woe: when they shall cry unto the
mountains to cover them, and for shame of their sins hide themselves, if it
were possible, in Hell fi^e. If we have any fear, this should move fear: If
any remembrance, this should cause a careful remembrance of our end. O
consider, says the Prophet, you that forget God, Least he take you away,
Psalm. 5. 22.
and there be none to deliver you. Salvation is a matter of great earnest. Our
Savior Christ by those parables of the Wise Virgins, Math. 25. ^.
and Watchful servants, what else does he teach his Disciples and us all,
Luc. 12. 37.
but in so weighty a cause to be careful in deed? We have as much need as
any that ever lived under the cope of heaven, considering these sinful
days. When God said, the wickedness of men is great upon earth, Genesis 6. 5
it was time for Noah to prepare for an Arc to save himself. When once the
cry of Sodom was ascended to Heaven, it was time for Lot to think of his
departure, Genesis 19. 14.
unto the Hill countries. When this world now after many strong fittes of great
contentions begins to trifle idly with every fancy, we may partlye gather
by these sickly signs, which may it is drawing and say. God of Heaven help
this world, for it is a weak world indeed. These be no days to live
securely in: but rather time and high time is it for every one, to amend one,
that God may have mercy upon us all. Have we not example by them that sleep
until the Bridegroomes coming, Mat. 25. 11.
that every knock will not be sufficient warrant to enter? Genesis 27. 38.
By him, that wept for a blessinge, when it was too late: that every sigh will
not be a satisfaction for our sins. It Is most sure, and we had need look to it
in time: Eccles. 11. 3.
Where the tree falls, there it lies. And as the last day (says S. Austen)
of our life leaves us; so shall the day of Doom find us. To let all alone
until it be too late, was their folly, who long since were drowned in the
flood. Genesis 7. 21
To cast only for wealth and ease, was his worldly wised^m, that made a
sudden farewell from both: when that night his soul was taken from him, Lu.
12. 20
and not yielded of him. To defer all unto the last push, never entringe into
a Religious remembrance of our end, is an effete of that ill spirit, called
sensual security, which kind of Spirit is not cast out, but by Fasting and
Prayer.

The Third Chapter.
How behoouefull it is for every Christian man, soberly to meditate of his end.

IN the whole Tenure of a Christian life, no part more heavenly, then that we
spend in Religious meditation, for this Religious meditation, no subject more
nearly concerns the state of man, then often to beat upon a Remembrance of
his end, wherein consists the Center of al his desire^, the harvest of all
his labors, his s^re and most happy repose for ever. How behoouefull then is
it for every one, to sequester himself sometimes from incombrances of this
world, vacare Deo, to be at leisure for God, and to call his best thoughts to
counsel to this business of his soul: the manyfold effects of so good and
practice will easily show and approve as much. For who is there that with
Ezechias will not fall to set his householde, his life, Esa. 38. 1.
his soul, and all in order, when once that of the Prophet mooues his very
heart: Ezechias moriere, Ezechias now God be merciful unto thee, thou art no
longer a man of this world, dispatche to be gone, thou must shortly die? Who
is there that will not set down, and cast over his bills of account, before he
run too far in Arrerages, that thinks thoroughly he shall (before long be)
hear his masters voice to warn him out of office: Iam non poteris villicare,
Thou shall be no longer Steward. Luc. 16. 2.
In a generality, how this or the like remembrance causes a careful direction
of all our life, when any temptation does come, that of the Wise man does
briefly express: My son remember thy end, Eccles. 1. 40.
in whatsoever thou shall take in hand, and thou shall never do amiss. This
remembrance, if it did sincke into the heart, whereas often like a piece of
music it sounds in the ear, then would it work better effects in the
world, then commonly it is wont. If coueteous men, who seem possessed with a
spirit of having, who like Moales and Antes, are always turning in the earth.
If the proud, who like Giants, with contempt, disdain the meaner sort of
men, who are made of the same mould* as well as they, did deeply consider
that one of these days, they shall become a clod of earth: when like a
State-searcher. Death will see they carry away nothing with them, when these
loftye looks shall be laid full low, and all their glory be Eclipsed:
some good thought to this effect, 1. King. 5. 18.
would make them say with Naaman the Sirian, God be merciful unto us, in this
one thing: that we think not oftener of our end. Would any Ammon commit
that freely in the sight of God, 2. Sam. 13 19.
which he shameth to commit in the sight of the meanest of all Gods creatures
^. Would any Ahab oppress and wrong poor Naboaths; 1. Kin. 13. 9.
and did himself remember he were but a Soiourner, as were his Forefathers; and
that after an evil course, he must shortly go to answer for all, when the
heart shall feel, for wrong offered, many a cold pull: and the sins lie upon
the soul, as heavy as lead. Our Savior Christ said, to fore-warne Reuolters:
Remember Lots wife. Lu. 17. 32
So may it be said, to advise all oppressors: Remember poor Naboths vineyard.
To call to mind, that this world, and the glory thereof, so soon passes
away, that we are here to day, and gone tomorrow. If nothing else: yet with
men of reasonable capacity, this were enough, were it considered, to contain
them within the listes and limits of a Christian and conscionable course. But
because this is not considered, so many live, as if they had no souls to save.
Such is the calamity of our time: Non sic erat a principio; but it was not so
from the beginning. The godly Patriarchs, in purchasing only a place to bury
in, what does it else, but manifestly show unto succeeding posterity, how
mindful they were of their state mortal. That song of Moses, which the
ancient Fathers say, the people of God used, in form of a daily prayer, to
wit, Psalm. 90. 12.
the 90. Psalm, wherein both man^ frailty is acknowledged, is also this
petition pathetically inserted: Lord teach us to number our days: does it not
show unto us, with what devotion they ^aily entered into a Remembrance of their
end? Where is that mindfullnesse of Abraham, so great a Patriarch, Genesis 18. 27.
who confessed himself to be but dust and ashes? Of Job, who daily waited
till his chaunginge should come? Job. 14. 14
Of king David, who made no other reckoning of himself, Psalm. 120. 3.
but to be only a stranger amongst men? Of the Apostle S. Peter, who
counted his contynuance here, 2. Pet. 1. 13.
but an abode in a Tabernacle, which he should shortly lay off. Tabernacles
were only for men in warrefare and Pilgrims, to show, while we are in these
bodies, we are no other, but men ready to remove. How far these were from
setting their repose here in earth, we may hence easily perceive, Amongst
heathen men, the Emperors, when they were crowned, the Sepulchers of dead men
were showed unto them, and they asked, what one should be made for them;
thereby putting them in remembrance, that they must look for no other, but
themselves shortly to have the like. For the old Saints and servants of God,
who lived in a continual farewell from the world, like wise marchantes always
thinking of their return, endeavored to take up treasures by bills of
receite, where they should stay and make their abode for ever. Jacob was
careful in his journey to Haram. Genesis 28. 12.
Jacob slept, the same night God showed him a ladder, the top whereof reached to
Heaven. Jacob that as the journey thou and al Pilgrims should be careful of
indeed. The Philosophers who saw no farther then the clouds of humane reason,
perceyuinge the declining course of humane nature, could say, the life of wise
men, what should it else be, but a continual meditation of death? If any to
exercise himself in this speculatiue remembrance of his state, would keep a
Catalogue to this end, and often recite by name? how many reverend Prelates,
how many grave Counselors, how many worthy men of Arms, and gallants of the
world, how many of his nerest familiars he had known, within these few years,
to have flourished with their troops and trames after them* saying (Good
Lord:) Are they not dead and rotten? are they not all gone almost, as if they
never had been? Why should men make so much account of this world, that is so
transitory? Again, what more effectual mean, to make us shake off the
allurements of this life, as Paul did the viper, Act. 28. 5
into the fire, then this or the like religious Meditation of our end?
Almighty God would show the Prophet Jeremy in no other place, then a house of
clay, Ierem. 18. 2. 3.
the state and condition of the despisers of his word, to signify, that we are
best lessoned, where our frail estate may be best considered. The Wise man
could not but wonder, Why any should be puffed up with pride, Eccles. 10 12.
considering what he was* Quid ^uperbis terra; O earth says he, why art thou
proud? As if all our pomp, and our selves too, were no better then the ground
we tread upon. A strange case to see the meanness of our estate, and yet to
exalt our selves? to consider upon how weak a foundation we stand, and to
think of nothing less? If we will needs be high minded, would to God we would
set our minds on heavenly things, Coll^s. 3. 2
or things on high. For consideration, necessary is it, to think of that which
must necessarily beefall. Were it but only for that which stands like the Law
of the Medes and Persians: Constitutum est omnibus semel mori: Heb. 9. 27
It is enacted that all must die* this were enough to cast a cloud over all
men's fairest delights. But that same post autem iudicium, there is somewhat
more behind, and that is called the time of judgment. This once possesing
the heart* there need not so many penal Laws to deter them and their
affections, which are often so far out of square, from extreme impiety. The
Cock (says one) fearing the Eagle and the Hauk, has one eye fixed on his
meat* and the other often directed in the air: So a provident godly man
providing beforehand things necessary, has respect unto the Eagle, or
Christ's coming in the air to judgment, as also unto the Hawk, which is
Death, therefore called Rapax* because it suddenly seizes and prays upon
all. A general restrainte from evil (says Cassianus an ancient writer) is a
mindfullnesse of Death, Gass. col. 18.
which the Egiptians perceiving, thought a bare resemblance thereof, al
trembling and shaking brought in at their solemn Feasts, to be a special
^neane to move the beholders unto Sobriety. The Centurion in the Gospel* who
otherwise was far off from acknowledging the Savior of the world, Mat. 27. 25.
when he saw the vale rent* the earth move, the stones cleave a sonder* the
Heavens mourn in black, and after all the graves themselves to open and yield
up the dead bodies of the Sainte^* a spectacle of death amidst all* moved him
to give this testimony, Surely this was the Son of God. Seeing then that
henc^^rise so forc^able motives unto a godly and careful direction of our
ways* did we but sometimes behold that pale horse* and Apoc. 6. 8.
he that sits thereon, whose name is Death, in our musing dispositions, it
would make us trample underfoot many alluring occasions, and cause us to
step back in the pursuit of some sinful vanities. The Holy Ghost
resembling the state of man, To the grass, Psalm. 145. 5.
to a shadow, the smoke, a vpour, a flower, things of so small continuance,
Job. 7. 7.
what else would he intimate unto us, Iam. 1. 11.
but a consideration of our unconstant and variable estate? Psalm. 102. 3.
The Apostle S. Peter unto the dispersed Jews, Iam. 4. 14. 1. Pet. 2 11.
and converted Christians, to draw them from carnal desires, used this as an
arga^^e^t of effect, Obsecro vos tanquam advenas, and peregrinas, I beseech
you, says he, as Pilgrims and strangers: as if he should have said, seeing
you are in this world but as wayfaring men, stay not your selves upon carnal
desires, (...) bay^es of Satan, and very bane of your souls* abstain from
them, fly them. It is the manner of strangers not to intermeddle with many,
much less dangerous attemptes: but no wise and circumspect men, to remember,
they are only in the way to a farther home, of more continuance, where they are
to make their abode. Wherefore says S. Austen, Aug. 31. tractat. in loa^n.
Nihil aliud in hac vita peregrinationis nostrae meditemur, nisi quia hic non
semper crimus, and ibi locum been viuendo praeparabimus, vnde nunquam
migrabimus: Let us meditate in this life of nothing more, then of our
pilgrimage, that here woe shall not always be: preparing our selves rather
to that place, whence we shall never depart, but have a sure stay for ever. And
S. Jerome, Hier. ad Paul.
Qui quotidie recordatur se esse moriturum, contemnit praesentia, and ad futura
festinat: He that does remember, that die he must, little regarding things
present, ever hastes toward things to come: which the old enemy of man
perceiving, seeks nothing more then to draw us from this frequent meditation
of Death, chiefly by the pleasurable allurementes of intising vanities. The
Hunter when he seeks to take the Tigers young (which is only one) is said,
to set up looking glasses, where the Tiger should pass a long, in seekinge
this young, which she does sometimes by straying abroad, loose; finding in
the glass, a resemblance of herself, leaves the pursuit, and loses her
young. This old hunter perceiving man's industry, in the conservation of that
which is one, and only one, his dear Soul; would by many goodly shows, make
us neglect this religious care, and stay our selves, upon every triuolous
delighte, so long, that we clean forget, whereabout we go, and so hazard
that, which the Prophet calls, most precious, even the Redemption of our
Souls. Psalm. 49* 8.
But the provident Christian man, knowing how dangerous it must needs be,
for the bird to take delight amidst the ginnes, and snares, of the Fouler,
makes no stay upon these intising evils, soars aloft, and taking the wings
of contemplation, thinks of the joys of Heaven, the pains of Hell, his own
Death, and the Death of the Son of God, for the salvation of us all: with
Daniel, strawes ashes or thoughts of his earthly being, to descry the steps
of Death, who steals along and eats to the continuance of our days: or
like a skillfull Pilot, who often sits at the Stern, looks unto the Stars,
and Planets, bears off from the shelues of many dangerous occasions, that so
by the prosperous gale of God his holy Spirit, he may put into the port of
everlasting rest. No servants, more orderly use their masters Talents, then
those, who ever fear their masters sudden return. Lu. 12. ^ 38
No Householder more safe; Math. 2^. 43.
then he who at every wateh, suspecteth the Thieves entering. When that of the
Prophet Esaias calls us aside from the world, and tells us softly, Mori^re, thou
shall Die, it makes us penitent, for the time past, and respective for the time
to come causing the fear of God, to have a predominate force, in this our
natural, and otherwise weakly constitution. To meditate therefore of our
end, at our lying down, which does res^^uble the grave, and our rising up,
which may mind us of a joyful resurrection; to make this Remembrance, the key
to open the day, and shut in the night: is a behoouefull practice, and we shall
soon perceive it* by the manifold effects, which do then consequently ensue.
Isaac upon Sarahs Death went forth to meditate: having lost Sarah, he met
Rebeckah. We sometime loose earthly comfort; but going forth religiously to
meditate upon God his excellency, and our own ^railty, we meet with
Rebeckah, Genesis 24. 63.
better comfort, that is to* say, heavenly.

The Fourth Chapter*
Wherein is showed, that the state and condition of the life present may justly
move us to this con^sideration.

AMongst the manifold reasons which may induce us to this religious
remembrance of our end, none more effectual, then a due consideration of our
estate present. For what is our life, but a Jonas grown, Jonas. 46
suddenly sprung up, and by and by, withered again, and gone: But a Jacob*
pilgrimage, Genesis 47. 9
the days whereof, are in number ^^oo, and in condition evil Is not all our
glory but as the visions which Esdras 2. Esdr. 8
saw, goodly to look upon, an^ vanished in a moment? Or as Nabuchadnezzars
Image, Dan. 2. 33.
that had a head of gold, breast and arms of silver, and yet one dash with a
stone out of the rock, brought all to ruin? May it not be said of the goodly
pomp, and most glorious shows, which we so much admire amongst men, as Christ
said, of the buildinges of the Temple: Math. 24. 2.
See you not these things; verily, there shall not be left a stone upon a
stone? As if little or no mention at al should be left. As for popular
applause, is it not much like smoke, which the higher it mounteth, the sooner
it vanishes away? And for beauty* do not some few fittes of a ^ea^er, mar
all the fashion? O the inconstancy of all worldly glory! All t^ is stately and
pageant like pomp shall vanish away, and come to nothing, as if it never had
been. He that had come to the Tomb of Alexander the great, and there found
interred, within the compass of seven feet, him, whom a whole world could
not suffice, might he not justly say, Is here the mirror of the world? Is
here the flourishing Monarke of his time? O world most unworthy to be
affected of us? We are but Tennants at will, in this clay farm, the foundation
of all the building, is a small substance, always kept cold, by an
intercourse of air, the pillar whereupon the whole frame stays, to only the
passage of a little breath he strength, some few bones tied together with dry
stringes, or sinews, how so ever we peec^ and patch this poor cottage, it
will at the last fall in manus Domini, into the Lords hands and we must give
surrender, when Death shall say, this or this man's time is come. First we
mourn for others, a little after, others mourn for us. Now we supply the
places, and offices, and heritages of them that were before; and cre long be,
others shall come a fresh in our rooms, and rule where we rule, sway where we
sway, and possess all which we have scratched together with care* kept with
fear, and at last, left with sorrow. Whereby we see, that we came not into
this world to build houses* or purchase lands, and join house to house, but
rather by this our short continuance, we are put in mind, to have temporalia
in vsu, aeterna in desiderio, these temporal things in use, but eternal
things in desire; to use this world, 1. Cor. 7 31.
as if we used it not* and so be gone. To this short continuance of life may be
added, the miseries of the same. For all is not life* we here live: when Job
said. Job. 14. 1
Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live he by and by,
shows, how this time is annoyed, and is, says he full of misery. Herevppon
by the Grecians, the first day of the life of man, was called (...), that is to
say, a beginning of conflicts, our ingresse, and egresse, is with signs of
sorrow S. Auste^n says of man's first entrance into the world: Nondum loquitur
and tamen prophetat, a tender infant, not able to speak, does by tears
prophecy of the sorrows incident in the life of man. Come we to our new
birth* according to grace, do we not in baptism take our pressed money, to
fight a battle, under the banner of Christ our Chiefetaine? And thou need
not, says S. Austen, care to fight against many enemies, Aug. de ^ug. anima.
for be thou well assured, in my enemies will fight against thee; which combat
Cyprian declares after this manner: If thou, Cyprian. ^e m^r.
O man overcome coueteousnesse, coueteousnesse being overcome, some evil
affection will assail thee: if that evil affection be strangled, vain glory
will allure thee: if vain glory be ^espised; wrath and a desire of revenge,
will incense thee: if wrath be pacified, then pride will puff* thee up: if
pride be allayed, some other enemy will step, to give thee (...) fresh assault:
As if the whole life of man were no other, but a continual hacking, and
he^^ing at, and of these Hydraes heads of sin. 1. Cor. 15
The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death: to show that until death
become and gone, an end of enemies will never come. I heard a voice from heaven
saying. (says S. Apoc. 14. 13.
John) Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their labors:
As if the Saints never rest, until rest and blessedness meet together. Here
the flesh is the field wherein we must be ever toiling. Sin is the Iebusite,
that will be ever troubling: the world is the stepmother to Gods children, that
will be ever chiding: Iud. 1. 5.
afflictions are the waters where our Gideon will try whether we are fit
soldiers to fight his battle. We read in the eleventh, Number. 11
sixteenth, and one and twentieth of the book of Nombers, Number. 16
that the people much murmured in the wilderness, Number. 21
thinking that after their deliverance out of Egypt to have found their
sweetness, there the people were deceived: God keeps that until we come
into the land^ of promise. We must not look^ for our happiness here, God
keeps that until we come into the holy land. Here we are euer^day gathering
Manna: whethe long Sabbath comes* the^ we cease gathering. Joseph gave his
br^ethren provision for the way, Genesis 42 25.
but the full sackes were kept in store until they came home unto their
fathers house God gives us here a taste and a say of his goodness: but the
full sackes are kept in store, until we come unto his heavenly king doine.
For this life Adam in ^^dore vultus tui, in the sweat of thy brows thou shall
eat thy bread: Nay Adam in laboribus comedes cunctis diebus vitae tuae, in
labor and sorrow shall thou eat thereof all the days of thy life, until
thou return unto the earth, out of which thou wast taken. As if the days of
man by reason of sinning; were no other, but the days of sorrow: because
every day has suam malitiam, Mat. 6. 34
his grief: and every night s^um terrorem, Psalm. 91. 5
his terror. So that in this the ancient saying will be verified (...),
Humana vita non est vita sed calamitas, the life of man is rather calamity
then life If one have goods and substance be lives in travel, and is same to
imprison his money under* loath and bolt, for fear it should fly from him. If
he be destitute and needy, he lives in grief, because want is grievous unto
man's nature. If he be in high estate, he is either envied, or enuieth: as if
the chiefest felicity of worldlings were infelicitie: and no other* but
Splendida miseria, a very shining misery: if we will hear Augustus so great
a Potentate, we shall find him wishing rather to lead a private life, then to
enjoy, the whole Regal Empire of the west Cyrus King of Persia, was wont to
say; that did men but know the infinite cares he sustained under an imperial
Crown, he thought no man would so much as stoop to take it up If these who
had the chiefest glory amongst men, found all so weari^some, much more may the
Christian soul resolve never to (...) her sweet requiem, until she come to
bear a part in that joyful quire of Saints and Angels a boue in heaven. For
the delights of sin they go down as the win* (says Solomon) pleasantly at the
first, but at the last they bite like a Serpent, and are as the Rose, when the
flower is gone, there remains nothing but a prick: in a word* they play us a
very Tragedy. Howsoever they begin with applause, yet at the shutting up of all
they will end with horror. In the mean time do we not see the v^ces
themselves reward their followers with sundry griefs and infirmities at the
last, and their fairest end often to be extreme penury. For the world it
self, does it not (says S. John) pass away, and concupiscentia eius, and the
lusts thereof, does it not show matta very Judas part, and betray them unto
Satan, saying, whom I kiss with a fained sign of love, take them, torture
them: which is enough to make them out of love with this world, and with Lot to
get them from Sodom, or with the Saints, to come out of Babylon, or the
affections of this sinful world, Apo. 18. 4.
that they be not partakers of the punishment, to be inflicted upon the same.
Now to come a little to the state of those in this world, whose inheritance is
above, what else do they find it but a maine sea of calamities, where they are
tossed with the billows of many stonnes, and do feel this passage full of
bitterness. Least they should take too much delight in wasting to and fro upon
worldly pleasures, God does ballast their ship with some affliction, to see a
little the state of Gods own friends. Ex^. 7 11.
There was never yet a Moses, 2. Tim. 3. 8.
but he had a Iannes and a Iambres to resist him Never was there a good
Joseph, Genesis 37. 11.
but he had in his own fathers house unkind brethren to envy him. 1. King.
19. ^.
Never an Elias, but a I^sabel to hunt him. Never a Paul, but an Alexander to
do him much eu^ll. 1. Tim. 1 20.
Never a reverent Athanasius, or most learned and painful Bishop of his time,
Socr. hist. eccles. lib. 1 cap. 20.
but bold spirited schismatickes wrongfully to malign him* wherefore to have
enemies in this world we must be content, it was his case that now sits at the
right hand of God in heaven to suffer persecution, it is no new accident. Sic
pers^cuti sunt Prophetas, Mat. 5. 21.
qui fuerunt ante vos, said our Savior to his disciples, the Prophets of old
drank of the same cup, all suffered. From this annoyance we may come unto
the domestical or home troubles within our selves, Genesis 16. 4
where old Adam, or nature, like Hagar the bond woman is very disdainful
toward her mistress Sarah: to wit, infused grace, where the rebellious
appetites conspire against the regiment of reason, where our will like another
Eve is still provoking us to reach after the forbidden fruit, Romans 6. 12
where sin like Tarquinius the proud, would tyrannise and usurp a perpetual
Dictatorship, did not the regenerate like men of courage and constancy cast
him out of his kingdom. And thus laboring to bring all to that seemly
Monarchy of Gods spirit, no small labor and travel is undertaken. In pleasing
men we often incur a greater loss by displeasing God: by pleasing God
(which is best of all) we often times displease men. So which way soever we
cast our eyes, we see and find that of the wise man verified: Ecclesiast. 4.
1. 2. 3
Great travel is created for all men: and a heavy yoke for the sons of
Adam, from the day that they come out of their mothers womb, to the day that
they return to the earth the mother of all things: from him that sits in
the glorious throne, unto him that is beneath in earth and ashes. This being
the estate of all in general, sinners corrected, sons chastened, nay the
evil themselves much tossed and turmoiled, they that worship the beast (says
S. Apoc. 14* 11.
John) have no rest day nor night, as they have not who make an idol of
sensual pleasure. Look how many vices, so many furies is wont to haunt the
licentious livers. But the good, who only have their trials, and are proved
with Simon of Cyrene, Math. 27. 32.
every one with his cross must be content to accompany Christ unto his
kingdom. Manifold troubles are incident to all, but in more special manner
unto those who are going from the dirt and mire of Egypt, to do sacrifice to
God, Exo. 8. 25
who will bring them into a good land, the remembrance whereof may make them
wish with David, that they had wings like a Dove, and so flying they might come
to rest. Wherefore for these transitory and fleeting delights of this sinful
world, happy are we if we see them, Psa. 55. 5
more happy if we shun them, but most happy of all when God shall take us
clean from them, when we shall be delivered from this irk^some necessity of
sinning. It is some comfort unto the wayfaring man to commune of his iournies
end. Joyfully does the bond man reckon of the year of Iubilee. This wearisome
pilgrimage of ours may justly move us, this burdensome bondage may move us
indeed* to enter into a sad remembrance of our end, 1. King. 19. 4.
and pause with that of the Apostle, Haec medita^e, meditate of these things.
Elias fled but a days journey before Iesabell, and he said, it is enough Lord,
take my soul. The Angel would have Toby rejoice: Toby replied, Toby. 5. 13
quale mihi erit gaudium, qui in tenebris sedeo, etc. What joy can I have, that
do here sit in darkness, and do not behold the light of the Sun? Those of
Babylon, Psalm. 137* 4.
would have the Israelites sing them a song. Alas, what song could they sing,
being so sorrowful captives as they were? Here we are flying before many
Iezabels. Here we sit in darkness, and see not the true ^ight, that does
shine above in glory. Here we are poor captives, what rejoicing should we
have in a vale of tears, in so low and marshie a soil, naturally subject unto
moisture? Lu. 15. 14*
This far country is full of penury and sorrow, no plenty, no music, until
we return unto our Fathers house. While we are on this side Jordan, we are
amidst many trials, and to say truth, we may look for no other. We find
that of S. Austen true, Quid est diu viuere, August. de ver. Dom. Sermon. 70
nisi diu torqueri? What is it to live long, but to be long troubled? We read
that Noah's Dooue, at her first flight from the Arc, (well she might mount
aloft) fetched many retires, but she could have no resting place, Genesis 8. 9
until Noah opened the window of the Arc, to receive her in again: so the
poor soul may soar a time, by lifting up many a sigh* and supplication unto
God, who at last does open the window of his heavenly Arc; and then, but not
before, she has sure footing, to rest for ever. Those good men, says the
Apostle S. Paul, Heb. 11 38.
in the eleventh to the Hebrews, of whom sometimes the bad world was
unworthy, wandered up and down, in sheep skins, in deserts, as men
forelorne, showing evidently, that their glory was not of this world, where
they found so sorry acceptance, and therefore had their hope full of
immortality, hoping for a reward to come. Now therefore, seeing in this state
of life, 2. Cor. 11. 26.
all is so troublesome; enemies at home, enemies abroad, perils on every side:
a Christian Meditation of our departure from this world, may tell us, All will
one day be better. That we should not think of our continuance here, we see
this life to be only a pilgrimage: That we should not take the way for our
country, or think of setting up our rest. where our state is so ^ombersome;
where we have much Wormwood, but little Hoonny: more motives to read the
Lamentations of Jeremy, then we have to sing the Songs of Solomon. God would
have it so, that we should look for an other home, and hope for a better rest.
If every creature groan, Romans ^. 22.
then much more may man, the most excellent of all creatures, waytinge for that
adoption of the Sons of God, which shall be given in the resurrection of the
just. When the Prophet Micheas Mich. 2. 10.
would raise up the pensive hearts of the people, in the time of their
captivity, he put them in mind of their departure, as thus, Surgi^e, hic non
habetis requiem, Arise to be gone, here is not your place of rest. In like
manner to quicken a little our weary spirits, amidst many calamities, the
lifting up of our hearts, by a meditation of our deliverance from this earthly
thraldom, as the prison of the soul, will tell us of a blessed state to come,
where we shall have rest* which is the end of every motion, and the perfection
of all our labors.

The Fifth Chapter.
That a consideration, of the li^e to come, may move in us the same
remembrance of our end.

IT is a rule in natural Philosophy, that to see the Planets, and those
superior lights at midday, men must go down into some wondrous deep pit or
well, clean from the light of the Horizon, where they live. To behold with the
eye of the soul, the light and joys of the life to come, men must be far
removed from the love, and delights of this in^erior world. The people never
tasted Manna, Exodus 16 15.
until they were come from the Leaven of Egypt. Our auncesters when they saw
no other but straw cottages, they never minded any farther buildinges: but when
once they beheld more seemly mansions, they began forthwith to dislike that,
which before was very acceptable unto them. Whilst we set our affections on
earthly things, we seek for no be^ter, we look no higher: but once taking a
taste of heavenly, we begin to dislike that, which before was very acceptable
unto us, and grow out of liking with the meanness of our former des^res. And
therefore as Zacheus, so long as he abode in the press, Luc. 19. 3
was upon the low ground to see Christ, until he gate him up into the fig
tree: so while we are in the route of too many worldly affairs, we are too
low, and therefore should get up into the sweet Fig Tree, or contemplation
of heavenly things: that there and thence, we may see the joy of Israel, or
excellency of the life to come. Genesis 13 17.
God said unto Abraham, arise, and walk about this land, this is the country
that I will give thee. God says unto Faith, arise, behold thy heavenly
inheritance. that is the city where thou shall have thy blessed abode for ever.
Seafaring men, having been long weatherbeaten in the surging and dangerous
Seas, are wont to shout for joy, when they do discry their haven. Joyfully may
the Christian behold a far off, after the manifold storms of this world, his
heavenly and everlasting harborough, the remembrance where of may move us,
either to wish with S. Paul, Phil. 1. 23
to be dissolved, and be with Christ, or reply with the Saints in the
Apocalips unto him that said, I come: Apoc. 22 20.
Even so come Lord Jesus. Here we do but sow in tears, there is the place,
where we shall reap in joy. Here we are members of the church militant, where
is nothing but combatting: there shall we be parts of the Church triumpha^t,
where is no other but reioycinge. The state of the life present, and to come,
is figured by the Tabernacle, and Temple of the old Testament: 1. Sam. 6 3.
the Tabernacle, for that it was mooueable, may resemble the condition of the
life present: 1. King. 2. 3.
the Temple, for that it was fixed, and immovable, the fruition of the life to
come. To the framing of the Tabernacle, came the Jews only: but to the
buildinge of the Temple, with the inhabitants of Iewry, the men of Tire and
Sydon, to wit, both Jews and Gentiles: all concur in this building, wherein
is never heard, the noise of a hammer. Psalm. 84 4.
Blessed are they O Lord (says David,) that dwell in thy house, where the
Son of God in glory, is light unto their eyes, music unto their ears,
sweetness unto their taste, and contentment unto their heart: where, in
seeing, they shall know him: in knowing, they shall possess him: in
possessing, they shall love him: in loving, they shall receive eternal
blessedness, and blessed eternity, which is the garland we all run for, 1.
Cor. 9. 24.
the crown we all fight for. All our watching, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
and fasting, and praying, is like Jacobs striving with the Angel: Genesis 3^.
26.
O bless me Lord. Every thing does in nature require a perfection: the heavens
which are in continual motion: the Angels, which are ascending and
descendinge, are said not to have their full perfection, but specially man, in
this troublesome motion, until he come to the accomplishment of all his hope.
If the Apostle, which was taken up into the third heaven, and is thought to
have seen part of this blessedness, could not express the excellency
thereof, being so high a subject the more he did consider of it, (he more he
seemed to wonder at it,) yet thus much he could say, 1. Cor. 2* 9
that eye had not seen, care had not heard, the heart of man could not
conceive the things that God had prepared for them that love him. Reach as
far as humane understanding can reach, all is not aunswearable unto the same
O^ things infinite, we cannot but infinitely consider. To life up our eyes,
toward those glistering beams of Gods glory, where the sharpest Eagle may be
dazeled: to wade into the depth of his excellency* wherein a Camel may be
pl^nged, the short reach of humane reason may move us to cry with y^ Apostle,
O altitudo, O the depth of the love and bou^ty, and mercy of God, They that
come unto the maine Ocean, find water enough, if they come by millions, to take
handfull^ of it, be there a multitude which no tongue can number. Apoc. 7. 9.
God has crowns for their heads, and palms for their hands, when they
shall follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes* when they shall rest upon Mount
Sion, when they shall (...) with him, and reign with him. Lact. lib. 6 de
diui. prae.
If you ask, says Lactantius, why God created the world, it was for no other
cause, but that man should be created: if you demand, why man was created, it
was because he should worship his Creator: if you inquire farther, why he
should worship his Creator, it was for no other cause, but that he should be
rewarded by him. Lord, what was man, that thou did so respect him? This was
the bowels of Gods mercy, who had no other cause of his mercy, but his mercy,
no other end, but his own glory, and our good, which is called (...) his most
great and ample reward, wherein there is no end of his goodness, no number of
his mercies no measure of his wisdom, no depth of his bounty: So Go^ does
deal, like God himself. Tertul. de Hamelier.
Si tanta in terris moraretur fides. quant^ merces expectatur in coelis, if
there were so great ^aith in earth, as there is reward looked for in heaven
(says Tertullian) merciful Lord, what love should we have to the life to
come? Pharao was content at last the Exodus 1^ 24.
people should go to do sacrifice, but they must leave their heads of
cattle behind. No Moyse^ will leave a house in Egypt: all our desires must
go with us, in believing that high reward of blessedness, so far above all
humane desert, that is, or may be. Seneca writes, that Alexander the great,
giving a poor man two talentes, the man was so astonished with the greatness
of the gift, as he aunsweared the ^ing: Most Princely Sir, I am not worthy to
receive so much: to whom Alexander replied, I do not respect good man, what
thou art meet to receive, but what beseemes me so great a Potentate for to
give. God does not so much regard, what we most vn^^oorthy creatures are worthy
to receive, as what becomes him, the God of all mercy and magnificence, to
bestow and give. Herod promised much, Mar. 6. 23
when he promised half his kingdom: but Christ, when he gives, we find him
giving an whole kingdom: Math. 25 34.
Venite benedicti patris mei, accipitote regnum; Come ye bessed of my father,
receive the kingdom. Men are sometimes liberal in promising, but more
niggardly in performing: with God it is not so. Again, amongst men, the elder,
or one only does inherit: but with God, Romans 8* 17.
all sons are heirs; all heirs inherit: and the inheritance too is a
heavenly kingdom, to reign, to rejoice ever. The meditation of this happy
end of man, if man did know his own happiness, were enough to make him
little respect a thousand worlds: nay to say with the Prophet, Psalm. 42. 1*
Like as the Heart desires the water streams; so is my soul a thirst for God.
Oh. when shall I enter those courts of joy? Demetrius Phalerius hearing the
Philosophers dispute about the immortality of the soul, (...).
wretched man that I am, (quoth he) who have so long lived in the perishing
delights of this crrruptible body ^ We know not what we loose, when we loose
opportunity of seeking, and buying that precious pearl, for which the
provident husband man should sell all that he has. Math. 13 44.
When the people, as we read in the two and thirtieth of the book of
Nombers, were come to their entrance, into the land of promise, the children of
Ruben and Gad, Nom. 32 3.
regarding not the promise so often promised, desired Moses that they might
stay on the hither (...) of Jordan, because it was a place meet for their
droues of cattle, which they more respected, then their passage into the holy
land. Are there not some in the world, not far unlike these children of
Ruben and Gad. who desire to make their stay here, and would g^e no farther
for that they esteem the pleasures and profits of a life temporal, more then
they do the incomprehensible joys in that life eternal? but for the true
Israelites, all is weariness, until they come unto the land of rest. whereas
in other things (says Cyprian) we are wont to blame Cypr. de mort.
it: yet in the expectation of so great a good, we may commend impaciency. Woe
is me says David, That my pilgrimage is prolonged. In things that are
ordained unto an end, the rule and measure of all actions is taken from the
same, which end is first in the intention, and last in the execution. Now if
blessedness be man's end, then is it the mark we all shoot at, and the scope
of all our ex^erprises whatsoever. Every thing is required for blessedness,
and only blessedness for it self. Jacobs seven years service seemed but
light, Genesis 29 28.
in regard of Rachell for whom he served. The labor and travel, not of
seven years but of all the years of our life* is nothing in respect of
Rachell the fairer, the happier state to come. And this does aunsweare the
profane Atheist, and meet with the objection of Jobs friends: What good has
the righteousness brought thee? Or as some would not blush, to say in the time
of the Prophet Malachy: Mal. 3. 10
What profit is there by serving God. That most happy reward in the life to
come, does strike the^ all dumme: that very assistance in the life present, may
make them amazed. Do but try me, says the Lord, if I will not power out a
blessing upon you. This blessing say the Ancient Fathers is both viae, Ciril.
de fide ad Reg.
and patriae, that is, of the way, and of the country. That which God gives in
the way, Hill. de unit. pat. and fill.
is spoken of by the Prophet David, in the first Psalm, where, mentioning the
state of him, that walks not in the counsel of the vngodl^, he shall be
blessed, says the Prophet, and how? Look whatsoever he does it shall prosper.
Psalm. 1. 6
So says he of the man that fears God, he shall be blessed, and wherein? For
he shall see his childrens children, Psalm. 128.
and peace upon Israel. The worlds manner is the Jews manner, Joan. 2. 10
who were wont to bring the best wine first. Christ he observes his old
manner, and keeps the best until the last. It is said of Isidot, who being at
a great banquet: and there beholding a great sign of Gods bounty toward the
sons of men, suddenly he brake out into abundance of tears, and being
demanded the cause why: For that (quoth he) I here feed on earthly
creatures, that am created to live with Angels: as if the remembrance of the
time to come, did draw his affections, as it should do the affections of us all
to a comfortable expectation of the same. Our bodi^s walk on earth; but our
souls should be in heaven, by our heavenly desires; and we should frame our
affections in form of a ship, tha^ is close downward, but open upward, in a
hearty desire of a super^our condition: The remembrance whereof is like the
message of the Angel Gabriell, which brought tydines of great joy, which may
make the faithful aunsweare with Ezechias, and say: Esa. 38. 9
The word of God is good, let there be peace, and that to peace eternal. In
the mean tune says S. Austen, Aug. man. vlt. cap.
Let my mind muse of it, let my tongue mention it, let my heart love it, and my
whole soul never ceas^ to hunger and thirst after i^. O Lord God of hosts,
Ps. 84. 13.
blessed is the man that puts his trust in thee.

The Sixth Chapter.
That we need not fear Death much less to meditate thereof.

WHen Moses saw his Exodus 4. 3.
rod turned into a Serpent, it did at first somewhat affright him, for he
began to step from it: but when once God commanded him to take hold thereof,
he found afterward by many effects, it did him, and the people of God much
good. At first sight Death does fray our natural weakness, and we begin to
shrink from it: but having confidence in God, who has willed us not to fear,
we find it a mean, to ^iuide the waters of many tribulations, to make us a
passage from the wilderness of this world, unto a better land of rest It Is
strange we should make so nice of our selves, as to count it a death, to
meditate of Death. Nay to esteem the very remembrance thereof, as Ahab did the
presents of the Prophet Elias, 1. Ri^. 18
to be troublesome unto us. Whereas Death is so far from hurting them, who
put their trust in God, as they shall rather find it a gentle guide, to bring
them home to their own City, where they would be, to remain for ever. That
which we call life, is a kind of death, because it makes us to die: but that
which we count death, is in the sequcle a very life: for that indeed it makes
us to live. There is a death, which some call mortal sin, and this is the
death of the Soul, which death we should all fear. There is also a moderate
fear of the other death, which is profitable to withdraw us from the
allurements of evil. But so to fear it, as if it were the utter ruin and
overthrow of all our being, we need not, we ought not. When the Apostle S.
Paul spoke of the vnconqu^rarable faith, which was his stay, and the stay of
all them, whose hope was in Christ: 2. Cor. 5. 1
We (says the Apostle) know, that if this earthly house of our Tabernacle be
destroyed, we have a building, not made with hands, but given of God, eternal
in the Heavens. As if he would tell the persecutors of his time, that miseries
for a moment could not dis^^ay them: the perishing of the outward man could not
daunt them* nor present death could discourage them: for they knew their
habitation was in ^eauen, and themselves incorporated Citizens into that
Jerusalem, which is above. A heathen man could say, Degeneres animos timor
arguit. this ^biect fear, is far dissident from a generous offspring. Solomon
says, The just is as a Lion, of whom the Naturalist writes, that he is of
such courage, as being fiercely pursued, he will never once alter his gate,
though he die for it. With what constancy answered the second of those seven
brethren who all yielded up manfully themselves to torment, for the
mainetenance of the Law of God: 2. Mac. 7. 9.
Thou O King take these our lives from us; but the King of Heaven, shall
raise us up, in the resurrection of everlasting life. The Philosopher might
say. Aris Eth. lib. 3.
(...), that is, of things terrible, none more then Death. But it is otherwise
with Christians. Tert. in apo.
Tertullian told the persecutors of his time, that their cruelty did but open a
door to Gods distressed people, whereby they might enter the sooner into a
state of glory: and therefore death was very acceptable to them. Why should I
fear (says the Prophet,) in the evil day. Psalm. 49
As if David saw no cause of dreading death, howsoever nature may begin to
tremble at the mention thereof. Hila^ion could not but wonder his soul should
be so loath to depart, Hier. de vit. Hilar.
after he had served God, and God him, so many years. Consider death, as in
it self, and so naturally we sear it. Consider death as a mean to bring us
unto Christ, willingly we may embrace it. When Jacob saw the chariots of Egypt,
Genesis 45. 28.
and thereby perceived his son Joseph was alive, his fainting spirits
revived, saying, I will go see him before I die. When faith does bring us
many testimonies, our Joseph lives, the Christian soul may recomfort her
self in her panges and say: Mori^r vt vido^^, In the name of God, to see him,
let me die. Now for these corruptible bodies, they take no damage at all by
death. It Is no harm to the seed, though it has for the time, a little earth
raked over it, it shall spring again, and flourish, and bring forth fruit in
due season. No hurt is it to these our bodies, to be cast into the ground:
being sown in wealienesse, they shall rise again in power: being sown
natural bodies, they rise again bodies spiritual: 1. Cor. 15 42.
being sown in dishonor, they rise again in glory. The keeping green of
Noah's Olive troo under the flood; The budding again of Aarons rod; Number. 17. 8.
The deliverance of Jonas, from the depth of the Sea; Ion. 2 10
The voice that calls, Psalm. 90. 3
come again* ye children of men; Job. 19. 25
The hope of Job, that he should see God, Ezech. 37 7.
with no other, but with the self same eyes; The Prophecy of Ezechiell unto
the dry bones, that should come os ad os, bone to bone, may stir in us a
joyful hope, and cheer us up, against all the fear and terror of death. But
the resurrection of our Savior Christ, that is the comfort of all coinforts,
Vox Christi, vox Christianorum: The voice of Christ, is by Christ, the doyce of
Christians says S. Austen. Death, where is thy sting? Hell, where is thy
victory? As he was the cause efficient: so was he also a figure of the
Resurrection. He risinge, we all arise. Of a more powerful cause there is a
more powerful effect. If the sin of Adam, who was a living soul, was the
cause that death reigned over all, much more the resurrection of Christ, Romans
5. 14
who was a quickening spirit, shall be of power to raise up all, that believe to
the hope of everlasting life. Phil. 3. 10
What greater joy then to be able to know him, as the Apostle speaks, (...).
And the power of this resurrection. Christ as in dying showed what we should
suffer: so in risinge from death, what we should hope: To wit, that all the
bones in Golgatha shall rise. Dan. 12. ^
and those that sleep in the dust of the earth, Joan. 11. 43.
shall hear the voice of Lazarus, come forth. Wherefore though Death do
swallow us up, as the Whale did Jonas: bind us as the Philistines did Sampson,
yet we shall come forth, and break the bendes, as the bird out of the
snare. The snare is broken, and we are delivered. They may well fear death,
says S. Cyprian, that have no says in Christ: but for those who are members
of that head, who vanquished the power of Hell and Death, Death is to them
advantage, and a gentle guide, that bringes them home to everlasting rest.
Hence is it that dying they are said since Christ's resurrection to fall
asleep. They that sleep in Jesus, says the Apostle, they lay them down, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
and take their rest, and God it is, that makes them dwell in everlasting
safety. We should not then fear to fall a sleep, for sleep is a refreshinge
after wearysome labors. The painful laboring man, after his days work
ended, sleeps often more quietly then Diue^ in his marble palace, on his bed
of Iuory, where he tosseth and tumbleth: he sleeps not quietly, either in
life or death, and of such is that verified, O mors quam amara, Eccl. 40. 1
O death, how bitter is thy remembrance? Having wearied themselves, says the
Wiseman, in the way of wickedness, they shall cry out, what has pride
profited us, Wisd. 5. 8
or the pomp of riches brought us. Surely this barren and light la^d, after
all our drudgery yeeldes no other, but a crop of cares, trouble, fear, and
vexation of mind. When those that have labored in the vineyard, and have been
often in watching, in fasting often, these rest from their labors, and fall
asleep to rise again with their bodies, when the Son of righteousness
shall appear in everlasting glory. Of these the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 11
I would not have you sorrow, as men without hope, for those that are a sleep.
How acceptable therefore may death be, when in dying we sleep and in
sleeping, we rest from all the travels of a toil some life. Again, where as
death is a tribute, we must all pay homage. Chrisost. Homel. 10 in Math.
Fi^t voluntarium quod futurum est necessarium, and offeramus Deo pro munere,
quod pro debito tenemur reddere, Let us make that voluntary, which is
necessary, and yield it to God as a gift, which we stand bound to pay as a due
debt. Had we no farther hope, then only to attain a state temporal, we
might fear indeed, because when we die, all our happiness shall deceive us:
but when God made man of the dust of the ground. God breathed into him, Genesis 2.
7
the breath of life, and man was made a living soul, therefore not a dying
soul. Caesar writes, that the bare opinion of the Druides, Cas. lib. de Bell.
Gal.
who taught that the souls had a continuance after their separation from their
bodies, it made many of their followers hardy, in great attemptes, and abated
in most, the fear of death. Cyrus himself could say unto his children, when
he was ready to die: Think not dear children, that I shall be no where or
nothing. If a baresupposall of a future being, could so much avail against
the fear of death: what does faith effect that does warrant us by good
evidence, of the blessed assurance of the resurrection? If Abraham the
faithful Patriarch, Genesis 12. 4
left his own country and kindred at the commandment of almighty God, and
went into a strange land, how willingly should we leave this country, wherein
we are only strangers; and go, where we have our own home, and abode for
ever? This was the resolution of S. Ambrose: who neither loathed life, nor
feared to die, because says he, we have a good Lord. This was the faith of
Simeon, L^^ 2. 29
who having seen Christ, prayed to depart in peace. This was S. Paul's gain,
when he said, Phi. 1. 21.
To die is to me advantage: because this passage was a dissolution, and this
dissolution was to be from the body, and this his being from the body, was to
be with Christ. Seeing therefore that death it self, being duly considered,
should nothing at all dismay us, then much less the meditation thereof. The
more we meditate of death, the less we fear it; the less we fear it, the
more faith have we. What shall separate us from the love of God, To. 8. 35
that is in Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish? shall life or death? Blessed
be God, says S. Peter, 1. Pet. 1. 3
who has begotten us to a lively hope of the resurrection.

The Seventh Chapter.
That the afflictions of mind, which are incident in the life of man, may
mocue him to a Meditation of his end.

Solomon, whom GOD for wisdom chose as it were to be a forman of a great
Enquest, to make enquiry of the state of the world, to come forth, to speak
for all, and his conscience of all, having heard and seen the nature of
things under the Sun; yeeldes up his verdite of all, as thus, Eccl. 2. 11
All is vanity, and vexation of mind. This is in brief the condition of all
in general. The rich discontented in honors, the poor languishing in grief,
the learned full of restless labors, all of what estate soever, subject unto
troubles and vexation of mind. As if Solomon should have said, you may look
for no other, all is vexation. Small cause had the Israelites, to care for
their continuance amongst the Taske-masters of Egypt, and as small cause, have
any to desire to live in this wilderness, amongst many wolves. We know,
Christ our Savior has told us, John. 15 19.
that being in the world, we are not of ye world: here we may not look for
perfect rest of body, or all contentment of mind: and therefore to meditate of
deliverance, may be some refreshing to the distressed soul, who may power out
her complaints, saying, Would to God that day might once shine, when I shall
see my Redeemer. When I shall come where is peace, within and without, when I
shall appear before the presence of God, with joy, and be no more oppressed
with griefs, disturbed with cares, molested with thoughts, but live and rest
for ever. What comfort can a man reap* or what quiet should he take, where
want is miserable, plenty full of peril? which way soever we cast our eyes,
we find cause of complainte, that we may well count Laughter, Eccles. 2. 2
error, and subscribe to that of the Prophet, Lord, Psalm. 88. 125.
thy terrors have I suffered from my youth upward, with a troubled mind.
Having then so little cause to joy in this life, where there is so small a
cause to make us rejoice: where the mind is so invested with cares, and
molested with griefs, we may recount with our selves, the happiness of them,
who after the storms of this troublesome sea, have cast anchor, in their safest
road. Noah had much molestation in the old world, Genesis 8. 4
he had the waters swelling under him, Genes. 19 17.
the heavens dark and gloomy over him. At last the Arc stayed upon the
mountains of Ar^^at. and then was Noah a glad man. Lot was grieved amongst the
sinful Sodomites, at last God sent his Angels to take him clean away. Elias
mourned for a time, sat under the Juniper tree, sent up his sighs to heaven,
1. Kin. 19
at last came the chariot, and then there was no more Iesabell to persecute
him, no more false Prophets to band themselves against him. Apo. 6. 10
The Saints under the* Altar may for a time cry, How long Lord Jesus: after a
little more sufferinge, their disgrace shall be turned into glory, their
mournful tears, into gladsome triumph: Ps. 42. 11.
Why art thou so vexed O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O
put thy trust in God. In the multitude of my sorrows (says the same Prophet,)
that were in my heart, thy comforts (Lord) have refreshed my soul. Thereby
showing, Ps. 94. 29
that as the world had a multitude of sorrows to assault his heart, so God had
a multitude of comfortes to refresh his soul amongst them all. For as our
sufferinges in Christ do abound, so our consolations also in Christ do abound
t^o, 2. Cor. 1.
s^th S. Paul. Our Savior, knowing that his Apostles should have many, and
great discomfortes in the world, Joan. 1. 4 16.
promises to send them after his Ascension up into heaven, an other comforter:
for his presence was their comfort, and afterward in their deepest prisons,
they should have the holy Ghost their fellow prisoner: and howsoever the world
did outwardly annoy them, yet they should inwardly have a comforter to make
them rejoice in their sufferinges, and after all to rejoice for ever. Now
therefore though the burden be heavy, yet a lightsomenesse it is, to remember,
the way is not long. When the Apprentise calls to mind that his years of
covenant will now shortly expire, and that then he shall have his freedom
confirmed, the remembrance hereof makes many laborsome works seem more
light, and less grievous unto him. The poor Traveler in thinking of his
Inn, goes on more cheerfully in his painful journey. The bondsman in
calling to mind the year of Iubilee, is wont with more patience, to go
through the years of bondage. Now then amidst the sundry afflictions that
grieve the mind, a Meditation of our end, may much mittigate, if not
altogether take away the greatest sorrows of all; Ps. 32. 19
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all: And takes either sorrows from them, or them from sorrows. Great are
their trials, but salvation w^ll one day make amends, when they shall have all
tears wiped from their eyes: and their reward by so much the more joyous, by
how much the more the course of their life has been grievous unto them.
Seeing therefore, that on every side, we have such urgent occasion, to pass
the days of this wearysome Pilgrimage in trouble, and pensiveness of mind,
may we not think them thrice blessed, who are now landed on the shore of
perfect Security, and delivered from the burden of so toilesome a labor? May
we not be refreshed, in calling to mind, that this battle will one day
beat an end, and we freed from the thorowes of all these bitter calainities?
well may we weep and mourn, as Job and Jeremy, in consideration of our
entrance into this vale of tears, and often may we muse with gladness, of
the time of our departure. After all sorrows, and those threatening voices, A
voice will come from the throane, Ap. 16. 17
when the vial of the seventh Angel shall be powered out, and will say,
Factum est, Now all is done: though God do begin with, Asslixi te, I have
afflicted thee, he would surely end, with non affligam te amplius, I will
afflicte thee no more. Naum. 1.


The Eight Chapter.
That the griefs of body may also move us to enter into this serious
meditation of our end.

WHen the Prophet Daniel saw what was, and in all likelihood (unless God set
D. ^. 9. 18.
to his hel^inge hand in time) what still would be the estate of the people,
while they were in the thraldom of Babylon, he thought more and more of his
and their deliverance: and beesoughte God, to look upon the desolation of his
people, and to show mercy in ridding them from all. When we see and feel,
what is, and still will be the condition in this our Babylon: griefs of body,
and afflictions of mind. we may in our highest devotion to God, call to (...)
the time of dismis^^^^, and our good delivery from all. Yea, we may consider,
that there will come a day, when the^e crased bodies, subject to several
infirmities, as, the Head to megrimmes; the Lunges to suffocations; the Iointes
to gowtes; the stronger parts themselves to convulsions: when these bodies I
say, which have helped to bear the burden of the day, shall with the happy
soul live together, and rejoice together. In the mean season, we may
remember in all these infirmities, that of the Prophet, Psalm. 94. 14.
The Lord will not fail his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance.
David knew it was Gods manner to try his servants, etc. therefore in his
afflictions, made this protestation of himself and them; though all this come
upon us, yet will not we forsake thee. It is our Isaaks use, first to feel us
by tribulation, Psalm. 44. 18.
and then to bless us: by these infirmities of the body, we may consider Gods
feeling. Now after we have suffered a little, then Take a blessing my son.
Genesis 27 23.
Though the wind blow cold, yet does it cleanse the good grain: though the
fire burn hoate, yet it purifieth the best gold. Afflictions as they are
(...) so are they also (...) both sufferings and instructions. For these
afflictions do often cause an utter contempt of all worldly pleasure,
humbleness of mind, penitency and sorrow of heart, for sins passed. Psalm.
137 1. 2.
In the hundredth and seven and thirtieth Psalm, the peoples captivity is thus
mentioned, Super flumina Babilonis, by the waters of Babylon, we sat down
and wept, in the verse following, As for our Harpes, we hanged them up upon
the trees that are therenigh: We sat down, a token of their humility; and
wept, a sign of sorrow and penitency: as for Harpes we hanged them up, which
showed they were now very far from mirth and melody. All the life of Solomon
was full of prosperity, and therefore we find, that Solomon did much forget
God: but the whole life of David has much adversity, and therefore we see by
his penitential Psalms, and others, that David did much remember God. These
chasti^ements of the body in particular, as they are in the consequent, means
oftentimes of our good (for the worser part of man faith S. Jerome, is sometimes
punished, which is the body, that the better part of man, to wit, the Soul,
in the day of judgment, may be saved, so are they in the cause, effects of
Gods love. For though he be at times a chasteninge father, yet a father, though
a ^aunching Physician yet a Physician: and therefore one that loves, and that
cures. we need no more, but lay open our griefs, and let him alone with the
saluing, who knows better then our selves, how best to ounce us, though the
potion be sharp, yet it is his, whose intent is, to do us good, whose love in
chasteninge we may not refuse. Chrysostom could say, Magna tentatio non
tentari, A great temptation is it, not to be tempted at all. Job was a
righteous man, by the testimony of him, whose testimony was most true. What
say thou to my servant Job, an upright man, and just man, one that fears
God? The next news we hear of him, Job. 1. 8.
Job is afflicted in body, from the crown of the head, to the soul of the
foot. You have heard (says S. James) of the patience of Job, and what end God
made with him. Iam. 5. 11
The holy man was tempted, that when we are tried, to teach us what we should
do. S. Jerome, having read the life and death of Hilarion, who after he had
lived religiously, died most Christianly, said: Well, Hilarion shall be the
champion, whom I will follow. If S. Jerome could say, Hilarion should be the
champion whom he would follow: If chaste men may say, Joseph shall be the
champion whom we will follow: Then may afflicted men say for true patience,
Job shall be the champion whom we will follow. Toby after that deed of mercy,
in burying the dead, was accepted of God, the next tydinges we hear of Toby,
is, Tob. 2. 10.
the holy man Toby is stricken blind. To suffer some chastisementes, we may
be content: for respectinge our sins, God by these afflictions does lay but
a soft hand upon us. It was an ancient Fathers prayer, Domin^ hic ure, hic
seca, vt in posterum sanes, Lord here sear and cut me, that thou may heal
me in the time to come, Better to suffer here, then hereafter. Non respicias
(says Chrysostom) quod via est aspera, Chrisost. Homil. 7. in Epist. ad Heb.
sed quo ducit, Respect not so much that the way is painful, as that the ^nde
thereof is pleasant. When S. John asked the Angel what they were that
appeared in long white garments, with Palms in their hands: the Angel
aunsweared, Apo. 7. 14
These are those that came out of many tribulations in the world. To show after
the storms of a troublesome life, they wear Palms and crowns, in token of
everlasting triumph. There is a threefolde consideration that may move in us
matter of meditation to this effect: The first, Quid fuimus, what we once
were: The second, Quid ^umus, what we now are: The third, Quid e^^mus, what
after a short space we shall be. What we once were, is showed by that of Esdras,
2. Esd. 7
O Adam (says he) what have thou done? When Adam fell, we all fell. If the
estate of man had been without sin man's estate had been as the Angels in
heaven. Solomon in his princely seat, was clothed in great royalty, and yet
Solomon, in all his royalty, was not clothed like the Lillies of the Field.
But neither Solomon in all his royalty, nor the Lillies of ye Field, was ever
so clothed, as was Adam before he lost the clothing of innocence. O happy
Adam, if Adam had well considered so much. Wherefore as the people, in the time
of the Prophet Aggee, Agg. 3. 4
beholdinge the form of the Temple, how far inferior it was unto the former
glory thereof, might in effect sorrow, when they saw the one, and remembered the
other. In like manner, when we call to mind the state of innocence, wherein
GOD made all things for man, and man for himself, (in that wonderful
excellency) placed him in Paradise, a Garden of all delights, subject neither
to grief of body, or vexation of mind. We cannot but with some sorrow for
sin, bethink our selves of that former felicity, and in the first place,
Quid ^uimus, what we once were. For the second consideration, Quid sumus, what
we now are, even soiourners in this vale of tears, exiles from our native
home, where troubles come like Jobs messengers, no sooner one has told his
tale, but another steps in, to say as much: where men are beset with crosses
and calamities round about, the feeling whereof may move us to break forth
into that desire of the Apostle, To. 17. ^4
Who shall deliver us from these bodies of death? Cato the wise, a Heathen man,
could tell his Scholars, that were he offered to be young again, he would in
no case accept of such an offer, so wearysome is the condition of our estate
present. For that future state, Quid crimus, what we shall be, when these drossie
bodies shall be changed, and made like the glorious body of the Son of God,
Phil. 3. 21
to which bodies God in mercy says, as sometimes unto Abraham, For Ismaell I
will bless him also: so of these bodies in their resurrection, though as
Ismaell, they are not so free borne, as Isaacke the Soul, yet shall they have
a blessing too. A Christian remembrance hereof, does make us desire with
longing, Prou. 13. 42.
aperfection else where. Hope (says Salomo^) that is deferred, does afflict the
mind. In the mean season, considering that God is at the last the rewarder of
patience, and death the finisher of pain, it may make us the more cheer^fully
to pass over the gretest griefs of body, and afflictions of mind whatsoever,
which afflictions in this life are testimonies of Gods love, but in the life to
come, signs of his justice. It is the wont of Fathers, to hold in their own
children, when they suffer the children of bondmen, to go loosely as they
list. God that keeps an inheritance for his, after his rod in correcting, he
has a staff of stay and comfort. Wherefore we may reckon these trials, as
harbingers to warn us before hand of deaths coming, as testimonies of Gods
care over us, as schoolemoisters toward our end, to teach us this lesson of
learning to Die. If God (says S. Ierom) had promised us all peace and quiet
both in this world, Ieron. de Consol. in aduers.
and in the world to come, then our troubles here might amaze us, and make us
doubt of our future rest: but finding by proof, the manifold tribulations of
the life present, we may expect with comfort, the promise of the time to come.
If a Heathen man could say, when he saw a sudden shipwreck of all his worldly
wealth, all lost in a moment: Well Fortune I see thy intent, thou would have
me be a Philosopher: how much more may the Christian man say, after the many
and manifold afflictions in mind, and body: well I see that God would have me
even to become religious, and to enter into a meditation of the life that is
freed of all.

The Ninth Chapter.
How much it concerns every one, in time of health, to prepare himself for
the day of his dissolution.

Seeing that our good or bad estate in the life to come, depe^ds much upon the
quality or condition of the life present. (for where the tree falls there it
lies) and our passage in order is from the life of grace, Eccl. 11. 3
unto the life of glory: they see but little, that perceive not how greatly it
concerns every Christian, in time of best health, while he has yet day
before him, to set forward in a provident course; that so in the cool of the
evening, he may arrive at the port of everlasting rest. The days of man are
but short, his time uncertain, that little moment, we have, to provide for a
state of all continuance, is run over before we are aware: Gods mercy in
giving us time and grace, passes a long, as a pleasant river if we stop
the course thereof, by our continuance in sin, it will arise high and turn
into justice, and bear them down by force, and overthrow our securest repose
in this world. That which once, and never but once, is done, should be
advisedly begun, carefully prosecuted, and most seriously labored with all
industry unto the end. It is the counsel of the holy Ghost: Gal. 6. 10.
Do good while ye have time. The place of making atonement with our adversary,
Mat. 5. 25
is while we are in the way. No preparing oil in our Lamps, Math. 25. 8.
no entringe with, the Bridegroom: no running, no crowning. For a sure rule is
it with God, Do well, and have well. Live the life of the righteous, and die
the death of the righteous. If any ask (says) Lactantius) whether death be
good or evil, my aunsweare is, Look unto the condition of the life present,
which if it be passed over in virtue, O well is thee, and happy shall thou be:
if otherwise, the case is altered, Mors peccatorum pessima, Psalm. 34 22.
the death of sinners is worst of all. For why, they pass over their days,
says Job, Job. 21, 13
in great iollity, and suddenly fall into a sea of miseries. Because we know
not the day, we should watch every day: because we know not the hour, we
should watch every hour. We see that in matters of weight, foresight and
deliberation is wont to bring them better to pass. The husbandman will take
his season, the Soldier will watch his fittest time: every one will cast the
best way to compass the business he has in hand: and shall the Christian
man be altogether careless and negligent, in preparing himself for his
departure? God forbid. It is the Wise man's wise counsel, Ante languorem adhibe
medicinam, ante iudicium interroga teipsum, Before thy languishing grief,
consult of the medicine. before judgment, examine thy self. The Prophet David
expressing the provident care, and careful providence of an holy man, says,
Psalm 33. 6
Orabit ad te in tempore oportuno, He shall pray unto thee in a time
convenient, or remember thee O Lord, in a time when thou may be found. The
servants that said in their hearts, the master does defer his coming, the
master of those servants shall come in a time they think not of, and give
them their portion, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. But happy are
those servants, who attend his return: these are those, that make all clean
and handsome^ these are those that sometimes look forth, sit as Abraham, at
the entrance of the Tabernacle: these are those, who have their loins girt,
their lamps burning, their oil ready, and wait with the wise virgins, for
the Bridegromes coming: these are those, whom their Lord shall find, sic
facientes, so doing, and therefore make them rulers over much, take them by
the hands, and bring them to the participation of everlasting joy. That men
would well prepare themselves in time, while they are their own men, they
shall one day find the benefit of this carfulness. To him that passes
through dark places* one light carried before him, will do him more good,
then many, that are brought after. For him that undertakes a long journey,
abuise beforeha^d will stand him in stead. Of this spiritual voyage, the vow
of the Prophet should be the vow, and resolution of every particular man, by
the assistance of Gods grace, Psa. 39. 1
Dixi custodiam vias meas, I said, I will take heed unto my ways. I religious
preparation in time, would do men more good, then they are aware. Christ
wept for the men of Jerusalem, which would not weep for themselves, Lu. 29.
41
and all was because they knew not the things that did belong unto their
peace. Antiochus after his many injuries ^ffered unto the people of the Jews,
1. Match. 6. 12. 13
and unto the temple of God it self, taking sacriligiously from thence the
ornaments appointed for Gods service, when the Lord called him to aunsweare
the cause at his own consistory, he could then wish he had never meddled with
sacred goods only consecrated ad pios vsus. to Church, to godly uses. When
Pharao saw the Sea ready to swallow him, he could then no doubt be sorry, that
ever he had wronged poor innocents, and oppressed Gods own portion. When
sleep is gone from their eyes, and rest from their tossed beds, then many may
wish, that they had used less oppression then they have, that they had fasted
often with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. 27
prayed with Daniell, Dan. 9. 21
wept with Mary Magdalen, Luc. 7. 38
lived in mean estate, and so have feared God, rather then to have inioyed the
pleasures of sin for a season, which they find to be full of bitterness at
the last. Pro. 1. 28
These things should be considered in time, and here is the time. They shall
seek me, says Wisdom, speaking of negligent sinners, but they shall not
find me, and why? because they seek when it is too late. The foolish virgins
may call, Mat. 25 11. 12.
Lord, Lord: but when the Bridegroom is past, and that mild countenance of
Christ turned away, the woeful plight of these virgins shall be such, as it were
enough to break their hearts with sorrow, and such sorrow, which shall never
cease to wound their very distressed souls. Had we not need, then in a case
of such importance, to stand evermore ready, by a serious preparation for our
end, to hold us fast in the fear of God, and to wax old therein, Eccl. 2. 6.
as Syrach counsels us. Moreover, our continuance here, being only
certain in uncertainty, and therefore says one: Eusebius. Emis.
Nobis certam solicitudinem, Hom. 1. ad. Mona.
imponat incerta conditio, In any case let our uncertain condition, put into
us a certain carfulness of our estate to come. If in any thing that care of
the Prophet is to be remembered, Psalm, 132. 4.
who would not suffer his eyes to sleep, nor the temples of his head to take
any rest, it should surely in this of all other be ^emembred. Who would pas^e a
day in sinful security? Wh^ would lay him down in that (...) of life*
wherein he would (...) loath to depart this Tabernacle? Do not many mere
with death and are often surprised at places of greatest triumph, where men are
wont to thinck of nothing less? Now merry, within short time mourned for: A
boane in the meat, a (...) in the cup. The laying wait of an enemy, has made
many a stout champion after manifest pe^ls escaped, in the midst of hateful
enemies, to yield by so weak a means, whether they would or no. Many good
friends oftentimes in the world, shake hands at partinge, and we see their
next meeting is at heaven. Wherefore when we keep our solemn assemblies, we
had need keep them religiously minded, for we know not whether we shall ever
keep them any more. When we make our humble repentance to God, we had need
do it sincerely in deed: Satan he is busy, because his time is short, and
therefore his wrath is the fiercer. But we remembering the continuance of time,
should use all diligence, and therefore our care should be the greater to
prevent the subtle Serpent. The Church does pray, and that in most Christian
manner too, that the faithful may be delivered from sudden death. And surely
great cause has the sober Christians man to desire rather leysurely to yield
himself to God, then to be taken in a moment from the society of men. To have
a good departure out of the world, may be a good man's prayer, and to close up
the course of life, with a treatable dissolution, is that fair Christian end
we may all beg at the hands of God. Notwithstanding, when the mind is well
prepared, and every day resigned to his will, who knows better then our
selves, how best to bring us to his kingdom Though the Christian end the days
of his transitory life, by a more short riddance, from these bodily
in^rn^ities, the suddainenesse with Gods help is no pre^^dice unto his future
good, that lives ever prepared for the day of his departure, and they are not
overtaken with death, how suddain^ly soever they are gone, that daily mind the
tune of their dissolution. We may remember, that if we respect our estate
and condi^ion of life, we are all at one, and the self same stay. Considera
(says S. Bernard) non qualis sis, Bernard. de consid. ad Eug. lib. 3.
sed qualis fueris, consider not so much what thou art, as what thou shall be:
What is become of all Adams posterity, for these many hundred years passed?
excepting a remnant that must shortly follow after, are they not all gone?
Moses mentioning the age of those who lived before the flood (when as yet the
days of man were of more continuance then they are) says: Genesis 5. 8. 20. 27.
All the days of Seth were nine hundredth and twelve years, and he died. All
the days of Iered were nine hundredth sixty and two years, and he died. All
the days of Methushelah were nine hundredth sixty and nine years, and he
died, that same, and mortuus est, and he died, will year long, be the clause
appliable to us all. In the mean season we read the Epitaphes of others,
follow the Funeralles of some dear friends; we see many, as those on whom the
Tower in Siloa fell) gone in a moment, Luc. 23. 4
warninges sufficient, if warninges will serve to make us live prepared for our
end. Careless men (says one) are not unlike dissolute seruitors in princes
courts, who having their allowance of lights, spend them out in riot, and so at
last are feign to go to bed darkling: provident Christians have a foresight to
think of the time to come, consider this transitory estate will have an end,
and therefore prepare for an other world, where they may have a stay or
perpetuity of rest. Now then to be ever in a readiness for the giving up our
acc^unt to God, to live prepared for the day of death, Luc. 16. 3
the uncertainty of life, the waightinesse of the charge may justly move us
all to be careful indeed. How much therefore it concerns us in time of
health to provide for another world, every one does see we have not two souls,
that we may hazard one. God willed his people upon their passage out of Egypt
to have their loins girt, Exodus 12. 12.
their staves in their hands, their shoes on their feet, that there might be
no let when the time of their delivery should come: we know not how soon God
will send us from this Egypt: Jesus Christ grant we may keep our Pasouers
with souls prepared to be gone. Who so fears the Lord (says the Wise man)
it shall go well with him at the last, Eccles. 1. 13.
and he shall find favor in the day of his death.

The Tenth Chapter.
Wherein is showed the manner of preparing, or the state and condition of life,
wherein the christian man should stand prepared for death.

THe mean then to die the death of y^ righteous, is firll to live the life of
the righteous. The mean to sit with Abraham, is here to walk with Abraham:
for God has appointed a virtuous life to go in order before the great reward
of eternal life, not as the cause, but as the consequent of our blessed
righteousness in Christ our Savior: What remameth but to frame the premises
as we would fine the conclusion. To sow, as we would one day reap, for those
that will lie soft, must make their bed thereafter, and to live the life we
hope to live, is in a generality here to live religiously. The old Christians
made the world to read in their lives, that they did believe in their hearts,
and Heathen men to say this is a good God, Justin. Mart.
whose servants are so good. Therefore, then this godly and holy conversation
of life, what better state for a Christian man to stand in, ever prepared sor
his end? Was not that a memorable protestation of Samuel, 1. Sam. 12. 3.
when before his death, in the presence of all the people, he declared as thus,
his integrity of life: Behold here I am, bear record of me before the Lord
and his anointed. As if he should have said, give me my qui^t^s est at parting,
whose ox h^u: I taken, to whom have I done wrong? The peoples reply in effect
was, now God be with thee good Samuel, to who^ thou art going, and so with
mournful hearts they gave him this testimony at parting. That of Saint Paul
when he took his farewell of the men of Ephesus, Act. 20. 26. 37.
who wept abundantly for the words he spoke, being chiefly sorry they should
see his face no more. I take you to record this day, I am pure from the blood
of al men, I have covered no man's silver or gold. After so good a life, was not
this a good farewell? That of Simeon a just man, Luc. 2. 19
one that ^eared God, and waited for the consolation of Israel, who embracing
Christ, prayed to depart in peace. O good life (says an ancient father) what
a joy art thou in time of distres? It made the some father neither ashamed to
live any longer, Poss. de Amb.
because he had lived honestly, nor afraid to die, because he had a good Lord.
Plutarch writes of Pericles, Plutar. in Gita Peric.
that he never caused man to wear sorrowful attire, he was so harmless. And
of Lysander, that he was more honored after his death then ever he had been
in all his life, Plut. in vit. Lysand.
he was so virtuous. But the Wise man speaking of the servants of God, who
passed through the darkness of this world with lamps in their lives, which
did both light themselves and others. The righteous (says he) are had in a
perpetual remembrance, Eccles. 44. 14.
their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for evermore. For such
is the power of virtue, as it makes men, not only honored when they are
alive, but also when they are dead, and it is wont to take them out of their
graves, and cause them to live in the mention of long posterity, having their
names registered and enrolled with the Saints of heaven. These stood evermore
upon their departure, having that heavenly treasure of a good conscience,
having peace and tranquillity of mind. When the evil are tossed, says the
Prophet Esai, as the raging waxes of the sea, their name perishes, says the
Wise man as if they never had been. Thus the innocent life like the watchful
servant opens the door gladly, when his master knocks: but the riotous
seeks corners, being ashamed to be seen: the one is quit by a joyful
proclamation, the other found guilty at the bar of his own conscience. He
that will say with the Apostle, Phil. 1.
Mors mihi lucrum, Death is to me advantage, must live with the Apostle,
(...) Omni bona conscientia, Act. 23. 1. 2.
with all good conscience. Thus much ingenerall of preparing our selves for the
time of our dissolution, in particular, to come nearer home, the applying of
himself to Faith, Hope, and Charity, is that Christian estate wherein the
servant of God once settled, need not to fear, Ps. 128. 5
To speak with his enemies in the gate. Faith is the staff whereupon we stay
both in life and eath: the which faith tells us, that God thorough Christ is
become our welfare. By faith we are blessed, Gal. 3. 4.
in the third to the ^alathians and fourth. By faith we rejoice in tribulation.
in the fifth to the Romans and second. Romans 5. 2.
By faith we have access unto God in the third to the Ephesians and twel^t.
Ephesians 3. 12
This is the shield whereby we quench the fire it darts of Satan. Ephe. 6. 6
This is the mean whereby we resist his power. Nahash the Ammonite would
make peace with the men of Iabesh Gilead, 1. Sam. 11 2 3 4.
but upon condition, that he might thrust out their right eyes. This ol^^
Ammonite our enemy wou^^ offer peace to Gods children, but it is upon
condition: for he would have their right eye, (...) that blessed faith that
behold^ Christ crucified put out. But will the true Giliadites yield to such a
condition? No, not for ten thousand worlds of riches. Have we any thing to do
at the throne of God in heaven, there we have but two pleas, the one of
innocence, the other of mercy? Faith bids boldly plead the plea of mercy,
and tells us the judge is reconciled. What shall sepearte us once confirmed in
faith from the love of God in Christ Jesus? Shall powers, Romans 5. 1
or principalities? things present, or things to come? no, neither life, Romans
8. 8.
nor death. What manner of faith Christ commends in the Gospel, we read by
that of Mary Magdalene, who after sorrowing and weeping f^r her sines, Christ
tells her: Thy faith has made thee whole: Luc. 7. 50
as if he should have said; Mary, this weeping, this repenting faith is faith
indeed. When he had seen the religious duty of the Samaritan, that came
back to give God praise, and fell down at Christ's feet, he faith unto him
also; Lu. 17. 19
Thy faith has made thee whole: as if this humble faith, this religious faith
is a saving faith: Go in peace. The blind man that cried. Lu. 18. 42
Son of David have mercy upon me. And being reproved would not leave
Mercy, until he obtained Mercy: Christ said to him as to the former, thy
faith has made thee whole, as if this praying faith of thine is a good faith:
Receive thy sight. What made many old Saints to endure bonds and imprisoment,
to be stoned, to be hewn a sunder? Heb. 11. 37.
it was faith (says the Apostle.) This was no pals^e faith, but firm and
constant unto the end, that comforts the languishing mind, and says, if we
live, we live unto the Lord; it we die, Romans 14. 8
we die unto the Lord; Whether we live or die we are the Lords. To this faith
is adjoined Hope, which is called by the holy Ghost, the Ancre of the soul.
The anchor lies deep, and is not seen, and yet is the stay of all: So hope
reaches far, Heb. 6. 19
is of things unseen, and yet holds sure anuds the surging waves of a
boistrous world. This hope makes not ashamed, abides with patience, Romans 5. 5.
rejoices in afflictions, is as S. Austen calls it, the very life of life.
For why? it biddes us go comfortablie to the throne of grace, Romans 13. 25.
and not to refuse the changing of these mortal badies, that we may receive
them in a better resurrection. In the third place Charity 1. The. 1. 6
the indivisible companion of faith may be considered. Heb. 4. 16
God in the creation did separate light from darkness; we may not in the state
of justification join the works of darkness as enuyinges; strife, and
contentions, with the light of faith. In the second book of Kings, and the
tenth Chapter, When Iehonadab came to wards Iehu, 2. King. 10. 15.
as if he had some earnest intent to be his follower, Iehu said, is thy
heart upright with mine? he answered, it is; then quoth Iehu, give me thy
hand. Our noble Iehu, whom God has set up to pull down the power of
darkness, says to all that would profess his name: Is your faith upright to
me? then give me the operations of your hands. The children of God, as they
shall differ from the children of this world hereafter; so must they differ from
them here by good works, which do manifest themselves by Christian charity.
Christ says unto his, as the Lord of the vineyard said unto them in the market
place, Quid statis oriosi, why stand ye idle? Faith like Rachel mourning for
her children, Mar. 2, 18.
lamenteth the defecte of good works; and says as Sara, give me fruit or Idie.
Our Savior Christ says to his disciples, by this shall men know you, whose
you are, Joan. 13. 35.
In that you love one another. Genesis 4. 5. 8.
Caine offered bad offerings, which was a token that the love of God waxed
cold in Caine, it was not long after that he laid violent hands on Abell,
which showed that he lost withal the love of his neighbor. Ieron. de cons. in
Aduers.
But O Caine (says Saint Jerome) what do thou? what cause have thou of this
cruel hatred and desire of shedding innocent blood? Quid commeruit frater? quam
vim intulit? what has thy brother deserved? what violence has he offered?
has thy solitary brother displeased thee, because he pleased God? thou
know not what a loss thou shall have in the miss of so good a companion.
But envy puffes up, blinds the understanding where it once enters. If you
will hear how Lamoch that was an evil man speaks: Genesis 4. 25
If ^aine were avenged seven fold, I will be avenged seventy seven fold:
Here is nothing but a mind set upon revenge. But if you will hear how David
the man of God speaks, 2. Sam. 9. 1.
Is there any of the house of Saul, that I may show mercy unto them? He
speaks of love and kindness toward his very enemies. And so Joseph when he
forgave his brethren, Genesis 50. 19.
because says he, I my self am under the hand of God. All that we can, or do
forgive our enemies, are (...), offenses or some final trespasses: Mar. 11. 25.
but that which God forgiues, they are (...), debts of great importance: Mat.
6. 12
we some few pence, Luc. 18. 28. 30.
he talents, and those ten thousand too. Thrasibulus ^ heathen man, to renew
amity lost amongst men; made a law, (...) of forgetfulness of all wrongs and
injuries that had been offered: it is nor a law of Th^asibulus; but of Christ
Jesus: Luc. 6. 37
Forgive and it shall be forgiven you. What has heaven more glorious then the
union of the Trinity? What has the earth more heavenly then consent and
unity? When one river runs toward the Ocean, it is a good course, and
goes as it should: but when it meets with another river, then they make a
current in deed. When the love of God does carry us along, we go well but
when this meets with the love of our neighbor, then we set forward with a
main stream into a sea of all blessedness. A special mean to increase this
double love in y^ hearts of al believers, is a frequent participation of the
holy and blessed Eucharist, (...).
which is called of some (...), that is to say, a most necessary provision for
out spiritual voyage: O blessed mystery! which amongst other high and heavenly
effects, is a mean to strengthen us in this great journey, and comfort us
toward the end of the way. Thus setting our selves in order, we may accept
of the time whenever it shall please God, that broughts us into the world,
to take us from this our continuance in the same. The condition of life wherein
we may stand prepared, requires our Christian practice: the happiness of this
condition we shall find when we come unto the state of all happiness.

The eleventh Chapter.
How the Christian man should demean himself when sickness begins to grow
upon him.

THe first and principal thing religiously to be remembered in the beginning
of sickness is, that the soul do call her self to a serious account of sins
passed, of the evil committed and the good omitted, remembering that of the
Prophet, Psalm. 32. 6.
Dixi quod confitebor aduersum me iniustitiam meam. I said I will confess
against my self my own unrighteousness. Therefore, In decre. vinc.
by an ancient decree, the sick was enjoined before sending for the
Physician, to make first a contrite confession, and humble acknowledgement of
his sins, as if our sins were (as they often are) the cause of our
sickness: and surely this decree was very respectively had in use. For God
does oftentimes take away the effect, when we take away the cause or use of
sinning. Christ having cured the man that lay so many years by the poole
Bethesda, Joan. 5. 2. 3.
and showed no small work of mercy, for being put back at the moving of the
water, of himself weak, of friends destitute, the right course of this
unrighteous world; if any go down, this man does. Well, Christ cures him,
and gives him this caution as a Memorandum for the time to come: Behold, Joan.
5. 14
thou art made whole: sin no more, least a worle thing come unto thee: made
whole, therefore sometimes a dieased creature: made whole, therefore not of thy
self whole: made whole, therefore now a sound man: Sin no more, least a
worse thing come unto thee. He that afflicted thee for a time, could have
held thee longer: he that touched thee in part, could have stricken thee whole:
he that laid this upon thy body, has power to lay a greater rod upon
both body and soul; Sin no more. So that by this we see, that sickness of
the body may move us to cry out with the Prophet, Peccata iuuentutis ne
memineris Domine, Lord remember not the sins and offenses of our youth: Psa
25. 6.
And ab occultis munda nos, cleanse thou us from our secreate faults.

When sickness begins sharply to touch us, Psalm. 19. 12.
we are careful in seeking and sending to procure the health of the body; as
Asa sought to the Physicians to heal his disease, 1. Chro. 16 12.
when he should have rather sent to y^ Prophet to have given him some
spiritual receipt for his sick soul: when the physician has done, then we
can be content the Divine should begin: as if some few words of ghostly
counsel were enough when we see there is but one way with us No, no, the
first and chiefest care in all extremities should be a penitent imploring of
the help of God, who in this case does oftentimes cure both body and soul,
and lengthen the days of sorrowful suppliants, as he did the days of
Ezechias. The lump of dried Figs, means ordained by God, have also their
convenient use. The phi^^eke of the soul must have the best cordials for the
penitent patient. That of the people in the book of Nombers may be remembered,
who being stung with the serpents in the wilderness, had no other mean of
succor then the looking up to the serpent, which Moses (as a mean ordained
by God) set up for the procuring of their health, we have no other refuge in
time of need, Nom. 21. 8.
then the lifting up of the eyes of our souls to behold Christ crucified. The
people cried unto Moses and Aaron, but there was no help until God in mercy
appointed this miraculous mean. No relief could be found in the Law for the
distressed soul, until God in his wonderful love raised up a mighty salvation
in the state of grace. The serpent was lifted up on high, that all might behold
him, so was the Son of God, that all believers might receive saving health
from and by him. In the curing those who were stung by the Serpent, it was,
Vide and viue, Nom. 21 9.
look and live: for Christ's curing, it is Creed and viue, Joan 3. 14.
believe and live. This blessed mean in times of greatest extremity does
add no small comfort to the afflicted man. And thus the principal ^are, when
sickness begins, being an humble acknowledgement of our sins, which may
move us to say, as Joseph's brethren, Therefore is this trouble come upon us;
Genesis 42. 21.
a hearty confession of them all; an humble desire with bended hearted and
knees for the remission thereof; a willing mind ^o be delivered from the
bands of sin, may make us cry with the prophet David, I am so fast in
prison, that I cannot get out: And last of all, a joyful lifting up of the
heart to the throne of grace, may make us willingly renounce the world and
resign over our selves unto his divine pleasure, to whose appointment we ought
with patience meekely to submit our selves. We see we are in his hand, who
alone has power over al flesh: when we are in want, we then know the benefit
of plenty: when we are in bondage, we then best perceive the good of freedom:
when we are in sickness, we must thankfully acknowledge the blessing of
health, (if we have any thank fullness) and may easily gather how God by
lingering sickness does in mercy, stay till we make us rendie. If it shall
please him to adiourne the time of this our pilgrimage, we ought to offer a
determina^e purpose, as a sacrifice upon the altar of our heart, to serve him
truly all the days of our life. And thus having our trust in Christ
crucified, we make this resolution; If we live, we shall do well: if we die we
shall do better.

The Twelfth Chapter.
How the sick should dispose of worldly goods and possessions.

HIs sins by the sick party confessed, his soul religiously commended unto
God, his desire either to live or die, given over to the Divine providence, an
orderly disposing of those temporal blessings, which GOD has here lent unto
his servants, is very convenient for every Christian in time of health, and
nothing ominous, as some have timirously doubted. None ought to alienate
ancient inheritance, Numb. 27 11.
God would that ^he ^ight heir should take place, and succeed in order.
Experience does show, that after wise men have lived long, and served God many
years in the world, this disposing of blessings temporal, makes us not to die
the more quickly, but the more quietly. And therefore it was put in practice of
Abraham, when he gave the principal part of his goods unto Isaacke his Son,
Genesis 25. 5. 6.
and unto others. Abraham gave gifts or legacies: 1. King. 1. 25.
this did David, Toby, and Ezechias, Tob. 4. 20 Esa. 38. 1.
for the quiet of succeeding posterity, dispose of earthly possessions, going
to possess heavenly. In this disposing, to be advised by them, whose learning
and knowledge is approved, does much further the well ordering of all. We
show our thankfulness unto God, and charity to men, when we become
beneficial unto others, remembering whose saying it was: Act. 20.
It is a blessed thing to give. In which giving, the maintenance of Churches,
Colledgs, Schools Hospitals, and such like godly uses, should* where ability
is answerable, be chiefly remembered: for by these deeds of mercy we do not
only our selves acknowledge Gods goodness, but make many others, when we are
long since dead and rot^en, bless him in the participation of the same.
Merciful men (says the Wiseman) have honored God by this means, and how;
Eccles. 44 2. 15.
The Lord has gotten great glory by them. To give unto the poor in time of
sickness, ^^is good: but more acceptable were it to do it daily, and in time of
best health. This giving is the ship that will never strike against the rock,
but bring our merchandise home in safety. This giving is the most gainefull
interest, when the merciful shall receive a thousand for one. In keeping our
riches says Gregory, we lose them: but in dispearsing them abroad, we most
surely keep them. To dispearse them when we can hold them no longer, is not
so much, though commendable in this kind: but to give our bread unto the
hungry, nay to take from our own plenty, to give unto Christ's little ones,
is commendable indeed: Psalm. 41. 1
Blessed is he (says David) that considers the poor and needy. A cup of
cold water shall not want one day a reward. Where is the large liberality
we should have toward the poor members of Christ* The excessive pride of
the world in attire, the needless superfluity in diet has eaten up
hospitalltie and there^^ toward many hungry souls. But to the disposition
of these worldly goods and possessions, wherein natural affection may not be
extinguished, the next^ heir or name disinherited, the custom of the place
and auncientrie not violated: restitution where wrong has been offered,
should be remembered: debts truly discharged: all which Christianlike
disposition is seemly both before God and man. The forgiving our enemies when
we can hurt them no more, is not so much. The perfect charity at al times, but
principally at this time, that becomes Christians, may not be wanting. The
example of Steven praying for his persecutors, may show us a mirror of charity
toward all. These special respects observed, the sick may in the name of
God dispose himself and his, as thus.

First with a free heart and willing mind, to yield and render his soul into
the hands of Almighty God his Creator, who of his endless goodness gave him
being; of his infinite mercy vouchsafed to redeem him, by the death and
passion of his dear Son and our Savior Christ Jesus, in whose only merits
is his last repose at parting: the commending his body to Christian burial,
he may proceed as Gods grace and wise advertisement shall direct, that so the
sick laying aside all earthly respects, he commend with penitencie and
contrition of heart, his soul into the hands of almighty God, humbly applying
unto his faith, the innumerable benefits of Christ's passion, and of the three
things he is then to dispose of, His body, goods, and soul: that principal
care he had of all other, in commending this his soul with all devotion into y^
hands of Jesus Christ.

The Thirteenth Chapter.
How necessary it is for the sick, leaving all worldly, thoughts, to apply
his mind to prayer and some godly meditation.

THe disposition of worldly goods being well and wisely* ordered, the mind is
at more quiet to consider of heaven and heavenly things, more apt to draw
nearer unto God by the actions of Christian piety: amongst which actions we
have no sweeter incense then our devotion offered up by prayer: Psalm. 141. 2.
The lifting up of our hands we may make our evening or latter sacrifice. We
have no better Orators to plead our cause, no surer ambassadors to conclude
our peace, then our humble supplications unto him, who sits ever in commission
to hear our suites, and looks that we should send up ou^ prayers, that he may
send down his mercy: by which means we enter into a spiritual traffic
with God himself: we give a cup of cold water, Ioh. 4. 14.
and he returns us a fountain of the water of life. We give him with the
poor widow two mites, and he gives us again the whole treasure of the
Temple. Luc. ^1. 2.
The merey of God (says one) is like a vessel full to the very brimme. If
once his faithful children by the hand of faithful prayer begin to take of
it, it does ouerflowe unto them.

Moreover, it is not with God as with man: those who are petitioners are wont
to be trouble some unto the^; but with God the more we offer up our prayers
unto him, the more we are accepted of him. The Ediles amongst the Romans had
ever their doors standing open for all that had occasion of complaint, to have
free access unto them. With God the gates of mercy are wide open to all poor
sinners, that will make their prayers unto him, Come and wel^come. Now as we
should at other times, and upon other occasions, with Abraham, sometimes leave
our terrene affairs, Genesis 22. 5.
as he left his servants beneath, when he went into the mount to sacrifice to
God: so principally in sickness and grief of body, should we then ascend
into the contemplation of heavenly things, and have recourse to Gods mercy,
as to a City of refuge: Call upon me (says the Lord) in the time of trouble,
and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me. Psalm. 50. 15.
In the t'me of trouble, there is a refuge for extremity; and I will hear
thee, there is the reward of mercy: and thou shall praise me, there is the
reflex of thankful duty. Christ wills all that are weary and heaui^ laden to
come unto him, Math. 11. 28.
and they shall not loose their labor, he will refreshe them. In time of need
no surer centerie, then by humble prayer to repair to God. Demus operam (says
S. Austen) vt moriamur in precatione, August* de vera inuoca. cap. 33. Psalm.
123. 2.
Let us endeavor even to die in prayer. I lifted mine eyes unto the hills,
(says the Prophet) from whence comes my help. And in an other place, As
the eyes of servants look upon the hand of their master; and as the eyes of a
maiden. unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God, until he have mercy upon us. Wherefore with the same Prophet let us
devoutly say; In thee O Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to
confusion, but ^idd^ me, and deliver me in thy righteousness: correct me not
in thine anger O Lord, neither rebuke me in thine indignation: heal me for my
bones are vexed: be not far from me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there
is none to deliver me: remember thy loving mercies, which have been ever of
old: cast me not away when my strength fails me: I acknowledge my faults,
and my sin is ever against me: wash me and I shall be clean: Lord hear me,
hide not thy face from me, for trouble is hard at hand: O let my cry enter
into thy presence. To this or the like penitent complaint, that joyful reply
is not far off; Psalm. 91. 14. 15.
Quoniam sperauit in me, liberabo ^um, Because he has put his trust in me, I
will deliver him. I will set him up, because he has known my name: Cum ipso
sum in tribulatione* I am with him in his tribulation. The select prayers to
be used in the visitation of the sick, should be observed with many of the
Psalms of David, which, when the afflicted read them, instruct the
conscience, and in times of sickness are wont more then ordinary to move the
mind. For these divine hymns says Saint Basil, Basil. in pra^a. in lib.
Psalm.
they are a part of holy Scripture, High in mystery, profounde in sense,
comfortable in doctrine, and have in times of affliction a special and peculiar
grace to instruct the soul. Amongst these the thirty eight Psalm. Domine ne
arguas me* Put me not to rebuke O Lord. The fifty one, Miserere mei Deus, Have
mercy upon me O Lord. The seventy Psalm, Deus in adiutorium, Haste thee to
deliver me O God. The seventy one, In te Domine sp^raui. In thee O Lord have I
trusted. The seventy seven; Voce mea ad Dominum, I will cry unto the Lord
with my voice. The hundred and thirty Psalm: De profundis clamaui ad te
domine, Domine exaudi vocem meam, Out of the deepes have I called unto thee O
Lord, Lord hear my voice, with many other like Psalms, proper and peculiar
for the sick. Hereunto may be added, a silent meditation, wherein the soul
does enter a solitary talk with God, which is very convenient in this ease.
When the joys of heaven have leisure to present themselves to our religious
thoughts, the pleasures of our sinful life, and this worlds vanities, are
then seen to be of small value, (as they are indeed) then may we call to
mind the unspeakable love of God toward man in general, and our selves in
particular. How this (...) s^ept forth in thine of need, before execution of
justice* to (...) man. That it was a work (...) comfort, when God said Fi^
Lux, Genesis 1. 3.
let there be light made* But that it was a work of counsel, and all
comfort, when he said in the great work of man's redemption, Fiat Chri^tus,
Let there be a Christ borne, which shall save my people from their sins. And
now have we fit opportunity to meditate upon the sufferinges of the Son of
God; his passion, his descention into hell, his resurrection the third day, his
ascension, and glorious sitting at the right hand of God, so that at the name
of Jesus, the sorrowful sinner may say with Thomas, Dominus meus, Joan. 20. 28.
and Deus meus, My Lord and my God.

We cannot in the world better employ our thoughts, then in calling to mind how
God has kept us from our youth up; from how many dangers we have been
delivered, Psalm. 22. 9
into which we have seen not a few fall before our eyes, Psalm. 27. 21.
and our selves by his only mercy unto this day freed from the same. Can we
but with all thankfulness call to mind the goodness of God toward us, for
the time past, and put our whole trust and confidence in him even in these
greatest extremities, yea both in life and death, for the time to come, seeing
the Lord is nigh to them that call upon him, Psalm. 145. 1^8.
yea to all such as call upon him faithfully.

The fourteenth Chapter.
How the sick, when sickness more and more increases, may be moved to
constancy and perseverance

WHen sickness more and more increases, we are more and more put in mind
of our mortality, and gently moved to renounce by little and little, all the
repose we have, or can have in this tran^^torie life, to arm our selves to
stand with constan^y unto the end, remembering evermore, as we had a time to be
borne, so have we a time to die. And our way to enter into life, is first to
pass the pinching griefs of a momentarie death. To raise up our spirits in
times of greatest trial, we may recou^t with our selves. that Christ himself
went not up to glory, but first he suffered pain. When Vriah was willed by
David himself to take his peace at home: Shall I see (quoth he) my Lord Ioab,
2. Sam. 11 11.
and the Ark of God lie abroad in the field, and shall I go take my rest and
^ase? No, I will not. Shall we see the Son of GOD himself all in gore blood,
suffering for the sins of the whole world, and shall we refuse all suffering,
taking our case in Sion, and our rest upon the mountains of Samaria, as loath
to endure any cross or calamity at all? Is that Soldier worthy to triumph
with his Captain, that would never strike stroke to fight the battle?
Again, whatsoeue^ we suffer, 1. Cor. 9. ^6.
Christ suffered more for us. But that which principally is to be remembered,
this our striving is not beating the air: for after we have fought a good
fight there is laid up for us a crown of glory. 2. Tim. 4. 8.
God is (says Tertullian) Agonothetes, Tertul. ad Mart.
both he that purposes the prize, and rewards the champion. Consider the
old generations of men, and mark them well: Eccle. 2. 11 12. 13.
Was there ever any confounded that put his trust in the Lord who has
continued in his fear and was forsaken? Or whom did he ever despise that
called upon him? Wherefore let the languishing person take unto him comfort in
Gods mercy; Was ever the righteous forsaken? God told Josias, 2 King. 22. 20.
that he should be gathered unto his Fathers in peace, and yet Josias died in
war. 2. King. 23. 29.
God gave him a constant mind* whereby he died peaceably: The Lord told
Jeremy he should not be vanquished: Jeremy was stoned, but not vanquished:
God gave him an invincible faith. The Angel to the Church of Smyrna, says,
Esto fidelis vsque dabo tibi coronam vitae, A^o. 2, 10.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. To raise
up himself in this lively faith, the sick may make a hearty confession of
his christian belief, saying, O holy Trinity, I commend my self unto thee,
the father, the son, and the holy ghost, which in unity of nature art one,
and the self same God. I commend me unto thee. O omnipotent father, which have
created me, yea heaven and earth, with all things visible and invisible. I
commend me unto thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, who for me, and the salvation of
mankind, were sent into the world, conceived by the power of the holy Ghost,
borne man of the blessed virgin Marie, did suffer, wast dead, vnried,
discendedst into hell, the third day did rise again from the dead,
ascendedst into heaven, where thou sit at the right hand of the father,
from whence thou shall come at the day of judgment, to judge all flesh. I
commend me unto thee, O holy Spirit, which proccedest from the father and the
son, whom together I adore and glorify, which do quicken one Catholic
and Apostolic church, to which thou have in mercy granted remission of
sins, the resurrection of these mortal bodies, and everlasting life after
death. The same confession may be made of the sick in manner of oblation: As I
offer my self unto thee, O holy Trinity, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, etc. Also in manner of an ^sibl^ supplication. As I beseech thee, O holy
Trinity, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, etc. In which christian
confession Gods servants may stand constant unto the end, against all
temptations. Not unlike y^ people of Ciniensis, who when the ambassadors of
Brutus would have the^ deliver over their city, and freedom into his hands,
Ferrum nobis a maioribus, etc. Tell your Captain Brutus, our auncesters have
left us weapons, to defend our right with courage and constancy unto the end.
The holy Ghost, by the Apostle S. Paul in the s^xt to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.
14. 15.
shows what these weapons are; as the breast plate of righteousness, the
shield of faith, the Helmet of salvation, the sword of the spirit, their feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel, where is spiritual furniture for all
parts, only the back or hinder part excepted, to signify that the Christian
soldier should not turn his back before his enemies. The Eagle to try her
young, is said to carry them up against the piercing beams of the Sun,
which seeing them to endure, she acknowledges them as her own Christ knows
us to be his, by our constant suffering, and therefore sometimes brings us unto
the conflict. We read in the 2. Sam. 20. That Seba a rebellious Jew, 2. Sam.
20 1.
blew a trumpet, and many of the people followed after him, but the men of
Judah, who were of the blood royal, they as good Isralites would live and die
with David their king. The old Seba, blows many an entising blast to carry
us away from our true allegiaunce of Christ Jesus our king, All that are borne
of water and the holy Ghost, will live and die in his faith. Howsoever the
world for a time frown upon them, yet they are not as the Reed without pith
or substance, and so wauing with every wind, but firm and constant, like
John Baptist, that will hold his profession, though he loose his head for it.
Wherefore considering that there is no crown without a conquest, and no
conquest without courage and perseverance, the faithful like Job say, Job. 13.
15
Though the Lord kill us, yet will we put our trust in him.

The Fifteenth Chapter.
How they may be advertised, who seem unwilling to depart the world.

IF in this life only (says the Apostle) we have hope in Christ, 1. Cor. 15
17.
then are we of al men most miserable: to show in effect, that we have not in
this life the occomplishment of our hope. Not here therefore we should expect
it else where: this is not our Paradise, but a barren desert: we may not look
for our heaven here, our city is above, which we all must inhabit, to draw
back when we are to go most comfortablie to take possession of the same, and
the hope so long hoped for, should most strengthen us in the way, is far from
that Christian belief whereof we make daily profession. Often have we prayed
Thy kingdom come. Mat. 6. 10
Now when God is leading us unto the same, our unwillingness to be gone
cannot but argue great weakness of faith* Quid face^emus si mori tantummodo
fine resurrectione praeciperet Deus? Ier. de non lugend. mort.
voluntas eius suf^iceret ad solatium, What would we have don, if God (says
Saint Jerome) had commanded us to die, without mentioning the resurrection,
his will ought to have bin our comfor^t: but now having this stay, why should
we waver? Oftentimes have we wished, that we were once freed from this worlds
captivity: now God is going about to free us indeed our desire is to continue
our captivity still, not unlike children, who cry out of pain^ and grief,
and when the Surgeon comes that should ease them of all, they choose rather
to remain as they are. There is no Mariner but after many sharp storms
desires the haven: and shall not we after so many tempests of this troublesome
world, accept of our deliverance, when the time is come? We are given to love
the world too much, and a great deal more then we should, being only
strangers in the same. Had we no farther expectation, but only to enjoy a
state temporal, where we might set up our rest, as having here attained our
chiefest good, then might our departure from this world be very grievous in
deed, because our being and happiness should end together. But looking as we
do for a further condition, so perinanent, so blessed, and death being the
passage or entry thereunto, there is no cause why man, if he bethink
himself, should unwillingly set forward, when his time of departure is at
hand. First remembering it is the ordinance of God, the course of all flesh,
and, as Iosuah calls it, Ios. 23. 14
the way of all the world. What man is he (says the prophet) Psa. 89. 47.
that lives and shall not see death? It is not proper to any one, which is
common to all: kings, princes, strong, valiant, take part with them in this
lot. There is no reason that any should look to be privileged in that wherein
all without exception must, will they, nill they, sub^^t themselves.
Secondarily, that it is a mean to bring us from a prison with out ease; from a
pilgrimage without rest, we all see evidently: and this made the Wise man
praise the dead above them E^cl. 4. 2.
which are yet alive, and prefer the day of death before the day of birth,
surely for no other rea^son, then for that in the one we come into a vale of
misery, in the other we depart from it, departing in the farth of him, by whom
we look for a better state to come. Thirdly, this being the way for the
obtaining so high a reward, we may step forth with confidence in his mercy,
who now calls us by death to the participation of y^ same. Why on Gods
blessing should any be loath that the soul should return to him that gave
it? When the loving mother sends forth her child to nurse, and the nurse
has kept it long enough* if the mother take her own child home again, has
this nurse any cause to grudge or complain? How much less cause have we to
show any part of unwillingness, that God should take home this departing
soul, the work of his own hands, the plant of his own grafting, who first
gave it, and will before all others most lovingly keep and tender it. There is
none knows the love of a mother, but a mother. There is none knows the love
of God, but God, who is love. Wherefore we are very unnatural to our selves,
if we should give testimony of coffeehouse, when our souls should be
delivered into his hands, who is the best preserver of all. Where is our
desire with S. Paul? Phil. 1. 23
To be dissolved and to be with Christ. Where is our complaining with the
Prophet David? Psa. 42. 2
That we are not yet come to appear in the presence of God. Where is the
longing of Saint Austen? August. Medit. 2.
to see that head which was crowned, those hands which were pearsed for our
sins. Had we the love and faith which these good men had, we should rather
wi^h for the hour of our rest, then show any unwillingness to depart when
God is about to call us hence. Shall natural inclination overrule the force
of Christian hope. Can we forget the prayer of Christ in the garden? Luc. 22.
42.
Father not my will but thine be fulfilled. The stars by their proper motion
are carried from the West to the East, and yet by the motion of obedience to
the first Mouer, they pass along from the east unto the west. The waters by
their natural course follow the center of the earth, yet yielding unto the
higher body, which is the Moon, are subject to her motions. The motion of
obedience to the will of God, who is the first mouer, the higher body should
draw us and al our desires, how contrary soever in nature: for hereunto all
should yield themselves, and obediently follow. Those who by Alchemie will
turn worser metal into a more pure, must first dissolve the worse: so if we
will change our wills into the will of God, we must clean dissolve them, that
his will only may take place. When Christ in the Apocalips says, Apoc. 22. 20.
I come quickly: the Saints reply; Even so Amen, come Lord Jesus. To show
whatsoever does please Christ, could not displease them, much less his
coming, which is most joyful to all that fear and love his name. And here we
may consider by this means of yielding our selves meekely unto God, we have
occasion offered to show our subjection to his divine pleasure: Genesis 22. 4
as Abraham had, when God commanded him to offer up Isaac his son, nay
Isaac his only son, and Isaac whom he loved, and Isaac in whom rested all
the hope of his blessed posterity. Here was a conflict, wherein God would see
which was strongest in Abraham, either faith or fatherly affection But Abraham,
who is called the father of the faithful* and so one that leaves his children
an example for the tune to come, in this straight resigned his will to the will
of God, stood not weighing so high a precept in the light scales or balance of
humane reason: but with hope contrary unto hope, proceeded to the
accomplishment thereof. The Apostles of our Savior Christ being willed to
launch forth* and to pass unto the other side of the lake, stood not casting
timorous doubts; as thus, Mar. 4. 35.
this Genazereth is a dan^gerous passage; y^ evening draws on; we our selves
plain fishermen, none of the skilfullest Pilots: but when Christ commanded
them, without more ado away they go. Now Christ bids us to put off from the
shore of our earthly estate; what should we but obediently set ^orward? at the
other side is heaven, the haven of our hope. Again, seeing we must needs
away, Si aliquando cur no^ nunc, If we must away, why not now? if not now,
when? There is a time to be borne (says the Wiseman, and there is a time to
die: we came into this world, upon condition to leave it: yield up our lives we
must with Codrus that valiant Athenian, and that before the field be won. With
the Thebane Captain, let us not care to change life with death, so the victory
may be ours, and to say the very truth, we have no great cause to covet long
life in this stony hearted world: we see some miseries, and wise men foresee
more, the righteous is taken away, 2 Kin. 22. 20.
from the evil to come: as God took Josias, because he should not see the
calamity of the sinful people. For our own estate in particular, when
de^repite age comes which we so much wish for before, and those fourscore
years which is y^ furthest hope of our strength, are we not the^ combersome to
others, and irksome to our selves? In the mean time, so many snares and engines
are laid by the professed enemy of man to entrap men's souls, as we may with
reverence and love wonder at the mercy of God in our delivery for the time
past, and peaceably accept our passage into a place of true security, now
consequently to ensue. Last of all, a remembrance of the place whither we are
going should take us away, as the Angels took Lot from Sodom. It is unto a
city of all continuance, Heb. 13. 4
Even that city where our souls shall live. Let us send our faith in
believing, our hope in expecting, (as losua sent messengers before) to view
that country which God will g^ue us. These messengers will bring us word, that
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived, the high
excellency thereof, which (me thinks) should move men to give this world a
willing farewell. To conclude with S. Cyprian, let Pagans and infidels fear
death* who never feared God in their life. But let Christians go as travelers
unto their nature home, as children unto their loving father, willingly,
joyfully. Psa. 27. 4
One thing (says the Prophet) have I desired of the Lord, that I may dwell in
the house of my God all the days of my life.

The sixteenth Chapter.
How they may be induced to depart meekely, that seem loath to leave worldly
goods, wife, children, friends, or such like.

WHile we set our affections upon earthly things only, we much affect them,
and are loath to depart from them: but once taking a taste of heavenly, we
begin to grow out of liking with the baseness of our former desires, and bend
all our affections to an earnest expectation of far better. If we do respect
riches, Christ has greater riches in another world, then all the empire of
Alexander can yield, If honor, he has greater honor then all the thrones of
earthly Potentates can afforde. (For one day in his house is better then a
thousand.) If friends, heaven has the glorious company of Saints and Angels,
who rejoice at our entrance into their common joy: what more ^cceptable then
good company, and together, joyful company? The company is good where the
righteous live for ever, joyful, where is nothing but a cheerful singing of
Allelu^ah. Apoc. 19. 3.
For worldly possessions here we found them, and here we leave them. The time
of our enjoying of the^ is uncertain, because we see them ebbing and flowing
like the sea, and we do not possess them as we ought, unless we are ready
at times best beseeming unto God to leave them. But the loss of friends cannot
be but grievous unto flesh and blood; to leave wife and children cannot but go
near the heart, where affection has been rooled. Yea, but if we open the
other eye, and see whether we are going to Christ that redeemed us, and is
nearer then all, we leave pleasant delights, but receive more pleasant by
infinite degrees: wherefore to unburden our selves of all earthly cares, we may
observe this course, which is, to commend wife, children, friends, and such
like in our humble prayers, unto his protection, who can better provide for
them then our selves, who is a father of the fatherless, and takes into his
own hand the cause of y^ widow and orphans, Psalm 88. 5
which y^ ancient patriarks well knowing at their departures from the world for
the blessing of God to come upon their posterities, and so left them. Knowing
that they were but sent before them, who should also follow after. Did we
rightly consider the manifold grieuances, which even our chiefest delights,
which we are so loath to leave, have often brought us, we should soon see our
departure from them to be a departure from many cares. The Sun though it be
cheerful and warm, yet is it sometimes less pleasing, by reason of
scorching heat: the air though it be lightsome, yet is it sometimes glomie
and ouercast. Our worldly delights, and whatsoever is here pleasing unto us,
have had oftentimes much sower sauce. Why then (says Fulgentius Fulg. ad Theod.
) do we not forsake this want to attain a future plenty? Of all other we
need not so much respect the forgoing of worldly possessions, which are
(says one: For these causes, rather to be despised of us, then to be left
with disco^tentment. First, for that they are vanities: Secondarily, for that
they are not only vanities, but also deceits: Thirdly, because they are
spinae, pricking thorns: Fourthly, for that they are aerumnae, even griefs
themselves. Be it we use them aright, we are but only stewards: when the owner
himself will have it so. What should we else but with all contentment of mind
forsake and leave them? We came all of us with Job ^^ked into the world; and
with Job, naked shall we return again: only our good deeds and our bad (as
they say) bear us company; bona sequu^tur, mala presequuntur. A great
conqueror of the world would have his ensigne-bearer carry forth Linteam
vestem, a sorry cloth or shrowding sheet, saying: here is all, of all his
conquests a worthy captain does carry with him. Hither we come as Jacob came
to Laban; Genesis 32. 10.
only by Gods providence we are that we are. These herds and droues about
us, they are from the mercy of God. Not plants growing in our own soil, not
vapors that did arise of us, but of the nature of influences that from heaven
are come upon us: every one sueth to God in forma pauperis, for things
necessary. Wherefore the Prophet David says; Psa. 148.
Te dante, nos colligimus, Lord, thou giving, we gather: and therefore called
goods, because they are Gods, his, and not our own: whereby we learn with
contentinent to leave them, when the giver thereof shall of his bounty call us
away to receive better. But is it possible we should forget whither we are
going? where should the members be, but where the head reigns? where should
the heart be, Mat. 6. 21
but where our heavenly treasure is? Christ who is our treasure, is in heaven,
whither first our affections ascend, and then we follow after. All these
riches remain not, nor help in time of need: they take them wings often and
fly from us, and are but straw and stubble, Prou. 27. 24.
whereupon we may build no sure foundation: And therefore we need not so much
care to forsake them. On the other side, we leave the society of men, and go to
that celestial society above in heaven, where a multitude of our good friends
expect us. Our separation each from other here, is only for a time, our
continuance together in the life to come shall be for ever.

The seventeenth Chapter.
How the impatient may be persuaded to endure the pains of sickness, and to die
peaceably.

THe conflict once begun, the courage of the Captain then, and never but
then is experienced. When God does call his children to any cross or
calamity, then begins the battle: then their blessed patience and meek
contentment is made manifest, or never: Knowing that all goes by his ordering,
in whom we live, Act. 17. 28.
move, and have all our being, and that no Physician can be more careful for
the health of the body, then God is wont to be for the health of the soul:
how bitter soever the potion seem, yet receiving it from him who means us so
well, we should not but receive with patient suffering whatsoever his merciful
hand shall reach unto us. Eccles. 2. 1. 2. 3.
My son (says the Wiseman) when thou come unto the service of God,
prepare thy soul unto temptation, and shrink not away when thou art tried,
for whom the Lord loves, him he chastises. Gold and silver are tried in the
fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of adversity. If God will have Moses to
be Exodus 2. 3
a gonernor of his people, God will have Moses to be cast out, and laid in the
bulrushes by the rivers brinke. If God will have Daniel to be a ruler under
Darius, Dan. 6. 16.
Daniel must lie for a time in the Lions den. If God will have Lazarus to be
in Abraham's bosom, Luc. 16. 20.
blessed Lazarus thy soars and sorrows soon ceased, but thy joys are
everlasting. 1. King. 19. 3.
He that had seen Elyas persecuted by Iezabel; Susanna accused by two false
elders: Susa. Job. 2.
the holy man Job afflicted from top to toe, would have thought God had little
respected their sincere worship and reverence of his name. Flesh and blood would
have thought their state most distressed: but if we stay a little and observe
their patience, we shall see their deliverance not far behind* Should we not
depart the world with a willing mind? the faith we have or ought to have of
our changing can tell us: Ioh. 12. 24.
Nisi granum frumenti cadat in terram, and mortuum fuerit, that same fructum
adferet will not follow: The grain of corn must be cast into the earth,
before we can have increase of fruit. Although our dissolution be unto nature
a painful travel; and therefore it is, Genesis 35. 18.
as Rachel said, Benoni an effect of sorrow, yet is the same to Grace an
offspring of strength, and so counted Pilius dexterae, the son of her power,
to endure and suffer somewhat, seeing the reward of suffering is great, should
be less grievous unto us. Elias must go to heaven in a whirlewind. 2. King.
2. 11.
God will send Jacob an Angel to comfort him in his journey, Genesis 32. 2.
after all his trouble with Laban: and God will bring him home with abundance
of increase at last.

God is faithful, and will not suffer his to be tempted above that they are
able: tarry a little the Lords leisure, deliverance will come; peace will
come; joy will come: should it so much grieve any in time of sickness? why
Christ himself w^nt not up to glory, but first he suffered pain. Crux
pendentis, Cathedra docentis; Christ upon the Cross as a Doctor in his
chair, read to us all a Lecture of patience. Whatsoever we suffer, he
patiently suffered more for us, 1. Pet. 5. 10.
and has called us to his eternal glory, that after suffering a little, he
will make us perfect, confirm, strengthen, and stablish us, which will be a
happy refreshing after all. That I may (says Saint Austen) after this
languishing life, August. manu.
see Christ in glory, and be partaker of so great a good, what though sickness
weaken, labors oppress, watchinges consume, cold benumme, heat enflame^nay
though my whole life be spent in sighs, and sorrows, what is all to the rest
that shall ensue in the life to come? The Apostle Saint Paul Romans 8. 18
counted these momentarie afflictions not worthy of the glory that shall be
showed unto us: wherefore seeing that after all these sorrows, we are going to
so quiet a haven, we may with patience endure a time some fatherly correction.
Shall we look for a garland and never set foot to run the race? shall we
with Jobs wife be content only to receive good at the hands of God, and no
touch of trouble? 2. Sam. 10. 4.
David took it not well when the Ammonites ill entreated his ambassadors* these
afflictions are Gods ambassadors: to repine or grudge against them, is to
entreat them evil. What should we but accept all thankfully, and in peaceable
manner depar^e this world. It is said of Plato, a heathen man, who at the point
of death amidst all his pains was said to give the Gods thanks that he was
borne a man, and not a beast; a Greek, and not a Barbarian, and so quietly
left the world. How much more should the Christian man with all grateful
remembrance of Gods goodness toward him, of blessings received, of dangers
prevented, now patiently bequeath his departing soul into the hands of God,
quietly enduring his transitory trial. Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning. Be patient says S. James: Iam. 5. 7.
Behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the earth, until he
receive the former and the latter rain: settle your hearts, for the coming of
the Lord draws nigh. Take the Prophets for an example, if we will rejoice as
they now rejoice, we must live as they sometimes lived, and suffer as they
suffered. If we look into the proceedings of God with all his servants, we
shall see him chastening them for a time, and leaving them a little in the
trial of their faith. The loving mother does sometimes leave the child, goes
aside, and seeing the infantes moaning after her, then she runs and is wont
to make the more of it. When God seems to withdraw a little his help from us,
it is only to see whether we will moan after him; which when he perce^ueth
we do, we are the more beloved of him, and withal our selves the sooner drawn
by these means to the exercise of obedience, humility, patience unto y^ end
when the waters of the floude came upon the face of y^ earth, down went
slately turrets and towers; but as the waters rose, so the Arc rose still
higher and higher In like sort when the waters of afflictions arise, down goes
the pride of life, the lust of the eyes: in a word, all the vanities of the
world. But this Arc of the soul rises as these waters rise; and how too?
even naerer and nearer toward heaven. Wherefore to endure the pains of
sickness patiently, being an example taken from all Gods children, as if a voice
from heaven did testi^^e of the patient man; Hie est filius meus dilectus, this
is my beloved son, we may not forget in time of need so good a virtue, for
which God has a double crown, the one our content here, the other hereafter
of all continuance.

The eighteenth Chapter.
How they are to be comforted, who seem to be troubled in mind with a
remembrance of their sins, and fear of judgment to come.

WHen the servant of 2. King. 6. 15.
the man of God saw the City Dothan to be compassed about with ^ multitude of
enemies, he cries out to the prophet saying, alas master, what shall we do? The
sorrowful sinner considering y^ justice of God, the severity of judgment,
the malice of the old Serpent, now all laying siege and ^atterie unto his
departing soul, the world forsaking him, his friends departing from him, or
at least sometimes weeping by him, cannot but with complaint say, What shall I
do, which way shall I turn? Let us sprinckle our hearts with the blood of
the Lamb, and the destroyer shall not enter, nor have power to hurt. Let us
call to mind the love of God, in not sparing his own Son, To. 8. 32.
which the Apostle took as an argument of good consequence: if he gave us his
own Son, how much, will he not give us all things, and therefore mercy in
time of need. What heart is able to conceive the divine providence from the
beginning had over man? One brings in the three persons in Trinity, after
this manner, consulting of his good. God the Father, says let us create man,
but being created will he not fall away? God the Son answers though he
fall away, I will redeem him: but being redeemed will he walk worthy of his
calling; God the holy Ghost replieth, I will conserve him, I will sanctify
him. The Prophet prays that the eyes of his servant might be opened, which
petition granted, then he sees that they were more, who stood for them, then
all the multitude which compassed the city. Now may the sick with Apostles
pray, Lord increase my faith. By which faith he shall see that Christ with
all, is merits is for him, which is more, and of more efficacy, then the whole
power of darkness, that can oppose it self against him. This blessed object
of Christ's merits, is alone able to revive the fainting sinner, and make him
argue his right against Satan, as thus* Where in thy force thou roaring Lion,
has not Christ weakened it? Will thou know my strength or might wherein I
overcome? It is the blood of the lamb. Thus when like David, we come to fight
with Goliath, we cast away Saul's armor, and al trust and confidence in our
selves, and only set forward in the name of the God of Israel. Gal. 3. 13.
Does the law indite us of transgression? we have a supersedeas to stay that
course, and our commission is under seal, to appeal unto the throne of Grace.
Col. 3. 14.
Does it bring forth our debts bil, our answer is the obligation is cancelled,
the book is crossed, and the whole debt fully discharged. Do the sins and
offenses of our youth now dismay us? If we acknowledge our sins, 1. Ioh. 1. ^
says S, John, God is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. I but do a multitude of sins inuiron
us? and we see our selves great sinners? why Christ appeared first after his
resurrection to Marie Magdalene to show that he brought comfort to the
greatest sinners of all. This is a true saying, says the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.
15.
That Christ came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am the chief: as
if S. Paul put himself in the number, as every one should, and say, whereof I
am one, nay the chief. And here we may call to mind that bottomless depth of
Gods mercy, who will be called rather by the name of a father to intimate
unto us his love, and to enconrage us to call upon him in time of need, whose
goodness is diffusiue, and communicable unto others, whose bounty is delighted
in nothing more then in doing good. And is wont rather to give great then
small things. God is not such a one as Adam took him to be, from whom when he
had sinned he should fly, or hide him self for fear: but God is such a
one, to whom Adam, and all that have sinned, may have access with hope, and
love. The servants of Benadab, in the first of Kings, and the twentieth, when
they saw and considered well their distressed case, began to advise their
master Benadab after this manner: 1. Kin. 20 31.
We hear that the Kings of Israel are merciful, wherefore let us cloth our
selves in sackecloath, that so we may go and find favor in their sight. If
this mercifulnes were a thing proper unto the Kings of Israel, what may we
look for at the hands of him, who is the God of Israel, before whom they that
humble themselves, shall questionless find grace and mercy. My sin is
greater: no Cain, thou errest, God his mercy is far greater, could thou
ask mercy. Men cannot be more sinful then God is merciful, if with
penitent hearts they will but call upon him. But come we unto Christ, the
fountain of al mercy, there shall we find God in his mediation only, great
without quantity, and good without quality (as Saint Austen speaks.) Matt.
11. 19.
Christ in the Gospel was called of the Pharisees, by way of reproach, a friend
of Publicans and sinners, and so was he in truth and verit^e. Never was there
such a friend to poor sinners, and such Publicans, as he was, who struck his
breast and said, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luc. 18. 13.
The Parable of the lost shaepe, does show this love in seeking the lost
sinner: the joy of the Angels of heaven, over our repentance may much comfort
us, to call for grace When the wandering son had consumed his fathers
substance, but yet returned sorowfully to acknowledge himself, the father
says not, whence ^^mest thou, or where is now all thy patrimony, Luc. 15. 22.
but bring hither the new garment, ^il the fat calfe, let us rejoice, my son
was dead, and is alive? Here was a welcome ^ome that might amaze this wandering
son: though we sometimes lose the nature of children, yet God does never
lose the name and nature of a father, a name of privilege to his children,
Gal. 4. 6.
we cry Abba father, a name of care and providence, Mat. 6. 32
your heavenly father eareth for you, Luc. 11. 13.
a name of love, If you give your Children good things, how much more shall
your father in heaven give you, if you ask them of him. And not only a
father, but our father, which should wound our hearts, and kindle our
affections in all distresses with comfort to ^al upon him. It may be said also
in this case as before it was said of the affection of a mother. There is none
knows the love of a father, but a father, nor any the love of God, but God
himself, who is love. That thou might be blessed O man: first he created
the^: that thou might be recovered when thou were lost, then he redeemed
thee, which redeeming shows a price paid for thy ransom, which price was
his dearest blood. When Christ wept and shed some few tears for Lazarus, Ioa.
11. 36
the Jews reasoned and said, see how he loved him: but when Christ shed his
own blood for us, and that in great abundance, Osee how he loved us. If he
bought us with so dear a price, will he refuse his own peniworth? If he
sought us flying from him, shall be not much more receive us when we come unto
him? Can a mother, Esa. 59. 4
says the Prophet Esaias, forget the child of her womb, yea though she do: yet
will not God forget his people. Psalm. 27, 12.
When my father and mother forsook me (says David) the Lord took me up. Luc.
10. 34.
We have a good Samaritan, that when the Priest, and the Leuite left us
wounded, to wit, the Law and figures thereof passed by us, he bound up our
wounds, and paid for our curing, that we might be recovered unto everlasting
health. Our Joseph is gone before to provide for his brethren, Genesis 45, 5
was there ever such love? Look how wide the East is from the West* so far
has he set our sins from us. Nay like as the pillar of clouds was set
between the host of their enemies, Exodus 14. 20.
and the tents of the people of Israel, that no harm might befall them: so
has he set his providence between us and all casualties, that no hurt should
oppress us We should be suitors unto Christ, and least our manifold sins
should make us bashful, he calls us unto him, saying: Matt. 11. 28.
Venite omnes qui laboratis and onorati estis, and ego reficiam vos, Come unto
me all that are weary, and hea^^e laden, and I will refresh you. Did all the
poor creatures come unto the Arc to save themselves? Did the Angels carry
Lot out of Sodom? and shall not we come unto him, who calls us so lovingly,
and means no other but to bring us unto his everlasting kingdom? Wherefore
let neither the multitude of our sins, the terror of the law, nor the fear of
Gods justice, discourage us in time of distress, Christ has put the^ al to
flight; as David did the Philistines, 2. Cor. 3. 6
by killing the killing letter of the law; who would not cast his burden upon
him that does desire to give us ease? As I live, Ezec. 33. 11.
says the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner. God would have the sins
to die, but the sinner to live, whose creatures have nourished us;
whose-prouidence has preserved us; whose mercies has carried us all along
from, our very cradles until this d^y, whose watchful eye has delivered us
from so many dangers, both of body and soul: have we had such and so many
experiments of his love, and should we now doubt thereof? Is the Judge become
our advocate and shall we fear to go forwards toward the throne of grace? The
Spirit and the Bride say, come, Apo^. 22. 17.
and let him that is a thirst com^, and let who soever will drink of the water
of life come freely. Romans 8. 34.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? who shall condemn.
Christ at the right hand of God makes request for us.

The ninteenth Chapter.
How the sick in the agony of death, may be prepared toward his end.

AL our life long have we lived in a departure and farewell from the world;
since our very first entrance, we were ever drawing toward our end; our
pilgrimage is almost over. When we approach toward the period of our course,
what else remains but a hearty commending our souls to God, and a
comfortable expectation of a better life to come, when weakness of humane nature
does not afford ability to manifest our souls affections, God shall accept
at our hands the sending up of our ^ghes and desires to heaven, Exodus 14. 15.
who said unto Moses, why have thou cried unto me for this people, and yet we
find that Moses spoke never a word: to show that he heard the secret
supplication of Moses heart. Jonas prayed in the belly of the whale, Jonas. 2.
1. 2.
when he thought upon God. Susanna in her distress, Susan. 35.
when she lifted up her eyes to heaven. Have I not remembered thee, says David,
upon my bed, and thought upon thee when I was waking? Psa. 63. 7
And in another Psalm. 108. 1.
place, O Lord my heart is ready, my heart is ready, As if his trust was, that
God would accept the readiness of his heart: wherefore the mind beating upon
a remembrance of Christ's passion, shall mittigate in part the bodies pains.
Now is the time that Timothy, 2. Tim. 4.
a good Soldiour, should fight, by Saint Paul's example, a good fight, Keep
the faith, and so finish his course, for after all there is a Crown of glory
reserved for Gods children: This is the last Secane of all the Comedy. When a
little brunt is ouerpast, troubles cease, but joys never cease. And therefore
a good remembrance, that we are going from the darkness of this world, to
the land of the living, Where is no night, no need of the Candle, nor light
of the Sun: for God gives them light, and they shall reign for evermore.
Hold thy peace Babylon (says Epiphanius) and be mute, Epiph.
O Sodom, Epist. 323
because (that article) I believe life everlasting is clear, and
consequently, brings comfort to Gods departing Children. But let us hearken
to Christ himself, I am the Resurrection, Joan. 11. 25.
and the life, (says the Lord) whosoever believes in me, yea though he
were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall
not die for ever. O joy of joys, we lay us down to sleep, and take our
rest, to dwell in safety. And here we may not omit to call to mind, the
manner how Gods servants of old have shut up the day of their mortality. As
first that of Moses, Deu. 33. 1
who after beholding the land of promise, Deu. 34. 5
blessed God for all his benefits, blesses the people, and so dies. That of
Iosuah, Iosu. 23. 11.
who exhorts Israel to fear God, to stand steadfastly in all his
ordinances, Iosu, 24. 29.
and so mildly goes the way of all the world. That of David, 1 Kin. 2. 2
who enioyneth Solomon his son to walk in the ways of God, that so he
might prosper in whatsoever he took in hand. That of Tobie, Tob. 13. 8
who called his son, and his sons sons, exhorting them to be merciful,
and just, that it might go well with them. That of Saint Steven, Act. 7. 60
who praying for his persecuters, and calling upon the name of Jesus, fell a
sleep. And after this manner have the godly taught us to depart this world.
That of Serapion, Eusebius. Hist. li. 5. cap. 45.
a good and faithful old man (says Eusebius) who after receiving the holy
Eucharist, most meekelie departed the world, Now for things transitory, they
leave us, and we them, the soul only remains to be commended unto God. If
when thou art going a journey, thou would be glad to commit thy remporall
goods to such a friend, by whom thou may be sure they shall be well and
safely kept, how much more may the Christian man comfort himself in
committing his soul to the custody of Jesus Christ his Savior, who will
keep it sure and safe for ever? Reuben said of Benjamin, when Jacob was loath
to let him go: Deliver him unto me, Genesis 42. 37.
and I will bring him safely home. So of Christ it may be more rightly said:
Commend thy departing soul unto him, and he will bring it unto her long and
blessed home.

The Twentieth Chapter.
In what manner the sick should be directed by those to whom this weighty
business does specially appertain.

Amongst men, those whom God Number. 6. 23.
has set apart to help distressed consciences, to loose or pronounce
remission in his mercy, to bless in his name, to teach his people, and to do
the^ good in times of need, partly by matter of exhortation, and partly also by
offering up in their behalf devout prayers toward the throne of Grace, In the
vi^tation of the sick, so high a work of mercy, they are occasioned, if
ever, to enter most seriously into the exercise of both. That care may be
thought to be of greatest importance, which is employed in helping them, who
be now least able to help them selves, and had never more need (God knows)
of ghostly direction. There is nothing which the sick in these extremities do
more desire against the natural terrors of death, and many troubles of
conscience which at this time are wont to assault them. It is greatly to be
wished, that like as the serpent, that old enemy of mankind, who the shorter
the time is, the ^^ercer his wrath is, and chiefly entendeth ruin unto the
heel. Apoc. 1^ 12.
As the last part of man's life is at this time busy: so those who in loving
feed, and in feeding* love Christ his lambs, should now be most careful to
keep Ioh. 21. 15
them from this devouring Lion, 1. Pet. 2. 25.
and endeavor to present them sound in faith, 1. Pet. 5. 8
hope, and charity, unto the great Bishop and Shepherd of their souls.
Notwithstanding that the good grace of that spirit, which directs our
highest proceedings, can better direct a discreet and sober Agent in this case,
then all forms of direction whatsoever: yet as in other duties, so in this some
aduertisements may be observed by those, who are content also to hear the advice of others. First therefore, death being that which all men suffer, but
not all after one sort, care ought to be had answerable unto the disposition of
the dying. Tediousness of discourse may soon weary the weak party. Few
words, and those sometimes in private well ordered, are wont for the most part
to avail most. Impertinent speeches very unfit, the presence oftentimes of
those, who have been associate in folly, yea sometimes the presence of those
who are nearest in alliance removed, is thought by grave indgement to be the
fittest opportunity for the giving of soul counsel, bearing a simple and
honest intent to do good. A premeditated exhortation, after information taken
of the disposition of the sick, is very behoouefull, this loose and slight
hudling up of divine matters, and sometimes of Gods mysteries themselves, does
often bring in contempt the high wisdom of holy Scripture, which but with
all reverence, watchfulness, and prayer, none should presume to search, and
open. This disposing then of the sick unto a Christian end, being a work of
such moment; they may proceed, to whom this shall appertain in this or the
like manner.

And first: Care is taken that the sick
1 Now make a most sincere and humble confession of all his sins. 2 That he
be content with all his heart to live, or die, as it shall seem go^d to God
his divine pleasure. 3 That he be resolved to make a hearty reconciliation
with the world, desiring forgiveness, and forgiving all offenses whatsoever
amongst men. 4 That he take in good part this visitation sent unto him, to
prepare him to die leysurablie Gods servant. 5 That he wholly commend him to
God his mercy, in the only mediation of Christ Jesus his savior.
Secondarily. Let care be had that the sick may be moved to call to mind
1 That all of what state or condition soever must depart this transitory
world. 2 That Gods children thoroughout the volume of holy scripture and
examples of ancient writers have willingly yielded themselves at the time of
their visitation. 3 That Christ himself went not up into glory, but first he
passed through death. 4 That the death of the servant of God is precious in
his sight, and that they rest from their labors.
These demaundes may be proposed to the sick.
1 Whether he acknowledge the faith of the holy Trinity, with the articles of
the Creed, and in this faith be resolved to live and die, 2 Whether he be
sorry for his sins, and ask God forgiveness, with a penitent heart in the
merits of Christ Jesus. To which confession, of faith God sends him this
message, go in peace
The sick should be willed seriously to consider,
1 That Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, he is
a sinner therefore for him. 2 That he was the very lamb of God that came to
take away the offenses of the world. 3 That he is a refuge for all them that be
weary, and heavy laden. 4 That he is our righteousness, 5 That if he live,
he lives unto the Lord, and it he die, he dies unto the Lord: whether he
live or die, he is the Lords.
He may be requested to say with
1 The Prophet David, Lord remember thy servant in all his troubles. 2 The
Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner. 3 The woman of Canaan; Jesus thou
son of David, have pity on me. 4 Job, I know that my redeemer lives, and
that I shall rise again, and see God, not with other, but with the self same
eyes. 5 Saint Steven: Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and to say: I am that
wounded man, blessed Samaritan, heal me: I^am that wandering child, that is
not worthy to be called thy son, father, make me thy meanest servant: I am the
lost sheep, O seek and save me; bring me home Lord unto thy heavenly fold. 6
To mention the words of Christ upon the cross: Lord into thy hands I commend
my spirit.
Let him also say, Jesus give me
1 Patience in my trouble. 2 Comfort in my afflictions 3 Strength in thy
mercies. 4 Deliverance at thy pleasure.
If the sick be
1 Not able to pronounce them himself, let the articles of the Creed be
recited in his presence by some other: I believe in God, etc. 2 Distempered, as
the best may be, in burning feauers, and otherwise, choler shooting up into
the brain, and the malignant humor meeting with the vital powers, which may
cause rauing; let him in few words be moved to remember God, and the
assembly may softly pray by him. 3 Troubled with strange visions, as good men
have been, beseech him in the name of God, to call to mind the abundant love
of Jesus Christ crucified. 4. Pensive and sorrowful, mention the joys of
heaven, whither he shall go by Gods grace, If the sick be
and the troubles of this sinful world, which he has often felt, and may
now very thankfully leave.
Read by the sick
The history of the passion, Luke 22. 23. The nine and twentieth Psalm. Unto
thee O Lord. The 42. Psalm: Like as the Heart desires the water streams, etc.
The 143. Psalm* Hear my prayer O Lord. The 14. Chapter of S. John's Gospel.
The 7. Chapter of the Apocalips. The 15. Chap. of the first Epistle to the
Corinth.
If the sick be painefully grieved or strangely visited.
1. Let not any censure him, Job. 20. 5.
as Jobs friends, Job. 22. 6.
who thought Job an hipocrite because of his affection. 2. Or as those y^ told
our savior of the Galileans, Luc. 13. 4
who judged them greater sinners then the rest, because the tower of Siloah
fell upon them. 3. Or as the Barbarians, Act. 28. 3
who deemed S. Paul an evil man, because the viper claue unto him. 4. Let none
be glad when his enemy falls, Prou. 24. 17.
least the Lord see it, and it displease him.
Let every one remember that of Joseph, Genesis 50. 19. 5.
Am not I also under the hand of God?

That of the Apostle in the twelft to the Romans, Romans 12, 15. 6.
Weep with them that weep.

That of the Wiseman; Eccles. 7. 35. 7.
Be not slow to visit the sick.

That of S. James: Ia. 5. 16. 8
Pray one for another.

A form of leaving the sick to Gods protection.
THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Jacob
defend thee, send thee help from his sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of
Sion.

Jesus Christ the Son of the eternal God, put his blessed passion between
thy sins and judgment to come. God the holy Ghost be thy comfort, to and at
thy end, Amen.

The sick may sometimes be left to silent meditation, and apply hunselfe
thereunto in the name of the holy Trinity.

Let him also sometimes commend himself to rest with these meditations.

A form of prayer to be used for the sick, by them that are present.
MOst merciful Lord we are at this present constrained to pray for other, who
are not worthy to pray for our selves, beseeching thee in the multitude of thy
mercies, to look down from heaven, and behold thy servant here visited with
sickness; enlighten his mind; preserve his sense; continue thy grace; assuage
his pain; and if it be thy good pleasure, prolong his days as thou did
the days of Ezechias: if otherwise, receive him unto thy Arc of mercy. In
the mean while, give him patience in trouble, comfort in affliction,
constancy in temptations, and victory against his ghostly enemies. Let the
blood of thy dear son wash and cleanse all the spots and foulness of his
sins. Let thy righteousness hide and cover his unrighteousness. Let that
joyful voice be heard of him: Thou shall be with me in Paradise. Grant this
O Lord for the honor and glory of thy holy name, through the same Jesus Christ
our only savior and redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer to be used by the sick himself.
O Lord Jesus, who art the resurrection and the life, in whom whosoever
beleaueth shall live though he die. I neither desire the continuance of this
mortality, or a more speedy deliverance, but only commend my self wholly to
thy will. Do with me most merciful Savior, accor^ding to the riches of thy
goodness: through thee have I been helped ever since I was borne; it grieueth
me that I have so often offended thy goodness, and I am grieved that I grieve
no more. Lord as an humble suitor I appeal unto the throne of mercy, and
there beg* at thy hands remission of all my sins in the merits of thy
bitter passion. I offer unto thee a penitent heart for the time past, and
promise amendment, if it shall please thy divine wisdom to continue on this
my pilgrimage for the time to come, wherein I refer my self wholly to thy
heavenly will, in hope of a better resurrection unto everlasting life through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Another prayer for the sick.
Almighty and everlasting God, maker of mankind, which do correct those
whom thou do love, and chastenest every one whom thou receyuest; receive O
Lord we beseech thee thy servant here visited with sickness, distrusting in
his own merits, and trusting in thy mercies. Look upon him O Lord, as thou
did upon Ezechias; restore unto him his former health, if it be thy will, or
otherwise give him grace to take this sickness patiently, that after this life
ended in thy faith and love, he may dwell with thee in life everlasting; unto
which life vouchsafe to bring him and us all thy hamble servants, for thy
infinite mercies sake, Amen.

The one and twentieth Chapter.
Wherein is laid down the manner of commending the sick into the hands of
God at the hour of death.

GOd the Father who has created thee, God the Son who has redeemed thee,
God the holy Ghost who has infused his grace into thee, assist thee in all thy
trials, and lead thee the way into everlasting peace.

Answer, Amen.

Christ that died for thee, keep thee from all evil.

Answ. Amen.

Christ that redeemed thee, strengthen thee in all temptations.

Answ. Amen.

Christ that loved thee so deerly raise thee body and soul in the resurrection
of the just.

Answ. Amen.

Christ that sits at the right hand of God in heaven, bring thee unto
everlasting joy.

Answ. Amen.

God grant thy place may be in Abraham's bosom.

Answer. Amen.

God grant thou may behold thy blessed Savior in the state of glory.

Answ. Amen.

God grant thy death may be precious in his sight, in whom thou art to rest for
ever.

Answ. Amen.

A brief form of prayer.
MOst merciful father, we commend unto thee this thy servant the work of
thine own hands: we commend unto thee his soul, in the merits of Christ Jesus
his redeemer. Accept O Lord, thine own creature: forgive we beseech thee, what
soever has been committed by human fra^ltie, and command thy Angels to bring
him to the land of everlasting peace.

Answer. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou did Noah in the flood.

Answ. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou did Lot from the fire of
Sodom.

Answer. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant as thou did Job in all his
adversity.

Answ. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou did the Israelites from
the power of Pharaoh, and the oppression of Egypt.

Answ. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant from the malice of Satan, as thou
did David from all his enemies.

Answ. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou did Daniel from the mouth
of the Lions.

Answ. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou did the three children
from the fiery flames.

Answ. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou did Elias from the false
Prophets that sought his overthrow.

Answ. Amen.

Preserve O Lord the soul of thy servant, and deliver him as thou did thy
Aposties out of prison.

Answ. Amen.

From that ruefull darkness,

Answer.

Deliver him O Lord.

From the pains of Hell,

Answer.

Deliver him O Lord.

From everlasting malediction,

Answer.

Deliver him O Lord.

By thy nativity,

Answer.

O Lord deliver him,

By thy cross and passion,

Answer.

O Lord deliver him.

By thy descention into hell,

Answer.

O Lord deliver him.

By thy resurrection from the dead the third day.

Answer.

O Lord deliver him.

By thy ascension into heaven.

Answer.

O Lord deliver him.

Into thy merciful hands O heavenly Father, we commend the soul of thy servant
now departing: acknowledge we beseech thee a sheep of thine own fold, a
lamb of thy own flock. Receive him into the arms of thy mercy, knowing the
thing cannot perish which is committed to thy charge, O most merciful Jesus
receive we beseech thee, his spirit in peace: Amen.

The blessing of the sick.

Jesus Christ absolve she from all thy sins.

Answ. Amen.

Jesus Christ that died for thee, put out all thy offenses.

Answ. Amen.

Jesus Christ that calls thee, receive thee into his heavenly kingdom.

Answ. Amen.

The Lord bless thee, and keep thee.

The Lord make his face to shine upon thee.

The Lord lift up his countenance over thee, and give thee a joyful
resurrection to life everlasting, Amen.

Depart O Christian soul in the name of God the Father who created thee: of
God the Son, who redeemed thee: of God the holy Ghost, who sanctified thee:
one living and immortal God, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

A Prayer to be used by the assembly at the time of the Christian man's
departure.
Let us pray.
O Almighty and everlasting God, seeing it has pleased thee to take this thy
servant out of the miseries of a sinful world, unto thy heavenly kingdom; for
which (Lord) thy name be blessed: make us we beseech thee, that yet remain,
mindful of our mortality, that we may walk before thee in righteousness and
holiness all the days of our life: and when the time of our departure shall
come, we may rest in thee, as our hope is, this thy servant does* that we with
him and all other departed in the faith of thy holy name, may reiorce together
in thy eternal and everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The two and twentieth Chapter.
An exhortation is comfort those who lament and mourn for the departure of
others.

TO use mourning for the dead, decency amongst men, and Christianity does
allow it; examples of holy scriptures do approve, as much. What more seemly
then the performance of the duty, whereby we give testimony of natural
affection, in this solemn departure each from other. God has neither made us
stocks nor stones, nor given us hearts which should have no seeling when
occasions offered, or times beseeming, require sorrowful affections. In the
contrary, what more uncomely, then to use nurth in the house of mourning. A
very Heathenish manner Council. Arela. 3. sub Leo. 1.
was it thought to be, by the decree of an ancient council. to sport at these
motives to mourning. For examples in holy scripture, we find that Abraham
mourned for Sarah: Genesis 23. 2
all Israel for Samuel: Sam. 25. 1
the people in the wilderness for Aaron Nomb. 20 29.
their high priest: the inhabitants of Bethulia for Iudeth, Iud. 16. 24.
that honorable widow: the Machabies for their noble Mac. 9. 20. 21.
Captain: Martha and Mar^^ for Lazarus their brother: Joan. 11. 31.
the women of Iewrie for their tender children, Mat. 2. 18.
those young infants: the twelve Putriarks for Jacob their aged father: Genesis
50. 14.
David for Jonathan his trusty and faithful friend. 2. Sam. 1. 17.
Nay Christ himself says Saint I^rome went not to his sepulcher without
weeping eyed: Neither has this mourning been a light passion only.

Great was the lamentation that Jacob made at the supposed death of his son
Joseph, when he said; Genesis 50. 14.
I will go unto the grave to my son sorrowing. Great was the lamentation
that David made, when news was brought him of Absalon his 2. Sam. 1. 17.
eude: O Absalon, Absalon, my son Absalon, I would to God I had dyed for
thee.

Great was the lamentation which the widows made for Dorcas, so good a woman
full of good works and alms, Act. 9. 39
when they considered her bounty toward them. And thus we see the laudable
custom and practice in mourning for the dead. When the Apostle forbad the
Thessalomans 1. These. 4. 13.
to sorrow, he did not absolutely forbid all sorrowing, but only after the
manner of the Gentiles; Bern. in Cant. sermon. 26.
Noa culpamus affectum, says S. Barnard, sed excessum, We blame not the
affection it self, but the excess or want of moderation. We may not only use
moderate sorrow in the departure of others, but even in the departure of the
godly and well disposed themselves: for as good men often are, and, in regard
of their great miss in the world, where they had been many ways helpful
unto others, may be mourned for of many; which is a testimony of their need,
who have left but few such behind: So is it a sign of some ill dealing
amongst men, when the poor and distressed let them go away without any
lamentation at all. It was said by the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem, 22. 15.
to Iehoiakin; So long as thy father did help the oppressed, did he not
prosper? And after he adds this, as a great punishment to be laid upon him,
well thou shall die in grief of mind, and there shall be none to make
lamentation for thee.

The Apostle confesses in plain words, that God had mercy on him in sparing
Epaphroditus, Phil, 2. 27.
lest he should have had sorrow upon sorrow: to show that he was not so
unnatural, but himself should have had feeling in such a case. My son says
the wiseman, Eccles. 38. 16.
power forth thy tears over the dead, and neglect not his burial: whence me
may gather, that funeral rytes, decent interring, exequies, and seemly
mourning, is not unsitting the practice of those, amongst whom all things
should be done in order.

The Israelites in burying so honorably their Fathers 1. Cor. 14.
and Governors, did show themselves a people of good and orderly disposition.
My son (says Tobie) when I Tobie. 14. 10.
am dead bury me honestly. The new sepulcher, the clean linen clothes, the
sweet ointmentes, the assembly of men of reputation, showed how our Savior
was respectively regarded and entombed with some solemnity: and sure these
bodies, which have been the temples of the holy Ghost, and shall be changed
at the day of doom into a condition of glory, should have that decency
performed as to agreeable both to practice, and conneniencie. Wherefore not to
yield the dead after a Cynick manner, comely burials, or Christian mourning
with moderation, is most inhumane, is a concept to say truth, very barbarous.
Notwithstanding this Christian sorrow, yet to sorrow as men without hope, is
far distant from the rule of faith; which tells us, that the death of the
Saints is Psalm. 116. 13.
precious in Gods sight. They are at peace, and that their hope is full of
immortalitic. He that said my son, Eccles. 38 17.
Power forth thy tears over the dead, said also comfort thy self. And surely
for Christians of all others, who believe the resurrection unto a better life,
should raise up themselves by faith, from too too deleful passions For as in all
other things, so in this a moderation should be had. Have we lost a good
father, friend, husband, wife or children, we may say with Job. Dominus dedit,
Job. 1. 21.
Dominus abstulit, The Lord has given, and y^ Lord has taken away, neither
are they yet clean taken from us; but gone a little before the way, wherein we
must all follow. We shall one day meet again, at which meeting (says
Cyprian) there will be no mean joy, Cypr. de mort. 1.
when friends come to rejoice together. Aug. Cir.
Our knowledge is now but in part, then shall we know as we are known;
where Peter shall be Peter, and Paul shall be Paul; and many long since
departed shall (as some of the ancient Fathers say) be known of us, that
have lived long after. But of all other means of comfort, that happy hope of
the resurrection should raise us up from over pensive thoughts. Christ our
Savior before his passion, when he saw the disciples sorrowful for his
departure, which was so shortly to ensue, Joan. 14. 28.
says unto them; Let not your hearts be troubled, I go unto the father. So it
may be said to those that mourn for the miss of others, let not your minds
be too much plunged in sorrow: those for whom you thus lament, are gone unto
their merciful redeemer. It is said of Enoch, because his soul pleased God,
Ecclus. 4. 10.
God took him away. It was spoken as a blessing to Josias, 2 King.
that he should be gathered unto his fathers before the captivity of the
people came Saint Jerome of sinful times says, Hiero. ad Helio.
Foelix Nepotianus, qui haec non videt, Nepotian is a happy man that lives,
not to see this wicked world. When God ships his Noah's, Genesis 7. 1
it is sign there is a flood not far behind. When God sends Angels to fetch
his Lots out of Sodom, Genesis 19. 1
it is sign there is a punishment for the sinful Cities shortly to ensue.
When God takes L^zarus to Abraham's bosom, Luc. 10. 22.
there is then no more penury to endure. Wherefore seeing we are all to pass
down the stream of mortality, we may not think it so strange to have
experience thereof. If we complain of the death of friends, we compla^ne in
effect that they were borne mortal Death is as the lives drawn from the
C^nter unto the Circumference, even on every part, or as the upright
magistrate equal to all, which may the rather move us to be content. The good
meaning borrower, the sooner his debt is discharged, the sooner is he a^
quiet. He that makes but a short voyage, and is the soonest at the haven of
rest, is the sooner also from danger of shipwreck. We may not forget to
conform our wills to the will of God, Luc. 1^. 3.
as we daily pray, Fiat voluntas tua, Thy will be done. The Wiseman praised the
dead above the living. And S. John pronounces the^ blessed which die in y^
Lord, Ap^c. 14. 13.
because they now rest from their (...) And therefore their good estate now
obtained should the rather move us to remember their good. At our entrance
into the world we brought with us a subjection unto death. Again, al sinned,
and therefore death goes over all, and return we must to y^ place from whence
we came, this world being our banishment for a time; from which these blessed
souls now freed, would tell us (were they to return into these earthly
regions, which without controversy they do not) that they with Mary have
chosen the better part. Luc. 11. 42.
We here with Martha, are careful about many things: They have y^ one thing
which is necessary, that shall never be taken from them How to accept of, and
take in good part as we may, the loss as we count it, or rather miss for a
time of friends departed. The behauior of D^uid in this case may be considered,
who when the child was sick, fasteth, prays, pros^rateth himself upon the
earth, but hearing that Gods will was accomplished in the death of the child,
David rose up, eat bread, received comfort, as it seemed after all his sorrow:
being demanded the cause of this diversity of behavior, answered: While the
child was yet alive, 1. Sam, 12 19.
I fasted and wept, for I said who can tell whether God will have mercy on
me, that the child may live: but being dead, wherefore should I now fast, can
I bring him again any more? I shall go unto him, but he shall not return
unto me. In the like case Saint Barnard being not a little moved for the death
of one: I turned me (says he) to prayer, and weeping, at last I considered
that God had done what seemed best in his divine providence, what should more
sorrowing avail? Lord thou have taken thine, none of mine, tears forbad me
to speak further: And so the good father resolved to rest content with the
will of God.

The three and twentieth Chapter.
How those that undertake any dangerous attempts, either by sea or land
wherein they are in peril of death, should specially before hand make
themselves ready for God.

IF those men, who live in times and places of most safety, should,
respecting the uncertainty of humane condition, think every day of their last
day, which by little and little will come upon them: then how much more ought
those who enter into place of apparent peril, undertake attempts of greatest
danger, stand upon their guard, and be well provided for to be ready for
God. Heathen men could tell Jonas Jonas. 1. 6.
that in this case there was no other refuge but to fly unto the assistaunce
of some superior power. Exodus 8. 8
Pharaoh himself could entreat Moses to pray for him: how much more then
should those whose hope reaches further then the saving or preservation of a
life mortal, entering into any attempt wherein they are in hazard, Iud. 9. 1
with Judith, who first worshipped God with all devotion, and their went forth
for y^ deliverance of Bethulia. Faith and trust in God does not make men
toward, but rather adds spirit and comfort in greatest assaults of enemies.
By faith (says the Apostle) Heb. 11. 32, 34.
Ged^on, Barac, Samson, Iephte, and also David, of weak were made strong,
waxed valiant in battle, turned to slight the armies of aliants, who came
against Gods people, with great force and multitudes. While they were arming
themselves with sword and shield, the manner of God his people was to arm them
with devotion, and a religious commending themselves either in life or death to
Gods protection. Number. 22. 5.
When Balaac saw the people of Israel to prosper, more by their praying, the^
he could by his strogest forces, he would needs have Balaam to curse them.
Moses (says S. Jerome) fought as well as Joshua against Amelech: Iero. ad
Heliod.
for while Moses held up his hands, Exodus, 17. 11.
Israel prevailed. Rufinus, and Socrates write, that Theodosius the Christian
Emperor, Rufi. Soc. Eccle. hist.
in a great battle against Eugenius, when he saw the huge multitude that was
coming against him, (and so in the sight of man there was apparent overthrow
at hand, he gets him up into a place eminent or in the sight of all the army,
falls down prostrate upon the earth, beseeches God, if ever he would look
upon a sinful creature, to help him at this time of greatest need: suddenly
there rose a mighty wind, which blew the darts of the enemies back upon
themselves, in such wonderful manner, as Eugenius with all his host was clean
discomfited, who saw that the power of Christ fought for his people, Exodus 14.
25.
and therefore cried in* effect as the Egyptians did, O, God is in the cloud:
or God fights for them. Thus with faith and constancy have the servants of
God gone forth against their enemies with all devotion, and a through
preparing of themselves either for life or death, as it should best stand with
the good pleasure of God. For those therefore that undertake any attempt,
either by sea or land, wherein life more then ordinary is endaungered, let
them in the name of God, go forth with souls prepared: for in so doing, they
remember themselves to have a further expectation, then either the gaining, or
loosing of a life temporal. Paratos inueniat, Eus. Emis. hom. 1. ad Mon.
says Eusebius Emisenus, extrema necessitas, quae saepe opprimit imparatos,
Let extreme necessity find them ready, which is wont to oppress men
unprepared. In worldly affairs, we oftentimes forget heavenly, and therefore
good reas^^ that in heavenly, we should also go aside from al earthly
cogitations; and presenting our selves before God, commend in solemn manner
our souls into his hands; which done, with Hester, Hest. 4. 16.
we may say: If we perish, we perish: now the will of God be fulfilled. So
therefore of preparing themselves before any attempt of danger, it may be
said, Apoc. 13. 18.
as S. John says, Hic est sapientia: here is wisdom.

The four and twentieth Chapter.
A brief direction for such as are suddenly called to depart this world.

COncerning prays for the deliverance fr^^ sudden death, some what has been
before mentioned, and their hard censure who are ever hasty in this cause to
judge others, in part, answered. Now for him, who upon short warning is
willing to die, this brief direction may suffice. First, let not the
suddenness dismay him, for that unto a well disposed man, it is no
suddenness at all, how soon soever he depart. Secondarilie, that God has
his penny for those that come at the eleventh hour: and an acceptance for the
servants, that are found stirring at the second or third watch. He has
Paradise for him that will call in his dying fittes. Lord remember me* in thy*
heavenly Kingdom. With Marie Magdalene, to give God at once the sacri^ice of a
sorrowful spirit, shall with Abell his offering, go upward, and be
acceptable unto God. We must let this little threede of life, twine out until
our clewe be all ended. When the Ship is covered with waves, Then help
Master. When a good remembrance of Jesus Christ shall not return void:
Abraham had but an intention in his mind concerning Isaac, to offer him, and
yet the Apostle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 11. 17.
By faith Abraham of fred up Isaac: as if y^ deed had bin done, when his
intention was good to do it, Whereby we see that God does accept a good
meaning heart, which is all we can offer at these times. The mercy of man
extends it self unto his neighbor, says the Wise man, but the mercy of God
reaches to all flesh; and both can, and will, save in a moment: wherefore this
suddenness, may not either give occasion to others to judge uncharitably, or
unto the patients themselves, to be disco^forted for want of time. Non nocet
bonis, says one, Ansel.
si subito moriantur, It does not hurt good men, how suddenly soever they are
called away: so they depart when God calls them; which time all must tarry.
For as the pleasures of this world, should not cause us to be altogether
addicted to the same: so also the miseries of life, should not cause any, how
deeply distressed soever, distrustfully to fly away; or desperately with
Saul, to iucurre his own danger: which foul attemptes nature herself does
abhor: but christianity utterly condemn. To be any way accessarie unto our
own decay, or much less principal, O God forbid. Fie upon that discontent,
or faithless cowardlinesse, to run away, or to fly, where no fear is: God is
a sure refuge, and will never fail: God is a present help in trouble. He that
brought us into the world, should have the calling us from the world. At
whose calling, we may meekelie depart, as becomes us: Abridge the time we may
not, we ought not, for all the afflictions that may betide the sons of men.
The laws of nations have forbid in this case the benefit of decent burial,
to terrify men from this shameful fact of casting away themselves
desperately. At the very motions whereof, the true Christian is wont to say,
as Christ said unto the tempter in the wilderness: Vade Satana, avoid
Satan. Thus therefore an humble submitting our selves to Gods pleasure, and
also a faithful commending our souls into his hands, how soon soever we are
called to depart, is that direction, which we should put in practice by the
assisting help of Gods blessed grace.

A prayer to be used of any, who finds himself troubled in conscience, or
disquieted by evil motions.
STrengthen me, O Lord* against al mine enemies both bodily and ghostlye, that
they never be able to say, we have prevailed against him. By spirit is
sorrowful, my heart is sad and heavy within me: if thou be not my comfort,
I shall surely perish in my trouble. For thy names sake, O Lord, have mercy
upon me, rise up to help me: that having help in thee, I may withstand my
mortal adversary, and say, depart from me thou wicked spirit, that bring
evil thoughts and this deiection of mind, go from me thou deceyuer of man,
thou shall have no part in me, for my savior Jesus stands by me as a strong
cha^pion, and thou shall fly away to thy confussion. I had rather endure al
affliction, al punishments and infamy of the world, then consent to thy
malicious motions: Be still therefore thou wicked spirit, cease thy prouokements
to evil. I shall never assent unto thee though greater trobles the^ these come
upon me, our lord is my light and my health, who^ shall I dread? he is y^
defender of my life, of who^ then shall I be afraid? Though an host of men set
themselves against me, though in^inite calamities overcome me, I shall not be
discomforted, for why? God is my helper and redeemer, in whom I trust; he is my
portion. To whom be praise and honor now and for evermore Amen.

A prayer for a good departure out of this world.
Eternal God, and most merciful father, seeing that the days of man are as
the flower of the field that soon fades; and his time like a shodow, that
vanishes away: considering we are all strangers as were our forefathers, and
have here no continuing city, make us evermore, Lord, we beseech thee,
mindful of our mortality, that like wise virgins, we may provide oil in our
lamps, to be ready against the bridegrooms coming; and that, tarying thy
good pleasure like watchful servants, we may be so doing whenever the
master shall return. And when sickness summoneth us to be gone, grant we
beseech thee, thut neither the infirmity of the flesh, nor the sharpness of
affliction, nor any other means whatsoever, remove us from a true and
steadfast hope, in the blessed passion of thy dear son Christ Jesus. And
when the hour of our rest is come, grant O Lord, we may commend our selves
into thy hands, and die thy servants, to the glory of thy name, and comfort
of our souls, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

The five and twentieth Chapter.
A consolatory admonition for those who are often overmuch grieved at the
crosses of this world.

IF the world hate you, says Christ our savior unto John. 15. 18.
his Disciple^, you know it ha^ed me before it h^red you^ that heaviness might
not dismay or cast them down without hope of deliverance: where he proposes
the one, he promises the other. Blessed are they that mourn, Mat. 5. 4.
for they shall receive comfort: are not those happy tears well distilled
from the limbeck of a sorrowful heart, Apo. 1. 17.
y^ shall have the hands of the son of God himself to wipe the^ clean away?
when al flesh, says Moses had corrupted his ways, Genesis 6. 6.
it repented y^ lord he had made man, that is, God was sorry that man created to
so excellent an end should himself destroy himself. Now God sends a deluge
upon y^ face of our earthly pleasured, these floods of tears extinguish the
heat of unlawful desires, cleanse the corruption of our s^nfull lives, when
all is ouerpast, there, ensues a calm. The church well celebrateth solemn and
sanctified feasts as public memorials of Christ's blessed birth, his
resurrection, his ascension, and many others, before which feasts she
appoints the eeuens, to be fasted: in this world we fast the ^^uen, we shall
keep holiday when we come to heaven: our lord and master Christ Jesus, as he
did seldom laugh in the Mat. 18^
world, so did the world as seldom laugh upon him. He tells his followers,
they must become as little children, little children we know have no other
weapons to avenge themselves but their tears, and what other have we against
our crosses of this world, but our sighs and supplications sent up to God.
Job says, Before I eat I sigh: Job. 3. 24.
whose suffering was such, that all which we do or can suffer (says Saint
Jerome) is in effect nothing. Hier ad Iulia. Exodus 3. 2.
We may not look to find God in the Gardens of Egypt, whom M^ses ^ound in the
thornie (...) of manifold tribulation^ (...) ^e without crosses, we may rather
wish then hope. The golden world is gone wheein men did joy in nothing more
then in sincerity and love; now this iron age of ours yields store of
crosses, and unconscionable wrongs (such is the calamity of our time) well,
heaviness may endure for a night, P^al.
but joy comes in the morning. We may not repine at these trials, if we
desire to solace our selves in the vanities of this world, our desires are
unlawful. Lots wife, Ge. 19. 26
her mind was upon her substance in Sodom, Luc. 17 29.
she looked, backward, but she never looked forward again. When with the
spider we have exhausted our very bowels to make a slender web, one puff of
wind carries all away: when we have endeavored to the uttermost to mount
aloft, suddenly death does clippe the wings of our soaring endeavors, and
down we fall. Did we look back and consider how many are under us, as we
are over ready to pry how many are above us we should soon see our estate
less gree^ous th^n the state of many, who are as dear to Christ as our
selves. But ease and pleasure is acceptable to flesh and blood, which the world
is wont to promise? Nahuchadnezzar, to draw the people from Gods service to
foul Idolatry, caused the noise of instruments, to sound that so delighting
themselves they might forget their obedience to God. Dan. 3. 10.
But is it possible that any ^elights should draw him from God, for who^ the
wh^le frame of the world was made? should base desires make man unfaith full
unto him from whom comes all his good? Genesis 39. 8
Joseph said behold my master has committed al into my hands, how then can I
do this? As if he could not find in his heart to commit evil against him, that
had deal^ so liberally as his master had done. For these worlds vanities we
may let them pass, what soever they promise, their pleasure is not permanent*
When Jacob was hasting into his own country, Laban followed him and said, why
did thou not tell me of thy departure* that I might have let thee go with
mirth and melody? When his meaning was to have kept him still in longer
serunitude. But as Jacob did well, Genesis 31. 2
seeing Labans countenance once set against him, to make readieto depart into
his own country: so when we shall find the world to frown upon us, to make
speed and prepare our selves to be gone. Notwithstanding the people in the
wilderness did drink of the bitter waters of Marah, Exodus 15 23.
yet in that God appointed his angel to direct them in their way, it was a
testimony he would bring the^ into a better land. God ha^h given us his spirit
more then an angel, for our guide, which may bear witness to our spirits, we
were not created for this frail and momentarie state, but look for better
things to come: in the mean time no calamities of life should make us hate
life, the course whereof we may not slack or hasten at our own pleasure. If it
did so much revive ye hearts of distressed people, that one (and that in vision
only) should seem to see Onias who had been high Priest, 1. Mac. 15 12.
a virtuous and a good man reverent of behauior, and of a sober conversation,
well spoken, and one that had been ex^re^sed in points of virtue of a child,
holding up his hands to heaven, and praying for them: then to see Jesus Christ
himself at the right hand of God, there to stand for us; merciful Lord, how
can it not but raise up our pen^^u^ h^rts? Elkanah said unto Hanna, when she
was sore grieved at the hard usage of the world. Quamobrem affligitur cortuum,
nunquid non ego tib^ melior quam december filii? Why is thy heart grieved, am not
I better unto thee then tensons? This was a speech of comfort to her troubled
mind. But unto the distressed man whose joy is in Christ crucified, may it not
be said Is not his love and mercy better unto us all then ten thousand
pleasures of a sinful ^ife? Who has said to all fear and love his name, In
the world you shall have affliction, but be of good comfort, John. 16. 33.
I have oxcrcome the world.

The six and twentieth Chapter.
An admonition to all, while they have day and time before the^, to make speed,
to apply themselves to this lesson of learning to die.

SEeing that all flesh is grass, and the glory of man, Esa. 40. 6
but as the glory of the field, the grass withers, and this flower fade^h
away. How behouefull then it is for all to apply themselves to this lesson of
learning to die, the Apostle shows when he exhorts all to walk wisely,
Ephesians. 5. 15 16.
because the days are evil: our spring is fading, our lamp is wasting, and
the tide of our life is drawing by little and little unto a low ebb,
whatsoever we do, our wheel whirles about apace, and in a word, we die daily.
Hence may we consider* that health is the mart where the provident merchant may
lay for his store: strength is the seed time, wherein the diligent husband:
^an may prou^^^ for harvest. He that will never put on sack^loth, until with
Ahab he see Gods justice at hand, to require punishment for his s^^^es. He that
will never begin to live until he be ready to die, may wish one day he had
been better advised, when all the world cannot recall opportunity past^ It is
the general practice of Satan to promise careless sinners time enough: as
racking, usurers are wont to give day to young heirs, from time to time, until
at last they wind their inheritance from them. We know not how dangerous it is
to defer all unto the last cast; As I will not promise, so I dare not presume
(says S. Austen) of evening repenters. To make all our of doubt* the best
course is to repent bet^^es. The holy Ghost says, Heb. 3. 15
Dum body appellatur, while it is called to day. The world thought it self
never Luc. 17. 27.
more secure, then when they were eating and drinking, when they were planting
and building, yet suddenly came the sloud, and overwhelmed all. The morning was
fair when Lot went out of Sodom, Genesis 19. 23.
and yet before night were the Sodomites destroyed. Nabuchadnezzer thought
himself never more s^re, then when he had builded g^^at Babe^and yet while the
word was in his Dan. 4. 12.
mouth, God pulled him down upon his knees. The rich man thought himself
never more likely to have lived, then when he had vie^wed his barnes; Luc. 12.
20.
set down in his counting house, and told over his bags, but yet before
twilight, his soul was taken from him. We all know what we have been, we know
not what we shall be, or how suddenly we shall be taken from all. Wherefore
our Savior exhorts us to agree with our adversary quickly, to walk while we
have light. And the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 55. 6.
to seek God while he may be found. In hac vita, Theod. in Psalm. sext.
says Theodoret, locus est gratiae and misericordiae, in illa tantum
iustitiae, In this life there is place of grace and mercy, but in that other
life of justice only: which being so, had we not need to seek the Lord
early, as Job speaks? Our Savior in the Gospel says, Adolescens tibi dico
^urge, Luc. 7. 14
Young man, I say unto thee arise. As there is resurrectio ad vitam glori^e, a
resurrection unto the the life of glory: So is there also resurrectio ad vitam
gratiae, a resurrection to the life of grace. Sin is a fall: Prou. 24. 16.
The righteous falls, ^aith the wiseman: amendment of life is a resurrection,
and Blessed are those that have part in this resurrection. Sin is a kind of
death: the father said of his riotous son, Filius hic mortuus erat, Luc. 15.
31.
This my son was dead Sin is a drowsy or heavy sleep: considering the
season, Romans 13. 11.
says the Apostle, it is now time to arise from sleep. Newness of
conversation is a resurrection; and blessed are those that have part in this
resurrection. Christ when he rose, Joan. 11. 39.
he rose carely. Lazarus that lay four days, began to savor. If we lie long
in our sins, we shall ware unsavory too. But with the women that came betimes
with sweet odors unto the sepulcher; we should bring our prayers and
supplications, which are acceptable to the most highest. Though we do not yet
hear the trumpe or voice of the Archangell summoning all to judgment, yet we
shall hear with these ears at the day of doom, that doleful v^ice* but unto
them that take heed in time, joyful. Surgite a mortuis, and venite ad
iudicium; Arise from the dead and come to judgment. Let us not offer the first
of our vintage to the delights of sin, and serve God with the lees and
dregs of our age. Let us not yield the flower of our life unto the foul
affections of sinful nature, and reserve for God the very refuse of our time.
It is no conquest to overcome a weak and feeble enemy, to resist the
pleasures of the flesh, when nature it self is decayed. We should consider
that our care is not so much now what to do, as what one day we may wish we had
done. Wherefore let men ^asse through this world, as the people did by the land
of Edon, Nomb. 20 17.
who only required to go through it, but would make no stay at all. What
should we set our delights in this Edon: our passage through it, is all we
should require. The chiefest matter we are to attend, is the good hour of our
departure. We see by experience, that the longer we defer the curing of
wounds, the harder is their recovery at the last. The loss of time is very
precious, we have no warrant for the least continuance thereof. Make no
^^rrying therefore Eccles. 5. 7
^^ith the Wiseman, to turn unto the Lord. Lose not any longer therefore
bonas horas, good hours. Quem saepe transit casus, aliqua^do inuenit; This
common cuse of all flesh passes so often by us, that at the last it takes us
too, as well as others: we may no^ defer ^ work of ^uch importance, but with
all expedition proc^ede we in the performance of the same. The Apostle S Paul
says; Romans 12. 2.
Give your bodies a liuely^ sacrifice unto God, your reasonable serving of him.
When we repent only in our last extremities, we give not a liu^ly but a dead
sacrifice, not our reasonable, but our unreasonable serving of God. Wherefore,
as Christ said, Ioh. 1. 35.
Walk while you have light: so may it be said unto every one; Repent while
ye have time.

The seven and twentieth Chapter.
The great folly of men in neglecting this opportunity of time offered, to
learn to die.

DId many in the world as much abhor the practice and course in the co^^on
life of Saduces and Epicures, as they are wont to do, their profession and
name: then would God be more sincerely worshipped then be is: then would the
time allotted us to prepare our selves for the kingdom of heaven be better
employed then ordinarily it is wont. We wonder at the old world, Luc. 17 26. 27
who for all Noah's forewarning of the flood to come, yet repented not. We
marvel at the Jews, who had Christ amongst them, Luc. 19. 42.
and did not accept him: but we ^ane forget our selves, having (...) much
warning as they: We ^aue Christ amongst us. Jacob said; Surely the Lord was in
this place, Genesis 28. 16.
and I was not aware of it. ^e have time, and health, and grace, the light of
his truth: Surely Gods goodness is upon us, and we are not aware of it: we
neglect all, which neglect is dangerous. Despisest thou (says the Apostle)
^he riches of his bountifulness and patience, Romans ^. 4
and long suffering, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance. God is not slack, 1. Pet. 3. 9
as some men count flacknesse, but is patient toward us, and would have no man
to perish, but would have all men come to repentance. Wherefore (as Solomon
sends the ^luggard, so may we send the careless sinner to school to the
Emet: For she labors in the Summer, and provides for the time to come. I
passed (says he) Pro. 6. 6.
by the ^^elde of the slothful man, and ^ound it full of briars and brambles,
such is the life of negligent people untilled, all out of order. They royst and
riot out time, moving God to sue them upon an action of wast. They spend their
golden days of youth and prosperity, as ill husbands wast and spend their
substance they know not how, and are in a manner so careless, as if God were
bound to bring them to heaven whether they would or no, thinking that all is
so sure, as if there were no more care to be had. No, no, S. Paul who knew
better then all the deuisors in the world, can tell men how to dispose
themselves to heaven, Phil. 2.
wills every one, that thinks he stands, to take heed least he fall, yea
to work out his salvation with fear and trembling. 2. Pet. 2. 4.
The fall of the Angels, the loss of Adam; the reiection o^ Saul. If we
consider Genesis 3 23 1. Sam. 16
what has become of the tallest Cedars in Lybanus, we cannot but with fear
think of our frail condition. But what speak we of any one in particular;
the Jews that ancient people of God, the Churches of Asia, which sometime
flourished, to consider how they are now defaced and brought to ruin, may
make all fear sinful security; What? Romans 11. 20.
not possible to err? Saint Paul told the Romans themselves long since; Be
not high minded, but fear* Beatus qui timer, Blessed is the man that fears:
our sins may make a separation between God and us. The Jews have not only
erred, but fallen away from that God, whose love and care they so long enjoyed.
Make your election sure (says S. Peter) and give your diligence hereunto: ^.
Pet 1. 10.
for if you do these things, you shall never fall: Thereby showing, that our
perseverance in the faith, and fear of God, is y^ duty after free
justification in mercy, which only he expects at our hands. Folly therefore
is it to flatter our selves in a fruitless course of life, and to defer time
until it be too late: If God offer grace to day says S. Austen, Tract 33. in
Joan.
thou know not whether he will offer the same to morrow, and therefore now
use it, if thou will use it at all. The light will shine when we shall not see
the closing in of that day, the evening will come, when we shall not see the
breaking forth of the morrow light. Lazarus after his want, Dives for all his
wealth, sicut homines moriemini, Psalm. 82. 6. 7.
and of the children of the most highest, says the Prophet, ye shall die like
men. Neither is that all, but as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 4. 5
Tanquam rationem reddituri, which shall give account unto him which is ready
to judge both quick and dead, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed, when the foolish virgins shall cry Lord, Lord, open unto us: but it
shall be answered, and said unto them, Mat. 25. 12.
I know you not. But as for the wise virgins, which have provided oil in their
lamps, they shall lift up their heads and pass unto that joyful marriage of
the lamb. Now therefore to conclude with Saint 2. Pet. 3. 11.
Peter, seeing we look for such things* What manner of persons ought we to
be, in holy conversation and godliness? But it is Durus sermo, a hard saying,
Discite, learn you: but it will one day be a harder, if men take not heed in
time: Discedite, get ye hence, depart you. Dispatch therefore about this
business of learning to die, the tide tarrieth no man: our going to such and
such a City is upon condition, Si, if God will, if we live, to set forward in
time is best: these after wits are not so good.

It were to be wished, that men at last would see their folly, and seeing it,
endeavor to reform the same. A vain thing is it for any to flatter himself
with hope of continuance. We go to our beds, Christ knows whether ever we
shall arise. For all this, one sin draws on another, and we never think
that secret sins shall come to open judgment* The careless guests made
ligh^ Mat. 22. 5
of their calling to come to the marriage of the kings son, did they not
find at last, when they were shut out, there was no testing with so great a
king that sent for them? Christ offers mercy (which is our last refuge)
freely, willingly, unto all: now is the accepted time: the flower of our age
will away a pace: we may be prevented we know not how soon: death and
judgment hastes: Shall we know these things, and neglect opportunity? God
forbid.

The eight and twentieth Chapter.
VVherin is showed that this lear^ning to die may justly move us to lead a
Christian life in holy conversation and godliness.

SUndry are the reasons which may stir up and quicken our backward dispositions
to the dutiful performance of that religious worship we all ow^ unto God. To
omit the promises, and those (...) mercy; the threatening, and those in justice,
which the volume of holy scripture does often mention to this end. Genesis 1. 3.
4. 5. 6.
Moses to move all the world to acknowledge God, he concluded no other
argument but, these and these are the works of God^ which the Apostle also in
effect expounds, saying: That the invisible things of him, to wit, Romans 1. 20.
his power and Godhead are seen by the creation of the world. Elimah, to
express God his Majesty, Job. 22. 12
says: Behold the stars. The Prophet David calls all Psalm. 148 2, 3.
the creatures of God to praise God, as in deed they do by their wonderful
order and decency of motion. If all creatures serve God, then much more should
man, for whom they were all created, and he only for the honorable service
of God. Come we unto man his new birth, there he takes his covenant penny, to
serve his redeemer in holiness and righteousness all the days of his life.
Consider we his justification and sanctification: there we find him drawn by
the cords of love* unto this sweet yoke of Christ. It is a Maxim in Moral
Philosophy, omne beneficium exigit officium, every benefit does require a
duty. In nature where the Sun does extend the beams of light, there the
solid body has a reflexe of heat. But that which does often move us we may
remember (as we should never forget) the author of our health; our wealth, our
peace, our prosperity and all, if these move not, we are inferior unto the
insensible creatures, if we should have no reflexe of duty.

Ancient histories make mention how much religious and de^out minded men have
desired to pass over their days in this world in some private and peaceable
course of life. It is said of Paphnutius, y^ he betook him wholly by this
desire to the service of God. John an Egiptian, of whom Saint Jerome speaking,
we have seen: this John (says he) in the ports of Thebais near the
City Ligo, living so calm and angelical kind of life, as is wonderful,
wholly addicting himself to live and die in the service of God.

Now therefore if the promises of grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, if the
greatness of the reward laid up for them that walk in the way of Gods
commandementes, and keep them with their whole hearts, (for is there not a
reward for the righteous? then might they well say with the Prophet; Psalm. 73
12.
Sine causa lauimus manus inter innocents, In vain have we washed our hands
amongst the innocente. If promises I say, and those in mercy cannot win us
to a just remembrance of our estate to come; yet at least to bethink our
selves of this reckoning day at hand should somewhat move us in this case. The
rich man in his scalding torments has a Discite ex me, Luc. 16. 24.
O learn of me to take heed in time: for all that swim in worldly
pleasures, in sensual delights, the conclusion whereof is sorrow and pain,
when they shall say, would to God we had never offended so gracious a Lord:
Would to God we had never neglected so favorable a time of grace: Would to God
we had never followed the follies of a sinful life: the b^nket is pleasant,
but the shot will prove deep and chargeable after an evil course: and
therefore if there be any consolation in Christ Jesus, any comfort of love, any
hope of mercy: if there be any fear or dread of judgment to come: consider
we of a future condition: prepare we our selves for a life permanent; for an
estate of all continuance; and God of his infinite mercy grant all grace so to
do. A special mean with Gods good assistance to obtain this calm and
peaceable course of life is to withdraw our selves from the inordinate and
excessive cares of this world; from the too too much delight in these earthly
affairs, which is called by divines, (...), a multitude of worldly businesses.
S John says, Love not the world, and we love nothing 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
else. Love it so long as we will says S. Ambrose, Ambr. de spe resur.
Quas non patimur tempestates? it will yield us storms enough. We set our
hearts on riches, do they make the possessors ever the quieter, ever the
merrier? no verily* and rich men know I speak true. Would we unburden our
minds of some earthly desires, should we not find much peace and quiet,
undoubtedly we should. Moreover, what does trouble the world so much as a self
desire to please our selves. When 1. King. 19. 11.
Elias fled before Iezabel there came a wind but the Lord was not in the wind:
after the wind there came an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the
earthquake: after y^ earthquake there came a fire, but y^ Lord was not in the
fire: after the fire there came a still soft voice, and the Lord came with the
voice: Where a calm and quiet life is, there God is. These tossing and
troblesome dispositions, Iam. 1. 17
these fiery scorching humors, are they from that wisdom, that is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without judging, and without hypocris^e, as S. James speaks? it seems not,
if we may, as we may (says he) judge the fountain by the water: or that men
would once frame themselves to live religiously, to live peaceably. Christ
says, Ioh. 14. 27.
Pacem relinquo vobis, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you.

In the trial of the holy man Job, Satan says of him: have thou not hedged
him in? as Job. 1. 10.
of these droues of Camelles, and heardes of cattle and children. Job is so
blessed* as if Job should not bless God, Job were worse then a stock or
stone. We see amongst men, the Master requires service, the Captain fight.
He that said, Da Caesari quae sunt Caesaris, said also, Date Deo, quae sunt
Dei, Give unto God that which is Gods: which is the reverence and worship of
his holy name.

The principal effects therefore that this remembrance of our end ought to
work in us, is purity and sincerity of life, which does not consist in some
talkatiue show of a mortified profession, but must be done in truth and
verity. The Prophet Esaias Esa 1. 17
exhorting to the true fruits of con^r^tion, does not say Discite been loqui,
learn to speak well, but Discite been facere, learn to do well, apply your
selves to equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherless to his right,
let the widows complaint come before you: it was our Sauiors own rule; Ioh
10. 25
The works that I do, testify of me. In like manner, the works that
proceed from us, do bear witness of us. We must not have the voice of
Jacob, and the hands of Esau. We must not do as boat-men are wont, who row one
way, but look another: talk this way, but live the contrary: nor as foolish
Merchants, who make a little show outward, but have bare storehouses beneath:
but our religious actions are they that must shortly stand by us: the penny is
ready for the end of the day, Mat. 20. 8
which is drawing on apace: the sun is long since past the Meridian line, and
we know death will not be answered with a Habe nos excusatos, Luc. 14. 19.
we had need bestirre our selves, the time is not long, and we may remember
whither we are going. Foolish virgins Luc. 16* 8
think their oil will never be spent. Christ says, the children of this
world are wiser in their generation. Are we so careful for the time to come,
as commonly we are for the time present? I would to God we were. Last of all,
our continuance in this world being only a passage unto that to come, should
move us to meditate of the end wherefore God sent us hither. And the
condition we expect, when we are departed hence, which departure should daily
put us in mind to eschew evil and do good, to fear God, and keep^ his
commandments.

The nine and twentieth Chapter.
Wherein is showed in the last place, that a consideration of Christ his
second coming to judgment, ought to move every one to live religiously, and
also to apply himself to this lesson of learning to Die.

THe manifold reasons before alleged, may induce the carefu^l Christian to
live reli^giouslie, and to learn to die, the inevitable necessity of death is
in it self sufficient. For what Esculapius, or physician how skillful soever,
can make mortali^ie immortal. The radical moisture by little and little, will
flash so long with the wasting Lamp. until at last the light goes out, the
lamp is spent, and so an end. God himself does teach us a consideration of
our mortal^ estate, both by testimonies of his sacred word, as also by many
spectacles before our eyes: so that we do not only hear with our ears, but
also behold often with our eyes, both what we are, and what we shall be* Many
are the events which we may read to have befallen others; Act. 5. 3. 4.
the sudden end of Ananias and Saphira; of Anastasius whom the Church stories
do mention, may move the most retchlesse to remember themselves. The Prophet
David mentioning the sudden destruction of those which murmured against God in
the wilderness, Psalm. 78. 30.
says, 1. Cor. 10. 11.
While the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them. Of
which very instance the Apostle says, These things came upon them for our
example, and are written to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are
come. If all this be not sufficient, yet a consideration of Christ his second
coming to judgment, should at last move every man unto a most serious
remembrance of the time to come. That which the holy Ghost does set down so
often, and is in scripture forcibly expressed, and that in too many places so
evidently laid before us, the holy Ghost does thereby show, how diligently the
same subject should be considered of by us. Now what more forcibly Joel. 2,
31
expressed in the sacred volume, Joel. 3. 15.
then is the second coming of Christ unto judgment, Da^. 7. 13
which is called a great day; Mar. 13. 24.
and such a day as never was from the beginning of the world: Lu. 21. 25
when the Sun shall be darkened, Mat. 24. 29.
the Moon shall not give her light: Esa. 13. 10.
when the Stars shall fall from heaven: Eze. 32. 7 10. 5* 22.
when the voice of the trumpet shall sound: Apoc. 20. 13.
when all the kindreds of the earth shall mourn: when they shall see the son
of Matt. 16, 27.
man come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory: 2. Cor. 5. 10.
when the Sepulchers shall open: when the sea* Romans 14. 10.
and the earth shall give up their dead: when all the world, Kings, princes,
and potentates of the earth, shall appear before the tribunal seat of Christ.
(Blessed Lord) what a time shall this be. Chrysostom. him. 77. in Mat.
I know not (says Saint Chrysostom) what others do think of it: for my
self it makes me often tremble to consider it. Do we not behold from year
to year the Sun to yield less heat, whereby the fruits of the earth do
less kindly ripen. O that we had hearts to meditate of this great coming of
Christ to judgment? then would we soon for a sinful life past be avenged
upon our eyes, and wish with Jeremy, Ierem. 9. 1. 2.
that our heads were a fountane of wa^ter: then would we say with
Demosthenes, yea every one would soon answer, the first prouocatio^ to evil
(...), I will not buie repentance so dear. To flatter our selves with hope of
deferring of this time is all in vain. Talem ^te inueniet dies Domini, qualem
^e reli quit extremus virae dies, Look how the last day of thy life does
leave thee, so shall the day of judgment find thee.

Who would not but accept of the fatherly forewarning of Christ our Savior,
by those many precedent tokens, as forerunners of his coming? These are both
sayings, and signs: The sayings amongst other, Mark. 13. 20.
That for his elect sake, the days shall be shortened. Apoc. 12. 12.
And behold, I come quickelie. For signs, the waxing c^lde of Charity, the
rising of Nation against Nation, Mat. 24 12.
the abounding of iniquity, without further application, Luke 17 27.
these may be left unto our silent thoughts. Was there ever less love?
Where is that Ionothan that loves David as his own soul? Where is that
uprightness of conscience, when men rather for shame of the world, then
otherwise, abstain from extreme impiety. How many with Ioab embrace
friendly, 2. Sam. 3 27.
but c^rrye a malicious heart to Amasa. The Apostle says, 2. Tim. 3 1. 2.
That the latter days shall be perilous days, for men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy.

The Philosophers can tell us, Nullum violentum est perpetuum: That no motion
violent is woone to be permanent. The Rainbowe as it has a waterie color,
which may show us what has been past: so has it also a f^erie, to signify
what is to come. Satan's f^erce rage, Apoc. 12. ^2.
may argue the shortness of his time: the coldness and barrenness of the
earth and trees, show the qualities of aged bodies, or in effect tell us,
there will come a time, when we shall not have any longer the use of them. The
decay of ancient families and houses, the defect of strength and stature, do
make us daily see, this world is wearing away. That which is the flash of
lightning, before the hideous clappe of thunder; that which is the mustering of
an host of men, before a sad battle, the same are these signs before
Christ his second coming to 1. Sam. 6. 1^.
judgment. To be curious with the Bethshemites, in prying into God his Arc,
has been the folly of some men: to be calculating au^ skanning the day and
years of that time, which is unknown unto the Angels of heaven, is needless.
For seasons or times, Non est nostrum scire, It is not for us to know, for our
appearance at that time before Christ to give our account: Omnium est scire: It
is for all to know^, That the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed; that a
general audite shall be kept, Christ himself shows in the Parable, where
the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain king, Mat. 18. 23.
that will take account of his servants. God will require a reckoning at our
hands, of the time he has lent us, of the graces he has given us, of the
blessings in this world bestowed upon us. When the rich man's steward in the
sixteenth of Saint Lukes Gospel, saw how the world was likely to go with
him, to wit, that he must give an account, it was time for him to call his
wits together, Luc. 16. 3
and so is it for us all, if we have any care of the account which will be
required at our hands. An account for our selves: Adam vb^ es? Adam where art
thou? How have thou walked in the comman dements I gave thee? Genesis 3. 9.
An account for our brethren, Cain Genesis 4. 9.
vbi est frater tuus Abel? Caine where is thy brother Abel? how have thou used
him? An account 1. Cor. 6. 19.
for our bodies: have they been kept as the temples of the holy Ghost? 1. Pet.
2. 25.
An account for our souls: Apoc ^2. 12.
whether be they fit to appear in the sight of the great shepherd? Mat. 12.
36.
An account for our works: An account for our words: Wis. 1. 9.
An account for our very thoughts: it is most true God is merciful. but we
cannot tell whether our sins will make a separation between God and us, if we
be not careful in time: a consideration hereof may be the compass to guide
our ship, the squire to frame our building, and may evermore move us to cast in
our minds how to provide for a day to come. Now therefore seeing our condition
of life is only certain in uncertainty* seeing our time passes away, as the
prophet David says, as noth^ng, and man disquieteth him self in vain* why do
we not endeavor to attain a retired course of life, and content our selves with
our calling, be it but mean amongst men. we know assuredly after all our
climing* down we must, die we must, where, or when we know not: one falls in
his full strength, being in all ease and prosperity, another in y^ bitterness
of his soul, and never eats with pleasure: both says Job, sleep in the
dust, Job. 21. 23
the slimie value shall be swept over them. O good Lord that men would
sometimes consider this, leave the pursuit of this troublesome world, and
follow Christ in meeknes, who is the way, the truth, and life: without the way
we walk not: without the truth we know not: without this life we live not. We
follow him in lowliness of mind; Mat. ^1, 29.
the reward of this following is rest unto our souls. Genesis 48. 14.
Jacob laid the hand of blessing upon Ephraim the younger: and God (says Saint
Iam. 4. 6.
James) bestows the gift of grace upon Ephraim too, that is to say, the
lowlier. The Apostle Saint Paul in every Epistle where he commends them to
whom he wrote to grace, he commendes them jointly to peace: his usual style
is Grace and Peace, as if where grace is, there peace is: as where the fire is,
there heat is. wherefore, that same vnum petii of the Prophet, may be the vnum
petii of every well disposed Psa. 27. 4
man: One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord. or serve him peaceably all the days of my life. Noah was an hundred
years together, busy about an Arc, to save him from the flood, we have not
so long to labor, in framing a peaceable and religious course of life, which
will one day be an Arc for the body, and a tabernacle for the soul, when we
shall be safe in deed. It is a world to see the unquiet disposition of some
men's natures, who are either whyning at Gods providence, because they have not
their own wills, or otherwise in bitter conflicts, because they will be ever
in trouble with men: did these consider that the days of their warfare are not
long, and that they are toward an other world, they could soon endeavor to
pass over that small time of continuance, yet remaining in more quiet and
contentment both with God and man. Now when we hear that God is just, we
learn to fear him, an^ when we hear that he is merciful, we learn to love
him. So that with fear. and love, we may go forward from virtue to virtue,
until we grow unto a perfect age in Christ Jesus: who is there that does not
desire to se^ good days? 1 Pet 3. 11.
Good days in deed, to wit, the days of all eternity, Psalm. 34. 13.
let him eschew evil, and do good. For the day of the Lord, that dreadful
day, it is resembled to the coming of a thief in the night: 2. Pet. 3. 10.
well it may spoil and torment the careless, and the retchlesse: but for the
watchful householder. that expectes the coming thereof, it shall pass along
by him* and never hurt him. The just shall stand Wis. 5. 1.
( says the Wiseman) with great constancy, Luc. 21. ^8.
and they shall lift up their heads* for their redemption draws nigh. There
is no better counsel to be given to the world, then the counsel of him, who
came to redeem the world; Watch and pray continually, that you may be counted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, Luc. 21. 36.
and that ye may stand before the Son of man: Mat. 25. 34.
go upon his right hand, and hear that joyful voice: Come ye blessed of my
father, receive the kingdom prepared for you, from the feundations of the
world, unto which kingdom Jesus Christ bring us all, for his infinite mercies
sake. Amen.



A short Dialogue between Faith, and the Natural man: concerning man's estate
in the world, and his departure from the world.
Faith. IS thy belief rightlye grounded?


Nature. I profess the name of Christ.


Fa Never tell me of profession. Do thou think of no other estate but a bare
continuance in this world only?


Nature. Yes, I think of an other world to come, and also of my departure from
the life present.


Faith. I would to God thou did in heart, in truth, and verity; for I
fear thou do deceive thy self.


Not. As ho^o I pray you?


Faith. Because this is but a superficial conceit.


Nature. How know you that?


Faith. Marie thy life is led in such security, as if thou mindedst nothing
less, then y^ time to come.


Nature. But may I not take part in the pleasures of this world, and use them
when they are offered?


Faith. Thou may, for honest recreation: but use the world, as if thou
use it not


Not. I am of great birth and parentage.


Faith. True honor is not of others. but of our selves.


Not. But my house is ancient.


Faith Then began it by virtue, and by virtue should thou continue it.


Not. But my progenitors have flourished.


Faith. Tr^e, but are they not gone the way of al y^ world? and thou also must
follow.


Not. But I am in the flower of youth.


Faith. Yet remember thy end, youth is but a flower that may soon sade.


Not. But there is nothing more distant from the end then the beginning.


Faith. In the state of man, it is not so, wherein often we begin and end
together


Not. But I have strength.


Faith. Boast not of strength, some little touch of sickness will make thee
soon stoop.


Not. But I am healthful.


Faith. Health is a blessing, and therefore use it well.


Nature. But I live in great abundance.


Faith. Then live thou in great care.


Not. But I live amidst many delights.


Faith. The^ live thou amidst many temptations, and therefore take heed of
them.


Nature. But I am in high place.


Faith. Then art thou in a s^ipperie place.


Nature. But I have the government of many.


Faith. Then art thou also servant unto many.


Nature. But I have friends.


Faith. Trust not in princes, trust not in any child of man, trust in God.


Not. But I have riches.


Faith. If riches increase set not thy heart upon them.


Not. But I have honors.


Fai. Then have thou envy also.


Not. But I am glorious in the world.


Fa. Desire to be hid unto the world, and known unto God.


Not. But me thinks I am well.


Fa^. How can that be, living as thou live, in a vale of tears.


Nature. But I hope for peace of mind.


Faith. Then must thou be a co^queror of thine own affections.


Na. But I have much laid up for many years.


Faith. So said he whose soul was suddenly taken from him.


Not. Is our sta^e then in this world so uncertain.


Faith. It is.


Not. Then will I hope for the life to come.


Faith. In so doing thou do well.


Not. But what shall I do in the mean space?


Faith. Love God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength:
and thy neighbor as thy self.


Nature. Seeing this world is so variable, then I bid all trust in earthly
vanities fare well.


Faith. Lift up thy mind to God, in him only is thy eternal welfare.


A Dialogue betwixt Discontent and Hope.
Discontent. I Am more miserable then any.


Hope. Others are miserable to, we all live in a world of misery.


Discont. But I more miserable then any.


Hope. Leave to complain, deliverance is of God, who will not fail them that
call upon him.


Disc. I am in bondag^*


Hope. Remember there will come a time of freedom.


Disc. But I am poor and helples.


Ho. So was Lazarus, who does rejoice in Abraham's bosom.


Discont. But I am afflicted in body.


Ho. So was Job, Whom God loved,


Discon. But I am reproached in the world, and I fear infamy.


Ho. Fear God: If the reproach be true, crave mercy for thy fault at his
hands: If false, let thy own conscience comfort thee.


Disc. But I have lost the time.


Hope. Indeed a great loss, but it is never too late, so that at last thou do
well.


Disc. But I am destitute of friends.


Hope. God is thy friend. if thy rely be upon him.


Disc. But I am weary of this toylesome world.


Hop. Heaven is the haven of rest.


Disc. But I would be gone from it, I care not how.


Hop. F^e Discontent suffer rather a world of torments, then to be so faithles.


Disc. But I have no other remedy


Hope. Call for grace: cast off this abject fear with vain thoughts, away
with them: hearken not to the shameful intisements of Satan.


Disc. But I am full of troubles.


Hope. So was he in the world, that is in glory,


Disc. But death is very grie^


Ho. It is not so, but an end of grief. In sorrow thou shall eat thy bread*
until thou turn to earth, as if th^n sorrow should end.


Dis. But I am sorrowful.


Hope. Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy commith in the morning.


Disc. But I eat the bread of carefullnesse.


Hop. So have all the servants of God done.


Disc. But I have often called, and see no deliuer^^ce.


Hop. God will send deliverance, assure thy self at the last.


Di. But I have not the possessions y^ others have.


Ho. A competent measure of wealth to retain honest reputation in the world,
is sufficient.


Dis But I wax in age.


Hop. Then does the time of thy deliverance draw on*


Dis But I am old and crooked.


Hope. Then make an end with the world.


Discon. But I am pained with sickness.


Ho. The health of the soul is most to be desired.


Discont. But I fear death.


Hope. Thou needst not, for it shall not hurt thee, but make thy happy
entrance into life.


Discont. But I am loath to leave the world.


Hope Why should thou so be, seeing thou art going to live with Christ.


Discont. But I live not in that pleasure I see others live.


Hope. Be content, remember to whom it was said, Son thou in thy life time
receiuedst thy pleasure.


Discon^^ But I am ever under the cross.


Hope. So must all be who will follow Christ.


Disc. But grief is present.


Hope. But the reward is yet to come.


Disc. But I often want mirth in this world.


Hope. God does humble us a little by want of worldly mirth: but blessed are
they who now weep, for they shall rejoice: we think them happy that here
laugh: but Christ says. Blessed are they that mourn.


Discon. Well Hope, seeing the case is such. and so full of comfort in times of
distress, whatsoever befall me, I will put my trust in God.


Hope. Then assuredly thou shall never fail, either in life or death, in this
world, or in the world to come.


A Dialogue between Presumption and Fear.
PResump. I am more holy then others.


Fear So said they who were most unholy.


Presum. But I am not so profane as I see many men.


Fear. What art thou that iudgest?


Pres. But may I not glory in my virtues?


Fear. Glory in God.


Pres. But I have more graces then others.


Fea. Despise no man, thou know what thou have been, thou know not what
thou shall be.


Pres. But I have better gifts the^ a number besides.


Fear. Take heed, thou know not how long thou shall enjoy them.


Presu. But I am sure all is sa^e.


Fe. So said they who counted themselves children of Abraham, and are fallen.


Pres. But I am wise.


Fear. So were thou, if thou did not say so.


Presump. But I am happy


Fear. S. Paul says, let him that stands take heed least he fall.


Pr. But I have many days to live.


Fear. No, thou have no warrant for the least continuance.


Presump. But I am strong and healthie


Fear. So have many been, and yet taken away in a moment.


Pre. Me thinks I should not pass away so soon.


Fear. Why not, thou have here no continuing City.


Pres. Well, I will make less reckoning of the world then I have done.


Fea. Then shall thou do well here and hereafter.


Pre. Now I see my folly in being so confident


Fe. Be careful, be careful: too much self love and boldness has undone
many.


Presump. Well, I will not from henceforth glory in my self.


Fear. Let him that glories, only glory in God, and know this, that by how
much the higher thou art, by so much should thou be the more humble.


Pre. Now I consider my own frailty.


Fear. This consideration will make thee poor in spirit: and blessed are the
poor in spirit. for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.


A short Discourse, wherein is showed the great commendations of a peaceable
course of life, unto which course of life we are moved by a consideration of
our departure hence.
TO pass over the days of this our pilgrimage in peaceable manner, is, and
ought to be our Christian honest care. Psalm. 34. 14.
The holy Ghost commanding us to seek peace, and to ensue it. Joan. 14. 17.
It was Christ's own farewell from his disciples: My peace I leave unto you.
And one of S. Paul's last exhortations unto the Corinthes. Brethr^n be at
peace, 2. Cor. 13. 11.
and the God of peace shall be with you. Amongst other great differences
whereby Gods children are discerned from the children of the world, this is not
the least, that they are the children of peace. Saul that had an evil spirit,
had an unquiet and troublesome spirit, but David that had a good spirit, had a
spirit of peace. Amongst the punishments of Egypt, that of the flies was not
the least, which would not suffer the Egiptians to rest. In like manner amidst
this worlds felicity these combersome thoughts are wont much to molest y^
worlds followers. The graces y^ flow from Gods spirit are resembled often unto
rivers and pleasant waters. These rivers abide not on the higher mountains,
but have their course through the lowest valleys. It is want Want of humility
the cause of an unquiet life.
of humility that makes men so far from a peaceable state and condition of
life. Our Savior Christ exhorts us to learn of him to be humble and m^^ke,
Mat. 11. 29.
that so we may find rest unto our souls. Was it not folly in the
Israelites, to desire rather to live in the troubles of Egypt, then in the
land of promise, where they might have quiet, and time to do their sacrifices
unto God? The same is the folly of many, who choose rather to be mo^ling in
the world about ambitious and contentious practices, seeking revenge and
glory rather then to retire a little to a peaceable state of life, wherein
they might apply themselves to devotion. Stories make mention of Arseniu^, who
of a glorious Senator, beca^^e a great lover of Christ, and contemner of the
world, who was also said to have by a divine oracle, this advertisement: Fuge*
tace, and qui^sce, Arsenius fly, bresilent, and give thy self to quiet or
peace. The more we estrange ourselves from the love of this world, the nearer
we draw to God: Iam. 4. 8.
and if we draw near unto God (says S. James) God will draw near unto us.
The most honorable state of life, is to serve him: all our inferior, either
pleasures or profits, for a time like some small clouds pass to and fro, and
are at last dissolved into nothing. So we have as much water as will Genesis 28.
20. 21.
carry the ship, or with Jacob food and raiment for this journey: let God be
our God, and let his benefits bind us unto him. An unquiet or troublesome life,
is their life who have not known the way of peace, and may also fear Romans 3.
17.
a time of trouble to come. To live religiously and peaceably before God and
man, is their Christian conversation, whose prayer is with the Prophet: One
thing have we desired of y^ Lord, that we may dwell in the house of our God all
the days of our lines. If Christ did call worldly men to labors, and anguish
of mind, they might answer as those in the Gospel: Luc. 14. 18.
Lord have us excused: but calling them to undertake a sweet yoke, and
promi^ing rest unto their souls, peace internal in y^ state of grace and peace
eternal in the state of glory: how can they but f^nd in their hearts to come,
being so lovingly called? and to pass their time in that peaceable course,
which true devotion is wont to afforde the well disposed for their everlasting
good? The bird, who for necessity is feign sometimes to staire upon the earth,
is notwithstanding for the most part soaring in the air, where she tunes many
a quiet and pleasant dittie. In like manner for necessities sake only, our
cogitations are sometimes on things here beneath: but our chief delight
should be higher, where is quiet, and peace of conscience; where no distracting
thoughts, which are wont to disturb the lovers of this world, do not come
near them: they are risen with Christ, and therefore seek the things that are
above where Christ sits at the right hand of God. The devout man's life
therefore is angelical, whose body walks on earth, but his desire (as has
been before showed) are above in heaven. It is a wondrous case to see how apt
men are to debates and quarrels, at the least offenses; sometimes rather taken
then given, their stomachs are aloft: they swel in malice, their hearts are so
big; nothing will qualify them, it is a disgrace they think to bear a
little, or put up the least injury: the in^^nite, needles actions and suits of
law, which for some vile unconscionable gain, find some fit patrons abroad in
the world, do much nourish this unchristian trouble, and troublesome life of
Christian men, who should affect nothing less: they follow on their course
from term to term, till at last Actio moritur cum persona, the action dies
with the party: they can account a lease of one and twenty years, as good
(in a manner) as a state of three lives: and they see time wears out the
Counselor, his client, the assurance, and all, but no amendment at al is
seen; were this well remembered, it would soon make men of another disposition,
then for the most part they are: more patient, more peaceable, 1. Cor. 5.
sesse contentious. Is there not a wise man to judge between brethren? We
have (God knows) but little time to spend in the world, what should we
desire more then to spend that little well, devoutly toward God; peaceably
amongst men? It was Iosephes counsel to his brethren, when they were returning
to their own country; Fall not out by the way; go along together to your
fathers house quietly as travelers, lovingly as brethren. Let only love of
the life to come move us to ser^e God. ^ be at peace with our neighbors, that
so we may turn our good purposes to good practices, our practices to custom;
our custom to delight, our delight to perseverance, our perseverance to live
to God, and to die to God. For the better performanc^ hereof, we should every
day more and more wax out of love with this combersome world. There is such a
noise in the catching desire of riches, that we cannot hear the soft voice
which calls us to devotion. There is such a noise in men's devises for
maintenance of pride, as they cannot hear the soft voice which calls them to
humility. There is such a noise in y^ multitude of earthie affairs, that we
cannot hear the soft voice which calls us to think of heavenly* we may be
compared unto those men, who living near the river Nylus, are said to become
very dull of hearing: we are so near in affection to these transitory
delights, as the prophets trumpet-like voice will scarce he heard to move us
to contrition, for our s^nnes: we feel the troubles of the world, and yet for
all that we make the world our paradise. We marvel at the rude and ignorant
Indians, who for glasses and trifles, are said to depart from the purest gold.
But we never think of our own folly, which is far greater; who forgo the
treasures of heaven for very bables, things of small or no continuance: nay
which is more, with toil we follow this mean traffic, as the spider that
exhausteth her bowels to make a slender web, which is dissolved again with
every puff of wind, it is enough to astonish any indifferent man, to see the
worlds blindness in this: when men might be more at peace, they never leave
climing until they take a fall, they look unto pleasures as they are coming
to them, not as they are going from them, when they are wont to leave trouble
behind. It were to be wished, that men would once withdraw themselves from
unnecessary cares and desires, in seeking too vehemently the vain riches and
pleasures of this world, which are so much in request as they are. In so doing
might they not pass over the days of their pilgrimage more peaceably, more
religiously? They might, young men from the childehoode in fearing God: old
men now departing the world by giving good examples unto others, all
considering the state and condition of life it self, which is but as a flower.
First it buddeth, then comes the blooming and flowrishing, a little after it
withers, and is gone. Wherefore man (says one) may be well greeted with a
threefolde salutation. From childehoode to thirty, the greeting is, you are
welcome. From thirty to fifty, the greeting is, you are in a good day. From
that time afterward, Then God give you a good departure. Now therefore
gently to accomplish this journey, to pass from childehoode to youth, from
youth to strength, from strength to old age, from old age to death: as
certain rivers, who are said by a still soft course to run through a part
of the maine Ocean is a very Christian and commendable condition of life, unto
which we are moved by a consideration of the uncertainty of life it self.
Unto him that is able to direct us in this course of life, to keep us that we
fall not, and to present us faultlesse in the life to come, in the presence of
his glory with joy, that is, to God only wise, with Jesus Christ our
Savior, and the holy Ghost, three persons, but one eternal and everlasting
God, be all honor, and glory and power, and dominion, both now, and for
evermore.

Laus Deo.
The Table.
A
ABraham tempted, that when we are tried, to teach us what to do. 2^9 Adam
happy, had he known his own happiness. 140 Adam sinning, we sinned. 119
Alms deeds commended. 181 182. etc. Athanasius falsely accused. 93 Ancient
fathers mindful of their mortality. 73 An advertisement for those who are
moved to commit graceless attemptes against themselves. 289 Advertisement for
those who undertake dangerous attempts by sea or land. 281
B
Blessedness the center of our desires. 110 Benefits received of God, make us
worship God. Bodily griefs inflicted for sin. 89. 90 Burials amongst
Christians decent. 274
C
Care in youth to live well, in old age to die well. 48 Charity the fruit of
Faith. 167 168. etc. Christ's resurrection, our resurrection 118. 119 Christ
our Joseph. 227 Christ's second coming joyful to them that fear him. 209
Commending of our souls into the hands of God a good duty. 198 Conscience
quieted how. Curious scanning the time of Christ's second coming to judgment
unnecessary. 333
D
Death has absolute authority over all. 62 Death of the righteous a steep.
120. 1^1 Death not to be feared 113 Despair far from Christians. 238
Coffeehouse of mind to be shaken off. 346
E
End of man his coming into the world. 51 End to be remembered. 60. 61 Every
day must be prepared, because the last day of our end is uncertain. 61
Examples should move. 66. 67 Examples of the godly in suffering. 136. 137.
etc. Excess of worldly cares hinders a godly course of life, and brings much
disquietnesse of mind. 320. 321
F
Faith described. 164. 165 etc. Faith the staff of the afflicted. 117. 164.
Fear of God necessary. 312 Fear to die none ought. 115
G
Glory of this world fleeteth. 85 God stays til we repent. 49. 50 Good life
has a peaceable death. Good rule to ^oresee, and to take opportunity in things
spiritual. 47
H
Health of body to be continued Help only of God. Hope described. 167 Hour
of Death uncertain. 61
I
Joys of Heaven comfortable to be remembr^d. 102. 103. etc. Intention of the
mind acceptable unto God. 287. 288.
K
Knowledge of God and our selves, 45 Knowledge of the Saints in the life
celestial.
L
Law satisfied. 238 Learning to die behoouefull. 69 Love of God and our
neighbor go together. 171 Life described. 84. 85. etc. Life of man full of
sorrows and afflictions. 90
M
Meditation of heavenly things. Mercies of God wonderful. Mourning for the
dead allowable. 2^9. 270
N
Necessity of calling upon God 240 Necessary instructions for the sick. 249
Neglect of Gods worship a great evil. 50
O
Old Prophets suffered. 136 Obedience to the will of God. 208 Oppression of
others punished. 72
P
Patience. 195. 196. etc. Perseverance. 200. 201. Pleasures of this world but
a show. ^0. Prayer a religious duty. 187. 18^. etc. Prayer a refuge in
distress* ibid. Prayer to be delivered from sudden death. Presumption
dangerous. 302. 303. etc.
Q
Questions of frivolous matters needless. 46. Quietness of life commendable.
352
R
Remembrance of our estate. 140. 141. Repentance in time. 68. 303
S
Solomon his verdicte of the world. 125 Security in sin dangerous. 66 Serpent
in the wilderness. 176 177 Sick to acknowledge their sins. 173. 174 and 178
Soul business the chief of all.
T
Temporal goods only lent us. 180 Time precious. 47 Trials of the righteous.
134 135
V
Vainglorious, like the Camelion. 47 Visitation of the Sick, a work of
mercy. 246
W
Want of humility the cause of trouble. 353 Wills and Testaments. 180. 181 Wise
Virgins teach us to be watchful. 67 Worldly goods how to be disposed. 180
World, not worthy to be beloved. 86 Wordly wisdom foolishness. Willingness
to depart, when God does call us. 184 Wordly possessions are vanities*
deceites, thorns, and sorrows. 217
Y
Youth and age are unequally yoaked. 63
FINIS.
The Register.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P, and Q the half leaf.


