Meditations OF MAN'S MORTALITY. OR, A WAY TO TRVE Blessedness.

WRITTEN By Mrs. ALICE SVTCLIFFE wife of John Sutcliffe Esquire, Groom of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Chamber.

The Second EDITION, enlarged.

ROMANS 6. The wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of GOD, is Eternal life,
through JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

LONDON Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Henry Seyle at the Tigers head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1634.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND GRACIOUS PRINCESS, KATHERINE DVTCHESSE OF
BVCKINGHAM: AND THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, SUSANNA, COUNTESS OF
DENBEIGH her Sister.
Gracious Princess:
WHen I read how the Gods sooner accepted of a Handful of Franken-sence
offered by pure Devotion, then whole Hecatombes of Arabian Spices in
Ostentation: I am encouraged, having duly considered Your unlimited Goodness,
to present this my Mite unto your Grace, and your Honorable Sister, For as you
are Twins in Virtues, so I have joined You in my Devotions: Where first, I
most humbly crave of You to pass a favorable Censure of my proceedings, it
being, I know not usual for a Woman to do such things: Yet ELIHA says,
There is a Spirit in Man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
Understanding. And it is said again: Out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings, thou shall perfect Praise. I am assured, I shall meet with mocking
Ishmaels, that will carpe at Goodness; wherefore, I run to Your selves for
refuge; humbly craving to be assisted by your Graciousnesse, which will
appear as the Splendant Sun to disperse those Mists. I have chosen a subject
not altogether Pleasing; but my aim is, that it may prove Profitable, having
observed in this short course of my Pilgrimage, how apt Man is, not to think
of his Mortality, which steals upon him as a Thief in the night: Experience
teaches me, that there is no Action wisely undertaken, whereof the End is not
fore-casted, in the first place, howsoever it be last put in execution; I have
ever accounted Ingratitude, to be like a Beast, who having received benefits,
thinks not of any acknowledgements. Owing therefore, a due Debt of
Thankfulness for Your unexpressable undeserved Favors, and being no ways
able to cause the desires of my Heart to appear worthy-your Acceptances, I
have made choice of this, as being persuaded thereto, by that truly Noble
vertuousnes which has evidently appeared in You, to the strengthening of
Goodness, that here it may find admittance, which otherwise might want
Entertainment; and for that you have been more then a Mother to me. I having
only from her received life, but next under God from your Grace, and your
honorable Sister the being both of me and mine. By which as there is none
greater then your Self to whom in duty I am bound, so there is not any to whom
I wish greater Prosperity both for Temporal and Spiritual blessings, then to
your Grace; beseeching God to preserve you and your Honorable Offspring here
upon Earth, with my no less virtuous Lady your Sister, to whom I am tied by
the same bonds of Thankfulness, that as God has made your Renownes great upon
earth, so I beseech him to add to your Lives length of days, and after life,
Eternal happiness in the Heavens, whither CHRIST is gone to prepare a place
for You. I always remaining,

Your Graces, and your Honors truly devoted Servant, Alice Sutcliffe.

AN ACCROSTIQVE, Upon the Renowned Name of the most virtuous Princess,
KATHERINE Duchess of Buckingham.
KNow you this Princess, BVCKINGHAM'S Chaste Duchess?
Ask aged Time with his worm-eaten Crutches,
TO find amongst the numbers of his Role
HEr-Paralell, of such a Heavenly moule,
EXcelling so in the beauties of the Soul:
RIch in all Treasures, that to Virtue tend:
IN Faith, Hope, Charity; the blessed's end.
NOr is there ought, that lives in Woman kind:
EXceeding the rare prowess of her Mind.
BOrne of High blood, from RVTLANDS Family:
United to a Duke of Royal state.
CVrs'd be the time, more cursed his cruelty
Killed him; and reav'd this Turtle of her mate,
IN peerlesse woe, we still lament that fate:
NOr shall his memory e're out of date.
Go on then Gracious Princess, graced by Fame,
Honor shall still, attend your noble Name:
ANd as your Goodness has abounded, so
MAy Heaven the greatest good on You bestow.
AN ACCROSTIQVE, Upon the Name of the Right Honorable, and truly virtuous
Lady; SUSANNA, Countess of Denheigh.
SEe here a Lady, blessed in her birth,
Unto whose Greatness, Goodness joined is still
SUSANNA never so famous was on Earth
AS is this Lady, lead by virtuous will,
NOthing so sweet to her, as heavenly mirth,
NO Music sounds like Haleluia still
A Happy Soul, which those delights does fill
DAigne then to view these lines, where truly I
Express but truth, not using Flattery:
NO Fallaces within my mouth once lurkes,
But hates all those, that use dissembling works.
EVen as your Goodness merits, so speak I
I Am your Servant, bound until I dye
GIve leave, then gracious Lady, for I find,
HEaven has indu'd you, with a virtuous mind.
AN ACCROSTIQVE, Upon the name and Titles of the Right honorable and my ever
honored Lord, PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke and Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain of
his Majesty's Household, etc.
PEMBROOKE's great Peer, your Princely favor I
Here humbly crave, to guerdon my weak pen,
IF this does show my imbecilitie,
LIke a good Patron, shroud it from bad men
I By your favors moved do this present,
PRay then my Lord, accept my good intent,
Poor are my weak endeavors, yet if you,
ENcourage my Minervaes infant Muse
MY cherisht thoughts, by that, may frame anew
Book of true thanks, unto your Lordships use:
RIght Noble then, view but the virtuous tract,
OF this small Volume, and if you shall find,
Ought good expressed, by our Sexes act,
KNow honored Lord, my stars are very kind,
MOVNTGOMERY, my Caelique Muse does mount
ON Cherubs wing, from this low Orb to heaven,
Virtue is here expressed, vices account;
NOr is it a Tale, or Fable that is given
TRuth never is ashamed to show it is face:
GReat man and good, but always loves the light.
OMay it then, find an accepted Grace
MOre cause a woman, did the same indite,
EVen then as DERORAH's sweet tuned song,
-- Run;
RVng out her sacred Peale, in holy Writ:
OSo, I pray my heart, my pen, my tongue,
YEa all my faculties, may follow it:
Your Lordships Devoted Servant, Alice Sutcliffe.

TO Mrs. Alice Sutcliffe, on her divine Meditations.
WHen I had read
your holy Meditatio^s,
And in them viewed
the uncertainty of Life,
The motives, and true Spurs
to all good Nations.
The Peace of Conscience,
and the Godly's strife,
The Danger of delaying
to Repent,
And the deceit of pleasures,
by Consent.
The comfort of weak Christians,
with their warning,
From fearful back-slides;
And the debt we' are in,
To follow Goodness,
by our own discerning
Our great reward,
the aeternall Crown to win.
I said, who' had supped so deep
of this sweet Chalice,
Must CELIA be,
the Anagram of ALICE.
Ben. Ionson.

Upon the Religious Meditations of Mrs. ALICE SVTCLIFFE.
TO THE READER.
Would thou
(frail Reader) thy
true Nature see?
Behold this Glass
of thy Mortality.
Digest the precepts
of this pious Book,
Thou can not in
a nobler Mirror look.
Though sad it seem,
and may loose mirth destroy,
That is not sad
which leads to perfect joy.
Thank her fair Soul
whose meditation makes
Thee see thy frailty;
nor disdain to take
That knowledge, which
a Woman's skill can bring.
All are not Syren-notes
that women sing.
How true that Sex can write,
how grave, how well,
Let all the Muses,
and the Graces tell.
THO: MA

To Mr. JOHN SVTCLIFFE Esquire upon the receipt of this Book written by his Wife.
SIr, I received your Book
with acceptance,
And, thus return
a due congratulation,
For that good Fortune,
which has blessed your life
By making you
the Spouse of such a Wife.
Although I never saw her,
yet I see,
The Fruit, and by the Fruit
I judge the Free.
My Praise adds nothing to it:
That which is
Well done, can praise it self;
and so may this.
To be a woman, it is enough with me,
To merit praise;
For I can never be
So much their Friend,
as they have heretofore
Deserved; although
they merited no more.
When, therefore
to their Woman-hood I find
The love of sacred
Piety conioyn'd,
Me thinks I have
my duty much forgot,
Unless I praise
(although I know them not)
But, when to Woman-hood
and good Affections,
Those rare Abilities,
and those Perfections,
United are,
to which our Sex aspire,
Then, forced I am
to Love, and to admire.
I am not of their mind,
who if they see,
Some Female-Studies
fairly ripened be,
(With Masculine success)
do peevishly,
Their worths due honor
unto them deny,
By overstrictly
censuring the same;
Or doubting whether
from themselves it came,
For, well I know.
Dame Pallas and the Muses,
Into that Sex,
their faculties infuses,
As freely as to Men;
and they that know,
How to improve their Gift,
shall find it so.
Then joy in your good Lot,
and praises due
To Him ascribe, that thus
has honored you.
Geo. Withers.

Upon the Meditations of Mrs. ALICE SVTCLIFFE.
I Have no Muse my own,
but what I see.
Worthy of praise,
that is a Muse to me.
Divinity (the highest theme)
will find
No fitter subject
then an humble mind,
And as in scorn of them
that are more fit
By instruments less notable
expresses it.
Alms and Devotion,
Zeal and Charity.
Might for thy Sex
beseeming Scripture be,
But when thou speak
of death, and that just doom
Which shall on all
conditions, ages, come,
And thence descending
to Philosophy,
Teach weak Nature
how to learn to dye:
It seems to me
above thy Sex and State,
Some heavenly spark
does thee Illuminate.
Live still a praise,
but no example to
Others, to hope,
as thou have done, to do.
Live still thy sexes honor,
and when Death
(With who^ thou art acquainted)
stoppes thy breath
Fame to Posterity
shall make thee shine
And add thy Name
unto the Muses nine.
PET: HEYWOOD.

AN ENCOMIVM upon the Authoresse and Book.
GReat Ladies that to virtue
are inclined,
See here the pious practice
of a wife,
Expressed by the beauties
of the Mind,
And now set forth
in Pictures of the life,
Wherein matter and form
are both at strife
Who shall be Master:
but in the end hands shook,
For that they have
a Mistress to their Book.
Whose Language I must needs
(in truth) admire,
And how such Elegance
should from her spring:
Until I think of Zeal
(that Caeliquefire)
Which might transport her soul,
by Cherubs wing
In Prose or Numbers,
piously to sing
Precepts of Praise,
worthy your approbation;
For she is Rara Avis
in our Nation.
And though her youth,
gives her no SYBILS name
Nor does she Prophecy,
as they of old:
Yet she is indu'd
with the most sacred flame
Of Poesy Divine;
and does unfold
Naught but the truth,
and therefore may be bold.
Whose holy pains,
and study here expressed,
Shall Register her name
amongst the blessed.
URANIA,
is her most heavenly Muse.
Which flies upwards,
where her mind is placed.
She sings such Songs,
as DEEORAH did use.
When she, and BARVCH
had their foes abased;
For which, with Laurel
she may well be graced.
And styled the Paragon,
of these our Times,
In her sweet Prose,
and true composed Rimes.
But think not Ladies
that I do contrive,
Numbers to mend
ought that is done amiss;
Or that I mean,
to keep her name alive
When she is gone:
and passed to greater bliss,
For I never knew her,
when I framed this.
Only I read her lines,
which forced me praise
The Picture of her mind,
with this course bays.
FRA: LENTON

THE Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
I. VVHerie the uncertainty of Man's life expressed, and of the fearful end of
the Wicked. Fol. 1. II. Motives and Jnducements to true Godliness. Fol. 53.
III. Of the Peace of a good Conscience, and the Joyful end of the godly. fol.
57 IIII. Of the deferring of Repentance, how dangerous it is, and of the
deceivablenesse of Worldly Pleasures. fol. 74. V. Comforts for the weak
Christian, and to be ware of Backsliding. fol. 101. VI. That man ought to be
won to follow Godliness, in respect of the Eternal happiness. fol. 114.
MEDITATIONS OF MAN'S Mortality.
I. Wherein the uncertainty of Man's life is expressed, and of the fearful end
of the Wicked.
WHen I behold the Heavens and the earth, the workmanship of the Almighty, and
see in (...) all Creatures both for commodity and pleasure, which as a
storehouse, preserve all things for the behoof and benefit of Man: I cannot
but use to my self, the saying of the Prophet DAVID; Psalm. 8.
Lord! what is Man, that thou should think on him; or the Son of man,
that thou should be mindful of him, thou have made him but a little lower
then the Angels; thou have crowned him with honor and worship; by reason of
which, I think him to be only happy and a God upon earth; and that there is
no blessedness beyond this: but looking into him with more deliberation; I find
his breath is in his nostrils, and that he is as the Beast that perishes;
Eccles. 3.
I find his wife to be but a span, and the perpetuity of his Happiness, no
better then a flower, which flourishes to day, and to morrow is out down and
withers; and that his habitation is but a Pilgrimage, he has no certain
abiding, I perceive there is no building of Tabernacles here, this is no place
of rest. I remember the fool, that said to his soul, Luke, 12.
There was much laid up for many years, but that night his soul was taken
from him, and how that after Death he must give an account of his Stewardship,
for they are not his, but lent him of the Lord; neither to abuse through
excess, nor niggerdice, but to put them forth to the best use, and to the
glory of him who is the giver of all good things.

For it is true, that a Philosopher says; He that seeks for true Happiness
in this world, follows a shadow, which when he thinks he is surest of,
vanishes and is nothing; and the Apostle PAVL says; If in this life we were
only happy, we were of all men most miserable.

Seeing then it is so, Job. 14.
That man which is borne of a woman has but a short time to live, and that few
and evil are the days of his Pilgrimage, pointed out but to Threescore and
ten, and if Nature befriend him so far, as to afford him life till
Fourscore, yet is it so full of infirmities, that it becomes a burden to him,
Life being a briitle and miserable fetter, which chaineth the pure and
everlasting soul, to the vile, sinful, and corruptible body.

Yet where is he, that takes the Wise man's counsel, Eccles. 12.
To remember his Creator in the days of his Youth, before the evil day comes,
and the time approach, in the which, he shall say; I have no pleasure in them;
for if a man live many years and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the
days of Darkness, for they are many; the Sun sets and rises again; but thou
alas, when thy glass is run, and the short gleame of thy Summers Sun is spent,
shall never return again. How soon alas, is thy span grasped, thy minute
wasted, thy flower dead, thy vapor of life gone; without thought, without dread
either of sins past, or accounts to come? Where is there one, that looks
into the estate of his Soul, with a serious eye; that examines his conscience,
unvayleth his heart, and considers his ways, and how that he is every day of
his life, a days journey nearer his end, and nothing is wanting for the
expiration thereof, but the stroke of death, which comes in a moment; and
then thou art gone, either to unexpressable end less Joys, or caselesse and
endless miseries. For no sooner art thou borne to possess this World, but
death issues forth incontinently out of his Sepulcher, to find thy life;
neither does he always send his harbinger before to acquaint thee with his
coming, but many times enters unexpected, unlooked for; and yet dare thou
rest in security, me thinks it should make thee tremble, were not thy
conscience seared; to think of the divinenesse of that Justice, before whom,
thou art to stand, being in the day of his Wrath, and at the bar of his
Judgment: can thou think then, to be able to endure his angry eye, whose
sight will pierce to the very centure of thy heart and soul, and rip up every
festred corner of thy conscience? O then! bethink thy self in time, before
that gloomy day comes, that day of Clouds and thick darkness, that day of
desolation and confusion approach; when all the Inhabitants of the Earth shall
mourn and lament, and all faces shall gather blackness. Joel. 2. Because, the
time of their Judgment is come; alas! with what a fearful heart and weeping
eyes, and sorrowful countenance, and tre^bling loins, will thou at that last
and great assize look upon CHRIST JESUS, when he shall most gloriously
appear, with innumerable Angels in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them
that know him not? What a cold dampe will seize upon thy soul, when thou shall
behold him, whom thou have all thy life long, rejected in his ordinances,
despised in his members, and neglected in his love: what horror and terror of
spirit will possess thee; how will thou cry to the Rocks and Mountains to
fall upon thee, and cover thee from the fiercenes of his Wrath; when thou shall
behold, the Heavens burning, the Elements melting, the Earth trembling, the Sea
roaring, the Sun turn into darkness, and the Moon incobloud: how will thy
numberless sins in hideous forms appear before thee, every one of them
bearing the Ensigns of Gods heavy displeasure, dipped in a bloody colored
dye; and crying out, for vengeance against thee: alas! if thy faultring tongue
should go about to feign some seeming show of a colorable excuse, how soon
would it be stopped, all thy actions both for thoughts, words, and deeds, being
registered in a book, and kept within the Court of Heaven. Oh remember! how
terrible his voice was when he gave his Law to his chosen people, and think
thou it will be less terrible, when he shall demand an account of that Law,
which thou have so many times carelessly broken. Oh then, whether will his wrath
carry thee, where will the blast of his breath hurry thee, it was thy sins that
inflamed his wrath, and his wrath will inflame that fire which will never go
out: Oh then alas, whilst thou have time, become thy own friend, look into
thy self, and by a serious examination, prove the Pilot of thy own Ship,
which now lies floating on the Seas of this troublesome World, balanced only
with cares, and disquieting pleasures of this life, and how thou sayl'st with a
full course, toward the haven of endless Happiness; yet one blast of
unprepared death will turn thy sails, and plunge thee irrecoverably into that
bottomless Guife, where one hours torment, will infinitely exceed all the
pleasures thy whole life contained: and will thou now standing upon the very
brim of Hell, melt in thy delights: Alas, slippery is thy footing, and thy hold
but by the thread of life, which stretched to the length, soon crackes: yet
how triflingly spendest thou thy precious time, tyring out thy spirits, and
robbing thine eyes of their beloved sleep, for those things, to the which, the
time will come, that the very remembrance of them will be bitter, and to the
which, thou must bid an everlasting farewell.

Yet not considering these things? how many are there, that only spend their
time in jollity, and suddenly go down to the Grave; they cry to themselves;
Peace, peace, when sudden Destruction overtakes them, not once thinking of
IEREMIA'S lamentation for Jernsalem; wherein he complains, That she
remembered not her last end. Lamen. 1.


Would they but consider, that as the Tree falls so it lies; and as Death
leaves them, so shall Judgment find them; they would not draw Iniquity with
cords of vanity, nor sin as with cartropes; did they think upon the reward
of Sin; did they consider how full of grief and misery, how short and
transitorious this present life is, and the vain Pleasures thereof: how on
every side, their enemies compass them, and that Death lies in wait against
them, every where catching them suddenly and unawares. Did that saying often
sound in their ears, Arise and come to Judgment, they would not defer their
Repentance to their last end, or their old age; when it can not be said, that
they leave Sin, but sin them. Shall they offer to the Devil, the World, and
their own flesh, the flower and strength of their years, and serve God with
the lees and dregs: ^al. 1.
when the Prophet MALACHY complained of the peoples evil Offerings, he said;
Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee or accept thy
person: and can they think, this great GOD will be pleased with them. King. 18
If RABSHECHA and HOLOFERNES, Judith. 5.
but Messengers for their Lords, took it so ill; that the Jews came not forth
to make their peace with them, that they threatened nothing should pacify their
fury but their Destruction: How much more, shall this King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, whose wrath is so kindled for their wickedness, condemn them into
utter Darkness, where shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth, (for no dead
carrion so lothsomly stinketh in the nostrils of an earthly man, as does the
wicked, abominable unrepentant man, in the presence of God;) yet not
considering this, they go on in a careless security, heaping one sin upon
another, till the burden become unsupportable, and the vials of Gods wrath
ready to be powered on them, not once calling them, to their remembrance; or if
they do, it is so far from Contrition, that it is rather a delight to them,
often glorying in the often co^mittings thereof; they neither thinking of their
account, nor their end, wherein yet they might have some happiness; if death
were the dissolving both of their body and soul.

For being rid of their bodies, they should also be rid of their Souls and
Sins; But forasmuch, as it is evident, that the Soul is immortal, there is
left no comfort for the wicked to trust in. Therefore, let such remember ESAV,
Who having once rejected the Blessing, Genesis 27.
could not after obtain it, though he sought it with tears; when it is too
late, with the five Foolish Virgins, they may cry; Lord, Math. 25
Lord, open to us; but the gates of Mercy will be shut, and it will be
answered, I know you not.

Then woe be to the sinful wicked men, that have not power to turn from the
filthy works of this finfull and wretched World, that hinders them from the
blissfull state, and keeps back their Souls from the presence of God: For
when Gods Sergeant Death, shall arrest them, and they shall be summoned to
appear before the Tribunal of the Almighty, with what terrible fear will
that Soul be shaken and smitten, and with how many spears of a piercing
Conscience, is he gored and thrust through; he will the^ begin to think of
the time past, present, and that to come; the time past, he may behold with
astonishment, to perceive how fast it fleeted, and the multitude of sins
therein committed, the which were accounted pleasures, but are now terrors, for
every one of which, he must answer; for as says a Philosopher: An accusing
Conscience is the secret, and most terrible thing that can be, at the
approaching and coming of Death, and infinite and unspeakable are the fears
and griefs it will bring with it; for then he will grieve, that the time of
Repentance has been so ill and lewdly past, he sees the divine Commandments
which he has contemned: he is aflicted, because he sees the inevitable hour
approach, of rendering an account, and of the divine just vengance; he would
tarry still, but he is constrained to depart; he would recover that is past,
but time is not granted? if he look behind him, he sees the course and race
of his whole life led, as a moment of time; if he look before, he beholds
the infinite space of Eternity which expects him, he sorroweth and sobbeth,
because he has lost the joy of everlasting Eternity, which he might have
obtained in so short a time; he tormenteth himself, because he has lost the
ineffable sweetness of perpetual delight, for one sensual, carnal, and
momentany pleasure; he blusheth, considering, that for that substance which is
Wormes-meat, he has despised that which Angels prize so highly; and weighing
the glory of those immortal riches, he is confounded, that he has changed
them for the baseness and vildenesse of Temporal things; but when he casts
his eyes upon things below, and sees the dark and obscure valley of this
world, and beholds above it, the shining brightness of eternal Light, then
he confesses, that all that he loved in this world, was black night and ugly
darkness.

To behold the time present, is as ill; for there he can find nothing but
weakness and pains; his friends either mourning by him, or else not able to
stay with him, to see his torments, which in this life, God has begun to let
him taste; having painful Limbs, dark Eyes, a faultering Tongue, hard
brows, short breath, and a panting heart, hasting to appear before God, who^
he must behold; not as his Father, but a most feirce Judge, whose pure eyes
beheld all his actions, and that through all his life saw nothing but
wickedness, no sorrowing tears to wash away those pollutions; and therefore
that leporous life must receive a heavy condemnation: there will not be any to
speak for him, neither will he be able to answer one word for a thousand; all
those pleasures now stand up to accuse him, and his own Conscience gives in
evidence against him, saying to himself the words of SOLOMON; Pro. 5.
How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and I have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me; woe is me poor wretch, into what a laborinth have my sins led me, how
suddenly, and thinking nothing less, has this hour intrapped me, how has it
rushed upon me, I never dreamed of it; what do now my Honors profit me, what
do now all my Dignities help me, what do all my friends for me, what profit
do now my servants bring me, what fruit do I now reap of all my riches and
goods which I was wont to possess; for now a small piece of ground of seven
foot will contain me, and I must be content with a dwelling in a narrow
Coffin, and with a lodging in a poor Winding sheet; my riches, shall remain
here behind me, which I scraped together with so great toil, and sweating,
others shall enjoy them, and shall spend them on their pleasures, only my
sins, which I have committed in gathering them, wait upon me, that I may
suffer deserved punishment for them; what can I make now of all my Pleasures
and Delights, seeing they are all over-past, only their dregs are my Potion,
which are scruples and bytings of Conscience, which like Thorns do pierce me,
and run thorough my miserable heart.

In what taking is this poor Soul; if time were now again, with what an
austere kind of life would he pass it, how would he shun all those alluring
Sirens, sower sauce finds he for his sweetes, and for a minute of Pleasures,
must possess a world of Woes; nay, woes without end, soon ended those
delights, endless are those miseries.

O thou wretched man! thou that did chose, rather to sit by the Fleshpots of
Egypt, then by enduring a little wearisome travailes, to enter into the
promised Land, which flows with Milk and Honey; See! O see now, what a long
chain of Miseries, those thy short Pleasures have wrought thee. O thou foolish
and senseless! had thou no respect to the death of CHRIST, who dyed to
redeem thee, but that by thy sins, thou must anew Crucify him, and make his
Wounds to bleed afresh? Thou have again, nailed him to the Cross by thy
pollutions! thou have again, pierced his side, not with one, but many spears
of Blasphemy, and as it were piece-meale, tearing him from Heaven! thou have
grinded him, by thy oppressions, which thou did to maintain thy superfluous
delights.

It was his love, that caused him to undergo his Fathers wrath, for thy sake;
but what one sin, have thou left for his? Can thou say, and that truly,
that thou have spared one dish from thy Belly, to feed his hungry Members; or
one Garment from thy excessive apparel, to cloth the naked; or one hours
sleep, to meditate on his miseries: a poor requital of such infinite Love!
Was CHRIST stretched on the Cross, and could thou recount it nothing to
stretch thy self upon thy downy Beds of sin? Did CHRIST suck down Vinegar
and Gall for thee, and could thou without prick of Conscience, surfeit with
overflowne Boles? Was CHRIST crowned with Thorns, and could thou crown thy
self with ease and pleasure? Then now behold, (O thou rich Glutton!) thou, who
would never cast up thine eyes to behold the true happiness, till it was too
late, and consider what the allurements of the Flesh now profit you, which you
then so much delighted in? What is become of your Riches? where are your
Honors? where are your Treasures? where are your Delights? were are your
Joys; the seven years of Plenty are past, and other seven years of Dearth
and scarcity are come, which have devoured up all your Plenty, no memory or
footsteps being left of it. Ioh. 24.
As it is in JOB, Drought and heat, consume the Snow waters; so does the
Grave, those that have Sinned; your Glory is now perished, and your Felicity is
drowned in the sea of Sorrows, not only your delights have not profited you,
which you enjoyed in this World; but they shall be the causes of greater
Torments: witness the Glutton in the Gospel, who fared deliciously every day,
being in Hell; was not that member his Tongue, most tormented, which gave him
the greatest delight in Sin.

Nay, speedily and unexpected, this horror rusheth upon them; for, as
everlasting Felicity, does quickly follow the Godly, in the short race of their
Misery; so everlasting Misery, quickly follows the ungodly, in the short race
of their worldly Felicity.

It were better therefore, for a man to live poorly, being assured of the
bliste of Heaven, then to be deprived thereof, though during life he possess
all worldly riches; for intolerable, are the burdens they bring with them,
seeing that the Scripture says; Where much is given, much is again required:
besides, the memory of the ungodly shall perish, as says JOB; The pitiful
man, Ioh, 24.
shall forget him, the Worm shall feel his sweetness, he shall be no more
remembered, and the Wicked shall be broken like a Tree.

II. Motives and Inducements to true Godliness.
HAving already spoken of the unstability of Man's life, and the wretched estate
the Wicked is in, at the hour of his Death; I will now also set down, some
Motives for encouragements to true Godliness, wherein it shall easily be
discerned, that Godliness excels Wickedness, as far as Light excels
Darkness; It is a thing, both usual and lamentable, to see how men go on in
wickedness, and can neither be drawn, to think of their end by the daily
examples of Mortality; nor won to remember, the infiniteness of Gods Love by
their daily preservations; they call not once to their remembrance, the saying
of the Apostle PAVL, wherein he admonishes them, to work out their Salvation
with fear and trembling; by which, he depriveth them of all kind of security;
and the Prophet JEREMIAH cries unto them and says; Jerem. 22.
O earth! earth! earth! hear the Word of the Lord.

Showing thereby, that howsoever they esteem of themselves, yet, they are but
dust; whose glory is but for a moment, and all their Pleasures, but Deceptio
visus; For that there is no Peace (says the Lord) of the Wicked. Esa. 48.


Wherefore, consider this ye that forget GOD, least he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver you; fear this God, for he is just; love this
God, Psalm. 4.
for he is Merciful; stand in awe and Sin not, commune with your hearts,
consider your ways, make your Peace with him, seek the Lord, Psalm. 2.
whilst he may be found; If his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed
are all those that puts their trust in him.

O taste, and see! how good GOD is, he is a God of Mercies, and delights not in
the Death of a Sinner, as he says; Have I any pleasure at all, Ezech. 18.
that the Wicked should dye, says the Lord; and not that he should return
from his ways and live: he will be found of them that seek him, he has
engaged his word for it, and again he says; Those that come to me, I will
not cast away; nay, he calls with abundance of love: Come unto me, Math.
11.
all ye that are weary and heavy laden with the burden of your sins, and
I will ease you; he is that good Samaritaine, he may power in Wine to make
those wounds of your Sins to smart, but he will again refresh you with the
oil of his Mercies: O then! prostrate thy self at his feet, creep under the
wing of his compassion; for he is slow to wrath, Joel. 2.
and of much mercy, and repents him of the evil: alas! it was thy weakness
that made thee sinful, and thy sins have made the miserable, and thy misery
must now sue to his mercy; if thy misery were without sin, then thou
might plead before his Justice, and his Justice would relieve thee; but for
that it proceeds from sin, approach the bar of his mercy, and thou shall
find the luster thereof to shine through all his works; remember Christ's own
words were: Math. 15.
I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Jsrael; what, though
with the woman in the Gospel, he call thee dog, will thou therefore leave
off thy suit; consider, that the tender mother many times for faults committed
by her child, hides her loving countenance and as it were altogether
rejects it, not for any hatred she bears to the child, but thereby to
indere the obtaining of his favor, and to cause the greater fear of
offending; if then, thou seasing thy suit goes without mercy, whom will thou
accuse: Christ said to Jerusalem, Thy destruction is of thy self, O Jerusalem!
but in me, is thy salvation. Christ came not, to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance.

He is infinitely good, and hurts no man, unless the blame be in himself,
through his own default; for, as the Sun beam, is clear and comfortable in
it self, and so is it to the eye that is sound, yet to a sore eye, it is very
grievous, not through any default in the sun, but by the diseased disposition
of the eye; so albeit, he in himself, be perfectly good, and does nothing but
good; yet to an unrepentant sinner he is grievous and terrible, but if he
return to him by unfeigned repentance, he soon inclines to mercy; as is
evident in that woman, whom Christ so called; upon her humiliation and
acknowledging her self to be no better, she receives this gracious answer; Be
it unto the even as thou will; and again, in the Nenivites; though his decree
was gone out against them, that yet forty days, and Ninivie should be
destroyed, Jonah. 3.
upon their unfeigned repentance, he also repented of that evil, and with
abundance of mercy revoked that sentence; For the eyes of the Lord, ^ Chro. 16
beholds all the earth, to strengthen them, that with a perfect heart believe,
and hope in him; and again, it is said; O how good is the Lord unto them,
Lament. 3
that put their trust in him, and to the Soul that seeks after him; never
was there any forsaken, that put their trust in him: and though the hand of
your Faith, be not strong enough to lay fast hold on him, as JACOB did, who
said; I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me; Genesis 32.
yet, if he perceive thee creeping after him, he will embrace thee, for he
has said; The bruised Reed, Math. 12.
I will not break, and the smoking Flax, I will not quench; that is, he
will not reject the desires of the heart, though in weak measure, if unfeyned,
and what he has promised, is Truth.

He loves not, as man loves; for they in prosperity will regard us, but if
Afflictions or wants come, they regard us not; but so far is our good God
from this, that his beloved Son CHRIST JESUS, took our shape upon him,
suffering Hunger, Cold, Nakedness, Contempt, and Scornings; for his own mouth
testified, That the Foxes had Holes, and the Birds of the Air had Nests, but
the Son of Man, had not whereon to lay his head; showing thereby to us, how
far he was from contemning our Poverty, or refusing us for our wants; let
us therefore, fly to this God, who will not fail us nor forsake us: let us
cast our care upon him, for he cares for us, and set us first seek the
Kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all things else shall
be ministered unto us.

How many have been known, which have gained to themselves, Riches, or
Honors, by unlawful means, that have prospered, but if for a time they have
seemed to do well, their Posterity have come to ruin, and their own
ill-gathered treasure, like a dilating Gangrene, has rotted their own memory,
and consumed every part of their heirs possession; seeming as it were, a Curse
and doom, intayled with the land upon the successor, and so proves, not a
Blessing, but the bane of him that Enjoyed it.

They may for a time, flourish like a Bay Tree, but suddenly they fade and
their place is no where to be found. Oh therefore! that they would consider,
what great evils, and how many inconveniences, this small prosperity brings
with it, they should find this love of Riches, more to afflict, by desire, then
to delight, by use: for it inwrappeth the Soul, in diverse temptations, and
binds it in infinite cares, it allureth it with sundry delights, provokes it
to sin, and disturbeth the quiet, no less of the body then of the Soul, and
that which is greater; Riches are never gotten, without troubles, nor
possessed, without care, nor lost, without grief; but that which is worst,
they are seldom gathered, without sin and offense to GOD? Why then, should
man be so greedy of this Worlds pelf, life being so short, and death
following at our heels? What need is there of so great Provision, for so
short a Journey? What would man do with so great Riches; especially, seeing
that the less he has, the more lightly and freely he may walk, and when he
shall come to the end of his Pilgrimage, if he be poor, his estate shall not
be worser then rich men's, who are laden with much gold; the Grave shall both
alike contain them, as says JOB; Job. 3.
The small and great are there, and the Servant is free from his Master.

Nay, it is better with the poor, then with the rich; for they shall feel
less grief in parting with this trash and pelf of the World, and a smaller
account is to be rendered before GOD; whereas on the other side, Rich men leaves
their Mountains of Gold, with great grief of heart, which they adored as GOD;
neither are they, without exceeding gerat hazard and danger, in rendering an
account for them: Besides, as he came forth of his Mothers Womb, Eccles. 5.
so naked shall he return, to go as he came; and shall take nothing of his
labor which he may carry away in his hand. Psalm. 7.
Therefore a little that a Righteous man has, is better then the Riches of
many wicked. I have seen says DAVID, in the same Psalm; The wicked in great
power, and spreading himself like a green Bay tree, yet he passed away, and
lo he was not; I sought him but he could not be found, the transgressors
shall be destroyed together, the end of the Wicked shall be cut off; but mark
the upright man, and behold the Just, for the end of that man is Peace.

Thrice blessed then is that man, that fears God, and they whose God the Lord
is, and he that sots his fear always before his eyes; Job. 5.
For they shall be delivered out of six troubles, and in the seventh, no
evils shall touch them, in Famine, he shall redeem them from Death, and in
War, from the power of the sword, they shall come to the Grave in a full age,
like as a shocke of Corn comes in, in his season: They may for a time be
bungry, but they shall be filld, for God himself will feed them with blessings
from above and from beneath. Even natural reason will not suffer them to
doubt, for he that gives meat in due season, to Ants and Worms of the Earth,
will he suffer Man to famish, who night and day, serve and obey him, as CHRIST
himself says in MATTHEW; Math. 6.
Behold the Fowls of the heaven, for they sow not, neither reap nor carry into
Barnes, yet your heavenly Father feeds them, are ye not much better then
they; This happiness moved DAVID to invite us to serve the Lord, saying; O fear
the Lord! ye that be his Saints, Psalm 34
for they that fear the Lord lack nothing, the Lions do lack and suffer
hunger, but they that feeke the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is
good.

The ungodly man, when he is full of wealth dies for hunger, and when they sit
even up to the lips in water, yet they are slain with thirst, as the Poets in
times past, fabled of TANTALVS. But though many and great be the troubles of
the Righteous, yet the Lord delivers them out of all. For the eyes of the
Lord is over the Righteous, and his Ear is open to their cry, but the Face of
the Lord is against them that do evil, Psalm. 3 4
to cut off their Remembrance from the Eatth.

Who would be unwilling then, to suffer ignominies and scornings, rather then
with the wicked, to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season; Revel. 2^.
God himself will wipe all tears from their eyes, he will give them Joys
for their Sorrows, as he says; Blessed are ye that now Weep, for ye shall
Rejoice, troubles in this life, are badges of Gods Children, Whom the Lord
loves, Prove. 3.
he chastises, and corrects every Son that he chooses with Patience;
Luke, 21.
Therefore, possess your Souls, John, 15.
and remember who it is, that said; You are not of the World, as I am not of
the World, the world hates you, because it hated me first, if you were of the
world, the world would love you.

Oh, blessed Sufferings! that makes us like to God himself, if we had the
Wisdom of SOLOMON, the Treasure of CRoeSVS, and the long life of METHVSALEM,
and out of the favor and love of God, our Wisdom were Foolishness, for to
know him, is perfect wisdom, our Riches were dross; for riches will not
avayle in the day of Wrath, and that life, so long and wickedly led, no better,
then a man that dreams he is a King, honored of all and wanting nothing,
when waking, he finds himself hated of all, and wanting all things.

III. Of the Peace of a good Conscience, and the Joyful end of the Godly.
SOLOMON, having set himself to behold all things that were under the Sun, and
having taken to himself, all that could be delightful, for what can he do
more that comes after the King, at last concludes; Eccles. 2.
That all the days of Man, are sorrows, and his travailes, grief; therefore
says he; I hated life, for all is Vanity and vexation of Spirit; and
perceiving how apt men were, to follow what delights this world could afford
them, scoffs at their folly, and by way of derision says: Rejoice O young man
in thy Youth, Eccles. 11
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, yet would he not let
them go on thus, but gives them an Jtem, saying; But know, that for all these
things, God will bring thee to Judgment, for though, says he: A Sinner do
evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged; yet surely I know, that it
shall be well with them, that fear God.

These Caveats, the godly man places before his remembrance, least he should
fall into errors, and making his life of no value to him, he despises all
things, only aiming at that, may make him happy, which is, a good Conscience,
for that will bring him peace at the last; death being to a godly man, the
ending of Sorrows, and the beginning of Joys; he does then begin to live with
God, when he dies to the World, Eccles. ^.
as it is said in Ecclesiastes; Who so fears the Lord, it shall go well with
him at the last, and in the day of his Death, he shall be blessed.

And St. JOHN, was commanded to Write: Blessed are the Dead, Revel. 14.
that dye in the Lord, even so says the Spirit; that they may rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. How can that man be discouraged, that
hears this of the Lord, in the hour of his Death, when he finds himself
hasting thither, where he shall receive that, which he has all his lifetime
desired.

And Saint AVGVSTINS, speaking of the Death of a Good man, says; He that
desires to be dissolved, and be with Christ, dies not Patiently, but lives
Patiently, and dies delightsomely, and it may be said; That like a Swan, he
dies singing, yiedling the glory to God which calls him. With what joy, does
that Soul behold his end, who has all his Lifetime possessed a good
Conscience, nothing fearful, can present it self before him, he sees all his
sins, not of a Crimson die, but White as wool, washed by the blood of
Christ; he beholds him, not as his Judge, but his Savior and Mediator, his
Judge is, his Brother, God in Christ is become his Father, he has no debts to
pay, Christ Jesus on the Cross has Cancelled the hand writing that was
against him, and has not only made him free, but also an heir of the
Kingdom of Heaven. The presence of Death, is not terrible to him, for he
fears not Death, because he feared GOD, and he that fears him need fear
none other: he fears not Death, because he feared Life, but fear of Death,
are the effects of an evil Life; he fears not Death, because through all
his life he learned to dye, and prepared himself to dye; but a man prepared
and provident, need not fear his Enemy; he fears not Death, because so long
as he lived, he sought for those things that might help him, that is, for
Virtues and good Works; he fears not Death, because to a Righteous man,
Death is not death, but a sleep, it is not Death, but an end of all labors,
it is not Death but away unto life, and a Ladder unto Paradise; for he
knows, that Death; has lost all the bitterness of Death, after it has
passed through the veins of Life, and that it has received the sweetness of
life: he fears not the presence of Devils, because he has CHRIST his
defender and Captain: he fears not the horror of the grave, because he
knows that his body is sown a corrup tible body, but shall rise again, in
incorruptible body, often boasting in the strength he has gained by Christ,
saying with cheerfulness of spirit; O Death, where is thy sting? 2. Cor. 15.
O Grave, where is thy victory? The strong man, death comes not upon him
unawares; for he has laid up in store for himself a good foundation against
this time, 1. Tim. 6.
which was to come, that he might lay hold on Eternal life.

Even the breast plate of righteousness, Ephesians. 5.
the shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit,
having his loins girt about with verity, and his feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace, what hope now has his enemy of any
advantage, though helped by the weakness of his own flesh: Death was ever
expected, and therefore provided for: he always lived as in the presence of
GOD, having a strict eye over all his actions, and though now Satan bend all
his Forces against him, because he has but a small time, before his siege
must be raised, and therefore presents that before him which he dearest loved,
his Wife, Children, Father, and Friends, with his whole Estate, Honor, Riches,
Youth, Health, Strength, and Life it self, thereby thinking to shake his hold;
for this subtle enemy knows, they are not lost without grief, which are
possessed with Love; yet fayles he of his purpose, for it is certain, he that
in this life knows of fewest delights, least of all other, fears Death, so
he having never prized them otherwise then they were in themselves, parts
from them with the less trouble, yet weak nature struggling with him, may a
little dazzle him, but calling to mind the Words of his Savior, who says:
Mark. 10.
He that forsakes Father, Mother, Wife, Children, house and lands, for my
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, he gains strength, and with the greater
joy his Soul answers? Oh sweet JESUS I shall I not willingly forgo all these,
who for my sake, suffered the Viols of thy Fathers wrath due to me for sin,
to be powered out upon thee, and in thy body endured that, which I deserved? It
was for my sake, thou wast borne in a Stable, and laid in a Cratch; for me,
thou flying into Egypt, livedst seven years in banishment; for me, thou did
fast, thou did watch, thou did run hither and thither, thou did sweat
Water and Blood, thou did Weep, and thou did prove by experience, those
miseries which my sins deserved; and yet thou wast without sin, neither was
there guile found in thy mouth, neither had thou offended, but wast offended;
for me, thou wast taken, forsaken of thine, denied, sold, beaten with fists,
spet upon, mocked, whipped, crowned with Thorns, reviled with blasphemies,
hanged upon the Cross, Dead, and Buried, thou were not only forsaken of all
external things, but also of the Divine comfort, as thy own Mouth testified,
when thou cryedst out, My God, my God, Math. 27.
why bast thou forsaken me; Oh the height of Loved Oh the depth of
unmeasurable humility! Oh the greatness of Mercy! Oh the bottomless Pit of
incomprehensible Goodness: Oh Lord! if I be so greatly indebted to thee, because
thou have redeemed me, what do I not owe thee, for the manner by which thou
have redeemed me: thou have redeemed me with most great dolours! with
contumelies, and ignominies, not to be borne; insomuch, that thou wast made a
reproach of men, and the scorn of the whole world; through thy reproaches,
thou have honored me; through thy accusations, thou have defended me; through
thy blood, thou have washed me; through thy death, thou have raised me; and
through thy tears, thou have freed me, from everlasting weeping and gnashing
of teeth: thine were the Wounds, that healed my sores: thine was the back,
that bare my sorrows; thine was the prize, that quit my scores: thou assumedst
my flesh, to redeem me here, and thou raignest as King, to crown me
hereafter. Thus by those miserable Torments, thou did free me from all evil;
and shall I be unwilling to suffer the deprivation of a little happiness, and
the enduring of a few pains to come unto thee, who have thus dearly purchased
me for thy self: these Meditations so ravished his soul, that with aint PAVL
he thinks himself in the third Heaven, he has drunk so freely of the River
of Paradise, one drop of which is greater then the Ocean, which alone is able
to quench the thirst of the whole World, that he loatheth these puddell Waters,
accounting all things but dross and dung in respect of Christ, all is to him
in comparison, no more then the light of a Candle, is to the glorious beams of
the Sun, he is now so far from esteeming either them, or life, that he
desires to be dissolved and be with Christ, he longs for the day of his
dissolution, life being to him a Prison, and with often groans and sighs,
cryoth, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; and with DAVID he says: O how I long
to appear before GOD. If life were offered him, with all the pleasures
thereof, he would despise it, for he is fitted for God, he is no man for the
World, his Soul has too exactly looked into the worth of it, to be deceived
with all the glithering shows thereof, the which he finds to be vain and
fleeting, and nothing permanent in this Life.

IIII. Of the deferring of Repentance, how dangerous it is, and of the
deceiveablenesse of worldly Pleasures.
HAving now seen the quiet Happiness, and happy Blessedness of the Godly, at
the hour of his Death, me thinks it should encourage every man to prepare
himself for his end in the time of Prosperity, least when the time of changing
shall come, they be found naked and bare, and so lie open to all the assaults
and batteries of Satan, many there, be to whom the Day of Judgment seems
terrible, not remembering the day of their Death, which is the first Judgment,
the which whosoever passes, on such the second shall have no power; as Saint
JOHN says in the Revelation: The deferring of Repentance proves dangerous. Yet
some inreligious man will say; When I am come to old Age, I will run to the
remedy of Repentance: Dare man's frailty presume thus much of himself, seeing
he has not one day of all his Life, in his own power, for though God has
promised Pardon to the Penitent; yet he has not promised to morrow to a
sinner: therefore, whilst it is called to day, Hebr. 5.
hear his voice and hearden not your hearts, least you enter into temptation.
Follow the counsel of that Kingly Preacher, make no tarrying to turn unto the
Lord; Eccles. 5.
and put not off from day to day, for soda nly shall his wrath come, and in the
time of vengeance he shall destroy thee: besides, there is another evil; sin
having no restraint, but free liberty, to run on in his own current; how
dangerous does it prove, and how hard is it to stop the course thereof, being
once grown to a custom: Is it not usually known, that he that drives a
Nail into a Post, fasteneth it at the first stroke that he gives it, but more
firmly at the second stroke, but so fast at the third, that it can hardly be
pulled out again; and the oftener he strikes it, the faster it sticks, and
is pulled out again, with the greater difficulty: So in every one of man's
wicked actions, vice is driven deeply into their souls, as if it were with a
Mallet, and there it sticks so fast, that it can by no means be pulled
forth, but by the bitter tears of Repentance, which are seldom and very
hardly found; this same thing our Savior showed in the raising of LAZARUS,
being four days dead; whom he called forth, Ioh. 1.
with groaning of spirit: whereas he raised others that were dead, with far
easier tokens of difficulty; signifying to us thereby, how great a miracle it
is, that God should convert one buried in the custom of sinning; yet, not
considering these things, how does time pass on, and what numberless sins
are committed without fear to offend, or care to provoke him to anger; through
whose Gates thou must enter, before whose feet thou must lie prostrate, will
thou nill thou; whose mercy thou must sue and deplore; Thou art piunged in the
Gulf of sin, he only must raise theee? thou art wounded, he only can healt
thee? thou art sick to the death, he only can give thee life? Oh then, fear
to offend him! of whose help thou stand in need every moment, Isa. 30.
tremble to provoke him to anger, who has for unrepentant sinness, prepared a
deep and large pit, the Pillar thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of
the Lord, like a stream of brimstone does kindle it; beware of going on in
delights, without remembering your end, lest you be like the Fishes, that sports
themselves so long in the delightsome streams of the River Jordan; that
unawares they plunge themselves in Mare mertuum, from whence there is no
Redemption; many are the baytes and snares, which are laid for man in this
life, covered over with glittering wealth, and delightsome Pleasures, but bare
these deceits, and cause them to appear in their own likeness, and thou shall
find this World to be a Casket of sorrows and grievances, a School of
Vanity, a laborinth of Errors, a dungeon of Darkness, a Marketplace of
Cousonages, a way beset with Thieves, a ditch full of mud, and a Sea
continually tossed and troubled with storms and Tempests: what other thing is
the world, but a barren Land, a field full of Thistles and Weeds, a Wood full
of Thorns, a flourishing Garden, but bringing forth no fruit, a River of
Tears, a Fountain of Cares, a sweet poison; A Tragedy pleasantly framed, a
delightful Phrenzie; the Worlds rest has labor, the Security of it without
ground, the fear of it is without cause, the Labor of it without fruit, the
Tears without purpose, and the purposes without success, the Hope of it is
vain, the joy feyned, and the Sorrow true, the Glory of this World, is but the
singing of Sirens, sweet, but a deadly Potion, a Viper, artificially painted
without, but within full of venomous poison: If the World fawn upon thee, it
does it that it may deceive thee; if it Exalt thee, it does it that thy fall
may be the greater; if it (...) thee merry, it does it that it afterward with
sorrow may break thy heart; it gives all her goods with a mixture of
incomparable heaviness and griefs, and that with the greatest usurie: if a
Son be borne to thee and soon after dye, thy sorrow will be seven fold
greater then was thy Joy, the thing lost, more afflicts, then found joyeth;
Sickness more excruciateth, then Health gladdeth; Injury more tormenteth, then
Honor contenteth; to conclude, what good things are found in the World, which
are not counterfeit, and what (...) vill which are not (...) deed; If these
things he so indeed as they are, wherefore should man desire to stay any longer
in this land of Egypt to gather stubble, who would not fly out of this
Babylon, who would not desire to be delivered from this fire of Sodom and
Gomorrah: seeing therefore, that the World is beset with so many snares, and
that so many downfals and breakneckes are in the way, and the flame of Vices
do so burn us, who at any time can be secure and safe, as the Wise man
says; Prove. 6.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt, or can a man
go upon Coals, Eccles. 13.
and his feet not burnt; he that touches Pitch, shall be defiled with the
same; estrange then thy mind from these ycie Vanities; listen and thou shall
hear CHRIST, who sees the danger thou art falling into, calling unto thee,
that he may teach thee a way to prevent thy hurt, and saying; Behold, I stand
at the door and knock, run and open to this Physician of thy Soul. O
refuse him not, neither delay his entrance, for thou art sick, and he will
give thee to drink of the water of Life, neither for money, nor by measure,
but freely, and taking thy fill, without limitation, and freely too, being of
his own Grace and Mercy.

Can you then, knowing to whom you are to open; stand with delays; as I cannot
yet, I will anon, but this I cannot yet, I will anon; is deferred so long, that
this heavenly ghest goes away without a Lodging, by reason of which, he will
hardly be brought again, without many tears: Oh then I be ready at the first
knock to open; I mean the first good motion, so shall you receive a ghest,
whose company is sweeter, then the honey and the honey Comb; On heart! more
hard then stone, that can refuse him; if considered who it is, it is CHRIST,
the well-beloved Son of his Father, it is he, in whom, God the Father is so
well pleased, that all thy sins are forgiven, being covered with the robe of
his Righteousness; it is he, that suffered Rebukes, Buffetings, Scornings,
Spittings on, and at the last, death; I, and that, the most cursedst death,
even the death of the Cross, as it is written: Cursed are every one that hang
on a Tree. Galat. 3.


These things being so, have you not hearts harder then an Adamant, thus to
oppose his entrance: Oh do not defer this purchase to the time to come, for
one minute of this time (which now vainly slydeth from thee) is more precious,
then the Treasure of the whole world.

Be like unto a wise Merchant, Math. 13.
that having found a precious Pearl, goes and sels all he has to purchase it;
what thing more precious then the Son of God, which here offers himself
unto thee? why art thou so slack in giving him entertainment, think thou
him not worthy, because thou beholdest him in his Humility, poor and despised,
or does thy flesh puff thee up with a conceit beyond thy merits, if it do,
cast thy eyes upon thy self, and consider what thou wast before thou wast
borne, what thou art now, being borne, and what thou shall be after Death:
before thou wast borne, thou wast filthy and obsceane matter, not worthy to be
named; now thou art dung, covered over with snow, and a while after thou shall
be meat for Worms: why then, should thou be proud, seeing thy Nativity is
sin, thy Life misery, and thy End putrefaction and corruption.

Having considered thus with thy self, tell me if thou have not the greater
reason to open with the more celerity, Semel.
he of himself, being willing to pass by these thy Infirmities, would
thou not account that man most heathenish, who having a Friend, that had
endured seven years imprisonment to keep him from that bondage, and at the
last paid his Ransom, at so dear a rate, as thereby his estate were for ever
ruined, otherwise he himself to endure perpetual Slavery: if this man, I
say, should come and knock at the door of his Friend desiring admittance, and
acquainting him, with who it was, and he for this his love, should seem not
to know him, but bid him be gone and bar the door against him; I know thou
would account him most inhumane and ungrateful, Isa. 5 3.
and yet how far short comes this of CHRIST'S love and bounty to thee, for
the chastisement of thy Peace, was laid upon him, and with his stripes thou
wast healed.

O wretched Soul! to loose such a Friend, Oh unhappie man! by this opposition,
to deprive thy self of all Happiness: for what greater Happiness can thou
have, then to enjoy that Fatherly providence by which God preserves his, what
sweeter Delights, then the Divine Grace, the Light of wisdom, the
consolations of the holy Ghost, the Joy and Peace of a good Conscience, the
good event of Hope, the true liberty of the Soul, the inward peace of the
Heart, to be heard in Prayer, to be helped in Tribulations, to be provided for
temporal necessities, and to be aided and to taste of Heavenly Comforts in
death: whilst I seriously meditate upon these things, my Soul is as in a
Rapture, me thinks I see CHRIST JESUS coming in the Clouds, with thousand of
Angels about him, the Heavens and Earth flying away at his presence, millions
of damned Souls, yelling and crying to the Rocks and Mountains, to fall upon
them, and to cover them, from the fierceness of his sight; The Devils quaking
and trembling expecting the denouncing of their Torments; and the Joys the
Godly have at that hour: For as it is a day of horror and terror to the
Wicked, so is it a day of joy and gladness to the godly; for as the body of
the one rests in the earth, without taste of those miseries it has deserved;
even so the Righteous, by this sleep of Death, is deprived of this
blessedness in their body, until corruption has put on incorruption, and
mortality has put on immortality; and that they are wakened by the sound of
the Trumpet; which su^moneth them to appear before CHRIST; when then their
souls become again reunited to their bodies, and both with Joy, beholds the
face of God, not as their Judge, for he is their Brother; and therefore can
expect from him, nothing but mercy; he has purchased them for himself, with
no meaner a (...) price, then his own precious blood; and there fore, must
needs be to him acceptable, this is their year of Iubilee, this is the
Marriage of the Lamb, with him they enter, Revel. 21.
and he is their God, and they are his Sons; they now behold his face, and
his Name is in their foreheads; They now, receive the fullness of their Joy,
Revel. 22.
they now, possess that happiness their Souls thirsted for; they now, enjoy
the reward of all their labors: this blessedness truly considered on,
affoordeth more pleasures then the tongue of Man can utter, or his Soul
remaining in the Prison of his flesh, is able to receive, without crying out
with the Spouse in the Canticles: Cant. 2.
I am sick of Love. It is no marvel, that the Church cries; Come Lord JESUS,
come quickly: for in this his coming, consists all happiness. Here is the
final end of all miseries and sins; it only, prooveth the waters of Mara to
the ungodly; it is terrible to none, but the unrepentant, even they who had
their eyes sealed from beholding any other Happiness, then what tended to their
pleasures; They which took to them the Timbrell and the Harp, and rejoiced in
the sound of the Organs, they spend their days in wealth, and were of them
that said: Speak no more to us in the name of the Lord; they said to God,
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the
Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we pray
unto him? Now alas! but too late, they see their own follyes; now without hope
of redress, they behold their own miseries; no marvel, though the mentioning
of the day of Judgment, be terrible to such a man; who by his wickedness,
deprives himself of all those Blessednesses; for ill will it prove, if the day
of Death, be not always in his remembrance; which is the first judgment, and
wherein he must stand either convicted, or acquitted; either condemned for his
bad works, or justified for his good, whereof he can have little hope, unless
he meet his Judge in the way, and make his peace with him, whilst he may be
found; yet, there is time to furnish thy lamp with Oil, yet the Gates of Mercy
are not shut, yet thou may so cry, as thou may be satisfied with this
gracious answer; Come ye blessed of my Father; Whereas, if thou defer thy
Repentance from time to time, putting far from thee the evil day, if thou
do not expect the coming of thy Lord, but become drunken, and fall to smiting
thy fellow Servants, if thou hide thy Talent in the Earth, which God in his
goodness has bestowed on thee to better uses: Thy Lord will come when he is
not looked for, Math. 21.
and in a time when thou art not aware of, and cast thee into utter Darkness,
where shall be wayling and gnashing of Teeth, giving thee a just hyre for thy
careless security: It is not thy pleasures, that can defer thy calamities;
it is not the enlarging thy Barnes, that can resist thy misery; the greatness
of Friends will not avail; thy Judge is blind to Bribery, and deaf to all
but Justice, if his wrath be not appeased before he come to give sentence, it
will then be too late to expect mercy.

V. Comforts for the weak Christian; and to beware of Backesliding.
OUR most subtle malicious Enemy retayning still the hatred he bare our first
Parents at the beginning, seeks to bring us into ever lasting Perdition, and
so to gain us to himself by one means or other; to a man nouzeled in Sin,
he uses no other ways, then the lulling him still the faster asleep in
worldly pleasures; the Miser he persuades still to covet Riches, thereby
making his Gold his God; by which means he fills up the measure of Wrath
against the day of Judgment: the Adulterer he draws on more easily, by the
delightsomnesse of the sin, telling him that stolen bread is sweet, Prove. 5.
and hid waters pleasant: the Proud man, he has hud-wincked, not to think of
time, but to account all loft, but what is spent in decking and setting
himself forth in the Devils Feathers: Thus all sins he lessens, that so he
may cause man to defer his repentance till the last, then the which, there is
nothing more dangerous: but when he meets a child in religion, who is glad to
suck milk from the sweet paps of Gods word, him he so to sceth and shakes,
with telling him of his own unworthines, and the severity of Gods Justice,
that the poor Soul is ready to leave his hold and to fall into desperation,
not daring scarce to look up to Gods Mercy; but if his weakness become strength
and he be raised by Faith, then he strives to cause him to become weary and
backward in well doing,

Therefore, thou O man I that would do the good thou do not, but through
the deceiveablenesse. of thy flesh stands loytering, and with SALOMONS
fluggard cries; Yet a little sleep, a little slumber; a wake and behold
CHRIST coming in the Clouds. Stand up and gird thy self like a man, lift up
thy eye of Faith and behold thy Savior, whose merits plead for thee? See him
dying for thee, and thereby paying thy debts? See thy Judge a just one, and
therefore will not require that again, which Christ has already satisfied,
he has beheld the thoughts of thine heart, and found thy desires, are to
serve him concerning, the inward Man, and though thou did fall into sins
most offensive to the eyes of his Divine Majesty, yet he knows, that the
evil thou did hate, that thou did: But it was a Law in thy Members that
led thee captive to the Law of sin: Romans 7.
then if as a Captive forced, it was no longer thou, but sin that dwelled in
thee.

Let the remembrances of these Mercies, waken thy Soul from the drowsinesse of
Sin, and remember who has said: Awake, Ephesians. 5.
thou that sleep and arise from the Dead, and CHRIST shall give thee light?
He calls thee? He bids thee awake, let not these sweet calls, strike
thee dead, Math. 20.
as his presence did the Keepers, who became astonished, and were as dead men;
but rather let that voice be of as great power to thee, as it was to LAZARUS;
not only to raise thee from the sleep, John. 11.
but also from the death of Sin. And be as ready to entertain this love as
THOMAS was, who no sooner touched his Savior, but cried out: John. 20.
My Lord, and my God: Neither deceive thy self, with a soothing conceit of
what is not in thee; I^th. 7.
For, the Tree is known by the fruit; for men cannot gather Grapes of Thorns,
nor Figs of Thistles: A good man, out of the good Treasure of his Heart, Math.
7.
brings forth good things, and an evil man, out of the evil Treasure of his
heart, brings forth evil things; so that howsoever thou may seem to the
World, yet as a shadow does always follow the body, so fear and desperation
will at all times, and in all places, wait upon an evil Conseience.

Let not thy Faith be as a House built upon the Sands, which will shake with
every blast of Temptations, or Afflictions, but found it upon the Rock CHRIST
JESUS; against which, whatsoever beats shall return with a greater repulse
to it self, as not being able to move it; and having once attained this
perfection, take heed of recoyling, for CHRIST says; He that lays hand upon
the Plough and looks back, is not meet for the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke. 9.


What though the way to Heaven be narrow, and full of Difficulties? Will thou
not therefore, being entered, persevere? Who would wish or desire to walk in a
way strowed with Roses, and planted with diverse fragrant Flowers, if the
assured end of it be death; and who would refuse a rough and difficult path,
that leads unto life; is it not commonly seen, that many men to attain to
Preferment, run into most apparent dangers, and hazard the loss of their life;
(nay I know thou would do it thy self) and shall it be troublesome and
grievous to thee, to do that for thy Soul, which thou refuses not to do for
thy Body? Shall it seem a great thing unto thee, to suffer a little trouble
here, that hereafter thou may escape eternal torment? What would not the
rich covetous man buried in Hell, willingly do, if he might have license to
come into the World again, that he might amend his errors? Is it meet that
thou should do less now, then he would do; seeing, that if thou do
persever in thy wickedness, the same torments remain for thee.

He that runs a Race leaves not till he come to the Gole; So run as you
may obtain: Remember LOTS Wife, who looking back became a Pillar of Salt; so
take heed, lest thou by looking back upon the vanities of this life, forget
the care of thy Soul, commanded thee by God; and so of his child, become not a
Pillar of Salt, but a child of Perdition; a man having much riches, is still
^^vetous of more, and what wealth to be compared to the Soul? A thing so great
in it self; that what gayneth he, that gets the whole world, and loses
his Soul; even as great a purchase, as he, who having with much Labor and
great charge, obtained a precious lewell, straight gives it for a trifle.

Nay, were it so, it were the less, for that were but the undoing of the body,
this the loss of the Soul; that friends again may raise, this is a loss
irrecoverable: Wherefore, think no pains wearisome, no labors irksome, nor
any troubles grievous, to attain true happiness; For our light afflictions,
2. Cor. 4.
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen; for the things which are seen, are Temporal, but
the things which are not seen, are Eternal: wherefore setting all hindrances
apart, with cheerfulness of spirit, take up the Cross of CHRIST, and
encourage thy feeble spirit, with the saying of the Apostle PAVL: The troubles
of this Life, are not comparable to the joys that shall be hereafter: 2.
Cor. 6.
having therefore these promises, cleanse your selves from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of GOD.

VI. That Man ought to be won to follow Godliness, in respect of the
Eternal Happiness.
HAving now set before thee, Deuteronomy. 30.
Life and good. Death and evil: I defire thee, to choose Life, that both thou
and thy seed may live, for having beheld, the deceiveablenes of worldly
pleasures, and how this momentany felicity is attended on, by sorrow and her
Confederates, me thinks thou should be weary of this house of Clay,
situated in a Wilderness of miseries, which hourly produces Monsters, that
ravenously seeks to prey on thy destruction: and withdrawing thy mind from
these fleeting delights, elevate thy thoughts to Heaven, and contemplate with
thy self, of those Celestial pleasures; note the beauty of the place, the
gloriousness of the company, and the durablenesse of that Happiness, which is
Eternity; for the beauty of this place, this Heavenly Jerusalem, look into
the Revelation, Revel. 21.
and thou shall find; It has the glory of GOD, the light thereof to be like a
Jasper stone, clear as Crystal; glorious must it needs be, when the Wall is
of Jasper, and the City of pure gold, clear like glass, and the Foundations
of the Wall garnished with all manner of precious stones; the twelve Gates were
twelve Pearls; every several gate, was of one pearl; Revel. 15
for the company, there are Angels, and Martyrs, with the four and twenty
Elders, that offer up golden Vials full of odours, which are the Prayers of
Saints; but, which is chief of all delights, there will be GOD himself who
will be a Looking-glass to the eyes of his Elect, Music to their ears,
Nectar and Ambrosia to their Palates, odoriferous Balsamum to their Smelling;
There thou shall see, the variety and beauty of the seasons, the pleasantness
of the Spring, the brightness of Summer, the fruitfulness of Autumn, and the
quiet of Winter, and there shall be whatsoever may delight thy senses, and
every faculty of thy Soul; there will be, the fullness of light to thy
understanding, the abundance of Peace to thy will, and the contitinuance of
Eternity to thy memory; there, the Wisdom of SOLOMON, shall seem ignorance;
there, the beauty of ABSASOM shall seem deformity; there, the strength of
SAMPSOM, shall seem weakness; there, the long life of METHVSALEM, shall
seem a span; there, the Riches of CRoeSVS, shall seem dross: for there, thou
may worthily call the treasures of all Emperors and Kings, stark poverty and
beggary.

These things being thus? Why should thou O man! delight to beg, and live
of Alms, when thou shall find such abundance in Heaven, look upon thy self
and consider, how the Lord has bestowed upon thee a countenance of Majesty,
with thy face erected toward Heaven, and thy eyelids to move upwards, thereby
to teach thee, that thou were not formed, to spend thy days in the moiling
cares of this troublesome world, but to aspire to that true Happiness, that
makes all the other Misery.

Mark the Sea-mans Needle, whose nature of that Iron is, that in what part it
has touched the Loadstone, that part always looks toward the North, and
remains unsettled, till it has found the Pole: even so has God created Man,
and has infused into him a natural inclination and readiness, that he
should always look to his Maker, as to the Pole and only true happiness.

When the Children of Jsrael in the Wilderness, were stung by fiery Serpents,
none could live, but those, that looked up to that brazen Serpent, which MOSES
erected; so no man being stung by those fiery Serpents of sin, can live; but
those, that by the eye of Faith look up to CHRIST JESUS, beholding him, dying
upon the Cross, and applying his death and merits, to their otherwise
deadly-wounded Soul, whereby that Ulcer is cured and they assured of life.

After ADAM had sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.
GOD sent him to Till the Earth, out of which he was taken; but the soul of
man was infused into him by the breath of God; Genesis 2.
let therefore the cogitations of thy heart and Soul be turned toward him,
from whence it had the being, seeing, as says Saint AUGUSTINE: There is
nothing more blessed, than this life, where there is no fear of Poverty, no
infirmity of Sickness, no deceipts of the Devil, neither Death of body or
Soul, but, a pleasant life through the gift of Immortality, then there shall
be no mischiefs, no discords, but all agreement; because there shall be one
concord, of all the Saints, peace and joy embrace all things.

What is it, that thou can desire here upon Earth, that thou shall not there
freely possess? If thou defirest pleasures, lift up thy heart and see how
delightful that Good is, that contains in it, the delight and pleasure of
all good things? If this life created does please thee, how much more shall
that life please thee, which has created all things? If health given make thee
merry, how much more shall he make thee merry, that gives all health? If the
knowledge of the Creatures be sweet, how much more sweeter shall the Creator
himself be? if beauty be acceptable unto thee, it is he, at whose beauty, the
Sun and Moon admire; the glory of which, was so great, that when MOSES went
up to the Mount, though he saw but the hinder part thereof, his Face became so
bright and shining, that the Israelites could not behold him; what should I
stand longer to set forth the beauty of that, which if I had the tongue of Men
and Angels, I could not do; for as the Apostle faith; 1. Cor. 2.
Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

Will thou then choose with the Prodigal Son, to eat Husks with the Swine,
rather than to return home to thy Heavenly Father, will not all these delights
move thee, nor cause thee to desire it; it may be thou art timorous, knowing
thy own unworthiness; but be encouraged by the words of thy Savior, who
seeing thy faint heartedness, says: Fear not little flock, Luke. 15.
for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Thou art one of the
flock, and this Kingdom is prepared for thee; why do thou not long to take
possession of thy own, pu chased for thee by CHRIST, who though he be thy
Elder brother; yet thou shall be co-heyre with him, whose love, thou may see
expressed, by his infinite care; for in his Prayer to his Father for his
Disciples, he remembered thee, when he said, I pray not for these alone, John.
117.
but for those that shall believe on me, that they may all be one as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, and the glory which thou have given me, I
have given them, that they may be one even as we are one, I will also, that
those thou have given me, be with me.

Can thou now have any doubts or waverings in thy Mind? Repair unto him, and
in true humility of Soul confess thy self unto him, and say; Father I have
sinned against Heaven and against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called
thy Son: This done, doubt not but he will embrace thee in the Arms of his
Mercy, the Ring and Robe shall be brought, and the fatted Calfe shall be killed:
for there is more joy in Heaven, over one sinner that repents, than of ninety
and nine just persons: It is a place prepared for thee, before the Foundations
of the World were laid. O happy Soul! that art made possessor of this
blessedness! How art thou able to behold any thing in this life, with true
contentment, having seriously beheld this; though thou did daily suffer
torments, if for a long time thou did endure Hell it self, so that at the
length thou might see CHRIST in his glory, and enjoy this blessedness, and
have society with the Saints; were it not worthy all Sufferings? All Bitterness?
and all Crosses, that thou might be partaker of all this good. At last, what
though the world account not of thee, but deride thee for thy virtuous living?
Remember ELIZEVS the Prophet of the Lord, who was mocked and called Bald-head,
in contempt; Resolve with thy self, no sooner to enter into the path of
Godliness, but such is the malitiousnesse of thy Mortal Enemy, that he will
set his members in the way agaiust thee; that if it be possible, they may
hinder thy proceedings, and turn thee back again into the broad way of
Errors, that leads to destruction.

No sooner did SAVL Prophecy, but the wicked and the men of BELIAL, had him in
derision, who better affected, then PAVL the Apostle, whilst he remained a
Persecutor of CHRIST in his members, and carried with him the authority of the
High Priests, to strengthen his proceedings; but no sooner was he converted,
but how many enemies had he, which straight sought his destruction, hayling him
to Prisons, to Scourging, and to Stonings to death. Yet so far were they from
being disheartened by this, as that they rejoiced that they were counted worthy
to suffer for the name of CHRIST.

When we enter into Baptism, we profess to become CHRIST'S soldiers, and to
fight under his banner; and is it the part of a Soldier, to fly at the first
onset, he that indureth to the end, gains not only the honor, but the
reward; nay, the fiercer the assault is, the more we ought to oppose our selves
against it, and though through the roughnes of the encounter, we may think we
have the worst, yet if with patience we strive to persevere, our Captain
CHRIST JESUS will be at hand to help us, for careful is he of his own, as
his own mouth testifies; when he says, to his Father, All thou have given
me, I have kept, and none of them is lost. Let all these proofs arm thy
mind, to be resolute in going on in goodness, till thou attain the end where
thou shall gain the reward of thy abours, and take with theel, the Counsel of
the Philosopher HERMES, who says, It is better, to suffer shame for virtuous
dealing, then to win honor by vicious living.

When SOLOMON had builded the Teinple and sanctified it, none might enter into
Sanctum Sanctorum, the holiest of all, but the Priest only. So none can enter
into this Kingdom, which is the true Sanctum Sanctorum; but those who have by
a Religious course of life, put off the vanities of this world, and clothed
themselves with the Robe of CHRIST'S Righteousness, whereby they are
Consecrated and made fit to enter.

When the Children of Jsraell were in the Wilderness, they were commanded every
day to gather. Manna, but on the Sabbath they that went to gather, found none
for that they were on the Even to provide for that day: so fail not thou every
day of thy life, to gather this Manna, the food of thy soul, and to lay up in
store against this day of thy rest, least when thou hopest to find, thou become
frustrate, and so thy soul starve with want thereof, feed not thy self with
hopes of entertainment, unless thou have furnished thy self with the wedding
garment, neither think to pass with one that is counterfeit, though never so
near the color; for if it be not found the right one, thou shall be taken and
bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness; therefore it is that the
Apostle says, Examine your selves whither ye be in the Faith, 2. Cor. 13.
prove your selves.

There are many, nay most that understanding the infinitnesee of the happiness
of this place, that with BALAAM will desire to dye the death of the Righteous,
Numb. 33
but they will not live the life of the Righteous: because they exempt
themselves from many things, in the which the wicked place their whole
felicity, they accounting this world their Heaven, shall therefore find none
other hereafter, as in the parable, Abraham said to the rich man in Hell; Son
remember that thou in thy lifetime, received thy good things; they were his,
becausein them consisted all his happiness: therefore possessing of them here,
he could not expect a future: For as the Apostle says, Be not deceived, God is
not mocked, for what a man sows, that shall he reap; for he that sows to
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the
spirit, shall of the spirit, reap life everlasting. For true blessedness,
consists not in meat or drink, or in richness of apparel, but in
Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

A man who has been long kept from his father and mother, wife or children,
by imprisonment, being once at liberty, and entered on his lourney toward the^,
regards not neither the length of the way, the wearisomnes of his own steps,
nor the dangerousnes of the places he is to pass, but goes on with
cheerfulness and longings, till he attain the end, and as a spur to whet
on his speed, places before the eye of his remembrance the sweet content he
shall find at meeting, can these earthly delights cause a man to undergo so
many difficulties, and shall not the delights which God has prepared for his
and whereof I have given thee a glimpse, cause thee with much more feruencie,
to long to attain to this place of happiness, and setting a part all
hindrances whatsoever, six thy eye of Faith upon those unspeakable pleasures
which thy soul shall then gain, and in Joy when thou shall meet with God thy
Father, Christ Jesus thy Brother and Savior, who has by the infinitenes of
his love espoused thee unto himself; and made the possessor of Heaven, where
thou shall as says Saint AUGUST. embrace a certain embracing above all
imbracings.

Thou shall find a sweetness above all sweetness, thou shall see alight above
all lights, thou shall smell a savor above all savours, most delectable, thou
shall hear a voice above all voices for rarenes, for that voice does sound
where no air does move it, this light does shine, where no place does receive
it, this savor does smell where no blast does carry it, and this embrace is
there touched, where it is not sundred; to conclude if thou desire to enjoy
all blessedness, and to escape all kind of punishments, tribulations, and
miseries, there thou shall find liberty and freedom from them all. The God of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Father of Glory, give unto us, the spirit of wisdom
and knowledge of him, that the eyes of our understanding being enlightened, we
may know, what is the hope of his calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of
the inheritance of his Saints, Amen.

Of our loss by ADAM, and our gain by CHRIST; The first Adam was made a
living Soul, the second Adam a quickening Spirit; For as in ADAM we all dye,
so in CHRIST, shall all be made alive. 1. Corinthians. 15.
GOD by his Wisedame,
and all-seeing Power
Ordained Man
unto Eternity,
Satan through malice,
turns that sweet to sour,
Man eating the forbidden Fruit
must Die:
No remedy was left
to escape this Curse,
The sore still looked on
became the worse.
He out of that delightsome
place is thrown
To travel in the World
with woe distressed,
Through all his life
a Pilgrim he is known,
With Cares and Sorrows,
and with griefs oppressed:
The more he looks
into his wretched state,
The more he rues his fact
but all too late.
Whereas he was
created King of all
The Creatures
God on Earth created had,
His Glory bated is
by this his Fall,
No creature now on Earth
remains so bad:
The senseless Beast
the sense of this has found,
And having Man possessed
with death does wound.
The Earth disdaines
to yield to him her strength
But pricking Thorns
and Brambles forth does send,
Till with his sweat
and labors she at length
Only for sustenance
some food does lend:
Thus he that was
a heavenly Creature formed,
By disobedience
to a wretch is turned.
Of all the Trees
that in the Garden grew,
He only was forbidden
that alone,
His Wife from that obedience
soon him drew,
And taste thereof
he did although but one:
O wretched man!
what have thou lost hereby
Wicked woman
to cause thy husband dye.
It Is not saying,
the Serpent thee deceived,
That can excuse the fault
thou did commit;
For of all Joys
thou have thy self bereaved,
And by thy Conscience
thou do stand convict.
Thy husband not alone
the fault must rue,
A punishment for sin
to thee is due.
For as thou now conceiues
thy seed in sin,
So in great sorrow
thou must bring it forth,
The gain which thou
by that same fruit did win,
Thou now do find
to be but little worth:
Obedience to thy Husband
yield thou must,
And both must Dye
and turned be to Dust.
The Truth sometimes
is used by the Devil
When as he said,
Your eyes, should opened be,
And that you should
discern the good from evil,
When you the Fruit had tasted
of that tree:
But he told not
your actions, should be sin,
And Death should be the good
which you should win.
For now your strength
to weakness turned is,
You know the Good
but have no power to chuse't,
Your eyes is open, to see
your own amiss,
And to behold the bliss
you have refused:
You see your nakedness
made vilde by Sin,
And now seeks for a place
to hide you in.
But O alas!
your deeds discovered are,
You naked lie
to those all-seeing eyes,
He viewes your actions
and does see you bare,
Bare of all Goodness,
vilde deformities:
And in your selves
you have no power to mend,
For all your strength, is sin
Satan does lend.
Now seizes on your sickness
Griefs and Fears,
Which night and day
with trouble will torment;
Your sweet Delights,
are turned all to tears,
And now what you have done,
with woerepent!
Nothing but Griefs and Fears
and sad annoyes,
You now possess,
in stead of endless Joys.
You were immortal,
but are mortal made;
You were created pure,
but now are vilde;
Your splendant Glories
turned all to shade,
Your Innocence
the Devil has beguilde:
You were created
Children of the Lord,
But now are loathsome Dung,
to be abhorred.
Which way, can you
recover this your loss?
What friend have you,
that will this great debt pay?
Can you gain, pure gold
from filthy dross?
Or have you power
to call again that Day;
No, you are in
a laborinth of woe,
And endless is the maze
in which you go.
Yet courage Woman,
whose weak spirit's dead,
GOD in his love
a help for thee has found,
Be sure thy Seed
shall bruise the Serpents head,
CHRIST by his Death
shall Satan deadly wound:
This Lion of Judea
resist who can,
In him is blessed
the whole Offspring of man.
This Promise in due time
fulfilled has GOD,
Unto the comfort
of each mortal weight;
CHRIST pays our Debt
he is beaten with that rod
That does belong
unto our Souls of right:
His Fathers wrath
was powered upon him,
Which does belong
as due to us for Sin.
He died upon the Cross
and conquered Death.
That though we dye
yet live again we must,
He buried was
and risen is from Earth,
And reigns with God
in Heaven amongst the Just:
With him, our Souls and Bodies
raised has he,
And from deaths thraldom
now, has set us free:
This causes Satan
stir himself amain,
To see, if he can win
what he has lost:
He strives to make
our overthrow his gain.
He stormeth now,
that he, by CHRIST is crossed:
And to his aid,
he all his forces draws,
That he may cause us
to obey his Laws.
Whole Armies of his Furies
forth he sends,
In shape transformed,
to delude our minds;
And unto them
his greatest force he lends,
To seize, where fittest
for his turn he finds:
He marks, to what men
are by nature given,
And unto that,
he turns his Compass even.
Sathan's deceipts
are covered, all with smiles.
That sin seems pleasing,
which our Souls destroys,
With quaint allurements,
he man still beguiles.
With sweet delights
he breeds Man's sad annoyes,
He imitates a Poison
rarely framed,
But once being taken
all the life blood's stained.
Old and crafty
is our Enemy grown,
He knows all Fish
at one bait will not bite,
He Will try a thousand ways
to gain his own,
He will not leave
till he the mark hits right.
Some with Drunkenness,
Murders, Lust beside,
Others with Idleness,
exessive Pride.
BACCHVS that drunken God
from Hell comes forth,
And reeling here and there
few scapes his knockes,
Who shunnes his blows
esteemed are of no worth,
One Drunkard at another
weakness mockes:
What ISAIAH says,
thereon they never think;
Woe be to them!
are strong to pw'r in drink.
GOD, in his love
formed all things for man's use,
That for his Comfort
they might daily be,
But they prove poison
through man's vilde abuse,
Sin changes all
into deformity:
PAVL for man's health,
to drink Wine does advise.
But through excess,
both Soul and Body dies.
Man, by this Sin
more vile is, than a Beast;
For but sufficient,
they will never take,
Man's senses fayles him
sins are still increast,
He tracing vices,
does all good forsake:
In Drunkenness,
LOT does to Incest fall,
NOAN in his Wine,
his secrets shows to all
Then Lust, and Murder
hands together take,
Like full fed Beasts,
they neigh at neighbors wife,
Stolen bread is sweet,
hid water their thirsts slake,
They fall to Murder,
through discord and strife.
For when man's reason fayles,
to guide his will;
He into mischief,
runs headlong still.
Most people takes
Idleness, for no sin:
Thus in Simplicity,
Satan deludes,
That precious time is lost,
that Grace might win.
And want of action,
many sins includes:
That mind, which unto
Idleness gives way,
Does open lie
to be the Devils prey.
When DAVID unto ease
himself had given,
His eyes extravagantly
look about,
VRIAH's wife he spyeth
in the Even,
He must, and did enjoy her
without doubt:
Satan by this his fall
more strength does gain,
For DAVID bids
VRIAH should be slain.
Thus by one means or other
Satan snares
Man's soul in Sin,
and hudwinck'd tills him on;
His cup of Gold
is filled up with tears
A bitter pittance
to their sweetes belong:
Pride, in it self
does bear a poisoned breath,
No Sin so small
but punished is with Death.
That sinn's thought least
that is spent in trimming fine
That Carcass vilde,
on which the Worms must prey,
They think not how
their hungry Soul does pine,
They count not
of their reckoning at last day.
But time of Grace, once lost,
is without call,
So headlong to destruction
they do fall.
Pride, of all other
sembleth most the Devil?
'Twas Pride, threw Satan
down from Heaven to Hell:
'Twas Pride, that Author was
of all man's evil:
'Twas Pride, made EVE
desire still to excel;
When Satan said,
as Gods, you then shall be;
Incontinent, she tasted
of that Tree.
This Lep'rous sin,
infected so the blood,
That through her offspring,
it has who ly run;
Before the child can know,
the bad from good;
It straight is proud,
Nature, this hure has done.
A female sin,
it counted was to be,
But now Hermaphrodite,
proved is she.
Like IVDAS, Satan
with each mortal deals,
His hail, is Hate,
his flattering kiss, is death,
He every where
still watching, creeping steals,
With armed troops
to stifle his souls breath:
His Sirens songs,
man's mortal Death intends,
And he must Dye
that thereto his care lends.
As a Physician
with his Patient still
Applies his potion
as he finds it fit;
Giving to some, more strong
because their ill
Disposed body,
often requires it:
Even so, does Satan
with each Creature deal,
But his is meant for death
and not to heal.
Nature and Satan,
are sworn Brothers still,
For neither of them
moves man to good;
By Nature, we incline
to all that is ill,
Which runs through
our body with our blood:
And by our Nature
often he us assailes,
And through our weakness
he often times prevails.
He, by our Nature sees
to what we bend,
Whether to goodness
or to mischiefs run;
And if he sind man aim
at the best end,
Then strives he for to mar
all he has done,
And by a pride of Goodness
makes him be,
Toward his God,
like the proud Pharisie.
The blessings, God to man
does often give,
As beauty, health, riches,
honors and fame,
That he, in thankefulnes
for them should live,
Still using them
to glorify his Name:
Satan transeformeth
all this unto sin,
Through vilde abuse,
or considence therein.
This thing, the Scripture
evidently shows,
By David's numbering
of Israel,
Whereby he thought
more trust for to repose
In his great army,
this to sin befell:
And drawing on
Gods Judgment for the same,
A heavy plague
he on his Realine did gain.
There is a sin, on which
small count is made,
And that is Disobedience;
for which sin,
SAMVEL the Prophet
unto SAVL once said;
From being King
God had rejected him:
When as he AMELECK
all should have slain,
Satan moved him
to let the best remain.
This sin, so great
in Gods pure sight does seem,
As that the Prophet
plainly does him tell:
The Lord, no better
of it does esteem;
Then, of vild Witchcraft
which in Israel,
The Lord commanded
banished quite to be;
This, like to that
and to Idolatry.
This only sin
on all Mankind did draw,
Gods heavy wrath,
for this, we suffer still.
By ADAMS breaking
Gods commanded Law;
Sin with a poysned dart
our souls did kill:
For through the breach thereof
there entered death,
For so 'twas sentenced
by Gods own breath.
O this same sin,
as an accusing one
On all occasions
still it guilty says:
Fulfill Gods Law, who did
nere yet, was known,
But CHRIST who came
for to appease Gods wrath:
Then by his Law
we all convicted stand,
And howerly may
look for Gods wrath at hand.
Deferring off Repentance
is a bayte
So closely laid
by that old Enemy,
That sew does diue
the depth of his deceit,
But unprovided
many men do die:
He bids them on the good thief
their eyes cast,
Who never did, repent him
till the last.
O slye, deceitful
cruel enemy,
How deadly, is thy hatred
to us all
Thou EHVD like
hides that will cause us dye,
And since thou fell'st
thou aym'st still at our fall:
In Paradise the Tree
death did us give,
But by the Tree
in Golgotha, we live.
From a decline in goodness
let each Soul,
With heedfull care
still study to beware;
Least in the end
for it he does condole,
When as his foot
is fettered in the snare:
Who once his hand
upon the Plough does lay,
Must by no means
look back another way.
Easy it is, to plunge
our selves in sin,
But, O alas!
hard to get forth again;
If by our faults
our Souls be black with in,
We then shall find
all his delusions vain;
His voice of peace
all peace does from us take,
Then shun that herb
where under lies the Snake.
Man ought at all times
have a careful eye;
For many are the Snares
which Satan lays:
When least he thinks on
to cause him dye,
He hides the bayte
the which man's soul betrays:
Of ease and pleasures
he will always tell,
But his smooth path
the broad way is to Hell.
Who on this Panthers skin
does gazing stand,
Had need beware
who lies in wait to catch,
Who holds a Woolfe by the ears
but with one hand,
Must with the other
muzzell up his chaps:
If better thou do get
leave not off so,
But of all means to hurt,
deprive thy Foe.
That man, the which
his Enemy foiled has,
Must straight unarm him
least he gather strength;
BENHADADS servants
after AHABS wrath,
With feyned words
did come to him at length
And from his kindness
they advantage draw,
For he, that feared to dye
now made a Law.
By his Example
let us warned be,
Gods Prophet unto AHAB
straight does come,
And said, Because from death
thou did him free,
Be sure thy life shall stand
in his life's room.
Leave thou not Satan,
till thou see him dead,
And IABL like,
kill SISERA in the head.
He aims not at thy slips,
but overthrow;
Small hurts content him not,
he life would spill:
With slight advantages,
he will not go:
When thou securest art,
he waits to kill:
And IOAS like
of thy health he will inquire,
But it is not life,
but death he does desire.
Can this old Serpent,
this deceiving Devil,
Get in his head,
then follow shall his tail,
If man but yield a little,
unto evil,
Sin will increase,
though creeping like a Snaile.
And if unto a Custom,
it does come,
He feels it not,
his soul is now grown number.
All Satan baits,
are glittering to the eye,
He leads man on,
in a delight some train:
Till death arrests them,
saying thou must dye,
And then he lets them see
all was but vain:
Then in the vgli'st form
he shows them all,
That into Desperation
man may fall.
Now having such a strong
and powerful foe,
What need has Man
with heedfull care to watch,
Least on a sudden
he from hence do go,
For Death as well
does lie in wayt to catch:
Who proves a welcome guest
to a good man,
For unprovided, come
he never can.
Deaths ghastly looks
to a gtod man seems sweet,
Who still prepared has
for that his end,
As ESAIAS JACOB, did
embracing meet,
So does he death
accounting him his friend:
If tears do fall
they are not shed through fears
For joy he is come
forces from him those tears.
Can he expect Death
Enemy to be,
Who by his Present
has his force alayd:
He sent before good works,
much Charity,
Blessings of Orphants
which for him have prayed:
His sighs and tears,
appeased has his King,
And this supposed Foe
glad news does bring.
Death is our guide
unto Eternal bliss,
Portall of Heaven,
by which we enter must,
The Ladder reaching
a true happiness,
Which brings man
to live amongst the Just:
By him we come
Gods glorious face to see,
From which by life
deprin'd we still shall be.
Our flesh a prison is
unto our soul,
Which does deprive it
of that heavenly light;
With spiritual groans and sighs
it does condole,
Till it attain
unto that wished sight:
Death is the key
unlocks our misery;
Loses our bonds
and gives us liberty.
Death's fangs are pared
his bitter potions sweet,
His edge abaited
all his hurt is done,
A godly man
most kindly he does meet,
And of a Foe
he is a Friend become:
His struck is like
the striking of a vein,
By which small smart
sick men their health do gain:
Death is the ending
of our days, not life,
For having closed these eyes
we wake to live,
Death having finished
once this mortal strife,
Our Faith in CHRIST
new life to us does give:
Our Night is past
our Day star does appear,
Our Cloud is vanished
and our Morn shines clear.
Now ends all sorrows,
now all griefs are done,
Sin takes his leave
and weakness has his end;
And now behold
our Iubilee is come,
The Harvest of our labors
we attend:
Death's potion only
bitter is in show,
The taste once past
no operation so.
Man's Glass once run
his flower of Life once dead,
That vapor vanished
and that span once grasped,
His breath once failing
all his body's Lead,
In senseless, coldness
all his parts are clasped:
He came from earth,
earth house-roome now him gives.
His spirit from God
with God for ever lives.
The carnal wicked
worldly minded men,
Who in this life
their whole content have placed
Does tremble, when Death
mentioned is to them,
Because by him
all Joys from them are chased:
Their ease and pleasures
changed quite will be,
All mirth is dashed
by present misery.
The sight of him
unto their minds do bring
Remembrance of their sins
they slightly past,
The which with woe
their souls do sorely sting:
For that they see
the count called on at last:
Which sure on earth
a hell may deemed be,
When without mercy
man his sins death see.
Those men which only
to delights are given,
At the approach of death
does fear and quake,
What earth afforded
they accounted heaven,
And now perforce
they must those joys forsake,
Gods blessings they
most vildly have abused,
And proffered time of Grace,
they have refused.
And now those words
which ABRAHAM did say,
To DIVES, when for water
he did call;
He finds too true
whose smarts without alay,
His Sorrows far more better
are then gall:
His good things only
were upon this Earth,
But life and them, are parted
quite by death.
Terrors and fears
must needs their souls affright,
When guilty Conscience
shows Gods angry eye,
O how they tremble!
to approach that sight,
To whom their sin
will out for vengeance cry;
He who on earth
to grieve, they did not fear,
Will give a sentence
which their Souls will tear.
O how man's sins
that mild aspect does change,
He, which for man did bleed
does man condemn,
If by their sins
from the right path they range,
Wanting their guide
dangers approaches them:
The Woolfe once seazing
it is in vain to fly,
Their Shepherd hears not
bootlesse it is to cry.
Alas, who would this world
as ought esteem,
If truly he consider
every thing,
Those pleasures which to man
most happy seem,
Does soonest fade
and gone they leave a sting:
Man upon Earth
no sure abiding has,
Then fear betime
before thou feel Gods wrath.
BELSHAZAR when he was
carrousing set,
Amongst his Princes
in his royal Throne;
A writing turns
those fair delights to Iet,
A hand then showed
makes bone encounter bone,
He fearful sits
whilst thus it does indite,
You Are weighed in balance
and art found too light,
Man's life's a scene
and tragic ke wo's succeed,
A Comet always
future harms foretell,
The happiest life
by death is made to bleed,
If vnprepar'd he dye
he goes to hell:
The gate is shut,
and they must take their lot,
For 'twill be answered;
lo, I know you not.
Unto a thorney field
and barren land,
How fitly may man's life
compared be,
What cares, what fears,
what griefs, are still at hand,
And for one Joy
ten discontents we see:
We always walk
as on a bridge of glass,
And often it crakes
as over it we pass.
Still barren is this world
of true content,
Fruitful enough
in procreating wees,
Thorny afflictions
toward us are bent,
But certain Joys
still backwards from us goes:
Who thinks to catch them
does a shadow chase,
And like IXION
does a cloud embrace
Then why should man
thus waste his precious time
And triflingly let slip
his golden days;
O! turn to God,
whilst thou art in thy prime
And put not off
repentance with delays:
For when death comes
it then will be too late,
By tears or vows
for to prorogue thy state.
Boast not of youth, or honors
wealth, or strength,
Who trusts to them
upon a reed does lean,
The which be sure
deceive thee will at length.
Then strive from these vain
thy self to weane,
And fill thy Lamp with oil thoughts
whilst thou have space,
Least afterward too late
thou call for grace.
Break off thy sins
by true repentant tears,
And turn to God
whilst it is called to day,
And rest assured
he their prayers hears,
That unto him
incessantly do pray;
For to encourage thee,
he this did say,
Who comes to me
I will not cast away.
Is not man's life
compared unto a flower,
And, O how soon! alas,
the same does fade and dye,
Then let man live
prepared (each day and hour)
Least unawares
the force of death he try:
And bear this saying
always in thy mind;
As death, thee leaves
so Judgment will thee find.
And as the Flower
in the chiefest prime,
Does fade and dye
when Sun his face does hide,
For it is not in the earth's
vast slippery clime,
An ever fading being
to provide:
No more can strength
or skill prevail at all,
To lengthen life
when God by death does call.
And as the spring
the water forth does put,
And by the earth drunk up
no more is seen,
So when by death
our third of life is cut,
On earth we are
as we had never been:
Then whilst we live
let us strive to purchase Grace,
That after Death
in Heaven we may have place.
Alas! how many are
the snares and bayts,
Which Satan lays,
our poor souls to betray,
HIENA like,
he murders by deceites,
Through false delights
to cause us miss our way,
His Mermaides Songs
are only sweet in sound,
Approach them not,
lest Death thy life does wound.
Therefore the safest way
unto our bliss,
Is meditation
of our certain Death
And though we tread
the steps of carfulness,
And all our life
in sorrow draw our breath,
The guerdon of our pains
our CHRIST will give
In causing us
eternally to live.
Thus by a godly
and an upright life,
Man of a deadly foe
may make a friend
And by a wise provision
stint that strife,
Which Satan laid
to bring us to our end:
And though our flesh
prove false, our God is Just,
By death our soul
gains heaven, our body dust.
Be ever vigilant
in all thy ways,
And always live
as in the sight of God,
Perform good actions
and use no delays,
Then fear not Death
it brings with it no rod:
With care attend
that sure uncertainty,
And live, as every hour
thou should dye.
This watchful care
wounds Satan in the head,
For he that thinks of Death
does shun all Sin,
By thought of this
man to the world proves dead
He counts all dross
and only CHRIST would win:
No earthly Joys
can cause him life to love,
His Soul is fixed
and nothing can him move.
Thus each weak Christian
may this tyrant foil,
For by CHRIST's Death
man armed is with strength,
Though in this Combat
he a while may toil,
But Faith in CHRIST,
gives victory at length;
And with a courage hold,
man now may cry
Death where is thy sting?
Grave where is thy victory?
What though we dye,
as dye we surely must,
Yet by this death,
we now are gainers made.
For when our bodies
are consumed to dust,
We shall be raised,
from that Eternal shade:
Our mortal bodies,
shall immortal be,
And with our Souls,
enjoy Eternity.
Our troubles in this life,
now changed are;
From tokens of his wrath,
unto his love.
For though a while
upon the Earth me share;
Of griefs and troubles,
yet when God above:
Shall by death call us
from the veil of sin,
We shall enjoy.
Eternal bliss with him.
Where all tears shall
be wiped from our eyes,
All griefs and sorrows
then shall ended be,
We shall be freed
from all clamarous cries,
No discontents nor troubles
shall we see:
But Peace, and Joys
and comforts shall be found,
And always in our ears
a heavenly sound.
Our Senses shall partake
all of this Bliss,
Our Eyes shall evermore
behold our King,
Our Hearing heavenly music
shall possess,
Our Tongues shall evermore
his Praises sing:
Thus Smell, and Taste,
thus hands, and ears, and sight,
Shall evermore enjoy
a full delight.
Unto this Happiness
and place of Joy,
In thy good time
sweet Savior Christ us bring,
Where being freed
from Sorrows and annoy,
We evermore
thy blessed Praise may sing:
Where we shall never cease
but Night and Day,
Sing Praise and Glory,
unto Thee always.
FINIS.

