A perfect Pathway to Felicity, Containing godly Meditations, and prayers, fit
for all times, and necessary to be practiced of all good Christians.

Imprinted at London by Richard Yardly for Humfrey Lownes. 1592.

To the right worshipful, virtuous, and godly Gentlewoman mistress Katherine
Milward, most faithful spouse to the no less worshipful, wise and religious
Gentleman, master William Milward, esquire, P. S. wishes all hapie success in
this life, with increase of worship, and in the life to come, eternal
felicity in the heavenly Hierarchy by Jesus Christ.
TWo things per adventure (right worshipful) may be maruailed at, concerning
this little book, as namely, first why I have published it, considering the
great number of books, either of the same, or very like argument, extant in
these days. Secondly, wherefore I have dedicated it rather unto you, then to
any other. For the first, I protest before God, who knows the secrets of all
hearts, I have not published it, either for vainglory, lucre, or gains, nor
yet for any other private respect of my own whatsoever, but at the instant
request, and earnest desire of one of my very good friends, and alliance also,
who yet being living, and the only man that has borne the whole charges of
the impression thereof, both can, and I know will (if need should require)
justify the same, against any that should auerre the contrary. And for the
second, when I considered with myself, how much b und I have always been to
your worship, ever since the time that I was first acquainted with you, for
your good opinion you have ever conceived of me, and sundry other your
courtesies showed toward me, far beyond my deserts or expectation: As also
when I called to remembrance your fervent zeal which you have ever borne to
the word of God, and holy religion, your exquisite knowledge therein, your
careful endeavor to put the same in practice, and to frame your life
thereafter. Briefly, when I remembered your maruailous humility and lowliness
of mind, your wonderful modesty, gentleness and affability, your rare
continency and integrity of life, with infinite the like virtues and graces,
wherewith God has beautified and adorned your worship above many others, I
say, when I remembered these things, with many mo, I could do no less (having
so fit an occasion given me, by reason of my friends importunacie) then to
dedicate these my labors to your worship, though not as a guerdon answerable to
your deserts, yet as an infallible testimony, pledge and token of my thankful
good will and grateful heart toward you. And albe it that in respect of the
form or method of the book (for herein I have not studied to be curious) it
may seem to be base and contemptible, and such as is far unworthy to be
exhibited, to so wise, so discreet, so godly and religious a gentlewoman, yet
in regard of the matter, which is heavenly and divine, I most humbly beseech
you to accept thereof, and to permit the same to go forth to the view of the
world under the guard of your protection, and to patronize both the author and
the book against the poisoned tongues of railing Phormions, and flouting
Momusses, to whom all good things are had in disdain. And in so doing, both
God shall be glorified by you, the church and Saints shall praise God in you,
and I my self besides that I will not rest unthankful to you to the death,
will not cease also to pray to God for you. And t^us I most humbly take my
leave. From my Chamber, this present 10. of April. 1592.

Your worships in the Lord. Philip (...).

To the courteous Rea der, grace, mercy, and peace
GEntle Reader, I have been constrained ^horowe the importunacie of my friend
to publish this little treatise or manuel of prayers and meditations, praying
thee in brotherly love and christian charity (which as Paul says covers the
multitude of sins) that if any thing have passed my pen, either through lack
of due consideration, or the press through want of diligent attention, thou will yet, either friendly amend it with thy pen, or else silently pass it
over. And if any thing seem harsh, rough or vnfiled, think that in this kind
of argument I have not studied to be curious and besides, impute the cause
thereof to straitness of time, which would not suffer me so much as to write
out my copy twice, nor being once writ, scarce to read it over again. Thus
friendly Reader I commit thee to God, praying thee to censure al things to ye
best, and to help me with thy prayers that both thou and I, and all the elect
of God, in his good time appointed, may come to the full fruition, and
possession of all the joys and glory of heaven, which God the father has
promised unto us, through his son Jesus Christ our Lord and Siuio^r.

Thine in the Lord. P. S.

Certain Graces to be said before and after meat.
O Lord our God we give thee most hearty thanks for all thy benefits which
thou in mercy have vouchedsafe to bestow upon us, and namely (O Lord) for
these thy creatures which at this present we shall receive of thy bounteous
liberality, beseeching thee to give us grace to use them both at this and all
other times, to thy honor and glory, and to the refreshing of our hungry
bodies, that thereby we may be made more apt to do those things which thou have
commanded us in thy holy word. Grant this O Lord for Jesus christ his sake our
only Savior.

Amen.
Thanksgiving after meat.
WE yield thee hearty thanks, O most merciful father for all thy benefits
most liberally bestowed upon us, and especially at this time, for feeding us so
plentifully, and grant (good father) that we never abuse them, but that we
may always use them in such sort as we never offend thy majesty thereby.
Grant this, O father, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Another prayer before meat.
O Gracious GOD, vouchsafe to look upon our weakness and want, and give us
at this time those things which may be to our comfort, sanctify these thy
gifts, that our bodies being replenished, we may be thankful, and enjoy at
thy merciful hands, the bread of eternal life, to the relief of our poor
souls; through Jesus Christ.

An other prayer after meat.
WE thank thee, most bountiful Lord, for this thy fatherly feeding our hu^gry
bodies, so likewise we beseech thee feed our hungry souls with the bread
of eternal life, yt after this life is ended, we may ascend where christ
Jesus our only redeemer is gone before.

Amen.
A prayer before meat.
AL things depend upon thy providence (oh Lord) to receive at thy gracious
hands due sustenance for the maintenance of their needy bodies, thou give it
them, and they gather it, thou openest thy hand, and they are satisfied with
all good things, O heavenly father, which art the very fountain of al
goodness, we beseech thee to show thy mercies upon us thy children, and
sanctify these gifts which we receive of thy merciful liberality.

Amen.
A thanksgiving after meat.
O Lord God, which of thy great bounty and fatherly kindness, have at this
time most plentifully fed our weak bodies, give us grace continually to be
thankful unto thy Majesty, for these and all other thy benefits most
abundantly at all times bestowed upon us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A note to know the beginning and ending of the four Terms of the year.
HIllarie Term begins the three and twenty of January, (which if it be
Sunday) then the next day following, and ends the twelft of February.

Easter Term begins seuentene days after Easter, and ends four days
after Ascension day.

Trinity Term begins ye next day after Corpus Christi day, and ends the
wednesday fortnight after.

Michaelmasse Term begins the ninth of October (if if be not Sunday) and
ends the eight and twenty of November.

The Queens Majesty's Judges neither sit in Westminster hall, nor hear any
matters pleaded in these days following. Namely, on the Ascension, Saint John
Baptist, All Saints, the Purification of Marie, nor the Sabbath days.

Note also that the Eschequer opens eight days before any Term begin,
except Trinity Term, in which it opens but four days before.

Special Medita tions for all times, and for all per sons.
_(...), meditate with thy self, and think what god is, namely a divine
spirit, or spiritual bring: and therefore will be worshipped in spirit and
(...). Consider how that this blessed God, being divided into a Trinity of
persons, the Father the Son, and the holy Ghost, yet all one in substance
and essence, has by his almighty power created all things both spiritual and
temporal, visible and invisible whatsoever. And as he has created them by his
omnipotent power, so does he rule and govern them by his providence,
according to his good will and pleasure. And therefore think that nothing
comes to pass by fortune or chance, but by his heavenly determination, and
appointment. Consider how he has created thee after his own si^itude and
likeness, and therefore ought thou to be holic, as he is holy. How he has
predestinate and chosen thee before the foundations of the world were laid, to
everlasting salvation in Jesus Christ: how he has and does justify thee, that
is, acount thee just and righteous by a true and lively faith in the blood of
his Son: how he does call thee to the knowledge of his will, and to the
state of grace. First by the secret working of his spirit, secondly, by the
preaching of his word: thirdly, by the sight and use of all his creatures of
infinite variety. Confider how he made thee holy, pure and righteous, and
how thou by thy rebellion, pride, infidelity, and disobedience, made thy
self sinsull and wicked. Then consider, how he sent his own son Christ
Jesus to redeem thee by the shedding of his blood. Who as he is our only
saniour and redeemer, so is he our only mediator and advocate, and only to
be called upon and inuocated, and neither Angel nor saint, martyr nor
confessor, patriarch nor father, nor any other creature whatsoever. Consider
with thy self, that as he has fulfilled all things for us, and reconciled us
to his father, so is he now ascended into the heavens, to prepare a place for
us, who at the great day of accounts shall come again in the same shape, and
with the same body that he received of Marie, to judge both the quick and the
dead, and to reward every man according to his works. Think that after the
general judgment, our bodies being made immortal, and incorruptible, shall
be united again to their proper souls, and for ever inherit the everlasting
kingdom of heaven, where is such joy, as no heart can conceive, no tongue, no
not of Angels themselves express, nor any pen is able to write. These and
the like meditations ended, render most hearty thanks unto god in the name of
Jesus Christ, for all his benefits and blessings in mercy bestowed upon
thee, pray for grace to be thankful, crave pardon for ^hy un thankfulness,
and the morning approaching, exercise thy self as follows.

Precepts and directions for the morning.
WHen thou arisest in the morning, lift up thy hands, thy eyes, thy soul and
mind toward heaven, giving God hearty thanks, as generally for all his
graces, and loving kindness showed toward thee in Christ: so particularly for
the quiet rest and sleep, which he has given to thy body that night. Pray
for his protection, and assistance, in the residue of thy life: which done,
meditate thus with thy selse.

Meditations in the morning.
SAy thus to thy self. This day which I now enter into, is my last day, nay
this moment, my last breath. I have no freehold of my life, fee simple of my
days, no charter of my years, no not for one minute of an hour, or
twinkling of an eye. Death, yea infinite deaths daily wait upon me, and
threaten my destruction: yea my body it self, earieth in finit deaths in it
self, being indeed the efficient cause of it own misery and calamity. Think
also that as shy body now resesh out of thy material b^d, so shall it rise out
of the bed of thy grave at the great day of the Lord, and appear before the
tribunal seat of God, all naked as ever thou wast borne, there to receive
either the incorruptible crown of everlasting glory, or else the just reward
of perpetual confusion. Think also, that as thou risest forth of thy bed to
be occupied and employed in the labors and travails of this life, so
should thou arise out of the bed of sin, to serve the living God, in
holiness and righteousness all the days of thy life.

Meditations to be conside red of, at the rising of the Sun.
AS now this temporal Sun in the heavens representing unto us the true Sun
of God Christ Jesus, is now risen, and has spread his beams upon the whole
face of the earth, so shall the son of God indeed, at the time appointed
manifest himself to the whole world, in unspeakable glory, to judge all
flesh, and to reward every work under the Sun according to the quality,
and merit of the same. Think also what infinite glory is treasured up in the
kingdom of heaven, for the elect and chosen of God, after this life. For if
this Sun in the element (being made but one lie for man's use, and to give
light to the world for a time) be so glorious as no mortal eye without tears
can behold the same, how much more glorious shall we think the ioies of heaven
to be, prepared for the elect after this life? Think also, that the Sun in
the element does not only give light to the world by his radiations and
glistering beams, but also does quicken, revive, fructify, and cause to grow
all natural things upon the whole face of the earth: so Christ Jesus the
son of God, does not only inlighten man by the beams of his grace, and
inspiration of his holy spirit, but also does revive and quicken both our
bodies, and our souls, being dead in sin, and also makes us fruitful and
plentiful in all good works, to the praise and glory of his holy name.
Think also of the immensitie of this visible Sun, which being in appearance
but a small creature, yet such is the majesty and glory thereof, that it
conueyeth his beams unto every corner of the earth: and thereby gather thou,
the immensitie and vnmeasurablenes of the son of God Christ Jesus, who being
the very light and life of the world, sits as a most glorious son in the
midst of his creatures, imparting to every one of them certain sparks of
his glory, which being taken away, they all consume and come to nothing.
These meditations ended, humble thy self before God, and pray as follows, or
otherwise as the spirit of God shall (...)thy spirit.

A prayer for the morning.
OH most glorious God and loving Father, who as thou have by thy mighty power
created all things; so have thou by thy unsearchable wisdom ordered and
disposed them, as may best serve for the benefit and comfort of man. I render
most humble and hearty thanks unto thee for all thy benefits and blessings,
both infinite, and inestimable, in merci^ bestowed upon me, and namely for the
sweet sleep, and quiet rest, which thou have given to my body this night.
And as thou have preserved me this night from all perils and dangers; so I
beseech thee to keep my body and my soul this ^ate, not only from committing
that which is evil in thy sight, but also from sustaining any evil through the
envy of the devil, the malice of his ministers, the allurements and intisements
of the world, or the corruptions of the (...). And for that thou
(...)commanded every man to labor and (...)in his vocation and calling, for
the maintenance of his estate, I pray thee ((...)father) so to bless all my
labors, and the works of my hands, which I shall take in hand in thy blessed
and holi^ name this day, so as they may tend to thy honor and glory, the
relief of my necessities, and the common benefit of all men. In all which my
labors, give me grace (I beseech thee most merciful Father) to deal
faithfully, truly, and uprightly, with all men, and not to increase my
wealtth by (...)wicked or unlawful means. Grant that I may spend this day in
such holy exercises as thou have commanded in thy blessed word, (...)those
things which are evil, and following those things which be good. And for that
we are as it were besieged, and on every side beset, and most strongly
assailed with many and puissant enemies, as the devil, and his members, which
are infinite, on ye one side, the world and the flesh on the other, I beseech
thee (good father) to preserve me thy servant from all their rage and fury,
from al their force and violence. And to this end, let thy holy Angels pitch
their tents round about me, conduct me by their ministry, and preserve me by
thy mighty power, so shall I praise thee for ever, in the congregation of thy
Saints, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Precepts at thy going forth of thy Chamber.
WHen thou go forth of thy chamber salute thy bedfellow (if thou have any)
giving him the time of the day, and in meeting others do the like, (for
civility requires it.) And when thou come into the presence of thy
parents, not only salute them, but also fall down upon thy knees before them,
and desire them to pray to God to bless thee. When thou have so done, wash
thy face and thy hands, and keep thy body clean and neat, in the doing
whereof meditate thus with thy self.

Meditations in the washing of ones face and hands.
AS the filthiness and pollution of my body, is washed and made clean by the
element of water; so is my body, and soul purified, and washed from the
spots and blemishes of sin, by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. Think
also, this washing puts me in remembrance of my baptism, of my spiritual
birth and regeneration, whereby I am not only borne anew by the operation of
the holy Ghost; but also am sealed up to eternal salvation, through the
redemption that is in Christ. These Meditations ended, pray as follows.

A prayer to be said at the wa shing of ones face and hands.
MOst gracious God, ind loving father, who have given thy only begotten son
Jesus Christ, to suffer death upon the Cross for my redemption, grant I most
entirely beseech (...), for his sake, that as this my body is now washed,
and made clean by the element of material water; so my body and soul, may
both be purified and purged from all uncleanness, and filthiness of sin,
through the efficacy of thy son his most precious blood. These things thus
ordered, go forth to thy labors in the fear of God, doing all things to his
glory, and the good of thy brethren.

Meditations before and at dinner.
WHen dinner time approaches, meditate thus with thy self, as this earthly
tabernacle of my body has need to be relieved and sustained with common air
and material food; so my sonle has much more need to be refreshed, and
fed with the incorruptible food of the word of God: and then as thou do
hunger after the one, so thirst thou much more after the other. This done, draw
near to the table with reverence, and with hearty affection pray as follows.

A prayer before meat.
Merciful father, who in thy great wisdom and incomprehensible power, have
not only created the fowls of the air, the beasts of the earth, and the
fishes of the sea, of infinite variety, for the benefit and use of man; but
also by thy blessing do daily multiply and increase them for the
sustentation of man's bodies, sanctify, I beseech thee, these thy creatures by
the power of thy word, give them strength to nourish my body, and me grace to
use them to thy glory, and my own comfort. And as in mercy thou do feed
my body with these earthly creatures, which are transitory; so vouchsafe to
feed my soul with the spiritual food of thy blessed word, which is
everlasting, and never shall decay, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and
savior, and for hs sake.

Amen.
Directions how a Christian should behave himself at the table.
WHen thou come to the table, show all obeisance, and curtesy, be having thy
self modestly, humbly and soberlie, as in the presence of God. Eat so much
as nature requires, not how much insaciable appetite desires. Be spare as
well of hand, as tongue. Let thy countenance be amiable and pleasant toward
all men. Let all thy communication be seasoned with salt, as the Apostle
speaks, that it may give grace to the hearers, remembering that we must give
accounts at the day of judgment for every idle word. Use not to laugh much,
to jest, or scoff, to floute or mock, to deride, backbite, (...) detract any
man behind his back, but in all things so (...)thy self, that thou may
neither dishonor thy God, nor give either offense, or evil example unto any
at the table. Dinner being ended, give God thanks as follows.

A thanks giving to God after dinner.
MOst holy father, Lord of heaven and earth, I give thee thanks in the name of
Jesus Christ, for all thy benesites and blessings in mercy bestowed upon me
ever since I was borne. And namely, O Fa there, I praise thee for feeding my
hungry body, as always heretofore, so now presently at this time, with
earthly food, beseeching thee to feed my soul likewise with the celestial
food of thy holy word. And I pray thee, good Lord, that as thou have given
unto me the use of these earthly creatures in great measure; so thou will in
mercy vouchsafe to give unto me the continual supply of al my necessities
and wants, needful either for my soul, or body, to the end, and in the end,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Meditations after dinner.
Think thus with thy self. As the mouth of my body whereby I receive
corporal sustenance, is flesh and blood; so the mouth of my soul, whereby I
receive the spiritual food of eternal life, is faith toward God, hope in
his promises, and love from a pure heart toward ye brefhren for his sake.
Think also, that as ye Sun is now in his highest ascent and degree, and
therefore of necessity must needs decline, and go downward: And as the day
also is now at the midst, or full, and therefore must needs in like manner draw
toward his end; so my life being once come to his full ripeness and
maturitie, must of force draw toward his end, which is death, the reward or
salary of sin. These things thus performed, dispose thy self to the labors
of thy vocation, as before, doing all things to the glory of him that made
thee, and one day will require a strait account of thee for all thy labors
and works done under the Sun.

Directions how to behave thy self before and after Supper.
WHen the day is ended, and the night approaches, first praise God, for thy
preservation, and protection that (...), beseeching him to take (...)care over
thee that night. This done arraine thy self (as it were) at the bar, and
call thy conscience to accounts, demanding of thy self, as well what good thou
have omitted, and have not done, as the evil which thou have committed, and
should not have done. And as well repent for the one, as be sorrowful for
the other. This dove, draw toward the table in reverent manner, pra^g GOD to
sancti^e his c^atures unto thee, either in this, or the like form.

A thanks giuidg to God before Supper.
FAther of mercy, and God of all truth, look down I beseech thee, from the
throne of thy heavenly palace upon us thy humble servants, albeit most
wretched and miserable sinners, sanctify both our bodies and souls, by the
presence of thy holy spirit, and bless these thy creatures unto us, give
them strength to nourish our bodies, and our bodies their natural powers and
force, every member to perform his office and duty, according as thou have
appointed, and as thou see to be best for thy glory, and the sustaining and
repairing of our ruinous and weak natures. And we pray thee good father also,
to feed our souls with the celestial Manna of thy blessed word, and bring
us once to suppe with thee in the kingdom of heaven, through the precious blood
of Jesus Christ.

Then sall to thy meat reverently, as before at dinner, having always a
diligent eye, that thou abuse not the good creatures of God, by gluttony,
drunkenness, gourmandise, or any other kind of riot, or excess. Remember
that nature is satisfied with a little, and what is more then will suffice
nature, is super fluous, and one day thou shall be accomptable for it, to the
great judge of all the earth. Thy body being satisfied, forget not to relieve
the necessity of the Saints, according to thy ability, that God may bless
thee, and multiply thy store. When Supper is ended, give God thanks, either as
follows, or otherwise, as the spirit of God shall illuminate thy heart.

A thanksgiving to God after Supper.
OH Lord our god, most gracious and holy father, we render all praise and
thanksgiving to thy sovereign majesty, for all thy benefits and blessings
so plentifully bestowed upon us. And namely we thank thee (holy father) for
these thy good creatures, which thou have at this present in full measure given
unto us. Oh Lord make us thankful for them, and pardon our unthankfulness for
Jesus Christ his sake. Finally, make us al thy true, obedient and faithful
servants, and bring us to everlasting life in thy good time, for thy great
mercies sake in thy beloved.

Amen.
Directions of Christian behavior after supper.
THe rest of the time after Supper until thou go to bed, spend with thy
family, either in singing of Psalms, and spiritual songs, singing and making
melody to the Lord, in your hearts: or else in conferring, reasoning,
disputing and talking of the word of God, in reading, expounding or
interpreting of the same. Then, when time calls thee to go to bed, call thy
whole household together in some conuensent place, make public confession of
your sins to God the Father, crave pardon and forgiveness for Jesus Christ's
sake, and pray for grace to be able to resist sin hereafter, with all
means, ways, and allurements leading there unto. Which done, repair to thy
chamber, reuoluing with thy self these and the like things following.

Meditations when thou co^ mest into thy chamber.
WHen thou art come into thy chamber, call to thy remembrance what evil thou
have committed that day past, either in thought, word, or deed, toward GOD, or
toward man, and the good which thou should have done, and have not done. I^
thou have s^ne or heard any good thing in any man, note it, learn it, and
pray for grace to follow it. If again thou have seen or heard any cuill in
any man, note it in thy self, and pray for grace to eschew it. This done,
kneel down by thy bed side confess thy sins to GOD the father, crave
pardon for Jesus Christ his sake, and pray to him to protect thee that night,
and to defend thee under the shadow of his wings, from all perilles and
dangers both bodily and ghostly. Thy clothes being put off, meditate thus
with thy self. Oh what a filthy, unclean, and vgglesome carcass do I bear
about with me, that for very shame had need to be covered with garments?
Think also from what an excellent state and dignity (in regard of thy first
creation) thou art fallen, by reason of the ^ilthines of sin. Then think, that
if thy apparel were given thee for very necessities sake, to cover and hide
thy shame withal, what reason have thou to be proud thereof? For should a
beggar be proud of the cloutes that wrap his sores? Think also, that as thou
can not without shame stand before men, naked and bare, so can thou not
without shame and confusion of face, stand before the majesty of God, except
thou be clothed and muested with the garment of Christ's righteousness and
holiness. Finally think, that as thou put off, and laiest aside thy
materialgarments: so shall thou once, and peradventure before thou ^ysest
again, put off, and lay away the earthly mansion of thy body, committing it
to mother earth again, from whence it first came. When sleep comes upon
thee, pray as follows.

A prayer when sleep com meth upon one.
MOst merciful father, with whom there is no difference of time, nor variety
of change, seeing thou have appointed the day for man to travail in, and the
night for him to take his natural rest, I beseech thee that as my body hash
been occupied and employed this day in the labors of this life, so it may
receive by thy protection quiet rest and sleep this night, that I may be the
ab^er to go forward in the exercise of good works, in the rest of my life that
I have to live, to the praise and glory of thy blessed name. And in this my
sleep defend me, I beseech thee, from all perilles and dangers, and from all
the force and violence of mine enemies both spiritual and corporal. And as it
may please thee to grant to my body quiet rest and sleep; so let it be thy
good pleasure to make my soul watchful and vigilant to wait upon thee, and
diligently to look for y^ coming of thy dear son Jesus Christ unto judge
meant for my redemption. Keep me from al fearful dreams, and visions, from
all fantastical apparitions, and devilish illusions of the wicked enemy,
from all carnal pollusions, and ungodly suggestions of the wicked spirit.
Finally grant, that both my body and my soul, resting under thy divine
protection, may be safe from all enmity and hostility whatsoever, and at the
last may attain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ my only Savior and
redeemer. This done, dispose thy self to rest, committing both thy body and
soul into the hands of God, praying him to be thy watchman that night. Then
descend thou into the secret closets and privy chambers of thine heart, search
every place, and ransacke every corner: and if thou find any filthiness
or uncleanness therein (as in deed thou shall, find nothing else) wash it away
with the tears of repentance, and make itcleane with the broom of contrition.
Then think thus with thy self. My bed does represent unto me my grave,
wherein I must once sleep, and the clothes, the earth, where with all I shall
shortly be covered in my sepulcher or grave. And as these flees and gnats do
bite and gnaw my skin, so shall the worms, cate and consume the frame of my
body, in the dust of the earth, when the Lord does please. When the morning
begins to dawn and the daystarre to appear, think thus. As now the
morning comes on, and the day star begins to appear, so shall Christ
Jesus the true morning star, show himself at the time appointed of his
father, to judge both the quick and the dead. And when thou hear the
crowing of the cock, the sounding of belles, or any other noise whatsoever,
think always, that thou hear the trumpe of the Archangell sound, saying,
arise you dead, and come unto judgment. When thou awakest out of sleep, pray
to this effect as follows.

A prayer when one awakes out of sleep.
Merciful father, grant that as thou have now awaked my earthly body out of
this material sleep, so thou will also vouchsafe to raise me up from the
sleep of sin, and in the general resurrection of all flesh, to eternal
life, through Jesus Christ my only Savior and redeemer.

Meditations when one awa keth out of sleep.
CAll to remembrance the unspeakable (...), glory and beatitude, the ineffable
blessedness, comfort and solace, which all the chosen of God have, and shall
have for ever after this life, in the kingdom of heaven. Think also of the
wonderful beauty that our bodies shall have and (...)at the day of judgment,
being made like to the glorious body of Christ Jesus, and shining for ever as
the Sun, in the kingdom of heaven.

A prayer to be said at the break of the day.
OH Lord thou great and everlasting light, from whom all other lights
whatsoever have their being, and in comparison of whom, they are all but gross
and palpable darkness, illuminate my heart, and inlighten my understanding with
the perfect knowledge of thy blessed will. And grant that I knowing it, may
faithfully obcie thee in the same all the days of my life, that at the last I
may attain to everlasting rest both of body and soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
Meditations at the appea ring of the day.
Think with thy self, that as thy earthly body is guided and governed by
thy bodily eyes; so, and much more, is thy soul and mind guided, ruled and
governed by the direction and inspiration of Gods holy spirit. And therefore
how much more precious the eye of the soul is, then the eye of the eye of the
body; so much more is the one to be sought for, then the other. Think that
brute beasts have their bodily eyes, but man has not only corporal eyes,
but spiritual also, whereby he (...)strange things, conceiueth infinite
things, understands wonderful things, believes all things, and hops all
things. This done pray as follows.

A prayer when one arises forth of his bed.
I Confess most merciful father, our first parents by sin threw themselves,
and all their pos^eritie into a most deadly lethargy, and sleep of sin,
whom thou in great mercy vouchedstsafe to restore again, and renew by the
death of thy son. Grant holy father, that as thou have now raised my body
from (...)(...)all sleep; so thou will also raise both my body and (...),
from the deadly sleep of sin; and at the last from the dust of the earth,
to dwell with thee for ever, in thy everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ.

Meditations when one ari seth out of his bed.
Think that as thou now arisest forth of thy bed, so should thou rise from
sin, (...)the living God in holiness and righteousness all the (...)of thy
life. Think also, that thy body shall rise again in the end of the world,
either to everlasting life (if thou do well) or to everlasting death (if thou
do evil.) Then put on thy apparel, in the doing whereof pray thus.

A prayer to be said at the put ting on of a man's clothes.
BLessed father, seeing my natural corruption and silthines is such, and so
great, that of necessity it must be covered with these earthly garments, least
o^ my nakedness and shame should appear to the world, clothe me, I beseech
thee, with the garments of Christ's righteousness and holiness, and impute not
unto me my manifold sins and offenses, least I receive not shame only, but
everlasting confusion both of body and soul, as a just reward and guerdon for
my deserts.

Christian directions for the morning.
WHen thou have attired thy ^cently and comely, not (...)nor proudly, go
forth of thy chamber, and if thou be a master of a household, call thy
family together, confess your sins, crave pardon for Jesus Christ his sake,
pray for grace to resist sin hereafter, praise God for all his benefits, and
blessings in mercy bestowed upon you, pray for continuance of them. Thank
him for your protection that night, besee ching him to protect you thatday, and
to bless all your works andlabours. And finally, desire him to keep and
defend you that day, and cuer from all perils and dangers, both bodily and
ghostly whatsoever, and to bring you to everlasting life at the time
appointed, through the precious blood of Jesus Christ. This done, go forth to
thy labors in the fear of God, doing all things with single eye, and good
conscience, to the praise of him that made thee, being assured that as in
mercy he will not leave the good good work that we do unrewarded: so in
justice he will not leave the least evil that we do commit, either in
thought, word, or deed, unpunished, except we repent. To God therefore our
father, to Christ Jesus our Savior and redeemer, and to God the holy Ghost
our comforter, and sanctifier, three persons and one true and everlasting God,
be all honor, glory, praise, dominion and thanksgiving for ever more.

Amen.
A short Treatise of prayers and supplications, Comprising a brief sum of
all such things as we stand in need of in this life.

By the same author, P. S. Gent.

A prayer for the morning.
I Give thee thanks most merciful father, for all thy tender mercies, and
loving kindness showed toward me in Christ Jesus ever since I was borne, and
namely for the quiet rest and sleep which thou have given to my body this
night, and for preserving of me from infinite perils and dangers where unto
poor man is subiet in this life. And I beseech thee holy father, to extend
thy loving favor toward me this day: defend me from all mine enemies both
bodily and ghostly, bless all the works of my hands: grant good issue and
good success unto me, in all my godly actions, enterprises and affairs. And
above all things give me a willing heart, and a ready mind to serve thee, in
true holiness and righteousness all the days of my life: that I glorifying
thee here upon earth, may be glorified of thee for ever in heaven, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A prayer for the Eve ning.
MOST gracious God, I praise thee through: Jesus Christ, for defending of me
this day from all dangers of body and soul, and for all thy other benefits
which thou have plentifully bestowed upon me. And I pray thee, good father,
to pardon and forgive me all my sins and wickedness wherein I have offended thy
divine majesty, either this day, or any day of my life here tofore, even to
this present hour. And receive me this night into thy tuition and protection,
that my enemies may have no power over me, nor in any sort prevail against
me: but that my body by thy gracious goodness, enjoying quiet sleep, my mind,
my soul and spirit may continually wait upon thee, and through faith behold
thy blessed majesty with an assured confidence, and an infallible hope, after
this frail and transitory life ended, to possess that immortal and
everlasting glory wherein thou eternally reignest, to whom be all honor
and glory for evermore.

A general confession os our sins to God thesather necessary to be said at
all times.
OH eternal God, father of our lord Jesus Christ, without beginning or ending,
and of whom all things have their being, I a poor wretched and mise able
sinner, lamenting my sins from the bottom of my heart, prostrate my self
before the footestoole of thy blessed majesty, acknowledging and confessing,
that I am a most grievous sinner, begot, conceived, and borne in sin, and
living in all corruption and iniquity, so that in me there is no goodness:
yea, my whole nature is so corr^pt, that my very righteousness it self is
nothing but sin in thy sight: wherefore dear father, setting a part al my own
pretensed merits as insufficient to purchase thy favor, I come unto thee in the
name of thy beloved son Jesus Christ (who is made unto us, holiness,
righteousness, santification, and redemption) most humbly beseeching thee for
his precious blood shedding, and for his bitter death and passion, to have
mercy upon me, pardon and forgive me all my sins and wickedness, both original
and actual, of thoughts, words, works and deeds, of presumption, of
frailty, of ignorance, and of knowledge, or how soever else committed against
thy sovereign majesty, ever since I was born. Good father blot them out of
thy remembrance, hide them in the bloody wundes of thy son, wash them away
in the streams of his blood. Accept his holiness for my holiness, his
righteousness for my righteousness, and his precious blood as a full
recampence, satisfaction and propitiation for all my sins. And as I crave
pardon for all my sins past; so I beseech thee, for thy great mercies sake in
Jesus Christ, give me grace, power and strength, to resist sin hereafter,
with all occasions, means, ways, and allurements leading thereunto. And
because (oh Lord) without faith nothing can please thee, give me, I beseech
thee, a true, perfect and a justifying faith, without the which no man shall
see thy blessed face. Strengthen this faith in me for ever to the end, and in
the end, grant me thy holy spirit truly to repent, and most heartily to
sorrow for the multitude and heynousnesse of my transgressions. Work in me
also (good father) an inward hatred, lothing, and detestation unto sum, that
I walking before thee with vprightnes of heart, may after the dissolution of
this my earthly tabernacle, inherit eternal glory in the heavens, through the
merits of thy son Christ Jesus,

Amen.
A confession of our sins to Christ Jesus our savior, with desireof
forgiveness.
OH sweet Jesus, oh most glorious Jesus, son of the eternal God, whorainest
into this world to take away the heavy burden of them that were laden, to
seek them that were lost, and to call sinners to repentance, to give life to
the faithful, and to be a mediator between God and man. I a poor and
miserable sinner, lamenting my sin from the bottom of my heart, most entirely
beseech thee for thy infinite mercies sake, according to thy accustomed wont,
to pardon and forgive me all mine offenses, sins and wickedness, of what na'
ture or kind, or how many or grievous soever they be, and to be my mediator
and advocate to God thy father, to appease his wrath, to satisfy his justice,
and to reconcile me into his favor again. Regenerate, renew, and sanctfie my
heart (sweet Jesus) with thy holy spirit, the spirit of truth, that I may
proceed and go forward from virtue to virtue, from grace to grace, from
holiness to holiness, until I ariue in the kingdom of heaven, the most quiet
and happy haven and port of all peace, through the merits of thy blood.

A fruitful prayer to God the holy Ghost.
OH most glorious spirit of the most high god, who being true and everlasting
God, with God the father, and God the son, proceedest from them both, who
also by thy heavenly inspiration and breathing, do quicken them that before
were dead in s^, comfortest them that were comfortles, inlightnest them that
were ignorant, bring ^tp the way of truth all such as have erred and are
decey, ued, and plentifully enrichest them with unspeakable graces, that pray
unto thee in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ. Purify my heart with the
fire of thy love, ^ortifie in me whatsoever is not thine, garnish my mind with
all heavenly and spiritual treasures, that I may be a most beautiful temple
for thy blessed majesty to dwell in, to lead me into all truth, oh thou
everlasting spirit o^ everlasting truth, and suffer me not to be carried about
with every blast of strange doctrine, but always to remain and abide in that
doctrine, whereof thou only art the author. Inarme my soul against the
poysoued suggestions, and crafty temptations of the denill, against the vain
pleasures and deceiuable delights of this life, and against the fil^hie lusts
of this my cankred flesh, that I being endued and replenished with thy holy
breath, may do that which is pleasant and acceptable unto thee, to whom be
all honor, glory, and thanksgiving for ever,

Amen.
A Prayer for the Queens Majesty.
WE render all praise and thanks to thee, oh king of all kings, and governor
of all things, for that in the multitude of thy mercies thou have vouchedsafe
to place over us thy little flock, so godly and virtuous a guide, so gracious
and wise a princes, as the world never had her peer. And we humbly pray
thee, holy father, with thy favorable countenance to behold the same thy
servant, our sovereign Lady and gouernesse. And so sanctify her heart with
the grace of thy holy spirte, that she may bend all her study and indenour
to yt setting forth of thy glory, yt maintenance of thy holy religion, the
advancement of true virtue and godliness, the supplanting of vice and
commodity of this her majesty's common whea^e under thee: kindle in her a
fervent zeal of thy glory and a vehement desire to establish whatsoever is
defective or wa^teth in this thy Church and vineyard in England, for the true
and sincere discipline and government of thy church and common wealth. Save and
defend her from al foreign power, and authority, from all traitterous
conspiracies, plots and practices, either of papists, Atheists, or any other
sectaries whatsoener. Give her godly, wise, and religious counsailers, such as
may respect only thy glory, that her majesty ruling acording to thy will,
they counselling according to the inspiration of thy holy spirit, and we her
subjects faithfully obeying, may altogether in the end receive the
incorruptible crown of eternal glory in the heavenly Jerusalem, through
Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of all such as be maiestrates and rulers in the common
wealth.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased theeoh, eternal God, ruler of all kings and
kingdoms, to constitute and appoint me (though altogether unworthy) to be a
ruler and governor of thy people under my sovereign, I be seech thee, give me
grace, so to ex^cute my office, and minister justice in the common wealth, that
I may please thee in all things injury no man, oppress no man, damnifie no
man, neither in body, nor in goods, but by thy gracious working, may judge
justly, neither favoring the rich nor mighty for desire of gifts, nor yet
dispising the poor for want of rewards, that I seeking thy glory, the
advancement of thy holy word, and Gospel, and the common benefit of all
men, may be found acceptable unto thee in thy beloved, and may hear that
sweet harvest sung, well good servant, thou have been faithful in small
things of this life, (which are but vanities and trifles to the things in the
life to come) enter into the joy of the Lord. Oh Lord let it be so for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Amen.
A prayer for the increase of faith.
O Almighty God, and loving Father in Jesus Christ, by whose holy word we
are taught, that without faith it is impossible to please thee, vouchsafe
therefore most merci^ull Lord God) to plant in my heart and mind, a true
perfect and a justifying faith, that I may certenlie know thee, the only
true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, with the holy spirit our
comforter, sanctifier, regenerator, instructor, and teacher. Increase this
faith in me (O Lord) daily more and more, that it may grow up to full
perfection, accompanied with good works, without the which no man shall see
thy glory. Banish fa^re from me, sweet father, all infidelity and
incredulity, all mistrust, and distrust, all dobting and wavering, in stead
whereof, plant in my heart a constant hope, with a careful keeping of all thy
commandments, that I doing that which is good and acceptable before thee, may
be glorified of thee in the end, in the kingdom of heaven, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

A prayer against the devil, the world and the flesh.
MOst merciful father, I a poor wretched and miserable sinner, humbly
beseech thee, to send me from thy holy heuens, both power and strength to
resist and withstand all the assaults, fiery darts, and subtle temptations of
the devil, who like a roaring Lion, goes about seeking to devour me. Give me
also thy holy spirit, with grace and strength to resist all the raging lusts,
and filthy concupiscenses of the flesh, with all the vanities of this wicked
world, that being by thy only help acquitted and freed, srom the force and
violence of these and all other my mortal enemies, may serve thee in holiness
and righteousness all the days of my lif^, through Christ our Lord.

A prayer for Gods direction in all things which we take in hand.
OH Lord my God, I do acknowledge and freely confess my own great
blindness, and ignorance, and the wilful obstinacy of my corrupt nature,
which seeks rather to fulfill the ^tasies and devises of my own brain, then
the motions of thy holy spirit, and rather to use human help, then to crave
thy divine aid. Wherefore, holy father, vouch safe I beseech thee, to
establish in my heart, godly fear, with most sincere obedience to thy holy
ordinances, statutes and laws. And for that without thy blessing nothing can
prosper, or come to good effect, bless all the works of my hands, all my
labors, actions and affairs, which I shall take in hand in thy holy name,
according to thy will, for the necessaire maintenance of my poor estate. Grant
me good issue, and good success in them for the glory of thy holy ame, that
I having plenty of al good things in this life, may be rich and plentiful in
all good works, to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of my brethren,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A prayer for a competent and a necessary living.
OH Lord our God, most gracious and holy father, whose love toward man in
Christ Jesus, is infinite and unspeakable, and whose tender care over him is
such, that thou have promised that who soever believes in thee, depends
upon thy proufdence, and seeks his relief at thy blessed hands, shall
never want any good thing, either necessary for soul or body. Wherefore most
gracious father, I thy ^elie creature, of my self poor, yea poverty and
nakedness it self, most entirely beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake,
that thou will give unto me a competent, and a necessary living, as meat,
drink and cloth, with all other things needful for my body, that pinching
poverty oppress me not, nor that I be not drawn to attempt wicked and
unlawful means for the maintenance of my life. To this end therefore (good
father) bless my store, and replenish my basket with thy blessings, that I may
be able through thy beneficial liberality, to live out of debt and danger of
all men, and to occupy my self in the exercise and practice of good works, to
the relief of them that have need, and the setting forth of thy honor and
glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer for grace that we may use our wealth to the glory of God.
Almighty and most merciful father, the only giver of al good things, the
only stay and comfort of all mankind, give me grace thy humble servant, that
as thou have blessed my store, and increased my wealth exceedingly, far
beyond either my deserts or expectation, insomuch as I have not only
sufficient to supply mine own want, but also enough to relieve others that
have need: so I beseech thee to remove far from m^e all couerous desires of
lucre and gain, and give me a willing mind, and ready desire to distribute to
the necessity of thy saints, according to the abundance of my wealth, to feed
the hungry, to cloth the naked, to harbor she harbourlesse, to visit the
sick and needy, and to do all other good works which thou requirest of me in
this life, that I live not to my self, and for my self only, but to the
help and relief of all that have need of my furtherance in this life, that
treasuring up for my self a good foundation in the kingdom of heaven, I may
inherit eternal life through Jesus Christ my only Lord and savior,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of women with child.
Almighty and most merciful Father, creator of heaven and earth, who in the
beginning for the sin of our first parents, did lay a most heavy
judgment upon the sinful daughters of disobedient Eve, namely, that in
sorrow and great pains we should bring forth our fruit. And for that our
nature is weak, and our sex frail, and altogether unable to bear the pangs,
the throbbes and throws, which accompany us poor women in these our
travails, I most humbly beseech thee, (holy Father) for Jesus Christ his
sake, that thou will extend to me, and to all others in the like case, thy
mercy and loving favor, to m^gate the pains thereof, that we may be able to
sustain and to indurs the pangs and pains of our travails at the appointed
time, that the fruit of my womb where with I am now laden, may gracious^ie
ve delivered from my weak and frail body, to thy praise and glory and my
comfort. Send us (good sather) both easy, and speedy deliverance, that we
may become ioiful mothers, of happy children. Grant both to me, and to all
others, who by thy blessing have conceived with child, strength to bring
forth that which thy almighty hand has so wonderfully wrought in us. Be
present with us (good Lord) in all our travails, help us, and most graciously
deliver us. Let thy mighty power and outstretched arm, be no less manifested
in the delivery, then it was, and is in the forming, and framing of thy
creature in our wombs: and after our delivery vouchsafe (holy father) to
restore us to our former strength, and ability of body again, that we may
sing unto thee the Psalms of praise and thanksgiving all the days of lour
lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A prayer for godly wise dome.
Holy father, who art wisdom it self, light it self, and understanding it
self, vouchsafe to give unto me thy s^elie creature, that excellent gift of
wisdom, discretion and understanding, replenish my heart with all heavenly
prudence, renew a right spirit within me, and write thy holy laws in the
tables of my heart, by the finger of thy holy spirit, that I walk not in the
ways of error, neither yet be carried away with every blast of vain
doctrine. Sweet father, give me this blessed gift of heavenly wisdom, that I
may perfectly know and understand what thy holy will and pleasure is, in
all things: and grant that I knowing it, may faithfully obey it, and walk in
the true observation thereof all the days of my life, that having the lamp of
love, and the candle of true faith continually burning, in the secret closets
of my heart, I may at the last enter with thine elect into the kingdom of
heaven, purchased with the blood of thy son to all faithful believers. To
thee therefore witth thy dear son Jesus Christ, and the holy spirit, be all
honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
A prayer against all kind of enemies:
OH Lord such is the malice of Satan that he not only seeks my confusion
himself, but also raises up his members, wicked men, in number many, in
power strong and mighty to practice my destruction: ^erfore (holy father)
receive me into thy protection, and safeguard: drive back and confound them all
that rise up against me: fight for me against them that fight against me.
Strike a terror into their hearts (oh lord) that they may not dare to lift up a
hand against me. Turn their wicked imaginations and devises from me, either to
their amendment, or to their own confusion. Let all the words which they
utter to my discredit, redound to their own shame. Let thy holy angels pitch
their tents about me, and defend me from the rage and fury of all my
enemies, that they may, not only not prevail against me, but also may fly
before my face by the mighty power of thine own right arm. Good Father,
look upon them, either in mercy to convert them, and to turn their hearts,
or else in justice to confound them, that they never have power to hurt me thy
servant, either in body, goods or name, so shall I praise thee for ever, through
Jesus Christ my only Lord and savior.

Amen.
A prayer when one takes a journey in hand.
O Lord God, who not only guidest and directest all those that walk and
travail in this world, but also defendest them from infinite perils and
dangers in the same: vouchsafe to hold thy holy hands of protection over me,
and defend me from all hostility and enmity whatsoever in this my intended
journey, which by thy divine assistance I purpose to take in hand at this time.
And because (O Lord) my enemies are many and stong in this world, which lie in
wait for me, and seek my destruction, I most humbly beseeth thee for Jesus
Christ his sake, to command thy holy. Angels to conduct me, by their
ministry, and to preserve me by thy mighty power, let them go before me, and
deliver me, as they did why servant Tobias travailing into a strange country.
Prosper me also in this my journey (good father) that my business may have
good success, and that I may by thy blessed assistance returue home again
safe and sound, both in body and soul, to glori^e thee the only true God,
to whom with thy dear son Jesus Christ, and the holy comforter, be all
honor, and glory for evermore.

A thanksgiving to God after ones return home from his journey.
MOst holy father, I praise thee in thy son Jesus Christ, for that it has
pleased thee of thy singular grace and goodness, to give me prosperous, and
happy return home again from this my journey: and for preserving of me from
all perils and dangers in the same, as namely from drowning by water, from
stroke of thunder, and blasts of lightning, from the insatiable jaws of cruel
beasts, and from the bloody hands of thieves and robbers, and infinite the
like dangers, whereto was ^iserable men are subject in this life. I praise thee
also (good Lord) not only for preserving of me in this my journey, but also
for prospering my business, and granting good issue, and good success unto
me in all things I have taken in hand. O Lord I acknowledge it to be thy
only blessing, and to proceed only from thy mere mercy and not from any
deserts of mine, to thee therefore, with thy son Jesus Christ, and the holy
ghost, be all praise and glory for ever.

A prayer for every subject of a common wealth.
O Lord God, we acknowledge and consesse, that as in thy unsearchable
wisdom, thou have appointed some to rule and govern, that thy glory may
be increased, and the common society of men maintained; so have thou ordained
also other some to obey, and to be subject. And for that it has seemed good to
thy blessed majesty, to appoint me in the number of subjects, I pray thee
(good Lord) give me a faithful heart, and an obedient mind to my superiors,
rulers and governors. Keep me far from all disobedience, rebellions,
treasons, conspiracies, and practices against them, knowing that who so
resists the powers, resists thy holy ordinance (for there is no power but
of thee) and purchases to himself eternal damnation, as thy holy word
bears record. Make me (O Lord) faithf^llie to obey them, and truly to
honor them, according to thy blessed word and ordinance, in all things not
derogating from thy honor, that they justly ruling, and I dutifully obeying,
may all in the end receive the crown of everlasting glory, purchased for us
by the blood of Jesus Christ: to whom be all honor and glory, both now and for
ever.

A prayer to be said of those that be unmarried.
OH Lord our god, in as much as thou have commanded in thy blessed word the
word of truth, that we abstaining from all whordome and fornication, and
uncleanness, should keep our vessels in holiness, and not in the filthy lusts
of the flesh as do the heathen, who know not thee. I beseechthee therefore to
give me grace to perform this thy most holy co^ma^dement, and grant that I
never pullute nor defile my body with whordome, fornication, nor any other
uncleanness. And because, O Lord, chastity of the body is nothing, without the
continency of the mind, bridle therefore, I beseech thee, all the motions and
affections of my heart, that I banishing all wicked thoughts, and unclean
imaginations out of my mind, may live in all holy innocence, purity, and
integrity, both of body and soul, unto my lives end, through the efficacy,
power, and strength of the precious blood of Aesus Christ.

Amen.
A prayer to be said of those that are married.
Holy father, we are taught by thy sacred word, the breath of thy own mouth,
that after thou had created all things, the last of all other thou createdst
man, and woman of a rib of his side, giving her unto him in holy wed^ke,
adding unto them thy blessing, saying: increase and multiply, and replenish
the earth: I give thee most humble and hearty thanks, for that it has pleased
thee, to call me to the honorable state of marriage. And I most heartily beseeth
thee, that we may live together in thy true faith fear, and love all the days
of our lives. Give us grace the one to love the other, and both of us to love
thee, and our brethren for thy sake. Keep us (good Lord) far from all wicked
ielosie, hatred, malice and contention one with the other. And as our bodies
are incorporate together, and become, as it were, but one body, so vouchsafe,
holy father, that as thy own turtle doves, we may live together in chastity
and contenencie both of bodies and minds, without de^rauding one (...)other.
And if it please thee to bless us with children, give us grace to bring them
up in such holy exercises discipline and learning, as thou requirest of us in
this life. Grant that we may labor and travail either of us in our vocation,
that by thy blessing, we may have always sufficient to maintain onr estates
withal, in thy holy fear, that we be not chargeable to others, but living
forth of debt and danger of all men, may be rich and plentiful in all good
works, to the praise and glory of thy blessed name, through Jesus Christ our
lord, to whom be praise and glory for evermore.

Amen.
A prayer to be said of those that be masters of households.
THou have commanded (oh gracious lord God) by thy blessed Apostle, that
masters should entreat their servants gently, and courteously, putting away
all bitterness, and threatening, doing unto them all equity and justice,
knowing that thou art our comma^ master in heaven: grant me grace theerfor,
good lord) so to order my servants, as I never attempt nor enterprise any
unrighteous thing against them, but so to execute my authority over them, as I
may always remember that thou art the Lord and master of us all, and
respectest no man's person. Make me, O Lord, to be the same unto them, that a
good pastor is to his flock, to teach them by words thy holy laws, and by
example of life, true righteousness and holiness in conversation, that they
and I together in thy good time, may all inherit everlasting life, by Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer to be said of servants.
O Lord our God, seeing thou have ordained sundry degrees and states of men in
this life, and amongst them all have appointed me to be a servant, give me
grace I beseech thee, to serve in my vocation faithfully, and to obey
willingly in all things, not repugnant to thy blessed will, not with ete
service as studying to please men, but with all sincerity, and singleness of
heart, as seeking to glorify thee, being thorowlie persuaded that in serving
them, I serve thee, and of thee shall receive my reward. Give me grace to
demeanor my self faithfullis, justly, and truly toward all men, in all
things, and not to enrich my self by picking, stealing, imbezaling, purloyning
or conueying any thing from any man by any sinister practice whatsoever but
so to behave my self toward all men, as there may be no fault found in me,
that thy name maybe glorified, and my salvation in Christ Jesus sealed up unto
me. Grant this O Lord for thy mercies sake.

Amen.
A prayer to obtain the grace and favor of God.
I Confess and acknowledge (O Lord my God) that albeit a man do around with
all transitory pleasures, and vain delights that this world can afford, yet
if he want thy grace and favor, all is vain vanity, and vexation of mind,
and he remains nevertheless the bondslaue and vassal of Satan: yea all his
pleasure is but a sweet poison, and all his riches nothing but beggerie it
self. Power down therefore (most merciful father) thy heavenly grace into our
hearts, and extend thy gracious favor and love toward us, that we may be
thorowlie persuaded by the suggestion of thy holy spirit, of the singular
good will, and fatherly care which thou have over us. Make us, O Lord, to love
thee above all things, and our brethren for thy sake. Banish far^ from us all
hatred, rancour and malice, and ingraffe in our hearts godly fear and
reverence to thy holy name. Keep us from all carnal security, and worldly
delights, and chain us unto thee by the linkes of thy love. Finally, grant
that we abandoning the world, with all deceytfull pleasures, and vain
detectations of ^lesh and blood, may in thy good time come to those
everlasting ioies, which thou have promised to them that love thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer to God for a quiet conscience.
THe wicked and ungodly (O lord) are like unto a tempestuous, raging and to
ming sea, which is never calm, never silent, nor never at rest, but
continually boiling and foming: whereas on the contrary side, such (good Lord)
as love thee, believe in thee, and obediently walk before thee, have all joy,
all peace, and all tranquillity of conscience, which is the greatest jewel,
and the incomparablest treasure in the world. Give me therefore (holy father)
a joyful mind, a quiet and merry conscience, with a full and resolute
persuasion of the accomplishment and performance of all thy gracious promises
made unto me in Christ Jesus, in thy good time. Grant (good Lord) that I may
so behave my self in this perverse and crooked world, that I may have the
testimony of a good conscience, in all my actions, that I being free from the
accusations of Satan, my ancient and deadly enemy, from the vain
allurements of the world, from the filthy incitations of the flesh, and from
the heavy curse and malediction of the law, may be made thy elected child in
Christ Jesus, and may final lie inherit everlasting life, through the merits
and death of thy son, who died for my sins, and rose again for my
justification, to whom be all glory, praise and thanksgiving for ever.

A prayer for a true and lively faith.
FOr as much (most merciful father) as whithout faith nothing can please thee,
seem it never so holy good, commendable, or beaufull to the eye of the world,
I beseech thee, to breath and instill into my heart, soul and mind, by the
inspiration of thy blessed spirit. this most excellent gift of faith, working
by charity. O Lord give me no weak, wavering, cold or faint faith, such as ye
very devils themselves have, who believe and tremble (as thy blessed Apostle
berreth record) but give unto me a true, perfect, lively and justifying faith,
such a faith (O Lord) as may believe thee to be the only true God, and him
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, with the holiespirit our comforter, and
teacher, yea such a faith as may bring forth good works in full measure, to
the glory of thy most blessed name, to whom be rendered all praise and
thanks for ever.

Amen.
A prayer for love and charity.
Holy father, we are taught by thy blessed word, that love and charity, from
a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, are the cognizances and
badges whereby thy children are discerned, and known from the profane people
of the world, I beseech thee therefore, holy and blessed father, give me this
Christian badge of love and charity, that I may love thee, my Lord God with
all my heart, soul and mind, my neighbor as my self, and all thy creatures
for thy sake, that at the great audite when all flesh shall appear before thy
tribunal seat, I may be known and discerned by this thy cognizance and
badge, from the wicked and reprobate, and being numbered amongst thy saints and
holy ones, may be received into the kingdom of heaven, there to rest with
thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our only Savior and redeemer.

A prayer against pride, and for humility.
WE are ta^ght by thy blessed word (most holy Father that every good gift,
and every perfect gift, comes from thee the father of light, and that we
have nothing which we have not received, remove far from me therefore (good
lord) all pride, arrogancy, and hautinesse of mind, and ingraffe in my heart
true humility, that I may not only acknowledge thee to be the author of all
good things, yea, goodness it self, but also may rest thankful unto thee
for them, and may so use them, as may be to the glory of thy great and
magnificent name, and ye profit of my brethren. Withdraw from me all love of
this world, and give me grace that I may reioise in nothing but in thee alone,
knowing that all things in this life are nothing but vanity and vexation of
mind, and that to love and believe in thee, is the only true life and
felicity of soul and body. To thee therefore with thy dear son Jesus
Christ, and the holy spirit, be all praise and thanksgiving for ever.

Amen.
A prayer for a good name.
THou have commanded (good Lord) in thy sacred word, that those that profess
thy name, should be holy as thou art holy, and should so frame their lives,
as ye very enemies of thy truth may have no sust cause to speak evil of them,
give me grace therefore (oh blessed father) so to order my life, after the rule
of thy word, as I may give no man just occasion to speak evil of me. Grant,
that whereas it has pleased thee in mercy to bestow upon me the name of a
Christian, the most excellentest name or title in the world, so I may in my
life and conversation bring forth the fruits of true Christianity, that thy
holy name be not blasphemed, nor evil spoken of amongst the heathen, which
know not thee. Make me able and willing (oh my good God) to do thy will, and
to stop the mouths of all them that lyinglie, falselie and deceitfullie go
about to take my good name from me. Finally, bring me to everlasting life in
thy appointed time, through the merits of thy son Jesus Christ, to whom be
praise for ever.

A prayer for patience in sickness.
THy holy Apostle (O Lord) does teach us, that thou do chastise every
child whom thou receyuest, and that him whom thou chastenest thou love, and
further, that if we be not under ^hastisement, we are bastards and not
children: therefore most holy father, in as much as thou have at this present
laid upon me thy heavy rod of correction, and chastisement, as a just
punishment for my sins, I most humbly beseech thee, good father, for Jesus
Christ's sake, to give me the excellent gift of patience, and contentation of
mind. Make me, O Lord, to humble my self under ^hy hand, to rest contented
with thy good will and pleasure, and not to repine, grudge or murmur against
thy judgments, but in all things to submit my will to thy blessed will, being
assured that thou workest all things for the best to them that love thee,
knowing most certenlie, that thou workest my salvation by these means,
subduest the flesh to the spirit, and renuest me in the inward man, that I may
serve thee in newness of life, to the praise and, glory of thy blessed name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A prayer for the assistance of Gods bolie Angels in any extremity or need
whatsoever.
FOrasmuch (oh most gracious Lord God) as thou have created thy holy Angels,
not only for the execution of thy blessed will, but also for the
preservation, protection and defense of shine elect and chosen upon earth, and
for that I thy poor servant, weak and feeble, am at this present, and at all
times, and in all places sundry ways assaulted with infinite, both spiritual
and corporal enemies, which dayl^ seek my destruction, I beseech thee, good
father, look down from heaven upon me, send thy holy angels, those ministering
spirits, to take care and charge of (...), to watch over me, to pitch their
tents round about me, and to save and defend me from all the raging fury, and
cruel tyranny of all my enemies. Let me not fall into their hands, O Lord,
lest they be too proud, and say, where is now his God? But aba^e thou their
pride, assuage their malice, confound their devises, and bring their counsels
to naught, and make them ^ares to take the mselues with all. Finally, grant,
O Lord, that I being delivered and set ^ree from all perils and dangers, and
from all the rage and f^rie of mine enemies, may give thee thanks, and so
wholly to rest upon thy mercies. Grant this, oh Father of all mercy through
Jesus Christ our Lord, and for his sake.

Amen.
A prayer against sudden death.
O Lord our God, who in thy secret judgments as a punishment for sin, have
appointed every man to die once, keep me, I beseech thee, from sudden death,
and from everlasting condemnation. Make me always ready and prepared, good
Lord, that the day of my departure hence come not suddenly upon me to my
utter destruction for ever. Make me also mind^ull and willing to die, knowing
that so long as we are at home in the body, we are strangers from thee. Teach
me to number my days, O Lord, that I may know how long I have to live. Give
me also not only true repentance for all my sins, but also sufficient time,
and space to repent in that I never depart hence in thy wrath and heavy
displeasure. Give me a true faith, and a constant hope, looking for y^
accomplishment of thy promises made unto us in thy beloved, as also, a zealous
care, and fervent desire to walk in the true obedience of thy blessed laws
and holy commandments, that after the final dissolution of this life, I may
dwell with thee for ever in the kingdom of heaven, through Jesus Christ

Amen.
A prayer for one that is sick, and at the point of death.
O Lord our God, who as thou have appointed all men to die once, so have thou
ordained sickness and diseases, as ordinary means to bring him to the same,
and as it were to summon him to the doom, I a poor wretch, and iniserable
sinner, visited by thy hand with extreme sickness, and grievous diseases,
most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to look down from heaven
upon me, with the eyes of thy pity and compassion. Pardon and forgive me all
my sins, which are the causes both of sickness and death it self. Enter
not into judgment with mo, O lord, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight.
Punish me not (O Lord my God) according to my deserts, neither in this life,
nor in the life to come, for then I must needs perish, so manifold are my
sins, and so heinous are my transgressions. Give me grace that I may
willingly leave this wicked world in full and certain hope of the blessed
resurrection of my body to eternal life in thy good time. Make strong my
soul (O Lord) against all temptations of the wicked enemy, and strengthen my
faith that I never waver, nor fall away from thee, neither for love of life,
nor fear of death. Grant (good father) that I mate humble my self under thy
hand, and take pacientlie whatsoever it shall please thee in mercy to lay
upon me, without all grudging and murmuring whatsoever. And if it be thy
blessed will, restore me to health of body again, as thou did thy servant
Ezechias, prolonging his life xv. years more, that I may praise thee all the
days of this my transitory and miserable life: but if it seems better unto
thee to take me out of this wretched world at this present, thy blessed will
be done, on^lie this (oh father) give thy holy Angels (...)to carry and
conueigh, my soul into thy everlasting kingdom of heaven, there to reign
with thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer for those that be rich and wealthy.
MOst gracious God, and loving father, who give thy blessings, and thy
benefits sundry ways to man, to some more, to some less, according to the
purpose of thy will and as thou see to be best for thy glory, and their
good. I praise thee, and I thank thee, for that it has pleased thee in thy
great liberality, to bestow upon me thy unworthy servant, so great a portion
of earthly riches and temporal blessings, I beseech thee to give me^ grace,
that I may use them to thy honor and glory, and to the comfort and help of
others that have need, being assured that thou have made me a steward of so
many and great things to no other end, but that I should destribute them to
the poor and needy. Oh Lord give me a willing heart, and ready mind to do
good, according to that ability that thou in mercy have bestowed upon me.
And as I acknowledge them to be thy gifts, so give me grace, good Lord, that I
never mispend them in gl^tonie, drunkenness, riot, or exce^e, neither yet in
prsde, or anis other uncleanness, vanity or folly, knowing that thou will
one day requier a strait account of me, both how I have got my goods, how I
have kept them, and how I have spent and laid them forth. And as thou have
made me rich in temporal bl^ssings, and things of this life, so make me much
more rich in spiritual gifts, and graces, that in the end I being found a
faithful and (...)Steward of thy goods, may receive the crown of immortal
glory in the kingdom of heaven, through the merits of Jesus Christ, to whom be
all honor and glory forever.

A prayer for those that be poor and needy.
GRacious father, who have apoin ted in thy unsearchable wisdom, sundry
states and conditions of men, and has^ commanded every one to be contented
with his state and calling where in thou have placed him, without all rep^ning,
murmuring, or grudging against thee for the same. I a poor worm before thee,
and one whom thou have placed in the lowest degree, and meanest state amongst
men, most entirely beseech thy fatherly goodness, to give me grace to be
heartily well contented with thy good will and pleasure, being assured that
thou know what is best for me, and workest all things for thy own glory,
and our good. Make me therefore good father willingly to submit my will to thy
blessed will, to depend upon thy providence, and to cast all my care upon thee,
who have promised to be careful for me. And albeit I be poor and needy,
yet keep me far from all infidelity, and incredulity, from all mistrust
and distrust, and from all despair of thy help whatsoever. Finally, grant (O
Lord) that I walking in thy holy fear, and doing those things which please
thee, may at the last receive the reward of everlasting glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

A prayer for the increase and preservation of the fruits of the earth.
AS thou have appointed man how long he has to live upon the face of the
earth, most merciful father, so have thou ordained him means to preserve and
continue this his life withal, as seems best to thy godly wisdom, and to
that end have appoinnted the earth to bring forth all manner of fruits of
infinite variety for his relief and sustenance. Bless therefore (I beseech
thee) the fruits of the earth universally, and of me particularly, whose
ground for the multitude of my sins thou have made barren. Enter not into
judgment with me; O Lord; neither punish me according to my deserts, but in
mercy look upon me, and so multiply my store, as thou did the Oil of
the woman of Sareptha thy servant. And if it please thee (good Father) to
multiply and increase the fruits of the earth generally, and of me
particularly, grant seasonable and temperate weather also for the gathering
and reaping of them, that we having plenty of all things, may be rich and
plentiful in all good works, and with ioifull hearts, may laud and praise thy
sovereign majesty all the days of our lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer against covetousness and avarice.
OH lord my God, most blessed and holy Father, who have commanded every man
to labor and travail in his vocation, for the maintenance of his estate, and
have promised thereto thy blessing, bless (I beseeth thee) all my labors,
actions, enterprises, and affairs, which I shall take in hand in thy holy
name, at any time hereafter, for the necessary maintenance of my poor
estate, so as I having always sufficient, may be free from all covetousness,
ambition, and filthy avarice, being always persuaded that godliness is great
riches, if a man be content with that that he has, for we brought nothing
into this world, neither shall we carry any thing out. Grant, good Lord, that
I having sufficient food and raiment for my body with all other necessaries
needful for this my life, may be heartily well content therewith, not
desiring or coveting more. Withdraw my heart, O Lord, from the love of this
vain world, and of all things in the world. Make me to love and desire ^hee,
and nothing but thee, knowing that he that loves any thing beside thee,
loves thee so much the less. To thee therefore, oh Father, with thy Son,
and the holy Ghost, be all glory, and praise for ever.

Amen.
A prayer to be said before the reading, studying, or hearing of Gods word.
FOr that thy word (O Lord) as David thy servant witnesses, is a light unto
our paths; and a lantern unto our feet: and for that all human wisdom is
nothing but foolishness before thee, and altogether unable to pearce into the
bowels and secrets of thy revealed will, without the illumination of thy holy
spirit. Instill therefore, O Lord, into my heart and soul, the spirit of
wisdom, knowledge and understanding, that I may be able to understand the
^isteries of thy law. Keep me far from all sects, schisms, heresies, and
errors contrary to thy word, and so root thy truth in my heart, that it may
never be removed, but alwies remain firm, and steadfast in thee. And in the
reading, hearing, studying, conferring, reasoning, disputing or talking of thy
word, give me (most glorious father) not only the spirit of holy wisdom, to
understand it aright, but also grace to humble my self unto thee in all holy
obedience, reverence, humility, and fear, that I obeying thee in thy word,
and living thereafter, may come to those everlasting ioies which thou have
prepared for them that love thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A prayer against swearing.
Seeing that thy holy name (oh most gracious God, and loving father) is both so
honorable and maiesti^all, as the same is never to be either remembered or
once spoken of, without great reverence, fear and dread, at the glorious
naming whereof, the very devils themselves doquake and tremble as thy holy
Apostle James records. And seeing thou have commanded us that we should not
swear at all, but that all our communication should be yea, yea, nay, nay: and
in as much as thy holy reverence have promised that thou will not hold him
guiltless that taken (...)name invain, I bes^ th^e therefore, good father, so
to direct me by thy spirit, that I may never think nor speak of thee, but
with all holy reverence, fear, and dread. And in all my communications and
speeches (good Lord) keep me I pr^y thee, from all manner of swearing,
forswearing, blaspheming, and profaning of thy sacred name; And for that thou
have given unto mankind only tho use of the tongue above other creatures, to
this end (no doubt) that he might glorify thee therewith. I pray (...)(holy
father) so to qualify the affections of my mind, and to order ye words of my
mouth, that in all my thoughts, words and deeds, I may do worship to thy
glorious name, through Jesus Christ thy only begotten son, to whom with thy
blessed majesty, and the holy spirit, be all honor and glory for ever.

A prayer against drun kennesse.
MOst merciful and holy father, who in thy great liberality have given unto
man the fishes of the sea, the fowls of the heavens, and the beasts of the
earth, with other thy good creatures of infinite variety, for the sustentation
and maintenance of this his life, and have commanded them to be received with
praise and thanksgiving unto thee for the same. I beseech thee therefore, O
Lord my good God, and holy father, to give me grace to use all thy creatures
both so^erlie and temperatelie, and always to rest thankful unto thee for
them. Give me grace (blessed Lord) that I never abuse them, nor offend thee in
them, through drunkenness, gluttony, or any other kind of superfluity, riot
or excess, knowing that the abusing of thy good creatures reaches even to thy
own reverence. Finally grant, that I walking in all sobriety and integrity of
life, may at the (...)receive the reward of everlasting; glory in the kingdom
of heaven, through Jesus Christ, and for his sake

Amen.
A prayer against slouthfulnes and idleness.
WE are faught, O Lord, in thy holy word, that solenesse is the mother and
nurse of al wickedness and sin: for the body being idle, the mind is
naturally occupied in vain thoughts, and foolish imaginations, and so
consequently made weaker, and readier for the enemy to assault. I beseech thee
therefore (oh my good God) keep me from all idleness and sloth, and grant
that I may be always occupied in some good thing, to the glory of thy name,
and the benefit of my brethren. And as it may please thee, O Lord, in mercy to
keep my body from all manner of idleness and sloth, so I beseech thee to
keep my soul ever exercised in bolie meditations, and (...)contemplations,
thinking always of thee, loving thee, and ever praising thee in all things,
till I come to the perfect fruition of thy heavenly ioies, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A prayer for those that (...) persecuted for the truth.
OH Lord Jesus Christ, who coming into this miserable world, and taking our
nature upon thee, did thereby not only deliver us from sin, but also
remembering thy mercies, did also leave unto us the i^imable treasure of thy
blessed word, as a perfect direction, and rule for us to frame our lives by,
and which alone is able to save our souls. Bless therefore this thy holy
word unto us, make it a word of power to regenerate and beget us a new unto
eternal salvation of our bodies and souls. And strengthen all thy servants
which in any place are persecuted, imprisoned, condemned, and daily put to
death, for ye sincere profession of the same, and for the testimony of a good
conscience. Be merciful unto them, O Lord, and although they seem destitute
of all man's aid, or worldly comfort, yet let thy sweet comfort and grace
never depart from them, O Lord let no further trial be laid upon them, then
they may be made able by thee to bear. And as thou have by the power of thy
might, not only vanquished and overcome all corporal and bodily enemi^s
where or whatsoever, but also thy and our spiritual adversaries, so strengthen
all thy seruans that suffer any kind of cross, persecution, trouble or
veration, either in body or mind, for the constant profession of thy holy
word and sacred religion. Give them patience, good Lord, to bear thy cross
thankfully, with strength to go through, and to persevere to the end, even to
the effusion of their blood, knowing that they who deny thee before men, thou will deny them before thy heavenly father, and his holy Angels in heaven.
And for that there is no true wisdom whereof thou art not the author, inspire
their hearts with the spirit of true wisdom, knowledge, and understanding
that they may know thy will aright, and that they may be able by the same
spirit to confound, and overthrow all the enemies of thy truth. Grant this
sweets Jesus for thy holy names sake.

Amen.
A prayer for Godly wisdom.
IConfesse (good Father) that so long as we bear about us this earth^e
tabernacle, imprisoning the soul, that our nature is so corrupted as it
always rebelieth against the spirit, accompting that true wisdom, which is
nothing but mere foolishness in deed. Wherefore good Lord, vouchsafe to send
down thy holy spirit, even the spirit of wisdom which waits upon thy
throne, into my heart, that I may know and understand what things are good and
acceptable before thee, that I may attain everlasting life, through the merits
of thy son his most bitter death and passion.

Amen.
A prayer for grace to be mindful to die.
OH lord our God, in whose hands stands the life and death of all mankind,
vouchsafe I beseech thee, for thy son Christ his sake, to make me mindful
and ready to depart out of this miserable and transitory life. And al though
my body does creep here upon ye earth, yet let my conversation be always in
heaven, from whence we look for a savior even Jesus Christ the righteous, who
shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious body, by the
mighty power whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Teach me,
good Lord to know, that we are al here strangers and pilgrims, and have in
this world no dwelling place, but look for one to come: in regard whereof,
give me grace, I be seech thee, willingly to forsake this wicked world, with
all the vanities thereof, and to hunger and thirst after that life, which never
shall decay. Make me good Lord to esteem all things in this worlds as dongue,
that I may win Jesus Christ. And for that yt remembrance of death terrifieth
us from sin, as thy servant Solomon bears record, give me grace I most
humbly entreat thee, always to remember and bear in mind, that I am mortal,
and therefore must once of necessity depart hence, either to everlasting
glory, or else to everlasting pains and confusion both of body and soul. Oh
Lord assist me with thy holy spirit, that I male so live in this present
evil world, as I may not fear either, but whenever he approaches, I may
with bold confidence, cry out and say, Oh Death where is thy sting? oh Hell
where is thy victory? Grant this, O Lord my God, for Jesus Christ thy only
begotten son his sake,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving to God for all his graces and blessings bestowed upon us.
SUCH is thy liberality and mercy, O Lord, toward mankind, that for all thy
blessings and benefits both in^nite and inestimable, be^owed upon him, thou
requires nothing again, but thankful hearis to thee. Wherefore (most holy
father) I render al praise and thanks to thee, from the bottom of my heart,
generally for all thy benefits and blessings, for all thy great mercies, and
loving kindness showed toward me in Jesus Christ, and particularly for that
it has pleased thee to elect and choose me in Christ Jesus to everlasting
salvation, before the foundations of the world were laid, for creating me
after thine own similitude and likeness, for redeeming of me by the death and
passion of thy own Son Jesus Christ, when I was (...)lost and cast away for
ever, for regenerating and renewing of me by thy holy Spirit, for sanctifying
of me by the same spirit, for instilling into my heart a true, a lively and
tustifying faith in Jesus Christ, for giving me grace to be penetent and
sorrowful for my sins, for inspiring my heart with a true and constant hope,
looking for the accomplishment of all thy gracious promises, made unto me in
thy beloved without all doubting, or ^uering. For giving me wisedonie,
understanding and knowledge in some competent measure, I praise thee, and I
thank thee also, O Lord, for feeding, nourishing, clothing and sustaining my
body ever since I was born, for defending of me from infinite perils and
dangers, yea from infinite deaths, which at diverse times, and in sundry
places have lain in wait for me, and threatened my destruction, and into which
I had certainly fallen, had I not been by thy gracious goodness supported,
protected and defended. Last of all, I thank thee, good Lord, and I praise
thee, for thy sweet promises of everlasting salvation, made unto me in Jesus
Christ. For these and all other thy most gracious, benefits and blessings, (oh
most glorious Father) I praise thee, most humbly beseeching thee for Jesus
Christ thy son his sake, to pardon and forgive me my great unthankfulness,
ingratitude, and unkindness toward thee, and from henceforth give me thy
holy grace, that I may proceed from thankfulness to thankfulness, from
gratitude to gratitude, and from kindness to kindness toward thee, that I be
never accounted amongst the number of those ix. unthankful leapers, who being
cleansed from their leprosy, returned not again to give thee thanks. Grant
these my petitions unto me, oh most benign father, with all other good things
which thou know to be necessary for me, better then I can either wish or
desire, even for the glory of thy great name, for the truth of thy promises,
and for Jesus Christ thy Son his sake my only Lord, Savior, Kedeemer,
Mediator, and Advocate, to whom with thy blessed Majesty, and the holy
Spirit, one true and everlasting GOD, be all honor, glory, praise,
dominion, power, and thanksgiving for evermore.

Amen.
Vni Deo and trino sit, omnis gloria.
FINIS.

