THE INTENDED Treason, of Doctor Parrie: AND HIS ACCOMPLICES, Against the Queens
most Excellent Majesty. With a Letter sent from the Pope to the same effect.

Imprinted at London for Henry Car, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the Sign of the Blazing Star.

The Treason of Doctor Parrie against the Queens Majesty.
THe state and condition of these our days ( Christian Reader) is most to be
lamented or rather to be bewailed with bitter tears. Wherein are found such
hollow hearted, not Christians: but Tartarians and most cruel vipers, whose
properties as they are to thirst after blood: so they leave no way unattempted,
no policy unassayed, nor any exploit vnatchiued to bring their blood thirsty
purposes about. The experiment whereof, although many times heartofore to our
great greef, we have tasted: yet now of late to our greater Ieopardie and
perrill, yea to our and the whole Realms destruction, and overthrow for ever,
we should more truly have felt indeed, if this bloody purpose of the traitorous
papists had not been discovered, for the prevention heerof and al other the
like: the Eternal God be praised. Now me think I hear it asked by whom this
bloody deed or rather most cruel Massaker of Gods anointed, should have been
committed. Truly by no stranger nor forriner but even by one of her majesty's
own native (but disloyal and most unnatural subject) the truth whereof was
as follows. One Doctor Parrie Doctor of the Civil Law being (though beyond
his deserts) very deer unto her majesty, and well liked of, was by her grace
sent over Seas in very weighty affairs, which he well atchiuing: returned home
and no doubt was bountefully rewarded of her grace for his service, and pains
sustained, within a while after: this doctor Parrie unworthy the name of a
doctor, or of a Christian, conspired the death of her majesty, having received
his fees of the Pope (as it should seem) for the same. For the accomplishing of
which most heinous fact: he with another determined to kill her majesty,
sometimes with a Dag, sometimes with a Poynado or dagger, sometime with one
thing and sometimes with an other. Well this platform being laid, and he having
promised the Pope to perform the thing: one of his conspirators through the
goodness of God disclosed the same, which done: both he and the said archtraitor
Parrie were both apprehended and committed, and upon the 25. of February the
said Parrie was conuaied from the Tower of London to Westminster hall, where he
was arraigned according to the law in that case provided.

The Pope that great Antechriste, and rose coullored whore of Room, as he
suborned many heertofore to kill her majesty: so he hired this traitorous
villain Parrie, and therefore sent him a letter dated the 30. of January 1584.
annimating, exhorting, and persuading him, as he tendered his holiness favor:
that he would bring to pass and perform this their bloody purpose, and in so
doing he should merit great thanks at his hands, and to the end he should go
forward in that wicked enterprise: he granted him plenarie, absolution,
indulgence and remission of sins. The which letter was written by the
Cardinal of Como. For the further credit of the thing it self: I have hear
set down word for word, as it was writ to the said Parrie.

The copy of the Letter sent to Doctor PARRIE.
SIR, his Holiness has seen your Letters of the first, with the assurance
concluded: and cannot but commend the good disposition which you writ to hold
toward his service and benefit public.

Wherein, his Holiness does exhort you to persevere with causing to be brought
to effect: that which you promise. And to the end you may be so much the more
helped by that good Spirit which has moved you thereunto: his Holiness does
grant you Plenary, Indulgence and remission of al your sins, according to
your request. Assuring you that: besides the merits that you shall receive
therefore in Heaven.

His Holiness will further make him self debtor to acknowledge and requite your
deseruinges by all the best means he may, and that so much the more: in that
you use the more modesty in not pretending any thing.

Put therefore to effect your holy and honorable determinations and attend your
health, and to conclude:

I offer my self to you heartily and wish you all good and happy success. From
Rome the 30. of January 1584. At your commandment N. Cardinal of Como.


NOw whose heart is so stony, that reading this bloody letter will not burst
forth into tears? See here how her grace was (as it were) bought and sold,
nay see how bloodely and how unmercifully they had murdered her royal majesty
in their hearts if their intended practices had taken expected success and
effect.

What good subject now, knowing the Pope and papists to be the instruments of
all mischeef, of blood, and of treason, will not abhor and detest both the one
and ye other? how many times has the Pope and papists practiced her majesty's
destruction? nay not only the destruction of her grace, but also the overthrow
of the whole Realm, the massaker of Gods Saints, and utter desolation for
ever. And how mercifully, or rather miraculously has God preserved her grace,
discovered their treasons, laid open their conspiracies, and turned their
inuencions to their own deserved destruction? how merciful a watch man has
the Lord been over her grace, her people and Cuntry these many years defending
both the one and the other from all mischeef what soever? how true is it which
is written He shall give his Angels charge over thee, that thou dashe not thy
foot against a stone? The Lord continue watchman over her grace, still confound
her foes and preserve her majesty for ever.

God grant that her majesty with her most honorable counsel, may sound the
depth of these things and prevent them in time, for the performance whereof:
would god papistry might be punished with death (as it ought to be) and that al
obstinate papists might sustain the same punishments which traitors are to
sustain, for take this for a Maxim, that all papists are traitors in their
hearts, how soever otherwise they bear the world in hand.

And therefore how many papists her grace has in the Land: so many deaths, may
she fear. God grant that this high Court of Parliament may see to this gear.
For shall it be lawful for the papists to put to death true professors of Gods
word without law, without reason, without concience, or warrant of the word
of God and shall it not be lawful for us to inflict the punishment of death
upon them being traitors to God, their Prince and cuntry, having the law of
God upon our side, reason, good concience, and else what soever? Well how soever
we persuade our selves, this is certain, that blood, treason, rebellion,
insurrections commotions, mutenies, murder, and the like are the badges and
cognizaunce of them, and of that wicked generation, and let us look for it,
they will be pricks unto our eyes, whips unto our backs, and knives to cut our
throts withal if time would serve them, which I pray God never do.

In conclusion, in as much as it has pleased the majesty of our good God in
mercy to preserve her grace heertofore and especially at this time, not only
from imminent daugers: but even from present death it self.

I beseech all true Christian hearts and loouing subjects even in the bowels
of Jesus Christ, to rest thankful to God for it, and to pray to God to
preserve her grace still, and confound her foes and to bring to light all
^^easons and conspiraces what soever shall be intended against her Majesty,
that peace may be in Israel, unto the end of the world. And in the end when
she must yield to nature to receive her into his everlasting kingdom, crowning
her with the immercessible Crown and most glorious Diadem of eternal glory

Amen.
FINIS.
Phillip Stubbes Gent.


