Two wunderfull and rare Examples.

Of the vndeferred and present approaching judgment, of the Lord our God: the
one upon a wicked and pernicious blasphemer of the name of God, and servant to
one Master Frauncis Pennell, Gentleman, dwelling at Boothbie in Lincolnshire,
three miles from Grantham.

The other upon a woman, named Ioane Bowser, dwelling at Donnington, in
Leicestershire, to whom the Devil very straungely appeared, as in the
discourse following, you may read. In June last. 1581.

Written by Phillip Stubbes.

Imprinted at London for William Wright, and are to be sold at his shop in
the Poultrie: the middle shop in the row, adjoining to Saint Mildreds Church.

Two rare examples, to move all Christians to repentance, the one of an
odious swearer, the other of a widow, named Ioane Bowser, etc.
IT is a pitiful case to consider, the inordinate sins, wherein the world
at this time, is as it were drowned. For where has not iniquity gotten the
upper hand? Is not pride, whoredom, swearing, and lying (by the malice of the
Devil) even in the time of the Gospel, more frequented, and held in
estimation, then at any other time heretofore? How many counterfeit visors,
has folly practiced, to cover all her trains of subtlety, persuading her
immitators, with such madness, that modesty is driven into exyle. Are not the
hearts of men so fast lulled, in the cradle of Security, that Pity is
forgotten, Chatitie fled, Mercy exiled, Avarice exalted* good Conscience
banished, and the poor vncherished, and the Gospel of Truth as a shaddowe,
with the lyppes professed, but in effect, little followed? Nay, rather the more
is the pity, Exhortations, Examples, Earthquakes, Comettes, fiery Skies,
Inundations, Shipwrackes, unnatural birthes, as well in men as beasts,
nothing regarded: which thing does but foreshowe, that our days are the
very same, which the Apostle Paul to Tymothie. 7. Chapter. Does so warelie
warn us to take heed off, saying: In the later days, men shall become
loouers of themselves, disobedient, evil speakers, etc. And who can be so
blind that does not see these things grown, to such corruption, that the
Scithe of Gods wrath, is no doubt ready to mow us, as unprofitable brambles
from the face of the earth, except we repent?

And here dear brethren, I have to present unto your eyes, a rare example of
the Justice of God, upon a great blasphemer of the precious blood of Christ,
which came to pass in Lincolnshire, in the month of June, last past, in a
Town called Boothebie, three miles from Granthame, in the house of a good
Ge^tleman, both of woorshippe and credit, named Master Pennell, who having
entertained this Seruingman (for so he was,) who had still in his mouth, the
use to sweat, Gods precious blood, and that for very trifles: Thus
notwithstanding, being often warned by his friends, to leave the taking of
the Lords blood in vain, did notwithstanding, still persist in his
wickedness: until at the last, it pleased God, to acite him, first with
sickness, and last, with Death. During which time, of the Lords visitation,
no persuasions could move him to repent, his forevsed blasphemies, but hearing
the Bell to towle, did most hardly, in the very anguishe of death, starte up
in his bed, and swear by Gods blood, this Bell does towle for me, whereupon
immediately, the blood aboundauntly, from all the joints of his body, as it
were in streams, did issue out, most fearefullie, as well, from mouth, nose,
wrestes, knees, heels, and toes, with all other joints, not one left free:
whereupon he most my serablie yielded up the ghost, whose judgment I leave
unto the Lord.

And now I will proceed, to show one other, as strange a Judgment,
happening in Leicestershire, in a Town called Donnington, where dwelled a
poor man, named John Twell, who deceased, owing unto one Oswald Bowcer, the
sum of five shilling, which the said Oswalde did forgive the said man,
before named, as he lay upon his death bed: but the said Oswaldes wife,
called Ioane, would in no wise forgive the said Twell, as long (she said) as
she had day to live. Whereupon, not long after, the Devil appeared unto her,
in the form of the said Twell deceased, expressing all the lyneamentes, of the
body of the dead man, which might well be, for we read in the Bible, in the
like order, did Satan counterfeit the body of Samuel. But to proceed to the
matter, this evil spirit, uttered unto her these speeches, and said, he had
brought her money from John Twell deceased, and willed her incontinent, to
disburse the said money, unto her husband, for his pains: Which she, with as
covetous a desire, received, saying, God thank you. She had no sooner named
God, but the money consumed away, from between her hands, as it were a
vapor, or smoke, till it was all consumed: wherewith, the Devil giving her a
most fearful, and sore stroke, vanished out of her sight.

Wherewith her whole body, became as black as pitche, replenished all over
with a most filthy scurffe, and other things which was so odious, as here my
pen for modesties sake, leaves to wright, referring you to the verses
hereafter ensuing. But to proceed, her body was most straungely benumbed, and
her eyes closed up from the benefit of the light. Thus remaining a certain
space, she confessed the hardness of her heart, and with great patience,
thanked God for his judgments, bestowed on her. Whereupon to be brief, it
pleased God, seeing her repentance, to revoke his Justice, and to restore her
unto her former health, where she remains, praising the name of God, for his
great mercies bestowed upon her. And I beseech the Lord Jesus, that these
examples, may not only be read, but warily marked, to the amendment of our
most sinful and wicked lives, and that blasphemers may beware and take heed,
how they more reverently, in their communication use the name of God: and that
these hard hearted people, who will not forgive their brethren, be the debt
never so small: But as it is well mentioned in the Gospel, will for a hundredth
pence, catch their poor brethren by the throat, forgetting how many debtes,
our heavenly Father has forgiven us, and washed us in his blood. To whom be
all honor and glory: Amen.

A fearful and terrible example of God just judgment, executed upon a lewd
fellow, who usually accustomed to swear by Gods blood, which may be a Caveat
to all the whole world, that they blaspheme not the name of their God by
swearing.
O Mortal men, which in this world, for time have your repast:
Approach, the fearefulst thing to hear, that ever happened erst.
Yea such a thing as does importe, the Lord our God on hye:
Through swearing by his blessed name, offended for to be.
Which strau^g event, whilst that I do, perpend and to mind call,
My Pen (in trothe) is ready pressed, out of my hand to fall.
My heart also does quail in breast, my eyes distill a pace:
The Saulte and brinish tears also, do trickle down my face.
But yet good Pen hold on thy course, to write, do thou not linne:
For I the truth to prosecute, hereof will now begin.
There is a town in Lincolneshire, which Bothbie has to name:
Just three miles distant from Grantam, a town of ancient fame.
Wherein there dwells a Gentleman, the truth for to decyde:
Who Frauncis Penell called is, this may not be denied.
It pleased God this Gentleman, into his house did hyre:
A Seruingman t'atende him on, borne in Worstershire.
Which said youngman inclyned was, unto a thing not good:
As for to swear by Christ his flesh, and by his precious blood.
So musled up hearein he was, that leave it he ne could:
But at each word, which he should speak, by Gods blood, swear he would.
This (...)was was his usual kind of oath (O Sathanist most vile:)
(...)erewith he did his loouing God, pollute, and eke defile.
(...) does you see, transnature us, and brings us to wrack:
Yea, makes a Metamorphosis, of us, behind our back.
Wherefore let us estraunge our selves, from rustomes that be naught*
Having regard unto our souls, which Jesus Christ has bought.
Now Christ our Lord and Father dear, in judgment does proceed:
Hurling at this miscreant vile, his thunderbolts of dread.
Meaning, in Justice for to make, this viper, Uarlet he:
A terror unto all the world, of swearing for to be.
Wherefore, our Lord commanded death; at him to shoot his darte:
Who straight without protract of time, gored him unto the heart.
Now, when that he the panges of Death, did feel, and eke sustain:
Than he began as you have heard, Gods name for to blaspheme.
And never ceased for to swear, by Jesus Christ his blood:
Untyll his soul, at the last gasp, forth of his body yood.
And in this cruel ecstasy, he passionate did lie:
The space of three or four whole weeks, still swearing bytterlie
Now when that he had languished, the spare that I have said:
The people they perceiving it, of force he would be dead.
Caused the Bell for to be told, that all for him might pray:
Beseeching God, his soul to keep, against the dreadful day.
But when that he had heard this Bell, knolling most drerilie:
He rushing up, said, by Gods blood, this Bell it tolles for me.
He had no sooner spoke these words, which I have showed to you:
But that a pace, his heart blood did, forth of his body flow.
For why, out of his singers ends, his blood did stream full fast:
So did it forth, at his toes ends, which made them all agaste.
And yet the Lord proceeded forth, this traiterous wight to scorge:
The blood gusht out, yea, at his wrests, much like the foming surge.
So did it also at his nose, run forth abundantly:
With other filthy excrements, which man does loathe to see.
Thus died he, commmitting his soul, to the furies fell:
Which do possess the infernal gulf, and Laberinth of hell.
Than was his body straight interde, although (in truth) forlorn:
For whom it had been better far, if he had not been borne.
Whose heart is now so obdurate, that hearing of this thing.
Will not permit out of the same, great floods of tears to spring?
Or whose mind is so fastinate, or eke so lulde on sleep:
That for to hear heerof will not, constrained be to weep.
And that for fear he should his God, through swearing thus offend:
And thereby purchase to him self, like dyre and rufull end.
O you that swear at every word, repleate with deuilrie:
For to abstain from swearing vile, let this a caveat be.
For sure you are as guilty of, the death of Christ Jesus:
As ever were the curssed Jews, which on the Cross him slew.
But (oh alas) so far are we, from leaving of this vice:
That we will not expung the same, but therein do rejoice.
We count that man heroical, and of a courage good:
Who can lashe out the greatest oaths, by Jesus Christ his blood.
And he that will not wear at all for fear of punishment:
He counted is a softishe fool, and eke a mere Peasant.
But now me thinks, I hear these Dogs, t'expostulate with me:
And say they have their God in mind, when that they swear him bie.
But to you men most Serpentine, the Lord does say again:
Thou shall not take the name of me, the Lord thy God in vain.
Also the Lord does thee command, in Matthew this is plain:
that thou at all from swearing should, for ever to abstain.
Proving that, what proceeds more, than this, yea, yea, no, no:
Does come from the infernal Prince, our mortal deadly foe.
The Apostle James does us instruct, by words effectual:
Saying to us, O brethren dear, do you not swear at all.
By other places infinite, of holy Scripture pure:
We are restrained we should not swear, at all, by no Creature.
For that is vile Idolatry, far from a learned lore:
Which thing we ought at all assayes, to loathe and to abhor.
Wherefore I hereof do conclude, without remorse or grudge:
That all vain oaths unlawful are, not made before a Judge.
For sure I am, we never ought, at any time to swear:
Except the Christian Magistrate, by law do it require.
And if before him we do swear, in truth and holiness:
The Lord him self acknowledges, he thereby honored is.
And thus I end, beseeching God, of his especial grace:
That we all sinful swearing may, abandone in each place.
Elizabeth our noble Queen, good Lord preserve and sheeld:
That she thy chaste and faithful Spowse, may still maintain and build.
Make her, O Lord, a Mother old, in Israel thy own hill:
Grant that she may in all respects, obey thy godly will.
Good Lord protect her royal Grace, and bless her with long life:
That this thy Realm, may long remain, in peace, void of all strife.
Let her, O Lord, be placed far, distant from cruel death:
And all that will not say, Amen* would God they had no breath.
Phillip Stubbes.

FINIS.
A fearful and rare example, of Gods just judgment, which he executed upon
an obstinate woman, who would not forgive her brother his debt, the Devil
appearing to her in most dreadful manner, and afflicting her body in pitiful
wise, and which may be a lesson admonitory to all the world, to move them to
repentance, and one to forgive an other.
THe works of God are wonderful, as you by this shall hear:
Wherefore attentive ear I crave, to hearken to my leyre.
Good Pen prepare thy self to write, those things I shall require:
Which happened in Donington, a Town of Lestershire,
A Town truly of auncientie, and of renownted fame:
For otherwise to speak thereof, in troth I were to blame.
But as the Town it famous is, and worthy so to be:
So are the people ineffrenate, perverse in each degree.
In Donington the foresaid Town, there dwelt an honest man:
Whose name in truth was John of Twell, so near as I can scan.
Which said John Twell arested was, by Death that cruel wight:
T'appeare before our Souerigne Lord, the Peareles King of might.
So called hence (iwis) he was, he owing shillings five:
Unto one Oswalde Bowser sure, an honest man, and blyue.
Which Bowser he forgave it him, upon his death bead thoe:
But Joan Bowser, wife to him, in no wise would do so.
But spoke and said, yea blas^e abroad, for this is verity:)
I never will forgive it him, until the time I die.
Now whilst that she persisted thus, in her pestiferous state:
It pleased God, the Devil should, her corpse infatuate.
For as she was disposde to sleep, toward the evening tide:
When Phoebus with his glistering beams toward ye west ca^ glide.
The Devil he appearde to her, in such an ugly shape:
As forste she was in every part, to tremble and to quake.
And then she lysting up her eyes, which now do give her light:
Saw one before her for to stand, as black as is the night.
Which thing she said (what so it was) that unto her was sent:
Did portraie forth the said John Twell, in corporal lyneament.
Farther she said he had bleard eyes, as had the foresaid Twell,
Resembling him in each respect,(...) as the fell.
This (...) Serpentine, spoke thus the woman till
Receive this money, which I bring to satisfy thy will*
And see that thou disburse the same, unto thy husband well:
And say that I do send it him, as due for his travel
Then she took up the money sure, with joy and comfort fraught:
For that she had so luckily, this Mass if money caught.
Thus she with joy inebriate, in all and every part,
Brust forth and said, now God you thank, oh sir with all my heart.
Now (...) God Jehovah hie,
The money (...) did vade away.
And he withalt vanishd away, and that in fearful sight:
She still persisting sore perplexed, and in a woeful plight.
But yet before he did depart, he smit her with his hand:
Yea such a deadly blow he gave, as uneath could she stand.
And straight way then, her corpse he came inn part as black as Pitche,
Replenished with filthy scurffe, as (almost) none is such.
And other dregs most fettulent, issued from her then,
Which modesty, and reason eke, commands me not to pen
And from that time until of late, her body it was lame:
Not able sure, to put in use the practice of the same
For in goodsoothe, her body was, benumde, and eke betakte:
The space of three or four whole weeks, all comfort her forsakte.
Her eyes also were closed up, of sight she was made blind:
Thanking her God, who too her had his providence assignde.
Now when the Devil had disgorgde his stinking poisoned breast:
Of all the malice that she could, her body to infest.
It pleased God, that she should be, to health again restoedt
By whom all sin and wickedness, God grant may be abhord.
And now she lives honestly, and (...) show,
Unto the world, the works of God, perfected here below.
Who grant to us his grace divine and pardon thee so free:
That unto us in heaven bliss, a guerdon it may be*
This woman she was plagued full sore and hereby you may view:
The same t'ourselues let us apply, that we may find astkew.
For if that we stifnecked be, and loathe for to remitts:
Th'offences which to us are due, a thing both good and fit.
Then is the Lord as able as was ever heretofore:
To plague us all with tortures, forever to endure.
And in his holy word most pure; he does us all command
That we th'offences to be done, too forgive should not stand.
Proouing that God our Father (...) forgive us all*
Our manifold inormities, when that on him we call.
Unleast that we be ready pressed, each other to forgive:
The sins, and eke th'offences all, of these that do us grieve.
Wherefore let us (dear Christians,) mauger the Devils head)
Forgive them all that do offend us, before we be dead.
Or else we never can be saved, by Jesus Christ his death:
A sacrifice saluificall, to them that live by faith.
For after death it is too late, his mercy to desire,
Because we would not them forgive, which did offend us hear.
No doubt these wonders from abooue, to us below are sent:
To subiugate our hautie looks, and move us to repent.
Therefore thou Town of Donington, I read thee to repent:
For by procrastination, in trothe thou may be shent.
Think thou this a presagie, of Gods fearce wrath to thee:
If that thou cleave not to his word, and eke repentant be.
God has thee warned now by this, and that in freendly sort:
To leave thy whoredom and thy pride, and all thy filthy sport.
Abandon then out of thy streates, all mirthe and minstrelsie,
No Pipers, nor no Dauncers vile, in thee let extant be.
Remember thou thy lately plague, of blayne, of Botche and Bile,
Whereby thy God, did scourge thee sore, least sin should thee defile.
O Donington fall not again, unto thy vomit old,
In filthy scurrile bawdie talk, do not thy self uphold.
Ne yet with vain and bloody oaths, do not thy self imbrew:
For than the Lord will throw thee down, amid the Devils crew.
Fly from all worldly vanities, the word of God imbrase:
Set not abroche opinions vile, the same for to deface.
And in this living thou shall be, safe from all worldly foes:
And in the world that is to come, shall have aye lasting joys.
To write hereof at this time more, my Pen I do suspend:
Beseeching God that we may have, heaven at our last end.
And now O gentle Donington, be mindful yet of me:
Who have with pains contrived this same, for love I bear to thee.
Requite me not with wrath again, that were disloyalty:
But see that thou accept hereof, as best beseems thee.
And as a pledge of my goodwill, let this be unto thee:
Desiring God that I thy state, in health and wealth may see.
Our noble Queen Elizabeth, in health and honor eke:
Good Lord preserve to Nestors days, that she thy truth may keep.
From bloody hands of foreign foes, good Lord her save and shend:
Grant that at all assayes she may, by thee still be defend.
And when thou shall her royal grace, in mercy to thee call:
Grant (Lord) that she with thee may have, thy joys celestial.
Amen.
Phillip Stubbes.

FINIS.
An admonition to the Christian Readers, inferred upon the two strange
Stratagems before passed.
WE may behold (Christian Reader) with no little grief of mind, the great
love of our God, and the little regard of our selves, his fatherly motions,
and in us no sign of amendment. Referring the innumerable examples, happening
not only to our Fathers, but in our time also: let us only consider these
twain, the one of an abominable swearer, the other of a wicked Woman, that
would not forgive. If we consider the wickedness of the time, grown into a
contumely, both of God and good things. we may enter into a secret conferring
with our selves, how, or by what means, we shall lay claim to the mercy of
God, being altogether void, and showing no sign of humility, whereby he may
perceive any sorrow for our sins, or in us any desire to be pardoned. We
abuse his name daily, in every light and trifling matter: we go to hear his
word, rather for a fashion, then any affection we bear to it. Love is exiled
amongst us, neighborhood nothing regarded, pity utterly subverted, and
remorse of conscience nothing esteemed, what shall become of us? Remember we
not, there is a life to come, a joy, a bliss, a crown of glory? Would we be
partakers thereof? no, if we would enjoy that heavenly happiness, our life
and conversation, would show some means, how we seek to deserve it. And
shall we then wilfully lose it? oh no, take hold of Faith, embarce
Repentance* humble your souls to the throne of mercy: that albeit the Lord
perceive we are unprofitable laborers in his Uineyard: Yet that he may behold
in us a desire, a good will, and a faithful intention, to put our selves
forth: and though sin so greeuouslie press us down (that our weakness
cannot resist him,) yet that we are armed with Faith, and entire Hope, in that
sweet Sacrifice once offered up for us all, even the precious body and blood
of our Lord and Savior Jesus, in his merits, to foil our enemy, comfort our
feeble souls: and with a repentaunt heart, enter into the bosom of rest,
prepared for us, since the beginning of the world. To the which that we may
come, and leave this wickedness of life: Assist us most merciful Father, with
thy continual grace, and arm our souls with faithful patience, so shall we
triumph over our foe, and rejoice in glory world without end: which God grant
us, for Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.

